Guidelines for Social Media Mining for Innovation Purposes 
Experiences and Recommendations from Literature and Practice 
Robert Eckhoff, Mark Markus, 
Markus Lassnig, and Sandra Schön 
Innovation Lab 
Salzburg Research Forschungsgesellschaft 
Salzburg, Austria 
markus.lassnig@salzburgresearch.at 
 
 
Abstract— Social media in general and user-generated content 
are seen as potential sources for trend detection and 
innovation. Nevertheless, there are a quite variety of 
approaches and experiences. Within this contribution, we want 
to give an overview where we collect and discuss existing 
recommendations from literature and more. Building on 
lessons learned from literature and an expert discussion, we 
present guidelines for social media mining for innovation 
purposes. These guidelines especially build on experiences with 
an approach called innovation signals, which combines social 
media mining technology with an interpretative methodology. 
We explain guidelines, as “No tool will do your work 
automatically” or “Narrow your search”, and discuss our 
methodology of guidelines’ development as well as the results 
critically. 
Keywords-innovation; social media monitoring; social media 
mining; guideline 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Social Media and its user-generated content is a valuable 
source for management tools and analysis that try to gain 
market and consumer insights. Weblogs, social networks or 
microblogging give insights in customers’ wishes, the image 
of a brand or new trends. Social media monitoring is also 
important to detect, select and analyze signs or facts for 
(future) innovation. In our contribution, we will give an 
overview about different approaches how social media 
mining is applied for innovation issues and provide insights 
into current research within the topic. The aim of our 
contribution is to deliver guidelines for researchers (and also 
practitioners) when they consider or plan to use social media 
mining for innovation purposes. Therefore, we will first 
introduce social media mining for innovation before we will 
present research question and research design as well as the 
guidelines we developed. Finally, we will discuss our results. 
The developed guidelines should be interesting and 
helpful for consultants as well as researchers dealing with 
social media mining for innovation purposes. 
II. 
SOCIAL MEDIA MINING FOR INNOVATION 
A. Diverse uses of social media content and the idea of 
social media mining for innovation purposes 
Social media are Web tools and services that allow to 
communicate, to collaborate, and to share. For example, 
social networks, discussion forums, Wikis, Weblogs or 
mailing lists are such applications. Within social media 
customers, colleagues, experts and others discuss brands, 
products and services, or related topics and issues. Therefore, 
social media is not only a way to share and discuss online, 
but also a good source of information for research and 
strategic planning. Marketing and PR departments of firms 
are interested in real-time monitoring of the Web to be able 
to react in time with a focus on customer satisfaction, 
customer relationship management, public relations or 
measurement of actions. Several tools help to monitor 
interactions within the web and send alerts for special 
keywords (e.g., the brand’s name) [1]. Sometimes active 
interaction within the social web [2] is called “social media 
listening”. In contrast to the in time monitoring of the social 
web the usage of social web content for mining purposes 
uses social media as source to find developments, new topics 
or interesting discussions. This approach is not only used for 
innovation purposes, but a quite common idea within 
innovation research [3]: Social web content is a cheap, non-
reactive and authentic; therefore, it is a broad source for 
diverse methodologies and approaches to get insights or 
ideas for ongoing trends and future developments.  
B. Approaches and Tools 
There are several ideas what might be found related to 
innovation by social media mining [4]: Signs for potential 
innovations can be diffuse, but “weak signals” might have 
the potential of future impact on innovation [5]. For example 
Twitter messages are used as a source to detect weak signals 
for events [6]. Also, comprehensive overviews for tools that 
might be used for such weak signals detection [3] or social 
media monitoring in general [7] are available. The purpose 
of social media mining might also be the detection of 
ongoing developments or existing open innovations - These 
are innovations developed outside the enterprise, for example 
by customers [8] [9]. Mining for innovation also includes the 
detection and clarification of new trends, for example the 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 1.  Process of social media mining for innovation purposes, 
based on [9], figure 3 (own variation) 
 
 
 
speed of adaptation of a new term or idea in a community. 
Some tools that are used to monitor or mine social media for 
innovation 
issues 
are 
for 
example, 
Attensity360, 
Brandwatch, Netbreeze Navigator, NM Incite - My 
BuzzMetrics, Radian6 or RapidSentilizer [3].  
C. The Process of Social Media Mining for Innovation 
Figure 1 gives an overview of the process of social media 
mining for innovation purposes. It builds on an overview of 
foresight with technologies [15]. We see it appropriate for a 
scheme of social media mining, but are skeptical about its 
linearity.   
a) Preparation: This first stage includes all basic 
assumptions, researchers or customers make: What should 
be done? What is the goal of research?  
b) Selection of tool(s): Another important issue is the 
usage of tools to support data collection, selection, and 
analysis.  
c) Selection of sources and data: What concrete data 
should be used for analysis?.  
d) Data collection: Data collection includes the sort 
of collected data, e.g., historical data, current postings, 
format of data.  
e) Data processing: There are many ways for data 
processing. The selected tools and approaches influence the 
processing (e.g., from keywords, detection abilities for 
sentiments). 
f) 
Presentation of data: Finally, the results of the 
analysis should be presented in an appropriate and versatile 
way. 
The last two phases of the process of innovation through 
social media mining (g) interpretation and discussion as 
well as (h) action are also influenced by, but not directly 
through, social media mining.  
D. The Method of “Innovation Signals”  
Exemplarily, we will now describe the research design of 
our project “innovation signals”. On the one hand, this is an 
example for a concrete research design [10] [11]. On the 
other hand, this is also a description of the background of the 
involved researchers and might explain their special 
experiences, even when we sum up and generalize the 
experiences and future guidelines.  
The concept called “Innovation Signals” exploits user-
generated content for strategic innovation purposes by 
combining quantitative and qualitative methods. The 
Innovation Signals research approach does not rely on 
technology alone, but unfolds in the development of social 
media mining technology in unique combination with an 
interpretative methodology. The process is described as 
following.  
a) Set-up: The set-up of Innovation Signals research 
mimics the traditional research design of empirical social 
science. The main goal is to formulate research hypotheses 
and define conceptual search terms, which contain between 
20 and 50 English and German keywords. Then, 40 to 50 
publicly 
accessible 
social 
web 
sources 
(forums, 
communities, blogs, newsgroups) are identified and quickly 
assessed, according to a catalogue of criteria (e.g., quality of 
contents, length of contributions, intensity of contribution). 
b) Detection and monitoring: The social media 
mining-based technology provides automatic detection of 
relevant keywords and topics of interest in sources selected 
before. It first extracts a large amount of user posts (e.g., 
200,000 posts) and then, automatically detects emerging 
keywords, topics and sentiments from compiled discussions 
and user’s publicly available opinions.  
The Innovation Signals technology provides answers to the 
questions in the context of product development and trend 
detection such as: How do users talk about existing 
products? What are critical issues? What issues are 
discussed very intensively? What are emerging topics? How 
do topics change over time? The technology enables experts 
to analyze and interpret detected innovation signals in an 
easy and intuitive way and also to save the most important 
posts for additional manual analysis and coding. 
c) Identification and contextualisation of innovation 
signals: The automated analysis of textual content enables 
an efficient information processing, but the machine-
processed information still remains ambiguous. In order to 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

enable effective research, the interactions in the social web 
must be structured additionally and analysed with social 
scientific methodology. This means to associate user 
generated content with relevant statistics, trends and 
theories to amplify the meaning of the information and to 
understand the consumers’ conversations better and in a 
broader context. 
d) Translation into business opportunities: This phase 
of the research process utilizes user generated content (in 
close co-operation with customers/companies) as an 
additional information source for strategic decision making 
with regard to the kind of innovation (product, process, 
business models, strategic innovation fields) to be pursued 
in order to determine the focus of the product innovation 
and market strategies and/or to detect new markets and new 
ideas. 
The approach of innovation signals and the technology was 
developed and used within the project “Innovation Signals – 
Development of a Social Web Innovation Signals Amplifier 
System”, funded by Austrian Research Promotion Agency. 
Three bigger and some smaller practical use cases have been 
delivered – for different branches and industry partners. The 
skiing industry, electric automobility, and the energy sector 
have been fields of application. 
E. Quality criteria of Future Studies and Social Media 
Mining 
According to our research, there is no comprehensive 
guideline available for the usage of social media mining for 
innovation purposes and future developments. Of course, 
there is a huge list of social media monitoring guides for 
general aspects as brand issues itself available, e.g., [12], 
[13]. An approach to develop guidelines is also to adapt 
quality criteria of future studies [14]. 
III. 
RESEARCH QUESTION 
The guiding question of our research is: What 
comprehensive guidelines for usage of social media mining 
tools might be offered to researchers and practitioners in the 
field of innovation management and future studies? 
IV. 
RESEARCH DESIGN 
Within our study, we developed a multi-stage approach. 
First of all, we collected recommendations, lessons learned 
and comments from literature and the Web from (i) general 
social media monitoring guides and (ii) from usage of social 
media mining in research (literature). Short sentences and 
key advices were written on sheets of paper. Additionally, 
we made a list of quality criteria for future studies [15]. 
Building on this, concrete guidelines were to be developed in 
an expert workshop. The structured discussion included a 
systematic review of existing experiences as well as 
collection of our own expert assessments. In a final round, 
the main guidelines were approved. 
V. 
RESULTS  
The development process as well as the guidelines for 
social media mining for innovation purposes is presented in 
the following. 
A. The development process  
The expert workshop was held in September 2014. The 
moderator and three experts in the field are authors of this 
text. According to the process of social media mining for 
innovation from Figure 1 the recommendations and lessons 
learned were first of all completed with lessons learned from 
own work (see paragraphs about innovation signals 
approach). 
The key source of the guidelines is the own practical 
experiences of the experts. They were asked to give advice to 
beginners, to think about pitfalls and also successes to collect 
a first set of issues for recommendations. Then, existing 
recommendations or criteria were used to systematically 
enrich and broaden the set of possible guidelines. Existing 
recommendations are sources from literature and the Web 
[12], [13], existing criteria for tools for special usage [3] as 
well as general criteria of future studies [14]. Another 
framework for orientation for the guidelines was the process 
of social media mining from Figure 1. 
After collecting, a phase of re-arranging, combining and 
also selecting more important issues and topics started. 
When all experts were satisfied with the first sketch of 
guidelines, the authors formulated these. According to the 
formulation of the guidelines we did not find a guide for 
good guidelines, therefore we orientated our formulation of 
guidelines on good practice [16]. In a final phase, the 
recommendations were discussed by all experts and 
formulated as follows. 
B. Guidelines 
The following guidelines should support future social 
media mining, especially for beginners and also potential 
future customers. 
a) No tool will do your work automatically: The 
expectation that a tool or set of tools might be able to do the 
work or the majority of work automatically is not realistic – 
not at all. In contrary, even sophisticated systems, or stand-
alone tools are more or less only a small support for 
comprehensive social media mining; at least by now. 
Notably, a similar assessment is available for social media 
monitoring tools: “None of them [the tools] do what you 
want to do them” [17]. Even more concrete, the experts’ 
experiences with sentiment analysis for innovation purposes 
or tool-delivered (automatically detected and defined) trends 
detection are unsatisfying by now.  
b) Narrow your search. The more narrowly the search 
field or topic was defined, the merrier our results and 
customers’ satisfaction was. This is of special importance 
when researchers are not already familiar with the sector of 
industry or topic. The data-driven approach is helpful, but 
only with a clear preference and focus in the beginning. For 
example, “car mobility” seems to be a good topic for mining 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

at a first glance. But thinking on the wide range of possible 
items, it might have been helpful to discuss in the very first 
meeting topics, which are really of interest, for example, 
“tuning of electric cars”. This opens the opportunity to mine 
for details within the concrete field of application.  
c) The mining is manual social sciences;  even better: 
The mining requires qualitative and quantitative social 
science. This is not only a consequence of the absence of 
useful stand-alone tools (see guideline a) but also building on 
the assessment of the power of the analytical approaches that 
are not easy to fulfill or overtake by algorithms. Manual 
work also includes that bottom-up (“data driven”) and top-
down (“hypothesis driven”) approaches should be combined, 
as this is a typical approach of explorative social science. Re-
adjusting working hypotheses, open minds and systematic 
procedures, e.g., coding and building of categories, are 
required working competencies for social media mining for 
innovation purposes. Some approaches directly build on 
social science experiences, for example, the so-called 
netnography approach [18]. The need of manual work by 
researchers is not only owed to missing possibilities for 
automation, but also the inevitable way to enhance results 
and realize smarter analyses. For example, the manual 
collection and selection of appropriate Web forums makes 
later analysis easier, as there is less “ information noise” and 
unrelated content (eventually with same keywords) included.  
d) The process is iterative rather than linear: 
Whereas typical illustrations of social media mining for 
innovation purposes are sketched as a linear process (see 
Figure 1), reality proves that successful social media mining 
for innovation has to be iterative and repetitive. A re-
definition of goals, tuning of selected data and approaches, a 
combination of bottom-up (data-driven) and top-down 
(hypothesis driven) approaches, are needed and to be 
recommended in order to achieve satisfying results. 
Typically, an explorative process has no steady goals, 
hypotheses, sources, data, or possibilities to process. 
e) Use well-selected topical discussion forums in the 
Web. The Web is full of opportunities and data where 
potentially interesting information might be delivered. The 
collection of data that is not directly about the key issues of 
the search requires further efforts while analyzing, especially 
if it contains similar key words and concepts in another 
context. Data extraction is simpler, if specialized forums are 
used. Besides this, we also try to choose such specialized 
forums for another reason. Topical discussion forums, e.g., 
on privately operated Wordpress-websites, more often not 
prohibit the analysis of public data (whereas most of the big 
commercial platforms, e.g., Facebook do). 
f) 
Do not expect outstanding surprises when mining 
for innovation: According to several years researching for 
innovations for diverse customers, there had been no big 
surprises for insiders and experts within a certain domain. 
Presenting results from social media mining, even for vague 
“weak signals” to insiders and experts, in no case delivered 
a real wow effect. The rate of completely new topics or 
ideas is probably very small, the pure information is seldom 
perceived (!) as surprising and new.  
g) The role of researcher as the customers’ consultant 
is important: A solid know-how of social scientific 
methodologies seems to be a key factor, but this should be 
combined with a classical consultant expertise for a 
successful mining. A constant dialogue with the client, an 
effective management of user requirements and presentation 
skills is needed to be successful in form of clients’ 
satisfaction. Being a good consultant also includes being able 
to transfer issues into the client’s language. 
h) Give results a meaning. Typically, social media 
mining delivers a long list of remarkable results, for 
example, a list of trendy topics or weak signals. Bringing 
social media mining to a success in form or customer 
satisfaction as well as potential action the results should get a 
meaning for the audience. There are several ways to give a 
good presentation, and not only a long list of themes and 
topics from your search field: 
• 
It is not the list of topics, but the smart way to 
organize them in a model. This model might be the 
process of product development or service (e.g., 
from first users’ contact on). 
• 
Time series might deliver a feeling for a 
development or trend. 
• 
Numbers are helpful, e.g., how many posts are 
analyzed and how many of them concern a special 
topic?  
• 
Exemplary statements (quotes) from the sources 
should be used to illustrate the numbers. 
• 
Nevertheless, the presentation should not blur 
information of needs, information about possible 
solutions or prototypes.   
i) 
Social media is not always a good or analysable 
source for innovation: Social media is in general a good 
source for many innovation purposes [e.g., 9]. Nevertheless, 
it is restricted: typically on languages (English, German, 
some others) and concerning the users (no offliners). 
Developing ideas of new mobile games should be done with 
Japanese data; and future developments of corrida (bullfight) 
should be done with Spanish content. Additionally, false 
friends or other meanings of words in another language 
complicate the analysis and should be considered while 
selecting sources or data. Whereas “e-bike” in German is a 
bicycle with an electronic motor (also called Pedelec), 
“bikes” for example, in English are also motorbikes. 
“Handy” is the German word for “mobile phones”, whereas 
“handy” is a common adjective in English. 
j) 
Decisions within social media mining are a 
question of cost-value ratio, not of possibilities. Social 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

media mining is dealing with an endless source of data, 
especially if you broaden it from text to pictures and videos. 
As the mining itself is an explorative work or a spiral work 
(see d), the constant re-designs of the goal, source, collection 
and processing regularly needs a weighting up of workload 
and results and an assessment of the cost-benefit ratio.  
C. Additional (concrete) recommendations 
The experts also have two additional advices, non-related 
to the already mentioned guidelines.  
• 
Look for fitting thesauri! Of course, thesauri are not 
available for any topic, but it is always worth to look 
if one is available. Using thesauri is a smart 
possibility to enhance results and analysis. 
• 
Use existing lists for social media mining and 
monitoring tools’ evaluation! Besides results of such 
evaluations and customers’ feedback on the tools, 
the criteria used for evaluation might help you to get 
a clearer picture of your own needs. But always, take 
in mind guideline (a).  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION 
To sum up, the experts developed general advices as 
guidelines that may help to come to more realistic 
expectations concerning approaches and tools of social 
media mining for innovation purposes. Additionally, the 
guidelines give advice how the process might get better 
results and be more successful. The guidelines themselves 
are new and original, but in some points they are coincident 
with existing opinions and research [17]. As existing 
recommendations and lessons learned were part of the 
discussion, the presented guidelines can be seen as support 
for ongoing and future social media mining for innovation 
purposes.  
Nevertheless, the development of guidelines and the 
guidelines themselves must be discussed critically. One point 
might be our set of experts. This might be considered as a 
limiting factor for the validity of the guidelines. The experts 
are only experienced in English and German speaking 
contexts and analyses, they have broad experiences with 
several tools and in several economic sectors, but of course 
there are still blind spots. As our current work with 
“innovation signals” focuses on technology-enhanced weak 
signals detection [19] this also might have influence on the 
results (compared with other social media mining for 
innovation approaches). 
VII. NEXT STEPS 
For future developments and potential adaptions of 
guidelines for social media mining, a broader base of 
experiences might be considered. Practically, there is no 
international network of researchers and practitioners that 
might be helpful for this special task. But social media 
mining for innovation purposes seem to be a developing [9], 
if not boosting approach, so future settings might allow 
broader developments of guidelines. So, we hope our 
guidelines provide a valuable first step and a worthy support 
for beginners and practitioners alike. 
Within our workshop and discussion several topics 
arouse that are still unclear from a research perspective, 
especially related to guideline (f) “Do not expect outstanding 
surprises when mining for innovation” [20]. Building on our 
experiences with social media mining, there seem to be 
space and possibilities to get better information and insights 
into innovation signals or trends. But the approaches, by 
now, are very limited concerning signals for disruptive 
innovations or other brand-new original issues that might 
become trendy in the future. Research that deals with historic 
data to evaluate existing approaches concerning their validity 
is also an interesting step forward.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
Thanks to Kathrin Parson and Laurenz Giger for their 
support within the project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
I. Stavrakantonakis, A. Gagiu, A., H. Kasper, I. Toma, I., and A. 
Thalhammer, A. “An approach for evaluation of social media 
monitoring tools” in: D. Fensel, H. Kett, and M. Grobelnik (Eds.), 
Common Value Management, Stuttgart Fraunhofer-Institut für 
Arbeitswirtschaft und Organisation, 2012, pp. 52-64. 
[2] 
R. W. Helms, E. Booij, and M. R. Spruit, “Reaching out: Involin 
users in innovation tasks through social media”, in: ECIS 2012 
Proceedings, paper 193, Online: http://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2012/193 
(2014-09-15). 
[3] 
K. Welz, L. Brecht, J. Kauffeldt, and D. Schallmo, “Weak signals 
detection: Criteria for social media monitoring tools”, Proceedings of 
the 5th ISPIM Innovation Symposium: “Stimulating Innovation: 
Challenges for Management, Science & Technology”, 09-12 
December, 2012, Seoul, Korea. 
[4] 
R. Zafarani, M. Abbasi, and H. Liu, Social Media Mining. An 
Introduction, 2014, Cambridge University Press. 
[5] 
I. Ansoff, “Managing Strategic Surprise by Response to Weak 
Signals”, California Management Review, 18, 2, 1975, pp. 21-33. 
[6] 
B. Song, „Weak Signal Detection on Twitter Datasets. A non 
accumulated approach for non- famous events“, Master Thesis TU 
Delft, 
2012, 
Online 
available: 
http://www.cs.uml.edu/~hachreka/files/related/Thesis.pdf 
(2014-07-
01) 
[7] 
I. Stavrakantonakis, A. Gagiu, A., H. Kasper, I. Toma, I., and A. 
Thalhammer, “An approach for evaluation of social media monitoring 
tools”, in: D. Fensel, H. Kett, and M. Grobelnik (Eds.), Common 
Value 
Management, 
Stuttgart 
Fraunhofer-Institut 
für 
Arbeitswirtschaft und Organisation, 2012, pp. 52-64. 
[8] 
H. W. Chesbrough, Open Innovation: The New Imperative for 
Creating and Profiting from Technology, Harvard Business Press, 
2006. 
[9] 
F. Piller, A. Vossen, and C. Ihl, “From Social Media to Social 
Product Development: The Impactof Social Media on Co-Creation of 
Innovation”, 2012, Online: http://www.alycante.it/wp/From-Social-
Media-to-Social-Product-Development.pdf (2014-09-15). 
[10] M. Markus, R. Eckhoff, and M. Lassnig, “Innovation Signals in 
Online-Communitys – ein komplementärer analytischer Ansatz”, 
HMD - Praxis der Wirtschaftsinformatik, 293, 10/2013, pp. 13-21. 
[11] M. Lassnig, M. Markus, R. Eckhoff, and K. Wrussnig, “Prospects of 
technology-enhanced Social Media Analysis for Open Innovation in 
the Leisure Industries” in: R. Egger, I. Gula, and D. Walcher, Eds., 
Open Tourism – Open Innovation, Crowdsourcing and Collaborative 
Consumption challenging the Tourism Industry. Salzburg, 2013. 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[12] L. Bush and L. Glazier, „3 guidelines for using social media 
monitoring during a PR crisis“, Prdaily.com, Post from 2013-09-13, 
Online: 
http://www.prdaily.com/Main/Articles/3_guidelines_for_using_social
_media_monitoring_dur_15189.aspx (2014-09-15). 
[13] Socialmedia hq (without year). “The Definitive Guide to Social 
Media 
Monitoring 
for 
Business”, 
Online: 
http://www.socialmediahq.com/pdf/the-definitive-guide-to-social-
media-monitoring-for-business.pdf (2014-09-15). 
[14] M. J. Boon, E. Rusman, and M. R. Klink, “Developing a critical view 
on e-learning reports: Trend watching or trend setting?” International 
Journal of Training and Development, 2005, 9(3), pp. 1-27. 
[15] J. Keller and H. A. von der Gracht, “The influence of information and 
communication technology (ICT) on future foresight processes — 
Results from a Delphi survey”, Technological Forecasting and Social 
Change, Volume 85, June 2014, pp. 81-92. 
[16] Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), Safeguarding Good 
Scientific 
Practice, 
2014, 
Wiley. 
Online 
available: 
http://www.dfg.de/download/pdf/dfg_im_profil/reden_stellungnahme
n/download/empfehlung_wiss_praxis_1310.pdf (2014-09-15). 
[17] J. Falls, “Where Social Media Monitoring Services Fail”, published at 
socialmediaexplorer.com, 
April 
1, 
2010, 
Online: 
http://www.socialmediaexplorer.com/social-media-monitoring/where-
social-media-monitoring-services-fail/ (2014-09-15). 
[18] G. Jawecki and J. Fuller, “How to use the innovative potential of 
online communities? Netnography – an unobtrusive research method 
to absorb the knowledge and creativity of online communities”, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Business 
Process 
Integration 
and 
Management, 3, 4/2008, pp. 248-255. 
[19] R. Eckhoff, M. Markus, M. Lassnig, S. Schön, “Detecting Weak 
Signals with Technologies. Overview of current technology-enhanced 
approaches  for the detection of weak signals”, International Journal 
of Trends in Economics Management & Technology (IJTEMT), 
volume 
III 
issue 
V, 
October 
2014, 
 
URL: 
http://www.ijtemt.org/vol3issue5/1_Detecting_Weak_Signals_with_T
echnologies_Vol_III_Issue_V.php 
[20] R. Eckhoff, M. Markus, M. Lassnig, S. Schön, “No outstanding 
surprises when using Social Media as source for weak signals? First 
attempt to discuss the impact of social media sources to detect 
surprising weak signals”, Proceedings of The Ninth International 
Conference on Digital Society (ICDS) 2015, in Lisbon, Portugal. 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

