Knowledge and Technology Transfer in the Center for Scientific and Technical 
Information of the Wrocław University of Technology 
 
Anna Wałek 
Center for Scientific and Technical Information 
Wrocław University of Technology 
Wrocław, Poland 
anna.walek@pwr.edu.pl 
Katarzyna Kozłowska 
Center for Scientific and Technical Information  
Wrocław University of Technology 
Wrocław, Poland 
katarzyna.kozlowska@pwr.edu.pl
 
 
 
Abstract—Knowledge and Technology Transfer between 
a university and economic operators affects innovation and 
growth of competitiveness, as well as the development of 
a knowledge-based society. In the structures of Wroclaw 
University of Technology, regarded as one of the best and the 
most innovative technical universities in Poland, a number of 
units responsible for a wide understanding cooperation with 
the economy have been established. To avoid dispersion of 
various activities, competences and information, Wroclaw 
University 
of 
Technology 
has 
started 
to 
implement 
a technology transfer system. A Contact Point for Technology 
Transfer has been established in the Center for Scientific and 
Technical Information. It coordinates activities of all the 
organizational units of the University, as well as people who 
fulfill tasks concerning technology transfer, commercialization 
and cooperation with the economy. The paper discusses the 
activities of the Center for Scientific and Technical 
Information related to knowledge and information transfer, 
including guidance of commercializing research results, patent 
information and assistance in the purchase of innovative 
solutions, as well as intellectual property generated at Wroclaw 
University of Technology. 
Keywords-Wrocław University of Technology; technology 
transfer; knowledge transfer; commercialization. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Knowledge transfer (KT) is a term used to include a very 
broad range of activities to support mutually beneficial 
collaborations between universities, businesses and the 
public sector.  
It’s all about the transfer and intellectual property (IP), 
expertise, learning and skills between academia and the non-
academic community. For academics, KT can be a way of 
gaining new perspectives on possible directions and 
approaches to research. Discussion around KT often focuses 
on the formation of spin-out business, or the licensing of 
intellectual property, based on the outputs of university 
scientific and technology-related research. Although these 
are vitally important areas, KT actually encompasses a much 
broader range of activities and is not limited to science and 
technology disciplines [1].  
The underlying assumption that there is a potential for 
increased collaboration between industry and universities is 
also underlined in much of current innovation literature. In 
particular, the Open Innovation [2] approach to developing 
business value is explicitly based on an assumption that 
Universities are a "vital source for accessing external ideas". 
Moreover Universities have been deemed to be "the great, 
largely unknown, and certainly underexploited, resource 
contributing to the creation of wealth and economic 
competitiveness" [3].  
Nowadays, the term "knowledge transfer" is usually 
applied to transfers between universities and industry, or 
between experts and non-experts. The focus is frequently on 
"science management" [4]. 
Technology transfer, also called transfer of technology 
(TOT), is the process of transferring skills, knowledge, 
technologies, methods of manufacturing, samples of 
manufacturing and facilities among governments or 
universities and other institutions to ensure that scientific and 
technological developments are accessible to a wider range 
of users who can then further develop and exploit the 
technology into new products, processes, applications, 
materials or services [5]. 
According to the definition in the “Business Dictionary”, 
technology transfer is “assignment of technological 
intellectual property, developed and generated in one place, 
to another through legal means such as technology licensing 
or franchising” [6]. 
The 
process 
typically 
includes: 
identifying 
new 
technologies; protecting technologies through patents and 
copyrights; forming the development and commercialization 
strategies, such as marketing and licensing to existing private 
sector companies or creating new startup companies based 
on the technology. 
Section II of the paper presents the background of 
creating the knowledge transfer and transfer of technology at 
Polish universities, which is connected with current situation 
of technical universities. Sections III and IV describe 
Wrocław University of Technology and the Center for 
Scientific and Technical Information (CSTI) along with its’ 
departments responsible for KT and TOT. Their tasks and 
the ways of implementing university system of cooperation 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

with the economy have been depicted. Section V presents 
detailed results of CSTI activity connected with the 
cooperation with the economy. This section presents work 
effects of particular teams and the specifics of inquiries and 
commissions directed to CSTI departments from the business 
and external entities. Last but not least, at the end of the 
paper, tables and graphs to illustrate the content of this paper 
have been presented. They depict commercialization 
scenarios, models and patters of particular forms of 
cooperation with the economy, which have been developed 
and implemented at Wrocław University of Technology.   
II. 
BACKGROUND 
The importance of creating networks between business 
entities, public administration, non-governmental, scientific 
and research institutions is growing steadily. Such networks 
help merging ideas, exchanging information and establishing 
cooperation methods between the above. The innovation and 
entrepreneurship centers which have been developing 
in Poland since the early 1990s of the 20th century are 
gaining in importance in these processes. Currently, the 
entrepreneurship support infrastructure in Poland consists of 
different types of innovation and entrepreneurship centers: 
technology parks and incubators, business incubators, pre-
incubators, technology transfer centers, training and advisory 
centers, loan funds, guarantee funds, seed funds etc. These 
institutions are generally intended to enhance human 
creativity, entrepreneurship and innovation leading to more 
effective use of the local growth factors. Since the beginning 
of system transformation, the number of innovation and 
entrepreneurship centers has been systematically growing. 
The process of developing the entrepreneurship supporting 
system is still running. New initiatives and new areas where 
the innovation and entrepreneurship centers operate are 
appearing. The changes observed and analysis of the 
experience acquired by “knowledge economy leaders” show 
an increasing role of support infrastructure in the process of 
the Polish economy innovation development. In the era of 
technological changes and dynamic expansion of the 
innovation to the services, organizations, marketing and 
social issues, the enterprises are looking for new solutions 
and this is where the innovation and entrepreneurship centers 
may have important contribution [7]. 
Nowadays, company competitiveness is based on 
components like knowledge, technological capabilities and 
skills. This led to a theoretical discussions on knowledge – 
based economies. In order to create this knowledge, which 
will eventually be transformed into new products and 
services, companies have internationally began to form 
increasing numbers of knowledge-based strategic alliances, 
thus creating a new form of competition. Nevertheless, the 
creation and transfer of knowledge and best practices 
through cooperation have proven to be quite difficult. 
Knowledge transfer is neither an easy nor a costless task. 
Unlike information, capabilities and knowledge simply 
cannot be bought in market. Instead, they have to be 
gradually built through intensive and systematic learning 
efforts. The issue of knowledge management and knowledge 
transfer is all the more important for firms lacking, or late, in 
technological capabilities [8]. 
III. 
WROCŁAW UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY 
Wroclaw University of Technology is one of the best 
technical universities in Poland. It was founded in 1946 in 
Wroclaw, and organized by researchers from pre-war 
research centers in Lvov and Warsaw. Since the very 
beginning of its existence, it has been an important center of 
technical education. Today, over 34 000 students study here 
under the guidance of 2 000 academic teachers, at the 12 
faculties, as well as in the 3 regional branches (Jelenia Góra, 
Legnica, Wałbrzych). It rates high in the annual rankings of 
Polish universities.  
Wroclaw University of Technology is situated in Lower 
Silesia – a dynamically developing region of Poland. 
Focusing on adopting its own offer to the market needs has 
become the regional strategy. Due to that, a synergy effect 
has been achieved with the development of segments 
strategic for the region. The University is strongly oriented 
toward cooperation with the economy and industry [11]. 
An excellent geographic location, teaching and research 
backup, and the developing infrastructure are the key assets 
of Lower Silesia, which have convinced international 
corporations to make investments there. Projects by such 
companies, as Volvo, Toyota, Volkswagen, Whirlpool, 
WABCO, Siemens, and LG Philips, 3M and Toshiba, have 
been implemented in the recent years in Lower Silesia. 
Crucial for attracting investors to the region is the 
research and scientific potential of Wrocław academic center 
and the work on creating a knowledge-based economy. 
Wrocław University of Technology, as the only technical 
university in the region, has become a leader of active co-
operation with the industry. Collaboration with the economy 
allows providing a comprehensive offer for companies 
looking for innovative solutions. Tens of long-term, many-
sided collaboration agreements signed prove that this is the 
right approach to business partners. These agreements cover 
a wide range of activities, from providing training for the 
employees of Lower Silesian companies to joint research 
aiming at introducing new technologies and products, and 
increasing 
company 
competitiveness 
on 
Polish 
and 
international markets [12]. 
IV. 
CENTER FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL 
INFORMATION 
On January 1st 2014, Wrocław University of Technology 
launched the Center for Scientific and Technical Information 
(CSTI). It is a unit serving the whole university performing 
scientific, research and service-oriented tasks. The Center is 
responsible for collecting and providing scientific and 
technical information for the needs of performing scientific 
research and supporting didactics, as well as coordinating 
cooperation with the economy and technology transfer. 
Within the structure of the Center, the Traditional and 
Electronic Libraries were established, providing the library-
information services and creating also a digital library, 
knowledge repository and the data base for scientific 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

achievements. Besides the library resources, data bases and 
electronic periodicals, the Center makes available the patent 
and standardizing information, as well as the information on 
new technologies both, for the needs of scientific society and 
industry representatives [11].  
Within the framework of the CSTI, units dedicated to 
cooperation of science with the economy, such as the Center 
for Science and Economy Cooperation (CSEC) operate. Its 
activity is focused on tasks supporting and initiating 
undertakings of all types in cooperation with representatives 
of business environment. The Center for Scientific and 
Technical Information runs the Contact Point for Technology 
Transfer. By creating a network of mutual relations with 
business and industry representatives, it identifies individual 
needs of enterprises in innovation, enabling that way 
development of solutions facilitating functioning of 
mechanisms of knowledge commercialization and widely 
understood cooperation of the University with businesses 
[13]. 
A. Center for Science and Economy Cooperation 
The mission of the Center for Science and Economy 
Cooperation is to support the transfer of knowledge and 
information between the Wrocław University of Technology 
and external economic entities, with particular emphasis on 
the region of Lower Silesia, as well as to promote 
cooperation between academic and economic environment 
on regional and national level. 
The activities of the CSEC focus on the tasks supporting 
and initiating all kinds of projects in cooperation between 
university units and business representatives. As a unit 
responsible for the coordination and organization of the 
cooperation process. The CSEC ensures efficient circulation 
of documents and deals with administrative formalities 
before signing cooperation agreements. 
1) Department of Knowledge and Information Transfer  
The Department of Knowledge and Information Transfer, 
which has been separated from the structure of the CSEC, 
undertakes activities, which aim at presenting University 
research offer. Moreover, these activities enhance the 
processes of efficient acquisition and transfer of know-how, 
allowing more effective use of knowledge by the economic 
environment. 
The Department of Knowledge and Information Transfer 
realizes part of a strategic plan for the development of the 
University, involving creation of a new organizational model 
and entrance into qualitatively new relationship with 
business, thus increasing the possibilities for commercial 
exploitation of knowledge resources. The activities aim at 
creating optimal conditions and solutions for the use of the 
scientific and technical potential of the University in specific 
areas of the economy. 
In the effort to ensure simplification and adjustment of 
the system regulation, as well as by direct consultancy, 
coordination, processing of orders and agreements resulting 
from the cooperation with third parties, the staff of the 
Department of Knowledge and Information Transfer 
counteract procedural constraints. Not only do they render 
complex services, but they also complete all formalities on 
company behalf. 
Taking into account the trend of development of the 
world economy based on the information society where 
innovation is a key factor, the staff of the Center for Science 
and Economy Cooperation have worked out an software 
which integrates databases identifying scientific potential of 
the University, including the access to expertise, cutting edge 
technologies, and research infrastructure. It is not only a 
perfect tool for promotion of intellectual output of the 
Wrocław University of Technology, but it also plays a role 
of a forum for exchange of modern technical and scientific 
ideas. 
The collected data have been published on the website of 
the Center for Science and Economy Cooperation 
(http://ofertadlagospodarki.pwr.edu.pl/en/o-nas/) and include 
a variety of subject areas: research offer; laboratories 
(summarizes the list of research laboratories at the disposal 
of Wroclaw University of Technology); key equipment; 
experts (the aim of creating this database was to provide both 
enterprises and scientists with a wide range of specialists, 
thus allowing efficient search for the right information, as 
well as contact); projects (on this site, users can publish new 
topics and attach suggestions for joint undertakings, resulting 
in starting new projects); inventions (it is a great tool for 
promoting research achievements of scientists among 
potential contractors interested in the implementation of 
products); standardization; knowledge repository (database 
developed in the Electronic Library. It includes scientific 
publications and papers, documentation of research data and 
other documents and resources being a result of scientific 
research and development works); product catalogue; 
innovative solutions (the database consists of technological 
solutions with full technical documentation, which can be 
immediately implemented in manufacturing companies); 
research centers. 
Databases are regularly supplied with information 
verified by persons specialized in different disciplines. 
Databases do not only document scientific achievements of 
the University employees, but they also provide a direct 
exchange of information, enable its recording and 
processing, and in particular allow multivariate data mining.  
The application mentioned above, accessible on the 
Center website, is extremely important from the point of 
view of the support for the commercialization process of the 
research results. One should take into account, that the 
scientific qualities of projects contribute often to the 
development of innovative products. 
2) Department of Intellectual Property and Patent 
Information  
The Department of Intellectual Property and Patent 
Information, within the CSEC, deals with problems of 
industrial property. It carries out activities for academic 
community of Wrocław University of Technology. Patent 
attorneys 
employed 
in 
the 
Department 
act 
as 
plenipotentiaries of the University in the proceedings before 
the Polish Patent Office, in cases related to obtaining and 
maintaining exclusive rights to solutions, which were 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

developed or co-developed by the University. Moreover, the 
Department 
comprises 
the 
Regional 
Standardization 
Information Center, which is a part of European PATLIB 
network, and runs consultancy activities concerning 
problems of intellectual property, its commercialization and 
cooperation with the regional economic environment. The 
Department staff provide patent information, help in use of 
patent databases and render legal advice not only to the staff 
of the Wrocław University of Technology but also to private 
individuals, thereby maintaining strong links between the 
University and economic entities. 
In addition to providing professional service of patent 
attorneys and patent information, cooperation with industry 
reveals itself primarily in preparation of commercialization 
and substantive care throughout its course. An important task 
of the Department of Intellectual Property and Patent 
Information is concluding license agreements and contracts 
for the commonality of rights to industrial property objects 
and consulting draft agreements in terms of intellectual 
property 
with 
other 
departments, 
in 
particular 
the 
Department of Knowledge and Information Transfer. 
Implementations bring tangible and mutual benefits, 
contribute to the competitiveness of enterprises, increase 
their profits and favor economic growth. They are of use also 
to 
inventors. 
Thanks 
to 
attractive 
conditions 
of 
compensations, the Terms of Use of Intellectual Property, 
adopted at the University, motivate authors of inventions to 
support the commercialization process and search for 
potential partners. 
B. Technology Transfer Contact Point 
One of the first stages of implementing the System of 
Technology Transfer at Wrocław University of Technology 
was launching the Technology Transfer Contact Point 
(TTCP) within the structures of the Center for Scientific and 
Technical Information. 
The aim of the Contact Point is to distribute powers and 
coordinate activities and cooperation of organizational units 
of the University in the commercialization process of 
intellectual property rights. In particular, the Contact Point 
excels in: 
 
identifying and monitoring research projects with 
high potential of commercialization of end products; 
 
supporting innovative ideas and technical and 
technological solutions in the process of gaining 
business partners for their development and applying 
for financing the implementation works; 
 
informing and consulting administrative and legal 
issues regarding opportunities and procedures of 
technology transfer;  
 
informing and consulting possibilities of obtaining 
financial support for the technology transfer process;  
 
rendering administrative and legal services related to 
starting and transferring intellectual property rights 
to new companies. 
As a unit responsible for coordination of the actions 
mentioned above, the Contact Point divides tasks and 
responsibilities 
between 
organizational 
units 
of 
the 
University, and initiates and supports development and 
implementation process of procedures and paths of 
commercialization, 
intellectual 
property 
management 
regulations, foundation of spin-off companies, internal 
regulations. 
Launching the Contact Point will significantly improve 
and simplify procedures related to initializing and running 
commercialization actions at the University through 
coordination and implementation of the “one stop shop”. 
The Contact Point for Technology Transfer should be 
perceived by scientists and entrepreneurs as the basic path of 
contact with the University on issues of technology transfer, 
not excluding previously used forms of communication - 
through 
Wroclaw 
Center 
of 
Technology 
Transfer, 
departments or other organizational units. In addition, the 
Contact Point will be equipped with an electronic system of 
recording and monitoring orders of commercialization. It 
will allow to track the current status of ongoing actions for 
technology transfer at the University level. 
The mission of the Technology Transfer Contact Point is 
coordinating activities of University departments as far as 
technology transfer is concerned. The Technology Transfer 
Contact Point is also responsible for overall registration of 
commercialization processes. Moreover, following the ‘one 
stop shop’ concept, it helps external entities contacting 
University units. Last but not least, it supports academic 
staff in establishing cooperation with business units in the 
area of technology transfer and through disseminating 
information about the development of new technical 
solutions. Each TTCP user will eventually save their time, 
as the TTCP staff will support them in fulfilling procedures 
and formalities connected with the commercialization 
process. 
V. 
KNOWLEDGE AND TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER – 
PRACTICE 
The main achievement of the Contact Point is the 
development and implementation of commercialization 
models and scenarios depicted below. 
There are two scenarios of technology transfer in WrUT 
(Fig. 1). 
Scenario 
1 
represents 
direct 
commercialization 
consisting in a direct sale to a company: 
 
The University has 30 days to make a decision 
whether 
they 
are 
interested 
in 
a 
given 
commercialization. If the decision is positive, the 
author gets informed and he/she is then to decide 
whether he/she wants to sign the contract with 
Wrocław University of Technology on proposed 
conditions. If he/she agrees, an agreement with the 
details 
of 
commercialization 
conditions 
and 
remuneration is concluded. 
 
The University renounces the commercialization or 
has not kept the 30-day-long deadline. In such case, 
the University transfers the offer to the author for 
maximum 10% remuneration. The author is then to 
decide whether he/she wants to commercialize 
individually. If yes, the author concludes an 
agreement transferring his/her economic rights with 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

the University and the commercialization is 
performed by the author.  
Scenario 2 represents commercialization by means of a 
special purpose company: 
In-kind contribution to a special purpose company 
(Fig.2): 
 
Deciding to commercialize a product and concluding 
a commercialization condition agreement with the 
author   
 
Determining copyrights distribution (the University 
covers the costs) 
 
Finding product recipient and makes product 
valuation (by the University or an external entity) 
 
Introducing products as University assets 
 
Obtaining a consent of the University for in-kind 
contribution 
 
Preparing and concluding an in-kind contribution 
contract 
 
Issuing and invoice and VAT settlement 
First model of commercialization process described 
below (Option 2) by means of a special purpose company, 
depicting commercialization income path (Fig. 3): 
 
Sales revenues and company profits go to a special 
purpose company. 
 
University receives a revenue refund for technology 
transfer to the special purpose company. 
 
University pays remuneration to the author. 
Second model of commercialization process (Option 1 – 
direct) depicting the path of commercialization incomes 
(Fig. 4): 
 
Economic entities transfer the sales and licensing 
income to the University 
 
The University pays remuneration to the author 
 
The following tables present effects of the cooperation of 
the Center for Science and Economy Cooperation and the 
Contact Point with economic environment in 2014. 
TABLE I.  
THE NUMBER OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF AGREEMENTS 
ELABORATED AND PROCEEDED IN THE CENTER FOR SCIENCE AND 
ECONOMY COOPERATION AND IN THE CONTACT POINT 
No. 
Elaborated agreements 
Number 
1. 
Framework cooperation agreements 
27 
2. 
Consortium agreements 
10 
3. 
Research and development work agreement s 
11 
4. 
Agreements on cooperation in framework of a 
project 
11 
5. 
Financing agreements 
4 
6. 
Non-disclosure agreements 
4 
7. 
Agreements on a series of lectures 
2 
8. 
Agreements on transfer of materials 
2 
9. 
Donation agreements 
1 
10. 
License agreements 
1 
No. 
Elaborated agreements 
Number 
11. 
Letters of intent 
7 
12. 
Memorandums of understandings 
3 
TOTAL 
83 
 
The next table presents different requests addressed to 
the Center for Science and Economy Cooperation and to the 
Contact Point in 2014. 
TABLE II.  
REQUESTS IN 2014 
No. 
Letter of inquiry 
Number 
1. 
Requests for performing tests/analyses 
83 
2. 
Requests for cooperation 
11 
3. 
Requests for an expertise 
4 
4. 
Requests for preparing a review of innovation 
8 
5. 
Requests for preparing a review for  the court 
4 
6. 
Other 
13 
TOTAL 
123 
 
The CSEC is responsible also for registration of the 
research and development work agreements, which in fact 
are research work orders commissioned and paid by 
different companies and external institutions. In 2014, our 
Center registered 252 of such agreements. 
The results of the activities undertaken by the 
Department of Intellectual Property and Patent Information 
for 2014 are shown in the following tables. 
TABLE III.  
THE NUMBER OF CASES HANDLED BEFORE THE PATENT 
OFFICE ON BEHALF OF THE UNIVERSITY 
No. 
Application type 
Number 
1. 
Prepared applications for  innovative solutions 
to the Polish Patent Office or European Patent 
Office or Office for Harmonization in the 
Internal Market 
169 
2. 
Prepared trademark applications 
7 
3. 
Total number of prepared applications 
176 
4. 
Applications to the Patent Office in defense of 
inventions (responses to allegations or other 
provisions) 
178 
5. 
Patents and other exclusive rights granted to 
the University 
130 
TABLE IV.  
THE NUMBER OF AGREEMENTS WITH EXTERNAL ENTITIES 
IN THE FIELD OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
No. 
Type of technology transfer 
Number 
1. 
Agreements on community of law 
36 
2. 
License agreements and cession of rights 
agreements 
6 
 
The Department of Intellectual Property and Patent 
Information supports the University also in the scope of 
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

supervising the agreements. In 2014, the Department gave 
opinions on or negotiated 439 agreements. 
CONCLUSION 
With the move of advanced economies from a resource-
based to a knowledge-based production, many national 
governments have increasingly recognized “knowledge” and 
“innovation” as significant driving forces of economic 
growth, social development, and job creation. In this context 
the promotion of “knowledge transfer” has increasingly 
become a subject of public and economic policy. Within the 
framework of knowledge and technology transfer (KTT), the 
university aims to use new research findings in cooperation 
with industry – as quickly and efficiently as possible – in an 
attempt to produce new products and services and to 
positively shape social development. 
Wroclaw University of Technology takes steps towards 
developing a system of cooperation with the economy. The 
implementation of a “one stop shop” concept is to support 
and facilitate contacts between the representatives of the 
scientific community and the economy. Last but not least, 
the goal of the system is to facilitate the access to 
information on new technologies, as well as the cooperation 
of business community with the university. 
REFERENCES 
[1] What is knowledge transfer? University of Cambridge. 
Research 
http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/what-is-
knowledge-transfer [retrieved: 10 October, 2014]. 
[2] L. Argote and P. Ingram, "Knowledge transfer: A Basis for 
Competitive Advantage in Firms", Organizational Behavior 
and Human Decision Processes, 82 (1), pp. 150–169, 2000. 
doi:10.1006/obhd.2000.2893 
[3] G. Holland, "Foreword", in H. Gray, “Universities and the 
creation of wealth”, The Society for Research into Higher 
Education and Open University Press”. 
[4] V. Lipphardt and D. Ludwig, “Knowledge Transfer and 
Science Transfer”, in: European History Online (EGO), 
published by the Institute of European History (IEG), Mainz 
2011-12-12. 
URL: 
http://www.ieg-ego.eu/lipphardtv-
ludwigd-2011-en 
URN: 
urn:nbn:de:0159-2011121229 
http://ieg-ego.eu/en/threads/theories-and-
methods/knowledgetransfer/veronika-lipphardt-david-ludwig-
knowledge-transfer-and-science-transfer. 
[5] R. Grosse, "International Technology Transfer in Services". 
Journal of International Business Studies 27, pp. 782, 1996. 
[6] Business 
Dictionary,  
http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/technology-
transfer.html  
[7] Innovation and entrepreneurship centers in Poland. Report 
2012, 
pp. 
5, 
http://www.pi.gov.pl/PARPFiles/file/OIB/IOB_Raporty_po_a
ngielsku/2012_BSI_in_Poland_Report.pdf 
[retrieved: 
14 
October, 2014] . 
[8] G. Tselekidis and A. Rafailidis, “Knowledge Transfer 
Management: studying the actual process”, The Fifth 
European 
Conference 
on 
Organizational 
Knowledge, 
Learning, and Capabilities 2-3 April, 2004, University of 
Innsbruck, 
Austria 
http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/wbs/conf/olkc/archive/okl
c5/papers/i-4_tselekidis.pdf 
[9] Perspectives 
University 
Ranking, 
http://www.perspektywy.pl/portal/index.php?option=com_content&vi
ew=article&id=724:uczelnie-akademickie&catid=93&Itemid=230 
[retrieved: 11 October, 2014]. 
[10] About the University. Wrocław University of Technology, 
http://www.portal.pwr.wroc.pl/info_podstawowe,242.dhtml 
[retrieved: 1 October, 2014]. 
[11] A. Wałek, “Center for Scientific and Technical Information - 
Library Services for Business and Science at Wroclaw 
University of Technology. eKNOW 2014 : the Sixth 
International Conference on Information, Process, and 
Knowledge Management, March 23-27, 2014, Barcelona, 
Spain”,  [Wilmington, DE, USA] : IARIA, pp. 93-97, 2014. 
[12] Research. 
Wrocław 
University 
of 
Technology, 
http://www.portal.pwr.wroc.pl/346196,242.dhtml, [retrieved: 
1 October, 2014]. 
[13] „Development of a model of cooperation Science of 
Economics in Wroclaw University of Technology", Wrocław: 
Politechnika Wrocławska, 2014, unpublished. 
[14] Knowledge transfer. Wikipedia the free encyclopedia, 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knowledge_transfer 
[retrieved: 
5 
October, 
2014].
 
 
 
 
 
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Technology Transfer in WrUT – scenarios. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Model of commercialization process 
 
 
 
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
Figure 3.  Model of indirect commercialization process in WrUT (Path 1 and 2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Model of indirect commercialization process in WrUT (Path 3 and 4) 
 
 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

