Blockchain in e-Health: Review 
Rees Mangena, Nidhal Taferguennit, Samia Aitouche, Seyf El Islam Bousiouda, Fadhila Djouggane, Morri Farida 
Laboratory of Automation and Manufacturing, Industrial Engineering Department, University Batna 2, Batna, Algeria 
e-mail: mangenarees@gmail.com, nidhaltaferguennit@gmail.com, s.aitouche@univ-batna2.dz, 
bousioudaseyfelislam@gmail.com, djougganefadhila@gmail.com, mourrisihame@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract— Certain researchers consider the blockchain 
technology as an Industry 4.1 revolution, because it benefits 
from the Industry 4.0 revolution and its technologies, in a 
decentralized manner. It is a revolution in digital world. In this 
paper, authors addressed a review of the use of blockchain 
technology in electronic health (eHealth) because of its 
importance for the comfort of citizens and the promotion of a 
healthy society, especially after the pandemic experience of 
COVID-19, where the necessity and the importance of 
telework and, Information and Communications Technology 
(ICT) became more essential than ever before. The review 
begins by the essence of eHealth and the problems encountered 
in it. It responds to how blockchain can promote eHealth in 
terms of management of patient data, its privacy, gains in time 
and because of how it is a facility without a central authority. 
The decentralized management of the blockchain does not 
mean a mess or a loss of data; on the contrary, it means the 
accountability of all members and partners of the blockchain 
(patient, doctor, medical institution, etc.). This is guaranteed 
by the good choice of the consensus algorithms to minimize 
time, energy consumption and consequently minimize costs.  
Several algorithms and other issues are discussed in this review 
paper to help researchers and software developers to discover 
and use the opportunity of blockchain in eHealth. All the used 
rules consented by the partners of blockchain system for 
eHealth are automatically applied in the form of smart 
contracts. These latter allow the treatment of citizens by the 
same way, without subjectivity and favoritism. 
Keywords-blockchain; eHealth; e-Health; telemedecine; 
EHR; electronic health record. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In 2008, the cryptocurrency Bitcoin [1] launched the 
blockchain technology, which has inherited properties such 
as decentralization, transparency, and anonymity. Bitcoin 
represents a good use-case for blockchain technology, with 
close to 400 million completed transactions as of March 19, 
2019 [2]. As a result, there have been talks and suggestions 
that blockchain technology could be useful in a variety of 
other data-driven sectors, others as big as healthcare [3]. 
Healthcare has had a reputation for being a traditional 
business that is difficult to evaluate due to the realities of 
change and it’s resistance to new ideas. Healthcare issues 
(such as privacy, quality of care, and information security) 
have gotten a lot of attention in recent years all around the 
world. Blockchain technology is becoming more widely 
recognized as a means for addressing current information 
mismanagement difficulties. It has the potential to improve 
immediate healthcare practices, such as health service 
delivery and care support quality. The blockchain's 
immutability is a critical feature for healthcare data. It can 
protect health records, clinical trial outcomes, and regulatory 
compliance. Smart contracts are being utilized to show how 
blockchain can help with real- time patient monitoring and 
medical interventions [12]. Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) compliant solutions provide 
record protection while enabling access to patients and 
medical professionals.  
Further 
blockchain 
applications 
include 
the 
pharmaceutical supply chain and the development of anti-
counterfeiting mechanisms. While the development of new 
pharmaceuticals incurs significant expenditures connected to 
trials to evaluate the drug's safety and efficacy, the usage of 
smart contracts allows for a more efficient informed consent 
approach, as well as improved data management and quality 
[13]. Providing patients with access to manage their own 
identities allows the informed consent method to be 
integrated while preserving the privacy of individual health 
data. In the pharmaceutical industry, blockchain has the 
potential to assist the pharmaceutical business deal with the 
rising risks of counterfeit and unapproved pharmaceuticals.  
With integrated Global Positioning System (GPS) and chain-
of-custody logging, smart contracts for pharmaceuticals can 
be formed and then identified, similar to device tracking. 
Within clinical trials, blockchain can be used to address 
issues, such as falsified results and data removal that 
contradict the researcher's bias or the funding source's 
objective. Clinical studies will be more reliable as a result of 
this. It also enables for the creation of an irreversible log of 
trial subject consent. It is estimated that identifying a chain-
of-custody in the supply chain may save the pharmaceutical 
sector $200 billion [7]. Many sectors of health insurance 
could benefit from a reliable record of events surrounding 
the patient pathway, such as improved incident reporting and 
automated underwriting operations. Contracts, such as 
automated payments for segments of the patient journey, 
could also be precisely stated and then implemented. 
This paper is organized as follows; Section 2 gives a 
view on the meaning of eHealth and some problems 
encountered in it. Section 3 clarifies the need of blockchain 
in eHealth to solve some of these problems. Some types of 
used blockchains in eHealth are given in Section 4. Section 5 
points the more adapted and benefic consensus or algorithms 
to eHealth. Section 6 highlights the use of smart contracts in 
eHealth. The methods of accessing and storing data are 
presented in Section 7.  Section 8 inspects the benefits of 
IOT in eHealth and blockchain. Section 9 is devoted to 
Electronic Health Records. Section 10 analyses blockchain 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

eHealth’s respect of General Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR) rules. Then we finished by general remarks in a 
conclusion Section.   
II. 
 PROBLEMS IN E-HEALTH 
The use of the Internet and other technologies in the 
health-care industry is referred to as eHealth [8].  eHealth is 
an evolving field at the intersection of medical informatics, 
public health, and business. It refers to health services and 
information distributed or enhanced through the Internet and 
associated technologies. According to the World Health 
Organization (WHO), eHealth is "the cost-effective and 
secure use of information and communication technologies 
in support of health and health-related fields, such as health-
care services, health surveillance, health literature, and health 
education, knowledge, and research."  
Many government health institutions have developed 
frameworks to ensure a high level of security and privacy. 
For example, the United States (US) Congress proposed the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA) in 1996 as a federal law that applies to the US 
healthcare industry. For effective use of eHealth, a set of 
valuable security and privacy requirements must be put in 
place in accordance with HIPAA guidelines [32]. 
 
Accessing and Sharing Health Data: Data must be 
transferred between healthcare providers, third 
parties, insurers, and patients while adhering to data 
protection regulations in the healthcare sector. 
 
Nationwide Interoperability: Having a single 
standard for patient data exchange facilitates data 
exchange between healthcare providers, which 
legacy systems frequently do not provide. 
 
Medical Device Tracking: Medical device tracking 
from the supply chain to decommissioning enables 
quick retrieval of devices, avoidance of unnecessary 
repurchasing, and fraud analytics. 
 
Drug Tracking: Blockchain like medical devices, 
allows for the tracking of the chain of custody from 
the supply chain to the patient, allowing for 
frictionless recalls and the prevention of counterfeit 
drugs. 
Furthermore, blockchain based health care systems face 
additional challenges, such as system evolution, privacy 
leakage, 
energy 
consumption, 
and 
communication 
scalability, due to the complexities associated with 
healthcare engagement and laws [28]. 
III. 
THE USE OF  BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY IN  E-
HEALTH 
There are many problems in today’s healthcare that may 
be solved using blockchain. Two of the major focuses that 
must be addressed are: Data security and Data ownership. 
Others 
include 
health 
data 
interchange, 
nationwide 
operability, Medical Device tracking, Drug Tracking, 
Clinical trials and Health Insurance. Currently, sensitive 
medical records lack a secure structure, resulting in data 
breaches with serious consequences. For example, in 2018, 
the Office for Civil Rights (OCR) at the Department of 
Health and Human Services (DHHS) received notification of 
numerous data breaches that exposed 13 million total 
healthcare records. 
The second source of concern is that patients are 
currently unable to fully own their own medical data, a 
concept that is becoming more relevant with the rise of 
personalized medicine and wearables. Both of these issues 
have significant moral ramifications that must be addressed.  
Blockchain technology could be the answer to both these 
problems. 
Another key challenge as tagging medical equipment 
with a usable ID and integrating trust in device identification 
and tracking. When a device, such as an infusion pump, is 
shown to have malfunctioned, tracking the device can reveal 
the source of the problem and prevent unnecessary 
repurchasing in the case of lost devices. These threats are 
likely to be reduced by a strong trust infrastructure based on 
medical device identification. According to the report, only 
20% to 30% of medical devices are connected within 
hospitals due to security and privacy concerns. 
Blockchain can also assist the pharmaceutical industry in 
overcoming the growing risks associated with counterfeit 
and unapproved drugs. As with device tracking, smart 
contracts for drugs can be defined and then pill containers 
identified using integrated (GPS) and chain-of-custody 
logging. 
Another use of blockchain in healthcare could be in 
clinical trials to overcome problems such as fraudulent 
results and the removal of data that does not support the 
researcher's bias or the funding source's intention. This will 
enforce clinical trial integrity. Furthermore, it allows for the 
keeping of an immutable log of trial subject consent. The 
pharmaceutical industry is expected to save $200 billion by 
defining a chain-of-custody in the supply chain. Health 
insurance could also benefit from a trusted record of events 
surrounding the patient pathway, such as improved incident 
reporting and automating underwriting activities. Contracts, 
such as automated payments for parts of the patient pathway, 
could also be clearly defined and then implemented [11]. 
Table 1 [25] shows the benefits of blockchain to the 
eHealth systems, relative to the traditional system. Privacy, 
security, transparency and reliability are guaranteed in the 
blockchain system.  
All pharmacists will potentially be impacted by this 
technology and therefore should have a strong interest in it. 
Pharmacists could have prescriptions that cannot be forged. 
Pharmacists in research laboratories could use this 
technology to prove the progress of their research without 
disclosing it. Finally, industrial pharmacists will be able to 
ensure the authenticity of medicines throughout their journey 
[26]. 
TABLE I. COMPARISON OF TRADITIONAL, CENTRALIZED,AND 
BLOCKCHAIN SUPPORTED EHEALTH 
criterion 
Traditional  
Healthcare 
System 
Centralized 
Telemedicine 
System 
Blockchain 
Supported 
Telemedicine 
Cost 
High 
Low 
Low 
Patient Waiting Time Very High 
Low 
Low 
Fault Tolerence 
No 
No 
Yes 
Requirement for In-
Yes 
No 
No 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Person Visiting 
Data Provenance 
No 
No 
Yes 
Health 
Record 
Manipulation 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Documentation 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
System 
Administration 
Centralize
d 
Centralized 
Decentralized 
Audit Trials 
No 
No 
Yes 
Data 
Privacy 
& 
Security 
Hard 
Hard 
Easy 
Transparency 
No 
No 
Yes 
Reliability 
& 
Integrity 
Low 
Low 
High 
 
Blockchain Supported telemedecine is better for the 
comfort of patients and healthcare personel. 
IV. 
EHEALTH TYPES OF BLOCKCHAINS 
Blockchains are classified into three types: public 
(permissionless), consortium (public permissioned), and 
private. They differ in terms of who has access to, writes to, 
and reads data on the blockchain [30]. Everyone can see the 
data in a public chain, and anyone can join and contribute to 
both consensus (in theory) and changes to the core software. 
The public blockchain is widely used in cryptocurrencies, 
and the two most popular cryptocurrencies, Bitcoin and 
Ethereum (the main chain), are public permissionless chains. 
A consortium blockchain is partially centralized in the sense 
that only a select group of entities has access to view and 
participate in the consensus protocol. The network in a 
private blockchain is distributed but frequently centralized 
[31]. Only selected nodes can participate in the network, 
which is frequently managed by a single central authority. 
The debate over the definition and categorization of the 
various types of blockchains presented here is still ongoing. 
There is currently no broad agreement on which distributing 
characteristics and consensus mechanisms are required to 
label a technology as "blockchain". 
V. 
ALGORITHMS (CONSENSUS) USED IN EHEALTH 
SYSTEMS 
The way data entries are accepted onto the distributed 
ledger by a distributed consensus protocol validating the data 
entries is a critical component of blockchains. There are 
several proposed and used consensus protocols, the three 
most commonly used being Proof-of-Work (PoW), Proof of 
Stake (PoS) and Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT) 
[34]. 
Because of its integration in Bitcoin, Proof-of-Work 
(PoW) is the consensus protocol most strongly associated 
with blockchain. When the PoW protocol is used, so-called 
miners compete to solve a computationally difficult puzzle. 
Miners use brute force to try to find a hash of the proposed 
block that is less than a predetermined value. The miner who 
computes this hash value first validates the transactions (or 
other entries) in the block and receives a reward. When used 
on a large blockchain, the PoW protocol consumes a 
significant amount of energy. This is demonstrated by the 
fact that the current electricity used for Bitcoin mining is 
comparable to the needs of a smaller country [33]. 
The selection of an approving node in Proof of Stake 
(PoS) is determined by the stake each node has in the 
blockchain. The stake in crypto-currencies is represented by 
the balance of a given currency. This, however, may give the 
"richest" node an unfair advantage. To account for this, 
several hybrid PoS versions have been proposed, in which 
the stake is combined with some randomization to choose the 
approving 
node. 
Ethereum, 
the 
second 
largest 
cryptocurrency, intends to switch from PoW to PoS [35]. A 
Byzantine agreement protocol underpins Practical Byzantine 
Fault Tolerance (PBFT). Because all nodes in PBFT must be 
known to the network, this consensus protocol can only be 
used in a public blockchain. The PBFT consensus process 
can be divided into three stages: pre-prepared, prepared, and 
commit. To progress through the three phases, each node 
must receive two-thirds of the votes cast by all nodes. 
Hyperledger Fabric currently employs PBFT [36].  
Due to the high cost of PoW algorithm in terms of 
hardware and energy, there was a need for an efficient but 
low-cost protocol. A promising candidate is the proof of 
elapsed time protocol made by INTEL which is secure and 
fast in processing and approving transactions, and low in 
energy consumption considering the huge number of blocks 
needed to be created and data to be stored in the health 
industry. However, this algorithm lacks decentralization, 
which is the main philosophy of the blockchain technology 
because this protocol depends only on INTEL hardware. A 
hybrid protocol with the same properties but independent of 
INTEL will have promising results [37]. 
 There is one other candidate that can be used which is 
the proof of weight protocol that has the speed and security 
needed to store and approve medical data and is low in terms 
of energy consumption. But the only down side for this 
algorithm is that it doesn’t reward miners. However, finding 
an alternative way of paying them will make this protocol an 
optimal choice for the health industry [19]. 
VI. 
SMART CONTRACTS 
Smart contracts are supported by some blockchain 
infrastructures, such as Ethereum. These are self-executing 
contractual agreements that formalize previously agreed-
upon provisions in source code. Because smart contracts are 
automatically enforced based on these pre-agreed provisions, 
they operate without the involvement of a third party or 
intermediary. This function within a smart contract can be 
activated in a blockchain transaction, and its use appears to 
be appealing to the health domain [10]. In [4], authors design 
secure payment protocols by performing blockchain-based 
smart contract enabling the patients and hospital to reliably 
pay the diagnostic and storage service efficiently. In general, 
the smart contracts in eHealth can be involved in [27]:  
 
Health Record Creation Contact to generate digital 
health records.  
 
Health Record Storage Contract for secure storage 
and rapid access  
 
Update permission Contract that can provide access 
at emergency situations.  
 
Data sharing Permission Contract for exchange of 
health records between different stakeholders and  
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

VII. METHODS OF ACCESSING AND STORING DATA 
A. Using a blockchain tree 
This is done by using a principal block on the main chain 
containing basic information of the patient and a sub block 
on the sub chain containing the medical record accessed only 
by using Proof Of Authority (POA) protocol to ensure the 
registration of any successful or unsuccessful attempts of 
access to the records, as illustrated in Figure 1 [20]. 
 
 
Figure 1. Blockchain tree structure 
B. Practical Byzantine fault tolerance 
Here, all nodes participate to the voting (2/3 must accept 
the transaction) which may cause a delay in the transaction 
processing and slow the whole operation. 
Delegated byzantine fault tolerance 
Not all nodes most vote which leads to a fast transaction 
acceptance but with a risk of centralization [21]. 
C. Adoptive leader election algorithm : (ALEA)   
This algorithm is based on electing a leader via Leader 
Election Algorithm (LEA) to grant him permission to create, 
access, copy, move, edit and delete data. This type of 
algorithm is using bully leader election method to minimize 
energy consumption.  
 
 
Figure 2. Leader election queue  
These algorithms are characterized by:  
  
 
0% failure: due to blockchain technology if a node 
fails others can do the work 
 
Ownership can’t change if the owner dies or loses 
consciousness  
 
High and slow response using ALEA [22] 
D. Using two types of chains  
A private one that contains the real ID of the patient and 
a public one which has health data of the patient under a 
temporary ID, under the control of a hyper ledger fabric 
framework, noting that only the trusted nodes can access the 
private chain, as shown in Figure 3.  
 
Figure 3. Types of permission for trusted and untrusted nodes 
Storage block: The main chain is used to secure the data 
from modification as it creates storage blocks containing the 
temporary ID, patient digital signature approving the 
transaction, medical institution signature and information 
about the current block and the previous one. 
Policy block: It contains a form of contract about the storing 
policies of the institution who store the data, signed by both 
it and the patient then approved by the trusted nodes and 
broadcasted on the main chain [23]. 
VIII. USING  INTERNET OF THINGS (IOT) IN EHEALTH 
In this section, we will try to see how can we introduce 
IOT and blockchain to the health care system, first we must 
refer to some existing platforms such as OmniPHR [38] 
which is a platform that allows the sharing of EPHR on a 
universal scale or GemOS which is used as an access 
platform to a medical chain owned by the patient and 
contains his EPHR. many researchers have developed BC-
enabled IoT eHealth systems and explored the application of 
BC technology in diverse fields of eHealthcare. The general 
idea is to equip patients, post-hospitalization, with equipment 
easy to use that collect data for example “heart rate, blood 
pressure, etc. and puts them on the blockchain while having a 
well put web platform that offers the link for authorized 
persons (medical staff) to access the patients’ data and 
monitoring his medical status leading to the lowering of the 
cost of post-hospitalization by roughly 113B$ just in the US 
(Fig. 4).  Cybersecurity is a critical consideration for all users 
of EHRs, particularly for patients. With the advent of 
Healthcare 4.0, which is based on IOT and sensors, cyber 
resilience has become a key requirement in ensuring the 
protection of patient data across devices [6]. 
 
 
Figure 4. IOT and blockchain health platform 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

One of many developed methods of collecting patient 
data and storing them or delivering them in real time to 
medical institution to ensure the best performance of health 
care towards the patient is Wireless Body Area Network 
(WBAN) [18]. It is mainly a collection of wireless sensors 
placed on or in a human body and is used to exchange data 
from patient to remote stations (Fig. 5). 
 
Figure 5. Wireless body area network scheme [29] 
Afterwards, all these data are then transferred using 
blockchain technology to ensure proper security and 
confidentiality.  
IX. 
HEALTH RECORDS AND THE INTEGRATION OF 
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY 
In a general point of view, e-health is an integration of 
computing methods and systems to provide solutions to the 
industry of health care, such as managing patient files but 
due to the huge amount and diversity of files provided by 
medical institutions, it has become a challenge to share and 
store data without failing or breaking the rules of privacy 
[15]. These files are called EHRs, i.e., a digital format of a 
patient information such as medical history, current and past 
medication, etc., that are sourced to cloud but cloud based 
EHRs aren’t secure enough and their current cryptographic 
methods aren’t sufficient enough [18]. Thus, blockchain 
technology has emerged as a promising solution in terms of 
privacy and data security since it is independent of third 
parties such as governments or banks. However, this doesn’t 
mean that it is an optimal solution since it is in its early years 
and needs more development in terms of performance, 
energy consumption and offering guaranteed confidentiality 
since in medical health care no one is allowed to read or see 
patient files without the proper permission [16].  
X. 
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY AND THE GDPR RULES 
After the rise of blockchain technology, all over the 
world, a tension was created between this technology and the 
GDPR. This tension was mainly because of two overarching 
factors. First, the GDPR is based on assuming that there is 
always someone who controls data thus adding more 
protection as commanded by data subjects; however, 
blockchain has a philosophy of decentralization, which 
means there is no more governance but many players who 
control these data, which can make accountability difficult.  
Secondly, the GDPR requires the possibility to erase or 
modify data in certain circumstances but blockchains are 
designed for the exact opposite purpose where they make the 
modification or deletion data difficult or even impossible, 
which makes it hard to reconcile with GDPR requirements 
[17]. The crucial challenges that companies face to achieve 
compliance with GDPR, and specifically to i) let data owners 
full visibility and control on the consents related to their own 
personal data, and ii) design services that can cope with 
consents that may change or be revoked dynamically. In 
[39], authors proposed a solution that relies on the 
blockchain technology to let data owners grant, access and 
rectify their consents in a decentralized peer-to-peer fashion, 
while guaranteeing consensual agreement of data owners and 
companies on the status of the relevant consents at any time. 
Although blockchains let all users access all contents freely. 
XI. 
CONCLUSION 
Blockchain is a new technology has the potential to 
disrupt a variety of data-driven industries, including the 
healthcare sector. The efficient management of EHRs is 
critical for patient telecare, which includes medicine for 
chronic patients, long-term telecare for special patients, and 
study of patients infected with a specific disease, among 
other things. The sharing of EHRs with medical practitioners 
can improve diagnosis accuracy; however, the system's 
privacy and security preservation of patients' records are 
drawbacks. Blockchain technology, due to its immutability, 
has recently been offered as a promising method for 
accomplishing EHR sharing while maintaining privacy and 
security [5]. Cyber resilience has become a major 
requirement in assuring the protection of patient data across 
devices, thanks to the introduction of healthcare 4.0, which is 
based on IOT and sensors. To all users in the network, 
blockchain 
provides 
crypto-enforced 
security, 
data 
immutability, and smart contracts-based business logic 
characteristics [6]. There are several other areas of healthcare 
and well-being that could be enhanced using blockchain 
technologies. Accessing and sharing health data, device 
tracking, clinical trials, pharmaceutical tracing, and health 
insurance are just a few examples. For accessing and sharing 
health data, patients can have their EHRs in a decentralized 
blockchain which any hospital can access instead of having 
their records scattered in different centralized hospital 
systems where they are difficult to access all at once and 
where they are susceptible to privacy breaches and 
alterations.  
In this paper, authors tried to give a review about the 
usage of blockchain in eHealth to resolve problems of central 
bureaucratic authority, replaced by a peer-to-peer network 
allowing decentralized responsibility, even including the end 
user in certain blockchain solutions, while maintaining 
patient privacy and protecting the confidentiality of their 
health folder. Blockchain is still promising in the future of 
the healthcare domain as well as in other domains. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash 
system. Decentralized Business Review”, 2008, 21260.‏  
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[2] Blockchain.com [retrieved: May, 2022]. Available on: 
https://www.blockchain.com/, charts/n-transactions-total. 
[3] M. Mettler, “Technology in healthcare: The revolution starts 
here. In: 2016 IEEE 18th international conference on e-health 
networking”, applications and services (Healthcom). IEEE, 
2016. p. 1-3.‏. 
[4] G. Zhang, Z. Yang, and W. Liu, “Blockchain-based privacy 
preserving e-health system for healthcare data in cloud”, 
Computer Networks, 2022, 203: 108586.‏ 
[5] S. Shamshad, Minahil, K. Mahmood, S. Kumari, and C. M. 
Chen, “A secure blockchain-based e-health records storage 
and sharing scheme”, Journal of Information Security and 
Applications”, 2020, 55: 102590.‏ 
[6] N. Venkatachalam, P. O'connor, and S. Palekar, “Cyber 
Security and Cyber Resilience for the Australian E-Health 
Records: A Blockchain Solution. In: Handbook of Research 
on Advancing Cybersecurity for Digital Transformation”, IGI 
Global, 2021. pp. 61-78.‏ 
[7] Frost and Sullivan, “Why Healthcare Industry Should Care 
About 
Blockchain?” 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available 
on: 
https://ww2.frost.com/files/8615/0227/3370/Why_Healthcare 
Industry_Should_Care_About_Blockchain_Edited_Version. 
[retrieved : June 2022] 
[8] eHealth: Definition, History, Characteristics, Scope, Benefits 
and Challenges, September 5, 2019. 
[9] S. Subashini and V. Kavitha, “Review: a survey on security 
issues in service delivery models of cloud computing”, J Netw 
Comput Appl, 2011; vol. 34(1), pp. 1-11. 
[10] A. Hasselgren, et al., “Blockchain in healthcare and health 
sciences—A 
scoping 
review”. International 
Journal 
of 
Medical Informatics, 2020, vol. 134: 104040.‏  
[11] L. Bell, W. J. Buchanan, J. Cameron, and O. Lo, 
“Applications of blockchain within healthcare. Blockchain in 
healthcare today”, 2018.‏ 
[12] K. N. Griggs, et al., “Healthcare blockchain system using 
smart contracts for secure automated remote patient 
monitoring”. Journal of medical systems, 2018, vol. 42. Issue 
7, pp. 1-7.‏ 
[13] N. B. A. Razak, G. Jones, M. Bhandari, M. C. Berndt, and P. 
Metharom, Cancer-associated thrombosis: an overview of 
mechanisms, risk factors, and treatment. Cancers, 2018, 
10.10: 380.‏.‏  
[14] E. F. Coutinho, et al. "Modeling blockchain e-health 
systems", Proceedings of the 10th Euro-American Conference 
on Telematics and Information Systems. 2020.‏ 
[15] F. Yahmed and M. Abid, "Trust Execution Environment and 
Multi-party Computation for Blockchain e-Health Systems", 
International Conference on Smart Homes and Health 
Telematics. Springer, Cham, 2020.‏  
[16] F. Michèle, “Blockchain and the General Data Protection 
Regulation, Can distributed ledgers be squared with European 
data protection law?”, Panel for the Future of Science and 
Technology EPRS | European Parliamentary Research Service 
Scientific Foresight Unit (STOA) PE 634.445 – July 2019 
ENEPRS 
[17] B. 
Arunkumar 
and 
G. 
Kousalya, 
"Blockchain-Based 
Decentralized and Secure Lightweight E-Health System for 
Electronic 
Health 
Records", 
Intelligent 
Systems, 
Technologies and Applications. Springer, Singapore, 2020. 
pp. 273-289.‏  
[18] M. R. Yuce and J. Khan, eds. , “Wireless body area networks: 
technology, implementation, and applications”, CRC Press, 
2011.‏ 
[19] S. M. H. Bamakan, A. Motavali, and A. B. Bondarti, “A 
survey of blockchain consensus algorithms performance 
evaluation criteria”, Expert Systems with Applications, 2020, 
vol. 154: 113385.‏ 
[20] L. Hirtan, P. Krawiec, C. Dobre, and J. M. Batalla, 
“Blockchain-based approach for e-health data access 
management with privacy protection”, In: 2019 IEEE 24th 
International Workshop on Computer Aided Modeling and 
Design of Communication Links and Networks (CAMAD). 
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1-7.‏ 
[21] T. Hyla and J. Pejas, “eHealth integrity model based on 
permissioned blockchain”, Future Internet, 2019, vol. 11.3: 
76.‏ 
[22] L. Xu, A. Bagula, O. Isafiade, K. Ma, and T. Chiwewe, 
“Design of a Credible Blockchain-Based E-Health Records 
(CB-EHRS) Platform”, In: 2019 ITU Kaleidoscope: ICT for 
Health: Networks, Standards and Innovation (ITU K). IEEE, 
2019, pp. 1-8.‏ 
[23] B. Assiri, “Using Leader Election and Blockchain in E-
Health, Advances in Science”, Technology and Engineering 
Systems Journal, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 46-54 (2020). 
[24] M. M. Neto, E. F. Coutinho, L. O. Moreira, and J. N. de 
Souza, “Toward blockchain technology in iot applications: An 
analysis for e-health applications”, In: IFIP International 
Internet of Things Conference. Springer, Cham, 2019, pp. 36-
50.‏ 
[25] R. W. Ahmad, et al. “The role of blockchain technology in 
telehealth and telemedicine”, International journal of medical 
informatics, vol. 148, 2021, 104399.  
[26] S. Tessier, Operation of the blockchain and its interest for the  
pharmaceutical world, PhD thesis in pharmacy, UFR 
pharmaceutical 
sciences, 
university 
Bordeau, 
France, 
Sciences du Vivant, 2019, dumas-02296520 
[27] U. Chelledurai, S. Pandian, and K. Ramasamy, “A blockchain 
based patient centric electronic health record storage and 
integrity 
management 
for 
e-Health 
systems”, Health 
Policyand Technology, 2021, vol. 10, n° 4: 100513.‏ 
[28] M.S. Rahman, M. A. Islam, M. A. Uddin, and G. Stea, “A 
survey of blockchain-based IoT eHealthcare: Applications, 
research issues, and challenges”, Internet of Things, 2022,  
100551. 
[29] M. Javed, G. Ahmed, D. Mahmood, M. Raza, K. Ali., and M. 
Ur-Rehman, “TAEO-A thermal aware & energy optimized 
routing 
protocol 
for 
wireless 
body 
area 
networks”, Sensors, vol. 19, n° 15, 2019, 3275. 
[30] https://www.techtarget.com/searchcio/feature/What-are-the-4-
different-types-of-blockchain-technology 
[31] https://www.investopedia.com/news/public-private-
permissioned-blockchains-compared/ 
[32] https://www.cdc.gov/phlp/publications/topic/hipaa.html 
[33] https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/blockchain.asp 
[34] https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/proof-work.asp 
[35] A. Hasselgren, K. Kralevska, D. Gligoroski, S. A. Pedersen, 
and A. Faxvaag, Blockchain in healthcare and health 
sciences—A scoping review. International Journal of Medical 
Informatics, 2020, vol. 134, 104040. 
[36] https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/practical-byzantine-fault-
tolerancepbft/ 
[37] D. P. Oyinloye, J. S. Teh, N. Jamil and M. Alawida, 
Blockchain 
consensus: 
An 
overview 
of 
alternative 
protocols. Symmetry, vol. 13 n° 8, 2021, 1363. 
[38] A., Roehrs, C. A. Da Costa, and R. da Rosa Righi, 
“OmniPHR: A distributed architecture model to integrate 
personal 
health 
records”, 
 Journal 
of 
biomedical 
informatics, vol. 71, 2017, pp. 70-81. 
[39] M. Calani, G. Denaro and A. Leporati, “Exploiting the 
Blockchain to Guarantee GDPR Compliance while Consents 
Evolve under Data Owners' Control”, In ITASEC, 2021, pp. 
331-343. 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

