Knowledge  Representation  Support  for  Substantive  Patent  Law  Precedents 
 
Sigram Schindler 
TELES Patent Rights International 
TU Berlin 
Berlin, Germany 
schindler.board@teles.de 
 
Abstract 
— 
The 
paper 
outlines 
a 
KR 
(Knowledge 
Representation) based IES (Innovation Expert System), for 
testing a claimed – classical as well as emerging – technology 
invention under the SPL (Substantive Patent Law) of any NPS 
(National Patent System), in particular under the 4 §§ 
101/102/103/112 of 35 USC (United States Code), as interpreted 
by the Supreme Courts’ KSR/Bilski/Mayo decisions. Already 
the IES prototype is capable of indicating the amazing power 
of the “Patent Technology” induced by this US Highest Courts’ 
SPL precedents as to such tests for a claimed invention. It 
works semi-automated when testing in explorative mode and 
fully automated/real-time when testing in confirmative mode. 
Developing this powerful Patent Technology has been enabled 
by performing substantial Mathematical KR research about 
recent US Highest Courts’ patent precedents – published by 
Mathematical KR research papers and Amicus Briefs sub-
mitted to the US Supreme Court and the US CAFC (Court of 
Appeals for the Federal Circuit) as to KR insights so obtained 
into the problems of SPL precedents, e.g., when dealing with 
claimed emerging technology inventions, in particular CIIs 
(Computer-Implemented Inventions). 
Keywords — SPL (Substantive Patent Law); KR Based IES 
Prototype; Emerging Technologies; Supreme Court’s KSR/ 
Bilski/Mayo 
Decisions; 
Inventive 
Concept; 
Preemptivity; 
Abstract Idea; CAFC’s Recent Precedents 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Internationally and nationally, inconsistencies in SPL 
precedents have increased with the advent of claimed 
inventions dealing with subject matter in emerging technolo-
gies areas. As compared to classical technologies SPL 
precedents and its allegedly clearly understood pragmatics, 
applying SPL on emerging technologies inventions encoun-
ters new kinds of pragmatics not yet understood. Inconsisten-
cies arise, as these new pragmatics of emerging technology 
inventions come together with their being intangible and 
invisible just as their subject matters. This requires replacing 
both by a purely mental model, the invention and its base of 
notions, that is, functionality provider. They will be called 
“model-based” from here on.  
Examples of such advanced alias model-based technolo-
gies underlying recent patenting are business technology, 
nano technology, pharmaceutics technology, genetics (DNA 
(DeoxyriboNucleic Acid) technology), software technology. 
All these model-based technologies raised fundamental ques-
tions of thinking about the creativity embodied by inven-
tions, about SPL stimulating and protecting it, and about the 
subject matter of inventions dealing with them, which 
required decisions by the respective national Highest Courts. 
For this paper, of particular importance is the US Supreme 
Court's famous, as direction pointing, line of KSR/Bilski/ 
Mayo/Myriad landmark decisions [32]-[34]. They deal with 
creativity/business 
respectively 
software/pharmaceutical/ 
DNA respectively life science technologies – whereby espe-
cially the Mayo decision [33] provides clear guidelines. 
These fundamental questions of thinking are hardly 
analyzable without applying Mathematical Knowledge Re-
presentation, customized to dealing with it - e.g. by simpli-
fying accordingly the notion of "concept". While this notion 
is well-known in "Advanced IT"1) (e.g., DL/KR/... [3][4]) it 
is in this form far too complex to enable meticulously mathe-
matically modelling SPL and SPL precedents - and also for 
ever becoming broadly accepted by the several million patent 
lawyers/examiners/judges/inventors. 
This means that classical SPL precedents is not really 
applicable to model-based claimed inventions, as its classical 
claim construction assumes a tangible/visible subject matter, 
hence allegedly always patent-eligible, i.e., there no need 
existed to separate patent-eligible from non-eligible inven-
tive concepts – potentially existing with intangible/invisible 
emerging technologies’ subject matters. For dependably 
achieving this separation and understanding its implications, 
a refined claim construction is indispensable, as shown by 
the inconsistencies evolved already (see below). Yet, defin-
ing this refined claim construction precisely and completely, 
as required and clearly outlined by the Supreme Court’s 
Mayo decision though with a broad brush only, involves 
serious intricacies. Removing them dependably is possible 
by KR Technology, partly by only Mathematical KR, as 
shown in [5]. 
To put this quite unmistakably: KR Technology indeed 
managed to identify the reasons for the notional incon-
sistencies of recent SPL precedents. It achieved this by 
removing them by defining, for a claimed invention, be it of 
classical or of emerging technologies, the refined claim con-
struction precisely and completely. This is probably hitherto 
the most important contribution of KR Technology to sol-
ving a problem otherwise seemingly unsolvable:  Of catering 
innovations in emerging technologies, and hence of techno-
logy depending societies. Anyway, the amazingly powerful 
“Patent Technology” outlined by this paper could not have 
been developed without this Mathematical KR (Technology) 
or the US Highest Courts’ SPL precedents inducing it. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

II. 
ON  SPL AND  SPL  PRECEDENTS 
This paper belongs to a series of other papers – as shown 
by the reference list – of an R&D (Research and Develop-
ment) project, namely the FSTP (Facts Screening and Trans-
forming Processor) project, dealing with supporting precise 
SPL interpretation and SPL precedents by Advanced IT1) 
[3][4], e.g., for making patents, in particular on emerging 
technologies subject matters - and the IES described by this 
paper - "Highest Court proof". While this paper is self-con-
tained, its terms/ notions yet are hard to understand without 
their detailed discussions in these other papers. Hence, there 
are many cross-references to them – though this paper's basic 
ideas are independent of the precise knowledge of this 
"context". 
The Mayo decision [33] showed that describing a model-
based claimed invention by its “inventive concepts” 
facilitates isolating/recognizing its new pragmatics in spite of 
its new mental problems due to its and its service provider’s 
intangibility/invisibility. The term/notion of “concept” is si-
milarly used since ever in Advanced IT1) [3][4]. I.e., the far 
reaching potentials of the term/notion of “concept” are com-
monly known and fundamental in probably all branches of 
Advanced IT since dozens of years. But there this term/no-
tion has been developed to a degree of sophistication 
completely clouding its potential usefulness for SPL prece-
dents. But, the Mayo decision shows that only the next to 
trivial kernel of this notion is used by the notion of “inven-
tive concept”, which makes it apt for SPL. This is confirmed, 
again, by the Supreme Court's recent invitation of Amicus 
Briefs as to the question of patent-eligibility of computer-
implemented inventions [24][25].  
Thus: Here the US SPL is taken exemplarily, i.e., the 4 
§§ 101/102/103/112 of 35 USC, but the SPL of any other 
NPS could have been taken also, e.g., in the EU the §§ 52-
57, 69 of the EPC (European Patent Convention). The incon-
sistencies in the US SPL precedents indispensably imply 
reconsidering in all NPSes their “claim construction alikes” 
for emerging technologies’ inventions.   
Proceeding as the US Supreme Court’s KSR/Bilski/Mayo 
decisions [32][33] require is possible in all other national/re-
gional SPLs, too. But this implies getting familiar with the 
“scientification” coming up in testing a claimed invention 
this way, especially with the Mayo decision’s [33] new key 
terms/notions “inventive concepts” and “preemption”/”ab-
stract idea” – as they facilitate separating in any SPL its con-
cerns 
(= 
requirements) 
from 
each 
other 
[10][18]. 
Additionally, they fully compensate the impossibility of gra-
phically supporting the presentation of the properties of a 
model-based claimed invention [19]. They thus enable show-
ing/proving that these properties meet the separated SPL 
requirements/concerns.  
The transition – from the classical claim construction to a 
refined claim construction by using these additional, new, 
and more purposeful terms/notions in i) interpreting an SPL, 
ii) describing the properties of the invention to be tested 
under this SPL, and iii) showing that these properties meet 
these requirements/concerns – is a “paradigm refinement”, as 
explained in detail in [18]. 
Summarizing the message conveyed by this section: This 
paper is focused on showing i) that the groundbreaking 
insights coming together with the Supreme Court introduced 
terms “inventive concept” and “preemption”/”abstract idea” 
just leverage on Mathematical KR [5] but completely avoid 
confronting a user with any Mathematics ii) the huge advan-
tages that the so by the US Highest Courts induced “Patent 
Technology” provides to every patent practitioner’s pro-
fessional life, by outlining the powerful functionalities of the 
IES. 
III. 
ON  PATENTS  /  INVENTIONS 
“Patent/SPL Technology” and its refined claim construc-
tion – induced by the US Highest Courts’ patent precedents – 
are intellectually only slightly more demanding than the 
hitherto allegedly sufficient classical claim construction [24] 
[25]. Nevertheless, its “post-Mayo” refined claim constructi-
on dramatically reduces by its “purposefulness” [1][10][18] 
the time for testing a claimed invention under 35 USC §§ 
112/102/103/101, i.e., under US SPL, while the classical 
claim construction is oversimplistic and so creates confusion 
and invites misuse in many practical cases, in particular if 
additionally applying the strange BRI (Broadest Reasonable 
Interpretation) [14][21][24][25].   
Patent Technology is an administrative “cross-sectional 
technology” in that it impacts on decision making in all US 
institutions below the Supreme Court – but not on the top of 
this hierarchy, the AIA (America Invents Act) (as 
erroneously seen, due to its disaggregating the 4 compound 
legal requirement statements of its 4 §§ 101/102/103/112 
into 10 SPL/FSTP tests) [10]. But this administrative view 
on Patent Technology ignores its impacts on everyday’s 
patent business.  
By performing this disaggregation of compound legal 
concerns/requirements – of the fictional but politically deci-
sive “social contract” underlying SPL – Patent Technology 
implements the Supreme Court above interpretation of the §§ 
101/102/103/112. It maps these §§’s 4 compound require-
ment statements onto (today) 10 “concerns separating” such 
statements, checked by 10 simple FSTP/SPL tests (for an 
invention to be patent-eligible and patentable).  
This logically correct mapping – of 4 compound onto 10 
elementary legal concern/requirement statements – implies 
that these 10 simple tests are to be passed by a claimed in-
vention if and only if it is patent-eligible and patentable 
under the SPL of 35 USC. This mapping onto the 10 simple 
tests exposes that the Supreme Court’s KSR/Bilski/Mayo 
[32][33] and CAFC decisions actually go far beyond their 
usual decisions impacting on subordinate institutions. 
This mapping namely exposes key insights as to basic 
questions arising in developing a much further reaching 
“Mathematical Innovation Theory” needed as guide to 
finding/developing/financing/evaluating/marketing/using, 
with an efficiency unknown today, useful innovations in all 
areas of social life – of which the Patent Technology pre-
sented here is just a first step. These insights refer to the 
crucial question, in what way to systematically expand an 
appropriate KR of a subject matter by inventive concepts 
such that the resulting knowledge and its KR – both about 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

the new, so “invented” resulting subject matter – solve a 
given hitherto unsolvable problem, i.e., these Highest 
Courts’ hints pointed at and inspired starting developing 
what eventually may become and then would be called 
“Practical Innovation Technology”. Such fundamental tech-
nologies – earlier found ones are e.g., building an acre, or a 
state, or a wheel, or an academy, or an electric conductor, or 
a computer, … – once recognized are never forgotten. 
IV. 
CONSISTENCY  AND  PREDICTABILITY  OF  SPL  TESTS 
In the international arena of national patent systems 
(NPSes), the US Highest Courts’ patent jurisdiction is just 
proving its leading role by adjusting the US SPL precedents 
to the needs of emerging technologies – by accordingly 
refining the interpretation of 35 USC §§ 112/101/102/103, 
i.e., the US SPL and hence its precedents’ paradigm. This 
adjustment is important, as the SPL together with its pre-
cedents are one of the sources of the wealth of any economi-
cally highly developed society, such as the US one. 
By KR, this adjustment phenomenon [1][5] is the 
following. It had started in 2007 with the Supreme Court’s 
interpretation of § 103 in the KSR case; but then this seemed 
to be, for many patent experts, the start of a US internal law 
administration dispute about the distribution of responsibi-
lities in patent jurisdiction between the Supreme Court and 
the CAFC. Thereafter this adjustment went on refining the 
interpretation of 35 USC §§ 101 and 112, according to the 
Supreme Court’s Bilski/Mayo decisions [32][33] and the 
CAFC’s Noah/CLS/Ultramercial/Accenture decisions [35] 
[36][40]. By today, it is clear that this dispute between the 
Highest US Courts is much more than a question of distri-
bution of responsibilities in US patent jurisdiction: Namely, 
that it is an internationally big step forward in getting under 
control the fundamental problems inevitably arising in clas-
sical patent precedents due to purely “model-based” inven-
tions – being totally mental, i.e., of intangible and invisible 
subject matter, i.e., no longer of “MoT” (Machine-Or-Trans-
formation) type – typical for all emerging technologies. 
Hence, these problems arise not only in the US but sooner or 
later in any high tech depending nation, putting the 
consistency and predictability of its patent precedents into 
jeopardy, as it happened in the US. With the above decisions 
the US Highest Courts reacted by starting taking the para-
digm underlying US SPL to a higher level of development, 
which enables consistent and predictable patent precedents 
also for emerging technology inventions – as the first 
Highest Courts, worldwide. 
This refined US SPL paradigm – underlying the refined 
SPL precedents and being just a refinement of the classical 
paradigm – embodies a significant increase of awareness of 
the intricacies in patenting e.g., business, human genome, 
pharmaceuticals, nano, and self-replication technology based 
inventions, and makes  it notionally significantly more pre-
cise and complete than the classical one. This is recognized 
easiest by the Mayo decision’s [33] refinement. Its 3 additio-
nal key terms/notions are: “inventive concept”, “preemp-
tive”, and “abstract idea”. But, as to their important 
meanings, this decision only briefly sketched them2). Yet, the 
meaning of the term “concept” is known in all branches of 
Advanced IT1) [3][5], of which a simplified version is 
sufficient here; the precise meanings of the other two key 
terms follow from elaborating on the outlines provided by 
the Mayo decision [33] in terms of inventive concepts and 
KR2). 
In other words, the Supreme Courts’ directive to use 
“inventive concepts” for presenting a claimed invention in 
increased clarity – its patent-eligible inventive concepts 
separated from its patent-noneligible inventive concepts, for 
gaining an increased understanding of its legal aspects, 
which also enables testing it under 35 USC §§ 101 and 
102/103 in a homogenous way – impacts, first of all, the 
classical interpretation of § 112 to become this section’s 
refined interpretation2). This improved legal understanding of 
the claimed invention stimulates two important insights into 
it: 
 
Its hitherto 4 compound tests under the 4 Sections 
101/112/102/103 of 35 USC may be broken down 
into a set of 10 elementary SPL tests, being logically 
and legally absolutely equivalent to these 4 
intriguingly complex tests. 
 
Its claim (sloppily just “the claimed invention”) is 
preemptive if and only if it is an abstract idea only, 
whereby the latter statement is simply testable by the 
not-an-abstract-idea-only test10).  
The structurally groundbreaking insights of the preceding 
paragraph are elaborated on by the 2 following subsections 
explaining the usability advantages of this term/notion 2 ) 
“inventive 
concept” 
and 
of 
the 
new 
just 
quoted 
terms’/notions’ “elementary SPL” tests, which comprise this 
“NAIO (Not-an-Abstract-Idea-Only)” test10), testing the 
claimed invention’s (non)preemptivity, as well as the 
“NANO (Novel-And-Non-Obvious)” test11), testing its no-
velty/(non)obviousness. 
A. Inventive Concepts: Basic Advantages 
The “misunderstanding” of the Supreme Court’s term 
“inventive concept” among “patent practitioners” got to be 
removed, first [7, ftn 4.d]. Indeed, the term “concept” as such 
is ambiguous3),4). I.e., there are 
 
over the millennia grown broad and sweeping 
meanings of the term concept, comprising different 
flavors, being “vagueness tolerating”, i.e., colloqui-
ally addressing big issues such as “soul, god, love, 
truth, drama, faith, belief, …, a general principle, a 
plot of a story, a pattern of events ” and  
 
by IT defined specific meanings of this term con-
cept, also comprising different flavors, but all of 
them being “details oriented” – as indispensably 
required for enabling precise statements by them, 
e.g., “formal specifications”, alias “mathematical 
models” of functional and non-functional properties 
of any complex system, its modules and their inter-
actions, such as SPL prosecution or litigation cases.  
The first systems, where this notion of the term 
concept was used for specifying/modelling/con-
figuring them, were large data base systems in the 
early 70s – then also starting from the above broad 
notion, but stepwise learning the lesson that it had to 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

be refined to enable the needed kind of precise des-
criptions/models of properties of their processes and 
data structures – and then it migrated from there into 
other IT research areas, such as AI (Artificial Intelli-
gence), Semantics, KR, DL (Description Logic) [3] 
[4].  
While the use of the above IT notion of concept 
mostly comes along with the awareness of the 
pitfalls of human thinking/speaking about complex 
systems, such as controversial SPL cases – and how 
these concepts are aggregated therein from other 
concepts – those who have not undergone the tedious 
learning process how deficient natural language and 
thinking often is, e.g., many patent business practi-
tioners, knee-jerkily leap to some historic/vague 
notions of concept, assuming erroneously it were 
well-definable and understood by them.  
As to these two optional meanings of the term concept 
the following holds. The Mayo decision [33] quite clearly 
talks of a claimed invention’s “details oriented” concepts to 
be identified as embodied by it, i.e., uses the IT interpretation 
of this term “inventive concept”. By contrast those, world-
wide, who disagree with the US Law Maker’s and US 
Highest Courts’ broad interpretation of 35 USC § 101 insist 
that the Mayo decision’s notion of “inventive concept” uses 
the above historic/colloquial very vague meaning of this 
term, although their consequential argument that the Su-
preme Court had asked for the claimed invention’s SINGLE 
inventive concept evidently contradicts the Mayo decision 
[33] – implying that this insistency strangely claims this 
were the proof that the US Supreme Court’s whole line of 
KSR/Bilski/Mayo decisions [32][33] were untenable, i.e., its 
breadth of interpreting § 101.  
But, if the above “details oriented” notion of the Mayo 
decision’s [33] inventive concepts is accepted, a fundamental 
question remains. Namely, what then are such inventive con-
cepts precisely – defined in terms of the person of pertinent 
ordinary skill/creativity, comprising some Advanced IT 
knowledge? This crucial question is answered by the 
following definition.  
Definition: An “inventive concept” of a claimed 
invention is a notion2) disclosed by the claimed invention’s 
specification, the meaning of which meets also the useful-
ness requirement stated by 35 USC § 1015),6).  
An inventive concept hence comprises the qualification 
of its meaning alias its pragmatics to be patent-eligible or not. 
While it is an indeed trivial mental/fictional construct – after 
one has understood it – it nevertheless is extremely helpful 
for clearly presenting and understanding the SPL construct of 
ideas. This becomes evident after having the following 3 
bullet points clarified some basic features of inventive con-
cepts.    
 
An inventive concept of a claimed invention is not 
only one of its “technical facts”, as disclosed by its 
patent (application)’s specification, but also the 
“legal fact” logically underlying it therein. Thus, an 
inventive concept is a claimed invention’s legal fact 
establishing its respective technical fact, i.e., repre-
sents a notional tuple. Inventive concepts hence are 
artificial notions representing the mental – jointly 
legal and technical – building blocks of any patent. 
Every patent business practitioner actually does 
practically use them every day, when thinking about 
a patent, also if hitherto not having been aware of 
them – he/she simply has no alternative but to use 
these inventive concepts – though normally he 
would think, at a point in time, about just one of 
these components of an inventive concept.  
 
Another evident question seems to pose the relation 
between terms and inventive concepts in patent 
precedents, as terms are actually explicitly used in 
patent specifications’ wordings, but inventive 
concepts hitherto usually not. But the Mayo deci-
sion’s [33] requirement statement for them implies 
that inventive concepts need not show up explicitly 
in patent specifications’ wordings. Mayo [33] 
implies even stronger: The names of inventive con-
cepts may be freely chosen by the person analyzing 
the patent at issue to be self-descriptive in natural 
language (of the person of ordinary skill/creativity). 
Though, in the future, it would greatly facilitate 
interpreting a claim claiming an invention, if its spe-
cification would explicitly describe the inventive 
concepts it is made-up of, e.g., in a short section 
therein of its own.  
 
Inventive concepts may be compound or elementary. 
Using a claimed invention’s compound inventive 
concepts when testing it under the SPL is often 
misleading; then disaggregating them into conjunc-
tions of elementary inventive concepts is indispens-
able [5]. But, there are several reasons, why for 
many claimed inventions – especially model-based 
ones – also not all their technical elementary facts 
are suitable for its inventive concepts and/or why the 
sequence of discussing their disclosures matters [5].  
Going beyond these clarifications – in testing a claimed 
invention under SPL – inventive concepts have primarily two 
advantages over terms, which make this next to trivial 
refocusing (of the use of the two mental instruments at issue) 
on “inventive concepts” instead of on “terms” extremely 
rewarding: This refocusing comes along with intuitively 
getting/understanding the “SPL construct of ideas” and 
hence testing a claimed invention therein. Firstly, to an in-
ventive concept usually may be given a self-descriptive name 
(just as to an atomic concept in DL) unless this is super-
fluous because the inventive concept’s meaning is known 
under its term’s name2) to the person of pertinent ordinary 
skill/creativity. And secondly, an inventive concept’s 
meaning is stated as a useful property of an element – while 
a term’s often identifies a meaning2) specified by a negation 
of a useful property. The first advantage is evident, the 
second one explained by the next paragraph. 
For showing that a claimed invention meets all §§ 
101/112 requirements, the 
 
classical claim construction assumes that the 
inventivity7) of this claimed invention becomes ap-
parent to patent lawyers/examiners/judges by its 
limitations – ignoring that in their brains, limitations 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

alone have difficulties to build up respective animate 
subcortically controlled recognition processes alias 
“intuition” as to this claimed invention, because 
limitations totally unnaturally are negations of the 
properties of this focal object – whereas 
 
the refined claim construction automatically engages, 
by its inventive concepts, these patent practitioners’ 
such intuitions while drafting/analyzing/defending a 
patent’s claimed invention – as these inventive 
concepts expose their contributions to the claimed 
invention’s total usefulness8) in a natural way, which 
makes it for the patent practitioners’ brains signifi-
cantly simpler to build up respective animate sub-
cortically controlled recognition processes of proper-
ties of the focal object. This process is stimulated by 
the brain, as it automatically recognizes that these 
positive properties are those meanings, with the 
negations of which it was struggling before. 
Such psychological phenomena – psychological 
preferences, when seeking understanding and/or 
working with some information, of assuming alleged 
congruities over concluding analytically, i.e., jum-
ping at a whole over building up this whole – are 
well known.   
This invocation of the patent professional’s intuition 
when testing a claimed invention under SPL does not only 
counteract any pretence of illegally broadening of terms’ 
meanings by the meanwhile really sophisticated misuse of 
the BRI guideline [14] and the Markman/Phillips decisions 
[38][39] it is based on [5], but it also animates the sharpness 
of a patent business professional’s ability as to criticism and 
creativity, thus increasing the comfort and efficiency of 
his/her work. This makes the refined claim construction 
based on the claimed invention’s inventive concepts by far 
superior to the classical claim construction based on solely 
the terms used by the claim’s wording. 
Thus, in total, there are strong reasons for this superiority 
of the Mayo decision’s view of basing the granting of patents, 
in particular those for emerging technology inventions, on 
these claimed inventions’ inventive concepts – more precise-
ly: for focusing the patent-eligibility and patentability tests of 
a model-based claimed invention on its inventive concepts, 
instead on solely its terms. Although inventive concepts as 
well as terms are subject to interpretations by the person of 
pertinent ordinary skill/creativity, there is the just outlined 
and undeniable better appreciation by a human brain of the 
meanings of inventive concepts than of the meanings of 
terms9).  
Evaluating the before said in this subsection: If the notion 
of inventive concepts at its beginning seemed sophisticated, 
this only shows how complex the thinking underlying testing 
a claimed invention under SPL actually is – often not at all 
recognized by those contemporary discussions clinging to 
using solely terms to this end, which bars their insights into 
this complexity. Such consistency and predictability creating 
insights, as described by the final part of this subsection, are 
clearly enforced by the Supreme Court by requiring using 
inventive concepts to this end, i.e., to use them in construing 
a claimed invention’s claim construction as described above.  
B. Elementary SPL Tests: Basic Advantages 
The Mayo decisions [33] inventive concepts also invite 
breaking down a claimed invention’s 4 compound tests 
under the 4 §§ of 35 USC 101/102/103/112 into 10 elemen-
tary “SPL tests” [5][11]. These are scientifically developed, 
hence their principles are freely available – potentially not 
their particular applications as “FSTP tests”, as they are 
subject to patent applications. 
Advantages these elementary 10 SPL tests offer to patent 
professionals are outlined below, after first identifying, 
which “aspects” of a claimed invention’s refined claim con-
struction they check – in IT language: what “requirements” 
alias “concerns” stated by the 4 §§ of 35 USC they may state 
as being met by the claimed invention – being patent-eligible 
and patentable iff it passes all 10 SPL tests, i.e., a claimed 
invention’s 4 tests under these 4 §§ is thus refined into 10 
tests of 
 
§ 112 for the well-definedness of this claimed 
invention’s inventive concepts, i.e., of their all 1) 
disaggregation into elementary inventive concepts, 
and of their 2) lawful disclosures, 3) definitiveness, 
and 4) enablement; 
 
§§ 102/103 for the novelty and nonobviousness of 
this claimed invention, i.e., of its 7) novelty and non-
obviousness by its “NANO test”, based on its 5) 
independent and 6) non-equivalent inventive con-
cepts; 
 
§ 101 for the patent-eligibility of this claimed 
invention, i.e., of its being 8) not a law of nature or 
natural phenomenon only, 9) not idempotent, and 
10) not an abstract idea only by its “NAIO test”, i.e., 
of its claim being nonpreemptive. 
The dramatic support of a patent professional working on 
a patent and its claimed invention – provided by an IES [7] 
leveraging on these 10 SPL tests – comprises,  
 
automatically prompting him/her through all steps of 
exploratively checking, whether they meet these 10 
SPL as well as 4 §§ 35 USC respective require-
ments/concerns by having him/her interactively 
input or by automatically computing these state-
ments and confirming them (= facts screening), and  
 
their automatic real-time affirmative execution (= 
facts transforming) on the user’s request. This 
execution provides to him/her controls for i) access 
to all information existing in any SPL test of the 
claimed invention, and ii) crossover from any one 
item in its patent to its peer in any one document and 
to any one of their relations, tests respectively their 
single steps, multiple presentations thereof, …. (and 
back), and iii) all these services anytime in “dialog 
real-time”. 
In so far, the US Highest Courts have taken, by their 
patent precedents, SPL precedents to a level of development, 
on which the today notorious problems with emerging 
technology are overcome, i.e., with model-based inventions. 
The evolution of classical claim construction to this higher 
level of evolution – represented by the refined claim con-
struction implied by the Supreme Court’s above line of 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

groundbreaking decisions, which in turn induced the above 
10 semi-automatic SPL test – will dramatically increase the 
productivity of all patent practitioners, be they inventors, 
research managers, examiners, lawyers, licensers/-sees, in-
vestors, or judges [9].  
Out of the 10 SPL tests, the NAIO10) and the NANO11) 
test are of particular interest, the latter as to the KSR 
(§102/103) case, the former as to the Bilski/Mayo/CLS/ 
Myriad/Accenture [32]-[35][40] (mostly erroneously under-
stood as being plain § 101) cases. As claim construction up 
to § 112 is just becoming an issue for the Highest Courts 
again, the role of the remaining 8 tests will shortly encounter 
more interest, too, as removing the above loopholes of the 
Markman/Phillips decisions[38][39].  
V. 
THE  IES  USER  INTERFACE 
The only prerequisite for applying these 10 FSTP/SPL 
tests, either exploratively or reconstructively, is appropriately 
having marked-up all documents involved in a PTRC’s 
(Problem of TT.0 (Technical Teaching) and RS (Reference 
Set)) analysis [6]-[9][11]. While this would only rarely 
happen with the doc.CTs (ConText DOCuments of a PTR), 
the needs of additional mark-ups in doc.i’s are frequently 
encountered during an explorative FSTP test’s iterative 
executions, in particular if the tested PTR’s RS is expanded 
by a further doc.i or the definition of a cr-C (CReative 
Concept) is changed [8][10][11]. Such mark-ups will be 
based on some of the XML (Extensible Markup Language) 
derivatives currently discussed to this end. Independently 
thereof, the IES’es UI (User Interface) concisely models the 
requirements of the NPS’es SPL, of its precedents10),11), and 
potentially also of some application area specificities (such 
as of communications, software system, lifecycle, DNA, 
nano, selfreplication, … technologies, including their above 
quoted pragmatics decisive for their social success).  
Figure 1 shows 4 separate windows of the IES’es UI, 
simultaneously mapped onto one or several screens, in total 
called “survey window”. These 4 windows are identified by 
their names “o-doc.i”, “facts.i”, “plcs.i”, and “tests” in their 
top left corners. They serve for the knowledge represent-
ations of/about primarily i) the original document.i’s in 
o.doc.i, ii) their “inventive concepts” on their o/BAD/BID-
KR-levels (o=Original, BAD=Binary, Aggregated and 
Disclosed, BID=Binary, Independent and Disclosed) in 
facts.i, iii) their “patent logic carrying semantics” items on 
these levels in plcs.i, and iv) the 10 FSTP/SPL tests. They 
may be arbitrarily zoomed, positioned, and overlapped with-
in the survey window. The graphical items within these 4 
windows basically represent inventive concepts and/or their 
components in these KRs. The lines between these items 
represent their peering in any KR and indicate interrelations 
between them. Their arrowheads are exemplary for browsing 
between them – i.e., all lines may have two arrowheads. 
This UI presents in its survey window – functionality 
top-down in telegram style – the following:  
 
The middle “tests” window provides access to the 
use of the claimed invention’s inventive concepts by 
any FSTP test – skipped here but shown to the user 
on its request by the ANC (anticipates/not-anti-
cipates-and-not-contradicts/contradicts) 
matrix 
columns, represented by test specific matrix lines 
describing in short hand this use. 
 
On the left lower side, in the “o-doc.i” window, two 
stacks are shown: Of 3 peer doc.i’s (their mark-ups 
comprising all potential cr-Cs’ disclosures) and of 
doc.CTs (their mark-ups comprising all le-Cs 
(LEgal-Cs), e.g., law/precedents items to be applied 
where appropriate, respectively additional informa-
tion potentially belonging to it, such as expla-
nations/confirmations/warnings/…, all of them inde-
pendent of the doc.i≠doc.CT, i.e., any pragmatics 
independent of the TT.i’s). 
 
On the right lower side the “facts.i” window shows a 
stack of 3 doc.i’s/TT.i’s – for simplicity assuming 
doc.i comprised just a single claim, otherwise any 
claim would be one sub-plane. Per TT.i its elements’ 
(= rectangles) properties (= ovals) are arranged on its 
plane in concentric “KR rings”, delimited by dashed 
lines. The large/small ovals represent BAD/BED-in-
Cs, o-in-Cs are parts of their elements’ rectangles. A 
BED-in-C shows some of its relations to other in-Cs 
and what all their KR details are, e.g., where in a 
claim in “o-doc.i” or “test” it is involved in and 
where in the problem to be solved by TT.i in these 
windows. The encoding of all KR details and the 
tests is shown in “plcs.i”.  
 
The “plcs.i” window on top is the IES “brain”. It 
stores all in-Cs’ peerings of all subject matter items 
(cr-Cs) with all legal items (le-C) and all their 
interrelations. It indeed shows everything the user’s 
brain knows about the PTR: all its objects, as well as 
all potential and/or actual associations between 
them, and all the sophisticated structures potentially 
appended to them (not shown here for brevity).  
The quick and total overview about all the documents 
and their mark-ups of all subject-matter items respectively 
legal/pragmatic items respectively all to these mark-ups 
related in-Cs (in o-/BAD-/BID-KR) in doc.i is provided to 
the user – be it an inventor or patent lawyer or examiner or 
judge – by the two bottom windows, whereby these stacks’ 
items may be presented non-overlapping and then show the 
interrelations between their peer items.  
The PTR independent counterparts to the cr-Cs, the le-
Cs, potentially making cr-Cs to in-Cs are the items on the 
right of the top window. The respective doc.CT’s, their 
mark-ups, and their items in the plcs.i-window are absolutely 
the same for all PTRs (in particular for their TT.0s’ claim 
constructions). For a given PTR, all such peerings and the 
explanations why they happened are the items on the left of 
the top window.  
As usual, the user would access any item of interest in 
any window by clicking on it and zooming into one or 
several of its interrelations. Thereby simultaneously several 
of such interrelations as well as concatenations of them may 
stay displayed and zoomed as momentarily of interest for the 
user. What actually is – or ought to be – of interest to him 
may be determined by him or an additional application not 
elaborated on, here.  
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

The “test” window, providing access to all FSTP tests (in 
all their various configurations), is highly configurable for 
the various needs of the user in particular in real-time 
confirmation mode for being able to appropriately guiding 
the user through a test.  
In total: The survey window provides e.g., 
 
immediate access to ALL information/knowledge 
existing in any one FSTP/SPL test of the claimed 
invention. 
 
immediate and instant crossovers between ALL KRs 
of ANY ONE subject matter and/or legal item. 
 
immediate crossover from ANY ONE subject matter 
item to ANY ONE of its relation – and back. 
 
immediate crossover from ANY ONE relation to its 
peer in any TT.i – and back. 
 
immediate crossover from ANY ONE test using an 
item or relation to any test and its use thereof. 
 
immediate information about the impact of a change 
performed in one of the 4 windows on the other 
ones.  
and all these services instantly, i.e., in “dialog real-time”, 
i.e., necessarily automatically. 
An important other powerful feature of the UI of the IES 
had to be completely skipped in this paper [24][25], due to 
space limitation. It is its capability to translate all ASTs 
(Arguable SubTests) of a claimed invention into LACs 
(Legal Argument Chains) in a variety of multimedia 
presentations – including natural voice presentations, e.g., 
using the user's voice – and to enable the user to easily select 
and control any LAC's presentation in realtime as needed by 
the user, potentially as to the logics of testing even suggested 
by the IES. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
No system like the IES exists today – or could only have 
been thought of without the insights of Mathematical KR 
presented in [5] and the informal KR ex- or implicitly used 
in our publications addressing the community of patent law 
professionals. The kind of KR induced primarily by the US 
Highest Courts SPL precedents enabled transforming it into 
this Advanced IT system. While the current IES is only a 
prototype, even its final version would not yet be capable of 
acting as an autonomous innovations tracing system, but will 
be able only of supporting such tracing activities. It is 
designed as just as a versatile evaluation system of 
innovations completely identified and specified already – 
though an amazingly powerful one.  
This is made evident in particular by its capability to 
semi-automatically generate in real-time all argument chains 
legally correct and technically as correct confirmed – in user 
controllable verbosity and user controllable multimedia 
presentations – that may be of actual interest in an in-
vention's test whether it satisfies SPL[24][25].  
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Schindler, “US Highest Courts’ Patent Precedents in 
Mayo/Myriad/CLS/Ultramercial/LBC: ‘Inventive Concepts’ Ac-
cepted – ‘Abstract Idea’ Next? Emerging Technology Patents: 
Intricacies Overcome.” 2013, www.FSTP-expert-system.com 
[accessed March 2014]. 
[3] R. Brachman, H. Levesque, “Knowledge Representation and 
Reasoning”, M K, 2004. 
[4] F. Baader, D. Calvanese, D. McGuinness, D. Nardi, P. Patel-
Schneider, “The Description Logic Handbook”, CUP, 2010. 
[5] S. Schindler, “Mathematically Modelling Substantive Patent 
Law (SPL) Top-Down vs. Bottom-Up”, Yokohama, JURISIN-
2013, , www.FSTP-expert-system.com [accessed March 2014]. 
[6] S. Schindler, “The FSTP Expert System”, 2012, Patent 
Application, www.FSTP-expert-system.com [accessed March 
2014]. 
[7] S. Schindler, “The Innovation Expert System, IES, and its 
PTR Data Structure”, 2013, www.FSTP-expert-system.com 
[accessed March 2014]. 
[8] J. Schulze, “Tech. Rep. #1.V1 on the ‘882 PTR and UI of the 
IES prototype”, www.FSTP-expert-system.com [coming soon].  
[9] S. Schindler, “Patent Business – Before Shake-Up”, 2013, 
www.FSTP-expert-system.com [coming soon]. 
[10] S. Schindler, “Amicus Brief in LBC v. Philips”, to CAFC, 
2013, www.FSTP-expert-system.com [accessed March 2014]. 
[11] S. Schindler, “Inventive Concepts Enabled Semi-Automatic 
Tests”, 2013, Pat. Appl., www.FSTP-expert-system.com [accessed 
March 2014].  
[14] USPTO/MPEP, 
“2111 
Claim 
Interpretation; 
Broadest 
Reasonable Interpretation [R-9]” , www.FSTP-expert-system.com 
[accessed March 2014]. 
[18] S. Schindler, “Amicus Brief in Alice v. CLS.”, to Supreme 
Court, 2013, www.FSTP-expert-system.com [accessed March 
2014]. 
[19] S. Schindler, “Amicus Brief in WildTang. v. Ultramercial”, to 
Supreme Court, 2013, www.FSTP-expert-system.com [accessed 
March 2014]. 
[21] K. 
O'Malley, CAFC, IPO, 2013, www.FSTP-expert-
system.com [accessed March 2014]. 
[23] S. Schindler, “Amicus Brief as to computer-implemented 
inventions, CIIs”, to Supreme Court, 28.01.2014, www.FSTP-
expert-system.com [accessed March 2014]. 
[24] S. Schindler, “Semi-Automatic Generation Customization of 
All Correct Legal Argument Chains (LACs) in an Invention's 
Substantive Patent Law Test”, 2014, Pat. Appl., www.FSTP-
expert-system.com [coming soon].  
[25] S. Schindler, “Automatic Derivation of Legal Argument 
Chains (LACs) from Arguable Subtests (ASTs) of a Claimed 
Invention's Test for Satisfying Substantive Patent Law (SPL)”, 
2014, www.FSTP-expert-system.com [accessed March 2014]. 
[32] “Bilski 
v. 
Kappos” 
- 
Supreme 
Court, 
2010, 
www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/09pdf/08-964.pdf 
[accessed 
March 2014]. 
[33] “Mayo 
v. 
Prometh.” 
- 
Supreme 
Court, 
2012, 
www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/11pdf/10-1150.pdf 
[accessed 
March 2014]. 
[34] “AMP 
v. 
Myriad“ 
– 
Supreme 
Court, 
2013, 
www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/12pdf/12-398_1b7d.pdf 
[accessed March 2014]. 
[35] “CLS 
Bank 
v. 
Alice” 
- 
CAFC, 
2013, 
www.cafc.uscourts.gov/images/stories/opinions-orders/11-
1301.Opinion.5-8-2013.1.PDF [accessed March 2014]. 
[36] “Ultramercial 
v. 
WildTang.” 
- 
CAFC, 
2013, 
www.cafc.uscourts.gov/images/stories/opinions-orders/10-
1544.Opinion.6-19-2013.1.PDF [accessed March 2014]. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[38] “Markman” 
- 
CAFC, 
Supreme 
Court, 
1996, 
www.courtlistener.com/cafc/4yqk/herbert-markman-and-positek-
inc-v-westview-
instrum/?q=&case_name=markman+v.+westview&stat_Precedenti
al=on&order_by=dateFiled+desc [accessed March 2014]. 
[39] “Phillips 
v. 
AWH 
Corp.” 
- 
CAFC, 
2005, 
www.cafc.uscourts.gov/images/stories/opinions-orders/03-
1269.pdf [accessed 2014]. 
[40] “Accenture 
v. 
Guidewire” 
- 
CAFC, 
2013, 
www.cafc.uscourts.gov/images/stories/opinions-orders/11-
1486.Opinion.9-3-2013.1.PDF [accessed March 2014]. 
 
                                                           
1) 
“Advanced IT” is a generic term for IT areas such as AI, Semantics, 
KR, DL, NL. 
2) 
A term together with its meaning is denoted as “notion”, its term being 
the notion’s name. A notion hence comprises a definition of the meaning 
and its name/term. This meaning may be a property of something, e.g., of 
an element quoted by a claim. Sometimes the meaning of a notion may also 
be taken as its name. 
A notion is called an “inventive concept”, if its meaning represents 
patent pragmatics, i.e., if its meaning also serves the purpose to define the 
“patent monopoly granting pragmatics, pmgp” determined by the 
Parliament or the Supreme Court, i.e. if it to this end puts one or several 
properties’ limitations of the invention (of some broader set of such proper-
ties’ limitations) such that it specifies an item of the invention’s “§ 
101(usefulness)” – additionally to its “§ 102(novelty)” and /or “§ 
103(nonobviousness)”, as explained in more detail later. 
But already here is evident that an “inventive concept” as such – while 
being a mental/fictional construct, just as any notion – in no way may be 
understood as an “abstract idea”, as suggested by some patent business 
practitioners. Also an “abstract inventive concept” cannot be thought as it is 
a clause contradictory in itself. A concept, just as an inventive concept, is 
always a concrete and named representative of something. 
3) 
These new terms’ meanings are here defined only in natural language 
of the person of pertinent ordinary skill and creativity, i.e., their 
Mathematical KR definitions – as far as today possible – are here left away 
[5], though its thinking is occasionally used. 
4) 
In patent law language the meaning of a term1) is often called 
“limitation”. One meaning of a term/name may be split into two parts 
and/or subject to different pragmatics. An inventive concept of a claimed 
invention is, by the Mayo decision, in the US patent precedents always a 
notion of this “meaning-tuple” kind, whereby any meaning-tuple 
component may be subject to different pragmatics alias meaning-qualifica-
tions. I.e., an inventive concept always comprises a legal concept and a 
creative concept [5]. 
5) 
Notwithstanding that any inventive concept of a claimed invention 
represents an item of usefulness and creativity of this claimed invention up 
to § 101, by the Supreme Courts’ interpretation of the Constitution it is 
additionally to determine, whether an inventive concept – as being of an 
exceptional kind/quality/pragmatics, namely of “law of nature”, of “natural 
phenomenon”, or of “abstract idea” – is by § 101 non-patent-eligible, to be 
described by this inventive concept’s legal concept. 
Put in Mathematical KR clarity [5]: An inventive concept’s “patent 
monopoly granting pragmatics, pmgp” qualifies this inventive concept as 
contributing to the claimed invention’s pmgp-height (Qpmgp) over prior art 
and pertinent skill (i.e., as contributing by 1 not only to its Qplcs (plcs = 
patent law carrying semantics), determined by the claimed inventions 
NANO test, but also to its Qpmgp). I.e., an inventive concept may contribute 
by 1 solely to the claimed invention’s plcs-height alias semantic height 
Qplcs over prior art and pertinent skill, but not also to this claimed 
invention’s pmgp-height [6]. In general hence holds Qpmgp ≤ Qplcs. It 
evidently is the determination of any inventive concept’s pmgp that 
performs the separation of concerns discussed above [5]. 
If the claimed invention is not well defined, i.e., does not pass one of 
the other SPL (e.g., the NAIO) tests, running its NANO test, i.e., 
determining its Qplcs, is meaningless, anyway. 
6) 
For representing its pragmatics, an inventive concept identifies one or 
several properties’ limitations (of the claimed invention’s total set of such 
                                                                                                  
properties’ limitations) putting it/them such as to specify its “§ 101(useful-
ness)”  – in addition to its “§ 101/102(novelty)” and “§ 103(nonobvious-
ness)”. I.e., a well defined claimed invention embodies no inventive con-
cept that does not meet the usefulness requirement stated by § 101, 
otherwise this claimed invention were not well defined [5] and the question 
as to its inventivity6) were obsolete. 
7) 
The legal meaning of the notion “inventivity” of a claimed invention – 
i.e., embodied by it – is represented by this claimed invention’s total set of 
limitations of all its elements, i.e., of all elements of the claim claiming the 
invention described by its specification. The psychological meaning of the 
notion of inventivity as such, counted in the number of inventive creative 
ideas it embodies, is not elaborated on, here. It has been clarified in [7], 
based on a pertinent German Highest Court decision, by the BGH 
(BundesGerichtsHof). 
8) 
The legal meaning of the notion “usefulness” of a claimed invention – 
i.e., embodied by it – is, just as its inventivity6), represented by this claimed 
invention’s total set of limitations of all its elements. Consequently, from 
the definition of the inventive concepts making-up this claimed invention 
follows [5] that any one of them contributes – by its contribution to the 
total set of limitations of the claimed invention – equally to the claimed 
invention’s usefulness, too, as required by § 101.  
The Mayo decision invokes, by its inventive concepts, for its refined 
claim construction for a claimed invention this additional “contribution to 
its usefulness” minded view at its claimed invention’s inventive concepts. 
This “contribution to the claimed invention’s usefulness” minded view at 
inventive concepts changes nothing with these inventive concepts’ and/or 
their terms’ hitherto only “contribution to this claimed invention’s total 
limitations” minded pragmatics – i.e., nothing is changed for the more basic 
classical claim construction for this claimed invention. It evidently is this 
additional “contribution to this claimed invention’s usefulness” minded 
pragmatics of the inventive concepts, by which the Supreme Court achieves 
an increased purposefulness of its refined claim construction. 
9) 
Whether the earlier exclusively used set of “terms” and their error 
prone interpretations/limitations of a claimed invention ought to be, in its 
refined claim construction, eventually completely replaced by a set of 
inventive concepts legally equivalent to them – and their more explicit 
names and more target-oriented pragmatics, i.e., their better as context 
sensitive guided interpretations – and hence making the former set 
redundant, needs no discussion, yet. Such redundancy is often avoiding 
committing errors of any kind and then to be preserved. 
10) The “NAIO test” of a claimed invention was originally suggested 
incompletely, as ignoring its potentially being pathological, which is fixed 
here. It is not clear at all, whether a pathological TT.0 exists – which also 
applies to the NANO test. For a more complete and detailed explanation 
see [5]. 
The complete NAIO test – just as the NANO test – would start with 
disaggregating the compound inventive concepts of the claimed invention 
into the respective sets of BED-in-Cs, then reduced to maximal sets of 
BID-in-Cs thereof.  
For brevity only considering the BID-cr-Cs of the BID-in-Cs, the 
NAIO test comprises 4 steps: 
1) 
verifying the TT.0’s specification of the patent (application) 
discloses a problem, P.0 (Problem), described to be solved by the 
claimed invention/TT.0, the latter described by its refined claim 
construction’s inventive concepts, {BID-cr-C};  
2) 
verifying, using these BID-cr-Cs of 1), that the so described TT.0 
actually solves this problem of 1); 
3) 
verifying for any one KR^ of TT.0 that this problem of 1), P^, is 
in KR^ not solved by any TT^*, derived from TT^ by ignoring 
therein one of these BID^-in-Cs completely or relaxing its 
limitation by reducing its TS(d(BID^-in-C)) (TS=Truth Set, 
d=Domain, in-C=INventive Concept), i.e., not solved by any 
TT^* <TT TT^ (“<TT” being the “less in-C-limited than” relation 
between TTs resp. Ps in KR*) – all these verifications to be 
confirmed by the person of posc (person of Pertinent Ordinary 
Skill and Creativity); 
4) 
stating, if all steps in 1)-3) are executed successfully, that the so 
described claimed invention/TT.0 is “not an abstract idea only” 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

                                                                                                  
of this problem’s solution, otherwise that it is only an “abstract 
idea” of this problem’s solution.  
11) 
The preamble of this NANO test and its respective first steps are 
the same as the ones described in the above NAIO test – for the given PTR, 
for its “anticipation combinations, ACs” and their “1 concept 
modifications, 1-cMs” for anticipating TT.0 each, as well as for an 
ind{BID-cr-C} (ind=INDependent) describing PTR’s TT.0 (For a more 
complete and detailed explanation see [5]) –  and thereafter comprises the 
steps: 
                                                                                                  
1) 
the user generating the ANC matrix for all TT.i ϵ     RS, i>0, its 
columns representing the BID-cr-Cs; 
2) 
the user generating, for any entry in the ANC matrix the technical 
and/or legal justification;  
3) 
automatically deriving from the predicates X.i.n, 1nN, 1iI, 
and the ANC matrix an AC anticipating TT.0 with a minimal 
Qplcs of 1-cMs; 
4) 
automatically delivering Qplcs as TT.0’s semantic height over RS 
and <Qplcs, {all justifications for AC’s 1-cMs}>. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 1: 4 separate UI windows of the IES 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

