An Exploratory Study on Notational Characteristics of Visual Notations Used in 
Decision Management 
Sam Leewis 
Optimizing Knowledge-Intensive Business Processes 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, The Netherlands 
sam.leewis@zuyd.nl 
Koen Smit, Matthijs Berkhout, Ruben Post 
Digital Smart Services 
HU University of Applied Sciences Utrecht 
Utrecht, The Netherlands 
koen.smit@hu.nl, matthijs.berkhout@hu.nl, 
ruben.post@hu.nl
Martijn Zoet 
Optimizing Knowledge-Intensive Business Processes 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, The Netherlands 
martijn.zoet@zuyd.nl
Abstract— The visual representation of Information System 
(IS) artefacts is an important aspect in the practical 
application of visual representations. However, important and 
known visual representation principles are often undervalued, 
which could lead to decreased effectiveness in using a visual 
representation. Decision Management (DM) is one field of 
study in which stakeholders must be able to utilize visual 
notations to model business decisions and underlying business 
logic, which are executed by machines, thus are IS artefacts. 
Although many DM notations currently exist, little research 
actually evaluates visual representation principles to identify 
the visual notations most suitable for stakeholders. In this 
paper, the Physics of Notations framework of Moody is 
operationalized and utilized to evaluate five different DM 
visual notations. The results show several points of 
improvement 
with 
regards 
to 
these 
visual 
notations. 
Furthermore, the results could show the authors of DM visual 
notations that well-known visual representation principles 
need to be adequately taken into account when defining or 
modifying DM visual notations. 
 
Keywords-Decision Management; Visual Notations; Evaluation; 
Physics of Notations (PoN) 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
      Decisions are amongst the most important assets of an 
organization [1], and therefore should be managed 
adequately. A decision is defined as: “A conclusion that a 
business arrives at through business logic and which the 
business is interested in managing” [2]. Furthermore, 
business logic can be defined as “a collection of business 
rules, business decision tables, or executable analytic 
models to make individual business decisions” [3]. 
Examples of decisions are: 1) determine what illness a 
patient has, 2) determine the loan default risk factor for a 
specific customer, or 3) determine the maximum credit 
rating of an organization. If an organization can’t 
consistently make and execute the right decision(s), large 
risks are taken that can eventually lead to high costs, 
reputation damage, or even bankruptcy. Following the 
previous example, imagine what will happen when a doctor 
makes the wrong decision continuously or a customer with a 
high-risk classification gets a low-risk classification. 
        One important aspect of Decision Management (DM) 
is modelling decisions and business logic using a visual 
representation. Such visual representations are often referred 
to as notations or modeling standards. An example of a  
decision modelling notation is the Decision Modeling and 
Notation (DMN) proposed by the Object Management 
Group [2] or The Decision Model, defined by von Halle and 
Goldberg [4]. 
        While empowering the semantic modeling capabilities 
of notations is desirable, notations also need to be 
cognitively effective [5]. Cognitive effectiveness, in the 
context of visual notations, refers to ‘‘the speed, ease and 
accuracy with which a representation can be processed by 
the human mind’’ [6]. Generally speaking, important and 
known 
visual 
representation 
principles 
are 
often 
undervalued in the design of visual notations, which could 
lead 
to 
decreased 
cognitive 
effectiveness[7], 
[8]. 
Furthermore, these notations are usually not designed with 
all stakeholders in mind, from someone who never modelled 
on the one hand (Decision modelling novice) to a Decision 
modelling expert on the other hand [6], and have no design 
rationale nor a scientific basis for the choices in the 
structure of the visual representation [5]. Decision 
modelling novices do have different requirements in 
comparison to users who are considered a DM expert. An 
expert will need more advanced functionalities in 
comparison to a novice, however, a novice should be able to 
learn the notation quickly to get started.  
        This paper examines whether these problems exist in 
the notations specifically designed for the DM domain, as, 
to the knowledge of the authors, no earlier studies exist that 
focus on evaluating multiple DM notations. To do so, a 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

proper framework to evaluate known visual representation 
principles needs to be selected.  
        Several frameworks to evaluate visual notations exist, 
for example, the Cognitive Dimensions framework [9], the 
ontological analysis framework [10], and the Guidelines of 
Modelling (GoM) framework [11]. The most complete and 
referenced framework on the assessment of visual notations 
is the Physics of Notations (PoN) theory [6]. This theory is 
partly based on the Cognitive Dimensions framework, 
which was the predominant theoretical paradigm in visual 
notations research [12]. The framework is developed and 
devoted to design, evaluate, and compare visual notations 
and is based on theory and empirical evidence obtained 
from different disciplines, such as perceptual psychology, 
cognitive psychology, cartography, graphic design, human-
computer interfacing, linguistics, and communication 
theory. Furthermore, one advantage of the PoN framework 
is that it also offers clear evaluation procedures and metrics 
so that researchers can easily operationalize them to be 
evaluated in practice. The PoN framework has been applied 
by many researchers to evaluate visual notations [13][14]. 
Since we selected a framework to evaluate DM visual 
notations with, the following research question is stated: 
“How do the selected DM visual notations score with 
regards to the PoN framework?” 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. First, the 
theory underlying visual notations and PoN are elaborated 
upon in the background and related work. This is followed 
by the research method utilized to conduct the research 
presented in this paper. Then, the data collection and analysis 
processes are explained. Next, in the results section, the PoN 
scores for the selected visual notations are presented. Lastly, 
the paper concludes with a discussion, conclusions, and 
directions for future research. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
        DM notations can best be categorized by their 
complexity and linguistic power. Complexity refers to the 
ease of understanding the DM notation and linguistic power 
refers to the amount of results it can produce, indicating its 
richness. Five different types of DM notations have been 
defined: 1) labels, textual markers, 2) graphical aids, 
symbols representing semantic constructs, 3) structured 
languages, semantic representations of logic, 4) constrained 
natural languages, ontology defined by base terms and 
grammar, and 5) pure natural languages, unbound syntax, 
see Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1.  DM notation categorization [15] 
The PoN framework is aimed towards visually represented 
DM notations. Therefore, this study evaluated DM visual 
notations of the graphical aids type. 
       The selected elements are drawn from the PoN 
framework [6]. This framework attempts to evaluate DM 
notations based on their visual representation, as these are 
often undervalued principles. It offers nine different 
principles by which the visual representation of a DM 
notation is measured against. The principles are as follows 
[6]: 
        Semiotic Clarity refers to every symbol having a one-
to-one correspondence to their referent concept. If not, one 
or more of the following four anomalies can occur: 1) 
symbol redundancy occurs when multiple symbols can be 
used to represent the same concept, 2) symbol overload 
occurs when different concepts can be represented by the 
same symbol, 3) symbol excess occurs when symbols do not 
correspond to any concept, and 4) symbol deficit occurs 
when there are concepts that do not correspond with any 
symbols. 
        Perceptual Discriminability refers to the ability to 
differentiate symbols based on their graphical appearance. 
This can be improved by increasing the number of graphical 
attributes a symbol represents. For example, adding color, 
additional shapes, or text to a notation can improve the 
ability to differentiate between symbols.  
        Semantic transparency refers to the extent to which 
the meaning of a symbol can be inferred from its 
appearance. For example, a rectangle representing a 
decision has a scarce semantic transparency, while an icon 
of a calculator representing a formula has high semantic 
transparency. 
        Complexity Management refers to the ability of a 
visual notation to represent information without overloading 
the human brain. The complexity our brains can handle can 
be improved by the usage of different concepts. For 
example, modularization can be used to reduce the 
complexity of a large system by dividing it into smaller 
parts or making use of subsystems. Additionally, hierarchy 
can be incorporated into the notation by representing 
information on different levels of details. 
        Cognitive Integration refers to the extent to which a 
notation enables multiple diagrams to represent a system 
without overloading the human brain. This can be supported 
by two concepts, conceptual integration and perceptual 
integration. Conceptual integration can be achieved by 
providing a summary diagram as a whole or parts of the 
diagram or by contextualization, a technique where 
contextual information on each diagram is showing its 
relation to elements on other diagrams. Perceptual 
integration is achieved by providing navigational tools in 
the notation. Commonly used navigational tools are, for 
example, lines to provide direction of the flow or a map in 
which the entire diagram is shown if only a part of the 
diagram is to be shown on the screen. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

        Visual Expressiveness is defined as the number of 
visual variables used in a notation. If a notation has a high 
number of visual variables, the perceptual discriminability 
increases, making the notation easier to use. Visual 
variables are size, brightness, color, texture, shape, 
orientation, and text.  
        Dual Coding refers to the use of both visual and 
textual attributes in a notation. For example, the semantic 
transparency can be increased by adding a keyword of the 
semantic concept to the visual representation of the symbol, 
consequently achieving dual coding.  
        Graphic Economy refers to the number of graphical 
symbols used in a notation. The human brain can 
discriminate around six categories simultaneously, defining 
the limit of graphical symbols a notation should contain. 
There are three concepts by which excessive graphic 
complexity can be reduced: 1) reduce semantic complexity, 
2) introduce symbol deficit, and 3) increase visual 
expressiveness. 
        Cognitive Fit refers to the Cognitive fit theory, which 
states 
that 
different 
methods 
of 
representation 
of 
information are suitable for different tasks and different 
audiences. This can be respected by creating multiple visual 
filters for, for example, expert-novice differences or 
representational mediums. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
      The goal of this research is to evaluate several DM 
visual notations with regards to the PoN framework [6]. 
When selecting an appropriate research method, one should 
take into account the maturity of the research domain [16]. 
Research with regards to visual notations to express 
business decisions and business logic is scarce [11]. 
Therefore, a qualitative research approach is selected as our 
research method. 
       To evaluate DM visual notations, a structured technique 
must be selected. We utilize a technique to do so from the 
body of knowledge regarding visual notations, as it is rather 
mature, compared to the body of knowledge on DM. Based 
on the PoN framework, the researchers constructed a 
template which covers the nine principles of visual notations 
indicated in [6] (the template itself is available upon request 
and omitted due to space limitations). Each of the nine 
principles consists of specific elements characterizing each 
principle, e.g., the principle ‘semiotic clarity’ has four 
elements of which one represents ‘symbol overload’. Every 
element is represented by a question whether the element is 
available in the visual notation, and if present, to what 
extent.  
        Instead of using a quantitative approach, it is more 
appropriate to use a mix of quantitative collection and 
analysis with qualitative thematic coding, as our template 
also aims to collect motivations of researchers evaluating 
the visual notations. The coding of the evaluations for the 
selected visual notations consists of three rounds of thematic 
coding according to the process of open coding, axial 
coding, and selective coding described in [17]. During the 
coding rounds, four researchers coded the five graphical 
aids-type notations separately from each other. The results 
of the coding rounds were compared and their meaning 
discussed among the four researchers. The process of data 
collection and analysis is described in more detail in the 
following section.  
IV. 
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS 
Before the data collection and analysis started, the research 
team needed to decide which visual notations to evaluate. 
For this study, the amount of visual notations to evaluate 
was five. The DM visual notations are selected based on the 
following criteria: 1) the notation should be applied in 
practice by multiple organizations, 2) the documentation for 
the notation should be accessible to be able to evaluate it in 
detail, and 3) the notation should be a DM graphical aid 
type. The selected visual notations for evaluation are:  
Beinformed [18], Berkeley Bridge [19], Decision Model and 
Notation (DMN) [2], The Decision Model (TDM) [4], and 
Visual Rules [20]. 
      The data collection for this study occurred over a period 
of two months, between March 2018 and April 2018. The 
data collection is conducted by four researchers representing 
different levels of expertise on visual notations. Two 
researchers representing the expert group (researcher 1 and 
2) and two researchers representing the novice group 
(researcher 3 and 4). Separating the coders increases the 
inter-reliability in the coding [21] and internal validity of the 
research [22]. Researcher 1 is a lecturer and postdoc 
researcher with seven years of practical and research 
experience in the field of DM; Researcher 2 is a PhD-
candidate with five years of practical and research 
experience in the field of DM; Researcher 3 is a Master 
student with four years of practical and research experience 
in the field of DM; Researcher 4 is a Bachelor student with 
two years of research experience in the field of DM. All 
researchers have experience with visual notations, and 
completed at least two or more projects in which DM 
models had to be produced to be utilized in practice. It took 
the research team a week to gather all data required to 
evaluate the visual notations. The data consisted of 
webpages, client case documents, learning documents, 
meta-models, demo applications, and video repositories 
with tutorials.  
       A template is created and utilized by the researchers to        
cover the nine principles of Moody [6]. Every principle has 
it’s own characteristics and thereby every principle in the 
template has different elements with each their related 
questions. For each element, a five-point Likert-scale 
ranging from 1) very poor; 2) poor; 3) neutral; 4) good; 5) 
very good. Additionally, the value 6) Not Applicable (NA) 
could be chosen. If NA was chosen it needed to be further 
specified why. Therefore, the dataset represents a total of 
four filled-in templates for each of the five visual notations 
selected.  
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

       The data analysis comprised three rounds of thematic 
coding based on the data analysis techniques described by 
Strauss & Corbin [17]. The first round of coding identifies 
the symbols and constructs of each notation, e.g., the 
different node-types as part of the BeInformed visual 
notation or the transition-types as part of DMN. 
 
TABLE 1.   
EXAMPLE CODING NOTATION. 
 
 
Visual notation: 
BeInformed 
 
 
Coders 
 
 
Expert 
Novice 
 
 
R1 R2 R3 R4 
Perceptual 
Discrimina
bility 
Redundant coding 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Perceptual popout 
3 
4 
3 
2 
Textual differentiation 
 
 
2 
3 
Iconic differentiation 
2 
1 
3 
4 
 
       The second round of coding refines and differentiates 
concepts that are already available and code them into 
categories [23]. The axial coding round consisted of the 
indication of the values (using a five-point Likert-scale) for 
each visual notation together with the principles of Moody 
[6], as shown in Table 1.                         
       The first and second coding rounds were based on 
knowledge derived from sources described earlier, however, 
the coders did not follow courses or applied the visual 
notation in practice for this specific research.  
       The third and last round of coding represents the 
identification of functional categories [23]. The selective 
coding 
round 
included 
the 
identification 
of 
any 
consistencies or inconsistencies (using the color grey) 
within 
the 
notations 
or 
difference 
in 
expertise 
(Expert/Novice), as shown in Table 1.  
       The five-point Likert-scale is used to enable calculation 
of averages used for the comparison of notations, and to 
create a standard quantification mechanism for the coders to 
use during the coding of the notations. If doing any 
quantitative analysis, the Likert-scale is the most accepted 
and used scale for this purpose [24]. 
V. 
RESULTS 
       In this section, the results from the data collection and 
analysis phase are shown and further discussed. The results 
include the differences in values, based on percentages or a 
five-point Likert-scale, when the coder is of a different 
expert level (Expert/Novice). Table 2 shows the average of 
all the analysed visual notations against the nine principles 
mentioned by Moody [6]. Further on in this section, the 
results of each PoN principle are discussed in detail. 
 
 
Semiotic clarity  
       The ideal notation does not have any Excess, Deficit, 
Redundant, or Overload in symbols. Therefore, any 
occurrence in this is seen as a negative (as shown in Table 
2). The Beinformed and Visual Rules notation have excess, 
and/or redundant symbols. The researchers identified 
18,75% of the BeInformed symbols as Excess and 
Redundant. The Visual Rules notation was identified with a 
7,69% Excess in symbols. 
 
Perceptual discriminability  
       A visually strong notation which discriminates itself by 
the use of text, icons, and visual spacing, in order to 
stimulate faster identification of the different symbols. 
Therefore, a higher value is an indication that the notation 
has a high perceptual discriminability. The BeInformed 
notation 
with 
a 
3,06 
has 
the 
highest 
perceptual 
discriminability of the analyzed notations, compared to the 
DMN notation with a 1,50 (lowest). 
 
Semantic transparency  
       Semantic transparency covers if the visual appearance 
of the symbols suggests their meaning. A higher value in 
this principle is an indication that the notation seems to have 
semantic transparent symbols. The Berkeley Bridge notation 
has the highest semantic transparency with a 4,4. This seems 
the result of the low number of symbols, which is two. The 
BeInformed and Visual Rules notation seems to have the 
same result but by their high number of symbols, these 
notations 
have 
the 
lowest 
semantic 
transparency 
(BeInformed 2,88, and Visual Rules 2,71). 
 
Complexity management  
       The complexity management principle covers the 
ability to scale the notation. A higher value in this principle 
is an indication that the notation is useful on a larger scale 
by utilizing modularization and hierarchical structuring. The 
BeInformed notation has the highest value (4,17) in 
complexity management and seems better when dealing 
with larger scale projects. The TDM notation seems to be 
impacted by the low number of symbols in their notation to 
score the lowest (2,17) in complexity management. 
 
Visual expressiveness  
       The visual expressiveness principle covers the use of 
visual variables (colour, 3d symbols, and textual encoding). 
A higher value indicates that the notations are visually 
expressive. The TDM notation has a total score of 4,5 and 
thereby seems to be the highest scoring notation in visual 
expressiveness, compared to the Berkeley Bridge notation 
with a 1,5 (lowest). 
 
Graphical Economy 
       The graphical economy principle covers the number of 
symbols a human brain is able to discriminate between, this 
number is estimated to be limited to six. A value above six 
would be a negative impact on the graphical economy of the 
notation, which is the case for BeInformed (16), Visual 
Rules (13), and DMN (9). 
 
Dual Coding  
       The dual coding principle covers the complement of 
graphics with text, which is more effective than using each 
of them on their own. A higher value in this principle 
indicates that the notation uses dual coding as the most 
optimal notation. The Beinformed (4.25) and Visual Rules 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

(4.00) notations are the only notations, out of the analyzed 
five notations, where dual coding was identified. 
 
TABLE 2.   
CODING RESULTS 
 
Beinformed 
Visual 
Rules 
DMN 
TDM 
Berkeley 
Bridge 
Average Total 
2,87 
2,97 
2,38 
2,89 
2,53 
Cognitive 
Integration 
2,88 
3,83 
3,00 
2,67 
1,92 
Cognitive Fit 
2,75 
2,25 
4,13 
4,50 
3,88 
Dual Coding 
4,25 
4,00 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
Graphical 
Economy 
*16 
*13 
*9 
4 
2 
Visual 
Expressiveness 
3,13 
4,00 
2,25 
4,50 
1,50 
Complexity 
Management 
4,17 
3,33 
3,83 
2,17 
3,50 
Semantic 
Transparency 
2,88 
2,71 
2,92 
3,56 
4,40 
Perceptual 
Discriminability 
3,06 
2,69 
1,50 
2,83 
2,53 
Semiotic 
Clarity 
Excess 
18% 
7% 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
Redundancy 
18% 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
 
 
Cognitive fit  
       The cognitive fit principle covers the theory that 
different representations of information are suitable for 
different audiences. The Visual Rules notation scored the 
lowest with a 2,25, compared to that of TDM, which scored 
the highest with a 4,50. 
 
Cognitive integration  
       The cognitive integration principle covers the range of 
mechanisms available for dealing with multiple diagrams 
thereby, helping the reader assemble information from 
separate diagrams. A higher value indicates that the notation 
has the mechanisms available to help the reader assemble 
information when multiple diagrams are shown. The Visual 
Rules notation has the highest value (3,83) in cognitive 
integration, compared to the Berkeley Bridge notation (1,92) 
which does not have the mechanisms to support the reader 
when dealing with separate diagrams (lowest). 
 
Difference Expert/Novice 
       Taking into account that having experience in the use of 
a visual notation, in this case, a modelling language, 
influences the attitude towards several of the Moody 
principles. For example, a notation could be more complex 
for a novice but not for an expert. Therefore, a difference is 
made between the results of the expert researchers and 
novice researchers.  
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 3.   
RESULTS DIFFERENCE EXPERT/NOVICE 
  
Expertise: 
Average Total 
Expert/Novice 
Average 
Total 
Beinformed 
Expert 
2,79 
2,87 
Novice 
2,95 
Visual Rules 
Expert 
2,99 
2,97 
Novice 
2,96 
DMN 
Expert 
2,25 
2,38 
Novice 
2,51 
TDM 
Expert 
2,92 
2,89 
Novice 
2,86 
Berkeley 
Bridge 
Expert 
2,39 
2,53 
Novice 
2,67 
VI. 
CONCLUSION, DISCUSSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
       In this paper, a study is conducted in which five DM 
visual notations, namely: Visual Rules, Berkeley Bridge, 
Decision Model and Notation, The Decision Model, and 
BeInformed, were evaluated using the PoN framework [1]. 
From our analysis, Visual Rules scores best according to the 
average total of all PoN framework principles. From a 
theoretical perspective, our study and its results give 
meaning to the operationalization of the PoN framework. 
Furthermore, it will enable further exploration of the 
application of the PoN principles, as well as other DM 
visual notations not included in this study. Moody [1, p.772] 
describes the theoretical interactions between the described 
principles. Our results show that these interactions are, to a 
large extend, verified. From a practical perspective, the 
results presented in this paper contribute towards a better 
awareness for taking into account validated visual notation 
principles and guidelines. Our results could be utilized by 
organizations to either evaluate for themselves which visual 
notation is most adequate or to utilize a visual notation 
based on our results.    
       This study has multiple limitations. The first limitation 
concerns the research team that carried out the evaluation of 
the visual notations using the PoN framework. This study 
included evaluations of four researchers, two novice level 
researchers and two expert level researchers on the DM 
topic. Therefore, one could argue that the results and 
conclusions are potentially biased by a low amount of data 
points for the evaluation of the visual notations included. 
However, most studies conducted with a focus on evaluating 
one or multiple visual notations are often centered on the 
evaluation of the visual notation using one or two 
researchers. Future research should focus on evaluating 
visual notations utilizing larger sample sizes that will add to 
the generalizability of the results and conclusions about the 
evaluated visual notations. The second limitation concerns 
the method and framework utilized to evaluate the visual 
notations, the PoN framework and its operationalization by 
creating and utilizing a template with the goal to structure 
data collection and analysis. Utilizing the PoN framework is 
an explicit choice, however, limits the results because the 
PoN framework represents a specific lens. Future research 
could, therefore, focus on applying other frameworks and 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

theories that focus on uncovering and describing essential 
notational principles, e.g., Guidelines of Modeling (GoM) 
[11]. Furthermore, the operationalization of the PoN 
framework described in [6] is left open for interpretation 
and perception of the researchers applying it, a good 
example is the lack of weighting of the nine PoN principles. 
Therefore, our template is another limitation. This 
phenomenon becomes clear in the work of [5], which shows 
that the operationalization of the PoN framework by 
different research teams often do not always seem to take 
into account all principles described. To our knowledge, our 
operationalization included, one-on-one, all principles 
described in the work of [5]. Future research, however, 
should focus on how these principles are best measured in 
practice, i.e., whether Likert scales or other less quantitative 
measurements are adequate or not. The last limitation 
concerns the visual notations selected. Although we choose 
two well-known visual notations, as well as three visual 
notations applied in the DM practice a lot, the selection of 
visual notations could coincidentally have resulted in a bias 
and affect the generalizability of our results. We argue that 
this risk is more or less mitigated as most studies conducted 
that utilize the PoN framework focus on only one visual 
notation, see also [5], while this study reports upon the 
evaluation of five visual notations. Future research could 
also focus on evaluating additional DM visual notations. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. W. Blenko, M. C. Mankins, and P. Rogers, “The 
Decision-Driven Organization,” Harv. Bus. Rev., no. june, 
p. 10, 2010. 
[2] 
Object Management Group, “Decision Model and 
Notation,” 2016. 
[3] 
Object Management Group, “ArchiMate® 3.0 
Specification,” 2016. 
[4] 
B. Von Halle and L. Goldberg, The Decision Model: A 
Business Logic Framework Linking Business and 
Technology. CRC Press, 2009. 
[5] 
D. Van Der Linden and I. Hadar, “A Systematic Literature 
Review of Applications of the Physics of Notation,” IEEE 
Trans. Softw. Eng., pp. 1–1, 2018. 
[6] 
D. L. Moody, “The ‘Physics’ of Notations: Towards a 
Scientific Basis for Constructing Visual Notations in 
Software Engineering,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., vol. 35, 
no. 5, pp. 756–778, 2009. 
[7] 
H. a. Reijers and J. Mendling, “A Study Into the Factors 
That Influence the Understandability of Business Process 
Models,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man. Cybern., vol. 41, no. 3, 
pp. 449–462, 2011. 
[8] 
D. L. Moody, P. Heymans, and R. Matulevičius, “Visual 
syntax does matter: Improving the cognitive effectiveness 
of the i* visual notation,” Requir. Eng., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 
141–175, 2010. 
[9] 
A. Blackwell and T. Green, Notational systems–the 
cognitive dimensions of notations framework, HCI 
Models. Morgan Kaufmann, 2003. 
[10] 
M. Rosemann, P. Green, and M. Indulska, “A reference 
methodology for conducting ontological analyses,” in 
Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Conceptual Modeling, 2004, pp. 110–121. 
[11] 
R. Schuette and T. Rotthowe, “The guidelines of 
modeling–an approach to enhance the quality in 
information models,” in Proceedings of the Conceptual 
Modeling–ER’98, 1998, pp. 240–254. 
[12] 
F. Saleh and M. El-Attar, “A scientific evaluation of the 
misuse case diagrams visual syntax,” Inf. Softw. Technol., 
vol. 66, pp. 73–96, 2015. 
[13] 
N. Genon, P. Heymans, and D. Amyot, “Analysing the 
Cognitive Effectiveness of the BPMN 2.0 Visual 
Notation,” 2011. 
[14] 
D. Moody and J. van Hillegersberg, Evaluating the visual 
syntax of UML: an analysis of the cognitive effectiveness 
of the UML family of diagrams, LNCS vol. Springer, 
2009. 
[15] 
Gartner, “Taking the Mystery Out of Business Rule 
Representation,” 2013. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.gartner.com/doc/2371915/taking-mystery-
business-rule-representation. [Accessed: 01-Feb-2019]. 
[16] 
R. D. Galliers and F. F. Land, “Choosing appropriate 
information systems research methodologies,” Commun. 
ACM, vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 901–902, 1987. 
[17] 
A. Strauss and J. Corbin, Basics of Qualitative Research: 
Techniques and Procedures for Developing Grounded 
Theory, 3rd ed., vol. 3. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE 
Publications Ltd., 2015. 
[18] 
BeInformed, “Be Informed Business Process Platform,” 
2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.beinformed.com/. 
[Accessed: 02-Jan-2019]. 
[19] 
Berkeley Bridge, “Berkeley Bridge Platform,” 2018. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.berkeleybridge.com. 
[Accessed: 15-May-2018]. 
[20] 
Bosch, “Business Rules Management using Visual 
Rules,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.bosch-
si.com/bpm-and-brm/visual-rules/business-rules-
management.html. [Accessed: 02-Jan-2019]. 
[21] 
H. E. Tinsley and D. J. Weiss, “Interrater Reliability and 
Agreement,” in Handbook of Applied Multivariate 
Statistics and Mathematical Modeling, San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press, 2000, pp. 95–124. 
[22] 
H. T. Reis and C. M. Judd, Eds., Handbook of Research 
Methods in Social and Personality Psychology, 2nd ed. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014. 
[23] 
A. Böhm, B. Glaser, and A. Strauss, “Theoretical Coding: 
Text Analysis in Grounded Theory,” A Companion to 
Qual. Res., pp. 270–275, 2004. 
[24] 
I. E. Allen and C. A. Seaman, “Likert scales and data 
analyses,” Qual. Prog., vol. 40, pp. 64–65, 2007. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

