Risk as a Subjective Construct: Implications for Project Management Practice 
 
Jose Irizar 
Information Systems Department 
TRW Automotive 
Germany 
Jose.Irizar@googlemail.com 
Martin Wynn 
School of Computing and Technology 
University of Gloucestershire 
Cheltenham, UK 
MWynn@glos.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract - The management of risk is a key element of all 
mainstream project management methodologies. It has 
implications for the effectiveness of the project management 
process itself, and for the management and communication of 
knowledge that is an inherent part of that process. There are 
two main schools of thought regarding project risk 
management – ‘risk as an objective fact’ and ‘risk as a 
subjective 
construct’. 
The 
former 
considers 
risk 
as 
epistemologically probabilistic, whilst risk in the subjective 
construct 
perspective 
allows 
multiple 
epistemological 
dimensions of risk. Here we review how 'risk as a subjective 
construct' features in existing risk management literature, and 
how these contributions can be classified or grouped together. 
The role of risk registers is then reviewed to determine 
whether this has any relationship with the 'risk as a subjective 
construct' concept. The paper then reflects upon the authors’ 
future research programme and the possible implications for 
project management practice.  
Keywords - risk; risk analysis; subjective construct; project 
management; knowledge management; perception; stakeholders 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Project management is an established discipline in 
traditional industries such as engineering and construction, 
and other industry sectors such as education, IT, health, 
pharmacy and surgery have adopted project management in 
their organizations in recent years [1]. Project management 
has also grown from a tactical to a strategic discipline, with 
project managers playing an increasingly significant role in 
the execution of senior management business strategy [2]. 
Strategic project management, project performance tracking 
and systematic assessment of lessons learned may underpin 
strategy revisions and adjustments [3]. 
Despite the recognized criticality of project success for 
organizations, a considerable proportion of projects continue 
to either not meet their due dates, exceed budget, do not 
deliver the specifications, miss quality, underestimate risk or 
do not meet customer satisfaction. That is why project 
management failure remains an area of considerable interest 
in contemporary project management literature [4]. 
Formal risk management is a relevant part of project 
management. In fact, risk management has been identified as 
one of the major criteria for project success [4]. Hence, risk 
management has become a central component of some of the 
most deployed industry standard methodologies such as 
Project Management Body of Knowledge, PRINCE2, 
Systems Development Life Cycle, Capability Maturity 
Model 
Integrated, 
and 
Information 
Technology 
Infrastructure Library. 
Comprehensive 
risk 
management 
implementation 
increases the probability of project success [5]. It is 
considered as the tool that limits the effect of unexpected 
events or prevents such events from happening. Therefore it 
is assumed, that risk management as part of project 
management contributes to overall project success [6].  
Contemporary risk management literature can be assigned to 
two distinct schools of thought, risk as an objective fact and 
risk as a subjective construction. Both schools provide 
different definitions of risk, both are based on different 
ontological and epistemological principles, and both handle 
risk in a different manner [11].  
Risk management is one of nine project management 
knowledge areas defined in the Project Management Body of 
Knowledge. Among project management practitioners it is 
one of the most critical activities for project success together 
with communication, resource planning and scheduling. 
Project management should always include risk management 
[7]. The Association of Project Management identifies and 
separates out a series of hard and soft benefits (see Table I) 
from deploying risk project management [8]. Bartlett [9] 
stresses individual benefits, and concludes that the major 
impact on deploying risk management resides in focusing the 
way the team members think, behave and work together. One 
further conclusion of the author is the contribution of project 
risk management to the organization as a means of 
identification of threats to the organization. 
 However, it is generally accepted that organizations tend 
to lack application of this knowledge. Bannerman [10] 
suggests the existence of a gap between the development of 
risk and risk management in the literature and the needs of 
the phenomenon in practice. Not only does there appear to be 
a disconnect between risk focused management research and 
the needs of project risk management in industry, but also 
the converse - the adoption of risk concepts and risk 
management methods in practice lags behind the new 
concepts and understandings found in the literature. 
Researchers and practitioners still have to learn from each 
other to reduce the level of project failure.  
Different schools of risk analysis provide different risk 
definitions which may have significant implications and 
impact on the management of risk in the context of project 
management. Generally speaking two schools of thought 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

have crystallized on project risk management, ‘risk as an 
objective fact’ and ‘risk as a subjective construct’. Risk as an 
objective 
fact 
considers 
risk 
as 
epistemologically 
probabilistic, while risk in the subjective construct 
perspective allows multiple 
epistemological 
dimensions of risk, encompassing experience, organization, 
culture and society which are to be taken into account to 
manage risk in the context of project management. 
 ‘Risk as a subjective construct’ opens a new opportunity 
and approach to risk management, a new perspective on the 
creation and use of risk registers, and engenders a two-way 
communication process between stakeholders and project 
manager [11]. 
The research questions (RQs) addressed in this paper are: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RQ1: To what extent does 'risk as a subjective construct' 
feature in existing risk management literature, and how can 
these contributions be classified or grouped together? 
RQ2: What is the nature of existing literature on risk 
registers and what relationship does it have with the 'risk as a 
subjective construct' concept? 
RQ3: How could project risk management theory and 
practice be informed or improved by an assessment of the 
'risk as a subjective construct' concept. 
This introductory section is followed by a discussion of 
the research methodology, based on a detailed literature 
review. Findings and analysis are presented in section three 
and the final section draws together some conclusions from 
work completed to date and briefly outlines the authors’ 
future research intentions. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
In the last two decades, qualitative research has found 
increasing recognition in the project management field [12]. 
A large number of empirical studies using qualitative data 
are available in academic literature and specialized journals. 
At the same time, management researchers and practitioners 
in particular rely on evidence-based policy [13]. In fact, most 
of the existing generally accepted standards in the field of 
project management are built around evidence-based policy 
and best practice. 
The systematic review deployed in this research assumes 
that it is feasible and sensible to cumulate findings and 
generalize results to create new knowledge. The review 
attempts to identify, evaluate and interpret all available    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
research relevant to the three research questions. The 
overarching aim is to synthesize existing evidence in a fair, 
rigorous, and open manner. This systematic approach is an 
aid to the grouping and structuring of findings, which will 
grow over time as new relevant materials are published, 
alerts collected and the search parameters or sources are 
adjusted. 
An initial literature scoping exercise encompassed a 
range of disciplines that contribute to the discussion of the 
validity of the subjective construct of risk in the context of 
project management [11].  As a first step, evidence on 'risk 
as a subjective construct' was documented. The intention is 
to expand previous studies [11] by extending the period 
observed as well as the source of literature.  Similar to other 
systematic researchers [14] who also accept the premise that 
TABLE I. HARD AND SOFT BENEFITS OF PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT [9] 
 
‘HARD’ BENEFITS 
 
‘SOFT’ BENEFITS 
H1 
Enables better planning, scheduling and 
budgeting. 
 
S1 
Improves corporate experience and general 
communication. 
H2 
Increases the likelihood of a project adhering to 
its schedules and budgets. 
S2 
Leads to a common understanding and 
improved team spirit. 
H3 
Leads to the use of the most suitable type of 
contract. 
S3 
Helps distinguish between good and bad 
management (and good and bad luck!). 
H4 
Allows a more meaningful assessment of 
contingencies. 
S4 
Helps develop the ability of staff to assess 
risks. 
H5 
Discourages the acceptance of financially 
unsound projects. 
S5 
Focuses project management attention on the 
real and most important risks. 
H6 
Contributes to the build-up of statistical 
information for better decision- making. 
 
S6 
Facilitates greater risk-taking, thus increasing 
benefits gained. 
H7 
Enables a more objective comparison of 
alternatives. 
 
S7 
Demonstrates a responsible approach to 
clients. 
H8 
Identifies and allocates responsibility to the 
best Risk Owner. 
 
S8 
Provides a fresh view of the personnel issues 
on a project. 
 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

project management is under-represented in the leading 
management 
research 
journals, 
the 
current 
paper 
concentrates on the two flagship project management 
journals, 
Project 
Management 
Journal 
(PMJ) 
and 
International Journal of Project Management (IJPM), 
established in 1969 and 1983 respectively.  The search which 
identified risk as subjective construct was broad, combining 
automated and manual searches. There were identified peer-
reviewed articles published up to July 2012. Discovery 
service EBSCO search engines and indexing systems were 
used; in addition bibliographies of the initial papers were 
scanned for additional papers. The combined research 
strategies provided 90 articles for the RQ1 and 15 for RQ2.  
Five areas were identified as interpretative contexts to 
understand 'risk as a subjective construct': 
• 
Individual risk constructions  
• 
Conflicts and contradictions 
• 
Multiple rationalities 
• 
Complexity - Size 
• 
 Perspective to project result / end product 
For synthesizing the studies the technique chosen is 
‘lines of arguments’. The articles selected examine different 
aspect of the same phenomenon. The interest for one author 
may be more focused on the disaster feature; the next may be 
stressing the uncertainty aspect; both relate to complex, big 
sized projects with stakeholders of disparate backgrounds. 
The ‘lines of arguments’ uses categories surfacing from the 
data. In the next section, as part of the analysis, categories 
are linked with personal interpretation to offer a holistic 
version of the risk analysis by the selected authors. 
III. 
FINDINGS AND ANALYSIS  
As regards RQ1, the quality criteria applied to select the 
articles were: 
1. 
A focus on project risk 
2. 
Addresses real projects, case studies – not a 
theoretical discussion 
3. 
Relates to risk, uncertainty or failure or risk 
analysis/risk register  
The studies which clearly fulfill all of the three quality 
criteria were graded ‘A’ (Table II). An analysis of this 
literature suggests that one defining characteristic of 'risk as 
a subjective construct' is the way risks are identified.  The 
identification of risk as a subjective phenomenon coincides 
with its creation – the risk exists only once the stakeholder 
has identified it. This is particularly noticeable for risks 
linked to an organization’s own qualities and deficiencies. 
Such risks show a significant limitation compared with 
traditional risk analysis based on external threats and 
probabilistic consequences. One further characteristic seems 
to be that risks apparently not identified by the existing 
project management systems are the ones originated by the 
organizational pathogens or organizational latent conditions. 
These are causes of failure, are created by actors, and often 
occur after a prolonged period, becoming evident or 
problematic after an adverse event occurs.  Such conditions 
are the result of the individual’s subjective interpretation 
(example: ring-fencing of funds for particular task against 
other tasks, investment flexibility becomes limited, and is 
then followed by unforeseen calls for other tasks). One 
stakeholder’s pathogen is another stakeholder’s protection. 
These constructions may move from protection to pathogen 
in the project life cycle. Such different constructs engender 
discrepancies during project development. Failure may not 
affect all stakeholders. Organizational pathogens can be 
better treated as subjective interpretations [15].  
Failure in complex systems provides evidence of 
competing and contradictory demands. The multi-nodality of 
complex systems shows conflicts and contradictions. These 
conflicts and contradictions are interpreted as deviations and 
misunderstandings by traditional project management. The 
practice of mixed top down/bottom-up, local empowerment 
and top down responsiveness does not easily fit with 
academic project management methodologies. Ivory and 
Alderman [16] suggest that predictive project management 
models cannot necessarily capture such complex models as 
evidenced with several case studies using qualitative data 
from three complex industrial projects. Projects are built as 
framed linear and non-linear interaction – the deconstruction 
of these interactions provides the opportunity to identify non-
linear interactions, in which inputs lead to unexpected 
outputs and possible project failure. The analysis of NASA 
recurrent disasters shows the prevalence of different and 
opposing risk rationality within a project oriented 
organization, in which certain leaderships, with certain 
objectives, influence risk handling with fatal consequences 
[17]. This provides a paramount example of different 
perceptions and expectations (commercial vs. safety) with 
different risk constructions leading to collapse.  
A knowledge based risk assessment template has been 
developed [18] to analyse the risks from both supply-side 
and demand-side perspectives. The author takes into account 
the fact that project participants may have perspectives that 
differ from those of the project manager. Both the definition 
and existence of risk phenomenon are considered as 
subjective in this model. Particularly interesting is Marrewijk 
et al’s contribution [19] to the concept of multiple 
rationalities in megaprojects. The authors oppose the 
assumption of projects having a single or shared rationality. 
Megaprojects offer - through their documentation and 
contract - a great example of the opportunities for 
ambiguities and multiple interpretations. Project participants 
with diverse cultures and rationalities will have different 
perceptions of uncertainty, ambiguity and risk. All this 
makes it hard to make “rational” and “consistent” decisions 
in such projects [20].    
An area related to the megaprojects example is the build-
operate-transfer (BOT) concession model. Yeo and Tiong 
[21] try to answer the question of how to positively manage 
such differences to achieve convergence of results. Actors in 
such a constellation are typically the representative 
authorities of the host governments, entrepreneurial 
promoters and banks. They represent different constructions 
of risk with different perceptions and expectations, values 
and motives. To sort out some of the conflicts that arise 
because of these different constructions of risk, the authors 
recommend an approach based on the Soft Systems 
Methodology [22]. 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Risk analysis could be subject to the impact of interest. 
The interest of the project owner is likely to be distinct from 
that of the project manager or a project team member. These 
 
 
 
different interests can be categorized as operational and 
strategic, and can lead to a different handling of operational 
and strategic risks. Krane et al [23] identify three major 
groups of stakeholders who will have different project 
objectives. They are: 
1. 
The project team with a ‘project internal’ 
perspective, focusing on the project’s deliverables, costs, and 
schedule. This is typically seen in a very short time 
perspective. 
2. 
 The customer or user, focusing on the benefits of 
the project or the project’s direct effects. The time 
perspective will necessarily be somewhat longer than the 
project’s perspective. They are the ones who will live with 
the end-product once the project is finished. 
3. 
The project owner with a longer-term strategic 
perspective on the project. 
These authors also use the term ‘risk management systems’ 
associated with the various stakeholder groups and point out 
that these distinct systems must communicate. The risk  
 
 
 
 
management systems communication is more a collaboration  
process to address the holistic view of the project and less a 
‘risk register’ for dissemination to project participants. 
      The risk register review (RQ2) does not require an 
integrative synthesizing analysis, but Table III details the 
grade ‘A’ articles that were reviewed (using the same quality 
criteria as noted above). Risk registers are widely used as a 
tool or template. Integration and simplicity are common 
requirements.  All of the selected studies described tools or 
analysis that could be adapted to incorporate and integrate 
several constructions. Project management applications 
supporting stakeholders' collaboration are primarily built 
according to specifications based on a project manager 
centric risk viewpoint. Although it may be too early to 
provide a definitive answer, it appears feasible to adapt the 
current systems and templates structure to incorporate 
several risk constructions. It is possibly not that much of a 
Author 
Title of work 
Region/Detail 
Knowledge contribution 
Practice implications 
[15] 
 
The pathogen construct in 
risk analysis 
UK - Based on interviews to 22 
project members 
Risk origination in the way an 
organization sees the world. 
Pathogen link to practice and  its 
subjective interpretation  
Enhancement of risk identification 
by querying contradictory 
interpretations of the same entity. 
[16] 
Project Managements learns 
from complex systems failure 
UK - Detailed examination 3 
large size projects 
Recognition of conflicts and 
contradictions as opposed to 
deviations and misunderstanding as 
consequence of diverse social 
positions, organizational 
responsibilities, values, and culture 
Suggestion of mixed top-
down/bottom-up approach to 
management. 
[16] 
Organizational behaviour and 
disaster: NASA 
USA - Detailed examination of 2 
large projects. Access to 
investigation board 
documentation and lessons 
learned. 
Risk analysis impacted by interests, 
values and culture and objectives; 
risk phenomenon is subjective 
Integrate devil’s opinion, 
independent quality review, 
identification and elimination group 
behaviour; setup multiple groups 
under different leaderships to work 
on critical issues 
[31] 
Deviation, ambiguity , 
uncertainty project-
organization 
USA – The Millcorp case study 
Knowledge sharing through 
interaction and communication 
between teams and contexts to 
enhance risk understanding  
Interactive risk identification and  
analysis processes  
[30] 
Fall of firefly 
USA – case study 
Different risk constructions 
Provides lessons learned / check list 
to identify different risk 
constructions for practitioners 
[23] 
Project Manager–Project 
Owner Interaction influences 
risk management 
Norway - Analysis of 7 big 
complex projects 
Project Owner – Project Managers’ 
interaction results in lack of 
strategic risk attention, strong focus 
on operational risk  
Recommendation to emphasize the 
identification of more short- and 
long-term strategic risks at all 
stages of projects  
[18] 
A knowledge-based risk 
assessment framework for 
evaluating web-enabled 
application outsourcing 
projects 
Global 
Practical tool to assess specific 
stakeholder risks 
Template available 
[19] 
Managing public–private 
megaprojects: paradoxes, 
complexity, and project 
design 
Netherlands and Australia 
Multiple rationalities 
Adequate project design to 
accommodate partners’ culture to 
enable cooperation to achieve 
project objectives 
[21] 
Positive management of 
differences for risk reduction 
in BOT projects 
Turkey, Thailand, Indonesia, 
Australia, Bangladesh, Malaysia, 
Canada and Hong Kong 
Analysis of different constructions 
of risk 
Proposed soft systems methodology 
to achieve convergence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE II. GRADE ‘A’ ARTICLES USED IN LITERATURE ANALYSIS FOR RQ1 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

technical challenge to incorporate different risk constructs, 
but more of a challenge to the people involved to adopt and 
deploy the required processes. 
Krane et al [23] [24] address the issue of how risks, once 
identified, are then distributed amongst different risk 
categories. This analysis provides a comprehensive general 
overview of how to deal with different risk items using a risk 
register. This comprehensive study proposes a basic 
categorization based on the levels of hierarchy of 
management objectives. They define the three categories as 
follows: 
 
 
 
1. 
Operational Risks—risks related to operational 
objectives of the project. This means risks related to the 
direct results from the project: its products. 
2. 
Short-Term Strategic Risks—risks related to short-
term strategic objectives of the project. The project owner 
will have a set of objectives related to his/her use of the 
project results. The short-term strategic risks are the risks 
related to those objectives, or the risks concerning first-order 
effects of the project— that is, risks pertaining to the effects 
that should be achieved for the target group or end users of 
the project. 
3. 
Long-Term Strategic Risks—risks related to the 
long-term strategic objectives of the project. This means 
those risks related to the project purpose—the long-term 
objective that the project is meant to contribute to. 
As regards RQ3, Macgill and Siu [25] stress the 
importance of a single architecture of risk knowledge as its 
epistemology.  Their proposal is the establishment of a risk  
 
 
 
 
 
knowledge database for the promotion of knowledge 
dissemination.  Macgill and Siu [26] also recognize the 
importance of risk analysis not as a philosophical or 
intellectual exercise, but as an applied discipline. The 
novelty of this proposal resides in the observation of the risk 
phenomena not only as a physical but also a social issue. 
People’s perception of risk results in acceptability of risk that 
Author 
Title of work 
Knowledge contribution 
Practice implications 
[32] 
Categorizing risks in seven 
large projects 
Analysis of 7 big complex projects – 
Categorization of 1450 risk elements as 
operational, short- term or long-term 
strategic.  
Questions of identification and assessment of 
operational short-term strategic and long-term 
strategic guidelines 
[8] 
Knowledge based proactive 
risk management 
Detailed description of mature interactive 
software application 
Recommendations for  adapting stakeholders 
interaction and collaboration 
[33] 
Integrated Methodology for 
Project Risk Management 
Comprehensive practice example of risk 
management with risk register development 
including Delphi Analysis for final 
validation 
Framework available for project owner -
external consultant- collaboration that offers 
opportunity to adapt to other particular projects 
[34] 
Risk avoidance in bidding for 
software projects based on life 
cycle management theory 
Integration of ‘bidding risk’ with project-
life-cycle and risk response measures 
Model suggested method for forecast, prevent, 
discover and reduce related risk completely 
and in a timely fashion, thus enhancing the 
probability of a successful bid. 
[29] 
Intervening conditions on the 
management of project risk: 
Dealing with uncertainty in 
information technology 
projects 
Provides approaches to ensure risk is 
assessed; and to overcome practitioners risk 
management ineffectiveness perception  
Application to improve risk management 
techniques when conflicting risk perceptions as 
opposed to deal with issue 
[35] 
Development of a Model for 
Risk Management at Corporate, 
Strategic Business, and Project 
Levels 
Methodology to ensure risk management 
integration with internal and external 
stakeholders, in line with McGill risk 
knowledge database  
Mainly theoretical, ensures consistency of risk 
register usage with corporate strategy 
[36] 
Comparing project 
management practices in new 
product development: a study 
in the automotive, aerospace 
and rail transport industry 
Comparative approach, identification of best 
practices and suggestion for best practices 
transfer  
Recommendations for best practice solutions 
exchange at inter-industry and intra-industry 
level 
[37] 
A Risk Register Database 
System to aid the management 
of project risk 
Presentation of project risk assessment and 
project risk register in an automotive 
company through a project lifespan 
Information about design and construction of 
risk registers in the automotive manufacturing 
industry 
[38] 
Project risk management 
practice: The case of a South 
African utility company 
Risk management in practice involving 
stakeholders, adherence to very simple risk 
management processes  
Insight, information for practitioners on how to 
integrate stakeholders using very simple risk 
management process. Ensures risk 
management is as part of mainstream business 
activities. 
[39] 
Risk management practices of 
leading UK cost consultants 
Insight of usage of risk assessment 
techniques and risk registers 
Outline of options for risk management 
approaches 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE III. GRADE ‘A’ ARTICLES USED IN LITERATURE ANALYSIS FOR RQ2 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

does not necessarily correspond with the consensual body of 
peer group scientific knowledge.  In this construct, risk based 
on people knowledge and the constructed social reality is not 
univocal. Risk appears to be contextual and the social actions 
adopted by individuals when facing a risk are related to their 
knowledge.  
With this relatively new approach to risk, a new school of 
thought has been identified in the area of project risk 
management.  Zhang [11] provides a systematic review of 
the position of 171 articles published between 1999 and 2009 
regarding project risk in the two leading project management 
journals, Project Management Journal and the International 
Journal of Project Management. Only 12 out of the 171 
articles belong to the 'risk as a subjective construct' category. 
The same author also suggests future exploration on 
identifying the epistemological dimensions of subjective risk 
for developing methods and tools to assess and evaluate 
subjective risk in the context of project management. 
A significant blocker to developing and applying new 
risk management theory is its low uptake as a concept in 
industry [27]. A fuller understanding of the implications of 
risk as a subjective construct has the potential to significantly 
enhance the management of risk in projects and thus overall 
project outcomes. Some studies have already explored how 
mainstream project methodologies can be adapted to 
different company contexts [28], and recognition of the 
different origins and dimensions of risk can be seen in this 
context. The perceived effectiveness of different project risk 
management assessments has been analyzed to identify the 
root causes for manager’s reluctance to deploy risk 
management processes and its consequences. This study [29] 
is a valuable input that could underpin an enhanced 
application of risk assessment in project management.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Of the authors that address 'risk as a subjective construct', 
no one presents a complete solution and none of them 
proposes a risk management system that could integrate 
several risk constructs. At the same time, literature on risk 
registers and current risk management is available but no 
relationship could be found between any of the existing 
proposals and the 'risk as a subjective construct' concept. 
This poses the question of how to adjust current approaches 
in order to integrate more than one risk construct. 
What is clear is that different stakeholders see different 
realities - as Peter Drucker has put it, ‘when intelligent, 
moral, and rational people make decisions that appear 
inexplicable, it’s because they see a reality different to the 
one seen by others’ [30]. This phenomenon, in the case of 
risk, has no unique or universally accepted interpretation and 
it thus requires further research and enhancement, which the 
authors are pursuing with regard to project management 
practice in the German automotive sector. In order to 
develop further knowledge in this field, interaction and 
communication between project teams and their contexts will 
be required. This knowledge - context dependent, situational, 
shared - will be created collectively [31].  If it can be 
successfully 
harnessed 
within 
project 
management 
methodologies and disciplines, it has the potential to 
significantly enhance eventual project outcomes.  
REFERENCES 
[1] D. E. Hodgson, “Disciplining the professional: The case 
of project management,” Journal of management studies, 
39(6), . 2002, pp. 803-821. 
[2] A. Brown, “Getting your projects to meet strategic goals,” 
Paper presented at the PMI Global Congress Proceedings, 
Sydney, Australia and Denver, CO, USA, 2008. 
[3] J. Tharp, “Align project management to organizational 
Strategy,” Paper presented at the PMI Global Congress 
Proceedings, Hong Kong., 2007. 
[4] D. McClure,  From the CIO trenches: Why some projects 
fail and others succeed, Gartner Industry Research, 2007. 
[5] R. Jen, Visual Ishikawa Risk Techique (VIRT) - An 
approach to risk management, PMI Virtual Library, 2009. 
Available: 
http://www.pmi.org/en/Knowledge-
Center/Knowledge-
Shelf/~/media/Members/Knowledge%20Shelf/Jen_2009.a
shx. Retrieved: January, 2013. 
[6] K. de Bakker, “Risk management affecting IS/IT project 
success 
through 
communicative 
action,” 
Project 
Management Journal, 42(3), 2011, pp. 75-90. 
[7] PMI., A guide to the project management body of 
knowledge (PMBOK®) (Fourth ed.) Project management 
institute, Inc., 2008. 
[8] J. Arrow, “Knowledge-Based proactive project risk 
management,” AACE International Transactions, June 
2008, 
pp. 
1-9. 
Available: http://ehis.ebscohost.com/eds/pdfviewer/pdfvie
wer?sid=7d282fa8-4eb3-4756-86ad-
5f2d4aa0d29d%40sessionmgr15&vid=2&hid=1. 
Retrieved: January, 2013. 
[9] J. Bartlett, Project risk analysis and management guide, 
Buckinghamshire: APM Publishing Limited., 2004, pp. 5-
13. 
[10] P. L. Bannerman, “Risk and risk management in software 
projects: A reassessment,” The journal of systems and 
software, 81(12), 2008, pp. 2118-2133. 
[11] H. Zhang, “Two schools of risk analysis: A review of past 
research on project risk,” Project Management Journal, 
42(4), 2011, pp. 5-18. 
[12] T. Biedenbach and R. Müller, “Paradigms in project 
management research: examples from 15 years of IRNOP 
conferences,” International journal of managing projects 
in business, 4(1), 2011, pp. 82-104.  
[13] A. Bryman and E. Bell, Business research methods,  
Oxford : Oxford University Press, 2007, 2nd ed. 
[14] B. Hanisch. and A. Wald, “ A Bibliometric View on the 
Use of Contingency Theory in Project Management 
Research,” Project Management Journal, 43(3), 2012, pp. 
4-23. 
[15] J. S. Busby and H. Zhang, “The pathogen construct in risk 
analysis,” Project Management Journal, 39(3), 2008, pp. 
86-96. 
[16] C. Ivory and N. Alderman, “Can project management 
learn anything from studies of failure in complex 
systems?”  Project Management Journal, 36(3), 2005, pp. 
5-16. 
[17] R. D. Dimitroff, L. A. Schmidt, and T. D. Bond, 
“Organisational behavior and disaster: a stydy of conflict 
at NASA,”  Project Management Journal, 36(2), 2005, 
pp. 28-38. 
[18] W. L. Currie, “A knowledge-based risk assessment 
framework 
for evaluating 
web-enabled application 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

outsourcing projects,” International Journal of Project 
Management, 21(3), 2003, pp. 207-217. 
[19] A. van Marrewijk, S. R. Clegg, T. S. Pitsis, and M. 
Veenswijk, “Managing public–private megaprojects: 
Paradoxes, complexity, and project design,” International 
Journal of Project Management, 26(6), 2008, pp. 591-
600. 
[20] M. Olzmann and M. Wynn, “How to Switch IT Service 
Providers:  Recommendations for a successful transition,”  
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, 
vol 5, no 1&2, 2012, pp. 209-219, IARIA journals. 
[21] K. T. Yeo and R. L. K. Tiong, “Positive management of 
differences for risk reduction in BOT projects,” 
International Journal of Project Management, 18(4), 
2000, pp. 257-265. 
[22] P. Checkland and J. Scholes, Softt Systems Methodology 
in Practice, J Wiley, Chichester, 1990. 
[23] H. P. Krane, N.O.E. Olsson, and A. Rolstadas, “How 
project manager-project owner interaction can work 
within and influence project risk management,” Project 
Management Journal, 43(2), 2012, pp. 54-67. 
[24] H. P. Krane, A. Rolstadas, and N.O.E. Olsson, 
“Categorizing risks in seven large projects—Which risks 
do the projects focus on?” Project Management Journal, 
41(1), 2010, pp. 81-86. 
[25] S. M. Macgill and Y. L. Siu,  “A new paradigm for risk 
analysis,” Futures, 37, 2005, pp. 1105-1131. 
[26] S. M. Macgill and Y. L. Siu,  “The nature of risk,” 
Journal of Risk Research, 7(3), 2004, pp. 315-352. 
[27] R. Hynuk Sanchez, M. Bourgault Benoit, and R. Pellerin, 
“Risk management applied to projects, programs, and 
portfolios,”  International journal of managing projects in 
business, 2(1),  2009, pp. 14-35. 
[28] M. Wynn. P. Turner, H. Abas, and R. Shen, “Employing 
knowledge transfer to support IS implementation in 
SMEs,” Journal of Industry and Higher Education,  
Volume 23, No 2, April, 2009, pp. 111-125. 
[29] E. Kutsch and M. Hall, “Intervening conditions on the 
management of project risk: Dealing with uncertainty in 
information technology projects,” International Journal 
of Project Management, 23(8), 2005, pp. 591-599. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[30] Bud Baker, “The fall of the firefly: An assessment of a 
failed project strategy,” Project Management Journal, 
33(3), 2002, pp. 53-57. 
[31] M. Hällgren and E .V. A. Maaninen-Olsson, “Deviations, 
ambiguity 
and 
uncertainty 
in 
a 
project-intensive 
organisation,” Project Management Journal, 36(3), 2005, 
pp. 17-26. 
[32] H. P. Krane, A. Rolstadas, and N.O.E. Olsson, 
“Categorizing risks in seven large projects—Which risks 
do the projects focus on?” Project Management Journal, 
41(1), 2010, pp. 81-86. 
[33] A. del Caño and M. P. de la Cruz, “Integrated 
methodology for project risk management,” Journal of 
Construction Engineering & Management, 128(6), 2002 
pp. 473-485. 
[34] G. Xie, J. Zhang, and K. K. Lai,. “Risk avoidance in 
bidding for software projects based on life cycle 
management theory,” International Journal of Project 
Management, 24(6), 2006, pp. 516-521. 
[35] A. Merna and T. Merna, “Development of a model for 
risk management at corporate, strategic business, and 
project levels,” Journal of Structured & Project Finance, 
10(1), 2004 pp. 79-85. 
[36] A. K. Müller, A. Wald, and A. Görner, “Comparing 
project 
management 
practices 
in 
new 
product 
development: a study in the automotive, aerospace and 
rail transport industry,” International Journal of Project 
Organisation and Management, 4(3), 2012, pp. 203-217. 
[37] F. D. Patterson and K. Neailey, “A risk register database 
system to aid the management of project risk,” 
International Journal of Project Management, 20(5), 
2002, pp. 365–374. 
[38] R. van Wyk, P. Bowen, and A. Akintoye, “Project risk 
management practice: The case of a South African utility 
company,” International Journal of Project Management, 
26(2), 2008, pp. 149-163. 
[39] G. D. Wood and R. C. T. Ellis, “Risk management 
practices of leading UK cost consultants,” Engineering 
Construction & Architectural Management, 10(4), 2003, 
pp. 254-262. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

