Performance Indicators for Business Rule Management 
 
 
 
Martijn Zoet 
Optimizing Knowledge-Intensive 
Business Processes 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, the Netherlands 
martijn.zoet@zuyd.nl 
 
Koen Smit 
Digital Smart Services 
HU University of Applied Sciences 
Utrecht 
Utrecht, the Netherlands 
koen.smit@hu.nl 
Eline de Haan 
Centre for Application Development 
Dutch Tax and Customs Administration 
Utrecht, the Netherlands 
ey.de.haan@belastingdienst.nl 
 
 
Abstract— With increasing investments in business rules 
management (BRM), organizations are searching for ways to 
value and benchmark their processes to elicitate, design, accept, 
deploy and execute business rules. To realize valuation and 
benchmarking of previously mentioned processes, organizations 
must be aware that performance measurement is essential, and of 
equal importance, which performance indicators to apply to the 
performance 
measurement 
processes. 
However, 
scientific 
research on BRM, in general, is limited and research that focuses 
on BRM in combination with performance indicators is nascent. 
The purpose of this paper is to define performance indicators for 
previously mentioned BRM processes. We conducted a three 
round focus group and three round Delphi Study which led to the 
identification of 14 performance indicators. Presented results 
provide a grounded basis from which further, empirical, 
research on performance indicators for BRM can be explored. 
Keywords-Business Rules Management; Business Rules; 
Performance Measurement; Performance Indicator. 
I. INTRODUCTION  
       Business rules are an important part of an organization’s 
daily activities. Many business services nowadays rely heavily 
on business rules to express assessments, predictions and 
decisions [2][15]. A business rule is [11] “a statement that 
defines or constrains some aspect of the business intending to 
assert business structure or to control the behavior of the 
business.” Most organizations experience three challenges 
when dealing with business rules management: 1) consistency 
challenges, 2) impact analysis challenges, and 3) transparency 
of business rule execution. A consistent interpretation of 
business rules ensures that different actors apply the same 
business rules, and apply them consistently. This is a 
challenge since business rules are often not centralized, but 
they are embedded in various elements of an organization's 
information system instead. For example, business rules are 
embedded in minds of employees, part of textual procedures, 
manuals, tables, schemes, business process models, and hard-
coded as software applications. Impact assessment determines 
the impact of changes made to business rules and the effect on 
an existing implementation. Currently, impact assessments can 
take significant time which results in situations where the  
business rules already have changed again while the impact 
assessment is still ongoing [1]. Transparency, or business rules 
transparency, indicates that organizations should establish a 
system to prove which business rules are applied at a specific 
moment in time. To tackle the previously mentioned 
challenges and to improve grip on business rules, 
organizations search for a systematic and controlled approach 
to support the discovery, design, validation and deployment of 
business rules [2][21]. To be able to manage or even address 
these challenges, insight has to be created concerning business 
rule management processes at organizations. This can be 
achieved using performance management, which can provide 
insight into an organization’s current situation, but can also 
point towards where and how to improve. However, research 
on performance management concerning BRM is nascent. 
       The measurement of performance has always been 
important in the field of enterprise management and, therefore, 
has been of interest for both practitioners and researchers. 
Performance 
systems 
are 
applied 
to 
provide 
useful 
information to manage, control and improve business 
processes. One of the most important tasks of a performance 
management system is to identify (and properly) evaluate 
suitable Performance Indicators (PI’s). The increase of interest 
and research towards identifying the right set of indicators has 
led to ‘standard’ frameworks and PI’s tailored to industry or 
purpose. Examples of such frameworks are the balanced 
scorecard, total quality management framework, and seven-S 
model [9][18]. Moreover, research on standard indicators is 
increasingly performed for the sales and manufacturing 
processes. To the knowledge of the authors, research which 
focuses on performance measures for BRM is absent. This 
article extends the understanding of performance measurement 
with regard to the BRM processes. To be able to do so, the 
following research question is addressed: “Which performance 
indicators are useful to measure the BRM processes?” 
       This paper is organized as follows: In section two we 
provide insights into PI’s and BRM. This is followed by a 
description of the research method used to construct our 
artifact in section three. Furthermore, the analysis of our 
research results is described in section four. Subsequently, our 
results which led to our Performance Indicators for BRM are 
presented section five. Finally, in section six we discuss which 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

conclusions can be drawn from our results, followed by a 
critical view of the research method and results of our study. 
II. RELATED WORK AND BACKGROUND 
       The aim of using a performance measurement system is to 
provide a closed loop control system in line with predefined 
business objectives. In scientific literature and industry, an 
abundance of performance management systems exists [6]. 
Although a lot of performance systems exist, in general, they 
can be grouped into four base types [9]: 1) consolidate and 
simulate, 2) consolidate and manage, 3) innovate and 
stimulate, and 4) innovate and manage. The predefined 
business objectives, and, therefore, the creation of the closed 
loop control system, differ per base-type. In the remainder of 
this section, first the four performance measurement system 
base-types will be discussed after which the registration of a 
single performance measure will be presented.  Subsequently, 
the processes will be discussed for which the performance 
management system is created. The last paragraph will focus 
on bringing all elements together. 
       Performance measurement systems of the first base-type, 
consolidate and stimulate, are utilized to measure and 
stimulate the current system performance. The formulation 
process of PI’s is usually performed with employees that work 
with the system, possibly in combination with direct 
management, and is, therefore, a bottom-up approach. 
Examples of this type of performance measurement system are 
the “control loop system” or “business process management 
system”. Performance measurement systems, that focus purely 
on measuring and maintaining the current performance level, 
are classified as the second base-type consolidate and 
manage. Consolidate and manage is a purely top-down 
approach in which PI’s are formulated by top management 
based on the current strategy. Each PI defined by the top-
management is translated into multiple different underlying 
PI’s by each lower management level. Two examples of 
performance 
measurement 
systems 
of 
this 
type 
are 
“management 
by 
objectives” 
and 
“quality 
policy 
development”. 
       The third base-type, innovate and stimulate, focuses on 
the customer and the product or service delivered to the 
customer by the organization. To define the PI’s, first the 
quality attributes of the product or service delivered to the 
customer need to be defined. Based on these quality attributes, 
PI’s for each business process that contributes to the product 
or service is defined. An example of a performance 
measurement system of this type is Quality Function 
Deployment (QFD). The fourth base-type, innovate and 
manage, focuses on the future of the organization while 
managing the present. It is a top-down approach in which PI’s 
are formulated, based on the strategy of the organization. 
Furthermore, these PI’s are then translated to the lower 
echelons of the organization. Furthermore, PI’s that are used 
to manage the current state of the organization are specified. 
The combination of both measures is used to make sure that 
the company is performing well while at the same time 
steering it into the future. An example of this performance 
measurement system type is the Balanced Score Card.  
       In addition to choosing the (combination of) performance 
measurement system(s), the individual performance indicators 
(PI’s) of which the performance measurement system is 
composed have to be defined. A PI is defined as: “an 
authoritative measure, often in quantitative form, of one or 
multiple aspects of the organizational system.” Scholars as 
well as practitioners debate on which characteristics must be 
registered with respect to PI’s [8][14]. Comparative research 
executed by [14] identified a set of five characteristics each 
scholar applies: 1) the PI must be derived from objectives, 2) 
the PI must be clearly defined with an explicit purpose, 3) the 
PI must be relevant and easy to maintain, 4) the PI must be 
simple to understand, and 5) the PI provide fast and accurate 
feedback. 
       The performance measurement system in this paper is 
developed for the elicitation, design, acceptation, deployment, 
and execution process of BRM. A detailed explanation of the 
BRM processes can be found in [23]. However, to ground our 
research a summary is provided here. The value proposition 
(end result) of a business rule set is delivered when the 
business rule set is executed. Business rule sets can provide 
the following value propositions: classification, assessments, 
diagnosis, monitoring, prediction, configuration design, 
modelling, planning, scheduling, and assignment [3]. Before 
the business rule set can be executed, it first needs to be 
elicitated, designed, accepted, and deployed. The elicitation 
process exists out of two main tasks: determining the scope 
and identifying sources. In the task determining scope, the 
value proposition of the business rule set is determined. After 
the scope has been determined, the data sources that influence 
the business rule set have to be identified. Data sources can be 
sources such as human experts, documentation, laws, and 
regulation. After the data sources have been determined the 
design process starts which consists of five phases. First, the 
scope is decomposed by means of a business rules 
architecture. The business rules architecture is a structure 
which decomposes scope in multiple fine-grained modular 
business rule sets that adhere to the single responsibility 
principle [11]. The purpose of the context architecture is to 
create a normalized business rule set in which individual 
business rule set can be changed without affecting other parts. 
For example, the scope is “determine candidate profile” which 
can be composed into multiple business rule sets: “determine 
candidate personality rating”, “determine candidate cognitive 
rating”, and “candidate maturity rating.” After the business 
rule architecture is created it is verified (to check for semantic 
/ syntax errors) and validated (to check for errors in its 
intended behavior). After the validation of the business rules 
architecture, a fact model and the business rules are defined 
for each individual business rule set. Furthermore, the 
verification and validation of the fact model and business rules 
take place per business rule set. After each individual business 
rule set has been validated, also, the scope (the combination of 
business rule sets) as a whole is validated. Until this moment, 
the scope, business rule sets, business rules and fact 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

models have been modelled in an implementation-independent 
language. 
An 
implementation-independent 
language 
is 
considered as: “a language that is not tailored to be 
applicable to a specific information system” [23]. An 
implementation dependent language, on the other hand, is 
defined as: “a language that is tailored to be applicable to a 
specific information system” [23]. Implementation dependent 
business rule languages have a specific grammar which can 
only be interpreted by a specific system. Examples of such 
systems are [19] and [20]. The translation from an 
implementation-independent language to an implementation 
dependent language is the goal of the deployment process. The 
last BRM process is the execution process which transforms a 
platform specific rule model into the value proposition it must 
deliver.  
       BRM is a process that deals with the elicitation, design, 
acceptation, deployment, and execution process of business 
rules within an organization to support and improve its 
business performance. Organizations are realizing that 
business rules are crucial resources that should be managed to 
stay 
competitive 
and 
innovative. 
Since 
no 
absolute 
measurement exists to measure the success of BRM as whole 
as well as individual BRM processes in an organization, this 
research will focus on identifying PI’s from the perspective of 
the first base-type, consolidate and stimulate. This implies that 
we will apply a bottom-up approach and will involve 
employees working on business rules and their direct 
management. Our focus per PI will be on the characteristics as 
defined by [8]: 1) derived from objectives, 2) clearly defined 
with an explicit purpose, 3) relevant and easy to maintain, 4) 
simple to understand, and 5) provide fast and accurate 
feedback.   
III. RESEARCH METHOD 
       The goal of this research is to identify performance 
measurements that provide relevant insight into the 
performance 
of 
the 
elicitation, 
design, 
acceptation, 
deployment, and execution process of business rules. In 
addition to the goal of the research, also, the maturity of the 
research field is a factor in determining the appropriate 
research method and technique. The maturity of the BRM 
research field, with regard to none-technological research, is 
nascent [10][15][23]. Focus of research in nascent research 
fields should lie on identifying new constructs and 
establishing relationships between identified constructs [5]. 
Summarized, to accomplish our research goal, a research 
approach is needed in which a broad range of possible 
performance measurements are explored and combined into 
one view in order to contribute to an incomplete state of 
knowledge.  
Adequate research methods to explore a broad range of 
possible ideas / solutions to a complex issue and combine them 
into one view when a lack of empirical evidence exists consist 
of group-based research techniques [4][13][16][17]. Examples 
of group based techniques are Focus Groups, Delphi Studies, 
Brainstorming and the Nominal Group Technique. The main 
characteristic that differentiates these types of group-based 
research techniques from each other is the use of face-to-face 
versus non-face-to-face approaches. Both approaches have 
advantages and disadvantages, for example, in face-to-face 
meetings, provision of immediate feedback is possible. 
However, face-to-face meetings have restrictions with regard 
to the number of participants and the possible existence of 
group or peer pressure. To eliminate the disadvantages, we 
combined the face-to-face and non-face-to-face technique by 
means of applying the following two group based research 
approaches:  the Focus Group and Delphi Study.  
IV. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS 
Data for this study is collected over a period of six months, 
through three rounds of focus groups (round 1, 2 and 3: experts 
focus group) and a three-round Delphi study (round 4, 5 and 6 
Delphi study), see Figure 1. Between each individual round of 
focus group and Delphi Study, the researchers consolidated the 
Figure 1. Data collection process design 
results (round 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7: research team). Both 
methods of data collection are further discussed in the 
remainder of this section. 
 
A. Focus Groups 
      Before a focus group is conducted, a number of key issues 
need to be considered: 1) the goal of the focus group, 2) the 
selection of participants, 3) the number of participants, 4) the 
selection of the facilitator, 5) the information recording 
facilities, and 6) the protocol of the focus group. The goal of 
the focus group was to identify performance measurements for 
the performance of the elicitation, design, acceptation, 
deployment, and execution process of business rules. The 
selection of the participants should be based on the group of 
individuals, 
organizations, 
information 
technology, 
or 
community that best represents the phenomenon studied [22]. 
In this study, organizations and individuals that deal with a 
large amount of business rules represent the phenomenon 
studied. 
Such 
organisations 
are 
often 
financial 
and 
government institutions. During this research, which was 
conducted from September 2014 to November 2014, five large 
Dutch government institutions participated. Based on the 
written description of the goal and consultation with 
employees of each government institution, participants were 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

selected to take part in the three focus group meetings. In 
total, ten participants took part who fulfilled the following 
positions: two enterprise architects, two business rules 
architects, three business rules analysts, one project manager, 
and two policy advisors. Each of the participants had, at least, 
five years of experience with business rules. Delbecq and van 
de Ven [4] and Glaser [7] state that the facilitator should be an 
expert on the topic and familiar with group meeting processes. 
The selected facilitator has a Ph.D. in BRM, has conducted 7 
years of research on the topic, and has facilitated many 
(similar) focus group meetings before. Besides the facilitator, 
five additional researchers were present during the focus 
group meetings. One researcher participated as ‘back-up’ 
facilitator, who monitored if each participant provided equal 
input, and if necessary, involved specific participants by 
asking for more in-depth elaboration on the subject. The 
remaining four researchers acted as a minute’s secretary 
taking field notes. They did not intervene in the process; they 
operated from the sideline. All focus groups were video and 
audio recorded. A focus group meeting took on average three 
and a half hour. Each focus group meeting followed the same 
overall protocol, each starting with an introduction and 
explanation of the purpose and procedures of the meeting, 
after which ideas were generated, shared, discussed and/or 
refined.  
      Prior to the first round, participants were informed about 
the purpose of the focus group meeting and were invited to 
submit their current PI’s applied in the BRM process. When 
participants had submitted PI’s, they had the opportunity to 
elaborate upon their PI’s during the first focus group meeting. 
During this meeting, also, additional PI’s were proposed. For 
each proposed PI, the name, goal, specification and 
measurements were discussed and noted. For some PI’s, the 
participants 
did 
not 
know 
which 
specifications 
or 
measurements to use. These elements were left blank and 
agreed to deal with during the second focus group meeting. 
After the first focus group, the researchers consolidated the 
results. Consolidation comprised the detection of double PI’s, 
incomplete PI’s, conflicting goals and measurements. Double 
PI’s exist in two forms: 1) identical PI’s and 2) PI’s which are 
textually different, but similar on the conceptual level. The 
results of the consolidation were sent to the participants of the 
focus group two weeks in advance for the second focus group 
meeting. During these two weeks, the participants assessed the 
consolidated results in relationship to four questions: 1) “Are 
all PI’s described correctly?”, “2) Do I want to remove a PI?” 
3) “Do we need additional PI’s?“, and 4) “How do the PI’s 
affect the design of a business rule management solution?”. 
This 
process 
of 
conducting 
focus 
group 
meetings, 
consolidation by the researchers and assessment by the 
participants of the focus group was repeated two more times 
(round 2 and round 3). After the third focus group meeting 
(round 3), saturation within the group occurred leading to a 
consolidated set of PI’s. 
B. Delphi Study 
      Before a Delphi study is conducted, also a number of key 
issues need to be considered: 1) the goal of the Delphi study, 
2) the selection of participants, 3) the number of participants, 
and 4) the protocol of the Delphi study. The goal of the Delphi 
study was twofold. The first goal was to validate and refine 
existing PI’s identified in the focus group meetings, and the 
second goal was to identify new PI’s. Based on the written 
description of the goal and consultation with employees of 
each organization, participants were selected to take part in the 
Delphi study. In total, 36 participants took part. Twenty-six 
experts, in addition to the ten experts that participated in the 
focus group meetings, of the large Dutch government 
institutions were involved in the Delphi Study, which was 
conducted from November 2014 to December 2014. The 
reason for involving the ten experts from the focus groups was 
to decrease the likelihood of peer-pressure amongst group 
members. This is achieved by exploiting the advantage of a 
Delphi Study which is characterized by a non-face-to-face 
approach. The twenty-six additional participants involved in 
the Delphi Study had the following positions: three project 
managers, four enterprise architects, ten business rules analyst, 
five policy advisors, two IT-architects, six business rules 
architects, two business consultants, one functional designer, 
one tax advisor, one legal advisor, and one legislative author. 
Each of the participants had, at least, two years of experience 
with business rules. Each round (4, 5, and 6) of the Delphi 
Study followed the same overall protocol, whereby each 
participant was asked to assess the PI’s in relationship to four 
questions: 1) “Are all PI’s described correctly?”, “2) Do I 
want to remove a PI?” 3) “Do we need additional PI’s?“, and 
4) “How do the PI’s affect the design of a BRM solution?” 
  
V. RESULTS 
      In this section, the overall results of this study are 
presented. Furthermore, the final PI’s are listed. Each PI is 
specified 
using 
a 
specific 
format 
to 
convey 
their 
characteristics in a unified way.  
 
TABLE I. EXAMPLE OF PI RESULT: TIME MEASUREMENT TO 
DEFINE, VERIFY, AND VALIDATE A BUSINESS RULE. 
 
PI 09: The amount of time units needed to define, verify, 
and validate a single business rule. 
Goal: Shortening the time needed to deliver defined, 
verified, and validated business rules. 
S 
The number of time units per selected single business 
rule: 
 
Measured over the entire collection of 
context designs;  
 
During the design process; 
 
(Sorted by selected context design); 
 
(Sorted by selected complexity level of a 
business rule); 
 
(Sorted by selected scope design); 
 
(Sorted by selected time unit). 
M 
 
Context design 
 
Business rule 
 
Complexity level of a business rule 
 
Scope design 
 
Time unit 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Before the first focus group was conducted, participants 
were invited to submit the PI’s they currently use. This resulted 
in the submission of zero PI’s. Since this result can imply a 
multitude of things (e.g. total absence of the phenomena 
researched or unmotivated participants), further inquiry was 
conducted. The reason that no participants submitted PI’s was 
because none of the participants had a formal performance 
measurement system in place. Some measured BRM processes 
but did so in an ad-hoc and unstructured manner. The first 
focus group meeting resulted in 24 PI’s. This first focus group 
meeting also had one interesting side-discussion: can a PI be 
configured to monitor specific individuals? For example, “the 
number of incorrectly written business rules per business rule 
analyst.“ Since the discussion became quite heated during the 
meeting, it was decided that each expert would think about and 
reflect on this question outside the group and that this 
discussion would be continued in the next focus group 
meeting.  
      After analyzing the results of the first focus group the 24 
PI’s were sent to the participants of the second focus group. 
During the second focus group, the participants started to 
discuss the usefulness of the PI’s and the fact that too many 
PI’s is also not a good thing. This resulted in the removal of 
ten conceptual PI’s. Ten PI’s were discarded because they did 
not add value to the performance measurement process 
concerning BRM. This resulted into 14 remaining PI’s, which 
had to be further analyzed by the researchers. Also, the 
discussion about the PI’s formulated to measure specific 
individuals was continued. At the end, only three experts 
thought this was reasonable and useful. The other seven 
disagreed and found it not useful which has led to the 
exclusion of PI’s targeted at a specific individual. 
      During the third focus group, the participants discussed the 
remaining 14 final PI’s which led to the further refinement of 
goals, specifications, and measurements. Additionally, the 
subject-matter experts expressed a certain need to categorize 
PI’s into well-known phases within the development process 
of business rules at the case companies. From the 14 
remaining PI’s, nine PI’s were categorized as business rule 
design PI’s, two PI’s were categorized as business rule 
deployment PI’s, and three PI’s were categorized as business 
rules execution PI’s.  
      After the third focus group, the 14 PI’s were subjected to 
the Delphi Study participants. In each of the three rounds, no 
additional PI’s were formulated by the 26 experts. However, 
during the first two rounds, the specification and measurement 
elements of multiple PI’s were refined. During the third round, 
which was also the last round, no further refinements were 
proposed and participants all agreed to the 14 formulated PI’s 
which are presented in table 2.  
 
TABLE II. PI'S DERIVED FOR BRM. 
 
PI 01: The frequency of corrections per selected context 
design emerging from the verification process. 
Goal: Improve upon the design process of 
business rules. 
PI 02: The frequency of corrections per selected context 
design, emerging from the verification process, per business 
analyst and per type of verification error. 
Goal: Improving the context design. 
PI 03: The frequency of corrections per selected context 
design emerging from the validation process per complexity 
level of a business rule. 
Goal: Improve upon the design process of 
business rules. 
PI 04: The frequency of corrections per selected context 
design emerging from the validation process per type of 
validation error. 
Goal: Improve upon the validation process for the 
benefit of improving the context design. 
PI 05: The frequency of corrections per selected context 
architecture emerging from the design process per scope 
design. 
Goal: Improve upon the design process for the 
benefit of improving the context architecture. 
PI 06: The frequency of instantiations per selected context 
design 
Goal: Provide insight into the possible instances of 
a context design. 
PI 07: The frequency per selected type of validation error. 
Goal: Improve upon the design process for the 
benefit of improving the context design. 
PI 08: The frequency per selected type of verification error  
Goal: Improve upon the design process for the 
benefit of improving the context design. 
PI 09: The number of time units required to define, verify, 
and validate a single business rule. 
Goal: Shortening the lead time of a business rule 
with regard to the design process. 
PI 10: The frequency of deviations between an 
implementation 
dependent 
context 
design 
and 
an 
implementation independent context design. 
Goal: Improve upon the deployment process. 
PI 11: The frequency of executions of an implementation 
dependent business rule. 
Goal: Gaining insight into which business rules 
are executed. 
PI 12: The frequency of execution variants of a scope 
design. 
Goal: Gaining insight into which decision paths 
are traversed to establish different decisions. 
PI 13: The number of time units required for the execution 
per execution variant. 
Goal: Shortening the lead time of an execution 
process with regard to enhancing an execution 
variant. 
PI 14: The amount of business rules that cannot be 
automated.  
Goal: Provide insight into which business rules 
cannot be automated. 
 
 
 
Analyzing the defined PI’s showed that three out of 
fourteen (PI 11, 12, and 14) are PI’s that can be classified as 
‘innovate and manage’ PI’s.  PI eleven and twelve focus on the 
number of times a business rule is executed. Thereby providing 
insight in which business rules are most applied. PI twelve 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

goes beyond that and shows which variants of business rules 
are executed. In other words, it shows the characteristics of the 
decision based on which citizens get services. This insight can 
be used to determine how many and which citizens are affected 
by changing specific laws (and, therefore, business rules). In 
other words, this can be used to further support the 
development of law. PI fourteen indicated the amount of 
business rules that cannot be automated and that needs to be 
executed manually. This can also provide an indication of the 
amount of workload that organisations encounter due to the 
manual execution of these specific business rules.  This PI can 
be used to decide if these business rules should be executed 
manually or that they should be reformulated in such a manner 
that they can be executed mechanically. 
VI. DISCUSSION, CONCLUSION, AND FUTURE WORK 
      From a research perspective, our study provides a 
fundament for PI measurement and benchmarking of the 
elicitation, design, acceptance, deployment, and execution 
processes of BRM. Several limitations may affect our results. 
The first limitation is the sampling and sample size. The 
sample group of participants is solely drawn from government 
institutions in the Netherlands. While we believe that 
government institutions are representative for organisations 
implementing business rules, further generalization towards 
non-governmental 
organizations 
amongst 
others 
is 
a 
recommended direction for future research. Taken the sample 
size of 36 participants into account, this number needs to be 
increased in future research as well. This research focused on 
identifying new constructs and establishing relationships given 
the current maturity of the BRM research field. Although the 
research approach chosen for this research type is appropriate 
given the present maturity of the research domain, research 
focusing on further generalization must apply different 
research methods such as qualitative research methods which 
also allow incorporating a larger sample size in future research 
regarding PI’s for BRM.   
      This research investigated PI’s for the elicitation, design, 
acceptance, deployment and execution of business rules with 
the purpose of answering the following research question: 
“Which performance measurements are useful to measure the 
BRM processes?” To accomplish this goal, we conducted a 
study combining a three round focus group and three round 
Delphi Study. Both were applied to retrieve PI’s from 
participants, 36 in total, employed by governmental 
institutions. This analysis revealed fourteen PI’s. We believe 
that this work represents a further step in research on PI’s for 
BRM and maturing the BRM field as a whole. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Alles, G. Brennan, A. Kogan, M. Vasarhelyi, “Continuous 
monitoring of business process controls: A pilot implementation 
of a continuous auditing system at Siemens,” International 
Journal of Accounting Information Systems, 7, 2006, 137-161. 
doi: 10.1016/j.accinf.2005.10.004 
[2] J. Boyer, H. Mili, “Agile Business Rules Development: Process, 
Architecture and JRules Examples,” Heidelberg: Springer, 2011. 
[3] J. Breuker, W. Van De Velde, “CommonKADS Library for 
Expertise Modelling: reusable problem-solving components,” 
Amsterdam: IOS Press/Ohmsha, 1994. 
[4] A. L. Delbecq, A. H. Van de Ven, “A group process model for 
problem identification and program planning,” The Journal of 
Applied Behavioral Science, 7(4), 1971, 466-492.  
[5] A. Edmondson, S. McManus, “Methodological Fit in 
Management Field Research,” Academy of Management 
Review, 32(4), 2007, 1155-1179.  
[6] M. Franco-Santos, L. Lucianetti, M. Bourne, “Contemporary 
performance measurement systems: A review of their 
consequences and a framework for research,” Management 
Accounting Research, 23(2), 2012, 79-119.  
[7] B. 
Glaser, 
“Theoretical 
Sensitivity: 
Advances 
in 
the 
Methodology of Grounded Theory,” Mill Valley, CA: Sociology 
Press, 1978. 
[8] M. Hudson, A. Smart, M. Bourne, “Theory and practice in SME 
performance measurement systems,” International Journal of 
Operations & Production Management, 21(8), 2001, 1096-1115.  
[9] L. Kerklaan, “The cockpit of the organization: performance 
management with scorecards,” Deventer: Kluwer, 2007. 
[10] A. Kovacic, “Business renovation: business rules (still) the 
missing link,” Business Process Management Journal, 10(2), 
2004, 158-170.  
[11] R. Martin, “Agile Software Development: Principles, Patterns 
and Practices,” New York, 2003. 
[12] T. Morgan, “Business rules and information systems: aligning 
IT with business goals,” London: Addison-Wesley, 2002. 
[13] M. K. Murphy, N. Black, D. L. Lamping, C. M. McKee, C. F. 
B. Sanderson, J. Askham, “Consensus development methods 
and their use in clinical guideline development,” Health 
Technology Assessment, 2(3), 1998, 31-38.  
[14] A. Neely,  H. Richards, H. Mills, K. Platts, M. Bourne,  
“Designing performance measures: a structured approach,” 
International Journal of Operations and Production, 17(11), 
1997, 1131-1152.  
[15] M. L. Nelson, J. Peterson, R. L. Rariden, R. Sen, “Transitioning 
to a business rule management service model: Case studies from 
the property and casualty insurance industry,” Information & 
Management, 47(1), 2010, 30-41.  
[16] C. Okoli, S. D. Pawlowski, “The Delphi method as a research 
tool: an example, design considerations and applications,” 
Information & Management, 42(1), 2004, 15-29.  
[17] R. Ono, D. J. Wedemeyer, “Assessing the validity of the Delphi 
technique,” Futures, 26(3), 1994, 289-304.  
[18] V. Owhoso, S. Vasudevan, “A balanced scorecard based 
framework for assessing the strategic impacts of ERP systems,” 
Computers in Industry, 56, 2005, 558-572.  
[19] Pegasystems, “Pega Decision Management Optimize Your 
Business Processes with Real-Time Decisioning,”   Retrieved 
March, 2016, from https://www.pega.com/products/pega-7-
platform/decision-hub 
[20] Progress Software, “Progress Software – Corticon,”  Retrieved 
March, 2016, from https://www.progress.nl/corticon. 
[21] R. Ross, “Business Rule Concepts,” Houston: Business Rule 
Solutions, LLC, 2009. 
[22] A. Strauss, J. Corbin, “Basics of qualitative research: Grounded 
theory procedures and techniques,” Newbury Park: Sage 
Publication, INC, 1990. 
[23] M. M. Zoet, “Methods and Concepts for Business Rules 
Management,” 
Utrecht: 
Hogeschool 
Utrecht, 
2014.
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

