VR-ProcessMine: Immersive Process Mining  
Visualization and Analysis in Virtual Reality 
Roy Oberhauser[0000-0002-7606-8226] 
Computer Science Dept. 
Aalen University 
Aalen, Germany 
 e-mail: roy.oberhauser@hs-aalen.de 
 
 
Abstract—Repeatable processes are fundamental for describing 
how enterprises and organizations operate, for production, for 
Industry 4.0, etc. As digitalization and automation progresses 
across all organizations and industries, including enterprises, 
business, government, manufacturing, and IT, evidence-based 
comprehension and analysis of the processes involved, including 
their variations, anomalies, and performance, becomes vital for 
an increasing set of stakeholders. Process Mining (PM) relies on 
logs or processes (as such evidence-based) to provide process-
centric analysis data, yet insights are not necessarily visually 
accessible for a larger set of stakeholders (who may not be 
process or data analysts). Towards addressing certain 
challenges described in the Process Mining Manifesto, this 
paper contributes VR-ProcessMine, a solution for visualizing 
and interacting with PM results in Virtual Reality (VR). Our 
realization shows its feasibility, and a case-based evaluation 
provides insights into its capabilities. 
Keywords-virtual reality; process mining; process analysis; 
business process mining; business process management. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
The digital transformation sweeping through society 
affects businesses and organizations everywhere, resulting in 
an increased emphasis on business agility and automation. 
Business Processes (BPs) or workflows are one significant 
automation area, as evidenced by the Business Process 
Management (BPM) market, which is forecast to grow from 
$8.8B in 2020 to $14.4B by 2025 [1]. Each execution of such 
a process leaves a digital footprint of process-related events 
and the timepoint of execution, typically contained in various 
log files across the various IT systems (business, 
manufacturing, etc.) involved in an enterprise. BPs are a way 
for ordering the activities involved in and executed in an 
enterprise, be they automated, semi-automated, or human-
driven, and thus BPM is where much of the value generated 
by an enterprise is achieved.  
Process Mining (PM) is a sub-field of data science 
specifically focused on analyzing event data generated when 
(business) processes are executed [2]. Because PM relies on 
event logs of actual process executions, it is evidence-based 
(or fact-based). This analysis can provide essential insights for 
understanding and optimizing (business) process execution. 
When referring to processes we assume BPs to be a subset of 
the more abstract term and will use both terms 
interchangeably. One process variant represents a set of 
process instances that resulted in the same sequence of events. 
The Process Mining Manifesto [3] describes eleven 
challenges for PM. Two of these, C10: Improving Usability 
for Non-experts, and C11: Improving Understandability for 
Non-experts, are a primary motivation for our work. A 
secondary effect is to address C9: Combining Process Mining 
with other Types of Analysis. 
In general, visualization remains a challenge when dealing 
with large data sets that involve relations and different 
variation sets. As data and processes become more relevant to 
the digital enterprise and stakeholders more digitally savvy, it 
is all the more relevant and challenging to include non-expert 
enterprise stakeholders in process analysis. By leveraging 
Virtual Reality (VR), BP analysis can be made more 
accessible to a wider set of stakeholders, such that not just 
process modeling specialists, but also those directly involved 
in executing a BP or observing an automated BP can view und 
gain insights to various issues regarding a BP of interest, 
including the combination with other relevant enterprise 
models. 
In prior work, we developed VR-BPMN [4] to visualize 
business processes in VR based on the BPMN notation. Our 
VR-EA [5] contributed a VR solution for visualizing, 
navigating, annotating, and interacting with ArchiMate EA 
models. And VR-EAT [6] presented our VR-based solution 
for visualizing dynamically-generated EA diagrams from EA 
tools. This paper contributes VR-ProcessMine, a solution for 
visualizing and interacting with PM results in Virtual Reality 
(VR). Our prototype realization shows its feasibility, and a 
case-based evaluation provides insights into its capabilities for 
addressing the aforementioned challenges. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: 
Section 2 discusses related work. In Section 3, the solution is 
described. Section 4 provides details about the realization. The 
evaluation is described in Section 5 and is followed by a 
conclusion. 
II. RELATED WORK 
PM is supported by various tools. Open source tools 
includes the ProM Framework [7], Apromore [8], and PM4Py 
[9]; commercial options include products from over 35 
vendors, including Celonis, Disco, UiPath, ARIS, and 
PAFnow. These tools typically provide a 2D user interface 
with some being Web-based interfaces (e.g., Celonis, UiPath, 
Apromore), whereas we provide a VR-based solution. 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Work involving PM with VR include Vogel & Thomas 
[10] show groundwork and an architecture concept, yet no 
prototype is described nor are VR screenshots provided. Other 
work combining PM with VR is often specialized to processes 
in certain sectors, such as training for factory or 
manufacturing, logistics, safety, or education and learning, or 
the health sector. For instance, Roldán et al. [11] describe a 
complex assembly training system for Industry 4.0 operators. 
III. SOLUTION 
VR is defined as a “real or simulated environment in 
which the perceiver experiences telepresence” (Steuer 1992), 
a mediated visual environment, which is created and then 
experienced. VR provides an unlimited space for visualizing 
a growing and complex set of enterprise models and processes 
and their interrelationships simultaneously in a spatial 
structure. As enterprise models grow in complexity and reflect 
the deeper integration of both the business and IT reality, an 
immersive digital enterprise environment provides an 
additional visualization capability to comprehend the “big 
picture” for structurally and hierarchically complex and 
interconnected diagrams and digital elements, while providing 
an immersive experience for digital process model 
visualization and analysis in a 3D space viewable from 
different perspectives.  
As to benefits of an immersive VR experience vs. 2D for 
an analysis task, [12] investigated a software analysis task that 
used a Famix metamodel of Apache Tomcat source code 
dependencies in a force-directed graph. They found that VR 
does not significantly decrease comprehension and analysis 
time nor significantly improve correctness (although fewer 
errors were made). While interaction time was less efficient, 
VR improved the UX (user experience), being more 
motivating, less demanding, more inventive/innovative, and 
more clearly structured. 
 
Figure 1.  The VR-ProcessMine solution concept (blue) in relation to our 
prior VR solution concepts. 
Our generalized solution concept for VR-ProcessMine is 
shown in Figure 1. VR-ProcessMine utilizes our generalized 
VR Modeling Framework (VR-MF) [5], which provides a 
VR-based domain-independent hypermodeling framework, 
which addresses four primary aspects that require special 
attention when modeling in VR: visualization, navigation, 
interaction, and data retrieval. VR-EA [5] provides 
specialized direct support and mapping for EA models in VR, 
including both ArchiMate as well as BPMN via VR-BPMN 
[4]. VR-EAT [6] extends this further with integration of EA 
tools for accessing dynamically generated diagrams and 
models from an EA tool in VR. VR-EA+TCK extends these 
capabilities by integrating further enterprise knowledge, 
information, and content repositories such as a Knowledge 
Managemement System (KMS) and/or an Enterprise Content 
Management System (ECMS). 
In order to support PM and visual analysis, the VR-
ProcessMine 
solution 
should 
exhibit 
the 
following 
capabilities: 
• 
Log file import: event logs in different event log 
formats can be imported and processed; 
• 
Multiple analyses: multiple event logs can be loaded 
in order to compare them directly; 
• 
3D visualization: elements should be depicted in 3D 
to support an immersive observation experience; 
• 
Free element placement: an individual analysis 
should be movable in VR space so that they can be 
compared in locality with another analysis of interest; 
• 
Hide/show analyses: to minimize visual clutter, 
analyses can be hidden and then seen again; 
• 
Trace detection: relations between events should be 
clearly visible; and 
• 
Colored hot spots: events are colored to indicate their 
relative frequency. 
A. Visualization in VR 
In order to differentiate process variants (depending on the 
analysis being done), our visualization concept for VR depicts 
each of these on separate vertical plates standing on a common 
hyperplane representing a single process. This permits any 
plate to be selected, moved, and compared with others of 
interest. Furthermore, since the number of process variants 
can be very large, it leverages the unlimited space in VR, 
allowing the hyperplane to depict many process variants at 
once. All process variants are initially equally spaced on the 
hyperplane and can be compared with each other.  
B. Navigation in VR 
The immersion afforded by VR requires addressing how 
to navigate the space while reducing the likelihood of 
potential VR sickness symptoms. Thus, two navigation modes 
are included in the solution: the default uses gliding controls, 
enabling users to fly through the VR space and view objects 
from any angle they wish. Alternatively, teleporting permits a 
user to select a destination and be instantly placed there (i.e., 
by instantly moving the camera to that position); while this 
can be disconcerting, it may reduce the susceptibility to VR 
sickness for those prone to it that can occur when moving 
through a virtual space. 
C. Interaction in VR 
Since interaction with VR elements has not yet become 
standardized or intuitive, in our VR concept, user-element 
interaction is handled primarily via the VR controllers and a 
virtual tablet. Our VR-Tablet provides detailed context-
specific element information, and can provide a virtual 
keyboard for text entry fields (via laser pointer key selection) 
when needed. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

IV. REALIZATION 
Our solution prototype is partitioned into the Data Hub, a 
backend for data processing and PM, and the front end 
responsible for VR visualization (see Figure 2).  
 
Figure 2.  VR-ProcessMine logical architecture. 
A. Process Mining 
The Data Hub, based on Python 3.9, prepares datasets for 
visualization. Flask was used to provide REST APIs with 
JSON for frontend integration. The python library pm4py 
(Process Mining for Python) [9] is used to convert imported 
log files into data objects and data frames. The result depends 
on the type of graph desired. A Directly-Follows Graph 
(DFG) algorithm provides a summary of all process event 
transitions and variants and how often each process variant 
was executed.  Listing 1 shows the result of the parsed dataset 
providing the number of transitions occurring between two 
events. 
 
Figure 3.  Example DFG-based process map result from pm4py. 
Figure 3 shows a DFG-based process map visualization 
result using pm4py. A node represents an event. A graph 
consists of a set of transitions between a set of nodes. 
Data is converted to a dictionary, whereby all duplicates 
are removed so that each node exists only once in the graph. 
The recursive list of fan-in relations (nodes reaching this 
node) together with their occurrence frequency provides the 
basis for a weighted directed graph as shown in Listing 2. 
Aggregating the total occurrences across all incoming 
transitions of a node (event) provides a total frequency of that 
event across all process instances. 
 
Listing 1.  Snippet of a parsed DFG dataset. 
 
Listing 2.  Recursive list of fan-in relations. 
B. Virtual Reality 
VR realization is handled by the frontend, based on Unity 
2021 using Steam VR and implemented in C#. VR hardware 
consisted of an HTC Vive. Via our VR-Tablet concept, a user 
can specify a log file to be processed. Currently CSV and XES 
formats are supported. Once loaded, the first plate shows a 
DFG with entire set of nodes and transition frequency (see 
Figure 4), with the plates behind it showing the different 
process variants (if any). 
To support interaction, an affordance in the form of an 
anchor (sphere) is provided on a corner of each vertical plate 
or hyperplane, which if selected can be used to reduce visual 
clutter by collapsing (hide) or expanding (show) that object, 
or the anchor can be used to place the object elsewhere. 
The total number of input transitions to a node represent 
the total number of times that event occurred. Thus, the higher 
this number, the higher the frequency. To represent this 
visually, a ten-step color scale was used to map the frequency 
between low activity (blue) and high activity (red), analogous 
to mapping temperature (see Figure 5). This can be used to 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

quickly identify frequently occurring events in a process and 
help focus analysis and potential optimizations. 
 
Figure 4.  Initial plate shows DFG with entire set of nodes and transition 
frequency. Each plate thereafter represents one process variant. 
 
Figure 5.  Node color and edges in a DFG. 
 
Figure 6.  Partial process variant showing occurence frequency. 
Process variants with only the relevant nodes (events) that 
occurred are shown uniquely in separate planes. The variants 
are assigned a default ID with their occurrence frequency 
indicated on top (see Figure 6). To support analysis and 
differentiation, placement of all nodes follows the initial 
placement in the DFG so that variants can be placed to overlap 
across the z-axis with the nodes in the same position, or when 
placed side-by-side the equivalent node locations are placed 
in the same relative position on each plate. 
 
 
Figure 7.  VR-Tablet showing scrollable variant list with a teleport option. 
Besides the fly-through ability in VR using the controllers, 
navigation support includes the ability to quickly teleport to a 
specific variant by using the VR-Tablet and choosing a variant 
of interest as shown in Figure 7. 
V. EVALUATION 
To evaluate the solution, we utilize a case study focusing 
on three challenges identified in the Process Mining 
Manifesto [3]. These are:  
C10: Improving Usability for Non-experts and  
C11: Improving Understandability for Non-experts.  
C9: Combining Process Mining with other Types of 
Analysis. 
Our dataset consisted of randomly generated process 
variants based on a software defect repair process (a snippet is 
shown in Listing 3). A process variant represents multiple 
process instances that exhibited the same sequence (or node 
transition) order. 
 
Listing 3.  Dataset snippet of randomized process variants (in JSON). 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

A. Improving Usability and Understandability for Non-
experts 
One aspect that these challenges intend to address is that 
PM results are made accessible to end-users, and that they can 
intuitively interact with these, and understand these in their 
daily work routines. As such, they require intuitive user 
interfaces (UIs) to support usability as detailed in C10.  
 
Figure 8.  All process variants displayed on a hyperplane. 
To support user-friendly UIs, our solution provides an 
immersive 
VR 
experience 
addressing 
visualization, 
navigation, interaction, and data retrieval. With regard to 
visualization, each process variant is visualized on a 2D plate 
(Figure 8), leveraging the third dimension for scaling to 
display all process variants, providing an overview of how 
many variants exist. Via fly-through navigation, differences 
can be observed. Furthermore, via our VR-Tablet concept 
(Figure 7), the user can instantly teleport to a specific one. For 
interaction, the VR-Tablet can provide details of an event or 
object.  
 
Figure 9.  Anchor control for variant comparison or collapsing/expanding. 
Plate anchors provide an affordance for flexibly collapsing 
or moving plates (Figure 9). Via data retrieval from our data 
hub concept, the VR-Tablet hides the sophisticated PM 
algorithms within a PM service, making suitable types of PM 
analysis accessible via the integration of the pm4py library as 
a service. 
 
Figure 10.  Different processes can be displayed via different hyperplanes. 
Furthermore, via the hyperplane concept, our solution can 
scale to depict a large set of different processes (and their 
variants) simultaneously, supporting larger cross-process 
analysis scenarios as seen in Figure 10. 
B. Combining PM with other Types of Analysis 
Although PM and analysis does provide operational 
insights, any resulting outcomes typically hinge on some 
comparison with the original process model (or schema) and 
potentially other enterprise-relevant knowledge or data. 
Furthermore, a result of a comparison to a process model may 
require adjustments to the process model to remove errors or 
for effectiveness improvements or efficiency optimizations. 
One advantage of VR's unlimited space is the ability to 
represent multiple heterogenous models simultaneously and 
for non-experts to immersively discover and navigate these 
models.  
 
 
Figure 11.  VR-BPMN [4]: subprocesses (top) and swimlanes (bottom) in 
VR. 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Towards combining PM with other analysis types, where 
BPMN models are available, VR-ProcessMine results can be 
displayed side-by-side with a VR-BPMN model (Figure 11), 
allowing non-experts to immersively comprehend various 
process aspects not necessarily evident via PM, such as 
subprocesses and swimlanes. 
 
Figure 12.  VR-EAT: Enterprise hypermodeling and analysis in VR. 
Furthermore, as exemplified with VR-EAT [6], our VR-
based heterogeneous hypermodeling capability shown in 
Figure 12, PM results could be visualized next to other 
enterprise models, making deeper cross-model and cross-
domain analysis readily accessible and allowing operational 
insights to guide such an analysis. 
 
VI. CONCLUSION 
Increasing digitalization in enterprises and organizations 
implies that the business and operational processes executed 
will increasingly also become digitally accessible, offering a 
significant opportunity. While current PM tools and 
techniques can provide valuable insights for optimizing 
(business) processes, these benefits can be hindered when 
possible insights are not readily accessible to a larger (non-
expert) stakeholder set, including those directly involved in 
performing these processes. VR-ProcessMine contributes an 
immersive solution concept for visualizing and interacting 
with PM results in VR. Our realization shows its feasibility, 
and the case-based evaluation provides insights into its 
capabilities towards addressing certain challenges described 
in the Process Mining Manifesto, in particular improving 
usability, understandability, and the potential to combine PM 
with other types of analysis. 
Future work includes more comprehensive PM analyses, 
deeper integration with our enterprise hypermodeling VR-
EA-TCK and VR-BPMN solution concept, automatic filtering 
of process variants by a node or transition of interest, 
collaboration support, and a comprehensive empirical study. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Laura Berroth for her 
assistance with the design, implementation, evaluation, and 
diagrams. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Business Process Management Market by Component, 
Deployment Type, Organization Size, Business Function, 
Industry, and Region - Global Forecast to 2025. [Online]. 
Available from: https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-
Reports/business-process-management-market-
157890056.html 2022.05.10 
[2] W. van der Aalst, Process Mining - Data Science in Action, 
Second Edition. Springer, 2016. 
[3] W. V. D. Aalst, et al., "Process Mining Manifesto," In: 
International Conference on Business Process Management. 
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 169-194.  
[4] R. Oberhauser, C. Pogolski, and A. Matic, "VR-BPMN: 
Visualizing BPMN models in Virtual Reality," In: Shishkov, 
B. (ed.) BMSD 2018. LNBIP, vol. 319, Springer, Cham,  2018, 
pp. 83–97.  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-94214-8_6 
[5] R. Oberhauser and C. Pogolski, "VR-EA: Virtual Reality 
Visualization of Enterprise Architecture Models with 
ArchiMate and BPMN," In: Shishkov, B. (ed.) BMSD 2019. 
LNBIP, vol. 356, Springer, Cham, 2019, pp. 170–187.  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-24854-3_11 
[6] R. Oberhauser, P. Sousa, and F. Michel, "VR-EAT: 
Visualization of Enterprise Architecture Tool Diagrams in 
Virtual Reality," In: Shishkov B. (eds) Business Modeling and 
Software Design. BMSD 2020. LNBIP, vol 391, Springer, 
Cham, 2020, pp. 221-239. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
52306-0_14 
[7] B. F. Van Dongen, A. K. A. de Medeiros, H. Verbeek, A. 
Weijters, and W. van der Aalst, “The ProM Framework: A new 
era in Process Mining Tool Support,” In: International 
Conference on Application and Theory of Petri Nets, Springer, 
2005, pp. 444–454. 
[8] M. La Rosa et al., "APROMORE: An advanced process model 
repository," Expert Systems with Applications, 38(6), pp.7029-
7040, 2011. 
[9] A. Berti, S. J. van Zelst, and W. M. P. van der Aalst, "Process 
Mining for Python (PM4Py): Bridging the Gap Between 
Process-and Data Science," In: Proceedings of the ICPM Demo 
Track 2019, co-located with 1st International Conference on 
Process Mining (ICPM 2019), 2019, pp. 13-16. http://ceur-
ws.org/Vol-2374/ 
[10] J. Vogel and O. Thomas, "Towards a virtual reality-based 
process elicitation system," 40 Years EMISA 2019. LNI P-304, 
Gesellschaft für Informatik e.V., 2020, pp. 91-104, ISBN 978-
3-88579-698-5 
[11] J. J. Roldán, E. Crespo, A. Martín-Barrio, E. Peña-Tapia, and 
A. Barrientos, "A training system for Industry 4.0 operators in 
complex assemblies based on virtual reality and process 
mining," Robotics and computer-integrated manufacturing, 59, 
2019, pp.305-316. 
[12] R. Müller, P. Kovacs, J. Schilbach, and D. Zeckzer, "How to 
master challenges in experimental evaluation of 2D versus 3D 
software visualizations," In: 2014 IEEE VIS International 
Workshop on 3Dvis (3Dvis), IEEE, 2014, pp. 33-36.
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

