Implementing Integrated Software Solutions in Iranian SMEs 
Maryam Rezaeian and Martin Wynn 
School of Computing and Technology 
University of Gloucestershire 
Cheltenham, UK 
Email: MaryamRezaeian@connect.glos.ac.uk 
Email: MWynn@glos.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract – There has been little research on information 
systems in Iranian companies, and this paper helps to address 
this by examining the implementation and functioning of 
integrated software solutions in two small to medium sized 
enterprises in Iran. This is of particular interest now that the 
sanctions on trade with Iran have been removed, which will 
inevitably lead to increased sales opportunities for western 
technology companies in the country. This study uses a process 
mapping and systems profiling approach to establish the 
current 
status 
of 
software 
implementation 
in 
these 
manufacturing companies. It investigates the underlying 
information systems strategy and examines how this has been 
implemented in the core process areas of these companies. The 
outcome of these major systems projects is assessed, and 
comparisons are drawn between these Iranian based “Total 
Systems” software products and similar products more widely 
available in the developed world. 
Keywords – Enterprise Resource Planning; Total Systems; 
Iranian SMEs; information systems; ERP; process change; IS 
strategy.   
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The first Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) software 
packages came to the market in the 1980s, and have been 
widely implemented in the developed world, particularly by 
large corporations. Since the turn of the century, there has 
been an increase in the use of these integrated software 
systems by small to medium sized enterprises (SMEs) in the 
developed world [1]. This has been paralleled – part cause, 
part effect – by an increase in the number of ERP vendors 
specifically geared to the requirements and budgets of SMEs. 
In the developing world, the uptake of these new systems has 
been slower, for a number of reasons, including the lack of 
the human and financial resources needed for such projects, 
and the non-availability of sales and support offices for many 
of the main ERP vendors in developing world countries. 
Nevertheless, the use of ERP packages in developing world 
countries has accelerated in recent years, but the current 
literature suggests that there have been both significant 
failures [2] as well as successes [3].  
One interesting development in Iran has been the 
emergence of integrated software solutions developed in the 
country, by and large for the home business market (Table 
1). These are sometimes called “Total Systems,” being 
produced and sold by Iranian software companies. The term 
“ERP” is also used, but these products are usually more 
customizable than western based ERP products to specific 
user requirements, and are also available in both the Parsi 
language, as well as English. The sanctions on trade with 
the West have further encouraged Iranian companies to look 
inside their country for integrated software solutions. This 
 
 
 
BEHKO 
http://www.behko.com/?page_id=96 
GREEN/ 
GALAX 
http://www.greendataware.com/about/hi
story/ 
PARS 
ROYAL 
http://parsroyal.net/products 
MEDAR 
GOSTARESH 
http://www.itorbit.net/ 
HAMKARAN 
SYSTEM 
http://www.systemgroup.net/products/%
D8%B1%D8%A7%D9%87%DA%A9%D8
%A7%D8%B1-
%D8%AF%D9%88%D9%84%D8%AA 
RAYDANA 
SYSTEM 
http://www.danabarcode.com/ 
EADEGOSTAR 
http://ideagostarco.net/Page/About 
EADEPARDA 
ZAN 
http://www.eadepardazan.com/pages/ltr
/LTRDefault.aspx?pid=2&lang=2 
RAYVARZ 
https://rayvarz.com/about-us 
FARAGOSTAR 
http://www.faragostar.net/automation/ 
PARNIAN 
PARDAZESH 
PARS 
http://www.parnianportal.com/OA/Pages
/Home.aspx 
BARID 
SAMANEYE 
NOVIN 
http://www.baridsoft.ir/products/integra
ted-approach/office-automation 
 
article examines the implementation of two such packages 
in Iranian SMEs and discusses the underlying information 
systems (IS) strategy. 
This introductory section is followed in Section II by a 
discussion of the background to this paper. In Section III, a 
TABLE I. HOME GROWN TOTAL SYSTEMS PACKAGES IN IRAN 
(INDICATING VENDOR WEB ADDRESSES) 
 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

brief description of the case study methodology used in this 
research is given. The final two sections – Sections IV and V 
- focus on the case study findings and analysis.  
II. 
BACKGROUND 
ERP is a modular but integrated software system which 
automates business processes, shares common data, and 
produces and accesses information in a real time 
environment [4]. ERP software can be implemented in 
stages, module by module, and therefore be used to integrate 
previously isolated IT systems and functional departments 
within a company. ERP is also viewed by some researchers  
[5] [6] as a fundamental method for achieving best practice 
within business operations – the implementation of an ERP 
package requiring the application of certain disciplines 
within main business processes. As Koch has noted, “ERP 
attempts to integrate all departments and functions across a 
company on to a single computer system that can serve all 
those departments’ particular needs” [4]. According to 
Turban et al. [7], ERP not only provides business discipline, 
it also allows the alignment of IT deployment with overall 
business strategy and business goals. Implementing ERP 
thus may also require change in core processes, often termed 
business process reengineering or “BPR” [8].    
There remain divergences of opinion regarding the 
suitability of systems developed in the Western world in a 
developing world context. When discussing IS in the 
developing world, Gomez and Pather [9] observe that there 
is a lack of literature and evaluation studies, and the World 
Bank view that “analysts and decision makers are still 
struggling to make sense of the mixed experience of 
information technologies in developing countries” is 
highlighted by other authors [10]. In spite of uncertainty and 
failure in the adoption of information systems (IS), the 
overall deployment of ERP and IS in general is increasing in 
the developing world.   
Increasing professional skills and training is viewed as a 
key element for successful IS project delivery by 
Noudoosbeni et al. [11], who argue that lack of planning and 
management as well as inadequate training led to IS project 
failure in Malaysian companies. Research of companies in 
Iran [12] [13] [14]  highlight a range of issues that have 
hampered IS deployment in general in the country - lack of 
managerial skills, low IT maturity, poor training, poor 
internet access, governmental policies, and poor business 
planning; but there is very little literature on the more 
specific issues faced  by  SMEs  attempting  to  implement  
ERP  software.  Other researchers [15] [16] suggest that the 
lack of human capability and economic conditions in 
developing countries lead to IS failure and prevent overall 
economic growth. There nevertheless appears to be a 
significant market for ERP software in SMEs in the 
developing world. The studies of Dezar and Ainin [17] and 
Arabi et al. [18] indicate that 90% of businesses in 
developing countries are SMEs; but adoption of ERP 
systems by SMEs in developing countries is a new activity, 
in part due to the high expense and technical complexity of 
such systems. 
Iran is an interesting example of the potential of ERP 
systems in a developing world country. Talebi [19] reports 
that the great majority of businesses in Iran are micro, small 
and medium-sized enterprises. According to Molanezhad 
[20], the majority of SMEs in Iran are in the manufacturing 
sector. He also suggests that due to the location of Iran in the 
Middle East, its access to Russia, Europe and Asia, and its 
considerable market size, ERP systems have significant 
potential in supporting Iranian SMEs grow their business and 
increase their employment. This potential has been 
reinforced by the recent international agreement on nuclear 
development in Iran, and the subsequent opening up of 
trading with the West. Hakim and Hakim [21] assert that 
“IT, as a new industry in Iran, has not found its rightful place 
within organizations, as the managers are still adamant and 
adhere to the traditional management systems, and show 
resistance to the required organizational and infrastructural 
changes”.  
Research by Heeks [22] suggests there are several main 
elements of change that are important in implementing new 
IS in developing world environments. He identified people, 
process, structure and technology as key dimensions of what 
he termed the “design-actuality gap”. Heeks’ model can be 
used in various business change contexts, and in this paper it 
is used to support the analysis of the implementation of the 
integrated software systems in the two case study companies. 
Other authors [23] have adopted a similar approach in 
looking at structures that are embedded in both packages and 
organisations 
in 
trying 
to 
assess 
the 
reasons 
for 
misalignments between IS strategy and the overarching 
business strategy of the organisation.   
The process mapping technique can help the researcher 
assess systems deployment at process level. It generates a 
sequence of maps that are used in identifying the information 
systems that are used in defined business areas. While 
process mapping is used as a framework to identify the 
business processes and sub-processes, it can also be used as a 
point of reference for assessing the functionality of the 
information systems themselves. This “systems profiling” 
encompasses a review and assessment of functionality, 
reporting capabilities, user interface and soundness of the 
underlying technology [24].  
Within this context, and in accordance with the research 
aims and objectives given above, this research addresses the 
following questions: 
1. 
What is the nature of the Iranian Total Systems 
products and do they parallel the modular 
structure 
typical 
of 
their 
western 
ERP 
counterparts?  
2. 
How successful has the implementation of these 
products been in supporting the growth of 
selected case study companies? 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
The case study is a widely used research method within 
business research. Bryman and Bell [25] argue that the case 
study is particularly appropriate to be used in combination 
with a qualitative research method, allowing detailed and 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

intensive research activity, usually in combination with an 
inductive approach as regards the relationship between 
theory and research. The case study is also appropriate for a 
combination of qualitative methods, which is of particular 
relevance to this study of information systems in two SMEs, 
where mapping and profiling techniques are combined with 
questionnaire and interview material.  Saunders, Lewis and 
Thornhill [26] argue that case studies are of particular value 
for explanatory or exploratory investigation, such as that 
pursued in this research. 
The case studies under investigation are manufacturing 
SMEs in Iran. This paper reports on the initial findings from 
two case studies, but additional cases are currently being 
researched, which will allow stronger conclusions to be 
drawn in due course. Aliases are used because of 
confidentiality issues. The first case study is the Isfahan Bus 
Company, which was founded in 1985 as a family business 
in Najafabad in Isfahan province. The company designs, 
manufactures and sells a range of buses, vans and spare parts 
and currently employs 350 staff. The second case study is 
Electronic Transmission Systems, a company employing 160 
staff which was founded in 1978, and is another family 
business in the Isfahan province. The company designs, 
manufactures and distributes electronic vehicles, E-bikes, 
differential transmission systems (for Pride, Nissan Jounior 
and Tiba engines), and pinion and gear differential systems 
and parts.  
Data collection to date has been achieved through 
questionnaires, interviews, and documentary evidence. Yin 
[27] suggests that the utilisation of multiple sources of 
evidence is one way of increasing the construct validity of 
case studies. A detailed structured questionnaire was filled 
in by two respondents in one case study and three in the 
second company and follow-up interviews have been 
conducted with the questionnaire respondents. The job roles 
of these respondents were: 
Isfahan Bus Company 
 
Head of IT: he was heavily involved in supporting 
main departments in specifying their requirements and in 
package selection. In implementation phase, he had regular 
meetings with department heads to progress check and make 
sure they understood the implementation process. 
 
Head of quality control and engineering: he was on 
the steering group that was responsible for selecting and 
implementing the Total Systems solution. As main user and 
responsible for overall project quality, he represented 
individual departmental needs, and met with the head of IT 
regularly.  
 
Head of commercial department: he worked 
closely with the head of IT in the selection and 
implementation processes, identifying and planning training 
for most of the staff.  
Electronic Transmission Systems 
 
Head of IT: he was involved in selecting the Total 
Systems package, but all main decisions were made by the 
company director 
 
Head of human resources: he was not involved in 
the software selection process but has played an important 
role in post implementation in reviewing and proposing 
training needs for new systems users. 
 The questionnaire responses and follow-up interviews 
have clarified the processes and sub-processes that are 
central to the companies’ business operations, and allowed a 
mapping of current technology deployment in each process 
area. More specifically, the topics included in the 
questionnaire can be categorised as follows: 
a) Company information: basic company data, company 
profile, 
size, 
operations 
and 
other 
general 
information.  
b) Company processes: the company’s main business 
processes and also the secondary processes (sub-
processes within each main process area).  
c) Information systems: the deployment of information 
systems and the underpinning technical architecture.   
d) Current systems status: the functionality of the main 
information systems and general satisfaction levels in 
different departments that use them.   
e) Problems and challenges: key problems or issues, 
both from a technical perspective and from the point 
of view of the end user; integration and interfacing of 
systems, report quality, systems performance.   
Questionnaires and interviews were conducted in Parsi 
and have been translated into English.  
IV. 
CASE STUDY FINDINGS 
This section will apply process mapping and systems 
profiling to the two manufacturing SMEs in Iran. 
 
Case Study 1: The Isfahan Bus Company (IBC)  
IBC has six major top level business processes and a 
number of sub-processes. These are briefly outlined below, 
along with the information systems which currently support 
them (Figure 1).  
The manufacturing process comprises three sub- 
processes: production planning and production, quality 
control, and engineering. Production planning is automated 
via the materials requirements planning (MRP) module of 
the BEHKO system. This systems module assesses the 
requirements for production against current company stock 
and suggests replenishment works orders for the appropriate 
dates and quantities to meet production requirements. The 
system takes account of current stock levels, outstanding 
orders, and minimum purchase order quantities. It will 
suggest a schedule of what should be made and when, what 
should be purchased and when, and current and future 
loading of production lines, by resource by week.  This sub-
process includes the bill of materials (BOM) function. When 
the MRP module receives an order, it will also create a list of 
required components to make that order. The MRP module 
also has additional forward planning functionality. It has the 
capability to plan requirements for meeting new orders and 
rescheduling existing orders. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

In contrast, the quality control and engineering sub-
processes are only partly automated. These sub-processes are 
supported by Microsoft Excel and Access to monitor, store 
and report upon key events and stock transactions. These 
include inspection and testing records, and inventory 
transactions for engineering parts.  
The sales and marketing process is also supported by the 
BEHKO system. There are two sub-processes – sales 
management 
and 
marketing 
management, 
supported, 
respectively, by the BEHKO sales management module (that 
encompasses customer records, sales orders, price lists and 
quotation functions) and the BEHKO customer relationship 
management (CRM) module.  
A customer record includes customer details, customer 
status, and customer discounts, and is linked to the sales 
ledger which shows outstanding invoices and displays these 
along with other real time data from BEHKO so that sales  
 
 
and purchasing staff have a total up-to-date view of pertinent 
financial data for each customer. The sales order function 
allows the entry and editing of sales order information and 
the generation of sales reports. The quotation function allows 
the processing of requested quotes for business and the 
generation of quotation reports to send to customers.  The 
BEHKO CRM module provides the systems functionality to 
manage and report upon sales contacts, prospects, existing 
customers and suppliers, in support of improved customer 
service and better information availability across the internal 
customer facing processes. 
The purchasing and procurement process centres on 
purchasing management and related operations. Purchasing 
management is supported by the BEHKO purchasing 
module, which provides a full range of purchasing functions. 
After the MRP module calculates requirements to fulfill a 
works 
order, 
a 
purchase 
requisition 
is 
generated 
electronically to be accessed by the purchasing department 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Manufacturing  
 
Production planning and production (G: 
BEHKO  MRP and production module)  
 
Quality control ( A: Access/ Excel) 
 
Engineering ( A: Access/ Excel) 
 
 
 
Sales and Marketing 
Sales Management (G: BEHKO 
Commercial module)  
Marketing Management (G: BEHKO 
CRM module)  
 
Purchasing and Procurement 
 
Purchase Management 
(G: BEHKO purchase 
module)  
 
Financial Management 
 
Finance management 
 (G: BEHKO Finance 
& accounting module)  
 
 
   
  
Logistics and distribution 
 
Inventory 
management (G: 
BEHKO Inventory 
module)  
 
Primary distribution 
and after sales 
service 
(A: SEVEN off the 
shelf package) 
 
Agency distribution 
(R: Manual/ 
spreadsheets) 
Human Resource management 
 
Personnel management 
(G: BEHKO HR module)  
 
Training (R: Manual) 
 
Health and safety 
 (R: Manual)  
 
Key  
 
G (Green) indicates a system that is effective and strategically sound 
A (Amber) indicates a system that may need replacement 
R (Red) indicates a system that is defective and needs replacing  
Figure 1. Main Business Processes and IS profiling at IBC 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

and processed as a purchase order on the system; copies are 
also made available electronically to the finance department. 
The BEHKO purchasing module generates unique supplier 
reference codes and provides purchase reports for each 
supplier. It also has the capability to assess suppliers’ credit 
worthiness and overall supply performance, and also attach 
picture, voice or any other document to supplier files.  
The financial management process is again supported by 
a BEHKO systems module – the finance and accounting 
module. This system reports the current sales order book 
(accounts receivable), purchase order book, outstanding 
purchase invoices and staff payments (accounts payable), 
alongside the company general ledger and cash management 
transactions. This system assesses current outstanding sales 
orders to raise sales invoice to customers, and matches goods 
received notes against purchase orders and purchase 
invoices. The module defines the financial period start and  
 
 
 
 
 
end dates and can accommodate a variety of foreign 
currencies and exchange rates. 
The logistics and distribution process has three sub- 
processes - inventory management, primary distribution and 
aftersales services, and agency distribution. Inventory 
management is automated via the BEHKO stock control 
system. The primary distribution and aftersales services sub-
process manages customers’ orders to ensure customer 
delivery and post sales service. It is supported by an off the 
shelf after sales information systems package called SEVEN.   
The agency distribution sub-process involves the sale of 
spare parts for buses and other vehicles via company 
agencies located in different cities in Iran. This process is 
partly manual and partly automated by use of spreadsheets.  
The human resource (HR) management process can be 
subdivided into three main sub-processes: personnel   
management handles employee records (including payment, 
staff absence and leave, and timesheet recording) and this is 
centrally managed and automated using the BEHKO HR 
systems module. There are also the staff training and health 
and safety sub- processes, which are mainly manual. 
The information system strategy adopted at IBC has been 
to implement modules of the BEHKO total system in the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
core process areas of the business, some of which have been 
customized to meet the specific requirements of the 
company. BEHKO is an Iranian software company, and its 
selection was based on functionality, language – it uses both 
Parsi and English – and easy access for systems support and 
External distributor 
systems  
 
Training 
Health & Safety  
Quality control  
Primary distribution & 
after sales services 
                                                        
                                                 BEHKO systems modules  
 
                                                 Manual System 
 
                                                 Off the shelf IS and in- house system developed in Excel/ Access 
                                           
                                                      File exchange  
 
Sales management 
Marketing management  
Finance and accounting 
management 
 
Personnel management  
Production planning & 
production 
Inventory management  
Purchase management  
Engineering 
Figure 2. Systems Interfaces at IBC 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

upgrade. IBC pursued a phased implementation to enable a 
careful phasing out of previous systems and a managed 
exchange of data between old and new systems. In addition, 
it allowed staff to adapt to the changes in systems and 
procedures in an orderly and controlled manner. Many 
modules were customised based on requested requirements 
specified by senior management in each process area. In all, 
it took three years to implement the system, but even now 
some sub-processes are still manual or are supported by 
using spreadsheets and semi-automated file exchanges 
(Figure 2).  
    Although the BEHKO system modules are well integrated, 
there is no effective integration with the stand alone SEVEN 
system, or with the MS Excel and MS Access applications. 
The BEHKO system is developed in C++ and uses the SQL 
database and is administered by senior managers who have 
access to all system generated reports and invoices. These 
reports include key business performance information, 
 
 
 
providing an overview of all sales, purchases, stock levels, 
financial data and staff reports. 
The current IS strategy at IBC was adopted in 2008 in 
support of the company’s business strategy to expand 
production and drive up bottom-line company profit. The 
strategy was a formal decision made by a committee 
comprising selected managers from across all departments - 
commercial, finance, production, engineering, quality 
control, and the IT manager. Previous systems were a mix of 
off the shelf packages and end-user applications. The initial 
focus was to be on the in the logistics and distribution 
process area, to establish consistent inventory product codes 
and simplify and standardise product information for both 
internal processes and also for customer facing sales and 
marketing departments. After a successful six month parallel 
run of old and new systems in this area in 2008, the BEHKO 
systems modules were introduced in stages, completing in 
2012. The software vendor continues to provide support and 
upgrades, IBC is now planning a major upgrade to the 
BEHKO ERP product in 2017. This package includes 
improved functionality which should allow the replacement 
of the SEVEN package and other standalone applications. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case Study 2: Electronic Transmission Systems (ETS) 
Initial process mapping suggests there are six top level 
business processes, and each process has several sub-
processes. The processes are depicted in Figure 3, along with 
the information systems which currently support these 
business processes.   
Manufacturing  
Quality control (G: Green Galax QC module) 
Production planning (G: Green Galax MRP 
module) 
 Production and assembly (G: Green Galax 
production module) 
 
 
 
Commercial Management  
Customer management (G: Green Galax 
commercial module) 
Supplier management (G: Green Galax 
commercial module) 
 
Financial Management 
 
Accounting management 
(G: Green Galax Financial 
module 
 
General ledger and assets 
G: Green Galax Financial 
module 
 
 
 
   
  
HR Management 
 
Personnel 
management 
(R: Manual) 
 
Key 
 
G (Green) indicates a system that is effective and strategically sound 
A (Amber) indicates a system that may need replacement 
R (Red) indicates a system that is defective and needs replacing  
Product Design 
(A: off the shelf 
software)   
 
Inventory Management 
 (A: EXCEL 
spreadsheet) 
 
Figure 3. Main Business Processes and IS profiling at ETS 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

The manufacturing process comprises three sub- 
processes: quality control, production planning, and 
production and assembly. The quality control sub-process 
encompasses the inspection of both purchased and 
manufactured parts and products, and the recording and 
monitoring of test results. The GREEN/GALAX quality 
control module records and manages all data associated with 
product sampling, testing and results recording and 
reporting. Security aspects are supported by systems controls 
on access, allowing only staff with the required skills and 
competence levels to undertake inspection testing.  
The production planning sub-process is automated with 
the GREEN/GALAX materials requirements planning 
(MRP) module, which determines the quantity and timing of 
component purchases. MRP stores the bills of materials and 
explodes these into requirements, based on received orders, 
and will then compare the demands to available company 
stock to generate necessary procurement requirements. The 
 
 
 
 
production 
and 
assembly 
sub-process 
encompasses 
production control and final inspection operations. The 
GREEN/GALAX production module also provides time 
estimates for parts delivery at production line and for final 
inspection of finished products. The production team can 
attach 
drawings 
of 
product 
designs 
and 
technical 
specifications to job sheet records.  
The inventory management process covers stock control 
and is partly automated with MS Excel spreadsheets 
monitoring manufactured and component products in and out 
of the stockrooms. The product design process is automated 
with a range of off the shelf design and planning software 
packages, including Catia V5R18, MSC Super Forge, Master 
CAM 9.0, Autodesk Mechanical desktop 2007, Power Mill 
6.0, Primavera Project planner, MS project 2007, and 
Minitab 13.0.  This process encompasses the design and 
drawing of company products based on received orders and 
customer specifications.  
The commercial management process has two sub- 
processes - customer management and supplier management 
– and both are supported by the GREEN/GALAX 
commercial management module. This module supports the 
categorization and management of both customers and 
suppliers, and recording of relevant details. The financial 
management process is similarly supported by a GREEN/ 
GALAX module. There are two sub-processes: accounts 
management, and general ledger and asset management. The 
system manages financial activities, financial figures and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reports and invoices; it contains the ledgers for sales and 
purchase 
transactions, 
and 
records 
company 
assets, 
liabilities, owners' equity, revenue, and expenses.  
The human resource management process covers 
personnel management, including employee records, staff 
absence and leave, and timesheets. The process is mainly 
manual. Employees have their own identity and attendance 
card, which are checked and monitored by security guards at 
MRP  
Production module 
Accounting management 
General ledger and assets 
  
Supply Management Module 
Customer Management Module  
Quality Control management  
HR 
Product design  
                                          Green/Galax system modules 
 
                                          
                                            Manual operations 
 
                                         Other off the shelf packaged software/MS Excel applications  
 
                                             File exchange link 
Inventory  
Figure 4. Systems Interfaces at ETS 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

the company entrance.  Annual leave is also authorised and 
recorded by a manual, paper-based system. 
The information system strategy adopted at ETS is based 
on the GREEN/GALAX Total Systems package, combined 
with point solutions developed in MS Excel. The choice of 
the main software system again was influenced by the fact 
that it was available in the Parsi language and there was easy 
access to software support and technical advisors.  
The current IS strategy was adopted in 2014 and was a 
formal decision made by the IT manager in conjunction with 
the company director. Modules of the GREEN/GALAX 
were implemented simultaneously in core business functions. 
Unfortunately, training was poor and insufficient and there 
have been significant user issues with some departments 
reverting to previous semi-manual processes. There also 
remain a number of file exchange operations whereby data is 
extracted from the GREEN/GALAX system and input into 
standalone applications for inventory management and 
product design (see Figure 4). In 2015, external consultants 
were engaged to review the status of the ERP project and 
specifically to provide training and user support. Despite this 
initiative, there remain significant issues to address. The 
implementation of new modules has not been adequately 
coordinated with changes in people capability. The HR 
system needs to be automated and integrated with finance 
and the accounting department to prevent duplication and 
data inconsistencies in payroll. Similarly, the inventory 
management module of the GREEN/GALAX system needs 
to be ushered in to provide consistent product codes and 
enhance the capability and functionality of company 
business activities. The company needs to address the 
training issue to encourage and support staff in using all of 
the available functions in the new system.   
V. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
    The current information system strategies at both IBC and 
ETS have some similarities. Both companies elected to adopt 
a Total Systems package, from Iranian based software 
suppliers, to provide the benefits of integrated systems and 
consistent management information to support company 
growth aspirations. In both companies, however, some of the 
old legacy systems remain in some core process areas, and 
these should be replaced in the near future with appropriate 
Total Systems modules. 
    There were significant differences between the two 
companies’ strategy implementation approaches. At IBC, the 
strategy development and its implementation was agreed to, 
and guided by, a cross-departmental steering group that 
carefully managed a staged implementation, providing the 
necessary training and support for end-users. At ETS, the 
package selection process was more the result of discussions 
between the IT manager and the company director, and 
lacked 
cross-company 
involvement 
and 
support. 
Implementation was simultaneous in most process areas, 
increasing the risk of systems problems and data issues. This 
was compounded by the absence of adequate training and 
support for end-users, which left the project in a parlous 
state. Only recently has the engagement of third party 
support helped to provide much needed training and bed in 
the new systems modules. 
    This initial analysis reinforces the findings of Heeks [22] 
and other recent studies [28][29] that suggest large scale  
technology implementation, even in SMEs, must be 
accompanied by appropriate process improvement and an 
upgrade in people skills to accommodate the new ways of 
working that are often introduced with new systems 
modules. At IBC, where a cross-departmental steering group 
guided and controlled the project, this was largely achieved; 
but at ETS, the lack of a similar project management 
capability constituted a major risk to successful project 
outcomes, which is only now being adequately addressed. 
    The research outcomes also provide some interesting 
insights into the ERP market in Iran, where, with 
international sanctions now lifted, the opportunities for 
western based ERP vendors are likely to be enhanced. 
However, the home-grown Total Systems packages, which 
exhibit a similar modular structure to the ERP packages used 
in the West, have an established user base which is likely to 
grow, in the short-term at least, given the benefits of 
customisation and bi-lingual operation that most of these 
packages offer. Nevertheless, the research to date is just a 
“snapshot” of the current situation and recent history in two 
small manufacturing SMEs and it is unwise to make broader 
generalisations from just these two cases. To address this 
limitation, other company case studies are now being 
undertaken, and it is expected that this will allow the 
development of an implementation model for ERP products 
in the specific environment of Iranian manufacturing SMEs, 
that will be useable in future systems projects in the country. 
REFERENCES 
[1]    M. Wynn, “Information systems strategy development and 
implementation in SMEs”, Management Research News, 
Vol. 32 (1), pp. 78 – 90, 2009.  
[2]    A. Hawari and R. Heeks, “Explaining ERP failure in a 
developing country: a Jordanian case study”, Journal of 
Enterprise Information Management, Vol. 23 (2), pp. 135-
160, 2010.   
[3]    M. Moohebat, M. Jazi, and A. Aseni, “Evaluation of ERP 
implementation 
at 
the 
Esfahan 
Steele 
Company”, 
International Journal of Business and Management, Vol. 6 
(5), pp.  236-250, 2011. 
[4] C.  Koch, “The ABCs of ERP”, CIO Magazine, Dec 1999. 
[5] C. Soh and S. Sia, “An institutional perspective on sources 
of ERP package organization misalignments”, Journal of 
Strategic Information Systems, Vol.13 (4), pp. 375-397, 
2004. 
[6] K. Boersma and S. Kingma, “Developing a cultural 
perspective on ERP”, Journal of Process Management, Vol. 
11 (2),  pp. 123- 136, 2005. 
[7] E. Turban, E. McLean, J. Wetherbe, N. Bolloju, and R. 
Davison, Information Technology for Management – 
Transforming Business in the Digital Economy, 3rd ed., 
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2002. 
[8] M. Hammer and J. Champny, Re-engineering the 
Corporation: A Manifesto for Business Revolution, Harper 
Business, New York, 1993. 
[9] R. Gomez and  S. Pather, “ICT evaluation: are we asking 
the right questions?”, Electronic Journal of Information 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Systems in Developing Countries (EJISDC), Vol. 50 (5), 
pp. 1-14, 2012.  
[10] S. Batchelor, S. Evangelista, S. Hearn, M. Pierce, S. 
Sugden, and M. Webb, ICT for Development: Contributing 
to the Millenium Development Goals – Lessons Learnt 
from Seventeen infoDev projects, Wasington DC: World 
Bank, 2003.  
[11] A. Noudoosbeni, N. Ismail, and H. Jenatabadi, “An  
effective end-user knowledge concern training method in 
enterprise resource planning (ERP) based on critical factors 
(CFS) in Malaysian SMEs,” International Journal of 
Production Economics, Vol. 115 (2), pp. 72-85, 2010. 
[12] A. Shahin, S. Sadri, and R. Gazor, “Evaluating the 
Application of Learning Requirements Planning Model in 
the ERP project of Esfahan Steel  Company”, International 
Journal of Business Management, Vol. 5 (2), pp. 33-43, 
2010.  
[13] P. Hanifzade and M. Nikabadi, “Framework  for  Selection  
of an Appropriate e- Business Model in Managerial Holding 
Companies: case study: Iran Khodro”, Journal of Enterprise 
Information Management, Vol. 24 (3), pp. 237-267, 2010. 
[14] A. Amid, M. Moalagh, and A. Ravasan, “Identification and 
classification of ERP critical factors in Iranian industries,”  
Journal of Information Systems, Vol. 37, pp. 227-237, 
2011. 
[15] M. Warschauer, “Dissecting the Digital Devide: A case 
study in Egypt”, The Information Society, Vol.19 (4), pp. 7-
24, 2003. 
[16] R. Wade, “Bridging the Digital Divide: New Route to 
Development or New Form of Dependency?”, Journal of 
Global Governance, Vol. 8 (4), pp. 443- 466, 2002.  
[17] S. Dezar and S. Ainin, “ERP implementation success in 
Iran: examining the role of systems environment factors”, 
World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology, 
Vol. 42, pp. 449-455, 2010.  
[18] M. Arabi, M. Zameri, K. Wong, H. Beheshti, and N. 
Zakuan, “Critical Success Factors of Enterprise Resource 
Planning Implementation in Small and Medium Enterprises 
in Developing Countries: A Review and Research 
Direction”, Proceedings of Industrial Engineering and 
Service 
Science, 
2011, 
http://www.academia.edu/1083186/Critical_Success_Factor
s_of_Enterprise_Resource_Planning_Implementation_in_S
malland_Medium_Enterprises_in_Developing_Countries:_a
_ Review_and_Research_Direction/ [Retrieved: March, 
2016] 
[19] K. Talebi, “How should the entrepreneurs of SMEs in Iran 
change their style in a business life cycle?”, Iranian Journal 
of Management Studies (IJMS), Vol. 1 (1), pp. 10-17, 2007. 
[20] M. Molanezhad, “A Brief Review of Science and 
Technology and SMEs Development in Iran”, The inter-
sessional panel of the United Nations commission on 
science and technology for development, 2010. 
[21] A. Hakim and H. Hakim, “A practical model on  controlling 
ERP implementation risks”, Journal of Information 
Systems, Vol. 35, pp. 204-214, 2012. 
[22] R. Heeks, "Information Systems and Developing Countries: 
Failure, Success, and Local Improvisations”, Journal of 
Information Society, Vol.18 (2), pp. 101-112, 2002. 
[23] C. Soh and S Kien Sia, “An institutional perspective on 
sources of ERP package-otrganisation misalignments”, 
Journal of Strategic Information Systems, Vol.13, pp. 375-
397, 2004. 
[24] M. Wynn and O. Olubanjo, “Demand-supply chain 
management: systems implications in an SME packaging 
business in the UK”, International Journal of Manufacturing 
Research, Vol 7 (2), pp. 198-212, 2012. 
[25] A. Bryman and E. Bell, Business Research Methods, 3rd 
edition, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011. 
[26] M. Saunders, P. Lewis and A. Thornhill, Research methods 
for business students, 5th ed., 2009, England: Pearson 
Education Limited. 
[27] R. K. Yin,  Applications of Case Study Research. 3rd ed., 
2012, London: SAGE Publications, Inc 
[28] H. Akeel and M. Wynn, “ERP Implementation in a 
Developing World Context: a Case Study of the Waha Oil 
Company, Libya”, The Seventh International Conference on 
Information, Process and Knowledge Management, Lisbon, 
eKnow, Feb 2015. ThinkMind, ISBN: 978-1-61208-386-5; 
ISSN: 2308-4375.  
[29] M. Wynn, P. Turner, A. Banik, and A. G. Duckworth, “The 
impact of customer relationship management systems in 
small businesses”, Strategic Change, Vol. 25, 2016 
(forthcoming). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

