Knowledge Management and Business Processes Learning on the Job 
A Conceptual Approach and its Prototypical Implementation 
 
Julian Krumeich, Dirk Werth and Peter Loos 
Institute for Information Systems (IWi) at the 
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI) 
Saarbruecken, Germany 
{firstname.lastname}@dfki.de 
 
 
Abstract—Business 
Process 
Management 
(BPM) 
has 
established itself as an important cross-functional task in many 
companies. Its primary goal is to optimize the business process 
design and hence the actual execution of business processes. 
Since optimizing processes on paper is not sufficient to really 
boost a company’s performance, it is an essential task to 
optimize the process execution that defines how business 
processes are actually performed at the end of the day. 
However, before employees are able to carry out processes, 
they need a given up-front learning time. Hence, it seems 
promising to research how business process learning can be 
realized on-the-job in order to reduce this up-front learning 
time; thus, being able to work efficiently on processes already 
from the very beginning. In this paper, we present an 
approach towards business process learning on-the-job using 
the concepts of task guidance and process guidance. After 
introducing the approach, the paper presents a prototypical 
implementation of it and in doing so proves its feasibility. 
Afterwards, the paper outlines a promising use case that is 
going to be supported by our approach after future research. 
Keywords-Business Process Management; Business Process 
Learning; Action Learning; Process Knowledge; Design Science. 
I. 
MOTIVATION AND CONTRIBUTION 
Business Process Management (BPM) has established 
itself as an important cross-functional task in many 
companies [1]. Especially in the field of process modeling, a 
lot of effort is done. The motivation for this is obvious: a 
strict documentation of business processes fosters the ability 
to optimize them starting from their modeled as-is state and 
ending at the optimized to-be state [2]. However, optimizing 
processes on paper does not really boost a company’s 
performance. Hence, one important facet in the course of 
BPM is the process execution that defines how business 
processes are actually performed at the end of the day.  
Since most business processes are not performed fully 
IT-based, human beings do often play a central role in their 
execution. However, in contrast to IT systems, individuals 
rely on learning as a basis for knowing how to carry out 
specific processes. Thus, before persons are able to perform 
them, there is always a given up-front learning time needed. 
In addition, not only these high startup costs for being able to 
perform processes for the first time, but also the risk of 
wrongly conducting activities are at a high level at the 
beginning of gaining experience in processes.  
During the execution phase of business processes, 
process guidance has been shown as useful in practice [3]. 
Hence, the guidance concept could be a way out of the 
previous described shortcoming. However, in research less 
effort is put into the question whether process guidance can 
foster employees in working on business processes that are 
unfamiliar to them, i.e. without having to learn these 
processes basically beforehand in a time-consuming and less 
productive way. Additionally, the same applies when 
significant changes have been enacted in processes which 
employees are already familiar with. Since working and 
business environment has come to ever shorter life cycles, 
the frequency of changes and hence the need for an efficient 
change-management including the training and learning 
becomes more and more important for doing successful 
business [4]. Consequently, it is often a heavy and time-
consuming task for employees to learn unfamiliar processes 
or adaptations of common ones. 
Hence, it seems promising to examine the concept of 
guidance as an approach to learn business processes on-the-
job. Thus, this paper presents an approach demonstrating 
how task and process guidance can be used to help 
employees in learning unfamiliar business processes and 
changes within existing ones with which they are already 
familiar. To minimize the up-front learning effort, the 
learning procedure will be implemented into the execution 
phase of business processes.  
The contribution of the paper is two-fold. First of all, the 
paper presents a conceptual approach that uses the concept of 
guidance with regard to learn business processes. In addition 
to that, the paper will further present an implementation of 
this theoretical concept; hence, following the design science 
research paradigm [5]. In doing so, the remainder of this 
paper is structured as follows: Section 2 examines related 
work in the field of conducting and learning business 
processes. Afterwards, Section 3 forms the foundation of this 
paper by introducing the developed concept. Within Section 
4, a prototypical implementation of the concept will be 
presented. In the subsequent Section 5, an additional use case 
will be outlined that will be supported by the developed 
approach respectively prototype in the future. Finally, the 
paper closes with a conclusion and outlook. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

II. 
RELATED WORK 
One approach heading pretty close towards the direction 
followed by this paper is the one proposed by 
Hawryszkiewycz [6]. He aims at integrating reusable 
learning components into business processes in order to 
allow employees to quickly acquire knowledge in their 
working context. One of his primary goals is to integrate 
learning resources within the actual workspace of 
employees. However, his approach just includes “a link to 
the learning systems from selected screens in the work 
process”. However, even though employees can start a 
learning unit by clicking on a button and hence the approach 
partly integrates business process learning into the actual 
process execution, employees will not improve or even build 
up their knowledge on-the-job meaning based on actually 
conducting business processes. In this context, workplace 
learning has evolved in literature describing the significant 
relationship between working and learning [4]. According to 
Chen and Kao [7], workplace learning summarizes activities 
and processes in the workplace by which employees acquire 
knowledge ranging from basic skills to high qualifications, 
which they can straightaway use in their job. As stated 
before, one dimension of workplace learning is on-the-job 
learning [8].  
Apart from the concept of workplace learning, also 
relevant for the approach to be developed are the so-called 
learning workflows and the adaptation of workflows, to 
which lots of work has been done in literature. The goal is to 
dynamically and flexibly apply changes into workflow 
systems. In doing so, unwanted side effects of complex 
changes in workflows are avoided since it is very inefficient 
and often impossible to stop running activities or workflows 
in order to enact changes. A recent work done by Weber et 
al. [9] presents a detailed review of challenges and 
techniques that exist in continuously managing the lifecycle 
of dynamic processes respectively workflows. As an 
example, one approach towards this direction is proposed by 
Dadam et al. [10]. With their ADEPT2 Process Management 
System, they aim at achieving a quick implementation and 
deployment of new business processes in order to enable ad-
hoc changes of running processes on the fly. To have a broad 
overview on these aspects, it is also referred to the recent 
state-of-the-art analysis provided by Burkhart and Loos [11].  
While the previous research stream primarily focuses on 
technical issues regarding how to dynamically enact changes 
into running business processes, other work explores ways 
how business processes can be improved by learning from 
their actual business context. A recent state-of-the-art 
analysis can be found in Ploesser et al. [12]. They state that 
context-awareness in BPM is a current and future challenges 
in process management in order to achieve true agility and 
flexibility. In this context, work dealing with learning how to 
improve business processes can also be regarded [13]. This 
learning process is also considered as an evolutionary 
process like BPM and hence must be managed as other 
business processes are managed in organizations. 
III. 
BUSINESS PROCESS LEARNING ON THE JOB 
Within the previous section on related work, some 
general concepts have been presented and outlined forming 
the basis of our approach: 
 
Firstly, business process learning will be intervened 
with the actual working on processes, i.e. the 
learning effect results from the process execution. 
This is basically what is understood as business 
process learning on-the-job.  
 
Secondly, the actual learning will be realized by 
using reusable learning components that are 
integrated into single process steps. In using the 
inherent knowledge of these components, users are 
assisted via task guidance (based on context-oriented 
knowledge) and process guidance (based on process 
flow-oriented knowledge).  
 
Thirdly, this 
guidance 
will 
be 
realized by 
recommendations that depend on the underlying 
business process models and is aware of the context-
situation in which the business processes are 
conducted. This is achieved by continuously 
monitoring the users’ behavior and adapting the 
process models based on their actual process 
execution for the individual user and on the other 
hand for all users within an organization.  
 
Fourthly, these process model adaptations and 
optimizations will be dynamically applied into the 
workflow system. In doing so, the approach aims at 
overcoming 
the 
trade-off 
between 
guidance 
(recommendations) and being flexible and adaptable 
to support ad-hoc processes (adaptation mechanism) 
(see Burkhart and Loos [11] for more details). 
According to Abecker et al. [14], Allweyer [15] and 
Lehner [16] business processes and knowledge processes 
have to be considered as intervened concepts during their 
execution (see Figure 1, (1) and (2)). Since the major 
objective is to learn knowledge linked to the underlying 
business processes, we need to have a closer look at what 
process knowledge actually mean. In this regard, Remus [17] 
distinguishes between two kinds of process knowledge: 
process flow-oriented knowledge and content-oriented 
knowledge in business processes.  
Besides combining business processes and knowledge 
processes there is also the need for including the training and 
learning processes into the overall process design [15] (see 
Figure 1, (1) and (3)). This means that employees have to 
learn both types of knowledge in order to know how to 
perform a business process. To realize this, the approach 
builds upon two basic concepts of learning that are 
considered as promising for process learning on-the-job: task 
guidance and process guidance (see Figure 1, (b)). While 
task guidance helps employees in conducting the current 
active process step (via content-oriented knowledge), process 
guidance (via process-oriented knowledge) assists them in 
questions regarding how to proceed in the business process. 
Based on this guidance during process execution, the concept 
follows 
a 
passive, 
structured 
on-the-job 
learning 
methodology, which is also called action learning [4].  
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

(1) Business Process 
Execution
(c) Process Monitoring
Crowed-based 
Recommendation
User-based 
Recommendation
(a) Recommender
Task Guidance
Process Guidance
(b) Guidance
t
Collaborative 
knowledge
Content-
based 
knowledge
Process flow- 
based 
knowledge
Organizational 
knowledge
(d) Learning Effect
(3) Training and Learning 
Processes
(2) Knowledge 
Processes
 
Figure 1. Approach towards Learning Business Processes on the Job 
This means “Learning occurs at the actual work setting as 
a result of using a systems approach, and with limited 
involvement of a trainer/facilitator”. In this regard the 
adjective “structured” does not describe the underlying 
business processes (cf. the last bullet point), but outlines the 
usage of a system that actually helps to learn. 
To realized task and process guidance, the concept makes 
use of recommendations (see Figure 1, (a)) based on the 
underlying business process models. In this regard, business 
process models are defined as a combination of single 
process steps, each of them including task guidance 
components 
based 
on 
the 
underlying 
content-based 
knowledge, which are considered as learning components. In 
monitoring users in their work on a continuous manner (see 
Figure 1, (c)), their behavior can be assigned to a specific 
process step within a process model. Hence, based on 
underlying process models, the approach recommends 
further process steps to the users in order to successfully 
accomplish the process execution.  
However, these process step recommendations are not 
solely based on the standard underlying process model, but 
can additionally be crowed-based or user-based. It is 
distinguished 
between 
crowed-based 
and 
user-based 
recommendations since each individual user exhibits a very 
personalized process that may deviate from the standard 
business process—as far as it is in line with a company’s 
compliance rules. Of course, user-based recommendations 
are preferably applied when a user has already acquainted 
knowledge on the process and not at the beginning when 
working on a process for the first time. Nonetheless, pure 
personalized recommendations could reinforce inefficient or 
even incorrect sequences, such as inadvertently skipping 
important process steps. Crowd-based recommendations 
mitigate this shortcoming. In doing so, crowd-based 
recommendations enrich the set of possible process paths 
through aggregation of the process experiences from 
multiple users; hence, it builds upon the knowledge of many. 
After a given amount of deviations from the standard process 
model, it will be adapted to the new business situation.  
Thus, there is a continuous learning effect resulting in 
enhanced personal (user learns how processes are conducted) 
and organizational (business process models adapt to new 
context situations) knowledge (see Figure 1, (d)).  
 In doing so, this recommendation methodology (see [18] 
for more technical details) contributes to the knowledge 
process that is linked to the business processes. Hence, 
collaborative knowledge is build up and based on optimizing 
the process models, the organization knowledge will be 
enhanced as well. Furthermore, changes can be automatically 
enacted into (running) business processes as one of the 
approach’s preconditions. Through the task and process 
guidance, users will be able to learn the process execution 
on-the-job; hence, they experience a learning effect (see 
Figure 1, (d)) which reflects the combination of business 
process execution and the training and learning processes. 
IV. 
PROTOTYPICAL IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONCEPT 
Having introduced the theoretical concept in the previous 
section, this section will show a prototypical implementation 
illustrating the feasibility of the learning approach in one 
particular context. This will ease the comprehensibility of the 
introduced concept and furthermore proves its feasibility to 
be realized.  
In doing so, we put a particular emphasis on email-based 
processes since email communication has generally become 
an integral part of daily business activities within companies 
at any size. On average, employees spend 2.6 hours a day 
with sending and receiving 33 respectively 72 emails 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[19] [20]. Furthermore, not only the time spent with emails 
as a means of communication, but also the knowledge that is 
bundled without structure in companies' email repositories is 
very difficult to manage. This becomes clear, if the number 
of 75 % is taken into mind representing the percentage of a 
company's knowledge saved in email messages [21]. As a 
direct consequence, if employees spend 1/3 of their time with 
email communication and 3/4 of a company's knowledge is 
stored in email inboxes, it can be concluded that in various 
companies a majority of business processes take place via 
email communication.  
Hence, it is promising to ground the approach for process 
learning in the context of email-based processes. Since 
emails are a very flexible and ad-hoc means of 
communication we also address one of our goals, namely 
supporting flexible and ad-hoc processes.  
A. Introducing the Underlying Three-Layer Approach 
The developed COPA system, which implements the 
approach, automatically hooks onto the existing email 
infrastructure and collaboration systems, e.g., Microsoft 
Exchange, and assigns incoming emails based on their 
semantic content to new or running business processes. 
This technique allows it to provide users task guidance 
helping them in conducting the currently active process step 
within an underlying business process. Furthermore, users 
will receive process guidance, so that they know how to 
conduct the following steps within the assigned business 
process. To explain how the task guidance and process 
guidance is realized, we initially introduce three layers on 
which the approach and hence the prototype is based:  
 
On the level of the system layer, each received email 
will be intercepted by the system and subsequently 
be analyzed, archived, decoded and decomposed. 
Each part of an email, i.e. headers, body or 
attachments, will be transformed into plain text and 
merged into a single XML document to allow the 
other layers to directly access the information for 
further processing. In addition, the system layer will 
provide system connectors usable to interface 
external as well as legacy systems, required to be 
accessible throughout a task.  
 
The 
semantic 
layer 
signifies 
meaningful 
communication of an enterprise. Outgoing from 
pattern based information extraction—using e.g., 
regular expressions—business process and specific 
process steps within them can be identified and 
relevant information in this regard will be extracted. 
 
From a task guidance and process guidance point of 
view, the process layer is the most important one, 
since it contributes to the actual process learning on-
the-job. The layer is further subdivided into one 
process build-time (configuration) component and 
four process run-time components, all of which are 
described in the following subsection.  
B. The Process Layer for Task and Process Guidance 
In the following, we take order processes as an example 
to apply the concept and its implementation to a concrete 
problem domain. Based on an initial set of business process 
models stored in an Enterprise Process Repository (EPR), the 
system can be employed. Therefore, it intercepts the 
incoming and outgoing email traffic and passes it through the 
three layers described in the previous section. Figure 2 shows 
the actual output of a processed email message. 
Subsequently, the four run-time components are presented 
and explained by making use of the figure. 
Process Detection. The detection component uses the 
EPR to determine whether an incoming email relates to an 
already running business process or whether a new process 
instance has to be initiated. In more detail, based on a 
semantic analysis performed in the prior semantic layer, the 
email can either be assigned to an existing process—where it 
constitutes the next step—or the email is considered as a 
starting event and triggers a new process. In this case, a new 
process instance with its specific process ID (see Figure 2, F) 
will be created outgoing from the corresponding reference 
model template from the EPR.  
Further, the information whether the incoming email is 
part of an already instantiated process or a completely new 
one, is being displayed to the user (see Figure 2, F). Future 
incoming emails concerning this particular business process 
will be assigned to this process instance henceforth. As 
mentioned before, the correct assignment of the current 
process step to the correct template is being realized by an 
analysis of process characteristics done by the semantic 
layer. If the detection component assigns an incoming email 
to a wrong process (step) based on an incorrect semantic 
analysis, the user still has the possibility to manually reassign 
the email to another process step (see Figure 2, H). To assist 
the user, the system provides information about the semantic 
matching of the email to a process step.  
Another feature of the system, which relates to the 
automatic acquisition of business processes or at least their 
adaptation to new circumstances, is the following procedure: 
if the common business process sequence is “A -> B -> C” 
and after conducting process step A, an incoming email 
relates to process step C or a user initiates via sending an 
email process step C and this process adaptation is done a 
given amount of times then the system automatically adapts 
the underlying business process in the EPR since this 
adaption in the process flow might result from a changed 
business circumstance. In this regard, process models within 
the EPR can relate to the overall enterprise or just to a subset 
of employees. This means that such process deviations can 
on the one hand only affect the personal respectively subset 
related process template or on the other hand affects the 
underlying process template of the whole enterprise. How 
this technique is conceptually realized can be seen in 
Burkhart et al. [18].  
Process Tracking. As the second step along the process 
layer's execution, the tracking component monitors all 
incidents occurring within a running process and stores every 
performed step in context of the related process. This 
component utilizes the EPR as well as the semantic 
information gathered from the original incoming email, to 
track which process is triggered by this email. Additionally, 
it updates the assigned process instance within the EPR with 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

all important data that can be useful or applicable for future 
process analysis. Each performed step concerns two 
occurrences, actions and events. Actions signify human or 
application triggered activities, whereas events have no 
active part. In the context of email communication, actions 
mainly correspond to the activity of sending an email and 
events to incoming emails. Since every performed step is 
related to its unique process instance, it can be tracked and 
on this basis recommendations for further steps can be 
obtained and provided to the user (see Figure 2, G).  
In case the system is applied in a collaborative scenario, 
it may be possible that the incoming email belongs to an 
overall process, whose previous steps have been executed by 
other instances. In this case, the tracking component offers a 
synchronization functionality, which offers the possibility of 
synchronizing already executed steps of an overall process 
throughout 
several 
instances. 
Hereby, 
the 
tracking 
component determines which information has to be gathered 
from other known instances. Thus, collected information will 
subsequently be added to the local database and utilized for 
further enhancement of the generated output. At this point, 
other beneficial aspects of the tracking component reveal.  
The gathered information provides a comprehensible 
documentation for further disposal. Due to the semantic 
extraction of process information, e.g., customer information 
and quantity of ordered goods, the system enables a (mostly) 
automated build-up of a company unique customer database. 
The email contains two sets of data informing the user of the 
present state of the current process, as well as the 
visualization of the preceding process steps. The first data set 
contains key information about the email and the process at 
hand and informs the user about the present status of the 
process instance the email belongs to (see Figure 2, G). The 
second data set shows an overview over all preceding steps 
in the current process including the corresponding emails. 
Task Guidance. As the correct process step has already 
been identified by the detection component and the semantic 
layer, the task guiding functionality is now deployed in two 
ways. First, the task guiding component exploits the EPR in 
order to gather relevant process data. Secondly, the task 
guiding functionality supplies the user with case-related 
information about the particular process step. On the one 
hand, this data consists out of internal information like 
customer history or article information from an own database 
(see Figure 2, A). On the other hand, additional external 
information are offered context-based either in form of a 
gateway to useful web links (see Figure 2, C) or email-
integrated travel details to a location provided by Google 
Maps (see Figure 2, B). Besides the context-sensitive 
enrichment of incoming emails with internal and external 
information, the task guiding component provides the 
possibility to send email drafts that are context-sensitively 
selected and recommended to the user (see Figure 2, D). 
Furthermore, if other software systems are used within the 
enterprise, e.g., ERP systems, components can be integrated 
that transfer information out of the email to these systems 
(see Figure 2, E). Depending on the context, different 
information can be useful for a particular process. Hence, the 
type and level of detail of the information to be displayed 
can be adjusted using a customization tool. 
Process Guidance. Due to prior process instances and 
according user actions, there is already knowledge about the 
underlying process available, which forms the input for the 
process guidance functionality. Using the Enterprise Process 
Repository, the guidance component—as the fourth step in 
the processing of an incoming email—offers suggestions and 
recommendations for the further proceedings in a particular 
process (see Figure 2, G; for detailed information on the 
recommendation process, it is referred to Burkhart et al. 
[18]). A second functionality of the process guidance 
component is to provide advice in actually executing the next 
process step once the user has chosen one of the provided 
actions.  
 
Figure 2. Screenshot of an enriched email message
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

V. 
EXPORT—SUPPORTING SMES IN THE ATLAS 
EXPORT PROCEDURE 
A. Motivation 
Having realized the basic use case regarding a support of 
order processes, we are currently researching how our 
approach can be applied to an additional application domain.  
A study conducted by the United Nations indicates that 
inefficient customs processing accounts for 7% of the overall 
international trading costs. To address this problem, the 
European Commission finished the eCustoms law initiative 
in 2003. While this initiative has to be implemented by all 
member states, the German implementation is called ATLAS 
(Automatisiertes Tarif und lokales Zollabwicklungssystem). 
In 2009, this system fully replaced the manual, paper-based 
processing and became mandatory for the use case of 
exports. For larger companies, such online-based customs 
declarations offer the chance to be included into the existing 
IT-infrastructure and business processes. Thus, they can 
contribute to process automation. Small and medium-sized 
enterprises (SME) however face difficulties with the change 
towards ATLAS [22]. Considering their usually scarce IT 
landscape that does often not exceed the basic email 
infrastructure, they often rely on the online platform IAA-
Plus as provided by the German customs office or consult an 
external service provider. Still, these alternatives do not 
satisfy all special needs and characteristics of SMEs. For 
instance, they cause additional costs and increase the 
complexity of process execution. Hence, the main objective 
of ATLAS, a largely automated handling of border-crossing 
product exchange resulting in an integrated and predictable 
supply chain, has not been reached. 
B. Use Case Description that will be Supported in Future 
A small SME occasionally exports its final products into 
foreign countries outside the EU. Considering the small size 
of the company in question, like most other such companies, 
it does not own an extensive IT landscape with an ERP 
system. Thus, software solutions that integrate ATLAS with 
common ERP systems are not applicable. To perform the 
electronic export declaration nevertheless, the company 
relies on the web-based platform IAA-Plus. This however 
turns out to be a time-consuming process because the 
responsible employee has to gather all relevant data from 
other colleagues and from Excel sheets (like product tariff 
numbers). Afterwards, this data has to be put into the web-
form manually and, after completion of the export 
declaration, most of the data has to be transferred again to a 
logistics service provider. This processing is not optimal, yet 
it is typical.  
EXPORT as an extension of the COPA system will 
address the mentioned problems. The majority of relevant 
information for the customs declaration has already been 
communicated between seller and customer before. For 
SMEs, this is in most cases done via e-mail. The e-mail 
infrastructure therefore has valuable information available. 
The EXPORT tool is simple to integrate into existing e-mail 
infrastructure. After installation, it extracts the required 
information from e-mail conversations and generates an 
ATLAS declaration automatically subsequent to a successful 
sell. If some piece of information is missing, the tool 
supports the user during the data input. As an example, it is 
referred to the product tariff numbers that are a challenge 
especially for SMEs. Appropriate search mechanisms as well 
as the automated building of a repository for mapping the 
own product portfolio to the respective numbers address this 
problem. As soon as the ATLAS system successfully 
assigned a unique Movement Reference Number (MRN) on 
the electronic customs accompanying document (ABD), this 
number can be forwarded together with the already available 
information to the cheapest logistics service provider. This 
happens via an appropriate interface connection and finishes 
the process. 
Communication 
between Seller and Customer
 Enhancing email messages 
with context information during 
the whole communication 
between sellers and customers
ATLAS System
 (Semi-)automatic generation of 
export declarations
 Constant insight on the status 
of export declarations
 Management of product tariff 
numbers
 Upgradeability to further ATLAS 
activities
Logistics 
Service Provider
 Support the selection of the 
cheapest logistics service 
provider
 Automatic shipping commission
 Automatic customer notification 
regarding the current shipping 
status
 Tracking feature
 Process support during the whole export process
 Automatic build up of master data and process repositories
 Reducing processing time and minimizing process costs
Process 
and 
Learning 
Module
Existing Email 
Infrastructure
Process 
and Learning 
Module
Logistics Module
ATLAS 
Module
Product 
Tariff 
Numbers
Archive 
System
RDT
E.400 // FTAM
Module to Support the Communication 
between the Seller and Customer
EDIFACT-
Converter
 Minimizing media breaks
 One-Face-to-the-
Customer (usability)
EXPORT-System
 
Figure 3. Main functionalities of an EXPORT supporting system and its schematic architecture
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

A learning component included in EXPORT builds a 
repository on its own during the tool operation in order to 
reduce manual data input and maintenance efforts during 
export processes; hence, ensuring a consequent implicit 
knowledge management. Additionally, the integrated process 
component supports the process execution starting from the 
customer request up to the communication with the logistics 
service provider and the product deliverance to the foreign 
customer. Thereby, it also allows for a retrospective view on 
the executed export processes. In summary, SME are 
enabled to cover the currently existing disadvantages in this 
section 
of 
the 
supply 
chain 
in 
an 
autonomous, 
straightforward and inexpensive way. Due to the process 
support that is given during the whole export process (via 
task and process guidance), users that are not familiar with 
the overall process can learn it on the job.  
The main functionalities of EXPORT as well as a 
schematic outline of the system are visualized in Figure 3.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
In this paper, we presented an approach that allows 
business process learning on-the-job using the concepts of 
task guidance and process guidance. After introducing the 
approach, the paper presented a prototypical implementation 
of the approach and in doing so proved its general feasibility. 
A first empirical evaluation of the approach and its 
application has already been conducted and can be found in 
Burkhart et al. [23]. This evaluation has demonstrated the 
basic benefits of guidance for carrying out unfamiliar 
business processes and learning them on-the-job based on 
real test persons that were involved. As a result, the study 
proofed that test subjects were able to process an unfamiliar 
workflow significantly faster by task guidance and process 
guidance. Furthermore, they experienced the processing as 
significantly easier and moreover, they were significantly 
higher satisfied with the result of the conducted workflow. 
In the next step, we are going to evaluate our approach 
using the implementation in a real-world scenario or even in 
a large-scale field study. Moreover, further highly-important 
features, which are only testable in a time-consuming way, 
e.g., the adaptive, flexible and self-learning features, will be 
evaluated to see how learning is progressing and how 
organizational-based as well as crowed-based knowledge 
will increase over time. Furthermore, we are going to 
implement further features into our prototype to be able to 
support the promising use case that was presented at the end 
of this paper. In applying the conceptual approach to this 
further application domain, we can prove its applicability 
and feasibility in more general and extended terms. 
REFERENCES 
[1] O. Marjanovic and W. Bandara, “The Current State of BPM Eduction 
in Australia: Teaching and Research Challenges”, Business Process 
Management Workshops (BPM 2010), pp. 775–789. 
[2] E. Kavakli, “Modelling organizational goals: Analysis of current 
methods”, ACM Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC '04), pp. 
1339–1343. 
[3] G. Grambow, R. Oberhauser, and M. Reichert, “Contextual 
Generation of Declarative Workflows and their Application to 
Software Engineering Processes”, International Journal on Advances 
in Intelligent Systems, vol. 4, no. 3/4, 2011, pp. 158–179. 
[4] R. L. Jacobs and Y. Park, “A Proposed Conceptual Framework of 
Workplace Learning: Implications for Theory Development and 
Research in Human Resource Development”, Human Resource 
Development Review, vol. 8, June 2009, pp. 133–150. 
[5] A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design Science in 
Information Systems Research”, MIS Quarterly, vol. 28, March 2004, 
pp. 75–105. 
[6] I. T. Hawryszkiewycz, “A Framework for Integrating Learning into 
Business Processes”, South East Asia Regional Computer Science 
Confederation (SEARCC) Conference 2005, pp. 23–28. 
[7] H.-J. Chen and C.-H. Kao, “Empirical validation of the importance of 
employees' learning motivation for workplace e-learning in 
Taiwanese organisations”, Australasian Journal of Educational 
Technology, vol. 28, May 2012, pp. 580–598. 
[8] N. Clarke, “Workplace learning environment and its relationship with 
learning outcomes in healthcare organizations”, Human Resource 
Development International, vol. 8, March 2005, pp. 185–205. 
[9] B. Weber, S. Sadiq, and M. Reichert, “Beyond Rigidity - Dynamic 
Process Lifecycle Support: A Survey on Dynamic Changes in 
Process-aware Information Systems”, Computer Science - Research 
and Development, vol. 23, May 2009, pp. 47–65. 
[10] P. Dadam, M. Reichert, S. Rinderle, M. Jurisch, H. Acker, K. Gösner, 
U. Kreher, and M. Lauer, “Towards Truly Flexible and Adaptive 
Process-Aware Information Systems“, United Information Systems 
Conference (UNISCON 2008), pp. 72–83.  
[11] T. Burkhart and P. Loos, “Flexible Business Processes - Evaluation of 
Approaches”, Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik 2010 (MKWI 
2010), pp. 1217–1228. 
[12] K. Ploesser, M. Peleg, P. Soffer, M. Rosemann, and J. C. Recker, 
“Learning from Context to Improve Business Processes”, BPTrends, 
vol. 6, Jan. 2009, pp. 1–7. 
[13] J. Ghattas, P. Soffer, and M. Peleg, “Learning Business Process 
Models: A Case Study”, International Conference on Business 
Process Management (BPM'07), pp. 383–394. 
[14] A. Abecker, K. Hinkelmann, H. Maus, and H.-J. Müller, 
“Geschäftsprozessorientiertes 
Wissensmanagement”, 
Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag, 2002. 
[15] T. Allweyer, “Geschäftsprozessmanagement: Strategie, Entwurf, 
Implementierung, Controlling”, Herdecke: W3L-Verlag, 2005. 
[16] F. Lehner, “Wissensmanagement: Grundlagen, Methoden und 
technische Unterstützung”, München: Hanser, 2006. 
[17] U. Remus, “Prozessorientiertes Wissensmanagement: Konzept und 
Modellierung“, Regensburg: University of Regensburg, 2002. 
[18] T. Burkhart, D. Werth, and P. Loos, “Flexible process support by 
automatic aggregation of implicit and explicit user behavior“, Fourth 
International Conference on the Applications of Digital Information 
and Web Technologies (ICADIWT 2011), pp. 167–172. 
[19] Email Equation, “Email marketing services for small to midsize 
business”, 
2010, 
retrieved 
July 
20, 
2012, 
from 
http://www.emailequation.com/emailmetricsroi.html. 
[20] The Radicati Group, “Business User Survey”, 2010, retrieved July 20, 
2012, from http://www.radicati.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/2010/11/ 
Business-User-Survey-2010-Executive-Summary.pdf. 
[21] Messaging Architects, “Policy-Based Email Security and Data Leak 
Prevention”, 
2012, 
retrieved 
July 
20, 
2012, 
from 
http://www.messagingarchitects.com/solutions/guardian.html. 
[22] J.-B. Delèze and J.-P. Lattion, “Nutzen einer möglichen Beteiligung 
der Schweiz am E-Zoll-Projekt der EU“, 2011, retrieved July 20, 
2012, 
from 
http://www.dievolkswirtschaft.ch/editions/201103/ 
Deleze.html  
[23] T. Burkhart, J. Krumeich, D. Werth, and P. Loos, “Flexible Support 
System for Email-based Processes: an Empirical Evaluation”, 
International Journal of E-Business Development, vol. 2, Aug. 2012, 
pp. 77–85. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

