 First Steps Towards a Formal Analysis of Law 
 
 
Tom Maarten van Engers 
Leibniz Center for Law 
University of Amsterdam 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands 
e-mail: vanengers@uva.nl 
Robert van Doesburg 
Immigration and Naturalization Service 
Rijswijk, the Netherlands 
e-mail: r.v.doesburg@ind.minvenj.nl
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, the authors present some work 
recently 
done 
within 
the 
Dutch 
Immigration 
and 
Naturalization Service (IND). Being responsible for the 
implementation and execution of complex and ever changing 
regulations, for which the use of IT systems is a necessity, this 
organization has become aware of their dependence on 
trustworthy methods to assure the correct implementation of 
law into their operations and services. While many attempts to 
automate law, even in the domain of migration law, have been 
made before, hardly any attention has been paid to the 
‘translation process’ from legal rules expressed in natural 
language to specifications in computer executable form. In this 
paper, we will explain the method we have developed and 
illustrate its application with some concrete examples. The 
work is part of a larger innovation programme initiative that 
we collaboratively conduct within a virtual collaboration, 
called the ‘Blue Chamber’. 
Keywords-knowledge acquisition; legal engineering; legal 
analysis; Hohfeldian analysis. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Making a formal analysis of law is problematic because 
sources of law contain huge amounts of implicit information. 
As a result, law can be difficult to understand and to 
interpret. In countries that follow common law tradition 
understanding the law requires the knowledge of a growing 
body of potentially relevant preceding cases, next to the 
knowledge of ‘black letter’ law, including bills such as tax 
law, or immigration law. The authors, living in a civil law 
country, 
conduct 
their 
research 
in 
governmental 
organizations. In civil law cultures, the most important legal 
sources are the laws that are produced by the parliamentary 
system and the sources of law that are produced by legal 
bodies based on delegated powers. Case law is relevant as 
well, especially in explaining the ‘correct’ interpretation and 
application of legal sources onto actual cases. But rather then 
taking case decisions as a primary source, institutions like 
the IND describe the legal consequences of court decisions 
in changed regulation.  
Translating sources of law into formal specifications for 
IT systems is a necessary step for (partial) automation of 
public services. The translation process of sources of law 
should be transparent to make sure that legal and policy 
experts are able to validate the correctness and completeness 
of the ‘legal rules’ the IT system. The authors have also 
pointed at the importance of inter-coder independency and 
scalability with respect to human resources [1]. The method 
to be developed should allow us to work with many 
knowledge analysts and knowledge engineers that have 
normal professional skills. Like us, other people have 
identified the need for a systematic approach that would 
allow to cope with law, and enable its translation into formal 
models that consequently could be executed by IT systems. 
In fact the very idea of translating law into computational 
models that we could use for solving cases using a computer, 
goes back to Gottlieb Wilhelm Leibniz who even build a 
mechanical reckoner that was supposed to solve complex 
(legal) problems once we would have the magical numbers 
of the legal concepts. Leibniz before Wilkins, both deserving 
recognition as founding fathers of modern computer science, 
stressed the importance of formal conceptualizations, these 
days usually referred to as ontologies, centuries before 
computer science came into existence [9][17]. 
Shortly after the invention of the modern computer, 
scientist recognized its power as a symbol processor 
allowing it to be used for reasoning processes. This includes 
reasoning about legal cases. Consequently, people have been 
working on using IT systems within the domain of law, 
particularly within public administrations. In literature, one 
can find quite some research papers on systems aimed at 
deciding on legal cases. The authors of this paper also have 
been working on such legal decision-support systems [2][3].  
The early work of Sergot et al., which is also within the 
domain of immigration law, like the work we present in this 
paper, uses the expert as the main source of legal knowledge, 
despite of its title: ‘the British Nationality Act as a Logic 
Program’ 
[13][14]. 
In 
the 
POWER-programme 
[4], 
conducted in the late nineteen-nineties by the authors, 
written sources of law were the main source of (legal) 
knowledge. Legal experts did, and do still, play an important 
role, but only as interpreters and validators of knowledge that 
can be traced back to sources of law.  
In a series of projects since the POWER-programme, the 
authors have been systemizing the translation process using 
(semi) automated norm extraction [1][11][12], particularly 
by looking at invariant language patterns typically used in 
written sources of law. Using computational linguistics we 
were able to identify the most important patterns and showed 
that we could use parsing to ‘translate’ written sources of law 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

written in natural language into model sentences in a formal 
language.  
Also, we have been working on the representation of 
norms in ways that enable multiple task contexts and 
multiple agents perspectives. The typical single task 
orientation used in Sergot et al. could be avoided. In order to 
achieve this objective, we used formal models [5][6] that are 
based upon an extended version of Hohfeld’s model [8]. In 
previous research projects we have showed that Hohfeld’s 
initial model is already a big improvement compared to 
traditional interpretation of rights, duties and allowances in 
(modal) logic. Our extended and completely formalized 
version of Hohfeld’s model enables us to express all typical 
jural relations in a formal way, but it is also expressed in a 
relational model that can be implemented in a straight 
forward way. Furthermore, we worked on the development 
of an agent-role based model, allowing us to reason about the 
consequences of norms in a social context [15][16]. We 
certainly do not claim that we have solved all issues, but by 
working on these related topics the depth and complexity of 
understanding law became much clearer to us and has 
inspired us to continue our quest.  
One of the issues that we did not address thus far was the 
scoping problem. While legal experts are perfectly able to 
list the regulations that are relevant to solving a legal 
problem of some kind (or at least claim to be), we have 
experienced that one of the problems for our knowledge 
analysts was where to start analyzing, what rules of law to 
include, and where to stop looking for additional sources of 
law. Obviously, a top down approach, analyzing all sources 
of law in a country, could not possibly work since there are 
simply to many sources of law available to allow for an 
analysis that finishes within a reasonable time. Furthermore, 
the concept ‘top down’ would be problematic. Although the 
constitution normally is considered to be the highest source 
of law (in the Netherlands just after ‘the grace of God’ that 
gives the formal power to the King), we are bound by even 
higher forces, such as international treaties. In the POWER-
programme we have experienced that a serial approach, 
where analysts worked through a source of law from the first 
to the last article, was both time consuming and required an 
integration step to ‘glue’ the different partial models 
together. At that time we did not have an explicit method for 
doing that and much was left to the insights of the analysts. 
 So the challenge we took up was to make explicit the 
issue of scoping relevant sources of law. If we would have a 
method that solves our scoping problem in such way that it is 
coder independent, and results in a model that could be 
mapped to the original sources (like we aimed for in the 
POWER-programme), we would be a step closer to our final 
aims, i.e. a method for the formal analysis of law. 
In this paper, we describe the approach we have 
developed and explain it by illustrating its application on 
Dutch Alien Law. We will explain the issues that were raised 
during the analysis and explain their relevance. 
In Section 2, we give a short description of recent IT 
developments within the IND. In Section 3, we give a brief 
overview of legal sources relevant to the domain. In Section 
4, we present a scoping procedure for sources of law. Section 
5, briefly describes the conceptual-semantic analyses. 
Section 6, contains conclusion and future work. 
II. 
INNOVATION OF THE IND 
In 2005 the IND has chosen to fundamentally rebuild its 
organization. One of the steps toward a newborn IND was 
the redesign of all processes, including all supporting IT 
systems. This new system, called INDiGO, would be based 
on rule governance principles, separating procedural 
knowledge (workflow) from legal case content related 
knowledge. This principle became known as separating the 
know from the flow [7]. In order to create the actual IT 
solution, the IND selected several middle ware components, 
following the architectural principle of having one type of 
functionality within one middle ware component (one thing 
in a box). In order to support its knowledge management the 
IND has chosen to work with an inference engine that works 
on an explicit knowledge model derived from sources of law. 
This set up was also intended to enhance adaptivity and 
reduce maintenance efforts as a result of changing law and 
policies. Frequent changes of the knowledge model should 
not compromise the systems stability. 
The INDiGO system is now operational for more than 
five years, and while the maintenance efforts are 
significantly less compared to the previous IT-systems, the 
effort required to implement changes is still substantially 
higher than expected when the solution was choosen.  
The biggest issue is that legal experts and policy advisors 
lack the skills or will to read and validate the knowledge 
representation used by the inference engine in order to adapt 
changes when necessary. This is not a new problem. The 
Common Business Oriented Language (COBOL) was also 
once expected to be used by business people, rather than the 
very specialized computer programmers that actually created 
the systems code. 
If systems are relatively stable the absence of direct 
insight of legal experts and policy advisors in the knowledge 
models would not hurt too much. But in volatile 
environments with constantly changing laws and policies, 
organizations will loose control of their IT systems unless 
they find ways to support the ‘translation’ of legal 
knowledge from the sources of law into a formal 
representation in their IT systems. 
 As a result of not using the knowledge models in the 
inference engine the user organization of the IND specifies 
changes without direct insight into the existing set of rules. 
Integrating the amended rules in the existing knowledge 
models is left to knowledge modelers. Although knowledge 
modellers within the IND all have a history in the primary 
process of the organization, this leads to an unnecessary 
burden on the IT change process. Because requests for 
change in the inference engine are not fully specified. 
Interpretation errors made by knowledge workers, because of 
the lack of details in specifications, will not be detected until 
the start of the test phase. This leads to relatively expensive 
modifications. 
The absence of unambiguous specifications also has 
consequences for the acceptance of changes by users. Having 
formal specifications is a condition for making a complete 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

test set. Test employees lacking full understanding of the 
required specifications will by definition carry out 
incomplete acceptance tests. Recognizing errors in the last 
stages of a release, or even in the initial period after delivery, 
leads to even higher repair cost than corrections made during 
the design and testing phase of a release. 
 The IND is seeking a formal method for coder 
independent 
and 
traceable 
specifications 
for 
the 
implementations of policy changes and changes in sources of 
law in information systems. These specifications should be 
available at the start of the process of changing knowledge 
models.  
The authors have not found any existing solution for 
solving this issue. 
III. 
LAWS AND REGULATIONS IN THE NETHERLANDS AND 
EUROPE 
Why is scoping difficult? Laws are referring, explicitly 
and implicitly, to other laws and subordinate legislation. This 
creates a network of relationships. Determining relevant 
relationships can only be done on the basis of a given 
context. The scoping process should lead to a set of rules that 
can be traced back to sources of law and to a context 
description. 
On October 15, 2014 the following rules where effective 
in the Netherlands, and thus potentially relevant for the IND: 
• 
1.100 Dutch Laws; 
• 
1.748 Dutch Orders in Counsel 
• 
5.273 Dutch ministerial regulations 
• 
679 Dutch international treaties  
• 
2.796 European Laws 
• 
3.164 European regulations 
• 
Dutch and European case law 
The IND is responsible for the implementation of the 
Aliens Act and the Netherlands Nationality Act. This article 
focuses on the implementation of the Aliens Act. The Aliens 
Act consists of 173 articles, 288 lines, 28.766 words. 
Subordinate legislation includes: 
• 
Order 
in 
Council: 
the 
Aliens 
Decree  
(322 articles, 5.642 lines, 56.331 words) 
• 
Ministerial 
regulation: 
Aliens 
Regulations  
(167 articles, 3.983 lines, 27.213 words) 
• 
Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines, part A to D 
(7.491 paragraphs, 13.935 lines, 153.068 words).  
The challenge of the scoping process is to distil a relevant 
set of rules out of the entire collection of sources of law. 
IV. 
A PROCEDURE FOR SCOPING 
To select a workable set of rules that provides an 
adequate basis for developing specifications for a specified 
context, we used the following procedure: 
1. Select an acting person (this can also be an 
organization). Describe the context of the acts of the 
agent  
2. Choose a starting point for the analysis: a legal 
statement that contains a condition and is relevant in 
the chosen context.  
3. Perform a linguistic analysis on a selected article.  
4. Transform the text to the active voice, thus insuring 
there the subject of the sentence is an acting person. 
5. Identify explicit references and terms that need a 
definition. 
6. Select words or constituents that contain or might 
contain an implicit reference. Make these references 
explicit, or make an explicit decision that further 
analysis is not relevant in the chosen context. 
7. Analyze all the selected words and constituents, 
starting with point 2 of this procedure. 
8. The procedure ends when all relevant references 
analyzed. The decision to end the analysis is being 
made by a multidisciplinary team in which legal 
experts, policy advisors, and practitioners are 
represented. 
The reader must be aware that the linguistic analyses 
(step 3 of the procedure) for the example cases described 
below have been conducted manually. The authors aim at 
supporting this step by automated devices in the near future 
and have worked on automated tools for the analysis of legal 
sources in the various previous projects [10][11]. The 
examples described below show that even a quite limited 
lingual analyses is sufficient for our purpose. 
A. Case: foreign students in the Netherlands 
The procedure for scoping has been tested for the context 
of services provided by the IND (acting person) to foreign 
students studying or wanting to study in the Netherlands at a 
university.  
B. Starting the analysis 
Choosing a starting point for the analysis is step 2 of the 
scoping procedure. Two logical starting points for the 
analysis are: 
1. 
A foreign student wants to come to the Netherlands. 
Conditions for admission to the Netherlands are stated in 
article 3, Aliens Act (Chapter 3: Entry).  
2. 
A foreign student wants to reside in the 
Netherlands. Conditions for residence in the Netherlands are 
stated in article 8, Aliens Act (Chapter 3: Residence). 
Both starting points lead to the same results within five 
iterations, because of implicit cross-references between 
article 3 and article 8, Aliens Act. 
C. The analysis of an article 
Step 3 of the procedure, the linguistic analysis of a 
selected article, is illustrated on the basis of Aliens Act 
article 16, paragraph 1, preamble and under b and article 4: 1 
of the General Administrative Law. 
Aliens Act article 16, paragraph 1, preamble and under b 
reads: “An application for a temporary residence permit can 
be rejected, if the alien does not possess a travel document.” 
This is a sentence in the passive form and it contains the 
following components, see Figure 1: 
• 
can be rejected (verb)  
• 
an application for the granting of a residence permit 
for a fixed period as referred to in article 14 (subject)  
• 
if (conditional conjunction)  
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

• 
the alien does not possess a travel document 
(adverbial of condition; subordinate clause). 
The subordinate clause of the sentence can be 
decomposed to: 
• 
possess (verb) 
• 
not (adverb of denial) 
• 
the alien (subject) 
• 
a valid travel document (direct object). 
Because the sentence is in the passive voice there is no 
acting subject present. 
In step 4 of the procedure the sentence is put in the active 
voice. Resulting in the question: who is the acting person 
that can reject an application for a residence permit. 
The question is answered in step 5 of the procedure. The 
explicit reference to Aliens Act article 14, paragraph 1 
reveals that it is Our Minister (the minister of Security and 
Justice) who is authorized to grant, reject or disregard an 
application for a residence permit. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Linguistic analysis of Aliens Act article 16, paragraph 1, 
preamble and under b. 
After annotating the explicit references in the article, step 
6 of the procedure commences: the search for implicit 
references. There is an implicit relationship between ‘an 
application for a temporary residence permit’ and ‘the alien’ 
that has to possess a travel document. Also the existing of 
‘an application for a temporary residence permit’ implies that 
such an application can be submitted. To be able to make this 
implicit reference explicit, relevant rules are searched for in 
sources of law. 
To make explicit what ‘the alien’ should do to proof he 
possesses a valid travel document, the requirements that 
enable ‘Our Minister’ to assess whether ‘the alien’ has a 
valid travel document are added, including references to the 
relevant sources of law, see Figure 2. 
Step 7 of the procedure is the analyses of the articles of 
sources of law to which implicit or explicit references have 
been found. 
The procedure continues with the analysis of article 4:1 
of the General Administrative Law is shown, see Figure 3. 
Article 4:1 of the General Administrative Law reads: 
“The application for taking a decision is submitted in writing 
to the administrative authority authorized to decide on the 
application, unless otherwise prescribed by law.” The 
sentence is in the passive form and contains the following 
components: 
• 
is submitted (verb)  
• 
the application for taking a decision (subject)  
• 
unless (conditional conjunction) 
• 
otherwise prescribed by law (adverbial of condition) 
• 
to the administrative authority authorized to decide 
on the application (adverbial of place) 
• 
in writing (adverbial of condition) 
Repeating the scoping procedure leads to new implicit 
references, see Figure 4. 
D. The size of the set of rules 
The scoping procedure leaves 38 articles relevant for the 
entry and residence of foreign students in the Netherlands 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Transformation of Aliens Act article 16, paragraph 1, preamble and under b. 
 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

out of the original 173 articles of the Aliens Act. The set of 
rules also contains related sources of law, including rules 
from other legal domains. 
The overall set of rules thus covers the following 
components (articles and paragraphs) of the regulations: 
• 
38 of the 173 articles of the Aliens Act  
• 
26 of the 322 in the Aliens Decree articles 
• 
12 of the 167 articles in the Aliens Regulations  
• 
280 of the 7.491 paragraphs of the Aliens Act 
Implementation Guidelines  
• 
1 article from a European law  
• 
13 articles of the General Administrative Law Act  
• 
2 articles from the Public Health Act  
• 
1 article of the Criminal Code  
• 
1 article from the Student Finance Act. 
E. The value of a linguistic analysis 
New in the proposed method is the explicit annotation of 
every legal rule that is needed for capturing the formal 
specifications of a service. Reasons for adding a legal rule to 
the relevant set of rules are recorded. Annotations for not 
adding a rule because of lack of relevance is only recorded 
when the analysts involved decide that this information 
might be relevant in the future. Every rule and every 
annotation in the model is explicitly related to a source of 
law.  
The set of legal rules and the annotations made in 
establishing the relevant set of rules provides a basis for 
discussion and further analysis of the accuracy of the 
determined scope. 
Adjusting the set of rules is possible at any time. 
Reapplying the procedure is necessary when changes are 
being made onto sources of law referred to in the relevant set 
of rules, or when any expert involved asks for adjustments.  
The obtained legal rules must be converted to a formal 
(executable) specification. We use a specific application of 
CogNIAM (see [5][6]). This results in a formal model 
expressed in some relational algebra. It is therefore quite 
different from other specification languages that have a rule-
like syntax, such as Prolog, most production rule syntaxes, 
business rules, etc. CogNIAM specifications can be used as 
formal specifications for IT systems and also provides a full 
set of test scenarios. With respect to the analytical approach 
used so far for the making of CogNIAM representations, the 
scoping procedure presented in this paper, yields the great  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Linguistic analysis of article 4:1 General Administrative Law. 
advantage that the linguistic analysis is easy to learn. The 
constituents resulting from the linguistic analysis are much 
more structured than the original legal text, leading to a 
decrease of coder independency. Additionally the full 
traceability to legal text enables standardization of the 
translation of legal text in natural language to formal 
language. In the near future unambiguous automated 
methods for linguistic analysis on legal text will be available 
(see also [1][11][12]). For multiple languages including 
Dutch and English parsers that can perform this analysis 
automatically are available.  
The intermediate step of linguistic analysis simplifies the 
often complex sentence structures in legal texts and thus 
provides for legal experts better understanding of the 
intended meaning of legislature, and makes anomalies that 
would otherwise remain hidden, visible. 
V. 
CONCEPTUAL-SEMANTIC ANALYSIS 
In [5][6] Van Engers and Nijssen describe the conceptual 
analysis of law. In order to allow the reader to understand 
how the models that are produced follow the steps described 
in the previous sections, we will briefly give the Hohfeldian 
analysis of one of the partial models (Aliens Act article 16, 
paragraph 1, preamble and under b). This model (see Figure 
2) describes potential legal relations between ‘Our Minister’ 
and ‘the alien’.  In Hohfeldian terms this model is read as 
follows: ‘Our Minister’ has a POWER to reject a request for 
a temporary residence permit, when ‘the alien’ cannot 
produce evidence of being in possession of a travel 
document. 
When ‘Our Minister’ executes that POWER ‘the alien’ 
has a LIABILITY towards the rejection and a new jural 
relation between ‘Our Minister’ and ‘the alien’ comes into 
existence, namely the DUTY of ‘Our Minister’ to produce a 
decision (rejection) and a (CLAIM)RIGHT of ‘the alien’ on 
that decision. Once ‘Our Minister’ has fulfilled his DUTY 
the DUTY-(CLAIM)RIGHT relation terminates.  
However, if ‘the alien’ can produce evidence of being in 
possession of a travel document, then ‘Our Minister’ has a 
DISABILITY and ‘the alien’ an IMMUNITY with respect to 
the rejection of the request for a temporary residence permit.    
The model does not answer the question what happens 
then? We may not infer that by not having the POWER to 
reject the request will then be granted. So we have to look 
 
 
Figure 4.  Translation of article 4:1 General Administrative Law. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

for other partial models that will provide us an answer to 
this question. 
Also one may wonder how ‘Our Minister’ would know 
about the alien’s request unless it is submitted (by ‘the 
alien’?). Looking for an answer to this question we might 
find that this is arranged for in AWB 4.1 (see the 
corresponding model in Figure 3). According to this model 
‘the alien’ got a POWER to submit a request for a temporary 
residence permit. If ‘the alien’ would execute this POWER  
‘Our Minister’ would have the LIABILITY to decide upon 
the request thus creating a new jural relation between ‘Our 
Minister’ and ‘the alien’. This DUTY-(CLAIM)RIGHT 
relation would give a DUTY to ‘Our Minister’ to make a 
decision and a (CLAIM)RIGHT on that decision for ‘the 
alien’. This jural relation terminates once ‘Our Minister’ 
makes the decision. 
If we would combine all these partial model we would 
find that the intended scenario would be as follows: When 
‘the alien’ executes his POWER to submit a request for a 
temporary residence permit, ‘Our Minister’ has the 
LIABILITY to decide upon the request.  This is the first 
POWER-LIABILITY relation. This creates a new legal 
relation between ‘the alien’ and ‘Our Minister’. Following 
from this relation ‘Our Minister’ got the DUTY to decide 
and ‘the alien’ the (CLAIM)RIGHT on the decision. When 
‘Our Minister’ fulfills his DUTY the relation between ‘the 
alien’ and ‘Our Minister’ is terminated. The second 
POWER-LIABILITY relation is relevant for content of the 
decision. According to the combined model ‘Our Minister’ 
has  POWER and ‘the alien’ has a LIABILITY towards a 
rejection if ‘the alien’ cannot produce evidence of being in 
possession of a travel document. ‘Our Minister’ then has the 
DUTY to produce a decision (rejection) and ‘the alien’ has a 
(CLAIM)RIGHT on that decision. Once ‘Our Minister’ has 
fulfilled his DUTY the DUTY-(CLAIM)RIGHT relation 
terminates. If ‘the alien’ produces evidence of being in 
possession of a travel document, then ‘Our Minister’ has a 
DISABILITY and ‘the alien’ has an IMMUNITY with 
respect to the rejection of the request for a temporary 
residence permit. What should happen in this case remains 
unclear.  
The Hohfeldian analysis given above shows that the 
deeper analysis of the partial models further clarifies the 
meaning of sources of law in terms of (potential) legal 
consequences  of  agents’ acts. Furthermore the analysis 
helps to identify issues that need further clarification to fully 
cover the potential situations that may occur within a given 
context. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The title of this paper was deliberately chosen. One could 
argue that the first steps towards formal analysis of law have 
been set long ago. For centuries researchers have been trying 
to formalize law, and certainly the last decades a lot of 
progress has been achieved. Legal information systems have 
become essential components in our modern society and 
without them efficient and effective application of law would 
be impossible. Despite all of this a complete method that 
translates law written in natural language into formal 
specifications is still lacking, although parts of such a 
method are already available.  
The work we report on in this paper, fits within a series 
of studies, experiments and trials that are all aimed at 
developing a method for the formal analysis of law. In this 
paper, we addressed an issue - scoping - that has been 
neglected so far, but is an essential part of the method we are 
working on. In this sense we address the first steps in the 
translation towards a formal model of law.  
By developing our approach and testing it on concrete 
cases we have learned a lot about how humans, including 
knowledge engineers and legal experts read and interpret 
sources of law and attribute meaning to them. 
Following the scoping procedure explained in this paper, 
we have not only been able to identify relevant pieces of law, 
and thus helped to find a solution to our scoping issue, but 
while building the partial models and transforming them, we 
have been able to identify and clarify implicit relations 
between constituting parts of sources of law, terminological 
and conceptual unclarities and vagueness. This makes that 
our approach offers much more than merely filling the 
scoping gap in our method, as it contributes to improving the 
quality of the analysis of law and consequently helps public 
administrations such as the IND to improve the quality of 
their operation.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research reported upon in this paper, wouldn’t have 
been possible without the support of the Dutch Immigration 
and Naturalization Service. Also the cooperation in the Blue 
Chamber has inspired us to continue to work on this 
intriguing topic and discuss our ideas even in late hours and 
at the cost of not paying attention to our spouses. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. M. van Engers, “Legal engineering: A structural approach 
to improving legal quality’” in A. Macintosh, R. Ellis and T. 
Allen, editors, Applications and Innovations in Intelligent 
Systems XIII, proceedings of AI-2005, Springer, Dec. 2005, 
pp. 3-10, ISBN 978-1-84628-224-9. 
[2] T. M. van Engers and E. Glassée, “Facilitating the legislation 
process using a shared conceptual model,” in IEEE Intelligent 
Systems, 2001 vol.16  Issue No.01, pp. 50-58, ISSN: 1541-
1672. 
[3] T. M. van Engers, P. J .M. Kordelaar, J. den Hartog and E. 
Glassée,  “POWER: Programme for an Ontology based 
Working Environment for modeling and use of Regulations 
and legislation,” in Tjoa, Wagner and Al-Zobaidie, editors, 
Proceedings of the 11th workshop on Databases and Expert 
Systems Applications (IEEE), Greenwich London, 2000,, pp. 
327-334, ISBN 0-7695-0680-1. 
[4] T. M. van Engers and P. J. M. Kordelaar, “POWER: 
Programme for an Ontology based Working Environment for 
modeling 
and 
use 
of 
Regulations 
and 
legislation,” 
Proceedings of the ISMICK’99, ISBN 2-913-923-02-X. 
[5] T. M. van Engers and S. Nijssen, 2014, “From Legislation 
towards the Provision of Services - An Approach to Agile 
Implementation of Legislation,” in A. Kő and E. Francesconi, 
editors, proceedings of the Third International Conference on 
Electronic Government and the Information Systems 
Perspective  (EGOVIS 2014), Springer, München, Germany, 
Sep. 2014 pp. 163-172, ISBN: 978-3-319-10177-4, e-ISBN: 
978-3-319-10178-1. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[6] T. M. van Engers and S. Nijssen, “Connecting People: 
Semantic-Conceptual Modeling for Laws and Regulations,”  
in M. Janssen, H. J. Scholl, M. A. Wimmer, F. Bannister , 
editors, Electronic Government, proceedings 13th IFIP WG 
8.5 International Conference, EGOV 2014, Springer, Dublin, 
Ireland, Sep. 2014, pp. 133-146, ISBN: 978-3-662-44425-2, 
e-ISBN: 978-3-662-44426-9. 
[7] T. M. van Engers, R. K. G. Winkels, and P. J. M. Kordelaar, 
“The know and the flow,” in Proceedings of the 5th 
International Symposium on the Management of Industrial 
and Corporate Knowledge, Columbus, Ohio, United States, 
Oct. 2008 
[8] W. N. Hohfeld, “Fundamental Legal Conceptions as applied 
in judicial reasoning,” Yale University Press, 1919. 
[9] G.W. Leibniz, “Dissertation on the Art of Combinations,” 
1666, in Philosophical Papers and Letters, Part I, 1989, pp. 
73-84, ISBN: 978-90-277-0693-5, e-ISBN: 978-94-010-1426-
7. 
[10] E. de Maat and  R. Winkels, “Suggesting Model Fragments 
for Sentences in Dutch Laws,”, Proceedings of Legal 
Ontologies and Artificial Intelligence Techniques, May 2010 
pp. 
19-28 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2013146 2015.01.10 
[11] E. de Maat, “Making sense of legal texts,”  PhD-thesis, Sep. 
2012, ISBN 978 90 5335. 
[12] E. de Maat and T. M. van Engers. “Mission impossible?: 
Automated norm analysis of legal texts,” in D. Bourcier, 
editor, Jurix 2003: The Sixteenth Annual Conference, Legal 
Knowledge and Information Systems, Amsterdam, IOS Press, 
Dec. 2003, pp. 143-144, ISBN: 978-1586033989. 
[13] M. Sergot, F. Sadri, R. Kowalski, F. Kriwaczek, P. Hammond 
and T. Cory, “The British Nationality Act as a Logic 
Program,” in Communications of the ACM, Vol. 29, No. 5, 
May 1986, pp. 370–386, doi: 10.1145/5689.5920. 
[14] M. Sergot, “Representing legislation as logic programs,” 
Machine intelligence 11, Oxford University Press, Inc., New 
York, NY, 1988, pp. 209-260, ISBN: 0-19-853718-2. 
[15] G. Sileno, A. Boer and T. M. van Engers, 2014, “Legal 
Knowledge 
Conveyed 
by 
Narratives: 
Towards 
a 
Representational Model,” in M. A. Finlayson, J. C. Meister 
and E. G. Bruneau, editors, 2014 Workshop on Computational 
Models of Narrative (CMN) Jul. 2014: pp. 182-191, doi: 
10.4230/OASIcs.CMN.2014.182. 
[16] G. Sileno, A. Boer and T. M. van Engers, “On the 
Interactional Meaning of Fundamental Legal Concepts,” in 
Legal knowledge and information systems: JURIX 2014: the 
twenty-seventh annual conference Vol. 271. Frontiers in 
artificial intelligence and applications, pp. 39-48. IOS Press, 
doi: 10.3233/978-1-61499-468-8-39. 
[17] J. Wilkins, “An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a 
Philosophical Language,” Gellibrand, 1668. 
 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

