MLPM: A Multi-Layered Process Model Toward Complete Descriptions
of People’s Behaviors
Zhang Zuo,
Hung-Hsuan Huang,
Kyoji Kawagoe
Graduate School of Information Science and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University
Kusatsu, Shiga JAPAN
e-mail: {gr0186rk@ed, huang@fc, kawagoe@is}.ritsumei.ac.jp
Abstract—Despite the rapid progress in the development of
sensor technologies, as well as of information management, no
technology exists for recording all the activities of people in the
many varieties of human societies. In this paper, we propose
a novel process meta model for describing people’s activities
that uses a Multi-Layered Process description Model, MLPM.
The meta model allows models for various kinds of human
social activities, such as sport plays, medical treatment, and
agent communications, to be easily described. The signiﬁcance
of this model is that it can be used not only for searching a
subpart of people’s activities given a process query, but also
for fostering a young novice by presenting to him/her behavior
patterns, differentiating between those of the expert and the
novice. The meta model can also be used for detecting outliers in
process databases. In this paper, we describe the components and
structures of the MLPM. It is mentioned that the MLPM is a
model suitable toward complete descriptions of people’s behaviors
by comparing it with other methods.
Keywords—process; behavior; action, meta model; searching.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recently, the use of various kinds of sensor devices, such
as motion and location sensors, has become widespread. As a
result of this rapid popularization, huge amounts of their mon-
itored data have been obtained and analyzed for application-
oriented purposes. For example, human motions can be easily
detected by using motion sensor devices such as Microsoft
Kinect [1] and Leap Motion [2]. Human trajectories can be
traced by using position sensing devices, such as GPS and
OptiTrack [3]. These advanced sensor devices are currently
used primary for analyzing object movements, as well as for
visualizing them.
Despite the fact that many data related to human activities,
recorded by the sensors, the data exist, they cannot be managed
for the purpose of processing in a uniﬁed way. In particular,
motion data are stored in a proprietary format and no common
formats have yet been proposed. The raw location data for
human activities basically comprises a combination of human
motions and positions. There are some common formats for
representing human motions and positions, such as H-Anim
[4] and BVH (BioVision Hierarchical data) [5]. However, these
formats are used only for storage and exchange of the data,
not for representations of all human activities.
In the area of business process management, some process
description models exist, such as BPMN (Business Process
Modeling Notation) [6], XPDL (XML Process Deﬁnition Lan-
guage) [7], and BPDM (Business Process Deﬁnition Meta-
model) [8]. Although these models are used for business
management representation and business system development,
their main purpose is not to represent people’s behaviors,
and thus, representations of human motions and positions are
outside their scope.
In this paper, we propose a new and novel process meta
model for describing a model for people’s behaviors that uses a
Multi-Layered Process description Model, MLPM. The model
allows various kinds of human social activities, such as sport
game plays, medical treatment, and agent communications, to
be easily described.
For example, suppose that a skilled doctor is fostering junior
doctors in order to impart to them better skills for the task of
giving intravenous or subcutaneous injections. It is difﬁcult
for them to understand and to perform the task without any
practical experience of it. Even if they have some experience
of giving the injections, appropriate real-time comments from
experienced doctors are very necessary and helpful. However,
when they use a subcutaneous-injection simulator, such useful
comments are not available to them. There is thus no opportu-
nity to improve their skills in such situations. When our model
can be applied to provide this medical treatment education, a
system based on our process model will be able to support
young doctors by presenting to them the differences between
the activity as executed by a skilled doctor and by a junior
doctor, with speciﬁc details. This is because all the activities
in the injection process can completely be represented by our
proposed model, and the difference can be detected by real-
time checking of the distance between two processes.
Our proposed model is composed of seven fundamental
components: Process, Task, Entity, Activity, Action, Motion,
and Expression. These components are linked to many types
of associations. The main characteristics of MLPM are:
•
All processes related to people’s behaviors can be mod-
eled by using our MLPM. A process can be represented
by a hierarchical structure, as well as by linked data
among components.
•
MLPM can give researchers in many ﬁelds a way of
describing behaviors in a common representation format.
•
Many functions and tools can be incorporated in the
basic structure of MLPM. Some examples of such func-
tions are process similarity searching, process outliers
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

detection, and process classiﬁcation.
The contribution of this paper is that the proposed MLPM
is the ﬁrst representation meta model for describing overall
people’s behaviors comprehensively. Throughout this paper,
it is assumed that the representation model is a model for
describing people’s behaviors that occurred in the past. The
prediction of a future behavior from past behaviors is beyond
the scope of this paper. The term “behavior” is used to deﬁne
all the aspects of people’s activities, including tasks, motions,
positions, and interactions, because the term is deﬁned in [10]
as “behaviors refer to those activities that represent actions,
operations or events as well as activity sequences conducted
by human beings under a certain context and environment.”
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Some
previous works related to our paper are described in Section
II. Next, in Section III, a detailed description of our model,
MLPM, including examples and formal speciﬁcations, is pre-
sented. Some expected applications and discussions are then
given in Section IV, followed by some concluding remarks in
Section V.
II.
RELATED WORK
We describe the related work from three viewpoints: busi-
ness process models, process mining, and multi-agent models.
Many studies on the business process model have been
reported [7], [8], [9], [11], [12], [13], [14]. Three innovative
business process models were proposed and standardized:
Business Process Deﬁnition MetaModel (BPDM) [8], Business
Process Modeling Notation (BPMN) [6], and XML Process
Deﬁnition Language (XPDL) [7]. These proposed models were
intended to represent all the processes performed in an enter-
prise. For example, the BPDM model is composed primary
of Common behavior model, Activity model, and Interaction
protocol model. The common behavior model is composed of
two detailed models: Behavior model and Interactive behavior
model. These models allow many types of processes used in a
speciﬁc enterprise application ﬁeld to be deﬁned. In addition
to these models, many similar models have been proposed.
Typical examples of such models are explained in survey
papers [9], [12]. Two examples are Object-Oriented Business
Process Model [11] and ADONIS BPMS model [15]. Although
all the business process models can be used for process
representations in an enterprise, they can never be employed
for representing people’s behaviors including their motions and
moving trajectories. The mining of business processes also has
been studied recently [13], [14].
Process mining is a new area in the data mining research
ﬁeld. Many mining methods for acquiring useful and effective
rules in terms of processes have been proposed [16], [17],
[18], [19], [20]. The deﬁnition of the objective of the process
mining is to discover, monitor, and improve real processes by
extracting knowledge from the event logs readily available in
today’s (information) systems [16]. However, this deﬁnition is
not appropriate in the case of descriptions of all aspects of
people’s behaviors. It is also difﬁcult to perform mining from
a large collections of logs of people’s motions, trajectories,
and actions, because of issues related to similarity deﬁnition,
dimensionality reduction, and data cleansing.
Lastly, the multi-agent model is a model for simulating
human behaviors by using virtual agents or humanized robots.
Many studies on the multi-agent model have been proposed
[21], [22], [23], [24]. The model usually includes the agents’
motions as well as interactions with other agents or with
humans. Examples of multi-agent models are AALAADIN
[21], Swarms [23], and IPC/Q [24]. The common concepts
applied in the models are based on the object-orientation
concept and the procedural process description. This category
of the behavior model has disadvantages in that in general
it is difﬁcult to archive all the process data, although a
process can be described using the procedures provided by the
model. Therefore, it cannot be used for representing people’s
behaviors comprehensively for the purpose of archiving.
In addition to the above related work, it should be noted
that a behavior model has recently been proposed [10], [25].
The proposed behavior model is very general and can be im-
plemented for many applications that require behavior mining.
However, it cannot be used for archiving an overall process,
to the best of our knowledge.
Recently, Neumuth et al. proposed a process model for
surgery [26]. Although the basic idea seems similar to that
of our proposed model, their model is basically a hierarchical
structure built from the descriptive format viewpoint, using
natural language sentences, ontological description, formal
mathematical description, and actual description. In contrast,
our model is a layered structure that uses the abstract-to-
concrete viewpoint.
III.
MLPM (MULTI-LAYERED PROCESS DESCRIPTION
MODEL)
A. Requirements
Before describing the MLPM proposed in this paper, we
describe some requirements for process representation that we
need to specify. The process model should meet the following
requirements to specify the overall process of people’s behav-
iors.
•
People’s behaviors should be described in various as-
pects, because they are recognized from an abstract view
as well as from a concrete view.
•
Usually, a business is run or a task is performed by a
team of people who uses various tools. Therefore, their
interactions should be represented by the process model.
•
In terms of the actual people’s behavior, the motions
of each person can be captured using various kinds of
equipment, such as cameras and GPS sensors. Therefore,
the model should be able to use the data generated by
these devices.
B. Basic concepts
We describe the basic concepts of our MLPM for process
representation. We introduce the multi-layered structure to
represent the overall process, which contains various kinds
of descriptive aspects. Our proposed model is composed of
three layers to meet the requirements mentioned above: the
process/task layer, activity layer, and motion layer.
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

• 
• 
Figure 1. The layered structure.
•
In the process/task layer, a sequence of tasks conducted
in a process and their properties can be described. The
business process model [8] or the work ﬂow process
model [7] can be introduced in this layer to describe the
sequences and task properties.
•
In the activity layer, activities representing each task can
be described. In this layer, a task is decomposed into
activities and represented by relationships with entities,
such as individuals and instruments. The properties of
the activity and the entity are also described here.
•
In the action layer, an activity is decomposed into a
sequence of actions. An action is further decomposed
into a set of motions, which constitute the basic compo-
nent corresponding to a human being’s actual movement.
Actual motions can also be described using various
forms of expression, such as video and trajectories. Con-
current motions can be represented by multiple actions
to which several such expressions are attached. Clearly,
actions, motions, and expressions all have properties that
describe them.
Figure 1 shows an outline of the layered structure of our
MLPM.
C. Fundamental components
In our MLPM, seven fundamental components are used for
describing an overall process. A brief explanation of these
components follows.
1)
The process/task layer
a)
Process: A process is an abstract unit of functions
in the speciﬁc application ﬁeld. People’s behavior
are ﬁrst deﬁned as a set of processes. Examples
of a process are ordering-by-customer, injecting-
drug, and ballroom-tango-dancing. The process
deﬁnition in BPDM [8] or XPDL [7] can be used
to describe the process.
b)
Task: A task is also an abstract unit of the sub-
functions that compose a process. Each process is
represented by a sequence of tasks as in BPDM
or XPDL, although the name of the task is either
the sub-process or the activity, representatively.
The task can be deﬁned using such a standard
speciﬁcation.
2)
The activity layer
a)
Entity: An entity is an abstract class of objects,
which can be modeled using MLPM. Entities
are used to perform a process/task. They are
divided into either user or instrument classes.
Other classes can be introduced according to
the speciﬁc application. The user classes are
related to human groups, such as doctors and
patients. The instrument classes are related to
the machines, goods, or tools that support users’
activities.
b)
Activity: An activity is a relationship between
an entity and a task that is used to represent a
task execution. It is possible to represent multiple
activities for an entity executing one speciﬁc
task. Moreover, there are multiple entities for
one speciﬁc activity. One example is that a nurse
inserts a syringe into a patient’s vein in a blood
collection task. In this example, Nurse, Injector,
and Patient are described as entities, and the
injection activity is an activity, which is followed
by the activity of removing the inserted syringe.
3)
The action layer
a)
Action: An action is an abstract movement re-
lated to one entity. One entity is related to a
sequence of actions used to perform an activity
associated with other entities.
b)
Motion: A motion is an actual entity’s movement
used to represent a speciﬁc action. The motion
data are aggregated and integrated from various
kinds of motion expressions.
c)
Expression: An expression is a view of one
motion. The motion data can be extracted from
various devices. Examples of these expressions
include pictures, videos, voices, trajectories, and
textual annotations.
In addition to these fundamental components, the following
types of associations are introduced for each layer in our
MLPM.
1)
Temporal associations: A sequence is a kind of tem-
poral association. In addition, there are other types
of temporal associations between components such as
those between activities and between motions. Other
temporal associations can be introduced from concepts
of temporal relations [27]. Examples include “done at
the time” “after” “before” and “during.”
2)
Spatial associations: A spatial association is an associ-
ation between components in terms of their locations.
When two entities are located in certain region together,
there is a type of spatial associations between them
called “located together.” Other types of spatial asso-
ciation can be deﬁned and to be used to describe the
overall process.
3)
Link associations: There are other types of association
in addition to spatial or temporal associations between
components. These types of association are called link
associations in our MLPM. For example, a nurse at-
taches a patient name label to a blood collection vessel
after taking blood. There is a type of link association
called “attaching” between the “Nurse,” “Blood collec-
tion vessel,” and ”Patient name label” entities.
An example of MLPM representation for medical treatment
process modeling is shown in Figure 2. In this Figure 2,
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Figure 2. MLPM structure example.
not all the nodes are illustrated because of space limitations.
Therefore, some associations with no destination nodes appear.
D. MPLM speciﬁcations
Basically and intuitively, an actual model, described using
MLPM, is represented as a directed graph, which is composed
of nodes and links. Both a node and a link have a type, which
is the special attribute for identifying its MLPM component.
The formal speciﬁcations of the fundamental components in
MLPM are described here.
First, the fundamental component FC is deﬁned, which is
the set of fundamental component classes FCi, as FC =
{FCi}. When instances of the fundamental components FC
are denoted by {FI}, the set of fundamental component
instances are described as FI = {FIj}. As the fundamental
components FC are composed of seven actual fundamental
components- Process P = {Pj}, Task T = {Tj}, Entity
E = {Ej}, Activity AV = {AVj}, Action AT = {ATj},
Motion M = {Mj} and Expression E = {Ej}, a fun-
damental component class FCi is a class of one of these
component classes. In addition, a fundamental component
instance set FIj is the set of instances of one of these classes:
P, T, E, AV, AT, M, and E. Moreover, the entity class set E
is decomposed into of Human Entity HE and Artiﬁcial Entity
AE. That is, E = HE ∪ AE where HE ∩ AE ̸= ∅.
In order to formalize the relationship between a class and
its instance, we deﬁne it as follows. For each class Pj in P,
the instance set is
PIj = {PIj,k|PIj,k ∈ FI, PIj,k is an instance of Pj}
In the same way as PIj, the instance set in the other compo-
nents can be deﬁned. For each class FCi, in FC, the class
has multiple attributes, represented by {ACk}, where ACk
denotes the domain of an attribute of FCi. By using these
{ACk}, we can deﬁne the set of the instances of FCi as
FCi ⊂ AC1 × . . . × ACpi.
Second, because the structure of MLPM is basically hierar-
chical, it is necessary to introduce the deﬁnition of the hierar-
chical relationships between multiple fundamental component
classes. The hierarchical relationship HR is deﬁned as the set
of the hierarchical relationship classes: HR = {HCj}. A hier-
archical relationship class HCj has the relationship instances
HIj, where HIj ⊂ C1 ×. . .×Cphj ×AH1, × . . .×AHqhj. In
this deﬁnition, Ck is a set of instances belonging to one of the
classses of FC, and AHk is the domain of an attribute of HCj.
An attribute is a property of the hierarchical relationship and its
value changes depending on the HCj instance. For example,
if C1 is a set of instances belonging to one process class Pk,
then C1 = PIk, where PIk is the set of Pk instances.
Finally, there are three types of associations: Temporal, Spa-
tial, and Link. Therefore, we introduce the following deﬁnition
of these associations. A link association LAk is described as
LAj ⊂ Labellink × C1 × . . . × Cplj × AL1, × . . . × ALqlj,
where Labellink is the set of label names for identifying the
type of link associations and ALk is the domain of an attribute
of LAj. Similarly, a temporal association TAk is described
TAj ⊂ Labelt ×C1 ×. . .×Cptj ×AT1, × . . .×ATqtj, where
Label is the set of label names for identifying the type of link
associations and ATk is the domain of an attribute of TAj.
The formalization of the spatial associations is deﬁned in a
similar way.
The fundamental components described above are only a
part of the components in MLPM. There are other components,
necessary for describing the overall processes using MLPM:
Event, Role, and Environment. These additional components
are all related to other types of relationship. The event is
used to represent a thing that occurs at a certain time hav-
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

TABLE I. MODEL COMPARISON RESULTS.
Main Components
Target
Similarity.
Applications
Deﬁnition
MLPM
- Process and Action Models
- Medical
- (TBD)
- Motion model incl.
process
movements & expressions
- Sports
- Temporal/Spatial assoc.
BPDM [8]
- Business Process Model
- Business
- None
- Business Semantics
- Rules and Policies
Behavior
- Abstract Behavior Model
- Business
- Behavior
model [10]
- Actor/Operation/Coupling
- Data analysis
Feature
- Temporal/Inferential/Party
Matrix-based
- Behavior Aggregator
similarity
- Risk and Impact
Process
- Natural Lang. level
- Surgical .
- Combination of
model [26]
- Conceptual levels
process
ﬁve similarity
- Formal level
deﬁnitions
- Implementation level
ing relationships with other components, the role is deﬁned
as the set of relationships among component instances, and
the environment can be represented as the space containing
many component instances. These components contain their
attributes, as do the fundamental components.
Evaluations of the speciﬁcations of MLPM are necessary
and are currently in progress in a medical treatment application
ﬁeld. We are also developing a detailed design of all the
MLPM speciﬁcations, for which we are considering the related
standards.
IV.
DISCUSSIONS
A. Comparison with other models
Although it is difﬁcult to compare our MLPM with other re-
lated models, the preliminary comparison results are shown in
Table I. In Table I, three features for each model are described:
the main components, target applications, and similarity def-
inition. The last feature is important for extracting processes,
activities, or motions that are similar to given process data
from a large collection of process data. In this table, it can
be seen that the point of the MLPM is an integration of the
existing process and motion models. However, it is important
to deﬁne the similarity function, which will be done in future
studies.
B. Functions to be realized based on MLPM
There are many functions that can be realized based on
MLPM. In particular, the followings are important and basic
functions, which we are developing.
•
Process database: In order to realize the proposed
MLPM, we need to develop a method to manage the
detailed speciﬁcations of our process model, in order
to realize an automatic process construction method by
developing data aggregation and abstraction methods.
•
Process classiﬁcation: When the process database has
been generated, we need to develop a method for com-
paring two processes and then a method for classifying
processes for process management.
•
Process matching and similarity search: It is important
to develop a matching or search function of similar
processes for improving the current process management
or for supporting a user’s process management.
•
Process mining: Process association rules or process
correlations need to be extracted from an MLPM-based
process database.
C. MPLM limitations
Currently, the following types of process data cannot be
represented using MLPM: 1) continuous motions and tra-
jectories, and 2) ontological relationships among component
instances. After specifying MLPM in detail and developing
several applications, the model will be extended to nullify these
limitations.
D. Applications
As mentioned in the previous section, suppose that an
junior doctor has to learn how to do an intravenous injection.
Although the doctor possesses useful how-to books for self-
study of the intravenous injection process, it is impossible to
practice the injection on a medical volunteer without a skilled
doctor being present. The most difﬁcult problem is how to
impart the doctor the know-how and the difference between
his/her execution of the injection process and that of skilled
doctor, by dynamically checking the injection process. If it
were possible to realize such support for a junior doctor, this
would draw a better and more natural way to practice a process
than looking at a how-to-book.
Moreover, it is also impossible in general to impart the
know-how of skilled doctors to junior doctors, because it tends
to be difﬁcult to describe the know-how precisely. If the know-
how can be extracted by comparing the junior doctor’s and
skilled doctor’s processes and by generating a process rule
from many skilled doctors’ processes, the know-how can be
expressed and thus transferred to junior doctors.
Finally, if the know-how can be extracted, described, and
visualized based on a process model and its database, skilled
doctors can identify their own skills and know-hows and offer
them to aid the development of the best process. Currently,
such doctors watch their past videos many times in order to
develop the best process, to improve the current process or
to solve a problem related to the current process. A process
model-based technique, such as our MLPM, can help them to
do this more effectively.
Another application of our MLPM, in addition to that for the
medical ﬁeld, is a process model for team sports. A team sport
is one that involves people playing together to accomplish a
speciﬁed goal. Although there are many team sports in the
world, we consider ballroom dancing, a sport that involves
pairs, as an example. In a ballroom dancing competition,
the competitors are judged according to several factors using
posture, timing, togetherness, and musicality. After archiving
and describing the entire process of a ballroom dance using
our MLPM, the dancers can check their process from the
abstract to the concrete level by examining the results of the
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

differentiating function of a MLPM-based system or mining
the processes using a method based on the MLPM.
The model can also be applied to improve worker’s skills.
After skilled worker’s movements have been captured and
the captured data have been annotated and aggregated, the
worker’s skill processes can be archived using our model.
Then, when a novice worker is learning how to do a job, the
archived processes can be used effectively by using functions
based on the model. That is, the model enables the workers
to improve their skills by checking the differences between a
skilled worker’s process and their own process. The model can
also produce a set of rules to a worker learn the skills more
easily. Clearly, many studies on the model reﬁnement, model
application experience, and MLPM-based mining method de-
velopment are still necessary.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed a meta model for representing the
overall processes from the higher abstract level to the lower
actual motion level. The point of the meta model is to introduce
a multi-layered process meta model to represent various kinds
of representations of processes in an integrated way. We
described the basic concept and fundamental components for
developing the process meta model.
The proposed MLPM requires further work. In particular, it
is necessary to develop 1) detailed speciﬁcations of MLPM,
2) methods for matching, searching, and classifying processes
using our MLPM, and 3) a new method of process mining
from MLPM-based process databases. We also plan to develop
a system based on the proposed MLPM after the design of the
architecture has been completed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by MEXT-Supported
Program for the Strategic Research Foundation at Private
Universities, 2013-2017. We also thank the reviewers for
providing valuable comments and suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1]
Kinect
for
Windows,
http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/
kinectforwindows/ , Microsoft, 2010 [retrieved: Jan. 7, 2014].
[2]
The
Leap
Motion
Controller,
https://www.leapmotion.com/,
Leap
Motion, Inc., 2013 [retrieved: Jan. 7, 2014].
[3]
OptiTrack, http://www.naturalpoint.com/optitrack/ , NaturalPoint, Inc.,
2013 [retrieved: Jan. 7, 2014].
[4]
H-anim: Speciﬁcation for a Standard Humanoid, http://h-anim.org/ ,
Humanoid Animation Working Group, 2000 [retrieved: Jan. 7, 2014].
[5]
M.
Meredith
and
S.
Maddock,
“Motion
capture
ﬁle
formats
explained,”
http://www.dcs.shef.ac.uk/intranet/research/public/resmes/
CS0111.pdf, 2001, [retrieved: Dec. 22, 2013].
[6]
Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN), FTF Beta 1 for
Ver. 2.0, Object Management Group OMG Speciﬁcations, http:
//www.omg.org/cgi-bin/doc?dtc/09-08-14.pdf, Sept. 2009 [retrieved:
Jan. 7, 2014].
[7]
Workﬂow
Management
Coalition
Workﬂow
Standard
Process
Deﬁnition
Interface-
XML
Process
Deﬁnition
Language,
The
Workﬂow Management Coalition The Workﬂow Management Coalition
Speciﬁcation WFMC-TC-1025, Ver.2.2, http://www.xpdl.org/standards/
xpdl-2.2/XPDL2.2(2012-08-30).pdf, Aug. 2012 [retrieved: Dec. 22,
2013].
[8]
Business
Process
Deﬁnition
MetaModel
(BPDM),
Ver.
1.0,
Object
Management
Group
OMG
Speciﬁca-
tions,
http://www.omg.org/spec/BPDM/1.0/volume1/PDF/andhttp://
www.omg.org/spec/BPDM/1.0/volume2/PDF/, Nov. 2008 [retrieved:
Dec. 22, 2013].
[9]
W. M. P. van der Aalst, A. H. M. ter Hofstede, and M. Weske,
“Business process management: A survey,” in BPM 2003, LNCS 2678,
W. M. P. van der Aalst et al., Ed., 2003, pp. 1–12.
[10]
L. Cao, “Behavior informatics and analytics: Let behavior talk,” Proc.
IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops, 2008, pp.
87–96.
[11]
P. Kueng, P. Bichler, P. Kawalek, and M. Schreﬂ, “How to compose an
object-oriented business process model?” Proc. IFIP Method Engineer-
ing, 1996, pp. 94–110.
[12]
R. S. Aguilar-Saven, “Business process modelling: Review and frame-
work,” International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 90, no. 2,
2004, pp. 129–149.
[13]
W. M. P. van der Aalst, H. A. Reijers, A. J. M. M. Weijters, B. F. van
Dongen, and A. K. A. de Medeiros et al, “Business process mining:
An industrial application,” Information Systems, vol. 32, no. 5, 2007
pp. 713–732.
[14]
A. l. Rebugea and D. R. Ferreirab, “Business process analysis in
healthcare environments: a methodology based on process mining,”
Information Systems, vol. 37, no. 2, 2012, pp. 99–116.
[15]
D. Karagiannis, S. Junginger, and R. Strobl, “Introduction to business
process management systems concepts,” Business Process Modelling,
1996, pp. .81–106.
[16]
R. S. Mans, M. H. Schonenberg, M. Song, W. M. P. van der Aalst,
and P. J. M. Bakker, “Application of process mining in healthcare: A
case study in a dutch hospital,” Biomedical Engineering Systems and
Technologies, Communications in Computer and Information Science,
vol. 25, 2009, pp. 425–438.
[17]
M. Castellanos, F. Casati, and U. Dayal, “A probabilistic-based approach
to process model discovery,” Proc. IEEE ICDE Workshop, 2011, pp.
232–237.
[18]
L. Wen, J. Wang, W. M. P. van der Aalst, B. Huang, and J. Sun, “A
novel approach for process mining based on event types,” J. Intell. Inf.
Syst., vol. 32, no. 2, 2009, pp. 163–190.
[19]
W. van der Aalst, A. Adriansyah, A. K. A. de Medeiros, F. Arcieri, and
T. B. et al., “Process mining manifesto,” Proc. BPM 2011 Workshops,
Part I, LNBIP 99, Springer, 2012, pp. 169–194.
[20]
W. M. P. van der Aalst, M. Pesic, and M. Song, “Beyond process
mining: From the past to present and future,” Proc. CAiSE 2010, LNCS
6051, Springer, 2010, pp. 38–52.
[21]
J. Ferber and O. Gutknecht, “A meta-model for the analysis and design
of organizations in multi-agent systems,” Multi Agent Systems, 1998,
pp. 128–135.
[22]
J. Dijkstra and H. Timmermans, “Towards a multi-agent model for
visualizing simulated user behavior to support the assessment of design
performance,” Proc. ACADIA ’99, Automation in Construction, vol. 11,
no. 2, Elsevier, 1999, pp. 135–145.
[23]
N. Minar, R. Burkhart, C. Langton, and M. Askenazi, “The swarm
simulation system: A toolkit for building multi-agent simulations,”
Santa Fe: Santa Fe Institute, 1996.
[24]
“Scenario description for multi-agent simulation,” Proc. AAMAS03,
2003, pp. 369–376.
[25]
E. L. Cao and P. S. Yu, Eds., Behavior Computing: Modeling, Analysis,
Mining and Decision, Springer, 2012.
[26]
D. Neumuth, F. Loebe, H. Herrec, and T. Neumuth, “Modeling surgical
processes: A four-level translational approach,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence in
Medicine, vol. 2011, no. 51, 2011, pp. 147–161.
[27]
J. F. Allen and G. Ferguson, “Actions and events in interval temporal
logic,” Journal of logic and computation, vol. 4, no. 5, 1994, pp. 531–
579.
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

