Analyzing Model Element Labels of Business Process Model Examples Provided on
the Web
Christian Kop
University of Klagenfurt
Klagenfurt, Austria
e-mail: christian.kop@aau.at
Abstract—
Business
process
models
are
important
for
Information Systems and the digitalization of the workplace.
The Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) is the de-
facto standard in this domain. Therefore, creating BPMN
business
process
models that
are
understandable
to
all
stakeholders is an important task. The Web provides many
business process model examples. These examples are provided
by enterprises and consultants who offer technical solutions
(i.e., business process modeling tools) or consulting services.
Since such models are provided on the Web as introductory
learning examples, such examples can also influence novice
business process modelers. Therefore, it is worth to examine if
such examples have the same quality standards as suggested in
the literature. Related to the area of business process modeling,
this paper, therefore, focuses on the analysis of such BPMN
examples. Particularly, it focuses on the labels of model
elements since these labels represent the relationship between
the process model and a certain domain.
Keywords-Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN);
Business Process Modeling; Quality of Business Process Models;
Labels of Model Elements.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A good analysis and documentation of business processes
is necessary in order to understand the internal behavior of
an enterprise and to implement process automation well. The
Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) is the de-
facto business process modeling language standard for
documenting processes (for the model elements of BPMN,
see e.g., the BPMN poster on the Web [16]). It is intended
for both high level organizational processes and lower level
processes that can be executed by a workflow engine.
For good business process documentation, which is
understandable by all stakeholders, skills in business process
modeling with BPMN are very relevant. Today, these skills
cannot only be obtained by reading books about BPMN or
visiting BPMN courses. Instead, it is often much easier and
cheaper to click through the Web, looking and reading the
diagrams, as well as the enclosed explanations, on a Web
site. Thus, Web examples can be taken as surrogates for
examples in professional literature (e.g., specialist books).
Actually, the BPMN and Process Management (BPM)
community (e.g., tool providers and consultants) also have
the aim to present BPMN examples on the Web to give
either an introduction of the tool features for BPMN
modeling or to show modelers how these diagrams look like
and how they should be modelled. Hence, a look at such
Web examples and their quality for being a standard for
novice process modelers can be useful.
There are different aspects of how modeling quality can
be defined (e.g., syntactical correctness; adequate drawing of
models; adequate color and shape of model elements;
adequate labels of model elements, etc.). This work focuses
on the labels of model elements. Labels on model elements
(e.g., “send application”) as a label example of a BPMN
Activity are important since they relate the model to the
observed reality. They represent the semantic bearing parts
of a domain giving the model elements and thus the whole
BPMN model a certain meaning in a specific domain.
Therefore, if the labels are not well chosen, a model can be
more confusing than understandable and this can lead to a
wrong interpretation of models. In the literature, which deals
with
the
quality
of
model
element
labels,
also
recommendations are given how certain model elements
should be labelled.
The goals of this work, therefore, are to:

Check
if
the
introductory
learning
examples
provided on the Web by BPMN experts (e.g.,
enterprises that offer BPMN tools and consultants
offering consulting services) follow the label quality
guidelines mentioned in literature.

Examine if in these examples, the labels are at least
well chosen. That means that, even if the labels do
not exactly match the guidelines, nevertheless, they
make sense in a specific context.
In order to answer this, the analysis of the examples on the
Web has been done on a sample extracted from the Web.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, an
overview of related work is given and labeling styles
together with literature recommendations of good labeling
styles are presented. Section 3 describes the preparation of
the sample of Web examples for this work. Section 4 focuses
on the labels of model elements for business process models
provided on the Web. It discusses which kinds of labels are
used and compares these with literature suggestions. The
paper is summarized in Section 5.
II.
RELATED WORK
All aspects of the quality of process models are in the
focus of the research community. Issues of deficiencies in
BPMN are stated in [14] and [15]. In [3], the author of the
book describes how good modeling styles of BPMN should
look like. A literature survey about business process
modeling quality is given in [5]. Seven guidelines for process
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-765-8
eKNOW 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

modeling are proposed and verified with user studies in [6].
Some researchers have thought about automating the
labeling
process
of
business
process
modeling
and
aggregation of process models to support the comprehension
of such process models [7] [8]. It was even analyzed how the
style, color and arrangement of label parts on a model
element improves readability [9] [10].
A.
Related Work with respect to Labels of Model
Elements
More detailed work on labels of BPMN model elements
itself was done in [11] - [13]. These research works are based
on data sets of process models from industry. Good labeling
styles of Activities, Events and Gateways for three different
natural languages were proposed and recommended in [11].
There, violations of these labeling styles are described.
Activities subsume Sub Processes, Event Sub Processes,
Transactions, Tasks and Call Activities. In all cases, the tasks
of a person or a system, namely, the working step within a
process, are described. For the labels of Activities, the
following styles were found in this literature:

Verb Object Style: A label that starts with a verb
expressing the activity followed by an object, on
which
this
activity
is
executed
(e.g.,
“create
document”).

Action Noun Style: This style has three sub styles: a)
A label that has either a nominalized verb only or a
compound noun consisting of a verb as the head of
this compound noun (e.g., “creation”, “document
creation”). b) The Noun can also be a noun phrase
with the preposition “of” in between (e.g., “creation
of document”). c) Finally, the Action Noun Style can
also start with a gerund followed by a noun (e.g.,
“creating document”).

The style called “Descriptive” is a style consisting
of a subject, a verb in 3rd person singular and an
object (e.g., “author writes book”).
Beside this, there are also labels that do not follow a
good style at all. These are labels with nouns only and no
verbs at all (e.g., “error”). According to literature [12], the
Verb Object Style is the most recommended style that should
be used for modeling Activities.
With Gateways, a work flow can be divided into several
paths, but different paths can also be merged. Most
recommended Gateway labeling styles in literature have in
common that they should end with a question mark (“?”).
Thus, the literature assumes that these kinds of styles are
mainly used for XOR and OR Gateways since in these
Gateways a decision is made, which can be expressed as a
question. On contrary, an AND (parallel) Gateway does not
need such a label since no decision is made. Such questions
in Gateway labels can be expressed in one of the following
styles:

Question with Noun and Verb in Past Participle
(e.g., “document created?”)

Infinitive verb question (e.g., “approve contract?”)

Object with adjective question: A phrase consisting
of an object followed by an adjective or an auxiliary
and an adjective (e.g., “parts available?” or “parts
are available?”)

Equation question: A phrase consisting of an object
followed by a logical operator and a value (e.g.,
“amount is greater than $ 200”).
Even here, there are labels, which are treated as bad labels.
As a counter example for good quality, a noun only (e.g.,
“result?”) is treated, since from this kind of label it is not
possible to derive a clear decision. For Gateways, the most
recommended label style is: Question with Noun and Verb in
Past Participle [12].
Finally, events that can occur within a process are
modelled with the model element Event.
Labeling styles for Events can be classified as followed:

Verb
in
Past
Participle
Style:
This
can
be
characterized by an object followed by a verb in
past participle or followed by a (modal) auxiliary
and a verb in past participle (e.g.,
“document
created”, “document has been created”, “document
is created”, “document must be created”)

Predicative Adjective Style: Here, a noun together
with a predicative adjective is used to label an Event
(e.g., “document correct” or “document is correct”).

Categorization Style: Two nouns are related with a
verb (mainly the verb “is”) in order to express that
the term specified with the first noun can be
categorized according to the term expressed with
the second noun (e.g., “person is author”).
Modelers also use labels that better should not be used
for Events at all, since they do not provide sufficient
information to a reader. For instance, they use a noun only
(e.g., “inquiry”). The Verb in Past Participle Style is the one
which is most recommended as a labeling style for Events
[12].
Beside simple labels, it has also been examined in
literature that modelers use complex phrases and sentences
for Activity labels instead of drawing more model elements
with simpler, so called canonical labels. Especially in [13],
these kinds of inconsistent use of labeling, so called non-
canonical patterns, are examined.
Three categories of
complex non-canonical label patterns were detected:

Complex control flow label:
The label of an
Activity consists of a sequence of verbs, each
describing an Activity, which are concatenated with
“or” or “and”. This verb sequence, however,
implicitly expresses a decision (in the case of “or”)
or a parallel respectively a sequential execution of
several Activities (in the case of “and”). It does not
express an atomic working step. Thus, instead of
one
Activity
with
a
complex
label,
several
Activities with simpler labels together with control
flows can also be used. Other complex labels of that
kind are phrases, which end with “as required”, “as /
if
needed”,
as
well
as
sentences
or
phrases
expressing an iteration (e.g., “while …. “, “repeat
until … “, “for each …”).

Extra specification of data, resources and time: In
this category, the label of the model element not
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-765-8
eKNOW 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

only contains the necessary information, but also
additional information that is often given in some
sorts of brackets (e.g., “clear differences (inventory
management)”).
Most
often,
either
this
extra
information should be itself explicitly modelled
with a model element like an Event, Activity or
Gateway or this extra information is useless.

Implicit Action and Decision: Here, the label and
the modelling element do not fit. For instance, the
label of an Activity is expressed in terms of a
pattern that is typically used for an Event (e.g.,
“Order received” instead of “Receive Order”).
In literature, these categories of non-canonical labels are
seen as patterns that can confuse the reader of a model.
B.
Focus of this Work with respect to Related Work
In this work, the labels of the model elements are also
examined. The focus is on model elements of process
diagrams. An explanation of process diagrams can be found
at [4]. In addition to previous work in the related literature,
the main emphasis of this work can be characterized as
follows. Instead of working with data sets from industry, the
aim of this paper is to look for BPMN examples on the Web.
Existing results of labeling guidelines in literature are taken
as a reference. With this as a basis, the Web examples are
examined and compared with the given guidelines.
Furthermore, for analyzing the labels, this work does not
only consider Activities, Gateways and Events as such, but
also explores different types of Activities, Gateways and
Events in detail.
III.
PREPARATION OF THE WORK
In order to check how different enterprises, which sell
BPMN modelling tools, as well as consultants, provide
BPMN diagram examples, the following procedure was
executed to get the sample. In the first step, the search term
“BPMN” was entered into the search field of Google. This
search engine was used as a means to choose the sample. In
order to get diagrams first and not descriptions of BPMN, the
image result list of the search engine was used. Here, it was
expected to get various images of BPMN diagram examples.
Once the list of diagram images were generated by the
search engine, in the second step the list was manually
examined. For each image, it was first of all decided if this
image is really a BPMN diagram example in English
provided at a Web site or if it is not. If it was indeed such a
diagram, then the link to the respective Web site, from which
the search engine listed the image, was collected. For this
purpose, the link was entered into a file in order to generate a
list of Uniform Resource Locator (URL) links. At the end of
this URL collection step, a list of URL links, each containing
at least one image of a BPMN diagram was collected in the
file. In the third step, the file with these links was further
examined. For doing this, the file with the URL link list was
automatically scanned and each link was grouped to a Web
domain.
Afterwards in the fourth step, each link, as well as the
additional link to the more general Web domain, was once
again examined further. From all these sources, images of
BPMN diagram examples were downloaded and collected on
the local file system. The aim of this fourth step was to find
more BPMN images provided at this Web domain. Much
more images were found and collected.
In the fifth step, all these collected images were manually
examined and the individual BPMN model elements together
with their features and labels for each diagram and domain
were transcribed into a database. This data set was then
analyzed according to the aim of this work.
In total, 43 Web domains and the BPMN 2.0 by Example
document of Object Management Group (OMG) [2] were
examined. The BPMN 2.0 by Example document was
included, since this is also an important information resource
about BPMN on the Web. During this collection phase,
images, which were not readable, were filtered out. Images
that are used as BPMN counter examples (i.e., how a BPMN
diagram should not be modeled) were filtered out too, since
the focus is on models that are seen as correct by the
provider. The remaining examples, which in total are 346
diagram images of BPMN model examples were used for
this work. Furthermore, only distinct labels were analyzed.
This should avoid that a certain label pattern appears too
often just because the same label (e.g., “order product”) is
used in many examples.
IV.
LABELS OF MODEL ELEMENTS
In this section, the analyzed distinct labels of Activities,
Events and Gateways specified in process model examples
on
the
Web
are
discussed
with
respect
to
the
recommendations in literature mentioned in Section II. These
model elements are chosen since a) quality guidelines as
references already existed in literature and b) introductory
examples hardly make sense without them. Especially, this
holds for Tasks as a subset of Activity and Events. Gateways
on the other hand have to be used as soon as a process model
does not have only a single sequence, but the specified
process in the process model branches to several paths. Thus,
in most process models, except the most trivial once,
Gateways are important. Furthermore, these labels are
analyzed in detail according to the specific model element,
since
for
different
model
elements
different
labeling
strategies are needed.
A.
Labels of Activities
Activities represent those parts of a process where
somebody or something should act in order to progress the
process. Therefore, an active verb, which is the best word
category for acting, should be used to label these model
elements. In literature, the Verb Object Style is preferred. An
object itself could be a noun (simple ore compound) or a
noun phrase.
In the sample, 944 distinct Task labels were found. The
majority of these distinct Task labels (74.6 %), which were
detected in the diagrams, follow this Verb Object Style,
where the object is a noun and the direct object of the verb
(e.g., “specify vacancy”, “ship item”, “review results”). In
some cases, an article is added (e.g., „select a pizza”). Only
in 2.3 % of all cases, a single verb or a verb together with an
adverb is the only label for a Task (e.g., “publish”, “rate
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-765-8
eKNOW 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

negatively”). 12.9 % of the Task labels extend the suggested
Verb Object Style a little bit. In these labels, the object is a
noun phrase (e.g., “nomination form” in “send nomination
form”). Also, cases were found, where the object is an
indirect object (e.g. “communicate to customer”) or there are
two objects (direct and indirect object) following the verb
(e.g., “deliver books to customer”). In 10.2 % of the Task
labels, the model designers used other label styles for Tasks.
For instance, they used nominalization of a verb (e.g.,
“delivery”), they used full sentences (e.g., “why have you
bought so many sticks of sausage?”), they concatenated
verbs (e.g., “add paperwork and move package to pick area”)
or they used a condition phrase (“check if extra insurance is
necessary”). It seems that model designers also like to
specify many verbs for the label of a Task. To summarize,
the Verb Object Style preferred in literature is also used in
the majority of cases on the Web (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Percentage of Task label styles.
For Sub Processes, the situation is as follows: From the
85 distinct labels of normal Sub Processes, 42.4 % have a
nominalization of the verb (e.g., “ordering”, “creation”) as
their label (i.e., Action Noun Style). In 55.3 % of the cases,
Sub Processes follow the Verb Object style. The rest either
does not have a label or it is a complex expression (e.g.,
“send out application forms & reminders”). Hence, no
definite labeling preference can be found in these examples
from the Web.
There
are
not
enough
Event
Sub
Processes
and
Transactions in the sample. Therefore, here it is hard to make
a good proposition. In these few examples, the labels follow
the Verb Object Style. There are also not so many Call
Activities in order to make a proposition. It could only be
observed here that the model designers of the Web examples
much more often used a nominalization of a verb rather than
the Verb Object Style.
B.
Relationships between Labels and Specific Task Types
Since about a fifth of all modeled Tasks are modeled as
User Tasks, it is interesting what is modeled as a User Task.
Especially, it is interesting what is modeled as a User Task in
comparison to what is modeled as a Manual Task. Therefore,
the labels of the two Tasks are analyzed.
From the point of view of the BPMN specification [1],
there is a clear distinction between a User Task and a Manual
Task. A User Tasks is performed by a human, but assisted by
a business process runtime. A Manual Task is also
performed by a human, but without assistance of a business
process runtime.
It could be expected that a task that is supported by a
system uses other verbs in the label, than a task that is purely
done by a human. However, according to the labels it is not
always possible to differentiate between a User Task and a
Manual Task. Of course, labels with a verb were found that
fit with the purpose of a User Task (e.g., “edit 1st level
ticket”, “fill in purchase form”, “book flight”, “find student’s
position”). On the other hand also labels were found, which
do not perfectly fit with the purpose of a User Task (e.g.,
“hire staff”, “plan interview”, “read book”, “rent office”,
“ship book”, “train new employee on job specifics”, “discuss
nominations”, “announce Nobel prices laureate”, etc.). The
labels for User Tasks and Manual Tasks are set arbitrarily.
One interpretation could be that it is the modelers decision to
see something as a Manual Task (without process engine
support) or a User Task (with process engine support) and it
depends on the purpose of the model (i.e., whether it is a
workflow model or not). Particularly, a User Task can be
more than a simple user interaction with the Information
System. Thus, if a workflow for a workflow engine is
specified with BPMN then it seems that every Manual Task
can also become a User Task. A second interpretation could
be that modelers of these introductory learning examples do
not really want to distinguish between User Tasks and
Manual Tasks at all. Therefore, they prefer to model a User
Task even in a situation where a Manual Task would be the
right choice.
The frequency of other Task types is very low and,
except for Send Tasks, no relationship between labels and
these Task types were found. For the 38 distinct labels of
Send Tasks, in this sample it turned out that 52.6 % of the
distinct Send Task labels start with the verb “send”. Further,
26.3 % have a verb like “email”, “inform”, “notify”,
“distribute”, “post”, “submit”, “order”. All these other label
examples can be seen as variants of sending. Thus, it could
be concluded that labels of a Send Task are in accordance
with the purpose of this Task type.
C.
Labels of Events
When talking about labels on Events, firstly, it has to be
examined if Events have labels. While BPMN modelers
always give labels for Tasks, they are not so systematic if
they have to specify labels for Events. From all the Start
Events found in the diagrams of the sample, 45.6 % do not
have a label. From these, most of the Events (85.7 %) are
untyped Events (i.e., Events that are not further classified to
be specific types of Events). However, a few cases were also
found with Link Events, Message Events and Signal Events
that have no label.
For Intermediate Events, fewer cases with no labels exist.
Only in 13.7 % of all Intermediate Events no labels were
detected. Particularly, the Intermediate Timer Event and
Message Event are those types with no labels. These two
Event
types
also
had
a
high
frequency
within
the
Intermediate Events types. 37.6 % of all Boundary Events
do not have a label. 55.6 % of all End Events do not have a
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-765-8
eKNOW 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

label. From these End Events with no label, 80.8 % are
untyped.
To summarize this, for the examples provided on the
Web, the modelers responsible for these examples especially
do not see the necessity to label Start and End Events.
Particularly, this happened if these Start and End Events are
untyped Events. Unlabeled model elements, however, cannot
be understood well. If novice process modelers see such
unlabeled model element examples on the Web, they might
take it as a standard although it should be avoided.
After the examination of Events with no labels, it is
interesting to see what kind of labels Events have. It is
expected that specific Event types have specific types of
labels. For example, Message Events and Timer Events are
labelled in different ways. For this analysis, six Event types
were further examined, since these six Event types cover
87.2 % of all Event types in the sample. These Event types
are:
Timer
Event,
Message
Event,
Signal
Event,
Compensation Event, Terminate End Event and the untyped
Event.
All labels of the Timer Event have, of course, in common
that they specify time. However, this is done in various
ways. Table I presents a list of representative Timer Event
labels. In this list, the grouping of the individual labels,
suggests label patterns of similar structure.
TABLE I. TYPICAL LABELS OF TIMER EVENTS

wait until next business day

24h; 10 min; 60 minutes;
one week; 2 weeks; 24
hours; 14 days; 48-hours

september year n-1

wait 6 days; wait some
time; wait until thursday,
9am

1st day of month; 20th of
each month

3 business days

friday at 6 pm pacific time;
friday, 6 pm pacific time

timeout; time out (1 week);
order timed out

content expired (5 days)

delay 6 days; delay 6 days
from announcement

< 60 min; > 60 min

expires at set deadline

auction over

10 min wait

12 o'clock

start time; finish time

on next Wednesday

start on Friday

every 10 minuts; every 24
hours
From the examples, it can be seen that they are not in
accordance with the Event labeling style recommended in
literature (Verb in Past Participle Style). Nevertheless in the
context of a Timer Event, many of these labels make sense.
For a Message Event, it has to be distinguished between a
throwing Message Event and a catching Message Event.
Usually, it could be expected that a catching Message Event
follows the Verb in Past Participle Style. However, the
found catching Message Events have a greater variety.
Beside the typical Verb in Past Participle Style also catching
Message Events were found that consists of

a noun (compound noun) or noun phrase only - i.e.,
the
message
(e.g.,
“payment”,
“complaints
to
customer service”)

a complete sentence (e.g., “where is my pizza”)

a verb in past participle only (e.g., “paid”).

a
noun
with
an
adjective
(e.g.,
“assignment
complete”)
Unfortunately, not so much throwing Message Events
were found. Most of these throwing Message Events had no
label at all. On the basis of the remaining throwing Message
Events with labels, it can be said that throwing Message
Events use the Verb Object Style as it is usual in Task labels.
Since a throwing Message Event can be used as an
alternative for a Send Task, this label pattern makes sense,
although literature recommends the Verb in Past Participle
Style without considering the specific type of Event.
The found Signal Events (catching or throwing) follow
the Verb in Past Participle Style to a large extent. Beside
this, the following interesting label examples were also
found: “on alert”, “undeliverable”. According to literature,
these
examples
would
be
out
of
the
scope
of
the
recommendations.
Many of the Compensation Events do not have a label.
Those that have a label mainly follow the Verb Object Style
(e.g., “cancel reservation”, “undo book travel”). Many of
these labelled Compensation Events are throwing Events.
Once again, this is out of scope of the recommendation in the
literature, which in general prefers the Verb in Past
Participle Style for Events.
But, in this special case of
throwing Events, which rather express an active action than a
passive reaction, the Verb Object Style makes sense.
Most of the Terminate End Events do not have a label.
The few remaining Terminate End Events with labels follow
the Verb in Past Participle Style or just have the label
“terminate” or “end”, respectively.
The analysis of untyped Events is split into the analysis
of Intermediate Events, Start Events and End Events. No
untyped Boundary Events with labels appeared in the
sample.
This
analysis
provides
the
following
results.
Untyped Intermediate Events follow the Verb in Past
Participle Style. The labels of untyped Start Events do not
only follow this style. Instead, some of them only have

a noun, compound noun or noun phrase - i.e., the object
only (e.g., “application”, “existing process”),

an adjective (e.g., “hungry”) or phrases starting with an
adjective (e.g., “hungry for pizza”),

a simple sentence (e.g., “the store opens”).
The labels of untyped End Events follow the Verb in Past
Participle Style to a large extent.
D.
Labels of Gateways
The labels of Exclusive and Inclusive Gateways vary.
The style Question with Noun and Verb in Past Participle is
not the only one. Again, additional patterns exist: Objects
only (i.e., nouns, compound nouns and noun phrases), verb
in past participle only, state of an object (i.e., where the state
is represented by an adjective or by the word “ok”),
comparison with operators (e.g., “>”, “<”) or with words
(e.g., “above”). What is common to many labels is the
character “?” at the end of the label. Many Exclusive
Gateways and Inclusive Gateways even do not have a label
although they branch the process path. Such cases once again
can be seen as a contradiction to the recommendations in
literature.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-765-8
eKNOW 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Beside the label of the Gateway itself, it is also important
to analyze the labels on the Sequence Flows, which leave the
Gateways. About a fifth of all these labels have either the
value “yes” or “no”. The rest varies (e.g., “1”;” >=20”; “40
%” “yes”; “2nd level issue”; “50 % education training”; “all
items available”; “allow extension”; “bicycle costs >= 500
usd”; “capacity & parts available”; “capacity not available”;
“capacity ok”; “employee is ready for work”; “fix in
release”; “in stock”; “is junk mail”; “no more responses”;
“not accepted”; “payment received == false”; “purchase 1”;
“put on hold”; “ready with request”; “simple”). Process
Diagrams intended for workflows also have Gateway labels
like “${order.price <= 250}” or “${!approved}”.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper described how BPMN model examples are
presented on the Web. Particularly, three categories of model
elements (Activity, Event, and Gateway) and their labels
were examined.
In the Web examples, for the labels of atomic Activities
called Tasks, there is common consensus to follow the
recommended Verb Object Style, since the majority of the
label examples for model elements on the Web follow this
style. For non-atomic Activities (i.e., normal Sub processes),
two ways of labeling are preferred: Nominalization of a verb
(Action Noun Style) and the recommended Verb Object style.
In the case of Event types, it turned out that the labeling
styles vary depending on the Event type used. Additionally,
within the same Event type, variations of labeling styles
exist. For some of these labeling strategies, existing literature
would
even state that these labels have deficiencies.
Therefore, it would be good that both providers of such
examples and readers of these examples have a more critical
look on them. However, it also must be said that some of the
label examples for Events (e.g., Timer Event) make sense
with respect to the certain type of Event.
If Gateways have a label, then it is quite well understood
that a question mark (“?”) should close the label, as it is
suggested in literature. But, this is the only accordance with
literature. Since many of the Gateways do not even have any
label, this could be also interpreted that labeling of Gateways
for a better understanding of the process paths is not yet
understood as an important feature by the community who
posts process model examples on the Web. In future, the
label quality in other BPMN diagrams, which are provided
on the Web, will be examined too.
REFERENCES
[1]
Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN), Version 2.0,
OMG
Document
Number
formal/2011-01-03,
http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/2.0
[retrieved:
January
2020].
[2]
BPMN 2.0 by Example, Version 1.0 (non-normative), OMG
Document
Number:
dtc/2010-06-02,
https://www.omg.org/cgi-bin/doc?dtc/10-06-02.pdf [retrieved:
January 2020].
[3]
B. Silver, “BPMN method and style,” 2nd edition, Aptos:
Cody-Cassidy Press, 2009.
[4]
https://www.ariscommunity.com/users/roland-woldt/2011-01-
28-learning-bpmn-2-which-models-are-available-bpmn
[retrieved: January 2020].
[5]
I. Moreno-Montes de Oca, M. Snoeck, and H. A. Reijers, “A.
Rodriguez-Morffi, A systematic literature review of studies
on
business
process
modeling
quality,”
Journal
of
Information and Software Technology, vol, 58, pp. 187-205,
2015.
[6]
J. Mendling, H. A. Reijers, and W. M. P. van der Aalst,
“Seven process modeling guidelines (7PMG),” Journal of
Information and Software Technology, vol. 52, pp. 127–136.
2010.
[7]
A. Koschmider, M. Ullrich, A. Heine, and A. Oberweis,
“Revising the Vocabulary of Business Process Element
Labels,” International Conference on Advanced Information
Systems Engineering (CAiSE 2015), Springer LNCS 9097,
pp. 69–83, 2015.
[8]
H. Leopold, J. Mendling, and H. A. Reijers, “On the
automatic labeling of process models,” Proceedings of the
23rd International Conference on Advanced Information
Systesm Engineering (CAiSE 2011), Springer LNCS 6741,
pp. 512–520, 2011.
[9]
K. Figl, J. Mendling, and M. Strembeck, “The Influence of
Notational Deficiencies on Process Model Comprehension,”
Journal of the Association for Information Systems, vol. 14
(6), pp. 312–338, 2013.
[10] A.
Koschmider,
K.
Figl,
and
A.
Schoknecht,
“A
Comprehensive Overview of Visual Design of Process Model
Element Labels,” Business Process Management Workshops
(BPM 2015, 13th International Workshops), Springer LNBIP
256, pp. 571–582, 2015.
[11] H. Leopold, R. H. Eid-Sabbagh, J. Mendling, L. Guerreiro
Azevodo, and F. Araujo Baiao, “Detection of naming
convention
violations
in
process
models
for
different
languages,” Decision Support Systems, vol. 56, pp. 310-325,
2013.
[12] H. Leopold, J. Mendling, and O. Günther, “Learning from
Quality Issues of BPMN Models from Industry,” IEEE
Software, July/August 2016, pp. 26–33, 2016.
[13] H. Leopold, H., F. Pittke, and J. Mendling, “Ensuring the
Canonicity
of
process
models,”
Data
&
Knowledge
Engineering, 111, pp. 22–38, 2017.
[14] J. Becker, “Opportunities and Constraints: The Current
Struggle
with
BPMN,”
Business
Process
Management
Journal, vol. 16 (1), pp. 181–201, 2010.
[15] J. Becker, M. Rosemann, P. Green, and M. Indulska, “Do
Ontological Deficiencies in Modeling Grammars Matter?”
MIS Quaterly, vol. 35 (1), pp. 57–79, 2011.
[16] BPMN
2.0
Poster
available
Online:
http://www.bpmb.de/images/BPMN2_0_Poster_EN.pdf
[retrieved: January 2020].
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-765-8
eKNOW 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

