Virtual World Process Perspective Visualization 
 
Ross Brown  
Queensland University of Technology,  
Faculty of Science and Technology 
Brisbane, Australia 
e-mail: r.brown@qut.edu.au 
 
 
 
Johannes Herter, Daniel Eichhorn 
Institute for Information Management in Engineering, 
Institute for Applied Informatics and Formal 
Description Methods, 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,  
Karlsruhe, Germany 
e-mail:{johannes.herter},{daniel.eichhorn}@kit.edu 
 
 
Abstract— Product Lifecycle Management has been developed 
as an approach to providing timely engineering information. 
However, the number of domain specializations within 
manufacturing 
makes such 
information 
communication 
disjointed, inefficient and error-prone. In this paper we 
propose an immersive 3D visualization of linked domain-
specific information views for improving and accelerating 
communication processes in Product Lifecycle Management. 
With a common and yet understandable visualization of 
several domain views, interconnections and dependencies 
become obvious. The conceptual framework presented here 
links domain-specific information extracts from Product 
Lifecycle Management systems with each other and displays 
them via an integrated 3D representation scheme. We expect 
that this visualization framework should support holistic 
tactical decision making processes between domain-experts in 
operational and tactical manufacturing scenarios. 
Keywords-Product 
Lifecycle 
Management; 
Process 
Modeling; Scientific Visualization  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The ability to deal with the increasing complexity of 
product manufacturing depends on mutual understanding and 
close collaboration between all manufacturing related 
domains. This level of collaboration is necessary in present 
day manufacturing enterprises, in order to make optimal 
decisions about product construction and process scheduling. 
This collaboration requirement leads to a strong demand for 
suitable information management and presentation tools as a 
fundamental component of successful operational and 
tactical decision making processes. In order to accelerate and 
improve holistic, integrated decision making, a conceptual 
framework is proposed, to provide multi-domain information 
visualization in a product engineering environment. This 
paper is structured as follows: First of all, the motivation, 
background and related work are introduced. On this basis, 
the conceptual framework is described by discussing several 
visualization options. Thereby special consideration is given 
to visualization approaches, which display links between 
central elements of information sets. This is concluded by a 
detailed analysis of hierarchical product structures and their 
impact on visualization. 
A. Motivation and Problem Description 
 
In recent years, Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) 
solutions have been developed for providing engineering 
related information wherever it is required. In PLM Systems, 
as an extension of Product Data Management (PDM), all 
relevant information relating products, resources and 
processes are stored [1], [2]. The internal data structure for 
storing and managing this information is referred to as the 
―Global Product Structure‖ (GPS) [3] in the context of this 
work. As the GPS contains all technical information of 
several engineering-related disciplines for all products and 
variants, the number of elements in the structure can easily 
become very large. In order to have a subset of information 
which is understandable and manageable, domain-specific 
views are created for the demands of specified target 
audiences. A view in this context is an extract from a global 
information system for domain experts containing a subset of 
relevant information in a suitable notation [2]. These subsets, 
extracted from the GPS, are the information used for 
decision processes and require inter-domain communication 
for making holistically optimized decisions. The conceptual 
framework introduced here is based on an elementary use 
case for a manufacturing decision, introduced in the 
following. The simplicity of the use-case regards the 
conceptual character of this approach; more complex 
scenarios are considered in future research.  
In this scenario, a decision making process is presented 
concerning the domains of resource planning, manufacturing 
process planning and product construction. Between 
representatives of these domains, a commitment should be 
made to have an overall optimized (pareto-optimal) outcome. 
This use-case describes the discussion about an attachment 
process in order to manufacture a wooden bench. One 
manufacturing alternative would be gluing the attachment; 
the other is screwing the attachment. Each variant would 
bring benefits and disadvantages for the considered domains: 
construction, process scheduling and resource planning. 
For benchmarking both process variants, performance 
indicators like manufacturing time, physical robustness, 
reusability or demand for several kinds of resources are 
identified. Following these indicators, it is plausible that the 
optimal choice of method could be different for each 
domain. In order to achieve an overall optimal choice, the 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

benefits of each variant have to be negotiated from the point 
of view of all disciplines in a process of direct 
communication. This discussion would end in choosing one 
of the variants, which would bring more benefits than 
disadvantages when considering all regarded disciplines. 
II. 
BACKGROUND THEORY AND PREVIOUS WORK 
Following ―General Model Theory‖ by Stachoviak [4] 
the models for each discipline, created with the motivation of 
―Pragmatism‖, contain elements which are only relevant in 
the corresponding domain. The individual models form the 
basis for domain representations in decision making 
processes. The fundamental issue for these cross domain 
negotiations is the development of domain-specific models 
for each participant. The direct communication between 
representatives of participating domains should be supported 
by a suitable visualization, which integrates and shows 
information extracted from all domains. Thereby, links and 
dependencies between all related models become obvious, 
communication processes are accelerated and consequently, 
decision quality is improved.  
Here the dilemma becomes obvious: within a common 
visualization on classic displays, the understandability of the 
extracts get lost as the number of items and their 
interconnections can easily get too high when the illustration 
is composed of several domain-specific extracts on one flat 
screen. Furthermore, there might be syntactic and semantic 
differences between the domain-specific models which could 
hinder understanding a combined visualization.  
To 
overcome 
the 
dilemma 
of 
complexity 
and 
understandability, a 3D visualization is proposed in this 
paper, to display the information from various domains 
simultaneously in an understandable and intuitive manner.  
In the field of visualization of abstract data sets, related 
work focuses information from singular domains like, e.g., 
process management [6], [9], [13], [16], [17]. In the field of 
visual data-mining, 3D visualization is used for showing 
unknown correlations between data [13]. Other approaches 
conduct 3D visualization for large data sets [18]. However, 
a 3D visualization for simultaneously showing information 
models from different domains seems not to be in the focus 
of research. 
Human spatial visualization capabilities give the 
opportunity to place domain-specific views in a 3D virtual 
space. Users can see domain-specific information models in 
the foreground or background, according to their position 
and orientation in the virtual space. This fact alone motivates 
the development of visualizations within a Virtual Reality 
(VR) environment, to increase understandability by full 
immersion and interaction, and has indeed led to an initial 
implementation. 
An initial 
VR 
prototype is 
under 
development in the Lifecycle Solutions Center (LESC), in 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany.  
A process-oriented use-case has been chosen to illustrate 
this integrated visualization challenge. The manufacturing 
process is used as the major information model with which 
other domain-specific data-structures are linked. A process 
oriented approach, from industry and science, is used, due to 
its relevance in product manufacturing [5].  
III. 
 3D DOMAIN VISUALIZATION APPROACH 
In order to integrate and show cross domain PLM data in 
a coherent manner, we propose to use a 3D Cylinder 
structure modified to suit the particular requirements of PLM 
process data [6], see Fig. 2. 
 
 
Figure 1: Plan View of 3D Cylinder-based PLM visualization structure 
with the outer cylinder used for analysis, and the inner GPS structure to 
provide context with regards to the entire GPS. 
 
A plan view of the cylinder-based representation is 
shown in Fig. 1, using an inner representation of the GPS 
data structures related to a production process and an outer 
cylinder 
surface 
devoted 
to 
showing 
analytical 
representations. The intention is that such a representation is 
used within a fully immersive VR facility, as previously 
mentioned. Using this visualization approach, production 
domain specialists are able to stand around the cylinder and 
view domain relevant analytic representations, seeing how 
they relate to the inner data structure used as a representation 
of the PLM processes. This approach provides two key 
functions, Context and Collaboration.  
Context is provided by a representation of the PLM GPS 
within the cylinder, showing the GPS in entirety, using 
appropriate representations, supports traversal of its large 
hierarchical data structures. Or conversely, the interior GPS 
representation may be via a visualization of the product 
itself. This internal representation will be described in detail 
later. 
Secondly, the analytic surface facilitates collaboration 
and comparison via the close juxtaposition of multiple, 
different, domain representations. Domain specialists may 
gather around and compare values, based upon the domain 
representations that suit each viewer, enabling cross-domain 
discussion and collaboration. 
We consider that a full virtual reality representation of 
the cylinder would work best, due to the scope of the 
visualization lending itself to the traversal of large scale data 
sets, such as those found in manufacturing [2], [3]. The 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

visualizations in this paper are mockups shown in a virtual 
world that indicate the scale of the system to be devised by 
using an avatar for size comparison. It also should be noted 
that the representations on the surfaces of the cylinder in the 
figures are images used to convey the basis of the future 
implementation, and so should be considered proof of 
concept in nature. 
Interactions with the cylinder system occur at two main 
points, with the external structure, via rotating the outer layer 
around the y axis, and by selecting and filtering information 
from the internal GPS structure. One person in the analysis 
team would typically be in control of these interactions and 
visual representations used in the visualization.  
The outer layer can be spun, and is intended to be related 
to the internal GPS via visible linkages, shown as red arrows 
in our example figures. The internal GPS is interactive and 
can be used as an information source, to extract a domain-
specific representation to be displayed on the outer cylinder. 
We now discuss the representations in detail. 
A. Cylinder Surface Related Representations 
For domain analysis purposes, different representations 
are applied from the central GPS from a PLM System onto 
an outer cylinder. We add domains and processes into the top 
levels above the views, with indicators of differences in the 
graphs [7] for comparisons of processes and their influences 
on the results of the PLM processes. The flow on cost effects 
can be viewed in the lower level, or over the elements of the 
process model, applied to another part of the cylinder 
surface. 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Analysis representations that can be applied to the surface of the 
cylinder regarding: Production Processes (top left), Bill Of Materials 
(BOM) (top right), Product Schematics (bottom left) and Human Resources 
(bottom right). Red highlighted areas indicate links to select information in 
the central GPS. 
 
Each of these can be either drilled down upon in the 
central GPS representation, or specifically selected by the 
viewing session controller using a search interface. Models 
describing a certain region of interest are extracted from the 
GPS, following the pragmatism (demand for information) of 
several domains. Interconnections are taken from the PLM 
System, where the links are stored within the Global Product 
Structure [3], augmented with process linkages, shown in 
Fig. 3.  
 
 
Figure 3: Initial use-cases in Petri-Net notation with further manufacturing 
information. 
 
The extracted models are then processed to identify 
grouping relationships or pivotal elements. These elements 
are taken as links between the information models. Elements 
of the models are linked with 3D representations following 
defined mapping specifications between the abstract model 
and graphical representations. The mapping specifications 
include a rule-set for spatial arrangements, to assist in 
providing an optimal layout. 
B. Internal Cylinder GPS Data Representations 
We propose two internal representations for the PLM 
data: Tree-Map Hierarchy Stack and a Product Centric view. 
Each of these is chosen to represent the complex production 
data in a manner that provides context and complexity 
reduction when seeking to traverse and extract other 
representations to be displayed on the outer surface of the 
cylinder for domain analysis. Each of these representations 
also provides the key abilities of context, drill down and 
interaction required to traverse wide and deep GPS hierarchy 
information.  
1) Tree-Map Hierarchy Stack: The Tree-Map Hierarchy 
Stack representation consists of layers from each level of the 
GPS, summarized to provide context data. Such an 
overview is often used for strategic views of data in other 
applications enabling parallax at each level to easily identify 
the planar position of objects. Such an approach provides 
complexity management by the spatial arrangement of the 
objects in a manner so that constrained camera motion 
reinforces the categories instinctively. This approach has 
been applied to large-scale process visualization approaches 
in Biology and we expect this approach to scale to large 
PLM Systems with multiple sources of data. 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 4: Example showing the inner structure as a Hierarchy Stack, made 
up of summarized Tree-Map levels within the GPS. 
 
Each level of the hierarchy is composed of a Tree-Map 
structure. The Tree-Map GPS representation (refer to Fig. 5) 
is a popular 2D embedded hierarchy representation that can 
facilitate display and traversal of large hierarchical data 
structures, showing the path through the hierarchy, and 
allowing drill down capabilities [8]. This representation will 
allow domain specialists to see the contents of the GPS 
levels at a glance, and still enable interactive sense making 
of the relationships between each component. In particular, 
the path through the hierarchy can be traced across the 
surface of the Tree-Map, so its contextual capabilities give it 
an ability to facilitate transitions to areas of interest (see Fig. 
7). 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Simple example of a Tree-Map converting a tree structure (top) 
represented as a map structure (below) from [8]. 
 
2) Product Centric: A product centric representation 
(refer to Fig. 6), provides a hierarchical representation of the 
production process, from the point of view of the physical 
product components. 3D exploded representations of the 
product are shown in the central area of the cylinder, as a 
form of hierarchical representation. This representation is 
expected to be useful as a domain specialist independent 
view of the GPS, as it can be reasonably assumed that all 
stakeholders in a production facility are able to identify 
physical products and their components. 
 
 
Figure 6: Example using a product representation as the inner structure. 
 
The GPS views can be constructed by attribute filtering, 
architecture references, component hierarchy, zones of 
interest, structure compression and enumerations of alternate 
configurations [3]. In effect, visual or text-based queries can 
be applied to the GPS structure, to extract representations for 
analysis on the cylinder surface. Design decisions are then 
made based upon multiple domain views emanating from the 
GPS. Each of these may be chosen to suit the domain 
expertise of the people viewing the information. A product 
centric internal representation will suit product designers, 
while process models are suitable for manufacturing 
management personnel.  
Relationship information proceeds from the outer 
surface, and recedes into the centre, being deprecated/ 
escalated as required by the user. The central representation 
adapts in structure to eliminate clutter and pushes the 
relevant selected information to the outer cylinder. The path 
through the structure can be highlighted assisting traversal 
through the centre of the cylinder (see the red arrows in Fig. 
2 to 5). Analysis using such a structure is kept to the surface 
of the outer cylinder, where a number of representations can 
be placed to support product process analysis. The internal 
representation provides a visual, summarized representation 
of the complex GPS hierarchies present in the PLM data, and 
thus allows the viewers to relate different components of the 
GPS to each other visually, while maintaining a sense of its 
whole structure. 
IV. 
GPS HIERARCHY STRUCTURE 
We now describe in detail how the internal GPS 
organizes itself with regards to user queries. We divide the 
GPS views up into a hierarchy, with roles determining views 
at the highest level. Deep hierarchies are reduced due to 
pragmatics as a form of structure compression that facilitates 
insight and speedier traversals. Thus the techniques use by 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Eichhorn et al. [9] are integrated into the visualization, with 
an enforcement of role levels onto planes, overcoming issues 
with the complexity of the hierarchy and its interaction with 
the process models at lower levels.  
In addition, each representation can be filtered either via 
a direct semantic querying, or by ordering in the natural 
hierarchy of the components. Each level ―group‖ can be 
related to, in order from top down: 
 
 
Domains – as defined previously in Pools and Roles 
[9],[6]; 
 
Views - related to the previous roles, derived from 
[10]; 
 
Processes - and their respective perspectives [11], 
[12], 13]; 
 
Product Architectures - levels of hierarchies in 
structure of the product [14]; 
 
Components - base level to complex assemblies can 
be added to levels [14]. 
A. Level Membership  
When displaying the GPS hierarchy, some of the major 
issues to address are the choice of the number of levels and 
their summarized contents. Due to the large data sets 
involved in a PLM GPS, this level membership becomes a 
complex issue of summarization [15] and selection [8] that 
will assist in reducing the complexity of the internal 
structures, and will help with interacting with the complex 
database present in the GPS. Two key factors in this 
presentation process are, the visual representations and the 
visual 
interactions 
provided 
by 
the 
adaptive 
level 
management.  
The summarization process is intended to be adaptive in 
granularity. Objects and linkages can be adaptively 
summarized for each level to collapse complex multi-level 
hierarchies into simpler forms to populate each level [15]. 
This summarization process, however, will differ depending 
on the level being processed. Some levels in the GPS, such 
as the role hierarchies, are orders of magnitude less in 
complexity than say the deep and wide component 
hierarchies composing the product itself; this is especially 
due to people having responsibilities for more than one 
product or one component of a product. The number of 
levels visualized will be constrained to the main levels 
identified: Domains, Views, Processes, Product and 
Components. Each layer can be expanded and contracted as 
required, using an interactive animation. 
Thus, the level membership is adaptive, but constrained 
to be within major organizational levels. The divisions are 
planar in nature, in order to promote a parallax effect when 
analyzing the structure of the GPS. For example, while a 
product hierarchy can be expanded to different levels across 
its tree, the hierarchy is constrained to the product level. 
These level hierarchies are then visualized within each level 
of the hierarchy using the previously mentioned Tree-Map 
technique. If such planar constraints are not implemented, 
then a feasible clear summary of the entire GPS would be 
problematic, due to imbalanced trees in the data model not 
being projected correctly onto each level plane, preventing 
parallax effects from providing insights into structures [8]. 
 
 
Figure 7: Hierarchy of Information Layers in the GPS. 
 
In this simplified example, we show Domains, Processes, 
and Product as a selection of layers. The red arrows in Fig. 7 
illustrate an example path through the hierarchy that 
indicates the context of the information presented on the 
outer cylinder, i.e., this is a detailed example of the coarsely 
illustrated red arrows shown in Fig. 2-7). 
B. Scalability Issues  
Tree-Maps are designed for large scale hierarchy 
representations, and so other methods for level selection and 
summarization can be exploited easily. The Product 
Hierarchy representation is simpler to process, due to its 
inherently hierarchical, non-planar, nature. Indeed, products 
and components lend themselves to such spatial 3D 
representations, as the manufactured products will have that 
structure on production, providing intuitive insight into the 
components under examination.  
Product hierarchies can be summarized via the use of 
selective components in the product; that is, the choice of 
subcomponents as the key representation, such as a 
suspension unit, within an entire car. In addition, the 
summarization can be performed using selective exploded 
views on the complex subassemblies [14]; which can be 
intuitively performed via click or touch-based interactions, or 
by searches based on component or product key terms, e.g., 
strut, spring and/or cylinder. 
Another issue to address with the PLM structure will be 
the maintenance of a sensible path through the internal data 
structure, to link together the outer cylindrical analysis 
visualizations, with the GPS. Thus, any of the highlighting 
mechanisms must allow for unbroken paths through the 
hierarchies, in order to facilitate user understanding of the 
context of the information as it is presented from the GPS. 
We show in Fig. 7, how the Tree-Map stack allows a 
summarized view of the relationships of each outer cylinder 
representation to the internal GPS structure. 
Smooth interactions with the internal GPS will require 
progressive rendering algorithms applied to the large 
Domain
s 
Processes 
Product 
From Cylinder 
To Cylinder  
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

hierarchy structures, in order to promote high levels of real-
time interactivity. Animations of the modification of the 
environment will allow the extraction of relevant product 
representations, and will enable the visual tracking of 
changes by users in the structure of the GPS.  
V. CONCLUSION 
Tight production process collaboration between experts 
of different domains is required for successful operational 
decision processes. To improve this decision process, we 
have developed a conceptual framework, which enables a 
sophisticated visualization of multi-domain information in an 
engineering environment. Our framework should support the 
experts in their decision process by giving a holistic 
overview of the different domains, showing the impacts of 
changes in one domain to other domains. Although our 
framework is generic for multiple dimensions, we chose as 
examples 
the 
three 
domains: 
resource 
planning, 
manufacturing process planning and product construction. 
Our framework is intended to be process oriented, due to 
a lack of domain independent process model representations 
in PLM. We connect the different domains to the process 
model domain. Therefore we aim to evaluate three modeling 
notations, Petri Nets, BPMN and YAWL as to their 
suitability to relate them to the resource and manufacturing 
domain. 
We based our visualization approach on information 
retrieval mechanisms provided by PLM Systems. The items 
contained in a PLM can be assembled into a Global Product 
Structure. Using the GPS, views can be generated, according 
to different domain specialties. Based on these views, we 
developed 
our 
new 
3D 
production 
process 
model 
representation. For the 3D presentation we proposed to use a 
cylinder structure. With this structure, it is possible for 
different domain experts to stand around the cylinder and 
view domain relevant analytic representations. 
We discussed, and showed as mock-ups of two different 
representations for the inner structure (Product Centric, Tree-
Map Stack). With these structures it is also possible to show 
the connection between the elements of the different views 
by highlighted assisted traversal through the center of the 
displayed data. 
Future work will involve developing the system further, 
so it can also display the inner cylinder and show the 
connections between the elements of the different views in a 
fully interactive manner. Afterwards, we plan to perform an 
evaluation with domain experts about the usability of our 
visualization approach.  
VI. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Grabowski, R. Anderl, A. Polly, "Integriertes Produktmodell" 
1.Auflage, Beuth Verlag, Berlin, 1993. 
[2] Stark, John. Product Lifecycle Management: Paradigm for 21st 
Century Product Realisation, Springer-Verlag, London, 2004.  
[3] A. Hambruegge, "Development of a method for evaluating the 
applicability of product views on a global product structure of an 
internationalautomotive manufacturer", M.Sc. thesis, KIT, Karlruhe, 
2010. 
[4] H. Stachowiak, „Allgemeine Modelltheorie―, Springer Verlag, Wien, 
New York, 1973. 
[5] EN ISO 9001:2008, 2008. 
[6] Effinger, J. Spielmann, Lifting business process diagrams to 2.5 
dimensions, in: J. Park, M.C. Hao, P.C. Wong, C. Chen (Eds.), SPIE-
IS&T Electronic Imaging: Visualization and Data Analysis, p. 
75300O-75300O-9, 2010. 
[7] U. Brandes, T. Dwyer, F. Schreiber. "Visual understanding of 
metabolic pathways across organisms using layout in two and a half 
dimensions", Journal of Integrative Bioinformatics, 2, 2004. 
[8] B. Shneiderman, Tree visualization with tree-maps: 2-d space-filling 
approach, ACM Transactions On Graphics. 11 pp. 92-99, 1992. 
[9] D. Eichhorn, A. Koschmider, Y. Li, A. Oberweis, P. Stürzel, R. 
Trunko, "3D Support for Business Process Simulation", Sheikh Iqbal 
Ahamed, Elisa Bertino, Carl K. Chang, Vladimir Getov, Lin Liu, Hua 
Ming, Rajesh Subramanyan, 33rd Annual IEEE International 
Computer Software and Applications Conference, IEEEComputer 
Society, Seattle,Washington, 2009. 
[10] R. Bobrik, M. Reichert, T. Bauer, ―Business process visualization-use 
cases, challenges, solutions‖, Proceedings of the 5th international 
conference on Business process management Springer-Verlag Berlin, 
Heidelberg pp. 88—95, BPM'07, 2007. 
[11] R. Brown, "Conceptual Modelling in 3D Virtual Worlds for Process 
Communication‖, Asia-Pacific Conferences on Conceptual Modelling 
(APCCM 2010), Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, 18-
21 Jan. 2010. 
[12] D. Eichhorn, A. Koschmider, "3D-Darstellung von Ressourcen-
attributen bei der Geschäftsprozessmodellierung", Christian Gierds 
and Jan Sürmeli, Proceedings of the 2nd Central-European Workshop 
on 
Services 
and 
their 
Composition, CEUR 
Workshop 
Proceedings, CEUR.org, Berlin, Feb. 2010. 
[13] M. Böhlen, L. Bukauskas P. Eriksen, S. Lilholt, L. Art,‖3D Visual 
Data Mining—Goals and Experiences‖, In Journal Computational 
Statistics & Data Analysis, of the International Association of 
Statistical Computing,43, pages 445–469, Elsevier Science, 2003. 
[14] Z. Qiu, K. Kok, Y. Wong, J. Fuh, Role-based 3D visualisation for 
asynchronous PLM collaboration, Computers In Industry. 58 (2007) 
747-755. 
[15] A. Streit, B.L. Pham, R. Brown, Ross, "Visualization Support for 
Managing Large Business Process Specifications." In van der Aalst, 
Wil M. P., Benatallah, Boualem, Casati, Fabio, & Curbera, Francisco 
(Eds.) 3rd International Conference, Business Process Management, 
BPM2005, Nancy, France, 2005. 
[16] T. N. Liukkonen, ―VIPROSA – Game-like Tool for Visual Process 
Simulation and Analysis.‖ In Design and Use of Serious Games 
Intelligent 
Systems, 
Control 
and 
Automation: 
Science 
and 
Engineering, 2009, Volume 37, IV, 185-206, DOI: 10.1007/978-1-
4020-9496-5_13.  
[17] E. Kindler, C. Psáles, ―3D-Visualization of Petri Net Models: 
Concept and Realization.‖ In Applications and Theory of Petri Nets 
2004, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2004, Volume 3099/2004, 
464-473, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-540-27793-4_27. 
[18] J. J. Thomas and K. A. Cook (Ed.) (2005). ―Illuminating the Path: 
The R&D Agenda for Visual Analytics‖ Chp. 3, National 
Visualization and Analytics, IEEE Computer Society, 2005. 
  
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

