An Ontology for Formalizing and Automating the Strategic Planning Process 
Juan Luis Dalmau-Espert, Faraón Llorens-Largo and Rafael Molina-Carmona 
Group ”Informática Industrial e Inteligencia Artificial” 
University of Alicante 
Alicante, Spain 
e-mail: {jldalmau, faraon, rmolina}@dccia.ua.es 
 
 
Abstract—From late 1980s and early twenty-first century, the 
environment where the organizations develop and act, has 
become increasingly uncertain and complex. Under these 
conditions, organizations have detected the need to move 
towards a more participatory model to address and reduce the 
complexity, based on information and knowledge as core assets 
to reduce environmental uncertainty and thereby ensure better 
decision-making. This new form of governance involves 
changes in the Strategic Planning process that are aligned with 
the 
characteristics 
of 
the 
new 
organizational 
model. 
Ontologies, as theories of content that allow the formalization 
of processes and knowledge, are a key element in this context. 
The aim of this paper is to formally define an ontology that 
could be defined in the future using the Web Ontology 
Language (OWL) that meets the standards approved by the 
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) and that is used to 
formalize the process of SP, as well as the knowledge that is 
created and flows among the several participants in the 
process.  
Keywords—ontologies; 
strategic 
planning; 
intelligent 
organizations; collective intelligence. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
From late 1980s and beginning of XXI century a series of 
events have occurred that, taken as a whole, paint a new 
landscape within the world of organizations in which the 
environment around them is increasingly uncertain and 
complex. Some of the most important facts behind this 
assertion are the internationalization of organizations, the 
economy globalization, the technological dynamism and, as 
a result, the growing need and importance of knowledge and 
learning within organizations [1]. 
Knowledge and ability to learn are today the main assets 
of the new model of intelligent organization referenced in 
[2]. The complexity and uncertainty of the environment can 
be reduced by providing and managing valuable information 
to help detect new needs in the environment and to guide the 
realization of new ideas to compete. To this end, the model 
of intelligent enterprise stands on three pillars: the collective 
intelligence, knowledge management and information and 
collaboration technologies. 
The Collective Intelligence (CI) is the ability of an 
organization to engage its stakeholders in a task of 
intellectual cooperation to ask questions and find answers to 
questions concerning the organization [2]. 
The Knowledge Management was initially defined by 
Nonaka and Takeuchi [3] as the process of applying a 
systematic approach to the capture, structuring, management, 
and dissemination of knowledge throughout an organization 
to work faster, reuse best practices, and reduce costly rework 
from project to project. 
The information and collaboration technologies are the 
quantity and quality of software, hardware and networks 
facilitating relational and information flows. 
From the new model of intelligent organization, it can be 
concluded that the traditional paradigm and process 
(centralized and reactive) for strategic planning that 
organizations utilize must be adapted to also be focused on 
that shared, participatory and collaborative learning-based 
vision, which supports the intelligent company [4]. The 
objective is to reduce complexity and increase the agility and 
flexibility of the process. 
The process of Strategic Planning (SP) is defined as the 
process by which managers of the firm analyse the internal 
and external environments for the purpose of formulating 
strategies and allocating resources to develop a competitive 
advantage in an industry that allows for the successful 
achievement of organizational goals [5]. 
From the previous definition and the new needs of 
organizations, two key issues of formalization should be 
addressed and solved within the new Strategic Planning: 
1) Formally define a conceptual framework that serves 
to represent the information/knowledge extracted from the 
internal and external environment of the organization and 
from each participant in the process, so that it constitutes a 
common vocabulary with which all managers can have a 
unified vision of the facts and that they can use to 
communicate and cooperate. 
2) Formalize the Strategic Planning process itself to 
determine the steps that make up this process (listed in [6]), 
the information/knowledge type that is used and who is 
involved in each case. 
The problem of formalization and conceptualization 
commonly appears in the literature linked to the concept of 
ontology. In 1993, Gruber [7] originally defined the notion 
of 
ontology 
as 
an 
“explicit 
specification 
of 
a 
conceptualization”. In 1997, Borst [8] defined ontology as a 
“formal specification of a shared conceptualization”. Finally, 
in 1998, Studer [9] merged these two definitions stating that: 
“An ontology is a formal, explicit specification of a shared 
conceptualization”. These definitions identify two key 
aspects to keep in mind: on the one hand this formalization 
allows for a strict description of ambiguities-free knowledge 
that can be machine-readable and, on the other hand, it 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

reflects the idea of sharing knowledge among individuals in 
a group. 
Guarino stated in [10] a classification of ontologies based 
on the level of generality proposing four types: high-level, 
domain, task and application ontologies. The latter describes 
concepts simultaneously belonging to a domain and a 
particular task.  
In this paper, we present an application ontology whose 
domain covers all the terminology associated with the SP 
and its implied task/process. 
According to Gruber [7], ontologies consist of concepts 
(formalized basic ideas obtained from the domain), 
relationships (they represent the interaction and the 
connection between the domain concepts), functions (they 
identify an element by calculating a function on several 
elements of the ontology), instances (they represent certain 
objects of a concept) and axioms (declarative theorems on 
relations that the elements of the ontology must fulfil). 
There are several methodologies and languages to define 
ontologies. The methodologies proposed by Noy and 
McGuinness [11] and Uschold [12] and the languages 
proposed by Gruber [7] and Smith et al.[13] are considered 
as the most notable. 
In Section I an overview about Strategic Planning inside 
organizations is introduced. The definition and steps of the 
strategic planning process are described in Section II. 
Ontologies are formally defined in Section III and finally, in 
Section IV, the ontology for strategic planning process is 
presented. 
II. 
STRATEGIC PLANNING PROCESS 
According to Hill and Jones [6], the Strategic Planning 
process is defined on the basis of a model that consists of 
five main steps:  
1) Selection of the corporate mission and major 
corporate goals.  
2) Analysis of the external competitive environment of 
the organization to identify opportunities and threats.  
3) Analysis of the internal operating environment of the 
organization to identify strengths and weaknesses.  
4) Selection of the strategies that are build on the 
strengths of the organization and correct their weaknesses to 
take advantage of external opportunities and oppose external 
threats. 
5) Implementation of the strategy. 
 
In practice, there are several strategic planning models 
which contain the steps of the previously presented model 
but that may have some special features. In Figure 1 a 
graphical representation of the model of SP stated by Llorens 
[14] is presented. It is possible to establish which element of 
the SP model is defined in each aforementioned step of the 
process [15]. 
Mission, vision, values and strategic axes are determined 
in step 1 and they define the reason for the organization, the 
state to be achieved in the future, the areas of action to 
achieve 
the 
vision 
and 
the 
organizational 
culture, 
respectively. 
 
Critical Success Factors are determined in steps 2 and 3 
from an analysis of the phenomena of the organization 
environment (internal and external) that can positively or 
negatively affect the fulfilment of the mission and a 
subsequent selection of the key factors. 
The Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats 
Analysis (SWOT), the Objectives and the Measurement 
criteria are part of step 4. SWOT Analysis [16] is an analysis 
tool for decision-making. From the Critical Success Factors, 
the main strengths, weaknesses, threats and opportunities of 
the organization are identified. The following step is to 
determine which strengths and weaknesses are the most 
relevant to take advantage of the opportunities and to avoid 
the threats. The result is the Strategic Solution.  
The Strategic Objectives are the major changes to 
perform so that the vision is achieved while fulfilling the 
mission. They should respond to the problem and to the 
identified strategic solution. At least one Strategic Objective 
must be defined for each Strategic Axe.  
The Measurement Criteria are specific and usually 
quantitative targets for determining how far the organization 
is fulfilling its Strategic Objectives. 
The Action Plans or Actions are a set of initiatives that 
are necessary to achieve the fulfilment of the Measurement 
Criteria and thus the Strategic Objectives. 
The Stakeholders are those individuals, groups of 
individuals and institutions whose actions can positively or 
negatively influence the accomplishment of the Mission. 
They are important because, on one hand, they are involved 
in the phases of analysis and strategic selection and, on the 
other hand, the success of the strategies depends critically on 
the position and commitment of these individuals (internal 
and external) to bring them to fruition. 
Figure 1. SP model, obtained from [14] 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Nowadays, the organizations approach the SP process 
using, in the best-case scenario, several tools and software 
technologies for some of the aforementioned steps, to 
achieve a certain degree of automation and formalization. 
This is the case of tools for Competitive Intelligence (CI) 
[17] or Business Intelligence (BI) [18] for the analysis of the 
environment. However, they are not integrated with the rest 
of the SP process and, often, they just provide reports and 
documents which substantially decrement the agility of the 
subsequent revisions of the Strategic Plan. There are 
approaches towards strategy content management [20] that 
consider the strategic planning process couldn’t be 
automated. In this paper, an ontology is presented to achieve 
some degree of automation and parallelism in the strategic 
planning process. 
 
III. 
ONTOLOGIES 
 
According to Pretorius [19] the ontological structure 
(explicit specification of the conceptualization of the 
domain) is formally defined as expressed by (1). 
 
                              O = {C, R, Ao}  
 
     (1)                                                                    
where: 
• 
C is a set of elements called concepts / classes, 
which have properties that describe their features 
and attributes. 
• 
R ⊆ C × C is the set of relationships between the 
concepts / classes of C, which is defined so that it 
contains the existing inherent hierarchical structure 
between concepts of C (hierarchical taxonomy). 
• 
Ao is the set of axioms in O that impose restrictions 
on the concepts and their relationships. 
The lexicon (language) L (common vocabulary regarding the 
conceptualization O) is defined as expressed by (2). 
 
 
 
  L = {LC , LR , F , G}  
 
     (2) 
where: 
• 
LC is the set of elements called lexical entries of 
concepts. 
• 
LR is the set of elements called lexical entries of 
relationships. 
• 
F ⊆ LC× C is a reference to concepts that establishes the 
link between a concept and a lexical entry. 
• 
G ⊆ LR × R is a reference to relationships that 
establishes the link between a relationship and a lexical 
entry.  
From the previous definitions an ontology Om is formally 
defined as expressed by (3). 
 
    
 
        Om  = <O, L>      
 
     (3) 
 
Where O is the ontological structure and L is the 
corresponding associated lexicon (language). 
IV. 
ONTOLOGY FOR STRATEGIC PLANNING PROCESS 
An ontology Om of type application is proposed. In 
Figure 2, the concepts and relationships contained by 
Figure 2. Ontology for SP process 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

structure O, as well as entries of lexicon L, which constitute 
the common vocabulary with which to refer to them, are 
shown. The Web Ontology Language (OWL) format of the 
ontology for SP process is not included for reasons of space. 
The basis of the design of Om is the Strategic Planning 
model of Figure 1. This design for ontology Om includes: 
• 
The formalization of all concepts associated with 
this model and involved in the process and their 
properties and relationships between them. An 
extract of dictionary of the associated concepts is 
included in Table I. 
• 
The formalization of existing tasks/steps and the 
order to perform them in the SP process, obtained 
from the dependencies and relationships between the 
various concepts.  
• 
The formalization of the Stakeholders as types of 
agents that are associated with a particular task or 
concept in the SP process. 
The concepts are organized into levels based on a 
hierarchical 
structure 
(hierarchical 
taxonomy), 
which 
determines the inheritance of properties between a father 
concept (or class) and the child concept (or class). All classes 
directly or indirectly inherit Object properties. 
For practical purposes, when performing the SP process 
to obtain a Strategic Plan, the definition of this ontology will 
allow instantiating the concepts that serve to define and 
formalize how the process is done. Since all concepts inherit 
from concept Object, any created instance has a property 
Identifier that uniquely identifies the instance, a property 
Name to refer to it and a property Level that determines the 
step in the SP process which this instance is associated to. 
For example, concepts Mission, Vision and Value belong to 
the first level, since they are needed to be instantiated in step 
1 of the SP process. However, concepts SWOT and Analysis 
Agents belong to level 4, because they take part in step 4 of 
the process. 
As a summary, considering the aforementioned and the 
steps that the SP process comprises and that have been listed 
above: 
• 
The completion of the first step would involve 
creating an instance of the concept Mission, among 
others, in which the Description property would be 
informed so that the mission of the organization in 
the SP process is fixed. 
• 
In steps 2 and 3, some instances should be created, to 
define what information is needed, where is it 
obtained and who is involved in it. In this case they 
are instances of the concepts External Environment 
Information, Internal Environment Information and 
Information Agent. In the instances of the first two 
concepts, it can be specified where the information is 
obtained by defining the property Source, the type of 
value to be obtained (property TypeValue), as well 
as who is responsible for obtaining the value of this 
information, provided by a reference to an instance 
of the concept Information Agent. 
 
 
TABLE I.  
EXTRACT OF OM  CONCEPTS DICTIONARY 
Super 
Concept  
Concept 
Properties 
Type 
Reference 
 
Object 
Identifier 
String 
 
Name 
String 
 
Level 
Integer 
 
Object 
Mission 
Description 
String 
 
Object 
Environ. 
Informat. 
Type 
String 
(Internal/ 
External) 
 
Value 
String/ 
Decimal 
 
Source 
String 
 
TypeValue 
String 
(Quantity/ 
Quality) 
 
Calculation 
Method 
String 
 
IsAcquired 
 
ReferenceTo 
Information 
Agent 
Environ. 
Informat. 
External 
Environ. 
Informat. 
OnBasisOf1 
ReferenceTo 
External 
Environ. 
Informat. 
Environ. 
Informat. 
Internal 
Environ. 
Informat. 
OnBasisOf2 
ReferenceTo 
Internal 
Environ. 
Informat. 
Object 
Agent 
Frequency 
String 
 
AgentType 
String 
(Information  
/Objective,..) 
 
Module 
ReferenceTo 
Program 
Code  
Agent 
Information 
Agent  
Acquire 
ReferenceTo 
Environ. 
Informat. 
 
From the last point, a first advantage can be identified: 
comparing to the way the task of analysing the environment 
using CI tools is traditionally performed, the use of the 
ontology directly integrates the diversity of information and 
knowledge within the SP process itself. Until now, it was 
necessary to use different CI tools depending on the type of 
information to be collected for later generating reports for 
the rest of the SP process. 
In addition, once the way of formally define and specify 
(using an instance) the information or a variable of the 
environment is set up, it can be reused for subsequent SP 
processes or reviews. 
Moreover, the ontology itself provides some level of 
automation in the collection and updating of information, 
thanks to the property Frequency of concept Agent. This 
property determines how often the Agent has to update the 
value of the information that is related. This is interesting 
because of the need of organizations to regularly make 
adjustments or revisions of the SP, which implies a partial 
review of the whole process. 
Due to the fact that agents represent the Stakeholders 
involved in the SP process, they have a property Module that 
contains the heuristics that is applied to obtain the value of 
the information to which they relate. Thus, each agent is 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

responsible for providing to the process the information it 
knows. 
The fact that instances of Environment Information 
contain a property Name, allows the creation of other 
instances of Environment Information that uses them and 
belongs to a higher level of abstraction (knowledge). For 
example, let Env1 and Env2 be two instances of the 
Environment Information concept, whose names are 
Env1.Name = Country_Competition_Index and Env2.Name = 
European_Competition_Index and they are computed by two 
instances of the Information Agent concept Ag1 and Ag2. It 
is possible to create another instance Env3.Name = 
Ratio_Competition_Index of the Environment Information 
concept with a higher level of abstraction, which depends 
upon (relation depends_uponx in Om) the others and is 
computed by an instance of the Information Agent concept 
Ag3. This way, the ontology enables two important features: 
the possibility of interaction between agents using a common 
vocabulary and its use to cooperate.  
The relationships between concepts formalize the order 
in which the tasks of the process are carried out, due to the 
fact that they establish the restrictions and dependencies 
between instances of two associated concepts at different 
levels of the process. For example, to create an instance of 
the SWOT concept of level 4 it is necessary to create in 
advance instances of concepts Thread, Opportunity, Strengh 
and Weakness of which it depends according to the 
relationships HaveThreat, HaveOpportunity, etc., which are 
of level 2 and 3. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The complex and uncertain environment surrounding 
today organizations have imposed the need for a change in 
the organizational model. The intelligent organization model 
requires a new form of governance in which it is essential 
that the Strategic Planning process has a more participatory 
approach allowing an increased participation and interaction 
of the stakeholders in the procurement and management of 
information/knowledge, and based on it, in making decisions 
that serve to achieve the synchrony of the organization with 
this environment. This is the way to reduce the uncertainty 
and complexity of the environment due to the fact that, on 
one hand, a large amount of characterizing variables is 
obtained and, on the other hand, they are obtained in an 
easier and more agile way thanks to the participation of 
several specialists (Stakeholders). 
The proposed ontology allows the formalization of the 
SP process by fixing its steps and its dependencies, the 
concepts of the domain that take part in the process, as well 
as their relationships and the Stakeholders involved in it. The 
formalization of the concepts provides a common 
vocabulary, which the Stakeholders can use to communicate 
and interact throughout the completion of the process. 
Finally, the fact that the development of the SP process is 
translated into a set of instances with a formal well-defined 
structure allows its reuse in other SP processes, as well as 
obtaining a complete documentation of the process in a more 
accessible format that is habitual nowadays. Moreover, it is 
even possible to automate certain parts of the SP process, so 
that the instances generated by previous operations are 
machine-readable (property of the ontology). 
The presented ontology for SP process is the first stage to 
propose a formal, automated and agile model for Strategic 
Planning. The very next step is defining the ontology using 
OWL to obtain the subsequent generation of the associated 
classes of a programming language. The aim of this 
hierarchy of classes is allowing the development of a 
graphical tool to design and graphically display the SP 
process. It could be possible by incorporating a panel of 
visible objects that represent instances of the classes and 
which could be accessed to specify their properties. This 
graphical tool will be the germ of an integral system for 
automated SP. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. Ventura López. Strategic Analysis of the Company, Ed. 
Paraninfo CENGAGE Learning, ISBN 978-84-9732-302-4, 
2009. 
[2] O. Zara. Managing Collective Intelligence: Toward a New 
Corporate Governance, Ed. M2 Editions, ISBN: 978-291-62-
6026-6, 2008. 
[3] I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi. The knowledge-creating 
Company: How Japanese Companies Create the Dynamics of 
Innovation, Ed. Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-509269-
4, 1995. 
[4] P. M. Senge. The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the 
Learning Organization, Doubleday/Currency, ISBN: 978-847-
57-7351-3, 2006. 
[5] M. Z. Cox, J. Daspit, E. McLaughlin, and R. J. Jones. 
“Strategic Management: Is It an Academic Discipline?”. III 
Journal of Business Strategies, Vol. 29 Issue 1, pp. 27-28, 
2012. 
[6] C. W. L. Hill and G. R. Jones. Strategic Management: An 
Integrated Approach, 8th Edition, Ed. McGrawHill. ISBN: 
978-970-10-7269-1, 2012. 
[7] T. R. Gruber. “A Translation Approach to Portable 
Ontologies”. Knowledge Acquisition, 1993, pp. 199–220. 
[8] W. Borst. Construction of Engineering Ontologies. PhD 
thesis, Institute for Telematica and Information Technology, 
University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands, 1997. 
[9] R. Studer, V. Richard Benjamins, and F. Dieter. “Knowledge 
engineering: Principles and methods”, 1998, pp. 161–198. 
[10] N. Guarino. “Formal Ontology in Information Systems”. In 
Proceedings of FOIS'98, Trento, Italy, IOS Press, Amsterdam, 
1998. 
[11] N. F. Noy and D. L. McGuinness. “Ontology Development 
101: A Guide to Creating Your First Ontology”, 2001. 
[12] M. Uschold. “Building Ontologies: towards a unified 
methodology”. Proceedings of Expert Systems '96, the 16th 
Annual Conference of the British Computer Society Specialist 
Group on Expert Systems, Cambridge, 1996. 
[13] M. Smith, I. Horrocks, M. Hrötzsch, and B. Glimm. OWL 2 
Web Ontology Language: Conformance (Second Edition), 
2012. 
[14] F. Llorens. Strategic Plan of the University of Alicante 
(Horizonte 
2012) 
http://web.ua.es/es/peua/horizonte-
2012.html, 2007. [Retreived: December, 2014] 
[15] C. A. Olivera Rodríguez. “Strategic Exercise: Facilitator 
Guide”. Matanzas, 2011.  
[16] N. Pahl and A. Richter. Swot Analysis - Idea, Methodology 
and a Practical Approach, Ed. Books on Demand, 2009. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[17] J. F. Prescott and S. H. Miller. Proven Strategies in 
Competitive Intelligence: Lessons from the Trenches, Ed. 
Wiley, 2004. 
[18] C. Howson. Successful Business Intelligence: Unlock the 
Value of BI & Big Data, Ed. McGraw Hill Education, ISBN: 
978-0071809184, 2013. 
[19] A. Johannes Pretorius. “Ontologies - Introduction and 
Overview”. Semantic Technology and Applications Research 
Laboratory, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium, Adapted 
from: PRETORIUS, A.J., “Lexon Visualisation: Visualising 
Binary Fact Types in Ontology Bases”, Chapter 2, 
Unpublished MSc Thesis, Brussels, Vrije Universiteit 
Brussel, 2004. 
[20] S. Paradies, S. Zillner and M. Skubacz. “Towards 
Collaborative 
Strategy 
Content 
Management 
using 
Ontologies”. Workshop on Collaborative Construction, 
Management 
and 
Linking 
of 
Structured 
Knowledge. 
International Semantic Web Conference. ISSN 1613-0073. 
Washington D.C., 2009.  
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

