Proﬁling of Patrons’ Interest Areas from Library’s Circulation Records
– An Approach to Knowledge Management for University Students –
Toshiro Minami
Kyushu Institute of Information Sciences,
Dazaifu, Fukuoka, Japan, and
Kyushu University Library,
Fukuoka, Japan
Email: minami@kiis.ac.jp, minami@lib.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Abstract—The concept of knowledge management is impor-
tant not only in industries but also in educational organizations
like universities. Considering the importance of this concept,
it is not surprising that many universities have introduced the
database system for saving the proﬁles and history informa-
tion of students and utilize them in order to improve their
educational abilities. In order to make the information more
effective in education, it is preferable to collect not only the
information in raw but also the knowledge that is found by
the data with data analysis and data mining. In this paper,
as a new approach to knowledge mining in education as a
part of educational knowledge management, we deal with the
circulation records of a university library as the target data.
The library’s circulation records show the relationship between
the patrons and the books, which are usable to know the
patrons about their ﬁelds of interest, knowledge levels, and
other information. In this paper, we put special emphasis on
the investigation of the proﬁling of students as a knowledge
management. As a part of this, we deal with the interest area of
a student and explore the measuring methods for the proﬁling
of the student patrons.
Keywords-knowledge management; knowledge discovery; li-
brary marketing; data analysis; data mining;
I. INTRODUCTION
The most important mission of a university as an edu-
cational organization is to provide its students with good
learning environment. The concept of knowledge manage-
ment is important not only in industries but also in such
an educational organization so that it can manage the data
concerning its students’ learning ability, willingness to study,
and other aspects that relate to learning and studying.
Considering the importance of this issue, it is getting to be
popular and many universities have introduced the database
systems for saving the proﬁle and history information of stu-
dents and utilize them in order to improve their educational
abilities. Such a database is sometimes called a learning
portfolio, student portfolio, or digital portfolio, etc.
In order to make the information more effective in edu-
cation, it is preferable to collect not only the information
recorded by teachers and other staff as an original data
but also the knowledge that is found by the data with data
analysis and data mining.
In this paper, as a new approach to knowledge mining in
education, we deal with library data analysis, especially the
circulation records. The library’s circulation records have an
advantage because every university has a library network and
every library must have the circulation records as necessary
data in their services. In this paper, we take the circulation
data of a university library as the target for analysis and show
how to extract useful information out of them. The library’s
circulation records deal with the relationship between the
patrons and the books, which can be used to know the
patrons about their ﬁelds of interest, knowledge levels [6],
and other information.
So quite a lot of researches have been conducted so
far. For example circulation records are used for evaluation
of collections of library in [2]. They are usually analyzed
with various kinds of statistical methods, which are very
useful to efﬁciently recognize the representative image of
the total data. The system WorldCat Collection Analysis
[11], for example, provides an easy-to-use and easy-to-
recognize analysis environment to librarians, based on the
standard statistical methods. A research on circulation record
analysis for evaluating the usage of e-books is reported in
[2]. Yamada analyzed the circulation records of a university
library with considering the material age of the circulated
books [12]. In addition to these research based on the
statistical methods, investigation of the association rules in
classiﬁcation category of books using a data mining method
is reported in [1].
Our approach to circulation record analysis is different
from such standard methods. We take the analysis methods
combining two ways; one is the statistical one for surveying
the general tendencies of the patrons, and another one is the
new way trying to ﬁnd the more realistic patron’s behavioral
model and to understand the patrons’ behavior in reading,
studying, and using of libraries more precisely, including
their underlying needs, preferences etc. In this paper we
show some example data analysis experiences as a case
study using the circulation records of the Central Library
of Kyushu University, Japan (KUL) for the academic year
2007. The results shown in this paper are extensions to the
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

results reported in [3], [4], [5], and [8]. Our aim in this paper
is to propose new methods for getting more precise patron
proﬁling as a whole and a patron’s preference, knowledge
level, eagerness to learning, etc. that will be helpful for
personalized services in learning assistance.
In the paper [6], we proposed the concept of p-rank for
measuring expertise level of a book and of a patron. In this
paper we propose two new concepts for measuring interest
range size and earnestness in learning. We compare faculties
in their features by applying these measures.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section II
we review our previous research results and show some
case studies that inspire the research presented in this paper.
In Section III, we propose a concept of the proﬁle of a
patron that indicate the patron’s interest. Then we deﬁne two
concepts for measuring interest range size and strength of
earnestness for studying from the patron’s proﬁle. We then
investigate how to capture the patrons behavior through these
measures. We also deﬁne the similar concepts for a group of
patrons and apply them to the comparative study of faculties.
Finally in Section IV, we summarize what we have done in
this paper and prospect possible future works.
II. PROFILING OF PATRON WITH DATA ANALYSIS FROM
LIBRARY DATA
This section describes some of our case studies on data
analysis of library data. The study in the next section is an
extension to these analysis experiences.
A. Target Data for Proﬁling with Data Analysis
In this paper, we use the circulation records obtained
in the Central Library of Kyushu University, Japan, in the
academic year 2007; i.e. from April 2007 to March 2008.
The whole data contain 67,304 circulation records. A record
item consists of the book ID, book’s classiﬁcation number,
call number, borrower’s patron ID (renumbered one so that
the record does not link to the real patron ID), borrower’s
afﬁliation, borrower’s type (undergraduate student, masters
student, Ph.D student, professor, staff, others), and the
timestamps for borrowing and returning, etc.
The number of patrons, who borrowed at least one book
during this year period, is 6,118 in all and the average
number of borrowed books per patron is about 11.
A circulation record has 10 patron types: undergraduate
student (Bachelors-1 to 6, or B1 to B6), masters student (M),
Ph.D students (D), academic staff (Professors, P), and others
(O). About 45% of books are borrowed by undergraduate
students and 24% by masters and 15% by Ph.D students.
Thus about 80% of books are found to be borrowed by
students; which supports based-on the objective data that
the frequently-told saying that most important patrons of
university libraries are students.
B. Preprocessing of Circulation Records
As a preprocessing, we eliminate the records that have
inappropriate values and no data for the inevitable properties
(items) that are necessary to deal with in the analysis in this
paper. For example 244 records have NDC (Nippon Decimal
Classiﬁcation) numbers that are greater than 1000 and 7,260
records have the non-numeric values for this item and thus
have eliminated from the original records. After elimination,
53,182 records are left as those for analysis.
C. Case Study: Expertise Level as a Proﬁle for Library
Patrons and Library Books
The concept of the expertise level of a patron is useful
in various purposes in such cases as to recommend books
to read, to form a study group, to estimate the period of
times to need for the patron to study some speciﬁc subject,
etc. We deﬁned an expertise level measure of a book and a
patron, which we call p-rank in both cases [6].
We deﬁned the expertise level of a book as the average
value of its borrowers’ initial expertise levels; where the
initial expertise levels of B1 to B6 are set to 1 to 6,
respectively, 8 for M, 9 for D, and 10 for P. We do not count
the patrons of the type (O). Then we deﬁne the expertise
level of a patron as the average expertise levels of the books
the patron borrows in the circulation records. See the paper
[6] for more detail about p-rank, and c-rank, which is another
deﬁnition for expertise level of a book.
D. Deﬁnition of a-value as Another Measure for Expertise
Level
As another idea for deﬁning expertise level of books with
assuming that if a book is borrowed by a limited number of
patrons then its expertise level is high. In other words, if a
book is borrowed by a wide range of patrons, its expertise
level is low.
Based on this assumption we deﬁne the a-value (afﬁliation
based expertise level) of a book [5]. Firstly we have to
choose the faculties as the representatives of expertise ﬁelds.
Afﬁliations of Kyushu University consist of not only the
faculties for undergraduate students but also of some number
of research centers, library, communications center, and
others. We will take 12 faculties together with the graduate
schools for graduate students relating ﬁelds and research
organizations for professors; precisely, SC for (Faculty of)
Sciences, AG for Agriculture, TE for Engineering, MD for
Medicine, DD for Dental, PS for Pharmaceutical, LA for
Law, LT for Letter, EC for Economy, ED for Education,
DS for Design, and 21 for the special faculty of Kyushu
University called 21st century program, which was founded
for the students who are willing to study from a wide variety
of learning ﬁelds.
So there are 12 groups based on the faculties. Let m be
12 as the number of categories and let Fi (i = 1, 2, . . . , m)
be the i-th faculty. The a-value of a book is calculated as
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

follows. Let CR be the set of circulation records; CR =
{r =< BookID, NDC Number, Borrower, Borrowed
Day and Time, Returned Day and Time, . . . >}. We
use BI(r) for the book ID, Cls(r) for the NDC number,
B(r) for the borrower, Bd(r) for the borrowed day and
time, and Rd(r) for the returned day and time, of r. For a
given book b, let us deﬁne the number si (i = 1, 2, . . . , m)
of the book for the faculty Fi by si = #{r ∈ CR|BI(r) =
b, B(r) ∈ Fi}, where # is the number of elements. We put
0 for a-value if all the si’s are zero; i.e. that the book is
borrowed by the patrons who do not belong to these faculty
related afﬁliations. Let us set s = Σm
i=1si, i.e. total number
of circulations borrowed by the patrons belonging to either
one of the nominated faculties. Then we deﬁne the a-value
of the book b as 10 × Σm
i=1(si/s)2, where multiplication
value of 10 is used in order to make the maximum value to
10 so that it becomes easier to compare it with other values.
III. INTEREST AREA ANALYSIS FROM CIRCULATION
RECORDS
A. Proﬁling Interest Area of Patrons
The eventual goal of the study in this paper is to provide
library patrons with good learning environment. Mostly the
services provided by libraries are intending to be universal;
to every patron in a uniform way and thus in a uniform
level. However toward the future, personalized services are
expected to be more and more important for libraries. With
personalized services, patrons are able to get better assis-
tance that matches more to the patrons’ needs and will have
better effects in learning. In order to provide with unique
services we would like to investigate in developing methods
of analyzing the library data and to obtain knowledge about
the proﬁles of patrons.
In this paper, we deal with proﬁling the patrons’ in-
terest areas by analyzing circulation records. The concept
of interest areas of a patron may be considered good for
characterizing the patron’s attitude to learning. We would be
able to extend the proﬁle on interest areas to other properties
of patron that relate more on knowledge level, learning
abilities, learning styles, etc.
We use the classiﬁcation ﬁeld of book using the NDC
number of the book. NDC is a decimal classiﬁcation sys-
tem like DDC (Dewey Decimal Classiﬁcation) localized to
Japan. The top level categories consist of the following
10 topics; 000 for General Works, 100 for Philosophy
and Religion, 200 for History and Geography, 300 for
Social Sciences, 400 for Natural Sciences, 500 Technology
(Engineering), 600 for Industry and Commerce, 700 for Arts,
800 for Language, and 900 for Literature. Note that NDC
classiﬁcation items are different from those of DDC.
For a patron p, we deﬁne the proﬁle Prof(p) of p as the
vector of frequencies of the books borrowed by the patron
p according with the books’ 10 classiﬁcation numbers from
000 to 900 in NDC.
Figure 1.
Proﬁles of the Top 11 Patrons in the Numbers of Borrowed
Books, or Items
For a patron p, we deﬁne Prof(p) = {< bt(c) >c∈NDC
| bt(c) = #{r ∈ CR | B(r) = p, and Cls(r) = c}}.
We apply this deﬁnition of Prof(p) to the 53,182 circu-
lation records that are described in Section II-B. Figure 1
shows the proﬁle patterns in 100% stacked column chart of
top 11 patrons in terms of the number of borrowed books.
We will call them from Patron A (P.A) to Patron K (P.K) in
the order of the numbers of borrowed books; from 388 by
P.A, 268 by P.B to 143 by P.J and P.K.
It is easy to see that the ratios of books according to
the classiﬁcation number, or topic area, vary from patron
to patron. For example, P.A borrows quite a wide area of
books with NDC number from 0 to 9. On the other hand, P.C
borrows mostly with the classiﬁcation number 400 (Natural
Science). Such difference about the range of topic areas
indicates a character of the patron in his or her interest range,
or curiosity range. Together with the number of the borrowed
books, this range can be good measures for characteristic
features of a patron, which will be discussed in more detail
in the next section.
B. Interest Range and Interest Strength Measures
In order to analyze deeper about the interest proﬁles of
patrons, we deﬁne 2 new measures; strength and range of
interest of a patron.
The interest strength is a concept intending to measure the
willingness to learn and to know, or earnestness to obtain
new knowledge. We use the number of books, or items,
that the patron borrows as the measure for interest strength;
Str(p) = #{r|r ∈ CR, B(r) = p} for a patron p.
Interest range is also a very important measure to describe
about the willingness of learning of a patron. As we see
Figure 1, we can easily recognize that P.A is interested in
quite a wide areas of topics, whereas P.C is mostly interested
in one subject only. In order to compare such difference
of the patterns of interest we propose a new measure for
the amount of the width of interest of patron. We use the
concept of entropy, or the amount of information, for the
interest range of a patron. Let p be a patron. We deﬁne the
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Table I
COMPARISON OF PATRONS IN THEIR PROPERTIES
㪧㪸㫋㫉㫆㫅
㪩㪸㫅㪾㪼
㪪㫋㫉㪼㫅㪾㫋㪿
㪘㪽㪽㫀㫃㫀㪸㫋㫀㫆㫅
㪫㫐㫇㪼
㪧㪅㪘
㪇㪅㪐㪌
㪊㪏㪏
㪦
㪦
㪧㪅㪙
㪇㪅㪊㪋
㪉㪍㪏
㪣㪫
㪛
㪧㪅㪚
㪇㪅㪇㪋
㪈㪏㪌
㪪㪚
㪙㪋
㪧 㪛
㪇 㪈㪉
㪈㪏㪊
㪣㪘
㪛
㪧㪅㪛
㪇㪅㪈㪉
㪈㪏㪊
㪣㪘
㪛
㪧㪅㪜
㪇㪅㪈㪍
㪈㪎㪊
㪪㪚
㪙㪊
㪧 㪝
㪇 㪊㪌
㪈㪍㪏
㪣㪘
㪛
㪧㪅㪝
㪇㪅㪊㪌
㪈㪍㪏
㪣㪘
㪛
㪧㪅㪞
㪇㪅㪈㪇
㪈㪍㪎
㪣㪘
㪛
㪧㪅㪟
㪇㪅㪈㪌
㪈㪌㪇
㪪㪚
㪙㪋
㪧㪅㪠
㪇㪅㪎㪉
㪈㪋㪏
㪦
㪤
㪧㪅㪡
㪇㪅㪊㪏
㪈㪋㪊
㪘㪞
㪙㪊
㪧 㪢
㪇 㪋㪐
㪈㪋㪊
㪪㪚
㪤
㪧㪅㪢
㪇㪅㪋㪐
㪈㪋㪊
㪪㪚
㪤
(interest) range of p as follows:
Range(p) = ∑
P rof(p)c∈NDC( P rof(p)c
Str
)log( P rof(p)c
Str
)
where Str = Str(p) and Prof(p)c is the number of books
borrowed by the patron p having the NDC number c among
NDC = {000, 100, 200, . . . , 900}. We take 10 for the base
of the logarithm so that the maximum value of the range
becomes 1 because the number of the categories, i.e. number
of the NDC values, is 10.
Table I shows the range, strength, afﬁliation, and type
of the 11 patrons from P.A to P.K. As has been predicted
the range of P.A (0.952) is quite high; the highest among 11
patrons. On the other hand P.C has the minimum range value
(0.04), who’s afﬁliation is SC and the year 4 undergraduate
student (B4).
To have a closer look at the table, there are 4 students
with afﬁliation of SC (Sciences) and 2 of them are B4
(P.C and P.H) and 1 (P.E) is B3 and another one (P.K) is
M (Masters). The 3 undergraduate students have very low
range values from 0.04 to 0.16. They are very concentrated
in learning just like P.C. It is interesting to see that the
remaining masters student (P,K) has relatively bigger range
value 0.49. He or she borrows the books not only in the
natural science ﬁeld (with NDC 400), but also the books in
general topics (with NDC 000), social sciences (with NDC
300) and others as well.
There are 3 Ph.D students with afﬁliation LA (Law); P.D,
P.F, and P.G. The patrons P.D and P.G have similar range
values 0.12 and 0.10, whereas P.F has bigger value 0.35. The
former 2 students borrow the books with NDC 300 (Social
Sciences) mostly, whereas the latter student borrows not only
the books of social sciences but also the books with NDC
800 (Language) as many as of 300.
Figure 2 shows the correlation between the range size (x-
axis) and the strength (y-axis) for all patrons. The range
value 0 means that the patron borrows only one book. The
range value is 1 if the patron borrows the books with all
the NDC numbers, i.e. from 000 to 900, exactly the same
number from each category. The location of the numbers
parenthesized with [n] indicate that it is the range value, i.e.
entropy, for the case that n categories have equal numbers
Figure 2. Correlation between the Range (x-axis) and the Strength (y-axis)
of All Patrons
of books, or log10n, which is the maximum value for
having values in n categories. The location of the numbers
parenthesized with (n) indicate that it is the range value for
2 categories in which one category has the possibility of n
and the other has the possibility of 1 − n. In this case, the
maximum range value is log102 = 0.30 when n=0.5, i.e.
half and half.
The patrons from P.A to P.K are named according to the
order of the strength, or the number of borrowed books,
so they are located in the upper part of the graph. Patron
A (P.A) is located to the right-most and top-most place,
which means he or she borrows the books from all the NDC
categories with borrowing almost the same number of books
each. Furthermore P.A borrows nearly 400 books, which is
over 100 books more than the second one, i.e. P.B, who
borrows more than 250 books.
The patrons C, D, E, G, and H are located in the left-
most part of the graph having the value less than 0.2, which
means they borrow books with one category more than 80%
of times and other ones less than 20%. Thus they have very
limited range of interest.
The patrons B, F, J, and K are located in the range with the
range value from 0.3 to 0.5, which means, roughly speaking,
they mainly borrow books with 2 or 3 categories.
C. Interest Proﬁle for a Group of Patrons
The deﬁnition of proﬁle of a patron is naturally extendable
to a group of patrons. Let P be a group of patrons, then the
proﬁle of the group P is deﬁned as follows:
Prof(P) = {< bt(c) >c∈NDC | bt(c) = #{r ∈ CR |
B(r) ∈ P, and Cls(r) = c}}. In other words, the c-th com-
ponent of Prof(P) is the sum of the c-th component of the
members of the group P; Prof(P)c = ∑
p∈P Prof(p)c.
Figure 3 shows the proﬁles of the afﬁliations of patrons.
The names in the ﬁgure come after the faculty names; the
graduate students and academic staff’s afﬁliation names are
assigned to the faculty names that are mostly closed to
the patrons’ afﬁliations. Patrons who have no appropriate
relationship to a faculty is assigned to other (O).
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Figure 3.
Proﬁles of Patrons’ Afﬁliations (or “Faculties”)
Figure 4.
Correlation between Region Size (x-axis) and Strength (y-axis)
of Faculties
Figure 4 shows the correlation between region size and
strength of faculties. SC (Sciences) is far away from other
faculties in both axes. It has the lowest value in region size
and the highest in strength, which mean that patrons in SC
borrow the books in natural sciences (NDC 400) mostly and
the number of the borrowed books are quite high, which
probably because that their places locate very close to the
library and thus it is quite easy for them to visit the library
and borrow many books.
PS (Pharmaceutical), DD (Dental), and LA (Law) are
located in the left part from the line with the range size
0.5, which means that their patrons also borrows books of
their expertise area mainly than other faculties. The reason
why the strengths, or the numbers of borrowed books, of PS
and DD is that their faculties locate in a different campus
from where the library locates. Thus the patrons in PS and
DD visit the library in order to get the books they could not
ﬁnd in the libraries in their own campus. LA is, on the other
hand, located in the same campus as the library and also the
number of the members is larger than that of PS and DD.
It is interesting to see that DS (Design) and MD (Medical)
are located in the lower right part where their range size is
relatively large. Even though MD locates in the same campus
as PS and DD, its range size is far bigger than these two.
Figure 5.
Comparison between the Range Size (x-axis) and the Average
Range Size of the Members (y-axis) of Faculties
In order to ﬁnd the reason of this fact, we investigate
more on the patrons’ behavior. Anyway in some reason the
members of MD visit the library in a different campus in
order not to ﬁnd the books relating to their study in their
expertise ﬁeld but to ﬁnd books in a wide variety of books.
DS locates in a campus of it own, i.e. different campus
from that of library and even farther than that of MD, PS,
and DD. The strength, i.e. the number of borrowed books, is
small probably because of this reason. DS is a faculty that
relates both to engineering and design, and thus it is easy to
guess that their interest range as a whole is wide. However
it is still a surprising fact that its range size is larger than
any other faculties including O (Other, or unclassiﬁed).
Another surprise is that LT (Letter) has high range size. LT
patrons borrow books not only of literature (NDC 900), but
also of those in other areas nearly as many as of literature.
We are able to deﬁne the concept of interest range of a
group, or faculty in the current situation, in another point of
view; the average range size of the members of the group.
Formally, AverageRange(P) = average{Range(p) | p ∈
P} for a group P of patrons. Figure 5 shows the difference
of the range size and the average range size of faculties. The
line in the graph is the linear approximation line.
From the deﬁnition, we can see that even if each member
have low range size, that as a group is much wider if each
member’s interest area is different. In other words, if all
the members of a group have exactly the same proﬁle and
thus have the same range size, the average range size is the
same value as of members. So we can say roughly that the
difference between the range size and the average range size
indicates the varieties of the interest proﬁles of the members.
From this view, or interpretation, quite many faculties are
close to the approximation line and thus they have average
interest varieties of the members. The faculties LT and NC
have larger average range size than the one on the line. So we
can say that these faculties have a wider variety of members
in terms of interest ranges.
On the other hand DD, MD, and TE locate in the lower
area of the line. So we can say that the members in these
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

faculties have a narrower variety of interest proﬁles than
other faculties; i.e. the members have somewhat similar
interest ranges.
IV. CONCLUDING REMARKS
We proposed a new concept of interest area proﬁle of
a patron using a set of circulation records of a university
library. Considering that one of the most important missions
of a library, especially of a university library, is to help its
patrons with learning more effectively and more efﬁciently
in the comfortable and enjoyable environment. In order
to achieve this goal, capturing the proﬁles of patrons in
terms of their learning styles, their learning histories, their
knowledge levels, their interests, their preferences, and so
on, is important.
In order to compare the proﬁles of patrons in more
practical ways, we additionally proposed new concepts of
strength and range (size) of the proﬁle. The strength intends
to represent the eagerness or diligence to learning of the
patron and we take the number of the borrowed books, or
items, of the patron in this paper. The range size intends
to represent the amount of eagerness or earnestness of the
patron in terms of the width of the topic areas. We took the
information entropy for deﬁning this concept in this paper.
We see the patrons’ characters not only with proﬁles but
also with these two values.
The concept of proﬁle was extended to a group of
patrons, especially to faculties. The concepts of strength
and range were also extended to groups. We compared and
characterized the faculties by these concepts and analyzed
the characteristic features of faculties.
Our approach to library data analysis is quite new and
there are no other such studies to our knowledge. Even
though our current analysis methods are still in a primi-
tive level, we are convinced from our experience that our
methods have high potential as a tool for library marketing,
and thus it will become an essential tool in the future.
The research directions of this paper include the topics:
• Investigation of more appropriate deﬁnitions of the
concepts of the amount of eagerness to learning and
the interest range size
• Exploration of deﬁning other concepts such as style of
learning, learning pace, preference in learning, etc. of
a learner
• Utilization of circulation records and other data that are
obtainable by libraries
• Usage of other data from different sources; for example
usage of lecture data
• Systematizing the analysis methods and developing a
learning support system and/or knowledge management
system
This research was partly supported by the Ministry of
Education, Science, Sports and Culture, Grant-in-Aid for
Scientiﬁc Research (C), 24500318, 2012.
REFERENCES
[1] S. J. Cunningham and E. Frank, Market basket analysis
of library circulation data, Proceedings of 6th International
Conference on Neural Information Processing, 825-830. IEEE
Computer Society, Perth, WA, Australia, 1999.
[2] J. Littman and L. S. Connaway, A Circulation Analysis of
Print Books and e-Books in an Academic Research Library.
Library Resources & Technical Services, 48(4), 256-262,
2004.
[3] T. Minami and E. Kim, Data Analysis Methods for Library
Marketing, The 2009 International Conference on Database
Theory and Application (DTA 2009), LNCS, 5899, 26-33,
Springer, Heidelberg, 2009.
[4] T. Minami, Challenge toward Patron Understanding - A
Search for Patron’s Proﬁle through Circulation Data of
Library
–,
Kyushu
University
Library:
Annual
Report
2010/2011, 9-18, 2011. (in Japanese)
[5] T. Minami, Book Proﬁling from Circulation Records for
Library Marketing – Beginning from Manual Analysis toward
Systematization –. International Conference on Applied and
Theoretical Information Systems Research (ATISR 2012),
pp.15, 2012.
[6] T. Minami, Expertise Level Estimation of Library Books by
Patron-Book Heterogeneous Information Network Analysis
– Concept and Applications to Library’s Learning Assistant
Service –. The 8th International Symposium on Frontiers of
Information Systems and Network Applications (FINA 2012),
DOI 19.1109/WAINA.2012.184, pp.357-362, 2012.
[7] T. Minami and Y. Ohura, Toward Learning Support for Deci-
sion Making – Utilization of Library and Lecture Data –, 4th
International Conference on Intelligent Decision Technologies
(KES-IDT’2012), Springer Smart Innovation, Systems and
Technologies 16, pp.137-147, 2012.
[8] T. Minami and K. Baba, Investigation of Interest Range and
Earnestness of Library Patrons from Circulation Records,
International Conference on e-Services and Knowledge Man-
agement (ESKM 2012), as a part of the 1st IIAI International
Conference on Advanced Applied Informatics (IIAI-AAI
2012), IEEE CPS, DOI 10.1109/IIAI-AAI2012.15, pp.25-29,
2012.
[9] T. Minami and Y. Ohura, An Attempt on Effort-Achievement
Analysis of Lecture Data for Effective Teaching, The 2012
International Conference on Database Theory and Application
(DTA 2012), T.-h. Kim et al. (Eds.): EL/DTA/UNESST 2012,
CCIS 352, pp. 50–57. Springer, 2012.
[10] T. Minami and Y. Ohura, Towards Development of Lecture
Data Analysis Method and its Application to Improvement
of Teaching, 2nd International Conference on Applied and
Theoretical Information Systems Research (2ndATISR 2012),
2012. (to appear)
[11] Online Computer Library Center, Inc. (OCLC), WorldCat
Collection Analysis. http://www.oclc.org/collectionanalysis/
[12] S. Yamada, Analysis of Library Book Circulation Data:
Turnover of Open-shelf Books, Journal of College and Uni-
versity Libraries 69, 27-33, 2003. (in Japanese)
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

