Reorganization of KM-Oriented Medium Voltage Power System Planning Process
Ricardo H. Guembarovski 
Post-Graduate Program in Knowledge Engineering and 
Management  
Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina (UFSC) 
Florianópolis-SC, Brazil 
E-mail: ricardohg@celec.com.br 
Murialdo Loch 
Post-Graduate Program in Knowledge Engineering and 
Management  
Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina (UFSC) 
Florianópolis-SC, Brazil 
E-mail: murialdo@egc.ufsc.br 
Jose Leomar Todesco 
Post-Graduate Program in Knowledge Engineering and 
Management  
Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina (UFSC) 
Florianópolis-SC, Brazil 
E-mail: tite@egc.ufsc.br 
Jeferson de Souza 
Post-Graduate Program in Knowledge Engineering and 
Management  
Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina (UFSC) 
Florianópolis-SC, Brazil 
E-mail: jefersons@celesc.com.br 
 
Abstract—The planning of medium voltage power systems has 
been so far carried out in a limited way. Apart from the purely 
technical aspects, other issues as relevant as the task of planning 
must be identified and defined. The methods currently available 
are based solely on mathematical principles and computational 
techniques applied to the schematic representation of power 
systems. The organization of the planning process proposed here 
stems from a cognitive approach that associates intrinsic 
knowledge with planning activities and other relevant aspects. A 
description of the organization of the planning process is 
preliminary presented so that the other aspects inherent to this 
activity are identified. From a systemic perspective, the re-
organization of the planning process is proposed taking its efficacy 
into account. Finally, the reorganization of the planning process is 
evaluated so that its properties are identified along with its 
efficiency. Undoubtedly, the planning of medium voltage power 
systems requires improvement. The optimization of this process 
transcends classical and purely technical problems with power 
systems, which leads us to propose a reorganization of the 
planning process, focusing on knowledge management (KM) as 
the main paradigm of investigation. 
Keywords-Process Management; Planning of Power Systems; 
Knowledge Management 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper discusses the planning of electric power 
distribution systems, more specifically the planning of a 
medium voltage distribution system. The re-organization of 
this planning process based on knowledge management is 
the main purpose of this study.  
The Brazilian national electric power industry has been 
considered one of the best in the world in terms of reliability 
and operational costs [1]. With some rare exceptions, the 
electrical power distribution system has always presented 
supply quality levels compatible with those demanded from 
the consumer market. 
In general, the interconnected system receives the energy 
generated by hydroelectric, eolic and thermal plants. The 
whole process occurs in accordance with rules established by 
various regulating agencies. In this context, Agência 
Nacional de Energia Elétrica – ANEEL [National Agency 
for Electrical Energy] has as a mission to provide favorable 
conditions so that the electrical energy market develops in a 
sustained and balanced way among its agents and for the 
benefit of society [2].  
The 
electrical 
power 
system 
consists 
of 
three 
interconnected components, each one with very distinct 
features: generation, transmission and distribution. The 
distribution systems, so called due to the fact they operate on 
voltage equal to or lower than 138 kV, distribute energy to 
all classes of consuming clients.   
In accordance with PRODIST [3] the distribution system 
can be classified as: High Voltage Distribution System 
(HVDS) with nominal voltage between 138 kV and 69 kV; 
Medium Voltage Distribution System (MVDS) with nominal 
voltage between 13.8 kV and 34.5 kV; and Low Voltage 
Distribution System (LVDS) with nominal voltage between 
440 Volts and 110 Volts. The distribution systems are 
interconnected by means of distribution substations (DSs) 
which aim to transfer vast amounts of power at more 
adequate voltage levels to distribution in accordance with 
urban specificities. Fig. 1 displays an electric power 
distribution system.   
The MVDS, a primary network segment in Fig. 1, aims 
to supply electric power from the DSs to low and medium 
voltage clients, which include large companies, industries, 
commercial clients and residences located in the rural and 
urban areas. This preliminary study focuses exclusively on 
the planning of a MVDS.  
It is argued here that the planning activities carried out by 
electric utilities need improvement, since there are 
difficulties in meeting regulatory goals concerning supply 
quality problems and in justifying investments. Ultimately, a 
planning activity requires approaches suitable for the 
scientific paradigms that support the management processes 
of modern organizations. 
 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 1.  Representation of an electric power distribution system. 
In this context, it is important to highlight that the 
organizations that make use of old-fashioned paradigms 
show organizational deficiencies in which the main reasons 
can be [4]: 
• 
Lack of focus on the client; 
• 
Lack of clear, well-defined and disseminated 
objectives and concepts; 
• 
Processes and activities are not registered or 
optimized; 
• 
Professionals who do not know the organization’s 
role and do not participate of processes, actions and 
solutions to problems; 
• 
Lack of ways to constantly measure and evaluate the 
processes. 
Although there 
are 
good prospects 
for 
the 
quality of electricity supply in relation to a medium voltage 
distribution system, there is much to be done in terms of 
improving the planning process: 
a) operationally, long and successive energy supply 
interruptions and problems of voltage regulation occur in 
MVDSs and LVDSs, resulting in damages and regulatory 
fees.  Additionally, these problems detract the company’s 
image in a significant way. 
b) tactically, organizational problems associated with 
indefinite processes often occur. There is some difficulty in 
integrating and standardizing procedures and Technologies.  
c) strategically, planning experts are questioned about 
their reasons for technical alternatives and requests for 
resources, which are not convincingly justified. There is 
much uncertainty and generally decision-makers, who act 
strategically, do not obtain the necessary information to 
make effective decisions due to lack of appropriate 
computational tools and processes. 
From a historical perspective, investments have not 
followed the demands for market expansion. In addition, 
experts face difficulties in articulating good investment 
justifications; the regulatory rigor is strong; financial 
resources are short; consumer market is demanding; 
ultimately, decision-makers need to know the organizational 
processes, that is, they need knowledge. It is believed that 
these issues would be attended to if a reorganization of the 
MVDS planning process was effectively implemented and 
supported by appropriate knowledge management. 
In line with [23], R$ 75 million was spent nationwide on 
fines resulting from problems of power quality supply 
between 2008 and 2009. Furthermore, it is highlighted that 
some electric utility companies going in the opposite 
direction of the regulatory framework signal an investment 
reduction, which implies a risk to distributors. ANEEL 
shows that investments must be justified and when approved 
they must be carried out in their integrity under penalty of 
the utility companies being discounted in the next tariff 
cycles [23]. 
In order to acquire a real picture of this process, in 2009, 
CELESC Distribution S.A., a state electric power 
distribution company in Santa Catarina state, provided 
electric power to approximately 2,256,178 consumers and 
invested more than R$ 66 million in LVDS and MVDS 
distribution networks [21]. 
In order to stay competitive in the market, the electricity 
distribution companies need systematically develop an 
investment plan consistent with reality. Technical data, 
information about electric systems and the market, 
ultimately, knowledge of this process is indispensable.  In 
this sense, [18] affirm that within information economy, 
pivotal 
knowledge-based 
competencies 
represent 
the 
organization’s greatest asset. Knowing how to do things 
effectively is the greatest differentiator of success.   
Another fundamental aspect when organizational issues 
are discussed has to do with the need to evaluate all the 
component parts of a process from various points of view. 
According to [24], systems thinking enables professionals to 
understand that a process consists of parts dependent on the 
whole and that these parts should not be analyzed in 
isolation. Systems thinking leads us to always evaluate the 
whole, considering the other disciplines of which it is 
comprised.  
In Sections 2 and 3, the current process of planning a 
power system is presented along with a brief introduction to 
knowledge management connected with the systems view, 
which is an intrinsic foundation to the study being 
developed. In Sections 4 and 5, the reorganization of the 
planning process is proposed with a view to knowledge 
management. Finally, conclusions and recommendations are 
offered. 
II. 
THE CURRENT MVDS PLANNING PROCESS 
Organizational efficiency has been an object of research 
due to its relevance to the economic context. Production with 
the highest possible quality and lower costs is the goal of any 
company that intends to stay competitive in the market.   
According to [13], as large companies perceive that one 
of the greatest competitive advantages of organizations is the 
production of intangible assets, knowledge of business 
processes becomes increasingly critical. In [12] view, these 
processes represent to modern organizations the essence to 
enable their existence, especially when the analysis of an 
organization emphasizes the evaluation of its processes and 
not only the results of these processes. 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Still according to [13], much of the literature defines a 
process as a set of sequential tasks that receive input, process 
value-adding functions, and provide customers with a 
product or service. Therefore, an organization has within 
itself a set of processes that constitute it, and some processes 
can be more efficient and effective than others. 
With a vast bibliography, the planning of distribution 
systems counts on a set of methods and computational 
techniques that have been developed for decades. Module 2, 
which refers to the PRODIST, establishes the guidelines for 
the expansion planning of the distribution system. Either for 
a regulatory or financial reason, the level of demand 
increasingly imposes that electric utility companies continue 
to improve their results.  
Along with [11], the expansion planning of distribution 
systems consists of proposing, analyzing and selecting 
expansion alternatives to meet the increasing demand, 
respecting guidelines, restrictions and the criteria for the 
quality of electric power supply. The lower cost alternatives, 
which meet the established criteria, are selected and 
integrated into a work plan for the study period here 
established. 
Generally speaking, the planning of distribution systems 
can be understood as follows [10]: Be it a distribution system 
meeting the demands of an electric power market comprised 
of consumers. The demand associated with electric power 
consumption is dynamic and varies in space and time. The 
increase of demand requires the expansion of the distribution 
system that can be translated in general lines by the 
following actions: build substations, increase the capacity of 
transformation, build new lines and/or change lines (i.e. 
reconducting). Develop a work plan taking into account 
network operation costs, and at the same time meeting a set 
of regulatory, economic and operational restrictions 
constitutes a planning problem.  
Various studies have dedicated to the analysis of 
distribution network planning ([14][15][16][20]). Most of 
these studies, however, have an exclusive focus on the 
development of mathematical and algorithmic models based 
on schematic representations of a power system, which by 
considering restrictions and technical criteria enable experts 
to propose solutions to the identified problems. The search of 
an “optimal solution” is always a goal to be reached; 
however, the kinds of work to be carried out are selected 
most of the time by considering planning experts’ knowledge 
and intuitions.  
The MVDS planning is carried out considering five years 
of annual periodicity. The following study year receives 
special attention from experts. Additionally, from a purely 
technical perspective, experts consider the demand forecast, 
criteria and studies on planning, in accordance with the 
procedures set out in PRODIST.  
More specifically, the MVDS planning has been carried 
out along with electric utility companies in a matrix and 
analytical way. Generally, the experts identify the technical 
problems, 
analyze 
information 
and 
after 
technical 
discussions with experts from other areas that integrate the 
electric power distribution system, power flow studies are 
carried out. According to the available budget, computational 
tools and mathematical methods for analysis of variables, 
works with the best cost-benefit ratios are prioritized.  
Fig. 2 illustrates the procedures for the MVDS planning 
carried out along with electric power utility distribution 
companies.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Representation of the current MVDS planning process. 
Evaluating the current planning process (Fig. 2), some 
relevant issues can be identified as follows: 
a) There is no distinction as to task execution. The 
identification of problems, development of studies and 
choice of alternatives are not realized in a structured way; 
b) Studies are carried out, but there is no register of 
problems, studies and alternatives in a computational 
environment. 
c) Conceptual indefinitions make it difficult to 
categorize problems, technical solutions and classify 
investments; 
 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

d) There is no structured register of studies, 
consequently, there is no management of the studies carried 
out, making it difficult to improve the process; 
e) The problems are not well-defined and there are no 
systems to facilitate the composition of precise diagnosis as 
well as adequate solutions, considering the other points of 
view that integrate the MVDS technical problems. 
Still in relation to Fig. 2, it is possible to observe that the 
planning procedure is carried out annually. Alternative-
oriented studies are carried out, but they are not recorded in a 
computational environment. The computational tools are 
specific for the optimization and they are not integrated into 
a management environment. 
Planning depends on other factors. The mathematical 
procedures 
currently 
diffused 
and 
associated 
with 
computational tools are not sufficient for the planning 
composition to propitiate an investment plan that is really 
efficient and consistent with reality.  
The management of works, the supervision of the power 
system according to its dynamics, consensus in the selection 
of concepts for the identification of technical problems, 
structured 
record of 
proceedings, 
the diagnosis, 
and definition of 
problem-solution 
patterns; 
ultimately, 
all kinds of knowledge related to planning development are 
relevant for an efficient work plan to occur.   
In line with [8], one of the most difficult things to be 
understood at present is the fact that if we do something that 
is good, continue to do that does not necessarily mean to get 
the best solution. In other words, companies cling to the 
paradigms that have kept them alive until the present time, 
safe in the knowledge that this will enable them to face new 
market challenges, especially competition increment and 
regulatory scrutiny. 
III. 
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT (KM) 
In the mid-90’s, knowledge management emerged as a 
key concept to organizations, as the basic economic resource 
was no longer the capital, but knowledge [9]. 
For Rodrigues and Helena [22], knowledge society is 
based on the value of intangible assets, which makes it 
imperative 
for 
companies 
to 
focus 
on 
knowledge 
management.  Companies must also create ways to 
accumulate intangible assets, produce knowledge, transfer it, 
and also recognize the kind of knowledge that adds value to 
the 
company. 
In 
this 
scenario, 
organizational 
and 
entrepreneurial management must comprehend the concept 
of knowledge and make an effort to structure all the 
necessary activities to deal with the organization’s intangible 
assets. It is, then, essential to understand how knowledge is 
built. 
According to [19], there are two types of knowledge: 
tacit knowledge and explicit knowledge. Tacit and subjective 
knowledge kinds of knowledge are skills inherent to a 
person. It is a system of ideas, perception, experience that is 
difficult to be formalized, transferred and explained to 
another person. Explicit knowledge, on the other hand, is 
relatively easy to codify, transfer and re-utilize, as it is 
formalized in texts, graphs, tables, figures, drawings, 
schematic representations, diagrams, etc, which are easily 
organized in data banks and general publications either in 
hardcopy or electronic format. 
In accordance with [25], an adequate experience of KM 
systematization must consider that knowledge exists in two 
formats: (i) people’s mind and (ii) various kinds of records; 
therefore, information technology has a relevant part on KM, 
which involves its formalization, refinement and sharing. 
According to [19], there are four modes of knowledge 
conversion: (i) socialization (from tacit knowledge of an 
individual to another); (ii) externalization (from tacit 
knowledge to explicit knowledge); (iii) combination (from 
explicit knowledge of an individual to a group) and (iv) 
internalization (from explicit knowledge to tacit knowledge). 
Nevertheless, implementing knowledge management 
requires cultural change. Apart from recognizing knowledge 
as an object of inestimable value, experts still need to 
perceive all aspects related to the vital processes of 
organizations. In this sense, a systemic approach stands out 
among others due to its peculiar ubiquity and synthesis.  In 
view of the complexities involved, understanding the whole 
through a systemic approach is indispensable [6]. 
In this context, two postulates [6] can be highlighted: 
1) Everything that exists at an abstract or concrete level 
is systems, components or potential components of a system; 
and 
2) A system must be understood as a set of 
interconnected components that relate to each other in 
order to achieve a purpose. 
Seen as a system, an organization can be evaluated as a 
system consisting of various subsystems. It can also be 
highlighted that systems as well as complex problems should 
not be analyzed in isolation as the whole is always larger 
than a sum of its components and presents a systemic 
characteristic that its components do not have [6].  
Moreover, [5] explains that in any field of knowledge 
current problems have become very complex; solutions 
require interdisciplinary and systemic approaches. Like other 
systemic authors, [5] also warns that problems should be 
analyzed in isolation as specific parts of a process does not 
enable us to know effectively a process or complex problem.  
Nevertheless, if the set of components of a system and the 
relationship between them are known, then high levels of 
understanding are obtained by means of the systems [5]. 
Therefore, by analogy it is assumed that the process 
consist of components, have specific functions and systemic 
features. The organizational change with a view to 
knowledge management presupposes a systemic approach.   
An interesting approach is still proposed by [7], focusing 
on the model and systems description. According to this 
proposal any system can be structured in accordance with the 
following attributes: 
1)  Composition: collection of component elements; 
2) Environment: collection of items that are not part of a 
system, but act or suffer an action of any component; 
3) Structure: collection of links between components 
and between these and other Items of the environment; 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

4) Mechanism: collection of processes that generate 
qualitative novelty, that is, they promote and obstruct 
transformations causing the emergency or submersion of the 
system or any of its properties.  
 
 
Table1 shows some examples of CESM models, which 
can be natural, social, technical or mixed. 
TABLE I.  
 EXAMPLES OF CESM MODELS IN EXISTING SYSTEMS. SOURCE BASED ON BUNGE (2000) 
System 
C 
Composition 
E 
Environment 
S 
Structure 
M 
Mechanism 
Atom 
 
Associated particles 
and fields comprising 
an atom. 
Things (particles 
and fields) with 
which an atom 
interacts. 
The fields that keep an 
atom together with 
environment items. 
Processes of emission and 
absorption of light, 
combination, etc. 
Company 
Personnel and 
Management. 
Market and 
government. 
Work relationships 
between company 
members and between 
members and 
environment. 
Activities that result in 
company products. 
Solar System 
Sun, planets and 
asteroids. 
Milky Way Galaxy 
and other universe 
celestial bodies. 
Gravitational forces. 
Translational motion of 
components in orbits that 
enable the continuity of a 
system (with no dispersion or 
collapse) due to inertia. 
 
According to this model, any system can be represented 
so that its relevant features are described. The technical 
properties as well as functions, combined with the 
description of components, structures, environments and 
mechanisms of the system, provide effective knowledge and 
enable to evaluate the capacity of the system to keep its basic 
properties or even (sub)emerge. 
By analogy, as long as evaluation processes are 
understood as systems, a complete evaluation of the 
proposed system in accordance with the CESM model can be 
carried out [7]. Concomitantly to this approach, explanations 
related to the properties of the system associated with its 
mechanisms can qualify the efficiency of the proposed 
reorganization process. 
IV. 
REORGANIZATION OF THE MVDS PLANNING 
PROCESS 
As occurs in most Brazilian companies in the electricity 
distribution sector, CELESC Distribuição S.A. decentralized 
its operations to optimize the achievement of their business 
goals. Each of these operating units, located in regions with 
distinct cultural characteristics, has developed particular 
ways of interpreting, therefore achieving those goals, the 
same occurring with the planning process for the SDMT. 
Reflecting that unique circumstance, the company created an 
organizational culture that, according to [26], allowed to 
adjust its operations as a small business, even in the case of a 
large corporation. On the other hand, it made implementing 
corporate solutions difficult, damaging the company's 
organization and appropriateness to the interests of the 
regulator (ANEEL), in particular the question of the planning 
process that could no longer fulfill its role.  
Consistent with [27], processes must be defined and 
modeled concurrently to the human tasks. The process 
should also consider the underlying infrastructure of the 
organization considering the interface with users so that 
interactive tasks can be defined and created. 
Most importantly, the planning process is crucial to the 
business of an electric power distribution company, and the 
reorganization of the planning process-oriented knowledge 
management is recommended. 
A KM-oriented reorganization of a planning process 
presupposes the restructuring of a system that has knowledge 
as its main paradigm. Therefore, the reorganization of a 
planning process starts to be understood as a system with its 
respective 
components, 
structure, 
environment 
and 
mechanisms that relate between themselves in order to 
achieve its purposes [7]. 
It is important to identify the intrinsic knowledge related 
to the planning system and its respective components before 
proposing a new MVDS planning process. 
 
Evaluating the planning process by means of a systemic 
approach and identifying components individually without 
losing track of the system as a whole. The following 
dimensions are highlighted: 
 
1) People have competencies and attributions; the 
ability to properly plan depends directly on the experts who 
need motivation, continuous training and evaluation of the 
results of their work; 
2) The process consists of activities and tasks in 
accordance with norms, instructions and a timetable; in 
addition to the planning process itself, other processes must 
be structured in order of formalization, implementation, 
refinement and dissemination of knowledge; 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

3) The technology consists of methods and techniques 
that are most of the time used by means of computational 
tools; emphasizing that the knowledge employed by the 
planning process requires a transactional and knowledge 
systems, which are essential tools to keep track of the work 
and search for better investment alternatives respectively. 
In an individualized way, components and their 
respective main attributes are highlighted in terms of the 
three aforementioned dimensions.  
TABLE II.  
SYSTEMIC VIEW OF THE MVDS PLANNING SYSTEM. 
Dimensions 
MVDS Planning System 
Components  
Attributes  
People 
 
experts, engineers, managers and 
directors 
motivation, tacit knowledge, explicit knowledge, attributions 
and established functions 
Process 
activities, tasks 
PRODIST, planning instruction, budget, master plan, 
environment norms, calculation of losses, specific resolutions, 
technical notes 
Technology 
computational tools, 
computational agents 
optimization methods, prioritization techniques, techniques for 
evaluation and market projection, artificial intelligence, 
knowledge agents, ontologies, data warehouse, transactional 
computer systems, knowledge systems 
 
Table 2 shows that the planning system consists of the 
following components: experts, 
engineers, 
managers, 
directors, 
activities, 
tasks, 
computational 
tools 
and 
knowledge agents. For each of these components, their 
respective attributes are observed.    
It is highlighted that an adequate planning presupposes 
the development of a work plan optimized and consonant 
with budget restrictions. Moreover, the planning shall 
consider federal, state and municipal norms and carry out 
studies following optimization techniques in accordance with 
the systemic approach, which enables to propose solutions 
considering all issues that influence the planning context. 
Economic scenarios, weather aspects, future regulatory rigor, 
new technologies; ultimately, all issues that direct or 
indirectly influence the planning environment must be 
systematically taken into consideration. 
Moreover, with the aim of proposing a new process, Fig. 
3 presents the reorganization of the KM-oriented MVDS 
planning process. 
 
Figure 3.  Reorganization of the KM-oriented MVDS planning process.
With a view to relating the dimensions identified in Table 
2 to the reorganization process proposed in Fig. 3, the 
experts are represented in green. The relationship of experts 
with the process occurs by means of the TCT (Transaction 
Computational Tool) and demands competencies from these 
professional in order to carry out their activities. Technology 
and its components, represented in blue, are integrated with 
the TCT, facilitating the execution of activities, especially by 
adopting methods, modern techniques, dominion ontologies 
to provide semantic consensus, and so on. Finally, the 
 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

process represented in brown shows the reorganization in 
specific tasks that are carried out successively.  
Fig. 3 shows that the MVDS planning process here 
proposed is structured by means of interconnected 
components that relate to each other in order to promote the 
MVDS planning.  The planning task, which was previously 
carried out in a general way, starts to be performed in a 
structured way in accordance with the following sequence of 
tasks: identification record, problem diagnosis, studies, 
alternatives, prioritization, and publication of the investment 
plan. Moreover, norms and instructions govern and guide the 
execution of tasks respectively.  
The TCT supports the whole process, providing experts 
with evaluation facilities and record of all tasks.  The 
problems are diagnosed with the support of knowledge 
systems and application of methods and optimization 
techniques occur in an integrated way as the TCT relies on 
these implemented functions. 
It is also important to emphasize that the TCT is critical 
for the reorganization of the proposed process. The 
interconnection of information systems that comprise the 
process occurs through the TCT. It is through this 
computational tool that the information flow occurs due to its 
integration with other computer systems that make up the 
process, like the construction management systems, 
operation, maintenance and ERP costs. The computational 
agents like knowledge system, data warehouse and artificial 
intelligence techniques complement the information flow in 
order to support the decision maker in the planning process. 
Due to the reorganization of the planning system oriented 
towards people, processes and technology, it is noticed that 
the components are organized, which in turn enables the 
understanding of representation tasks, refinement and 
application of knowledge in terms of the development of an 
efficient work plan. It is important to highlight that the 
efficiency of the planning process starts to be evaluated 
because by means of the categorization of problem patterns, 
engineering actions and investments, the experts with the 
passing of time will be able to refine the knowledge related 
to the MVDS planning concomitantly with the performance 
of the power system. 
According to [7], it is possible to verify along with the 
proposed system a set of mechanisms essential to the 
maintenance of its properties as well as its emergency 
condition. The CESM model is then applied to the new 
process in order to evaluate the reorganization of the 
proposed planning (see Table 3). 
TABLE III.  
APPLICATION OF THE CESM MODEL TO EVALUATE THE REORGANIZATION OF A MVDS PLANNING. 
System 
C 
Composition 
E 
Environment 
S 
Structure 
M 
Mechanism 
MVDS 
Planning 
System 
people 
computer tools, 
computer agents 
PRODIST, MVDS, 
methodologies, market, building 
site, maintenance and operation, 
investors, directors, 
administrative council 
processes, 
norms. 
provide a work program 
trainings, process evaluation, 
motivation, formalization, 
representation, and refinement of 
the knowledge related to planning 
 
Table 3 displays a set of mechanisms that were identified 
along with the proposed process reorganization. These 
mechanisms provide the planning system with efficiency as 
the investments programs start to be evaluated concomitantly 
with knowledge management as well as the other attributes 
that comprise the process. The planning system oriented 
towards people, process and technology facilitates the 
identification of the knowledge required to the execution of 
KM-oriented tasks.   
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The current planning process of a power system 
exclusively oriented to technical analysis must be re-
evaluated, especially in the strategic area, which lacks 
compelling arguments for the development of investment 
plans. 
Preliminarily, the current planning process was described 
so that its main aspects and deficiencies were identified. The 
reorganization of the process was proposed taking into 
consideration three knowledge dimensions: people, process 
and technology. The CESM model was used to evaluate the 
process reorganization that started to be understood as a 
system. It is important to highlight that the reorganization of 
the KM-oriented planning process enables the representation 
tasks, refinement and knowledge application to be 
understood. Taking into account the expertise acquired by 
means of the evaluation of the planning processes analyzed, 
experts provided with refined knowledge will effectively 
justify the necessary investments.   
According to this proposal, the association of knowledge 
management with MVDS planning starts to occur in a 
regular way along with organizations that implement this 
kind of reorganization. New studies, however, will have to 
be consistent with the definition of knowledge systems, 
ontologies and motivational aspects with a view to achieving 
planning efficiency. It is recommended to carry out scientific 
research on the application of knowledge agents to the 
development of precise diagnosis for MVDS technical 
problems.  
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

REFERENCES 
 
[1] G. A. G. Santos, E. K. Barbosa, J. F. S. Silva and R. S. 
Abreu, Por Que as Tarifas Foram Para os Céus? Propostas 
para o Setor Elétrico Brasileiro. Revista do BNDES, Rio de 
Janeiro, V. 14, N.29, pp. 435-474, Jun. 2008. 
[2] Agência Nacional de Energia Elétrica – Aneel. Obtained 
through 
the 
Internet: 
<http://www.aneel.gov.br/area.cfm?idArea=635&idPerfil=2
>, (retrieved: November, 2011). 
[3] ANEEL. Procedimentos de Distribuição de Energia Elétrica 
no Sistema Elétrico Nacional – PRODIST. Obtained 
through 
the 
Internet: 
http://www.aneel.gov.br/area.cfm?id_area=82. 
(retrieved: 
November, 2011). 
[4] F. B. Batista. Governo Que Aprende: Gestão do 
Conhecimento em Organizações. Brasília, Jun 2004. Texto 
para Discussão No 1022 Governo Federal Ministério do 
Planejamento, Orçamento e Gestão Ministro – Guido 
Mantega, Secretário-Executivo – Nelson Machado, ISSN 
1415-4765. 
[5] L. V. Bertalanffy, ‘The History and Status of General 
Systems Theory’. The Academy of Management Journal. 
Vol. 15, No. 4, General Systems Theory (Dec 1972), 407-
426. 
Stable 
URL:http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-
427328 
197212%29 
15%3A4%3C407%3ATHASOG%3E2.O.C0%3B2-4, The 
Academy of Management Journal is currently published by 
Academy of Management. (retrieved: November, 2011) 
[6] M. Bunge, ‘Systemism: the alternative to individualism and 
holism’. Journal of Socio-Economics 29 (2000) 147–157, 
Department of Philosophy, McGill University, 855 
Sherbrooke St. W, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 2T7. 
[7] M. Bunge, ‘How Does It Work? The Search for 
Explanatory Mechanisms. Philosophy of the Social 
Sciences’. Vol. 34 No. 2, Jun 2004, pp. 182-210, DOI: 
10.1177/0048393103262550. 
[8] F. Capra, (1983). O Ponto de Mutação – A Ciência, a 
Sociedade e a Cultura Emergente. Editora Cultrix: E.U.A . 
[9] I. 
M. 
de 
Carvalho, 
‘Condições 
para 
criação 
de 
conhecimento numa organização de alta tecnologia’. In: 
(2006). 
Gestão 
do 
Conhecimento, 
uma 
estratégia 
empresarial, conhecer é preciso! (pp. 47-74). Brasília: J. J. 
Gráfica e comunicações, 2006. 
[10] A. M. Cossi, “Planejamento de Redes de Distribuição de 
Energia Elétrica de Média Baixa Tensão”. PhD thesis. 
Universidade Estadual Paulista – UNESP, São Paulo, Brazil 
2008. 
[11] D. P. Duarte, “Automação como Recurso de Planejamento 
de Redes de Distribuição Energia Elétrica”. PhD thesis. 
Universidade de São Paulo – USP, São Paulo, Brazil 2008. 
[12] D. A. Geuber, (2009). Contribuição de Ferramenta e 
Práticas 
de 
Gestão 
da 
Qualidade, 
Tecnologia 
e 
Conhecimento para a Evolução do Nível de Maturidade do 
processo de Distribuição de Energia Elétrica no Brasil – A 
Percepção do Cliente e do Gestor do Processo. Master 
Dissertation. Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná – 
UTFPR, Paraná, Brazil. 
[13] L. E. L. Gonçalves, ‘As Empresas São Grandes Coleções de 
Processos’. Revista de Administração de Empresas. 
Jan/Mar  2000. São Paulo v. 40, n.1, pp. 6-19. 
[14] N. Kagan, C. C. B. Oliveira, and C. C. B. de Guaraldo, 
(2000) – Enerq /USP J. S. Simões – CELESC. 
Planejamento de redes de distribuição a partir de avaliação 
automática de reforços na rede. 
[15] N. Kagan, (1992) Electrical Power Distribution Systems 
Planning Using Multiobjective and Fuzzy Mathematical 
Programming. PhD thesis. Queen Mary & Westfield 
College, University of London, United Kingdom.  
[16] N. Kagan, (1999) Configuração de Redes de Distribuição 
Através de Algoritmos Genéticos e Tomada de Decisão 
Fuzzy. Tese de Livre Docência: Escola Politécnica da 
Universidade de São Paulo – EPUSP, São Paulo, Brazil.  
[17] N. Kagan, et al. (2004). INTERPLAN – Uma Ferramenta 
para o Planejamento Integrado de Sistemas de Distribuição 
de Alta, Média e Baixa Tensão. IEEE T&D Latin America, 
São Paulo. 
[18] K. C. Laudon and L.P. Laudon, (2004) Management 
Information System: managing the Digital Firm. 8. Ed., 
New Jersey: Ed. Prentice-Hall. 
[19] I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi, (1997). Criação do 
Conhecimento na Empresa. Rio de Janeiro: Campus. 
[20] C. C. B. Oliveira, (1997) Configuração de Redes de 
Distribuição de Energia Elétrica com Múltiplos Objetivos e 
Incertezas Através de Procedimentos Heurísticos. . PhD 
thesis. Escola Politécnica da Universidade de São Paulo – 
EPUSP, São Paulo, Brazil.  
[21] Relatório Plano de Desenvolvimento de Distribuição – 
(PDD) Fonte Celesc/ DPEP/DVPE, 2009. 
[22] M. R. Rodrigues and L. Helena, Um Modelo de Gestão do 
Conhecimento em uma Empresa de Energia, II Simpósio 
Internacional de Transparência nos Negócios, 31 Julho a 2 
de Agosto de 2008. 
[23] E. Santana, Em entrevista para Canal Energia, Blecautes, 
regulação e investimentos. Obtained Through the Internet 
2010.http://www.canalenergia.com.br/spublisher/materiais/
Artigos_e_Entrevistas.asp?id=76862. (retrieved: November, 
2011). 
[24] P. M. Senge, et al. (1994). A quinta disciplina – caderno de 
campo: estratégias para construir uma organização que 
aprende. Rio de Janeiro: Qualitymark. 
[25] S. L. Silva, ‘Gestão do conhecimento: uma revisão crítica 
orientada pela abordagem da criação do conhecimento’. 
Ciência da Informação. Brasília, V.33, n.2, pp. 143-151, 
may-august 2004. 
[26] J. Stecjuka, J. Makna and M. Kirikova. Best practices 
oriented business process operation and design. pp. 122-
129. Proceedings of BPMDS’ 2008. 
[27] J. Reichwald,  T. Dornemann, T. Barth, M. Grauer and B. 
Freislebem. Model-Driven Process Developent Human 
Task in Service Grid Environments. pp. 79-90. 
 
 
 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

