The Shin-Life Career Game: Pursuing Your New Life Style through Gaming
Simulation
Akinobu Sakata
Department of Computational Intelligence and System Science
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Yokohama, Japan
e-mail: sakata.a.aa@m.titech.ac.jp
Takamasa Kikuchi
Graduate School of Business Administration
Keio University
Yokohama, Japan
e-mail: takamasa kikuchi@keio.jp
Ryuichi Okumura
Career Innovation Division
Mitsubishi Research Institute,Inc.
Tokyo, Japan
e-mail: okuty@mri.co.jp
Masaaki Kunigami
Department of Computer Science
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Yokohama, Japan
e-mail: mkunigami@gakushikai.jp
Atsushi Yoshikawa
Department of Computer Science
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Yokohama, Japan
e-mail: at sushi bar@dis.titech.ac.jp
Masayuki Yamamura
Department of Computer Science
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Yokohama, Japan
e-mail: my@c.titech.ac.jp
Takao Terano
Chiba University of Commerce
Ichikawa, Japan
e-mail: terano@cuc.ac.jp
Abstract— The purpose of this study is to propose a serious
game: the Shin-Life Career Game, which allows players to
construct various careers. The name of this game is come
from the most famous classic game: the Life Career Game
developed by Boocock. In the field of career education,
various serious games have been developed as a means for
students to learn about career planning and development in
a practical way. However, in conventional serious games for
career education, the diversity of careers constructed by the
players is low compared to the reality of today’s working
society. We propose a new serious game: the Shin-Life Career
Game which eliminates the restriction on the number of
occupations a player is able to take at the same time. We
plan to use this game to explore the possibilities of various
lifestyles for people.
Keywords—Serious game; career education; gaming
simulation; resource allocation.
I. Introduction
The purpose of this research is to propose a gaming sim-
ulation: the Shin-Life Career Game, which provides players
with the experience of constructing various careers. Gaming
simulation is a simulation in which humans participate
as players in the context of the simulation, and which is
operated through the decisions of those players [1].
In the field of career education, serious games have been
developed to help school students learn about career planning
and development [2] [3]. It has been reported that students
who learn through serious games are motivated to learn,
acquire factual knowledge, and gain confidence in the real-
world application of what they have learned [2].
A variety of serious games have been developed in the
field of career education [2]-[4]. However, these games are
not designed to take into account the diversification of
careers faced by today’s working society [5]. Specifically, in
conventional career education games, players cannot work
in more than one occupation at the same time. In addition,
players is not able to choose the type of work when they
enter a certain occupation. If there were a realistic career
simulator that reflected the diversity of careers, it would be
of use in revealing the lifestyles of various people. Therefore,
we developed a new serious game: the Shin-Life Career Game
in which players are able to work in multiple occupations at
the same time and to choose the type of work (employed or
independent). This game inherits the features of the original
life game [6], as well as the Life Career Game, an early serious
game for career education.
Therefore, we developed a new serious game: the Shin-Life
Career Game in which players are able to work in multiple
occupations at the same time and to choose the type of work
(employed or independent). This game inherits the features of
the original life game [6], as well as the Life Career Game, an
early serious game for career education. Boocock’s the Life
Career Game has been played by students of all ages, from
elementary school to university. Of course, our game can be
used to educate students of all ages as well. On the other
hand, we are considering having adults who have a lot of
life experience play our games. This is because analyzing the
games played by adults who have worked in the society and
gained various experiences may help us to find their unique
wisdom and perspectives on worldly affairs.
In this study, we conducted an experiment to verify the
behavior of the Shin-Life Career Game. The goal of this
experiment is to confirm that the game players experience
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-874-7
eKNOW 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

a significant reduction in income when they experience an
economic recession. To achieve this goal, we first prepared a
scenario in which game players experience an economic re-
cession. Next, we created four software agents with decision-
making rules and made them participate in gaming. As a
result of the experiment, we found that (1) the income of
the players temporarily dropped when they experienced an
economic recession in all the strategies, and (2) the strategy
of devoting resources only to the core business (permanent
work) may result in less money resources acquired through
gaming than the strategy of distributing resources to the core
business and other activities.
II. Related Work
To overcome the contradiction between the way secondary
school youth see the career world and the way adults see it,
Boocock developed a life career game that plays much like
the original life game [2]. In the game, players experience a
hypothetical life, playing various roles and spending their re-
sources (money, time, etc.) on various activities with the goal
of maximizing their present satisfaction and the possibility of
a good life in the future. As a result, they acquire knowledge
related to career development and develop understanding
and confidence. These characteristics have been partially
inherited by other serious games for career education that
have been developed since then (e.g. [3], [4]).
In today’s world, many workers have the opportunity to
build a variety of careers [5]. There is a growing population
of workers worldwide who choose non-traditional ways of
earning a living, such as those who work more than one
occupation at the same time, those who are independent
of organizations and earn a living through contract work
using highly specialized skills, and those who earn efficient
rewards from simple labor online [5]. However, in traditional
games, players are expected to make a living from only one
job. In addition, players is not able to choose the type of
work (Players should have a variety of options, such as
working as an employee or as an independent contractor)
when they take a certain occupation. Therefore, we have
developed a new game that takes into account these modern
workers’ circumstances. The features of the game are shown
in Table 1. A career simulator that reflects the realities faced
by today’s workers could be applicated to reveal the lifestyles
of different people.
III. The Shin-Life Career Game
In this section, we describe the features of the Shin-Life
Career Game in detail.
A. Overview
The Shin-Life Career Game is a kind of turn-based life
game. Players experience a virtual worker’s life in the game.
The players are given several kinds of resources by the game
system, and allocate them to various activities according to
the game rules, restrictions, and their own will, resulting in
the gaining or losing of new resources.
Fig. 1. MATH model for agents in the game.
B. Agent model
1) Resource variables: We used MATH model [7] to rep-
resent the activities of agents that gain and lose resources
by allocating resources to various activities (See Figure 1).
Our agent model contains three types of resource variables:
money resources, ability resources, and time resources. The
following sections describe the resource variables and activ-
ities that make up the model.
The variable of money resource corresponds to an asset in
the real life. Human beings use monetary assets to support
their lives. The variable of money resource has extensive
property and does not have an upper limit.
The variable of ability resource corresponds to knowledge
and skills for work in the real life. Human beings use their
skills and knowledge to engage in labor and get paid for it.
The variable of ability resource has intensive property and
does not have an upper limit.
The variable of time resource corresponds to time for real
life. Human beings live their lives by spending their time
in a variety of activities. The variable of time resource has
extensive property and an upper limit. 　
2) Activity: Next, we describe the agents’ activities. In this
game, agents allocate their resources to several activities,
”Permanent work (PW),” ”Freelance work (FW),” ”Simple
work (SW),” and ”Learning (LN),” in each turn according to
the constraints of the game and their own will. The features
of each activity are summarized in Table II, and the details
are described below.
PW is a work style in which workers are employed by
an organization until they reach retirement age and receive
remuneration for their labor. The characteristics of PW are
described below. First, the remuneration for PW is stable.
In reality, full-time workers are less likely to experience
unemployment due to the effects of the economy than part-
time workers [8]. Second, the remuneration for PW is higher
than that for SW. In reality, the income of full-time workers
is much higher than that of part-time workers [9]. Third, if a
player’s ability resources increase, the reward for PW will be
higher. In the personnel evaluation system in companies, it is
customary to reflect the medium- to long-term accumulation
of capabilities by regular workers in the increase of their
basic salary and the promotion of their qualification grade
[10]. Fourth, engaging in PW increases the ability resources
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-874-7
eKNOW 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

TABLE I
Comparison of features between the Shin-Life Career Game and traditional games for career education
Feature
Conventional Gamesa
The Shin-Life Career Game
Nomber of occupations a player
can have at the same time.
One
Multiple
Diversity of labor forms.b
Low
High
a
The target games are ”the Life Career Game [2],” ”the Real Game [3],” and ”MeTycoon [4]”.
b
In the real world of labor, workers earn their living not only through traditional full-time employment, but also through freelance work,
part-timejobs, gig work, and many other forms of work. Conventional games do not make a clear distinction between these forms of work.
TABLE II
Features of each activity
Feature
Activity
PW
FW
SW
LN
Type of activitya
W
W
W
L
Income levelb
M
H
L
-
Positive impact of ability level
on income levelc
P
P
N
-
Stability of incomeb
H
L
L
-
Ability growthc
P
N
N
P
a W and LN stand for ”Work” and ”Learning,” respectively.
b H, M, and L stand for ”High level,” ”Middle level,” and ”Low level,”
respectively.
c P and N stand for ”Positive” and ”Negative,” respectively.
of players. Firms provide regular workers with education and
special jobs that encourage their growth [11]. Fifth, a player
has to provide a certain amount of time resources for PW. In
general, the law sets minimum and maximum working hours
for regular employees. Sixth, a player is not able to decide
the amount of time resources to be allocated to PW at will.
In general, in regular employment, workers are obligated to
engage in overtime and holiday work according to the orders
of their supervisors.
FW is a way of working that is independent of a particular
organization and is paid by providing expertise and skills
to a contracted party. FW has the following characteristics.
First, the income of workers who engage in FW is unstable.
The income of real freelancers is also unstable [12]. Second,
as a player’s ability resources increase, the reward for FW
increases. In online job brokerage services used by real
freelancers, workers with high value-added skills have a
chance to get high-paying jobs [13]. Third, a player’s ability
resources do not increase when the player engages in FW.
Employers spend less time training the self-employed than do
employees [14]. Fourth, a player is free to decide the amount
of time resources to be allocated to FW. Since freelancers do
not have an employment contract, they have no obligation
or responsibility to have their working hours controlled by
others [15].
SW is a form of work in which workers provide their time
to their employers or contractors and are paid for it. In this
game, SW is the kind of work that manual workers do in the
real world, such as part-time jobs, day labor, and gig work,
which do not require any special skills or qualifications. SW
has the following characteristics. First, the money resource,
which is the reward for labor, increases in proportion to
the amount of time resource the player allocates to SW.
In general, the wages of part-timers are determined by the
length of time they work. The wages of day laborers and gig
workers are determined by the unit cost and number of jobs
that can be completed in a short period of time. Regardless
of the type of labor engaged in, the longer the time spent in
labor, the more the worker’s income is expected to increase
roughly proportionally. Second, the amount of a player’s
ability resource do not affect the amount of compensation
for SW. In fact, many managers do not require part-time
workers to have special job performance skills [16]. Third,
the income of a player who engages in SW is unstable. If
the economy is strong, the reward of simple workers’ will
be stable, but if the economy worsens, simple workers’ jobs
will be reduced or they will be laid off [17]. Fourth, a player’s
ability resource does not increase when the player engages
in SW. Many companies keep the training costs they pay
for part-timers to a minimum [16]. Finally, a player has the
flexibility to adjust his/her working hours to engage in SW.
Workers who earn money from one-time jobs, such as on-
call work or gig work, and part-time workers can flexibly
manage their working hours [18].
LN is the act of taking extra time to develop competencies
in order to nurture one’s work capacity. People who hold
core positions in organizations or who do business with their
expertise as freelancers engage in lifelong learning to develop
professional competencies that will keep them eligible for
work [19]. Self-employed individuals with unstable incomes
spend more time on work-related learning than employees
of firms [14].
Based on each of the above characteristics, we examined
the structure of resource acquisition by each activity. The
amount of remuneration for regular employment labor is
thought to increase monotonically in proportion to the prod-
uct of working hours and the worker’s ability. The amount
of remuneration for freelance labor increases monotonically
in proportion to the product of working hours and ability,
but there is uncertainty in terms of income. The amount of
compensation for simple labor is expected to increase mono-
tonically with the number of hours worked. The more time
a worker spends in formal labor, the more work experience
he or she will gain and the more education he or she will
benefit from. Therefore, the ability acquired through formal
employment is expected to increase monotonically as total
hours worked increase. However, if a worker works for a
particular company for a long time, the growth potential will
gradually decrease. Finally, the ability of a worker is expected
to increase monotonically in proportion to the product of
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-874-7
eKNOW 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

TABLE III
Variables and constants in eqations
Variable/Const
Name
IP W (t)
Reward for PW in turn t (money resources)）
IF W (t)
Reward for FW in turn t (money resources)
ISW (t)
Reward for SW in turn t (money resources)
GLN(t)
Reward for LN in turn t (ability resource)
A(t)
Agent’s ability resources as of turn t
AP W (t)
Ability resources that an agent has developed in
PW by turn t
MLN(t)
Money resources allocated to LN in turn t
TP W (t)
Time resources allocated to PW in turn t
TF W (t)
Time resources allocated to FW in turn t
TSW (t)
Time resources allocated to SW in turn t
TLN(t)
Time resources allocated to LN in turn t
cP W
Reward per unit time for PW (constant)
cF W
Reward per unit time for FW (constant)
cSW
Reward per unit time for SW (constant)
cLN
Reward per unit time for LN (constant)
a0
Intercept of equation (2) (constant)
ϵF W (t)
A random number generated according to a
continuous distribution whose probability density
function is constant on a finite interval [α,β] and
zero outside the interval.
TP W
T OT AL(t)
Total time resources allocated to PW by turn t
working hours, learning fees to the power of 0.5 , and
working capacity. Based on the above, we have prepared
equations (1) through (5). See Table 2 for the variables and
constants that make up each equation.
IP W (t) = CP W × A(t − 1) × TP W (t)
(1)
AP W (t) = a0 +
1
1 + exp(r × (TP W
T OT AL − d))
(2)
IF W (t) = ϵF W × CF W × A(t − 1) × TF W (t)
(3)
ISW (t) = CSW × TSW (t)
(4)
GLN(t) = (CLN × TLN(t) ×
√
MLN(t)) × A(t − 1)
(5)
Equations (1) and (2) are used to determine the money
resources and ability resources that are the rewards of
PW, respectively. Because of the sixth characteristic of PW,
players cannot determine the value of TP W by themselves.
The value of TP W is determined by the system using a
random number generator according to given conditions. The
given condition is the range of values that TP W can take.
This condition reflects the fifth characteristic of PW. Next,
equations (3) and (4) are the equations for calculating the
money resource, the reward for FW, and the money resource,
the reward for SW, respectively. Finally, equation (5) is an
equation for calculating the ability resources gained from LN.
C. Happening
In the real world, events that cannot be avoided by individ-
uals, such as natural disasters and economic recessions, can
occur. Whenever people experience such events, they try to
rebuild their lives by making various decisions. In this game,
Fig. 2. Flowchart for gameplay
an ”economic depression” is implemented, which temporarily
reduces the amount of resources acquired by each activity.
When an economic depression occurs in a given turn, the
rewards for various types of labor are forcibly reduced. At
this time, once a player has allocated resources to labor, he
will eventually only receive the amount of reward he would
have received if he had invested the least amount of resources
in labor. In this game, a player who engages in PW are not
laid off, so he/she is able to secure some income even if an
economic recession occurs. However, workers who engage in
FW and SW experience a significant temporary decrease in
income.
D. Instructions for Gameplay
In this section, we describe the procedure for playing the
game. Figure 2 illustrates the procedure for playing the game.
The player has to make a decision about resource allocation
at each turn. First, when his turn comes, the player gets
a chance to check the game information. Here, the player
is allowed to check the amount of resources he currently
has, the history of his past resource allocation activities, and
information about the game environment. The player decides
the policy of resource allocation based on the information
obtained in this stage. Next, the player allocates resources to
each activity. After the resource allocation is completed, the
game system updates the player’s resource variables. At this
time, if the game system considers that a financial crisis event
has occurred, the effect is reflected in the calculation results.
Finally, the calculation results are fed back to the player, and
the turn ends. When a turn ends, a new turn begins. The
game is repeated for a predetermined number of turns.
IV. Method
In this section, we describe in detail the methodology of
the experiment.
A. Agent
A software agent has a policy for resource allocation,
and allocates resources to various activities according to the
contents of that policy. Software agents allocate resources
to various activities. Each software agent has one policy for
resource allocation. This policy consists of three components
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-874-7
eKNOW 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

TABLE IV
Correspondence between policy and resource allocation behavior
Policy
Explanation of policy about resource allocation by agents
Policya
Resource allocation behaviourbc
SI
HI
AG
PW
FW
SW
LN
A
Agents with Policy A hope to work in a way that allows them to
earn a stable and high income and to grow in their abilities.
○
○
○
Rand.
-
Rest/2
Rest/2
B
Agents with Policy B hope to work in a way that allows them to
earn a stable and high income.
○
○
Rand.
-
Rest
-
C
Agents with Policy C hope to work in a way that allows them to
earn a stable income and to grow in ther abilities.
○
○
Rand.
-
-
Rest
D
Agents with Policy D are satisfied as long as they have a stable
income.
○
Rand.
-
-
-
a
SI, HI, and AG stand for ”Stability of income,” ”Higher income,” and ”Ability growth,” respectively.
b
Rand represents the amount of resources determined by the random number generator.
c
Rest is the amount of resources of time held at the beginning of each turn minus Rand.
TABLE V
Values of the parameters of the MATH model in this experiment
Parameter
Value
Parameter
Value
CP W
5.5
r
−2.5 × 10−3
CF W
5.5
d
1.5 × 103
CSW
3.0
α
-1.0
CLN
2.0 × 10−4
β
3.0
a0
1.0
(”stable income,” ”high income,” and ”growth”), each of which
can be either ”important” or ”unimportant” (there are eight
policies in total). Each policy is associated with a strategy
and action rules for resource allocation. Each software agent
allocates resources according to the action rule corresponding
to its policy. In this study, we tested the behavior of the
gaming system using only the software agent with the policy
that emphasizes stable income. The test evaluation using the
software agent with the remaining four policies is a future
work. In this study, we tested the behavior of the gaming
system using only the software agent with the policy that
emphasizes stable income. The correspondence between each
policy and the resource allocation behavior is summarized in
Table IV. The following is a description of the behavior of the
software agent with each policy. A software agent with Policy
A allocates resources to PW, FW (or SW), and LN, because he
considers stable income, high income, and ability growth to
be all important. A software agent with Policy B allocates
resources to PW and FW (or SW) because they consider
stable income and high income to be important. A software
agent with Policy D allocates resources to PW only, because
it considers only stable income to be important. A software
agent with Policy A or Policy C is subject to special rules that
do not apply to a software agent with other policies. Because
these policies emphasize ability growth, they allow software
agents to allocate additional time resources to LN that were
not allocated to labor due to the economic recession. In
addition, the money resources spent on LN by a software
agent with Policy A and a software agent with Policy C are
fixed at 50.
B. System
The software for simulation is written in C#. The simula-
tion was carried out using Intel(R) core(TM) 4600U CPU @
2.10GHz PC with 16GB RAM, Windows10 Pro, 64bit OS.
C. Game scenario
In this experiment, we checked the behavior of the system
and the changes in the resources of the software agents when
an economic recession occurs. In our scenario, each software-
agent experiences just one economic recession in a gaming.
The recession occurs on turn 30 (the worker is in his/her
50s).
D. Procedures
We prepared four software agents, each with a different
policy. Each software agent was ordered to play 40 turns
per gaming session. We assumed that one turn of the game
corresponds to one year in the real world. Therefore, 40 turns
corresponds to the period from entry to retirement for a
standard permanent worker. Each software agent played the
game under the aforementioned scenario.
V. Results and Discussion
In this section, we describe and discuss the results of our
experiments.
A. Results
As a result of the experiment, it was observed that the
money resources of each agent gradually increased as the
game progressed (See Figure 3). It was also observed that
the income level of each agent gradually increased as the
game progressed (See Figure 4). Finally, the pace at which the
ability resources of the software agent with Policy B and the
software agent with Policy D increased, gradually accelerated
in the first half of the game and gradually decelerated in the
second half of the game (None of the agents allocated any
resources to the LNs, so their lines overlap on the graph.).
While the ability resources of software agents with the other
policies increased software agents with the other policies did
not decelerate in the second half of the game (See Figure 5).
B. Impact of economic recession on agents’ income
When we check the income of each agent in turns 30 in
Fig.4, we can see that the income of all software agents has
fallen uniformly. The impact on software agents with Policy
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-874-7
eKNOW 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Fig. 3. Figure for time series change in money resource
Fig. 4. Figure for time series change in income
A or Policy B, which allocate resources to FW and SW in
addition to PW, seems to be relatively large. The reason for
the large drop in the income of these software agents is that
their income from labor other than PW was cut off due
to the economic recession. The recent collapse of Lehman
Brothers and the pandemic of the new coronavirus caused
many non-regular workers and freelancers to reduce their
income significantly or lose their jobs. This result may reflect
this reality.
C. A relationship similar to that between ants and grasshoppers
Among the four software agents prepared in this experi-
ment, it can be seen from Figure 3 that the money resources
finally earned by the software agent with Policy D that
considers only income stability to be important are less than
those earned by the software agents who chose other policies.
This software agent allocates resources only to PW, while
other software agents invest resources in various activities in
addition to PW, and succeed in increasing their income. In
particular, software agents with Policy A or Policy B allocated
resources to LN and engaged in skill development. Even as
the speed of ability growth in PW slowed in the second
half of their working lives, They continuously grew their
Fig. 5. Figure for time series change in ability growth
skills (see Figure 5) and increased their income (see Figure
4), The difference between the two groups is similar to the
relationship between the ant and the grasshopper in Aesop’s
fable, ”The Ant and the Grasshopper. The grasshopper (Agent
with Policy D) seems to have widened the gap in income with
the ant (Agent with Policy A, Policy B, or Policy C), which
steadily accumulates resources, over the course of 40 turns.
VI. Conclusion
In this study, we proposed a gaming simulation: the Shin-
Life Career Game, which allowed players to choose various
careers. To test the behavior of the game, we conducted a
gaming experiment using software agents that had different
policies and behaviors regarding resource allocation. As a
result of the experiment, we found that (1) the income of
the players temporarily dropped when they experienced an
economic recession in all the strategies, and (2) the strategy
of devoting resources only to the core business (permanent
work) might result in less money resources acquired through
gaming than the strategy of distributing resources to the core
business and other activities.
References
[1] C. S. Greenblat, ”Designing games and simulations: An illustrated
handbook,” SAGE Publications, Incorporated, 1988.
[2] S. S. Boocock,“ The life career game, ”The Personnel and Guidance
Journal, Vol. 46 No. 4, pp. 328-334, 1967.
[3] A. J. Edwards and A. G. Watts,“The Real Game: Evaluation of the Initial
Field Trials,”Cambridge: National Institute for Careers Education and
Counselling (mimeo), 1998.
[4] I. Dunwell et al., “ MeTycoon: A game-based approach to career
guidance”, in 2013 5th International Conference on Games and Virtual
Worlds for Serious Applications (VS-GAMES), Poole, 2013, pp. 1-6.
[5] C. Kelliher, J. Richardson, and G. Boiarintseva, “ All of work? All of
life? Reconceptualising work‐life balance for the 21st century,”Human
Resource Management Journal, Vol. 29, No. 2, pp. 97-112, 2019.
[6] J. Ferrara,“ Games for Persuasion: Argumentation, Procedurality, and
the Lie of Gamification,”Games and Culture, Vol. 8, No. 4, pp. 289-304,
2013.
[7] M. Kunigami, R. Okumura, T. Kikuchi, A. Sakata, and T. Terano, “
Agents ’Resources Allocation and Growth Modeling for Social and
Organizational Agent Simulations, ”In: Editor, F., Editor, S. (eds.) JSAI
Special Interest Group on Business Informatics 17th, 2021. (in Japanese)
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-874-7
eKNOW 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[8] Statistics
Bureau
of
Japan,
“ Monthly
Results, ”
Labour
Force
Survey,
March
2021,
[Online].
Available:
https://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/roudou/index.html.
[Retrieved:
05, 2021] (in Japanese)
[9] Statistics
Bureau
of
Japan,
“ 労 働 力 調 査（ 詳 細 集 計 ）
2020
年
平 均 結 果
(Labour
Force
Survey
(Detailed
Tabu-
lation)
2020
Average
Results), ”
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.stat.go.jp/data/roudou/sokuhou/nen/dt/.
[Retrieved:
05, 2021] (in Japanese)
[10] H. Kakizawa and O. Umezawa, “ 評価・賃金・仕事が労働意欲に与
える影響 ― 人事マイクロデータとアンケート調査による実証分析
(The impact of evaluation, wages, and work on work motivation - An
empirical analysis using human resources micro data and questionnaire
surveys),”JILPT Research Report No. 598, pp. 67-82, 2010. (in Japanese)
[11] Y. Zhu,“Responding to the challenges of globalization: human resource
development in Japan, ”Journal of World Business, Vol. 39, No.4, pp.
337-348, 2004.
[12] C. Brown and M. Reich, “ Developing skills and pay through career
ladders Lessons from Japanese and US companies, ”California Man-
agement Review, Vol. 39, No. 2, pp. 124-144, 1997.
[13] S. Horowitz et al., “ The Rise of the Freelance Class: A New Con-
stituency of Workers Building a Social Safety Net, ” Brooklyn, NY:
Working Today, 2005.
[14] A. G. Kazi, R. M. Yusoff, A. Khan, and S. Kazi, “ The Freelancer: A
Conceptual Review, ”Sains Humanika, Vol. 2 No.3, 2014.
[15] J. Kirchner and K. Wilhelm, “ Employee or Freelance Worker, ” Key
Aspects of German Employment and Labour Law. Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg, pp. 45-52, 2018.
[16] C. Inman and C. Enz,“Shattering the myths of the part-time worker,”
Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Administration Quarterly, Vol. 36, No. 5,
pp. 70-73, 1995.
[17] Cabinet Office,“日本経済 2010 (Japan Economy 2010),”2010. [Online].
Available: https://www5.cao.go.jp/keizai3/2010/1210nk/nk10.html. [Ac-
cessed: 6-May-2021] (in Japanese)
[18] J. Rubery, A. Keizer, and D. Grimshaw, “ Flexibility bites back: the
multiple and hidden costs of flexible employment policies, ” Human
Resource Management Journal, Vol. 26, No. 3, pp. 235-251, 2016.
[19] R. Preston and C. Dyer, “ Human capital, social capital and lifelong
learning: an editorial introduction, ”Compare: A Journal of Compar-
ative and International Education, Vol. 33, No. 4, pp. 429-436, 2003.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-874-7
eKNOW 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

