Discovery of Precursors of Serious Damage by Disaster Context Library with Cross-
field Agents 
Taizo Miyachi1, Gulbanu Buribayeva1 
1 School of Information Science and Technology, Tokai 
University, Hiratsuka, Japan 
e-mail: miyachi@keyaki.cc.u-tokai.jp, banu.b@hotmail.com 
Saiko Iga2, Takashi Furuhata3 and Tseveenbolor Davaa 3 
2 Keio Research Institute of SFC, Fujisawa, Japan 
3University of Utah, USA 
e-mail: sai@s05.itscom.net, Takashi.furuhata@utah.edu 
Tseveenbolor.davaa@utah.edu 
Abstract— Unpredictable scale of disasters (e.g., earthquake 
and Tsunami, etc.) has caused tremendous number of deaths 
all over the world. Citizens need to study effective basic actions 
and adaptive actions for the sudden change of disaster contexts 
in order to survive. By referring the case of The Great East 
Japan Earthquake in 2011, we propose disaster context library 
“d-Library” that shows citizens an eight layered disaster 
contexts framework, allowing them to easily recognize 
important layers of knowledge to survive. They can also study 
latest scientific knowledge and learn how to discover 
precursors of various types of disasters and their serious 
damages. 
We 
also 
discuss 
a 
methodology 
to 
avoid 
“catastrophic occurrence forgetting” used to remind important 
problems and to ensure safety after the evacuation. We also 
discuss experimental results of decision making assistance and 
checking the safety assist function.  
Keywords-disaster context; 
cross-field 
agent; catastrophic 
occurrence forgetting; warning picture; risk grade 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
The Great East Japan Earthquake in 2011 and Tsunamis 
[1] killed about 20,000 citizens. Moreover, many people 
were irradiated [2] and about 300,000 residents have lost 
home town by explosions of Fukushima nuclear power plant 
and occurred some nuclear leakage. From the experiences of 
such serious damages, it became clear that it is very difficult 
for ordinary citizens to understand separate scientific 
knowledge over many academic fields, such as seismology, 
physics, tsunami science, psychology 
[3], geology, 
unpredictable accidents by human behaviors, and invisible 
radioactive contaminants in a limited short time in the 
disaster. They could not also adapt such knowledge against 
serious dangers by the great earthquakes, giant tsunamis and 
radioactive contaminants. They should evacuate indoor, 
outdoor, and indoor respectively. Therefore, citizens need 
different types of organized knowledge. They also need 
information distribution systems, and prior learning systems 
in order to quickly start evacuation and survive from the 
great disasters. Public organizations already have a variety 
of information sharing systems for disaster prevention [4] 
and have built mutual assist society among many cities and 
companies both in Japan and in the world. We should 
enhance the disaster prevention system from the view point 
of human centered design. The citizen can find disaster 
contexts and some precursors of the great disasters. We 
propose an eight layered context-oriented disaster library 
“d-Library” as enhancing parts of the disaster information 
systems in order to reduce the serious damage [5] not only 
by separate scientific knowledge, but also by coping with 
human 
nature 
and 
ability, 
social 
behaviors, 
and 
collaboration in the mutual assist societies, etc. New 
technologies, such as enhancing collaboration by social 
networks [6] and Big Data [3] analysis should be also 
introduced into the library.  
The citizens should ensure the safety at the place of 
refuge when they complete evacuation utilizing such 
disaster contexts since many people were irradiated in a 
place of refuge. We also discuss safety check functions for 
avoiding Catastrophic Occurrence Forgetting (COF) [7] that 
is caused by mass-media reports of a deluge of remarkable 
occurrences. We also discuss experimental results of 
decision making assist and checking safety assist function. 
II. DISASTER CONTEXTS IN MANY ACADEMIC FIELDS AND 
CATASTROPHIC OCCURRENCE FORGETTING  
The Seismological Association of Japan (SAJ) could not 
predict not only “Hanshin-Awaji great earthquake Mj7.3” 
but also “Great East Japan Earthquake Mw9.0” at all. Even 
famous ten meters height beachside fences in Taro-cho in 
Tohoku district could not guard the Taro village from giant 
tsunamis in The Great East Japan Earthquake. Whole village 
was washed out by the giant tsunamis. The myth of safe 
nuclear power plant has been broken by explosions of 
Fukushima nuclear power plants.  
On the other hands, about 80 percent of the 184 students 
that were on their way home from Kamaishi Primary School 
could safely evacuated by the quick actions based on the 
disaster contexts of “Tsunami Tendenko” [8].  
 
(1) Disaster context  and safe evacuation  
“Disaster Context” includes context of occurrences in a 
disaster. Sharing disaster contexts enables citizens to avoid 
serious damage and adaptively evacuate from unpredictable 
danger. Disaster contexts are also very important for 
detecting disaster precursor of serious damage in order to 
reduce the damage. Disaster precursors can also be acquired 
in “technology assessment” [9].  
Disaster context mainly consists of layer ID and six sub-
contexts. (c1) Preparation, (c2) Environment, (c3) Action, 
(c4) Information, (c5) Psychology, and (c6) Safety check. 
Sub-context consists of “sc-attribute,” ”discription,” ”state,” 
and “risk grade of context.” “state” also includes 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

“concealed.” This means the necessity of careful check of 
safety. Relationships between sub-contexts are useful for 
checking the safety.  
Major assists for citizens by disaster contexts are 
classified into eleven categories.   
(a1) Know a “current situation” in typical contexts  
(a2) Avoid “invisible/unpredictable danger,” such as 
radioactive contaminants and tsunamis from hill-side  
(a3) Find “precursors of serious damages” like a warning  
(a4) Find “preparation stratagem” based on a pair of disaster 
contexts and serious damages  
(a5) Find a “slighted danger” that causes the death like fast 
ebb tsunami of 20 cm depth 
(a6) Know “how to make evacuation leaders” like “be the 
first in “Tsunami Tendenko”” [8] 
(a7) Know “the reason of missing a chance of survive” like 
swallowed persons in a car park in a shelter 
(a8) Know “the reason of seizing a chance of survive” like 
catching at a branch at the head of a great tsunami  
(a9) Know “the reason of death by same actions” like 
evacuation by car near a few bridges [3] 
(a10) Mind the change of degree of dangers 
(a11) Find danger and ensure safety 
A disaster context should include at least one description 
in six kinds of descriptions.  
(i) Dangerous situations with a photo for the rescue  
(ii) Change of dangers with photos or video 
(iii) Serious damage and its change with the causes. 
(iv) Embedded dangerous phenomenon   
(v) Wrong decisions and serious results with photos 
(vi) Success stories in evacuation 
(2) Catastrophic Occurrence Forgetting   
People should remind both ensuring their safety at a new 
place of refuge and reconsidering pending problems when 
they complete safe evacuation according to disaster contexts. 
Awareness of disaster contexts in an important occurrence 
to be observed is sometimes reduced by the catastrophic 
occurrences. We call these phenomena “Catastrophic 
Occurrence Forgetting (COF).” COF often lets citizens 
forget the important occurrence to survive. This has caused 
serious damages in emergency time. There are mainly four 
categories of catastrophic occurrences to make human forget 
disasters. (i) Lost of property, (ii) Encounter with what 
victims expect to forget, (iii) Catastrophe Forgetting (CF) 
[7] by a torrent of remarkable occurrences and big news, 
(iv) Sever life-style in separated family in a stricken society. 
(i) Lost property are (a) physical property, such as house 
and car, (b) family, such as child and parents, (c) 
community and neighborhood, (d) home town, (e) pleasant 
lifestyle, (d) economic base, such as field, farm, ground, 
non-radioactive fishes etc. Some occurrences in human’s 
memory are forgotten or wiped out by COF.  
(ii) Encounter with what victims expect to forget.  
Human instinctively forgets abnormal experiences in 
order to recover from Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder 
(PTSD) etc. A victim tries to forget the image of disasters, 
for example as a tsunami, people rolled off upper body and 
lower body by a swirl of strong undertows, public hall 
swallowed by tsunami and an expressionless face of the 
wife who were waving her hands on the top of a big tsunami 
[10].  
(iii) Catastrophe Forgetting (CF).  
Japanese mass-media continually reported a torrent of 
remarkable happenings, such as large fires, explosions of 
gas tanks, broken buildings, stopped trains, accidents in 
highway tunnels, North Korean nuclear missiles, avian 
influenza and tsunamis just after The Great East Japan 
Earthquake. A victim had to dispose broken stuffs and 
furniture and tidy up the rooms with fallen bookshelves and 
fallen products just after the great earthquakes. S(he) often 
forgot passed, but important occurrences [7] and reduced 
their awareness against tsunamis. We call this “Catastrophe 
Forgetting (CF)” in disaster psychology.  
Example 1. Forgetting the accidents in nuclear power 
plants. All Japanese were surprised at the scenes such that 
tsunami swallowed a whole town including lots of cars and 
all houses, and the fire spread over a town etc. Japanese 
citizens could not help reducing the awareness of the 
accidents in Fukushima nuclear power plants because of CF 
although a BBC news caster suspected the serious accidents 
in Fukushima nuclear power plants and French government 
prepared free airplanes for the French people in Japan. 
Example 2. Forgetting the certification of the safety in a 
new safe place at the arrival time. A family has evacuated 
to a safer place in Iitate village that locates about 60km 
away from the nuclear power plant. A father forgot to 
certify the safety of Iitate village at the arrival time. All the 
families were irradiated by strong radiation. Young women 
may not be able to have babies. 
III.  DISCOVERY OF PRECURSOR OF SERIOUS DAMAGE BY 
D-LIBRARY WITH CROSS-FIELD AGENT 
Early evacuation in a safe direction in safe environments 
is the best evacuation. Early discovery of disaster precursor 
is very important for such safe evacuation.  
Citizens need different types of organized knowledge 
and information distribution systems in order to easily 
understand disaster contexts, quickly start reasonable 
evacuation in a short time period and survive from the great 
disasters. Root and transfer routes of a disaster context 
decide the reliability of the disaster context and facilitate the 
easy understanding.  
From the experiences of serious damages and after 
effect of the earthquakes, we propose “eight layered disaster 
context” over multiple academic fields and disaster context 
oriented disaster library “d-Library” (Fig. 1) [11]; so, as to 
enhance the disaster information systems in local 
governments. The aims of the eight layers are facilitating 
the reduction of serious damage not only by separate 
scientific knowledge, but also by coping with human nature 
and ability, social behaviors, and collaboration in the mutual 
assist societies, etc. Introduction of new technologies, such 
as enhancing collaborations by social networks and Big 
Data analysis are also the aims. 
The eight layers are (a) Collective unconsciousness, (c) 
General Knowledge in home country, (d) Good ideas in the 
other areas/foreign countries, (e) Big Data analysis, (f) 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

  
Figure 1. Eight layered disaster context base “d-Library.” 
Problem/solutions and history of statements are kept in (g)  
Cross-field
agent
twitter
SNS
FB
Watcher
Radioactive
contaminants
Airplaine, Satellite 
Sensor Network
GPS
Tsunami Buoy
Citizens,
Visitors
d-Library
Prior 
Learning 
System
Power
ring
Bulletine
Board
Bulletine
Board
Eight Layered 
Disaster
Contexts
Eight Layered 
Disaster
Contexts
Mail Auto-
Delivery
Mail Auto-
Delivery
・・・
Consensus
Conference
Technology
Assessment
Mutual
Assist 
Society
Push-type
distribution
Contribution
  
Figure 2. The citizens share eight layered disaster contexts in real time 
through bulletine board or mail auto-delivery 
Selected knowledge from SNS and the general public, (g) 
Serious problems with solutions and a history of statements 
(PS), and (h) Evolved knowledge (EK). Ordinary citizens 
can understand a target disaster context and the reason of 
effectiveness of practical actions in each layer. Big Data 
analysis often shows unpredictable important causes against 
human’s bias. Separate academic knowledge with some 
conditions belongs to layer (c) “General knowledge 
information in home country” in case of the great disasters. 
For example “a nuclear power plant is safe from the point of 
killing a person” belongs to layer (c). Effective knowledge 
in any disasters belongs to layer (h) “Evolved knowledge.” 
The Japanese government and the local governments 
have information sharing system for disaster prevention. d-
Library should be introduced in the information sharing 
system.  
d-Library consists of two kinds of feature (Fig. 2):        
(i) Additional database in the information sharing system, 
and (ii) a report from users and the mutual assist society in 
disaster time.     
(i) Additional database in information sharing systems 
of a government. Tables in the additional database include 
“description of context with key words,” “raw information 
in text, picture, video, multimedia, and AR type of 
multimedia data, etc.,” and “URL: link to information in the 
internet, such as URL of information” since copy right of 
the information is owned by the other person in the world.  
(ii) A report from users and the mutual assist society in 
disaster time. A contributor can easily make an article with 
a name of original contributor in a blog site and contribute it 
with the URL of the article to a bulletin board or a mail 
auto-delivery system of the information sharing system. 
Even older people can easily acquire the latest information 
in real time since the mail auto-delivery system enables 
push type of information distribution. Administrators of the 
certified layer like layer (h) should check articles and 
deliver them to the registered people.   
Dangerous areas with disaster contexts should also be 
opened for the citizen since citizens can neither watch 
physical phenomenon nor understand serious risk in them. 
We propose “cross-field agent” in disaster context 
library (d-Library) in order to safely guide the citizens to 
safe places and reconstruct home town with pleasant 
lifestyle.  
Cross-field agents provide the citizens with the eleven 
assists by useful disaster contexts and practical actions. 
Useful disaster contexts enable citizens to find clues of 
practical actions and a right decision to survive. 
Example 2. There are a lot of small towns in saw tooth 
coastline in the east Japan. Disaster contexts have 
constraints in human actions by the small plains, a few main 
streets and a few large bridges [3]. The bridges caused the 
traffic jams. Residents should not use automobiles in case of 
giant tsunami. They might adaptively drive to the hillside 
and walk up to a higher ground when they notice the jams. 
Cross-field agent provides citizens with useful disaster 
contexts for either a great disaster or a serious accident and 
allows them to timely find a safe way of evacuation 
corresponding to the change of disaster environments. 
Cross-field agent shows the user the tsunami warning with a 
picture of evacuation in order to make an immediate 
decision to leave the house and go to a higher ground in 
case of giant tsunamis (Fig. 3). The resident can know the 
serious situation that a friend near beachside has already left 
his/her house to survive when s/he accesses the disaster 
web-site. The picture also shows the resident that a friend is 
running up the stairs in an evacuation route. The resident 
reconsiders the decision of leaving the house although COF 
would happen in himself/herself.  
“Risk Grade” of a disaster context should be decided in 
six levels. (rg0) safe, (rg1) safe with some dangers, (rg3) 
dangerous staying in a safe place, (rg4) evacuation to a 
place of refuge, (rg5) evacuation to a place of secondary 
refuge/ dangerous staying in a dangerous place, and (rg6) 
evacuation to the outside of a place of secondary refuge. We 
should check current risk grade and the history of it. The 
grade and the history contribute to the decision making. 
Cross-field agent can become a reliable disaster guide in 
emergency time. It reminds the important problems with 
solutions if COF would force citizens to forget the 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 3. A picture of tsunami warning shows that a friend in the 
beachside has already left the house 
  
 
                     Group1                                 Group2 
Figure 4. Effective warning in text or picture 
important problems. The field-agent also gives citizen 
awareness and a chance to ensure the safety that s/he 
selected. Well experienced people and good watchers could 
find the danger and its solution with maps that shows the 
serious risks. Cross-field agents also give citizen a chance to 
acquire dynamic change of situations and to ensure the 
safety that citizen selected.  
IV.  PRACTICE OF DECISION MAKING AND 
CHECKING SAFETY  
4.1 Practicing decision making to survive  
During the Great East Japan Earthquake in 2011, about 
70 percent of residents did not evacuate because of 
Normalcy Bias [11], although they knew the tsunami 
warning of the government in text and reading out by an 
announcer. We tested the efficiency of tsunami warning 
with a picture. A user of d-Library can acquire the real-time 
information by one pushing “Where is people?” icon in a 
window of d-Library. Field agent shows whether the 
residents in a zone have started evacuation to a safe place or 
not (Fig. 3, 5) based on the actions of personal examiners or 
community/area examiners that a user of d-Library chosen. 
The user can also know which zone the other residents 
started moving to a safe place. 
We built a prototype of safety check system by web base 
system and tested whether a subject feel the danger of 
tsunami such that s/he has to leave his/her house. 
Conditions C0. The subject lives near a beachside. The 
tsunami warnings have already been issued. Resident A 
lives in a house that locates between the house of the subject 
and the beachside. Resident B lives in a house that locates 
on higher ground than the ground of the subject’s house. 
The house of resident B locates farer from the beachside 
than that of resident A. 
Devices. (1) TV, radio and mobile phone, (2) Cross-field 
agent stand next the subject 
Picture (p1). A friend near the beachside has already 
evacuated to survive (Fig. 3). 
Case 1. The tsunami warnings in text were shown on a 
screen of TV and an announcer of TV and radio tells the 
residents the tsunami warnings. 
Case 2. A subject accessed a disaster web-site. S/he watches 
the picture (p1) of the tsunami warning and hears the voice 
guide of the tsunami warning. 
Subjects: 
Group 1. 16 persons between 23 and 65 years old. 
Group 2. 45 persons between 18 and 22 years old. 
Test 1. Difference of tsunami warnings between in text 
with reading out and in picture.  
Operations O2. 
(1) A subject hears an explanation of the conditions. 
(2) A subject hears an explanation of case 2 and watch a 
picture of evacuation. 
(3) A subject hears an explanation of case1 and reminds the 
scene of the tsunami warning on a screen of TV and 
voice reading of sentences in the warning. Japanese 
often watch such TV screen in daily life. 
Question 1. “Which case do you feel a mortal danger in?” 
Answer 1. (Fig.4) 
Group 1. Case 1: 1, Case 2: 15, both cases: 0 (person) 
Group 2. Case 1: 2, Case 2: 41, both cases: 2 (person) 
Interview 1. Why do you feel the mortal danger in the 
case1 that you chose? 
Answers in Case 1.  
Group 1. (a1) One aged person trusts the voice reading out 
of the warning by an announcer.  
Group 2. (a2) Two subjects trust the warnings of JMA and 
could feel the mortal danger from the tsunami warning on 
TV.  
Answers in Case 2.  
Group 1. (a3) 15 subjects felt the mortal danger in the 
picture since they were accustomed to watch the warnings 
of JMA and cannot feel the mortal danger in the warnings 
on TV etc.  
Group 2. 
(a4) 41 subjects answered as same as (a3).  
(a5) A picture showed an image of concrete scene of 
evacuation by the other resident. 
(a6) A picture let me know that there was a person that had 
already evacuated.  
(a7) Most subjects were accustomed to see the tsunami 
warning and have never been attacked by the great tsunami 
in their life for more than 18 years.  
(a8) A woman did not trust the warning and tried to check 
actions of the neighbors before the evacuation. 
(a9) Most subjects could make a concrete image of 
evacuation from the picture. The picture produced a strong 
motivation in subject's mind in case 2. All subjects decided 
to immediately leave his/her house to survive. 
Answers in the both cases. (a10) Two subjects basically 
evacuate anytime when they hear the word of “tsunami,” 
since they lives near the beachside and the plain near the 
beachside is small. They could guard their lives against any 
kinds of tsunamis. 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

  
 
               Group1                                 Group2 
Figure 6. Useful pictures and embedded danger 
            
(a) One push on an icon ”Where is people” 
 
 
(p1) A friend in the beachside has already left the house 
 
(p2) A friend in the hillside has already left the house 
 
Figure 5. A user can know the latest action of the other residents by only 
one push on “Where is People?”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                
Fig. 7 Evacuated people in “Beachside” or “Hillside”  
                                                                                                   
is displayed with acoustic information 
Test2. Difference between tsunami warning from a 
beachside friend and that from a hillside friend. 
Pictures. (Fig.5) 
(p1) A picture shows that a friend near the beachside has 
already evacuated to survive.  
(p2) A picture shows that a friend near the hillside has 
already evacuated to survive. 
Operations O2. 
(1) A subject hears situations of the tsunami warning with a 
picture.  
(2) A subject watched two pictures for the tsunami 
warnings. 
Question 2. “Which picture do you feel more mortal 
danger?” 
Answer 1. (Fig.6) 
Group 1. p 1: 8, p 2: 7, both p1 and P2: 1 (person) 
Group 2. p 1: 2, p 2: 39, both p1 and P2: 4 (person) 
 Interview1. Why did you feel more mortal danger in the 
picture that you chose? 
Answers for interview 1.  
Group 1. Eight subjects thought that residents in the 
beachside would be the first persons that felt the danger.  
(a12) Seven subjects thought that residents in the hillside 
could find some dangers on a higher ground. They could 
find the black wall of the great tsunamis coming. 
(a13) One subject thought that any tsunami is dangerous. 
Group 2. (a13) Only two subjects thought as same as a11. 
(a14) 39 subjects thought as same as a12. Some of them 
thought that it would be too late for residents in the 
beachside to evacuate. They would be swallowed by the 
great tsunami. 
Discussion. We confirmed that no serious damage for 37 
years has made most subjects be accustomed to the tsunami 
warning and feel no mortal danger in the tsunami warning. 
We found that a good picture could distribute the effective 
warning with dangerous situations and contexts in Japan. 
Japanese subjects could not only easily extract evacuation 
actions by a resident and make an image of reasonable 
situation for the surroundings, but also embedded dangerous 
situations. All subjects except one subject decided to 
immediate evacuation by both pictures p1 and p2. A female 
subject in 40’s answered that she would watch the 
surroundings and reconsidered the evacuation. To our 
surprise, most young subjects in group2 could not only 
understand the pictures, but also analyze the embedded 
danger from actions by a friend in the hillside instead of the 
actions by a friend in the beachside (Fig.6). We should 
prepare two kinds of good pictures for both young people 
and ordinary citizen. 
4.2 Application of practicing safety check in d-library  
Objective analysis of the serious damages by great 
disasters should be supplied citizens since citizens cannot 
afford to find the useful information in such an emergency 
time for example, The Great East Japan Earthquake in 2011, 
citizens experiencing earthquakes, Tsunami, even nuclear 
leakage. We proposed “cross-field agent” that shows 
awareness of checking the safety for citizens in order to just 
push the icon of easy safety check “E-Safe”. E-Safe icon 
allows a user to acquire objective information and many 
kinds of risk map like radioactive contaminants map of the 
Energy Department of State in the U.S. from the outside of 
the interested parties or from foreign countries by one push 
of an icon (Fig. 7). The tsunami warning changed the 
prediction of height of tsunami twice “from 3 meters to 6 
meters” and “from 6 meters to more than 10 meters.” A 
citizen should also be given awareness of these two changes 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
      
                                                     Second revision 
 
         
 
The first revision 
Figure 7. One push of an icon “Check the safety” and two revisions of the 
tsunami warning   
                                                 
 
Figuire 8. The map of radioactive the contaminants sent by US 
embassy [12] 
 
by field-agent in d-Library and only push the button for the 
check. A user of d-Library could safely evacuate from the 
great tsunami. S/he also could know the latest right 
information and objective information like the map of 
radioactive contaminants from foreign countries etc. A 
citizen could avoid the potential strong nuclear leakage and 
easily evacuate to a safe place in the safe direction if s/he 
would easily know the map (Fig. 8) and ensure his/her 
safety by E-Safe when s/he would worry his/her own 
situation. 
V.  CONCLUSION 
We described the importance of learning disaster 
contexts by referring the case of The Great East Japan 
Earthquake in 2011, a sequence of great disasters and 
serious accidents in Fukushima nuclear leakage, etc. We 
proposed eight layered disaster context library “d-Library” 
with cross-field agent for citizens in order to quickly 
evacuate to a safe place and ensure their own safety after the 
evacuation. We also discussed how to evacuate avoiding 
psychological 
difficulties 
as 
catastrophic 
occurrence 
forgetting. “Cross-field agent” gives citizens a chance to 
find precursors of serious damages and find additional 
solutions for the disaster emergency situations by 
collaborations in the Internet.  
We also discuss a warning method with pictures that 
enabled a citizen to avoid the psychological difficulties and 
reminds important problems as the safety check.  
REFERENCES 
[1] F. Imamura, et al., “Irian Jaya earthquake and tsunami cause serious 
damage,” 
Eos 
Trans. 
AGU, 
78(19), 
1997, 
pp. 
197-204, 
doi:10.1029/97EO00128.  
[2] S. Nomura, et al., "Mortality risk amongst nursing home residents 
evacuated 
after 
the 
Fukushima 
nuclear 
accident," 
“http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10. 
1371%2Fjournal.pone.0060192,” February 26, 2013, [retrieved: 
January, 2014]. 
[3] NHK, “Great tsunami, How people moved at the great tsunami,” NHK 
special, 2nd, Oct. 2011, [retrieved: January, 2014]. 
[4] MIC Japan, “Information Sharing for Disaster Prevention,” 
“http://www.soumu.go.jp/main_sosiki/joho_tsusin/top/local_support/i
ct/jirei/thema10.html,” [retrieved: January, 2014]. 
[5] T. Miyachi, G. Buribayeva, S. Iga, and T. Furuhata, “A Study of 
Disaster Library System with a Field Agent to Learn a Sequence of 
Great Disasters,” IWIN2013, Sept. 2013, pp. 91-97  
[6] 
Shinshu 
radioactivity 
lab 
BLOG, 
“http://imeasure.cocolog-
nifty.com/isotope/2013/11/post-a012.html,” 
[retrieved: 
Febrary, 
2014]. 
[7]  M. McCloskey, and N. Cohen, “Catastrophic interference in 
connectionist networks: The sequential learning problem.” in G. H. 
Bower (ed.) The Psychology of Learning and Motivation: NY: 
Academic Press, vol. 24, 1989, pp. 109-164.  
[8] T. Katada, and M. Kanai, “Implementation of Tsunami Disaster 
Education for Children and Their Parents at Elementary School,” 
Solutions to Coastal Disasters 2008: 2008, pp. 39-48 [9] N. Mikami, 
“Challenges in the Practical Stage of Participatory Technology 
Assessment: From the Experience of GM Consensus Conference in 
Hokkaido,” Japanese Journal of Science Communication, No.1, 2007, 
pp. 84-95. 
[10]  T. Suzuki, “My wife was waving her hands･･･,” Talk about 3.11, 
KHB East Japan Broadcasting, vol. 1, 2012. 
[11] New Jersey Personal Defense Academy, “Normalcy Bias: Cause, 
Effect, Cure,” “http://njpersonaldefense. com/normalcy-bias-cause-
effect-cure/,” [retrieved: January, 2014]. 
[12] U.S. Department of Energy, “Aerial Monitoring Results Cumulative,” 
“http://energy.gov/downloads/radiation-monitoring-data-fukushima-
area-32211,”  25, March, 2011, [retrieved: Febrary, 2014]. 
 
 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

