An Analysis of Expression Patterns for Establishing Research Significance 
Kiyoko Uchiyama 
Dept. Applied Computer Science 
Shonan Institute of Technology 
Fujisawa, Japan 
e-mail: uchiyama@sc.shonan-it.ac.jp 
 
Abstract—It is crucial to investigate essential information for 
comprehending contents of technical documents and academic 
papers in order to write a paper as novices. The previous 
works revealed the importance of grasping the logical 
structure and the knowledge of technical terms in the domain-
specific field. As it takes a lot of time to acquire the knowledge 
of technical terms, a method which can be assumed the 
meaning of technical terms requires for effective reading. In 
this paper, we attempt to extract and analyze expression 
patterns of establishing discourse structure and reflecting 
author’s intention in the Section Introduction of academic 
papers. 
The 
analysis 
carried 
out 
using 
by 
original 
categorization based on the existing model and reported the 
results. 
 
Keywords-Expression 
Patterns; 
Comprehensive 
Reading; 
Creating A Research Space (CARS) model. 
I.  
 INTRODUCTION 
In academic education, some important assignments ask for 
reading academic papers and writing a report in specific 
field. Students in the engineering department have a lot of 
assignments that require reading of academic papers and 
technical reports related to the state of the art of technology. 
 Such documents, however, include various technical 
terms, which are unknown words for undergraduate students. 
A lack of knowledge of technical terms makes it difficult for 
novices to read the technical documents in the specific field. 
On the other hand, education for reading technical 
documents is not enough at the early stage of research.  
We have proposed a method for reading technical 
documents, understanding technical terms and function 
words in logical structure. Firstly, regarding the technical 
terms, novices need to know the technical terms, which are 
basic and essential to a target field, in advance. However, 
the importance or essentiality of the terms in a target field 
remains unclear.  We defined such technical terms as 
introductory terms. If novices do not have any knowledge of 
the introductory terms, they cannot comprehend the outline 
nor understand more difficult terms in a target field.  We 
proposed various criteria for identifying the terms in a 
specific domain [1]. We proposed original criteria for the 
introductory terms: priority and compositionality and 
calculated the score based on C-Value [2]. C-Value is one of 
the term scoring methods and uses the type and token 
frequency for each constituent from the compound nouns in 
a corpus of the target field.  
At first, we defined priority as a sort of ordering for 
learning in textbooks and attractive keywords in research 
papers. 
Secondly, 
concerning 
the 
compositionality, 
introductory terms tend to generate various new compound 
nouns by concatenating single words or word strings in 
prefix/suffix form. The introductory term candidates were 
calculated based on the type and token frequency occurred 
in academic papers and textbooks. As the result, we found 
that the frequency from the table of contents in textbooks 
was useful for extracting the introductory terms. 
The subsequent analysis of the distribution of the terms 
has processed in a logical structure, such as “Abstract”, 
“Introduction”, and “Conclusion” [3]. The introductory 
terms tend to be included in the logical structure of 
“Abstract” and “Introduction”, rather than that of 
“Experiment”, “Discussion” and “Conclusion”. It is 
assumed that novices can understand the outline of technical 
documents by effective reading the section of “Abstract” and 
“Introduction”.  
Based on those previous analysis, comprehensive 
reading in “Abstract” and “Introduction” section is 
necessary for novices in order to grasp the outline of the 
target paper effectively. As the “Abstract” section is too 
short to analyze the structure, “Introduction” is a target 
section.  
As it takes a lot of time to acquire the knowledge of the 
technical terms in a specific field, a method requires other 
clues for comprehensive reading than the method by using 
the knowledge of technical term. That is to say, it is crucial 
that the meaning of technical terms can be detected by using 
functional words, phrases which establish the author’s 
intention in the context. 
In this paper, the expression patterns which reflect the 
discourse of the paper and the author’s intention are   
analyzed in the context of the Section Introduction. The 
three steps are introduced for the analysis. Firstly, the role 
assigned to each sentence, in other words, discourse segment 
which dominates the context in the paper is processed. 
Secondly, based on the CARS model (detailed in Section 2), 
the following three types of expressions, which are related to 
construction and context of the paper are categorized for this 
analysis. Three types are (1) mutual expressions frequently 
used in academic field, (2) characteristic expressions in 
domain-specific field, and (3) reflecting expressions for 
establishing the author’s intention. Finally, we analyze the 
relationship between the role of sentence and each type of 
expressions and organize the results by the previous two 
steps.  
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-542-5
eKNOW 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

       This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, related 
works are summarized and our motivation to conduct our 
study. The analysis and results are described in Section 3 
and Section 4 concludes our possible future work.  
II.  
RELATED WORKS 
 There are several researches of rhetorical structure and 
writing strategy in academic papers. The existing researches 
are focusing on the role of each sentence and categorization 
of discourse segmentation related to our research. 
A.   Creating a Research Space (CARS) model 
Based on existing analysis of the Section Introduction, 
we assumed that the CARS model proposed by Swales [4] 
can be applied to analyze the structure of target documents. 
CARS model consists of three moves that describe how 
research paper introductions are structured.  
The three rhetorical moves are: (1) establishing a 
territory, (2) establishing a niche, and (3) occupying the 
niche. The model breaks down each of those moves into 
more detailed descriptions. The move1 establishing a 
territory includes three steps, claiming centrality, making 
topic generalizations, and reviewing items of previous 
research. After describing move1, authors try to write their 
refutation to earlier research, indicate a gap, raise a question 
and continue a tradition. Finally, authors reveal their 
findings or solution to help fill the gap in move2, by 
outlining purposes, announcing present research and main 
findings, indicating structure of the paper and evaluation of 
findings. 
In establishing a niche of CARS model, authors claim 
their research advantages by showing that the previous 
research are not enough. Authors criticize the existing 
research by using words expressing a contrast evaluation, 
such as “less”, “little”, “fail”, “ignore” and “inefficient”. 
This sort of expressions might become clue words for 
novices to understand the author’s intention and find the 
originalities of the target documents.  
B.   The Role of Sentence in Discourse Segment 
Swales’ CARS model has been used extensively by 
discourse analysis and annotation scheme for information 
retrieval of scientific papers. A Core Scientific Concepts 
(CoreSC) is one of the annotation schemes [5][6]. This 
annotation scheme adopts the view that a scientific paper is 
the 
human-readable 
representation 
of 
a 
scientific 
investigation. The CoreSC introduced 11 categories. 
Similarly, de Waad and Pander Maat categorized seven 
discourse segments: Fact, Problem, Goal, Method, Result, 
Implication and hypothesis [7][8]. The seven categories at 
the sentence level can be used for classifying the sentence 
in the Section Introduction.  
      We correspond Swales’ CARS model to seven 
discourse segments in each sentence for analyzing 
expression patterns in the Section Introduction. 
III.  
ANALYSIS AND RESULT 
We collected and analyzed academic papers in order to 
investigate the expressions which are structured. The 
Section Introduction were selected from the full text of the 
academic papers. The key expressions were extracted 
referring Swales’ CARS model and classified by the role in 
structure of Introduction. 
A.   Target Documents 
One hundred academic papers written in Japanese which 
include a keyword “Natural Language Processing” in 
Information Processing Journal of Japan from 1998 to 2011 
were collected. The 2000 sentences in the Section 
Introduction are target for this paper. The seven categories 
of annotation scheme for discourse segments is assigned to 
each sentence.  
B.   Analysis and Result 
We analyzed three types of expressions. The first type is 
mutual expressions frequently used in academic field. This 
type can also define the role of sentence. For example, the 
expressions like “the purpose of this paper”, “we propose a 
method…” can be assigned the role of “Goal” to the 
sentences. The second type is characteristic expressions in 
domain-specific field. There are several kinds of words: 
clue words in wide range of field, such as “precision” 
“method” “automation” in information processing or 
engineering field., domain-specific technical terms which 
can be defined as introductory terms in our research, such 
as “morphological analysis” “parse” “corpus” in natural 
language processing field.  
The third type is reflecting expressions for establishing 
the author’s intention which corresponds to Swale’s move 
2: establishing a niche. The expressions include various part 
of speech, conjunction, adverbs, verbs and adjectives.  The 
authors tend to use positive/negative words in each part of 
speech for describing their intention or emphasis point of 
their research. The words, such as “versatile”, “enormous”, 
“redundant”, “robust” and “exclusive” are observed 
characteristically in information processing field. Those 
expressions are commonly used for evaluating proposed 
method or research in contrast to the expressions “contrast 
or negative evaluation” widely used in academic field.  
IV.  
CONCLUSION 
In this study, we defined the expressions which 
constitute of context and the Section Introduction in 
academic paper as “establishing expressions”. The three 
steps were proceeded for analysis of each sentence applying 
the framework of Swale’s CARS model and discourse 
segments. The results of the analysis were that establishing 
expressions have common ones in academic field and 
specific ones in domain-specific field. We plan to further 
investigate the establishing expressions in some field, and 
confirm whether those expressions can be useful for 
effective reading. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-542-5
eKNOW 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

REFERENCES 
[1] K. Uchiyama, “A Study for Identifying Domain-Specific 
Introductory 
Terms 
in 
Research 
Papers,” 
Proc. 
9th 
Terminology and Artificial Intelligence, pp.147-150, 2011. 
[2] Katerina T. Frantzi and Sophia Ananiadou (1996). Extracting 
Nested Collocations, In proceedings of the 16th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING 96):41-
46. 
[3] K. Uchiyama, “An Analysis of Domain-Specific Introductory 
Terms in Logical Structure of Scholarly Papers,” Proc. 
Workshop on Corpus Japanese Linguistics, pp. 195-198, 2012. 
[4] J. Swales, Genre Analysis English in Academic and Research 
settings, Cambridge University press, 1990.  
[5] M. Liakata, S. Teufel, A. Siddharthan, and C. Batchelor, 
“Corpora for Conceptualization and Zoning of Scientific 
Papers,” 
Proc. 
Language 
Resources 
and 
Evaluation 
(LREC2010), pp.2054-2061, 2010. 
[6] M. Liakata, S. Saha, S. Dobnik, C. Batchelor, and D. R. 
Schuhmann, “Automatic Recognition of Conceptualization 
Zones in Scientific Articles and Two Life Science 
Applications,” Bioinformatics, 28(7), pp.991-1000, 2012. 
[7] A. de Waard and H. P. Maat., “Categorizing Epistemic 
Segment Types in Biology Research Articles,” Proc. 
Workshop on Linguistic and Psycholinguistic Approaches to 
Text Structuring (LPTS 2009), 2009. 
[8] A. de Waard and H. P. Maat, “Epistemic modality and 
knowledge attribution in scientific discourse: a taxonomy of 
types and overview of features,” Proc. Workshop on Detecting 
Structure in Scholarly Discourse, pp.47-55, 2012. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-542-5
eKNOW 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

