Commenter Behavior Characterization on YouTube Channels
Shadi Shajari
COSMOS Research Center
University of Arkansas at Little Rock
Little Rock, USA
Email: sshajari@ualr.edu
Nitin Agarwal
COSMOS Research Center
University of Arkansas at Little Rock
Little Rock, USA
Email: nxagarwal@ualr.edu
Mustafa Alassad
COSMOS Research Center
University of Arkansas at Little Rock
Little Rock, USA
Email: mmalassad@ualr.edu
Abstract—YouTube is the second most visited website in the
world and receives comments from millions of commenters
daily. The comments section acts as a space for discussions
among commenters, but it could also be a breeding ground for
problematic behavior. In particular, the presence of suspicious
commenters who engage in activities that deviate from the norms
of constructive and respectful discourse can negatively impact
the community and the quality of the online experience. This
paper presents a social network analysis-based methodology
for detecting commenter mobs on YouTube. These mobs of
commenters collaborate to boost engagement on certain videos.
The method provides a way to characterize channels based on the
level of suspicious commenter behavior and detect coordination
among channels. To evaluate our model, we analyzed 20 YouTube
channels, 7,782 videos, 294,199 commenters, and 596,982 com-
ments that propagated false views about the U.S. Military. The
analysis concluded with evidence of commenter mob activities,
possible coordinated suspicious behavior on the channels, and an
explanation of the behavior of co-commenter communities.
Keywords-Social Network Analysis; YouTube; Commenter Net-
work Analysis; Principal Component Analysis; Suspicious Behav-
iors;
I. INTRODUCTION
YouTube is a popular online platform for sharing and
discussing videos, which allows millions of users to upload
content and comment on videos daily. While YouTube has
many benevolent uses, it has also been used to spread misin-
formation, propaganda, and other inappropriate or malicious
content [1]. In addition, the comments section on YouTube
has been used as a breeding ground for suspicious commenter
behavior. For example, adversarial information actors deployed
an information tactic known as commenter mobs, a strategy of
random group of commenters collectively comment on a video
(or a set of videos) to boost the video’s engagement (hence,
fabricate virality), as investigated by Hussain et al. [2].
Moreover, such mobs of commenters could comment on
videos on one or multiple channels, where these comments
may or may not be relevant to the videos. This behavior can
harm the quality of the YouTube community and shape public
perceptions of important issues.
Prior studies on this issue have mostly focused on identify-
ing certain keywords and phrases that may indicate suspicious
behavior. Researchers applied methods to analyze the behavior
of the key sets of commenters in co-commenter networks on
YouTube [3]. However, we discovered some limitations in
these methods as well as shortcomings in the final analysis,
in which the authors did not count the suspicious behavior of
commenters at the channel level.
This paper proposes a social network analysis based
methodology to detect commenter mobs, which helps to de-
velop a channel-level characterization from highly suspicious
to least suspicious level. In addition, the methodology helps
assess the similarity between channels based on commenter
behaviors, which allows the detection of varying degrees of
collusion (or coordination) among channels. This systematic
analysis was implemented to investigate suspicious commenter
behavior on 20 YouTube channels promoting false views of
the U.S. military and claiming to report official news and
information about the U.S. Department of Defense. Likewise,
mob activities were detected in this collection of channels. For
example, the method found activities in standalone channels
that shared similar organizational structures (mob leaders and
affiliates), comment posting styles, and languages. Further
analysis was done on the commenter mobs of the three most
suspicious channels to describe their similarities and the nature
of the content they posted. This study has contributed signif-
icantly and generated new insights into analyzing inorganic
behaviors in YouTube platform, as presented below:
• Conducted an analysis of co-commenter networks on 20
YouTube channels to identify similarities using clustering
methods and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) for
dimensionality reduction.
• Detected the commenter mobs of the three most suspi-
cious channels.
• Investigated cross-channel activities among the three most
suspicious channels.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section
II reviews the suspicious behavior on YouTube, commenter
network analysis, and the current understanding of the topic.
Section III details the methods used for data collection, includ-
ing the techniques and tools utilized to collect data. Section
IV explains the methodology used in the study, which involves
a combination of PCA, k-means, and hierarchical clustering
methods. Section V presents the results of the study, including
a detailed analysis of the data, commenters behavior, and the
YouTube channels analysis. Finally, Section VI provides a
conclusion and recommendations for further research.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we review the relevant literature related to
suspicious behaviors on YouTube. Since this area is vastly
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-082-7
eKNOW 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

understudied, we expand our literature survey to include
approaches that are methodologically relevant to ours, even
if they are studying a different research problem.
A. Suspicious Behavior on YouTube
Several approaches have been proposed to study suspicious
behaviors on YouTube. A study by Alassad et al. [1] dis-
covered intensive groups on YouTube, and identified content-
user networks that responsible for disseminating conspiracy
theories using a two-level decomposition optimization method.
Likewise, Alassad et al. [3] applied the bi-level max-max
optimization approach to identify key sets of individuals on
social media who have the power to mobilize crowds and
regulate the flow of information. Research by Kaushal et al. [4]
focused on detecting child unsafe content on YouTube, using
supervised classification and a convolutional neural network
with an accuracy of 85.7%. Furthermore, Hussain et al. [2]
analyzed metadata, such as engagement scores to identify
inorganic behaviors on YouTube.
Kirdemir et al. [5] presented an unsupervised model for co-
ordinated inauthentic behavior assessment on YouTube using a
methodology that combines multiple layers of analysis, includ-
ing rolling window correlation analysis, anomaly detection,
peak detection, rule-based supervised classification, network
feature engineering, and unsupervised clustering approaches.
These studies come close to analyzing suspicious behaviors on
YouTube. There is still a gap in the literature on examining
suspicious commenter behaviors on YouTube that may lead to
engagement boosting or fabricating the virality of the content.
We focus on addressing this knowledge gap at the channel
level through the research presented in this paper.
B. Commenter Network Analysis
An extensive body of literature applies social network
analysis methods to reduce the complexity of social media
data structures. Reviewing all those studies would be outside
the scope of this research. Therefore, we narrow our focus
on the studies that utilize social network analysis to analyze
networks on YouTube only. Shapiro et al. [6] analyzed the
video-commenter discussion on YouTube. They presented a
comprehensive network analysis for the 20 most popular
climate change-related YouTube videos to understand the role
of elites and small groups of frequent commenters in shaping
the discussion.
More recently, studies have focused on exponential random
graph modeling [7]. Another study by Ferreira et al. [8]
examined the mechanisms of imitation, intergroup interaction,
and communities of co-commenters. In this research, the
model focused on groups of users who frequently interact by
commenting on the same posts. Coppola et al. [9] found that
machine learning can detect maximal cliques within larger net-
works by implementing the Bron-Kerbosch algorithm to detect
communities and central nodes. Likewise, the study presented
by Cascavilla et al. [10] focused on analyzing commenters’
comments and social network graphs to identify censored
individuals in news articles. Another study by Wattenhofer et
al. [11] analyzed the social and content aspects of YouTube
and compared them to traditional online social networks, such
as Twitter.
However, there are gaps in the literature related to com-
menter behavior on YouTube that could be addressed in future
research. For example, we noticed a need for more research
on the effectiveness of different approaches to detecting and
addressing the multi-channel suspicious commenter behavior.
In this research, we propose graph theoretic methods to
identify mobs of commenters who post comments together
on one or a set of videos and exhibit similar behaviors on
different Youtube channels, in an attempt to discover collusion
(or coordination) among channels.
III. DATA COLLECTION
In this study, we used a Python-based multi-thread script
[12] to collect data related to the U.S. Military on YouTube
channels. For this purpose, subject matter experts identified a
list of 20 YouTube channels that promoted false views of the
U.S. military.
TABLE I. YOUTUBE DATASET STATISTICS
Channels
Videos
Comments
Commenters
20
7782
596,982
294,199
The YouTube Data API is utilized to retrieve huge amounts
of data about the number of videos, the number of comments,
the details of the comments, and the commenter’s IDs as
presented in Table I.
IV. METHODOLOGY
This section describes our model. First, we describe how
to create a co-commenter network (Section IV-A) and then
discuss the 20 network structural features extracted from
the co-commenter network (Section IV-B). Next, the model
utilizes k-means and hierarchical clustering methods [13] on
the co-commenter networks to determine the level of similarity
between all 20 YouTube channels. The network structural
features also allow us to rank the suspiciousness of the
channels based on their co-commenting behaviors. Next, we
explain the model in detail.
A. Creating Co-commenter Network
The process begins by creating a co-commenter network
for each channel based on a chosen threshold. This co-
commenter network is made up of edges between commenters
who have commented on the same video, with the weight of
the edge representing the number of the same videos they have
commented on. Let’s call this number n. To maintain stronger
co-commenter relations, a threshold needs to be identified for
n. To find the optimal threshold, 10 co-commenter networks
were created for each channel using thresholds from 1 to
10. The average clustering coefficient was calculated for each
network at each threshold, and the results were analyzed.
The optimal threshold for each channel was determined by
identifying the point in the plot where the rate of change
starts to decrease, which is commonly known as the “elbow
point” [14]. This method is often used to determine the optimal
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-082-7
eKNOW 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

number of clusters in a data set. We analyze the co-commenter
network with the best threshold that is calculated through the
“elbow point” for each channel.
B. Extracting Co-commenter Network Features
Kirdemir et al. [5] have developed a method to detect suspi-
cious clusters and behavior on YouTube channels by analyzing
the interactions between commenters. They established a set
of network features, including metrics from well-established
graph measures to analyze the networks’ behavior from dif-
ferent dimensions. In our analysis, we utilized 20 network
structural features to study the co-commenter networks, such
as number of nodes, number of edges, total number of unique
commenters, total number of comments, normalized ratio of
co-commenters (nodes / total commenters), average degree,
density, average clustering coefficient, modularity, number of
maximal cliques that have at least 5 members, number of
unique commenters in cliques, number of commenters in
cliques / total number of commenters in the channel, number
of commenters in cliques / number of nodes, average degree of
cliques, average degree of cliques / average degree in the co-
commenter network, average clustering coefficient of cliques,
average clustering coefficient of cliques / average clustering
coefficient in the co-commenter network, mean clique size,
median clique size and maximum clique size.
The methodology presented in this paper attempts to dis-
cover the similarities between channels across all the features
in the dataset using unsupervised methods, such as k-means
and hierarchical clustering [15]. In other words, utilizing
k-means and hierarchical clustering methods, we gain in-
sights into the similarities of commenter behaviors exhibited
in different channels. In addition, the Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) is utilized to reduce the high-dimensional
co-commenter network feature space, thereby reducing the
complexity of the dataset, retaining important links between
commenters, increasing the interpretability of the identified
patterns, and minimizing information loss [16].
Additionally, channels are ranked on suspiciousness based
on the highest number of commenters, comments, and max-
imal cliques that have at least five members (for having sig-
nificant number of cliques). The behavior of the commenters
across the top suspicious channels is analyzed. While per
channel analysis allows us to see commenter mob behaviors
on a particular channel, combined-channel analysis shows
how commenter mobs span across multiple channels. Such an
analysis shows how some influential commenter mobs move
from one channel to another in an attempt to amplify/boost the
videos’ engagement in a highly sophisticated manner, much
like a well-choreographed flash mob.
As the next step, social network analysis is conducted on
the most suspicious channels. This analysis is done in order
to gain insight into the behavior and interactions of those
who comment on these three channels. Furthermore, the co-
commenter network for each channel is examined separately,
and communities are identified based on modularity methods.
The influential commenters who posted the most comments
Figure 1. Channel categorization using k-means (left) and hierarchical
clustering (right).
within these communities were identified by analyzing the
average degree centrality of nodes. The next section discusses
our results and findings.
V. RESULTS
This section will cover the results of K-Means and Hi-
erarchical Clustering, followed by an examination of the
findings from the analysis of commenter mobs on the top three
suspicious channels.
A. K-Means and Hierarchical Clustering
This section discusses the results of clustering analyses
performed using both the k-means and hierarchical clustering
methods [13]. The utilized techniques identified three clusters
in both methods. The optimal number of clusters for k-means
was found by utilizing the silhouette score as described in
[17], where a higher score indicates higher similarity among
channels within a cluster. For hierarchical clustering as pre-
sented in [18], the single linkage method is used to create
a dendrogram (tree-like structure) that shows how close each
channel is to other channels.
Moreover, the cut-tree method is used to determine the
optimal number of clusters and separate the channels into
groups based on their similarity. Likewise, the optimal number
of clusters helps to evaluate the quality of clustering by deter-
mining how similar an object is to its own cluster compared
to other clusters. The visualizations of the clusters, such as
scatter plots [19] demonstrated that the clusters were well
separated. In other words, such a clustering method offers a
better visual representation of how well each data point has
been classified within a cluster. The clusters identified by both
k-means and hierarchical clustering were distinct and did not
overlap, as shown in Figure 1. The PC1 and PC2 correspond to
the two principal components identified using the PCA method
for dimensionality reduction, as explained in Section IV.B.
The channel index is the unique channel ID assigned to each
channel in our dataset. Both methods successfully identified
the same number of clusters in the data with good separation
between them. Finally, we examined the structure of clusters’
networks based on three primary characteristics of the co-
commenter network. In other words, we measured the average
clustering coefficient (ACC), the modularity values, and the
density to identify the characteristics of channels within these
clusters, as shown in Table II.
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-082-7
eKNOW 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

In summary, the clustering analysis indicates that three
channels require further investigation due to the network
structures. Channels like “USA Military Channel” and “USA
Military Channel 2” are classified as part of cluster 1, which
is logical as they have similar video content and denser
co-commentor network structures. On the other hand, “The
Military TV” channel is part of cluster 0, which comprises
channels with smaller co-commenter networks and distinct
content.
B. Commenter Mobs for All Three Channels
As described in Section IV-B, our model can rank channels’
suspiciousness based on the highest number of commenters,
comments, and maximal cliques that have at least five mem-
bers. We identified the top three suspicious channels from
our model for further analysis. The three most suspicious
channels are “USA Military Channel” (1.53M subscribers),
“The Military TV” (399K subscribers), and “USA Military
Channel 2” (372K subscribers). We created a combined-
channel commenter network for the three channels. Figure 2,
illustrates groups of commenters across the three most suspi-
cious channels. The structure of each channel is represented by
Figure 2. Commenter mobs spanning across the three most suspicious
channels.
a central node called the channel’s name, and nodes connected
to that channel are the commenters who post comments on that
channel’s videos. Next, we employed the modularity method
to identify patterns and communities (different colors) within
this network. The green group is “The Military TV” chan-
nel with ID “UC6qHUwB5F fPPaRXL8COqew”, the purple
group is “USA Military Channel” with ID “UC5bu8qvD-
y0eo2A6yLfvr3A”, and the orange group is “USA Military
Channel 2” with ID “UCpU184Ub1cuTsrHqb1RodjA”. The
channels’ analysis tells us that the most active commenters are
those who frequently post comments on both “USA Military
Channel” and “USA Military Channel 2”.
Moreover, these commenters show interest in channels that
primarily post videos related to the United States military
and other narratives, such as the Army, Navy, Air Force,
and Marine Corps. From our analysis, we identified many
Japanese comments posted by these commenters due to pos-
sible common interests in Japan’s self-defense forces and
NATO countries [20]. Moreover, Figure 2 shows the bridge
commenters sitting at the intersection of two channels, “USA
Military Channel” and “USA Military Channel 2”. We could
call such behavior “YouTube cross-channel activities” due to
the behavior of these commenters. Finally, “The Military TV”
channel offers viewers footage from various military branches,
including the narrative weapons, aircraft, tanks, ships, guns,
artillery, vehicles, military operations, and technologies of the
US and other countries [21]. However, it appears that the
commenters on this channel are less active than those on
the other two suspicious channels. Next, we illustrate each
channel’s structure and discuss commenters’ behavior.
C. Commenter Mobs for USA Military Channel
In Figure 3, the co-commenter network presents 1.53M
subscribers, and 41,092 commenters spread information across
1,993 videos. According to the modularity measurements, the
Figure 3. USA Military Channel’s co-commenter network (A) and the three
largest commenter mobs (B, C, and D).
co-commenter network in the USA Military Channel is divided
into four distinct communities. Due to the space limit, the
analysis focused on the top three largest communities shown
in Figure 3. Moreover, the structures of communities (B),
(C), and (D) indicate leaders and followers in organizations
based on the degree centrality values. In other words, we
observed commenters supporting comments posted by highly
central commenters in the channel. For example, the leader-
follower case was related to comments on videos related to the
United States military, such as the Army, Navy, Air Force, and
Marine Corps. In addition, our analysis shows that US allies
were involved in many comments with Japanese contexts and
videos related to the Japanese Self-Defense Forces and NATO
countries.
D. Commenter Mobs for USA Military Channel 2
Figure 4 illustrates the “USA Military Channel 2” which
has 372,000 subscribers, and 37,527 commenters across 227
videos. The analysis shows similar behavior from the com-
menter as we implemented the exact steps explained in Section
V-C. From our results, we observed similar context, language,
and the same commenters were active on both channels.
Likewise, these two channels display a strong resemblance in
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-082-7
eKNOW 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

TABLE II. CLUSTER STATISTICS AND DESCRIPTION
Cluster
Acc
Density
Modularity
Description
0
0.35
0.06
0.41
Channels in this cluster have fewer network structures than the channels in other clusters. The co-commenter
networks do not have many tightly knit groups of commenters and not cohesive structure.
1
0.75
0.07
0.25
Channels’ co-commenter networks are well-connected networks with strong internal connections among com-
menters.
2
0.52
0.002
0.24
The clusters’ channels show larger co-commenter network structures than the networks in other clusters.
Figure 4. USA Military Channel 2’s co-commenter network (A) and the
three largest commenter mobs (B, C, and D).
organizational structures on YouTube, indicating a potential
level of collusion or coordination among commenters. More-
over, our analysis revealed commenters were active on both
channels, “USA Military Channel” and “USA Military Chan-
nel 2” which indicates cross-channel activities on YouTube.
Furthermore, these two channels were part of cluster 1 using k-
means and hierarchical clustering methods, as shown in Figure
1.
E. Commenter Mobs for The Military TV
Figure 5 depicts the last suspicious groups of commenters
in the structure of channel “The Military TV” This YouTube
channel includes 399,000 subscribers, 54,898 comments, and
29,113 commenters across 582 videos. Our findings indicate
Figure 5. The Military TV channel’s co-commenter network (A) and the
three largest commenter mobs (B, C, and D).
that the network structure for this channel is smaller in terms
of nodes, edges and the number of commenters in comparison
to the other two channels. Additionally, the organizational
structure of the channel is different from “USA Military Chan-
nel” and “USA Military Channel 2” similarly, k-means and
hierarchical clustering methods put this channel in cluster 0
as shown in Figure 1. Likewise, our analysis showed different
context used by commenters in this channel, where the videos
and comments were related to the US and other countries,
such as Russia and Ukraine.
To recap, we observed similarities among the 20 YouTube
channels with false views about the U.S. Military. These
similarities were captured by analyzing the network structural
features of co-commenter networks on these channels and
applying k-means and hierarchical clustering methods. PCA
was used to reduce the dimensionality. The similarities in
commenters’ behaviors suggested a high level of collusion
(or coordination) among the channels. Three most suspi-
cious channels were identified where commenter mobs were
detected. Furthermore, cross-channel commenter mobs were
identified on two of the three most suspicious channels,
meaning the commenter mob moved from one channel to the
other.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this study, we present a methodology to identify suspi-
cious commenter behaviors by analyzing co-commenter net-
works, in particular on YouTube. We developed a network
analysis based approach that leverages 20 network structural
features to assess suspicious behaviors in commenter net-
works, which enables channel-level characterization. Further-
more, the proposed methodology helps identifying behavioral
similarities among the channels based on commenter net-
work structures, which allows assessment of varying degrees
of collusion (or coordination). We evaluated the proposed
methodology on a set of 20 YouTube channels that post videos
containing untrue and unflattering views of the U.S. Military.
Our methodology helped identify the top 3 most suspicious
channels. A deeper analysis of these three channels revealed
false narratives being pushed in their videos. The methodology
also revealed clusters of channels with similar commenter
behavioral profiles that range from highly suspicious to semi-
suspicious.
To advance our understanding of suspicious commenter
behavior on online platforms like YouTube, future research
should analyze the motivations, interests, and power of the
users willing to participate in suspicious activities. Further-
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-082-7
eKNOW 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

more, there is a requirement for an extended research study
to explore behavior patterns associated with suspicious activ-
ities, such as topic modeling, sentiment scoring, and toxicity
analysis. Another future study will investigate the potential
impact of suspicious commenter behavior on the spread of
misinformation and the integrity of online discussions. Uti-
lizing the focal structure analysis models [22] could help to
observe mob activities on suspicious YouTube channels, with
the importance of identifying any commenters’ collusion or
coordination.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is funded in part by the U.S. National Science
Foundation (OIA-1946391, OIA-1920920, IIS-1636933, ACI-
1429160, and IIS-1110868), U.S. Office of the Under Secre-
tary of Defense for Research and Engineering (FA9550-22-
1-0332), U.S. Office of Naval Research (N00014-10-1-0091,
N00014-14-1-0489, N00014-15-P-1187, N00014-16-1-2016,
N00014-16-1-2412, N00014-17-1-2675, N00014-17-1-2605,
N68335-19-C-0359, N00014-19-1-2336, N68335-20-C-0540,
N00014-21-1-2121, N00014-21-1-2765, N00014-22-1-2318),
U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory, U.S. Army Research
Office (W911NF-20-1-0262, W911NF-16-1-0189, W911NF-
23-1-0011), U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(W31P4Q-17-C-0059), Arkansas Research Alliance, the Jerry
L. Maulden/Entergy Endowment at the University of Arkansas
at Little Rock, and the Australian Department of Defense
Strategic Policy Grants Program (SPGP) (award number:
2020-106-094). Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding
organizations. The researchers gratefully acknowledge the
support.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Alassad, M. N. Hussain, and N. Agarwal, “Finding fake
news key spreaders in complex social networks by using bi-level
decomposition optimization method,” in Modeling and Simu-
lation of Social-Behavioral Phenomena in Creative Societies.
Springer International Publishing, 2019, vol. 1079, pp. 41–54.
[2] M. N. Hussain, S. Tokdemir, N. Agarwal, and S. Al-Khateeb,
“Analyzing disinformation and crowd manipulation tactics on
YouTube,” in 2018 IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1092–1095, Oct. 2018.
[3] M. Alassad, M. N. Hussain, and N. Agarwal, “Comprehensive
decomposition optimization method for locating key sets of
commenters spreading conspiracy theory in complex social
networks,” Central European Journal of Operations Research,
vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 367–394, Feb. 2021.
[4] R. Kaushal, S. Saha, P. Bajaj, and P. Kumaraguru, “KidsTube:
Detection, characterization and analysis of child unsafe content
& promoters on YouTube,” in 2016 14th Annual Conference on
Privacy, Security and Trust (PST), Dec 2016, pp. 157–164.
[5] B. Kirdemir, O. Adeliyi, and N. Agarwal, “Towards character-
izing coordinated inauthentic behaviors on YouTube,” in The
2nd Workshop on Reducing Online Misinformation through
Credible Information Retrieval (ROMCIR 2022) held with the
44th European Conference on Information Retrieval (ECIR
2022), vol. 3138, Apr 2022, pp. 100–116.
[6] M. A. Shapiro and H. W. Park, “Climate change and YouTube:
Deliberation potential in post-video discussions,” Environmental
Communication, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 115–131, Jan. 2018.
[7] Y. Chen and L. Wang, “Misleading political advertising fu-
els incivility online: A social network analysis of 2020 u.s.
presidential election campaign video comments on YouTube,”
Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 131, p. 107202, Jun. 2022.
[8] C. H. Ferreira et al., “On the dynamics of political discussions
on instagram: A network perspective,” Online Social Networks
and Media, vol. 25, p. 100155, Sep. 2021.
[9] C. Coppola and H. Elgazzar, “Novel machine learning algo-
rithms for centrality and cliques detection in youtube social
networks,” vol. 11, no. 1, p. 65–77, Jan. 2020.
[10] G. Cascavilla, M. Conti, D. G. Schwartz, and I. Yahav, “Reveal-
ing censored information through comments and commenters in
online social networks,” in Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Anal-
ysis and Mining 2015, Aug. 2015, pp. 675–680.
[11] M. Wattenhofer, R. Wattenhofer, and Z. Zhu, “The YouTube
social network,” Proceedings of the International AAAI Con-
ference on Web and Social Media, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 354–361,
Aug. 2021.
[12] J. Kready, S. A. Shimray, M. N. Hussain, and N. Agarwal,
“YouTube data collection using parallel processing,” in 2020
IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Sym-
posium Workshops (IPDPSW), Jun. 2020, pp. 1119–1122.
[13] F. Murtagh and P. Contreras, “Algorithms for hierarchical
clustering: an overview,” WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 86–97, Jan. 2012.
[14] C. Shi et al., “A quantitative discriminant method of elbow
point for the optimal number of clusters in clustering algorithm,”
EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Network-
ing, vol. 2021, no. 1, p. 31, Dec. 2021.
[15] A. Gupta, H. Sharma, and A. Akhtar, “A comparative analysis
of k-means and hierarchical clustering,” EPRA International
Journal of Multidisciplinary Research (IJMR), pp. 412–418,
Sep. 2021.
[16] I. T. Jolliffe and J. Cadima, “Principal component analysis: a
review and recent developments,” Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences, vol. 374, no. 2065, p. 20150202, Apr 2016.
[17] K. R. Shahapure and C. Nicholas, “Cluster quality analysis
using silhouette score,” in 2020 IEEE 7th International Con-
ference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA), Oct.
2020, pp. 747–748.
[18] F. Nielsen, “Hierarchical clustering,” in Introduction to HPC
with MPI for Data Science.
Springer International Publishing,
2016, pp. 195–211.
[19] D. A. Keim, M. C. Hao, U. Dayal, H. Janetzko, and P. Bak,
“Generalized scatter plots,” Information Visualization, vol. 9,
no. 4, pp. 301–311, Dec 2010.
[20] USA military channel 2. [retrieved: March, 2023]. [Online].
Available: https://www.youtube.com/@USAMilitaryChannel2
[21] The military TV. [retrieved: March, 2023]. [Online]. Available:
https://www.youtube.com/@USAMilitaryChannel
[22] M. Alassad, B. Spann, and N. Agarwal, “Combining advanced
computational social science and graph theoretic techniques to
reveal adversarial information operations,” Information Process-
ing & Management, vol. 58, no. 1, p. 102385, Jan. 2021.
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-082-7
eKNOW 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

