A Novel KM Framework for Fostering Creativity and Stimulating Innovation 
Amirhossein Roshanzamir, Ahmad Agha Kardan 
Department of Computer Engineering and IT 
Amirkabir University of Technology 
Tehran, Iran 
Emails: {amrhssn, aakardan@}aut.ac.ir 
 
 
Abstract—Knowledge Management (KM) is a dynamic system 
to identify important information, collect it from those who 
possess it, store it, and finally, share it with those required 
including employees, customers and other stakeholders. Today, 
a good KM system consolidates a company's internal expertise 
with external information by generating and collecting as much 
as useful information in order to improve processes, customer 
relations, decision making, employee morale, performance and 
most importantly revenue and profit. This paper explores the 
framework of KM by identifying two core phases, i.e., 
knowledge creation and knowledge usage and then maps each 
respectively to creativity and innovation. Invention and 
innovation are extremely dependent on the availability and 
richness of knowledge; however, the major challenge in many 
organizations is that KM is focused on maintaining continuity 
and consistency of capturing that knowledge and publishing it 
appropriately in order to be used by those who need it. This 
structure alone treats ineffectively with the creativity and 
invention process and leave not much spaces for innovation to 
be stimulated. Meanwhile, there is no solid measurement tool to 
assess performance and productivity of KM systems. In order 
to address these challenges, this paper integrates the four 
traditional steps of KM including Capturing, Storing, 
Disseminating and Implementing by Planning, Leading and 
Adapting (PLA) aspect to form a two dimensional model for 
directing and leading the whole KM process. The new model 
can potentially foster creativity in the first two steps of 
capturing and storing and then stimulate innovation in the 
second two steps of disseminating and implementing. Finally, 
the paper studies Apple Inc., as one of the most innovative 
companies in order to illustrate the possible application of this 
novel model.  
Keywords-knowledge management; creativity; innovation; 
evaluation; assessment; value creation; Apple, Inc.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Knowledge Management (KM) is simply defined as a 
dynamic system to identify important information, collect, 
store, and finally share it with those required this information 
including employees, customers and other stakeholders [1]. 
KM is an emerging concept and has been around for more 
than 20 years in terms of growth as a discipline. Meanwhile, 
in today competitive world and global economy, where its 
characteristics is described by rapidly evolving technology, 
shorter product lifecycles and higher rate of new product 
development, organizations need to foster creativity and 
innovate their products, services and policies. This approach 
will enable them to prosper and keep up with highly dynamic 
environment.  
Some anecdotal evidence suggests that KM is more 
widely accepted within certain industries like the 
pharmaceutical, energy, aerospace, and manufacturing. 
These knowledge intensive industries are the leaders in 
KM organizational adoption as well as creativity and 
innovation by leveraging new knowledge throughout their 
organizations, customers and stakeholders. Much is said 
about the role of KM in supporting innovation within 
organizations and this is also closely tied in with 
enhancing the activities of ‘knowledge workers’ in 
dynamic organizations such as consulting firms. It is worth 
remembering that business organizations are neither built 
for KM, nor for innovation; they are built for profit making 
and increasing stakeholder's value. This can be achieved 
by meeting and exceeding what customers perceive as 
value for price. It is widely recognized that KM can drive 
and support innovation within organizations, through a 
wide variety of approaches and techniques which can be 
embedded within KM frameworks. Bates and Khasawneh 
[2] suggested that innovation is equated with the adoption 
and application of new knowledge and practices, including 
the ability of an organization to adopt or create new ideas 
and implement these ideas in developing new and 
improved products, services, and work processes and 
procedures. Innovation, then, is considered an intangible 
resource that is very difficult to imitate. However, the main 
goal of KM in many organizations seems to be focused on 
improving the management of information and knowledge 
within and across enterprises [3]. KM in most organization 
is centered on maintaining continuity and consistency of 
capturing the knowledge, and publishing it appropriately to 
be easily and quickly used by those who require it 
including staff, customers and other stakeholders. This 
structure lacks measurement and assessment sprite in order 
to evaluate and improve KM efforts. It can further 
ineffectively be aligned with organization's goals and 
fruitlessly may treat with the creativity and invention 
process. It also leaves not much spaces for stimulating 
innovation which can be defined as generating drastic 
change in what customer perceives as value for price.  
The general belief is that everything that gets measured 
can be evaluated, adjusted and then controlled and 
improved. It is, therefore, the intention of this paper to 
formulate a novel framework in KM equipped with the 
basic assessment tools. The model will give readers a new 
perspective in fostering creativity and stimulating 
innovation within their organizations in order to create 
value and deliver benefits. We first review invention and 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

innovation concept and study major divers of innovation in 
Section III. Section IV describes invention, innovation and 
technology. Section V determines incremental and radical 
innovation. Section VI reviews KM current models. 
Section VII introduces our two dimensional KM model. 
Section VIII focuses on idea funnel and integrates it with 
the new model.  Section IX studies Apple Inc. in order to 
illustrate the possible application of  the model. In section 
X, we emphasize on KM leader role and elaborate on 
knowledge hierarchy and we sketch out the conclusion and 
future works in the final section. 
II. 
INVENTION VS. INNOVATION  
People normally equate innovation with creativity or 
invention. However, innovation is different from invention 
and creativity. Sloane [4] has defined these terms as 
follows: Creativity is the capability or act of conceiving 
something original or unusual. Invention is the creation of 
something that has never been made before and is 
recognized as the product of some unique insight, while 
Innovation is the implementation of something new.  
Invention is the act of generating a device, process or 
discovery that is new 
and useful 
which reflects 
extraordinary creativity and can even make a distinct 
contribution to science advancement. Invention is somehow 
individual activity focused on internal process of an 
organization which can potentially result in innovation, if it 
is properly leaded, managed and finally commercialized. In 
such a sense innovation is the external manifestation of 
invention which has a tangible impact. It is about executing 
and commercializing in order to meet or exceed the 
customer's needs. Accordingly, creativity and innovation 
process is divided into five blocks by many scholars, as 
shown in Fig. 1).  
The process begins with idea generation and opportunity 
recognition which happens when an insight about something 
new is developed. Once the idea is considered to be of value 
to either customers or shareholders in form of cost 
advantage or solution to a problem, then, it must be 
evaluated by decision makers to address below questions : 
 
 
What kind of value does the idea creates ? 
 
Is there a market for this new value ? 
 
Is market large enough to justify development ? 
 
How does the idea fit within organization's strategy 
? 
 
 
Figure 1. Innovation process adopted from [5]. 
Ideas that produce affirmative answers to these questions 
can be considered for development and commercialization 
stages. Therefore, we can summarize the model to below 
equation according to Govindarajan [6]: 
 
Innovation = Ideas + Execution  
or 
Innovation = Creativity + Commercialization 
III. 
MAJOR DRIVER OF INNOVATION  
The successful innovations do not come into being by 
benchmarking and copying. They come into being by 
overcoming contradictions, limitations, paradigms, by 
taking another view at the problem and differentiating. . 
Differentiation can be achieved by a new design, other 
functions or another view at the customer need [7]. In fact, 
there are many drivers of innovation which include but not 
limited to profit and revenue growth, productivity, cost 
efficiencies, business or organizational model, partnership, 
route to market or marketing method, employee satisfaction 
and 
most 
importantly 
new 
products 
and 
services 
development.  
We tend to think of an innovation as a new product; but, 
we can innovate with a new process, method, business 
model, partnership, route to market or marketing method 
too. In fact, every aspect of a business operation is a 
candidate for innovation. Some of the most powerful 
innovations we can make, are in business methods and 
customer services. If we look at companies like Dell, eBay 
and Amazon, we see that their great innovations were with 
their business models rather than in new products. 
In a broader view, there is a difference between the 
organization's view of product innovativeness and the 
customers' view of the same. Firms express product 
innovativeness by comparing technology product content to 
competitor offerings and by assessing the degree of 
technical and marketing resources needed, whereas the 
customers based their evaluation of innovativeness on their 
need to alter metal models and behavioral habits. The key 
drivers and assessment tools like employee satisfaction, 
productivity and cost efficiency can help organizations to 
improve the quality, price, image and availability of 
products and services in order to better serve the customers. 
Therefore, we can say that the customer is the major driver 
of innovation and must be at the center of focus in all 
innovation efforts. Specifically, the major criteria in 
assessing new ideas should be in involving the customer's 
real requirements in entire process in order to record his or 
her feedback in a scorecard. This measurement tool would 
increase retention rate, increase new customers; reduce 
complaints and cost of it, reduce response time, increase 
revenue per customer (new or existing), increase sale 
volume and increase customer satisfaction [8].  
We can think of Apple's iPhone, introduced in June 29, 
2007 as of one of the most dynamic example of innovation 
which, not only changed the mobile industry, but 
revolutionized people's lives and the way business is done. 
Here, one can observe the role of putting customers and 
users at the center of attention and the driver of innovation. 
The iPhone certainly was not the first smartphone, nor was 
it the first phone to offer users access to their email and the 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Internet. But, it introduced the touch-based user interface, 
which, like the mouse, changed the way people interact with 
their devices. This alone together with other user-friendly 
features made communication more simple, fun, intuitive 
and interactive for users. 
IV. 
INVENTION, INNOVATION AND 
TECHNOLOGY  
Innovation and technology are not the same, although 
innovation can be the result of new technology; however, in 
some cases innovation is based on smart redeployment or 
combination of existing technologies. Other important issue 
is that not all invention end in commercial application or 
useful product, since, simply there might not be market for 
it or even timing is not correct. For example, Ampex in the 
US was the company which invented video recording 
system; yet, JVC of Japan was the one to become successful 
with the VHS standard. The same is true with Netscape, the 
first Internet browser, which has not been the most 
successful one. iPhone as the most successful and amiable 
smartphone was not certainly the first one on the market 
either.  
Therefore, we can observe that successful innovation 
must generate higher value for customers in the first step 
and then sustain this value in long run. Many new and good 
ideas can be generated within a company; yet, only those 
which have an internal rate of return that is significantly 
higher than cost of capital are called innovations. This 
higher rate can justify resources for stimulating innovation 
compared to the other alternatives and can also reward for 
the risks taken with innovation. In brief, a sustainable 
economic success can lead invention to innovation. To 
succeed, organizations need to build up their competencies 
for managing and sustaining both invention and innovation 
and we can think of this success by multiplying creativity to 
innovation, if either has a zero score then the success is 
zero. Apple Inc. is considered as magnificent icon of 
inventiveness by connecting creativity with technology in 
order to create value in digital-age economies. The company 
represented amazing products that directed and transformed 
seven fields i.e., personal computing, animated movies, 
music, phones, tablet computing, digital publishing and 
retail stores. Apple Inc. combined leaps of the imagination 
with amazing feats of engineering and became the US most 
admired company.  
V. 
INCREMENTAL AND RADICAL 
INNOVATION  
Innovations can be incremental or radical, based on the 
nature of knowledge and the amount of knowledge to be 
acquired and applied.  
Likewise, every improvement in products or services 
can be seen as an incremental innovation which is a kind of 
solution for problems in current set-up. Incremental 
innovation exploits existing forms and/or technologies in 
order improve or reconfigure something that already exists 
[9]. Most businesses and organizations are good at 
incremental innovation. A radical innovation, in contrast, is 
a departure from existing technologies or methods which in 
many occasions creates new and emerging market [9]. A 
radical innovation demands an entirely new approach to do 
or make things. As such it is often risky and challenging and 
requires more time and budget. Most large organizations are 
not so good at radical innovation.  
The four types of innovation on the basis of the nature 
of knowledge and the amount of knowledge to applied and 
acquired are plotted in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. Innovation plot adopted from [9]. 
A. Major Incremental Innovation  
The innovation is a major incremental if the nature of 
knowledge is additive that is to say there is a new thing but 
it is in sequence with the existing findings and the amount 
of knowledge that is to be acquired and applied is high [9].  
An incremental innovation would build upon the 
existing knowledge and resources and enhance the 
competence of an organization. Mobile commerce, which is 
in sequence of developing and enhancing e-commerce can 
be considered in this innovation category.  
B. Minor Incremental Innovation  
The innovation is minor incremental if the nature of 
knowledge is additive that is to say there is a new thing but 
it is in sequence with the existing findings and the amount 
of knowledge that is to be acquired and applied is low [9].  
An incremental innovation would involve modest 
technological changes to improve the existing products 
and/or services and sustain their competitiveness. Adding 
more features on existing 2010 Microsoft Office and 
updating its bug fixing is considered to be in this innovation 
category.  
C. Minor Radical Innovation  
The innovation is minor radical, if there is a new thing 
but it is in sequence with existing findings and the amount 
of knowledge that is to be acquired or applied is low [9]. 
When an organization first published its website for e-
commerce and online sales that is considered a minor 
radical innovation for the organization since, many other 
websites of the same nature are already exist. Yet, the nature 
of sales and marketing for this particular organization is 
radically changed.  
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

D. Major Radical Innovation  
A radical innovation, on the other hand, requires 
completely new knowledge and/or resources and will be, 
therefore, competence destroying [9]. A radical innovation 
involves large technological advancements, rendering the 
existing products, rendering the existing products non-
competitive and obsolete [9]. As in many field, a radical 
innovation undermines and abolishes established products 
and services by passing of time. For example, music 
downloads over the internet as a radical innovation would 
make music CD obsolete. Digital photography has also 
eroded demand for traditional photography film. Founded in 
1880 by George Eastman, Kodak was one of the America's 
most notable company, which established market for camera 
film and dominated the field afterwards. However, the 
company has been struggling for years to adapt to an 
increasingly digital world before filing for bankruptcy 
protection on January 2012.  
The big winners often are not the companies that obtain 
new technologies and use them to enhance existing 
products; rather they are the companies that understand how 
those technologies can be used to create better customer 
experiences than existing applications do and the biggest 
winners will be companies that learn to systematically 
produce one technology epiphany after another [10]. 
Drucker [28] said that ‘Every organization must prepare for 
the abandonment of everything it does.’; this statement 
brings us to the fact that those companies who cannot keep 
up with innovation and technology trend will be soon out of 
the market. The change in the mobile phone market caused 
by iPhone has most severely affected Nokia and Sony 
Ericsson which used to sell quality and affordable feature 
phones. Apple dared to be different and innovator by 
offering unique features. While more expensive than many 
alternatives, iPhone is wildly popular with low return rates 
and high user satisfaction levels.  
To sum up, it is presumed that creativity should be 
incorporated in daily work of the organization where 
everybody is encouraged and rewarded to generate new 
ideas again and again. The aim should be to build up a 
climate where innovation is stimulated and sustained in both 
dimensions, i.e., the amount of knowledge and the nature of 
knowledge as a culture.  
VI. 
KM CURRENT MODELS 
KM has fueled the creative process of many companies 
like Google, Microsoft and Apple Inc. as it is an intricate 
weaving of knowledge by collecting, storing, sharing and 
finally putting it into practice. KM activities must have a 
conceptual framework to operate within in order to ensure 
that they will be coordinated and produce the expected KM 
benefits [1].  
Many 
KM 
models 
represent 
a 
holistic 
and 
comprehensive perspective (i.e., they are comprehensive 
and take into consideration people, process, organization 
and technology dimensions [1]. We review the most known 
models here.  
Weick [23] proposed a theory of sense making to 
describe how chaos is transformed into sensible and orderly 
processes 
in 
an 
organization 
through 
the 
shared 
interpretation of individuals. He claims sense making 
consists of four integrated processes, i.e., ecological change, 
enactment, selection and retention. Nonaka and Takeuchi 
[24] studied how knowledge is produced, used, and diffused 
within an organization and how such knowledge is 
contributing to the diffusion of innovation. Wiig [23] 
focuses on the three conditions that need to be present for an 
organization to conduct its business successfully: it must 
have a business (products and services) and customers for 
them, it must have resources (people, capital, facilities), and 
it must have the ability to act. von Krogh and Roos [26] 
distinguished between individual knowledge and social 
knowledge and took an epistemological approach to 
managing organizational knowledge: the organizational 
epistemology KM model. Boisot [22] distinguished 
information from data and emphasized that effective 
movement of information goods is very much dependent on 
senders and receivers sharing the context and same coding 
scheme or language. Choo [25] has described a model of 
knowledge management that stresses sense making, 
knowledge creation, and decision making. The model 
focuses on how information elements are selected and 
subsequently fed into organizational actions. 
Bennet and Bennet [21] described a complex adaptive 
system approach to KM and believed that the organization 
can be viewed as a system which is composed of living 
subsystems that combine, interact, and coevolve to provide 
the capabilities of an advanced, intelligent, technological, 
and sociological adaptive enterprise. 
Despres and Chauvel [16] suggested that four 
dimensions cut across KM field:  
 
Time: referring to a linear and simplified 
representation of cognitive process, including the 
(a) mapping, (b) acquisition, (c) codification, (d) 
storage, (e) application and (f) transformation of 
knowledge or its elements. 
 
Type: referring to tacit and explicit knowledge 
 
Level: referring to different levels of social 
aggregation. 
 
Context: referring sense-making, in that no 
knowledge element has any meaning outside of a 
given context. 
Meanwhile, they concluded that seven major clusters of 
activity are currently active in KM and the majority of 
behaviors and practices associated with KM may be located 
in this classification. 
 
• 
Business intelligence; 
• 
Benchmarking; 
• 
Data warehousing; 
• 
Groupware/virtual teaming; 
• 
Communities of Practice; 
• 
Innovation/synergies, Creativity, and 
• 
Learning/Competencies/Employee Development. 
 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

VII. 
INTRODUCING PLA MODEL  
In fast-moving world, most organizations rely on their 
ability to consistently deliver new and improved products 
and services to their audiences. KM managers have a pivotal 
role to play in helping their firms to become more 
innovative [11]. Indeed, creativity and innovation are at the 
cutting edge of KM, although there is generally lengthy time 
span between development of the new knowledge and its 
transformation into commercially viable products and 
services. Most company's innovation efforts start with ideas 
and brainstorming sessions which are nothing more than a 
one dimensional approach. More importantly, it ignores the 
organizational capabilities and lacks the assessment tool 
whilst reducing innovation chance of success.  
The basic model of KM, on the other hand, lacks the 
measurement and assessment spirit in order to analyze, 
adjust and improve KM outcome. The model is too general 
to align with organization's goals and treats ineffectively 
with the creativity and invention process. Therefore, this 
KM approach leaves not much space for fostering creativity 
and stimulating innovation. As the saying goes everything 
that get measured can be evaluated, adjusted and then 
controlled and improved. There is an old saying that what 
gets measured gets managed.  
In today’s global business organizations need to integrate 
the measurement and management of company’s tangible 
assets with the assessment of knowledge assets. On the 
other hand, Invention and Innovation are extremely 
dependent on the availability and richness of knowledge; 
therefore, we developed a new approach for planning, 
leading and adapting new ideas and integrate it into KM 
classical model, as shown in Fig 3. We name the model 
PLA (Planning, Leading, Adapting), which enables us to 
have a closed loop. The model tries to measure and assess 
the whole process in order to foster creativity in the first two 
steps of capturing and storing and then stimulate innovation 
in the second two steps of disseminating and implementing.  
 
Figure 3. KM Framework for fostering creativity and stimulating 
innovation. 
Planning: Refers to the policies, methods and logic 
formulated for steps 1 through 4 of classic KM model in 
order to meet and exceed current and future customer's 
perceived value. We need to accurately describe the whole 
KM model and shall consider where to begin, how to 
structure, which people should participate and how they 
should be trained (assembling team). In this phase, we 
delineate the objectives and boundaries of our KM system in 
terms of scope, time and budget. This is mainly focused on 
defining our customers and their requirements as well. The 
goals and/or objectives of KM system are then set based on 
the customer's current requirements and future expectations. 
At this stage, as shown in Fig. 4, we form a brainstorming 
team of creative thinkers in the community 
Leading: Refers to the extent to which and how well the 
company execute steps 1 through 4 by creating the required 
environment and sustaining invention and innovation 
capacity and capabilities in order to implement policies and 
methods formulated in planning stage. It also involves 
defining the indicators to monitor and measure success level 
for each step of classic KM model and then quantify it. To 
measure KM success, we first develop a data collection plan 
and document the steps we intend to quantify. We will then 
select our metrics and key performance indicators and then 
conduct data collection and measure the indicators. At this 
stage, as shown in Fig. 4, we allow new ideas to be 
evaluated by selected groups of community and/or potential 
customers. 
Adapting: Reflects on the assessment of planning and 
leading processes to ensure the right modifications for 
effective execution of KM steps in order to adapt the whole 
approach for engaging and responding to customers and 
stakeholders. This step focuses on the indicators to reduce 
the gap between the current performance of system versus 
the desired goal. KM systems need to find new ways for 
doing things better, cheaper and faster. Adapting also 
ensures that performance improvement remains at the 
desired level. We institutionalize this by modifying policies, 
procedures and incentive system. We can plot these 
modifications on a small scale to determine their 
sustainability and then implement them on a wider scale. In 
this stage as shown in Fig. 4, we build another team of 
selected experts to put ideas into practice. 
VIII. 
IDEA FUNNEL AND PLA 
The process from idea generation to market place is 
challenging and demands systematic assessment since many 
ideas - if not most - are either technically unfeasible, too 
expensive to implement or simply not appealing to the 
customers. The idea funnel is a metaphor to eliminate 
unpromising ideas at early stages in order to avoid wasting 
time and resources. The funnel has wide mouth into which 
all ideas are poured and a few of them pass towards 
marketplace while the funnel narrows by the criteria which 
are already defined. While aggregating PLA approach into 
idea funnel, we can observe that planning is bold at the 
entrance of funnel which demands most of time and 
resources should be spent in formulating a plan at the 
beginning. Then, the ideas are leaded and screened 
according to the criteria set by the organization and pass 
through for evaluating and finally adapting to the customers' 
or 
potential 
customers' 
requirements. 
The 
diagram 
highlights the fact that as ideas pass through the funnel the 
center of attention will be shifted from planning to leading 
and then adapting. The same is true in KM framework of 
Fig. 2 in which more attention to be given to planning and 
leading in the first two steps of KM whereas, in the second 
two steps the emphasize is on adapting.  
 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 4. Idea Funnel integrated with PLA approach. 
IX. 
CASE STUDY - APPLE INC.  
Apple Inc., incorporated on 1977 by Steve Jobs and 
Steve Wozniak, designs, develops, and sells consumer 
electronics, 
including 
computer 
software, 
personal 
computers, tablets and mobile phones. Apple achieved 
widespread success with iPhone, iPod Touch and iPad 
products, which introduced innovations in mobile phones, 
portable music players and personal computers respectively. 
Apple closed at a record share price of $665.15 on August 
2012 reported by CNBC and became one of the most 
profitable companies on the Earth. In the same month, it had 
a market capitalization of $622.98 billion which was the 
highest nominal market capitalization ever reached by a 
publicly traded company. Apple's success story and 
astronomical growth stems from the mastery of several 
areas including, but not limited to, creativity, innovation, 
supply chain management, knowledge management, and 
operations. 
We believe that KM is the core competency of Apple 
Inc., which is manifested in its corporate culture and 
engaging in the innovation value processes to capitalize on 
new market space and providing an understanding of 
predictive markets, finally translates into amazing products 
and the brand loyalty of customers. Apple's culture and 
knowledge-sharing initiative, implanted by its great pioneer 
late Steve Jobs when he created Apple University to assure 
continuity of his vision. He hired Yale and Harvard 
academics to teach the company’s history to Apple 
executives, and he commissioned internal and external “case 
studies” to prevent managers from repeating strategic errors 
[12]. This initiative is fairly new and is not easy to measure 
its influence on the company's innovation and success story, 
yet it proves the commitment of Steve Jobs to manage 
knowledge flow within the company.  
Contrary to current business trends toward transparency 
and flatter hierarchies, Apple Inc. has fiercely encouraged 
secretiveness, silos and a start-up mentality and Apple’s 
marketing campaigns resists imparting information and 
actively seeks to protect it [13]. Despite all these and the 
lack of first hand data of what exactly is happening inside 
Apple Inc., we observed the external manifestation of Apple 
innovation and focus on its strengths in knowledge 
management and try to evaluate this with our proposed KM 
model in this section.   
A. PLANNING in Apple  
Apple had formulated solid polices, methods and logic 
to create and collect knowledge through different source 
including staff, customers and stakeholders. It further 
constraint its secrets so there have been limited leaks 
whereas data were distributed among design teams, selected 
suppliers and premium customers for further studies. Apple 
also had the ability to constantly change its structure and 
goals with new information in order to meet the customers' 
requirements by targeting six industries including personal 
computing (with Apple computers and laptops), animated 
movies 
(through 
Pixar, 
which 
pioneered 
computer 
animation), music (through the iTunes Store and the iPod), 
phones (with iPhone), tablet computing ( with iPad), digital 
publishing and retail store ( by opening Apple own physical 
store).  
B. LEADING in Apple  
In leading stage, Apple stimulated creativity and 
fostered invention and innovation capacity and capabilities 
and came up with the grand vision that the personal 
computer should become a “digital hub” for managing all of 
a user’s music, videos, photos, and content. Apple, thus, got 
into the personal-device business by designing and selling 
collection of finest products in respective six industries that 
are iTunes music store in April 28, 2003, which had over 40 
billion downloads before Xcode introduced. In January 
2007, Apple introduced the iPhone and sold 37.04 million in 
Q1 this year alone. Apple TV, iPod touch, and iPod classic 
introduced as well. iPhone 3G in 2009, iPad in 2010, which 
became the number one selling tablet to date by having half 
of the market share. In 2008, MacBook Air introduced, 
worlds slimmest computer at the time iPhone 3G 
introduced. In January 2010, Apple introduce the iPad, the 
number one selling tablet to date which still owns more than 
half the market share. Apple also set up its own direct-to-
consumer product distribution service, first with the online 
Apple Store, which handled $12 million in sales in its first 
month of operation, and then with Apple retail stores in 
high-end, prized locations. Steve Jobs brought his famous 
attention to detail to every design aspect of Apple’s stores, 
including the shelving, flooring and lighting [14]. In 2010, 
Apple came up with the successor strategy—the “hub” 
would move to the cloud—and Apple began building a huge 
server farm so that all a user’s content could be uploaded, 
and then, seamlessly, synced to other personal devices [12]. 
C. ADAPTING in Apple  
Apple constantly assessed the former stages to ensure 
the right modifications for effective execution of KM steps 
in order to adapt the whole approach for engaging and 
responding to customers' and stakeholders. Apple would 
never release any new product unless its designers and 
engineers had successfully answered his favorite question, 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

“Will this help the purchaser?” [14] Apple also ensures 
continuous improvement in overall performance in 
delivering the right goods and/or services to the customers. 
This happened when Apple introduced the original iMac. 
The device was quite useful for managing a user’s photos 
and videos, but it was left behind when dealing with music. 
People with PCs were downloading and swapping music 
and then ripping and burning their own CDs and the iMac’s 
slot drive couldn’t burn CDs [12]. Apple created an 
integrated system that would transform the music industry 
instead of upgrading the iMac's CD drive. The result was 
the combination of iTunes, the iTunes Store, and the iPod, 
which allowed users to buy, share, manage, store, and play 
music better than they could with any other devices [12]. 
After the iPod became a huge success, Apple explored all 
possible reaction of competitors and learned that mobile 
phone maker might add music player to their handsets. So, 
Steve Jobs cannibalized iPod sales by creating the iPhone. 
“If we don’t cannibalize ourselves, someone else will,” he 
said [12].  
X. 
KNOWLEDGE HIERARCHY  
Reviewing Apple case study pointed out an important 
role of its founder, Steve Jobs that, we believe, acted as a 
KM director and leader to nurture creativity and foster 
innovation. Visionary leaders as Goleman [19] discusses 
can see the far-flung consequences of local decisions and 
imagine how the choices they make today will play out in 
the future. Jobs was the one who saw the commercial 
potential of many innovations in computer, music and 
mobile industry, well ahead of anyone else. That is why he 
has been described as the "Father of the Digital Revolution" 
[17], or a "Master of Innovation" [18]. The case also 
illustrated how Jobs created an environment where a clear 
vision of KM leader challenged the people to deliver and 
break out of their traditional thinking patterns. The other 
important issue as indicated by Dugan and Kaigham [20] is 
that breakthrough innovations, by their very nature, do not 
lend themselves to consensus. Most of innovative products 
developed by Apple Inc. dazzled and jumped off the page 
because Jobs himself played a significant role as KM leader 
and director who had visibility into and the authority to 
define 
and 
select 
projects 
while 
reallocating 
and 
reprioritizing resources.  
As such, we add the 5th level in Data-Information-
Knowledge-Wisdom 
hierarchy 
(DIKW), 
which 
was 
introduced by Russell Ackoff in his address accepting the 
presidency of the International Society for General Systems 
Research in 1989 [29]. Perspicacity as Indicated in Table I. 
is the gift of seeing and understanding people, things, or 
situation intelligently far ahead of others and setting trends 
to reshape specific sector and push value to the relevant part 
of the eco-system.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I. REVISED KNOWLEDGE HIERARCHY 
 
 
XI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper has explored the convergence of knowledge 
management and creativity and innovation. The proposed 
framework and model tries to promote the continuous quest 
of the business community to describe two of the most 
important resources of sustaining and developing the 
business of a company - creativity and innovation. 
Developing and bringing to market innovative products 
ahead of competitors can generate various benefits in 
economic, preemptive, technological and behavioral factors. 
[15].  
We argue that the proposed model builds new insights 
into the role of knowledge management systems in 
knowledge-intensive organizations for fostering creativity 
and stimulating innovation. We further highlighted an 
important role of KM director and leader who employs 
perspicacity to see, understand and recognize things and 
situations that are beyond the realm of normal expectations 
in science and technology to guide and direct innovation 
trends. We believe that implementing a successful KM 
system to foster creativity and stimulate innovation in every 
organization 
requires 
adopting 
a 
multidisciplinary 
perspective, encompassing issues of strategy, structure, 
systems and human resource management. This requires 
more detailed analysis on successful cases in order to 
develop KPIs to bridge the gap between goals and results in 
KM which is beyond the scope of the present paper. We 
hope that the idea of formulating a two dimensional model 
for directing and leading KM process will generate interest 
for further research in this area.  
 
REFERENCES  
 [1] K.  Dalkir “Knowledge Management in Theory and Practice” The MIT 
Press, 2011.  
 [2] R. Bates and S. Khasawneh “Organizational learning culture, learning 
transfer climate and perceived innovation in Jordanian organizations” 
International Journal of Training and Development, vol., 9, pp. 96 – 
109, 2005.  
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 [3] M. Grauer, U. Müller, D. Metz, S. Karadgi, and W. Schäfer “About an 
Architecture for Integrated Content-Based Enterprise Search” The 
Third International Conference on Information, Process, and 
Knowledge Management, pp.  48 – 54, 2011.  
 [4] P. Sloane “The Innovative Leader: How to Inspire Your Team and 
Drive Creativity” Kogan Page, 2007.  
 [5] Harvard Business Essentials “Managing Creativity and Innovation” 
Harvard Business Review, 2003.  
 [6] V. Govindarajan “The Other Side of Innovation: Solving the Execution 
Challenge” Harvard Business Review Press, 2010. 
 [7] J. K. Sturiak “Innovations and knowledge management” Human 
Systems Management 29, pp. 51 – 63, 2010.  
 [8] C. Hannabarger, B. Buchman, P. Economy “Balanced Scorecard 
Strategy for Dummies” Wiley Publishing Inc., 2007.  
 [9] N. Mundra, K. Gulati, and R. Vashisth “Achieving Competitive 
Advantage Through Knowledge Management and Innovation: 
Empirical Evidences from the Indian IT Sector” The IUP Journal of 
Knowledge Management, vol. 9, no.2,  pp. 7 – 25, April 2011.  
 [10] R. Verganti “Designing breakthrough products” Harvard Business 
Review, pp. 114 – 120, October 2011.  
 [11] C.V. Winkelen and W. Jordan “Building the capability to be 
innovative” KM Review, vol. 11, issue 3, pp. 8 – 13, July/August 
2008.  
 [12] W. Isaacson, “The real leadership lessons of Steve Jobs” Harvard 
Business Review, pp. 92 – 102, April 2012. 
 [13] A. Lashinsky “Inside Apple How America's Most Admired – and 
Secretive – Company Really Works” Business Plus, 2012.  
 [14] J. Elliot, L. William and W.L. Simon “The Steve Jobs Way 
Leadership for a New Generation”  Vanguard Press, 2011. 
 [15] C. E. Castro and K. A.  Desender ”Analyzing Porter’s Ideas: 
Horizontal Differentiation and Product Innovation”, The IUP Journal 
of Knowledge Management, vol. 8,  no. 3, 2010.  
[16] C. Despres and D. Chauvel “A Thematic Analysis of the Thinking in 
Knowledge Management”. In: Charles Despres and Daniele Chauvel 
(Eds.), Knowledge Horizons: The Present and the Promise of 
Knowledge Management. Butterworth-Heinemann, 2000. 
[17] ”Steve Jobs: Father of the Digital Revolution”. People and Lifestyle. 
October 14, 2012. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. 
Retrieved February 18, 2014. 
 [18] ”Steve Jobs: Master of Innovation”. SUCCESS. May 4, 2010. 
Archived from the original on September 16, 2012. Retrieved 
February 18, 2014. 
 [19] Daniel Goleman ”The focused leader” Harvard Business Review, pp. 
50 – 60, December 2013.  
 [20] R. E. Dugan and K.J. Gabriel “Putting the Breakthrough Back into 
Innovation” Harvard Business Review, pp. 73 – 84, October 2013. 
[21] A. Bennet, and D. Bennet “Organizational survival in the new world: 
The intelligent complex adaptive system. A new theory of the firm. 
Burlington” Elsevier Science, 2004.  
[22] M. Boisot “Knowledge assets” Oxford University Press, 1998. 
[23] K. Weick, “Making sense of the organization” Blackwell Publishing, 
2001.  
[24] I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi “The knowledge-creating company: How 
Japanese companies create the dynamics of innovation” Oxford 
University Press, 1995.  
[25] C. Choo “The knowing organization” Oxford University Press, 1998. 
[26] G. Von Krogh and J. Roos. “Organizational epistemology” St. Martin's 
Press, 1995.  
[27] K. Wiig,“Knowledge management foundations: Thinking about 
thinking. How people and organizations create, represent and use 
knowledge” Schema Press, 1993.  
[28] P. F. Drucker “Classic Drucker: Wisdom from Peter Drucker from the 
Pages of Harvard Business Review” March 1, 2006.  
[29] R. L. Ackoff “From Data to Wisdom” Journal of Applied Systems 
Analysis, 16 (1), pp. 3– 9, 1989  
 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

