Integration of Healthcare Information Systems: 
Improving Data Quality in a Diagnostic Imaging Department 
 
Conceição Granja 
Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto 
Porto, Portugal 
granja.conceicao @fe.up.pt 
 
 
Joaquim Gabriel 
IDMEC – FEUP Campus 
Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto 
Porto, Portugal 
jgabriel@fe.up.pt 
Zafeiris Kokkinogenis 
LIACC and IDMEC – FEUP Campus 
Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto 
Porto, Portugal 
pro08017@fe.up.pt 
 
Terje Solvoll 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
terje.solvoll@telemed.no
 
 
Abstract—The existence of multiple information systems in the 
healthcare environment causes data integrity issues when the 
information flow architecture is not implemented considering 
the specificities of each department, the multiple data sources 
and the data input does not follow the systems requirements. 
This paper presents a case-study of a diagnostic imaging 
department information flow analyses and optimization, using 
the DICOM standard embedded on most equipment, to 
improve data integrity, availability and structure. The existing 
patient data structure was redefined and the existing 
information flow was re-engineered in accordance with the 
DICOM and IHE guidelines. This study focuses in a diagnostic 
imaging department and resulted in the identification of a new 
information flow that permits a significant and positive 
reduction of information inconsistencies, thus improving data 
quality. 
Keywords- Healthcare Information Systems; Information 
Flow Re-engineering; Medical Records; Data Quality 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The development of information technologies (IT) has 
made available, namely to healthcare providers (HcP), a 
better flow and processing of information that supports the 
clinical activity. The clinical activity has been brought closer 
to the inherent administrative and financial actions 
increasing the capacity to plan, monitor and evaluate the 
performed activities which has a positive impact in the 
financial management, production capacity and in the 
provided services quality [1]. 
Patient information is spread through several information 
systems (IS) that gather different kinds of data, such as 
demographic, medical, financial or managerial, each system 
having its own idiosyncrasies. In radiology departments, the 
IS comprised in the information flow are the Hospital 
Information System (HIS), Radiology Information System 
(RIS) and the Picture Archiving and Communication System 
(PACS). HIS is a management system that has three main 
functions: i) support clinical and medical care actions; ii) 
administer the hospital operation such as financial, resources 
scheduling and patient admissions; and iii) evaluate the 
hospital performance. A radiology department has specific 
operational requirements and, therefore, requires its own 
management system, acting under the umbrella of HIS. Such 
management systems need separate information which has to 
be integrated with the data from HIS, this being the role of 
RIS. PACS is the image management system, it acts as an 
archiving server which receives studies/images from the 
acquisition gateway, inserts/appends the study information to 
a database and stores the images. Together, these systems 
allow the HcP to manage the information flow and share it 
using different communication protocols in order to handle 
their heterogeneity.  
The existence of multiple IS may cause data integrity 
issues when the information flow architecture is not 
implemented 
considering 
the 
specificities 
of 
each 
department, the multiple data sources and the input data does 
not follow the IS requirements. 
A. Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine 
The Health Level 7 (HL7) [2]and the Digital Imaging and 
Communications in Medicine (DICOM) [3] are the most 
common communication Standards used to interface the 
healthcare IS in order to collect and integrate information 
from different sources and types facilitating its distribution 
and availability where it is needed. 
The development of the DICOM Standard dates back to 
1982 to a joint committee of the American College of 
Radiology (ACR) and the National Electrical Manufacturers 
(NEMA) [2]. Such cooperation intended to create the 
possibility of data transfer in healthcare regardless of the 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

manufacturer’s Standards. The first version of the DICOM 
Standard, at the time denominated ACR-NEMA Standards 
Publication No. 300-1985, was published in 1985 and 
revised by version 2.0 in 1988. The first version named 
DICOM was in 1993 (v.3.0), and was the foremost to include 
services beyond data transfer [3]. 
The current DICOM Standard is structured in parts, each 
layer being used to define different services and objects. An 
implementation of the DICOM Standard does not have to use 
all of its parts. Implementations may use the parts of 
DICOM, such as Service-Object Pair (SOP) classes, media 
storage profiles and attributes, necessary to support the 
designed architecture, as Conformance Statements refer to a 
specific implementation. 
DICOM SOP classes and associated Information Object 
Definitions (IODs) are used to convey specific medical 
imaging information at the Data Format Layer. IODs are sets 
of Attributes that comprise a type of data element identified 
by tags [4]. Attributes are classified in three types: Type 1: 
Mandatory data elements. When classified as 1C, the 
mandatory character of data elements is dependent of the 
specified conditions; Type 2: Required data element but its 
value may be unknown. When classified as 2C, the data 
elements are required under the specified conditions; Type 3: 
Optional data elements. 
A DICOM tag is a unique identifier of an Attribute, and 
corresponding data element, defined by a pair of numbers 
represented as (gggg,eeee), where gggg denotes the Group 
Number and eeee the Element Number. Group Numbers 
were given a meaning in the ACR-NEMA Standards 
Publication No. 300-1985 and ACR-NEMA Standards 
Publication No. 300-1988, known as version 1.0 and 2.0. For 
example, Group (0008,xxxx) was denoted by Identifying 
Information. In DICOM version 3.0 the Group’s names are 
not mentioned, as new Attributes are now being assigned to 
Groups based on their similarity to the existing ones. 
An architecture that implements the information flow 
aiming the optimization of the service provided to the patient 
was defined by the Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise 
(IHE). As the IHE architecture was developed for the 
specific healthcare environment based on communication 
standards, it provides a set of profiles to ensure 
communication between different systems, which use 
different communication protocols, allowing the information 
to flow through the hospital and become available where it is 
needed [5]. 
This paper presents a case-study of a diagnostic imaging 
department information flow analyses and optimization, 
using the DICOM standard embedded on most equipment, to 
improve data integrity, availability and structure.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Data integrity is a known problem in healthcare, being 
the object of multiple studies in recent years. Arellano et al. 
[6] studied the problem of integrating multiple master person 
indexes (MPI) into a single enterprise person index (EPI). 
The authors evidenced the importance of standardization 
when filling in MPI files and the existence of a unique 
patient identifier. Cruz-Correia et al. [7] used three 
approaches, working simultaneously, to monitor data quality 
in a Portuguese public hospital where a Virtual Electronic 
Patient Record (VEPR) had been implemented. On the first 
approach a third party network monitoring application was 
implemented and configured to generate alerts on abnormal 
report retrieval and visualization rates. On a second approach 
patient identification inconsistencies were monitored by 
crossing 
data 
from 
the 
departmental 
IS 
and 
the 
administrative database. On a third stage data integrity was 
monitored through the verification of the physician digital 
signature on clinical records delivered by the VEPR. The 
first solution presented a large number of false alerts, and 
non-trigged alerts, due to the inactivity of some departments 
on the weekends. Nevertheless, achieved a significant 
reduction on the number of inconsistencies and increased 
data integrity. The data quality in healthcare was approached 
by Bates et al. [8] by inferring on the influence that 
information technologies (IT) have on data errors. The 
authors proposed a framework on recommendations using 
ITs to reduce errors in healthcare, divided in two categories: 
i) general recommendations; and ii) domain specific 
recommendations. 
The 
first 
category 
included 
recommendations such as the use of standards for data and 
systems and the communication between systems. The 
second category suggested the use of identification standards 
of consumables and the use of ITs to communicate 
asynchronous data. 
III. 
CASE STUDY DESCRIPTION 
The case study described in this section is based on the 
data structure and information flow of a diagnostic imaging 
department; the name will not be mentioned for ethical 
reasons. 
The studied HcP provides diagnostic imaging services on 
the modalities: computed tomography (1), mammography 
(1), conventional radiology (1), ortopantomography (1), 
densitometry (1), magnetic resonance (1), stereotaxy (1) and 
ultrasound scanning (5). 
According to the language standard, the HcP information 
flow can be divided into three modules: i) Management, ii) 
RIS, iii) Imaging, as shown in Figure 1. 
The Management module is the input point for the patient 
demographic and clinical data. Usually, the patient 
demographic data and exam information is inserted in the 
database upon an exam request made by the patient, the 
majority of the times made through a phone contact. This 
information is confirmed and updated on the front desk in the 
presence of the patient on the exam day. This module also 
manages the financial information taking into account the 
existing public and private conventions. Public conventions 
enclose entities such as the National Health Service (SNS, 
from the Portuguese Serviço Nacional de Saúde), the public 
officials assistance (ADSE, from the Portuguese Assistência 
na Doença aos Servidores do Estado), and the Public 
Security Police insurance, (PSP, from the Portuguese Polícia 
de Segurança Pública). Private conventions include the 
health insurances that have established a protocol with the 
clinic. Each one of these conventions has its own  
 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 1 Illustration of the information flow at the studied HcP. 
particularities concerning the invoicing exam description and 
rules. 
The Broker receives the patient and exam information in 
HL7 from the Management Module, converting it to the 
DICOM standard before sending it to RIS. 
RIS is in charge of creating a bridge between the 
Management and the Imaging modules. RIS receives the 
necessary patient and the exam information to create the 
Modality Work List (MWL) at the Modality request. 
The Modality and the PACS together constitute the 
Imaging Module. The Modality issues the MWL requests to 
RIS, making the patient and the exam information available 
to the technicians at the exam room. After image acquisition 
and processing, at the demand of the technicians, these are 
sent for storage in PACS. 
The aim of the work presented herein is to improve the 
information flow in between the described modules, in order 
to identify and resolve actions that can incur in information 
incoherence, to provide accurate information when and 
wherever it is needed. 
IV. 
METHODS 
A holistic approach was used to determine the existing 
information flow. As the Management Module is a non-
commercial system, during this phase the existing IS were 
identified and characterized according to the communication 
standard supported and data available. In a second phase the 
data consistency was verified, by crossing information from 
the ISs, outlined in the first phase, and the problems 
identified. The identified problems can be classified in two 
categories based upon the type of data in which they are 
related to: i) Patient data or ii) HcP internal data. 
The identified problems related to patient data are as 
follows: 
a) Internal identifiers are attributed upon the request – in 
case of patient no-shows, or late-cancellations; patient 
records with no data are sent to RIS for the MWL creation, 
causing empty entries on the modality; 
b) Absence of a unique patient identifier (UID) – in the 
absence of an UID, when a patient returns to the clinic it is 
impossible to unequivocally identify him/her and multiple 
internal identifiers could be generated to the same patient. 
This patient misidentification leads to the existence of 
multiple records for the same patient being impossible to 
make his/her clinical history available to the clinical staff. 
Additionally, the propagation of this problem through the 
other systems could not be controlled or avoided; 
c) Creation of a new patient registry without cancelling 
the previous - this action occurred when mistakes were found 
in the primary registry, causing not only multiple patient 
registries for the same exam but also a double patient billing 
registry that had to be filtered afterwards by the accounting 
staff. 
d) Consumables were registered as exams – This 
occurred because the information generated by the Modality 
was not being returned to the billing system. As this 
information arrives at the Modality it reveals MWL 
inconsistencies, exams without data or associated images 
and, furthermore, inaccurate data passed forward to the 
billing system; 
e) Patients registered and their demographic data 
changed manually at the Modality – this caused 
inconsistencies between the patient demographics and exam 
data existing in the Management Module and the real 
operational activities. Therefore, patients may not appear in 
the billing system or the existing information could be 
incorrect.  
The identified problems relating to the HcP internal 
information comprises: 
a) Incorrect attribution of Accession Number – Accession 
Number represents the request identifier for the Modality. As 
this identifier was attributed by Modality, different exams 
were attributed with the same Accession Number. In practice 
this means that if a patient is scheduled to perform more than 
one exam at the same Modality they would all be attributed 
the same Accession Number and, when sent to PACS they 
would be stored as a single exam; 
b) Patient request not matching the referring doctor 
prescription – Different conventions have different exam 
descriptions and require to be billed according to different 
rules. Therefore, upon the patient request the information 
was inserted on the database according to the patient 
convention exam description and rules. Thus, the same 
patient had multiple requests for the same exam and the data 
sent to the modality was not correct; 
c) Inexistence of information on the MWL – The exam 
description was not identified on the MWL message sent to 
the Modality by the RIS. This lack of information made it 
 
Management 
Scheduling 
Admission 
Billing 
Broker 
RIS 
Modality 
PACS 
MWL 
Creation 
MWL 
Image 
Storage 
Image 
Storage 
Image 
Storage 
  
  
  
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

impossible for the technician to be acquainted of which exam 
was going to be performed by the patient until the paper 
copy of the referring doctor’s prescription was delivered by 
the auxiliary staff.  
To propose improvement changes to the information 
flow that would tackle the problems presented above with 
the minimum possible impact on the HcP workflow, it was 
essential to be acquainted with the existing workflows [9-11] 
and to know the Portuguese and International guidelines, 
protocols and best practices [5, 12-16]. This knowledge 
supported the information flow re-engineering and presents 
the fundamental issues, such as process interactions and 
information requirements and structure. 
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The patient data structure, shown in Figure 2, was 
defined 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
DICOM 
Standard 
requirements and the existing database architecture, in order 
to minimize the changes to the last once the existing records 
could not be changed given the linkage to PACS and to 
avoid further inconsistencies. In this sense, was created a 
new identifier of the patient visit, Episode ID, which is 
attributed to all the exams performed on the same visit 
independently of the modality in which they ought to be 
performed. This identifier would replace the previous 
Accession Number. The Accession Number was kept in the 
structure but it is now attributed by exam requested and not 
by Modality. The Accession Number identifies a scheduled 
procedure, by HIS request, and it is duplicated to the Study 
ID by the Modality to identify the performed procedure. 
Each series, which denotes a set of acquired images, is 
identified by the Modality with a Series ID according to the 
nomenclature defined by the DICOM Standard. 
The temporary registry data stores the patient requests. 
These patients have made a request and are scheduled for the 
day but, as they have not yet been admitted they are given no 
identifiers, unless they already exist in the database. This 
avoids the creation of empty patient records and registries 
from patients that have not yet been admitted are sent to the 
Modality through the MWL.  
At the moment of admission it was made mandatory to 
fill the patient VAT number to tackle the patient 
misidentification. The VAT number is personal and allows 
the univocal identification of the patient. It was evidenced 
 
 
Figure 2 Illustration of the defined patient data structure. 
that, during admission, the creation of a new patient registry, 
when the original contained errors, is bad practice. However, 
such action cannot be controlled by the IS. To avoid several 
denominations for the same exam a look-up table was 
created based on the protocol lists existing in the modalities. 
Furthermore, and also in admission, the patients’ requests are 
now registered according to the referring doctor’s 
prescription and not to the patient convention rules. Thus, an 
interface was implemented to treat the patient request 
information according to the patient convention rules and 
create a list of provided services to be billed to the patient 
and stored in a financial information database, independent 
of the clinical information. In this sense, the consumables 
also no longer register as exams being managed by the 
Modality through the Modality Performed Procedure Step 
(MPPS) DICOM service. The MPPS is a complementary 
service to the MWL that enables the Modality to report on 
the performed exams. It is included in the MPPS message 
information relating: i) the patient demographics and IDs; ii) 
the exam performance, such as beginning and ending time of 
image acquisition, parameters used in the configuration of 
Modality protocols, number of series acquired, list of objects 
generated during acquisition; iii) the dose delivered to the 
patient; and iv) the consumables used during the exam such 
as contrast, anesthesia and number of film sheets used to 
print the exam [17]. The MPPS message is generated in three 
different study states: i) On patient registry at the Modality, 
taking the value IN-PROGRESS, acknowledging the 
moment in which the exam has started; ii) When the patient 
study is closed, taking the value COMPLETED, referring the 
moment when the exam has finished and reporting all the 
information regarding the performed exam; and iii) when, for 
some reason, the exam is discarded, taking the value 
CANCELLED. The activation of this DICOM service allows 
the modules prior to the Modality on the information flow, 
RIS and Management module, to return on the information 
sent to the Modality and be acquainted with the actual status 
of the operations. 
These changes in the Management module facilitate 
better management of the MWL creation by RIS. The full 
information regarding the patient and the scheduled exam are 
now sent to RIS allowing both the patient and exam to be 
fully characterized by the Modality. This fact is of extreme 
importance as it not only avoids the information to be passed 
from the admission to the control room on paper, but also 
enables the Modality to create a DICOM structure making 
any previous exams of the same patient available to the 
technician. Furthermore, as RIS receives MPPS message 
from the Modality it is able to control the MWL according to 
the information sent. 
Thus, patients are removed from the MWL if the status is 
COMPLETED or CANCELLED and maintained in queue if 
the status takes the value IN-PROGRESS. 
The activation of the MPPS service implies some 
changes on the technicians’ workflow. Consumables have 
now to be registered by the technician on the MPSS and 
studies have to be set to the COMPLETED status after image 
acquisition. 
 
Patient 1 
PatientID 
 
EpisodeID 
Episode on 
day 1 
Episode on 
day 2 
 
 
StudyID 
Study 1 
Study N 
 
SeriesID 
Series 1 
Study 1 
Study 2 
Series 2 
Series 1 
Series 1 
Series 1 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 3 Illustration of the re-engineered information flow. 
 
This action can either be performed automatically in the 
moment another patient is registered on the Modality, or 
manually by the technician when the acquisition is 
terminated. The activation of this service also requires that 
patients cannot be registered, or their demographic data 
changed manually on the Modality, as the MPPS message 
will only be sent for patients created by the MWL. The 
principle behind this fact is that the MPPS message will only 
be sent if there is a correspondence between the RIS and the 
Modality data, which does not happen with manual inputs. 
To avoid this from happening, the implementation of a 
management terminal on the control was suggested. As such, 
the technician can perform these actions without disturbing 
the information flow. The re-engineered information flow is 
shown in Figure 3. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
It was demonstrated that the implementation of 
information flows that apply the DICOM and the IHE 
guidelines can significantly reduce problems that affect data 
quality. The re-engineered information flow proposed herein 
significantly reduced the information problems at the studied 
HcP.  
The implementation of the re-engineered workflow also 
facilitated an easier access to patients’ previous examinations 
and minimized the number of duplicated records. The 
information flow has a clear and more efficient architecture, 
evolving towards the recommended paperless flow that 
minimizes human errors. 
In the future it would be interesting to digitalize the 
referring doctor’s prescription in order to make it possible to 
store it in PACS along with the study, as well as make it 
available on time to any clinical resource that has the need to 
consult it. Additionally, the creation of DICOM structured 
reports should be considered, that enable semantic queries to 
PACS based in fields such as the examined body region and 
evidenced pathologies. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
M. Smits and G. Van der Pijl, "Developments in hospital 
management and information systems," in Proceedings of 
the 32nd Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System 
Sciences, 
Maui, 
1999, 
p. 
9. 
[Online]. 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=
773007&isnumber=16784 
[2] 
W.D. Bidgood and S.C. Horii, "Introduction to the ACR-
NEMA DICOM standard," Radiographics, vol. 12, no. 2, 
pp. 345-355, 1992. 
[3] 
S. Khludov, L. Vorwerk, and C. Meinel, "Internet-
orientated medical information system for DICOM-data 
transfer, visualization and revision," in 13th IEEE 
Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS 
2000), Houston, TX, 2000. 
[4] 
"Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine 
(DICOM) - Part 2: Conformance," Rosslyn, Virginia, 2011. 
[5] 
Integrating 
the 
Healthcare 
Enterprise. 
[Online]. 
http://www.IHE.net 
[6] 
M.G. Arellano and G.I. Weber, "Issues in identification and 
linkage of patient records across an integrated delivery 
system," Journal of Healthcare Information Management, 
vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 43-52, 1998. 
[7] 
R. Cruz-Correia et al., "Monitoring the integration of 
hospital information systems: how it may ensure and 
improve the quality of data," Studies In Health Technology 
And Informatics, vol. 121, pp. 176-182, 2006. 
[8] 
D. Bates et al., "Reducing the frequency of errors in 
medicine using information technology," Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 8, no. 4, 
pp. 299-308, 2001. 
[9] 
C. Granja, J. Mendes, F. Janela, J. Soares, and A. Mendes, 
"Optimisation-based on simulation: A diagnostic imaging 
department 
case-study," 
in 
Second 
International 
Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge 
Management (eKNOW), Saint-Marteen, 2010, pp. 32-36. 
[10] J. Martins, C. Granja, A. Mendes, and P. Cruz, "Gestão do 
fluxo 
de 
trabalho 
em 
diagnóstico 
por 
imagem: 
Escalonamento baseado em simulação," Informática de 
Saúde: Boas Prácticas e Novas Prespectivas, vol. 1, pp. 
85-96, 2007. 
[11] C. Granja, P. Cruz, and A. Mendes, "Healthcare Decision 
Support System," in 10th International Chemical and 
Biological Engineering Conference, 2008, pp. 1099-1104. 
[12] American 
College 
of 
Radiology. 
[Online]. 
http://www.acr.org 
 
 
Management 
Scheduling 
Admission 
Billing 
Temporary 
Broker 
RIS 
Modality 
PACS 
MWL 
Creation 
MWL 
Image 
Storage 
Image 
Acquisition 
Image 
Processing 
  
  
Clinical 
Financial 
MPPS 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[13] European 
Association 
of 
Radiology. 
[Online]. 
http://www.ear-online.org 
[14] B.I. Reiner and E.L. Siegel, "The cutting edge: strategies to 
enhance radiologist workflow in a filmless/paperless 
imaging department," J Digitl Imaging, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 
178-1900, 2002. 
[15] Eliot L. Siegel and Bruce Reiner, "Work Flow Redesign: 
The Key to Success When Using PACS ," Journal of 
Digital Imaging , vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 164-168, 2003. 
[16] M.D. Ralston, R.M. Coleman, D.M. Beaulieu, K. 
Scrutchfield, and T. Perkins, "Progress toward paperless 
radiology 
in 
the 
digital 
environment: 
Planning, 
implementation, and benefits," Journal of Digital Imaging, 
vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 134-143, 2004. 
[17] Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine. 
[Online]. http://medical.nema.org 
 
 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

