 
 
Semantic Agent of Informational Extraction on Big Data Ontological Context 
Caio Saraiva Coneglian, Elvis Fusco 
Department of Computer Science 
UNIVEM –University Center Euripides of Marilia 
Marilia, SP - Brazil 
caio.coneglian@gmail.com, fusco@univem.edu.br 
 
 
Abstract—The 
large 
increase 
in 
the 
production 
and 
dissemination of data on the Internet can offer information of 
high value-added to organizations. This information may be 
from heterogeneous databases that may not be considered 
relevant by most systems, e.g., social media data, blogs, and 
more. If organizations would use such sources, they could build 
a new management vision known as Competitive Intelligence. In 
the context of an architecture of Information Retrieval, this 
research that aims on implementing a semantic extraction agent 
for the Web environment, allowing information finding, 
storage, processing and retrieval, such as those from the Big 
Data context produced by several informational sources on the 
Internet, serving as a basis for the implementation of 
information environments for decision support. Using this 
method, it will be possible to verify that the agent and ontology 
proposal addresses this part and can play the role of a semantic 
level of the architecture. 
Keywords-Big Data; semantic web; semantic scrapper; 
ontology. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
The massive diffusion of generated data is testing the 
ability of the most advanced techniques of information 
storage technological, treatment, processing and analysis. 
The areas of treatment and information retrieval are being 
challenged by the volume, variety and velocity of semi-
structured 
and 
unstructured 
complex 
data, 
offering 
opportunities for adding value to business-based information  
providing organizations a deeper and precise knowledge of 
their business. 
Opportunities to add value to the businnes-based 
information arise due to both the internal and external 
environment. Hence, there is a need for a new approach to 
structure Information Technology (IT) companies to 
transform data into knowledge, which cause far-reaching 
impact. 
To aggregate and use information that are scattered in the 
internal and external environments of organizations, there is 
the concept of Competitive Intelligence, which according 
Fleisher [1], is a process by which organizations gather 
actionable information about competitors and the competitive 
environment and, ideally, apply it to their decision-making 
and planning processes in order to improve their 
performance. 
A proactive informational process leads to a better 
decision, whether strategic or operational, in order to 
discover the forces that govern the business, reduce risk and 
drive the decision maker to act in advance, besides protecting 
the knowledge generated. 
In the current scenario of the information generated in 
organizational environments, especially in those who have 
the Internet as a platform, there is data that, due to its 
characteristics, is classified as Big Data. 
In the literature, Big Data is defined as the representation 
of the progress of human cognitive processes, which 
generally includes data sets with sizes beyond the capacity of 
current technology, methods and theories to capture, manage 
and process the data within a specified time [2]. Gartner [3] 
defines Big Data as the high volume, high speed and/or high 
variety of information that require new ways of processing to 
allow better decision making, new knowledge discovery and 
process optimization. 
In the process of information search for Competitive 
Intelligence and Big Data robots, data mining on the Internet 
are used; according to Deters and Adaime [5] robots are 
systems that collect data from the Web and assemble a 
database that is processed to increase the speed of 
information retrieval. 
According to Silva [6], the extraction of relevant 
information can rank a page according to a domain context 
and also draw information structures them and storing them 
in databases. To add meaning to the content fetched, the 
robots are associated with Web search semantic concepts, 
which let the search through a process of meaning and value, 
extracting the most relevant information. 
The ontology in the philosophical context is defined by 
Silva [6] as part of the science of being and their 
relationships; in this sense, the use of ontologies is essential 
in the development of semantic search robots, being applied 
in Computer Science and Information Science to enable a 
search smarter and closer to the functioning of the cognitive 
process of the user so that data extraction becomes much 
more relevant. 
Thus, an agent presents itself as a solution to retrieve 
information on the web by semantic means. Currently, the 
content is organized in a jointly manner, in which syntactic 
structures do not have semantic data aggregation. In this 
sense, the role of the agent is to extract the information from 
the content and use syntactical ontology to achieve semantic 
relations and apply them to retrieval information. 
This research aims to implement a semantic agent for 
searching on the Web and allowing the retrieval, storage and  
processing of information, i.e., Big Data from various 
informational sources on the Internet. Such semantic agent 
will be the main mechanism for building  a computational 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
architecture that transforms disaggregated information on an 
analytical environment of strategic, relevant, accurate and 
usable knowledge to allow managers the access to 
opportunities and threats in the field of higher education 
institutions, based on concepts of competitive intelligence. 
The semantics of the agent will be built using ontological 
structures. 
To achieve this goal, the Semantic Agent will be built 
using the domain of higher education institution, addressing 
the problem related to scientific research. 
In this paper, the proposed architecture, the test of the 
ontology and the Semantic Agent are described. 
 
II. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL IN BIG DATA 
The traditional information systems are unable to cope 
efficiently with all new data sources and multiple contexts of 
information that have mainly the Internet as a platform. 
Problems are encountered in retrieving, standardizing, 
storing, processing and usage of information generated by 
various heterogeneous sources that are the basis for enabling 
systems for decision support organizations. 
In this context, it is questioning whether the computing 
environments of information actually present in full all 
relevant information to decision makers in organizations. 
In this sense, Beppler [16] proposed a type of architecture 
of information retrieval. This recovery occurs only by 
analyzing documents, and removing and storing information, 
without observing the existing context, e.g., using syntactic 
analysis. 
The solution was proposed to create an architecture for 
information retrieval in the context of Big Data, as seen in 
Figure 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Architecture Context of Semantic Agent of Extraction. 
 
Already Wiesner [17] proposed a semantic solution for 
this issue, using for making ontologies the recovery of 
information with a more generic architecture, by this the 
ontology you can insert semantics during the recovery 
process. 
This architecture was proposed, so that the recovery of the 
information can be made using the semantic space. The 
architecture has the agent as the structure of information 
retrieval and integrates with all elements and layers of the 
architecture. 
This architecture will be used at an institution of higher 
education, because in this area there is much information not 
being used several times in competitive intelligence. 
This architecture distinguishes itself from others, for 
doing all the recovery information using the same domain, 
therefore, only information relating to the problem in 
accordance with the defined ontology is extracted. 
 
 
III. ONTOLOGY 
To set a network of Semantic Web, ontologies have been 
used frequently [13]. 
According to Clark [10], an ontology is organized into 
concept hierarchies, because it cannot reflect optimally 
specific formalisms; then, it is possible to consider an 
ontology as the embodiment of the knowledge level. 
There are several types of ontologies, as outlined below 
[11]: 
• 
Upper Ontology: this type of ontology serves to 
explain what exists in the world. And most are used to 
represent large knowledge bases; 
• 
Domain Ontology: is a more specific area of an area 
of knowledge; 
• 
Task Ontology: This ontology serves to solve a 
specific problem of a domain; 
• 
Heavy-Weight Ontology: these ontologies are much 
more defined, have well-defined rules, be very careful 
when conceptualizing the world, and 
• 
Light-Weight Ontology: this type need not be precise 
as large in the conceptualization. 
 
Noy [8] explains the seven steps that are required to build 
an ontology, these steps are described below: 1. Determine 
the domain and scope of the ontology; 2. Consider reusing 
existing ontologies; 3. Enumerate important terms in the 
ontology; 4. Define the classes and the class hierarchy; 5. 
Define the properties of classes—slots; 6. Define the facets 
of the slots and; 7. Create instances. 
The ontology proposal was hatched seeking cover a 
problem within the domain of higher education institution, 
which is the issue of scientific research, was used this issue 
to be able to have a more synthetic ontology, with the focus 
on extracting value information, why this ontology is not so 
great; so, one can get a better view about the Semantic Agent, 
which is the focus of this research. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
The focus of the use of ontology in this case is for being 
the semantics of the agent. The agent will acquire the 
information from web pages, and from there pass the data by 
ontology implemented. 
IV. SEMANTIC  AGENT OF EXTRACTION 
The creation of a software agent that aggregates 
semantically information available on the web in a given 
domain can bring to a computational platform grants for the 
creation of an information environment for decision support 
giving a broader view of the internal and external scenarios 
of information relevance in organizational management. 
In this context, we understand the extreme importance of 
using agents to extract data through scrapper semantic search 
with the use of technologies like NoSQL [4] persistence in 
information processing with characteristics of Big Data, 
essential in the recovery, storage, processing and use of 
various types of information generated in these environments 
of large volume data sets on Competitive Intelligence. 
In the context of the architecture presented in Figure 1, 
this research are dealing the problem of automatic and 
semantic information extraction of web environments that 
have as informational sources: web pages, web services and 
database with the development of the agent semantic of data  
extraction. 
This agent should communicate with internal and external 
information spaces of Big Data basing their search on 
ontological rules on a metadata standard to perform the 
semantic extraction of the domain proposed and supported by 
other systems in a broader context of Information Retrieval. 
From this semantic search, the scrapper comes as a 
tooling strategy in the search and find the information that 
really add value to the decision-making process. Inside a 
huge and massive data structure scattered throughout the 
web, it is essential that the search engines do not support only 
syntactic structures of decision in information retrieval, but 
also in investigations of the use of semantic extraction agents. 
The research uses the domain of higher education 
institutions as a case study to apply the proposed computing 
platform in the architecture described in Figure 1. For the 
development of the prototype of the ontology, we used the 
issues of scientific research within educational institutions, 
such as notices, grants, funding agencies, search directories, 
events, and journals, among others. 
To elaborate the conceptual notation of ontology, we used 
Protégé software [14], as shown in Figure 2, which shows the 
class hierarchy of the ontology. In this figure, the dotted 
arrows are properties of objects in each class, i.e., when a 
dotted arrow goes from one class to another, means that the 
class from which emerged the arrow contains an object of 
destination class of the arrow. 
The agent will act on this proposed ontology that this 
scenario is called Task Ontology, according Mizoguch [11]; 
it is an ontology that solves a specific problem within a 
domain, that is, solves the problem of scientific research 
within the domain of an institution of higher education. 
 
Figure 2. Class Hierarchy of Research Ontology. 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Having access to information from your business domain 
is a fundamental requirement for management and decision 
making in organizations. 
An Information Retrieval system has the ability to 
provide relevant information for accessing Web sites and 
services, it is necessary the existence of software agents that 
add semantic information from various informational sources 
for a specific domain. 
In this context, the scrapper semantic search enters as a 
tooling strategy for searching and finding the information that 
really add value to the decision-making process, because 
inside a huge and massive structure of data spread across the 
Web, is essential that the search engines do not support only 
in syntactic structures of decision, but also in investigations 
of the use of semantic extraction agents. 
Currently, we are performing the implementation of the 
ontology, and the integration with semantic extraction agent, 
that is also being created. This process is nearly being 
finalized. The agents will be tested for verifying if will be 
able to extract from there will be tests to check if the agent 
will be able to extract the information that really will add 
value to competitive intelligence. 
By the development of an agent for semantic extraction, 
authors envision an effective use of information in the 
Environments Information Retrieval, an effective use of 
information in the scenarios of Big Data in the field of Higher 
Education Institutions will be obtained. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] C. S. Fleisher and D. L. Blenkhorn, “Managing Frontiers in 
Competitive Intelligence”. 2001. Westport. 
[2] “Big data: science in the petabyte era”. Nature 455 (7209): 1. 
2008. 
[3] Gartner, Douglas and Laney, “The importance of big data: A 
definition”. 2008. 
[4] M. Diana and M. A. Gerosa, “NOSQL na Web 2.0: Um Estudo 
Comparativo de Bancos Não-Relacionais para Armazenamento de 
Dados na Web 2.0” (“NoSQL Web 2.0: A Comparative Study of 
Non-Relational Data Storage Benches for Web 2.0”). São Paulo, 
2010. 
[5] J. I. Deters and S. F. Adaime, “Um estudo comparativo dos 
sistemas de busca na web” (“A comparative study of search 
systems on the web”). 
[6] T. M. S. Silva, “Extração De Informação Para Busca 
Semântica Na Web Baseada Em Ontologias” (“Information 
Extraction for Semantic Search In Web Based On Ontology”). 
Florianópolis, 
2003. 
<https://repositorio.ufsc.br/handle/123456789/85791> [retrieved: 
03/10/2014]. 
[7] M. A. A. Mesquita, “Web Semântica E Recuperação Da 
Informação Na Internet : O Que Esperar Do Futuro?” (“Semantic 
web and information retrieval on the Internet: What to Expect 
From the Future?” 2010. 
[8] N. F. Noy et al, “Ontology Development 101: A Guide to 
Creating 
Your 
First 
Ontology”. 
<http://www.ksl.stanford.edu/people/dlm/papers/ontology-
tutorial-noy-mcguinness-abstract.html> [retrieved: 03/10/2014]. 
[9] T. R. Gruber, “Towards Principles for a Design of Ontologies 
Used for Knowledge Sharing”, International Journal of Human 
and Computer Studies. 1995 
[10] D.  Clark, “Mad cows, meta-thesaurus and meaning, IEEE 
Intelligent Systems”. 1999. 
[11] R. Mizoguchi, “Tutorial on Ontological Engineering”. 
<http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.76.62
26&rep=rep1&type=pdf> [retrieved: 03/10/2014] 
[12] J. Davies, D. Fensel and F. Van Harmelen, “Towards The 
Semantic Web: Ontology-Driven Knowledge Management”, John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2003.  
 
[13] R.A. Falbo, et al., “ODE: Ontology-based software 
Development Environment”. IX Congreso Argentino de Ciencias 
de la Computación, p. 1124-1135, La Plata, Argentina, Outubro 
2003. 
[14] Protégé. Stanford University. <http://protege.stanford.edu/> 
[retrieved: 03/10/2014]. 
[15] J.E. Prescott, “The Evolution of Competitive Intelligence”. 
1999. 
[16] F.D. Bepler, et al. “Uma Arquitetura Para Recuperação De 
Informação Aplicada Ao Processo De Cooperação Universidade-
Empresa” (“An Architecture for Retrieval of Applied Information 
In Case Of University-Industry Cooperation”) 2005, São Paulo. 
[17] K. Wiesner et al. “Recovery Mechanisms for Semantic Web 
Services” DAIS 2008, LNCS 5053, pp. 100–105, 2008. 
 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

