The Electronic Silverback 
Absorb Knowledge Loss in Industry by Social Network Approach 
Dirk Malzahn 
OrgaTech GmbH 
Lunen, Germany 
dm@orgatech.org 
 
 
Abstract—Over the last decades, focusing on core competencies 
was one of the major management strategies to reduce cost and 
improve performance. Knowledge loss was accepted to some 
extent as this knowledge was not seen as crucial for the well-
being of the company. What most companies underestimated 
was the impact of losing application knowledge, defining the 
specialties of applying non-core competencies on a company 
specific implementation. As both sides, the company and the 
supplier, limited their knowledge to their own core 
competencies, the required interfacing 
knowledge was 
completely lost. In this paper we will explain from an 
industrial perspective why this loss was disregarded for a long 
time, what the impact of this loss is and how the lost knowledge 
can be regained using a social network approach. Social 
networks are already widely used in industry, but mainly 
limited to marketing and recruiting. By this paper we want to 
extent the usage to the field of knowledge management. It 
builds the basis for a project starting in German Chemical 
Industry in 2012. 
Keywords- social network; industrial knowledge loss; core 
competencies; expert knowledge; incentives. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the late decades of the last century, lots of companies 
reduced their processes and workforce to the minimum, 
required to deliver their so called core competencies. Under 
core competencies fall all elements that contribute directly to 
the creation of value of the produced product or delivered 
service, and build a unique selling proposition – or be at least 
not too easy reproduced by competitors. 
All other competencies were outsourced to third parties, 
either by outsourcing parts of the company into independent 
companies or handing over work to a third party supplier. 
The basic idea was not too bad: let the company with the 
most experience and knowledge do the work it is specialized 
for - and by this benefit from their performance. 
Companies easily accepted the loss in knowledge of 
outsourced work – as this knowledge was not seen as crucial 
and they still had suppliers to continue, and maybe optimize, 
this knowledge. By this approach, companies were able to 
free resources and money to further improve their core 
competencies and specialize on these - the same did the 
supplier. By this, another creeping knowledge loss started, 
which was not managed by most companies: the loss of 
application knowledge [1].  
What is meant by application knowledge might best be 
explained by an example: if a company produces chemicals 
it needs pipes. Pipes are a highly standardized product. 
Therefore, the chemical company outsourced all piping work 
to an external supplier. Due to the high standardization of 
pipes, the supplier was able to deliver piping work in shorter 
time for lower cost. 
With the saved money the chemical company was able to 
invest in more research for new products and optimized 
production processes. After several years of research the 
chemical company came up with a new product requiring a 
special type of piping. The company itself was not able to 
develop the piping system as it had outsourced all piping 
work. The piping supplier also was not able to deliver the 
piping work as it has focused on delivering standard piping 
systems and was afraid of the extra invest that has to be 
spend on research for developing the special piping system. 
At the end of the last century, companies were still able 
to cope with this situation. Most companies still had 
employees “knowing the old times”. In these old times, 
where everything was developed and delivered by the 
company itself, it was the employees’ day-to-day work to 
cover all required steps of the production process. These 
employees usually were still able to give “hints” what a 
system should look like and therefore were the hidden 
knowledge tanks of the company – in one company they 
have  been called “silverbacks” (like the gorillas) to express 
the deep technical knowledge they had collected during their 
lifetime. 
By this, the problem was somehow known but not 
properly addressed as resources were still available to cover 
the problem.  
But the longer it lasted, the more simple biological 
aspects came into account. Employees who collected their 
expert knowledge in the 70’s or 80’s of the last century are 
now retired – the silverbacks left the forest! 
In Section II of this paper we will further define the 
problem. Section III describes the needs of the stakeholders. 
Section IV covers possible solution approaches. One of these 
approaches is detailed in Section V followed by a description 
of the implementation requirements in Sections VI to VIII. 
The paper ends with a conclusion, outlook and references in 
Sections IX to XI. 
 
II. 
DEFINING THE PROBLEM 
Focusing on core competencies leads to a knowledge gap 
where different knowledge areas come together. If both sides 
focus on their own knowledge area only, existing application 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

knowledge is stepwise lost. For some time, this can be 
absorbed by remaining part-knowledge on both sides and in 
later phases maybe also by knowledge silverbacks, but in the 
very end knowledge is irretrievably lost [2]. 
In the first phase, the company holds knowledge on the 
core competencies as well as on non-core competencies. By 
this, application knowledge is automatically maintained and 
developed. 
 
Figure 1.  Starting state 
Once the non-core competencies are outsourced, 
application knowledge decreases, the more both sides are 
focusing on their own core competencies. 
Figure 2.  Knowledge decrease 
This lasts until the knowledge is limited to some experts. 
 
Figure 3.  Silverback state 
In the very end, this leads to a knowledge gap. 
 
Figure 4.  End state - knowledge disconnect 
 
Dependent on the state a company is already in, the 
problem has different severity. A company in starting state 
has to perform a knowledge management initiative to ensure 
that application management knowledge is collected, 
maintained and developed. 
A company in knowledge decrease state has to do the 
same, but should also evaluate how much knowledge is 
already lost, e.g., by analyzing application knowledge need 
for possible research and development initiatives. 
If the company is already in Silverback state it has to 
ensure that the knowledge of the Silverbacks is conserved 
and multiplied (e.g., by a mentoring approach, interviews, 
scenario techniques…). 
The biggest challenge is to regain application knowledge 
for a company that is already in the knowledge disconnect 
state. Here once existing knowledge is lost and has to be re-
build based on the requirements of the further developed 
core competencies. 
The approach described in this paper covers the 
knowledge disconnect state, integrating elements from the 
Silverback state, as the first two states allow management by 
standard knowledge management techniques. 
 
III. 
DEVELOP THE PROBLEM 
To propose a solution, the impact, impediments and 
preferences of the different stakeholders have to be evaluated 
[6]. 
Stakeholders, in this case, are the company which is 
asking for the best solution, the supplier who is interested in 
developing a long-lasting customer relationship as well as 
the development of its own core competencies, and last not 
least the Silverbacks as long as they are available [3]. 
A. Company needs 
The company first has to identify which application 
knowledge is required [4]. Based on this it has to be decided 
whether this application knowledge should be developed by 
the company itself or a supplier. 
If the application knowledge is developed by the 
company itself, it has to cover research time as well as 
research invest. Based on time and invest it has to decide 
whether this application knowledge might or should become 
a core competency of the company. 
If the application knowledge should be delivered by a 
supplier, the company has to cover the additional research 
cost and the risk, that the supplier is not able to deliver the 
application knowledge in the very end. If the company is 
developing the application knowledge itself, it is facing the 
same risk, but in this case the company is able to manage the 
risk directly, which is not possible if knowledge provision is 
outsourced. 
B. Supplier needs 
If a supplier develops application knowledge for a 
company, this work has to improve the suppliers’ capabilities 
and economic success – otherwise there is no need for the 
supplier to perform this work. 
Supplier capabilities are improved if the supplier can 
reuse the developed knowledge for other customers or 
improve its own core competencies. 
Economic success is reached if either the cost for 
knowledge development is covered or the knowledge can be 
used for several customers and by this an economic benefit 
can be reached. Indirect economic benefit is delivered if the 
supplier becomes a preferred status and therefore is more 
often selected by the company. 
 
C. Silverback needs 
The Silverbacks are the most contributing but also the 
most problematic stakeholders. On one hand they hold most 
of the required knowledge. On the other hand they need a 
strong incentive to participate (“why should I help them on 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

something they have thrown away several years ago, now 
that I’m retired?”). 
IV. 
SOLUTION APPROACHES 
As problem and stakeholders are known now, question is 
how the problem can be solved with the given stakeholders. 
Usually a formal approach is chosen. 
A. Formal Approach 
In a formal approach a project is set up to develop the 
knowledge. Therefore resources from company and supplier 
are required, which work on a defined topic to deliver 
defined results on a defined timeline. 
 
The positives of a formal approach are that 
 
Structured management is possible 
 
Resources and roles are defined 
 
Goals are defined 
 
Effort and cost are planned 
 
The negatives of a formal approach are that 
 
Required resources are hard to get (Silverbacks 
working for a defined duration with a defined effort) 
 
Effort and cost are hardly predictable if research 
methodology and impacting factors are unknown 
 
Project is limited to the goals, additional benefit 
opportunities identified during the project are not 
followed up 
 
So, a formal approach will always help when we know 
what we need and want, and be able to define whom we need 
for this work, and can ensure that all the required resources 
are available. 
 
B. Informal Approach 
By an informal approach, information is collected in a 
community. Several people can work on a topic at their own 
will defining their own effort and contribution. 
 
The positives of an informal approach are that 
 
A wide group can contribute 
 
Costs are minimized for the first step 
 
Additional benefit opportunities might be mentioned 
as well as impediments unknown by now 
 
The negatives of a formal approach are that there is 
 
No guarantee that a solution will be developed at all 
 
No structured approach and timeline 
 
Unclear ownership of contributed knowledge 
 
Given the management benefits of a formal approach and 
creativity benefits of the informal approach, combination of 
both might also be reasonable. 
 
C. Combined Approach 
In the combined approach, knowledge development starts 
with the informal approach. Driven by an event the collected 
information is transferred into the formal approach. 
Possible events might be 
 
Information 
quality 
– 
amount 
of 
collected 
information and knowledge is sufficient to perform a 
reliable planning 
 
Time constraint – knowledge development project 
has to be started at a defined point in time to ensure 
in-time knowledge delivery. Up to this starting point 
as much information as possible is collected by the 
informal approach. 
 
V. 
DEFINING THE INFORMAL SOLUTION APPROACH 
Performing projects is a well-known and properly 
equipped process in industry [10; 11]. Therefore, the formal 
approach is not further described here. 
Using the informal approach is much more uncommon in 
industry. Therefore, influencing factors and possible 
impediments require further analysis. 
At first, the contributors (here stakeholders) act at free 
will. To foster this, each contributor must receive an 
incentive for the contribution. 
Then, 
the 
contributors provide 
knowledge. This 
knowledge must be useful for other users. Therefore, the 
benefit of a contribution must be rateable. 
As a third point, the user wants to get his problems 
solved, so there must be a possibility to communicate 
questions and problems. 
Last, but not least, intellectual property must be safe. It 
has to be either ensured that only selected users have access 
to defined information or the incentive reaches a level that 
allows common usage. 
 
 
VI. 
IMPLEMENTING THE INFORMAL SOLUTION APPROACH 
The basic idea is to implement the informal solution 
approach by using the strategies and technologies known 
from social networks, in this specific case: 
 
Set up stakeholder specific profiles 
 
Connect to other stakeholders 
 
Share information (knowledge, questions, problems, 
etc.) 
 
Comment on shared information 
 
Reuse shared information 
 
Rate shared information 
 
Limit access to information 
 
Allow direct contact 
 
Calculate and deliver incentives 
 
Independent clearance 
 
Each of the topics above will be further discussed now. 
 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

A. Setup stakeholder specific profiles 
As described before, stakeholders are companies, 
suppliers and silverbacks. In the interaction, companies now 
become information customers of suppliers and Silverbacks. 
Customer companies want to get their problems and future 
challenges resolved. Therefore, it has to be possible to 
profile requests as well as fields of work. This allows other 
stakeholders to react on a problem or identify, develop or 
contribute knowledge useful for solving further challenges. 
Suppliers mainly want to present themselves and show 
their capabilities. Therefore, there should be an appetite to 
present 
marketing 
information 
in 
addition 
to 
the 
competencies itself. 
Major question regarding the Silverbacks is how it can be 
ensured that they are interested in participation. Thinkable 
might be a Silverback network which allows connecting to 
retired colleagues and a very strong incentive model (“what 
do I get out of it?”). On the other hand, it has to be ensured 
that required information about the Silverbacks’ qualification 
and capabilities is available. 
 
B. Connect to other stakeholders 
Once stakeholders are present in the network, connecting 
types have to be evaluated. First question is whether direct 
competition is allowed. If so, each supplier can see the offers 
of its competitors and can react by pointing out which 
advantages it has compared to the competitors. Same is the 
case for customers. If they are able to see their competitors 
and also the suppliers working for them, they are able to 
benchmark themselves as well as to select new suppliers 
based on the contributions for other customers [9]. The direct 
approach allows building sub-communities (e.g., setting up a 
syndicate working together on a specific product or service 
for a defined period of time under defined rules). 
On the other hand, it might be required to limit 
information to a specific group (e.g., if confidential 
information is made available). In this case the information 
offering partner should be able to decide which information 
is publicly shared and which is limited to a defined group. 
Same is applicable for Silverbacks. They should be able 
to openly present themselves and their knowledge as well as 
limit access to private knowledge and conversations. 
 
C. Share knowledge 
Knowledge sharing is defined by profile and connection 
type. It should be possible to share structured knowledge as 
well as unstructured knowledge. Structured knowledge is 
offered based on a defined topic, question or problem. It can 
clearly be assigned to a specific field of work or application. 
Unstructured knowledge is each information, a supplier, 
customer or Silverback wants to offer. It has more a “what I 
also did in my life” style than addressing a specific topic. 
Knowledge sharing should be able in a pull and push 
mode. In the pull mode [8], an interested party searches for 
information. In the push mode information is distributed to 
generally interested parties whenever it is produced. To 
avoid information overload, a subscribing mechanism must 
be in place to allow a pre-selection of acceptable “pushs”. 
 
D. Share questions and problems 
Questions and problems are requests for information. 
Whilst a question is usually made available to all 
participants, a problem might require a proper pre-selection 
of involved parties. Background of a question is to retrieve 
as much information as possible on the specific topic. 
Problems look for more specified information and therefore 
have to avoid “information noise”, meaning information 
which is generally useful but not contributing in resolving 
the problem. 
It should be defined who is allowed to raise questions 
and problems. In a customer-centric network only customers 
should be able to raise questions and problems. 
In a knowledge-centric network, everybody should be 
able to ask everybody else (e.g., Silverback asking for a 
specific tool, supplier asking for a special sub-process, etc.). 
 
E. Comment on shared information 
Once information is shared, everybody should be able to 
comment on it. Comments could be remarks, enhancements, 
corrections, but only the original provider should be able to 
change information based on the comments. 
 
F. Reuse shared information 
All information should be available to the intended user 
group. This can either be all participants or a limited group 
defined by the information provider (supplier makes new 
method available to preferred customer) or an information 
user (e.g., customer uses specific supplier knowledge).  
Question is how an interested party gets hands on the 
information. Therefore manual and automatic search 
mechanisms must be available to identify and select required 
and useful information. Especially in research driven 
industries the “language” often is not fully defined, therefore 
search must be possible on syntactical and semantic level. 
Additional search setting might be the current rating of 
information, to identify often used (common) information as 
well as seldom used (expert) information in relationship to 
the search topic. To avoid information noise, it has to be 
possible to exclude information rated as not useful. 
Once information is selected, it has to be defined under 
which rules information can be re-used [5]. Silverback 
knowledge might e.g., be re-published by everyone as long 
as it is ensured that the originator receives his incentive for 
each 
reuse. 
Confidential, 
protected 
or 
trademarked 
information might only be reused under defined rules. 
 
G. Rate shared information 
Every information has to be rated on quantity, quality 
and domain level. Rating on quantity level means that it has 
to be measured, how often information has been accessed. 
Rating on quality means that each retriever of information 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

rates the benefit he gets out of the information. In the last 
step the search keywords leading to information are collected 
to improve the matching of search results. 
Based on these 3 base ratings, a participants rating can be 
calculated. By this all participants can be grouped in classes 
like “contributors” (delivering a significant amount of useful 
information), “profiteers” (using more information than they 
are contributing), “blabbermouths” (contributing lots of 
information but with low benefit for others) or “freeloader” 
(which are using lots of information without contributing 
anything). 
 
H. Limit access to information 
As said before, it must be possible to limit access to 
information. Therefore an invite mechanism is required 
which allows a contributor to select participants who are 
allowed to retrieve this information. For search improvement 
reasons this might be structured stepwise. It might e.g., be 
possible to limit access to the information but not to related 
keywords. If a participant now searches for a keyword, he 
might see that information on this topic is available but still 
has to ask the information provider for access (e.g., access to 
trademarked / confidential information requiring a contract, 
non-disclosure agreement…). 
 
I. 
Allow direct contact 
To allow quick feedback or clarification, there must be a 
possibility to contact other participants directly. This could 
e.g., be done by chat functionality. 
 
J. 
Calculate and deliver incentives 
Incentives should be calculated based on the rating that a 
participant receives (as described under VI.G). The easiest 
way is to transform the different ratings into points. These 
points then might be changed into different incentives per 
group (Silverbacks, suppliers, customers). How these 
incentives might be managed is described in section VII. 
 
K. Independent clearance 
Even though the whole network is based on trust, misuse 
cannot be ruled out. For this reason an independent clearance 
body (e.g., trust center borne by all groups) should be 
installed. 
Whenever a participant thinks that information is 
incorrect, copyright and related rights are not properly 
respected, or the ethics of the network are not followed, the 
participant can ask for clearance. 
Additionally this clearance body can support the 
installation of the Electronic Silverback as described in 
section VIII. 
 
VII. HOW TO MANAGE INCENTIVES 
It is evident that incentives have to be managed 
differently per group: an incentive for a Silverback has to 
look different than an incentive for a supplier or customer 
[7]. 
 
A. Customer Incentives 
For customers no specific incentives are required at first 
sight. Customers benefit from the provided information. 
However in later phases incentives might be reasonable, if 
customers act differently in information provision. If e.g., 
some 
customers 
provide 
information 
regularly 
(“contributor”) 
whilst 
others 
only 
use 
information 
(“freeloader”), new Silverback or supplier information might 
e.g., be made available to contributors first, whilst 
freeloaders are granted access after a defined period (x days / 
weeks later). 
 
B. Supplier Incentives 
Suppliers might see the network as a possibility to tighten 
their relationship to their customers. On the other hand 
suppliers have to spend a reasonable amount of time and 
effort if they really want to contribute to the network. A 
possible incentive might be to integrate the supplier ratings 
into supplier performance monitoring. Most large companies 
have performance indicators for their suppliers. Contract 
terms and durations, supplier selection and preference and 
cost calculation are often driven by these indicators. If a 
supplier now has collected a high number of points in the 
network, this should improve the suppliers’ performance 
indicator. For this reason it might be required to calculate 
customer specific ratings (e.g., not only “how often has 
information provided by this supplier been used” but “how 
often has information provided by this supplier been used by 
a specific customer”). These customer specific ratings should 
be confidential and might e.g., be managed by the clearance 
body. 
 
C. Silverback Incentives 
The hardest group to get is the Silverback community. 
What drives a Silverback to contribute time and knowledge? 
If the Silverback is still in the company, classic incentive 
models like salary increase might be possible as well as early 
retirement (“you can retire earlier if you are still available as 
expert from time to time”). 
Silverbacks already retired might be caught by receiving 
credit or direct or indirect payments. 
Giving credit might e.g., been implemented by inviting 
highly pointed Silverbacks to conferences or setting up 
expert groups which meet in appropriate locations with high 
quality service. 
Indirect payment might e.g., be done by providing 
Silverbacks with the newest computer technology, offering 
discounts in company owned stores or allowing them to 
participate in company rebate systems. 
Direct payment might either result from points (points 
collected are converted in € or $), or improvement sharing 
(Silverback receives a percentage of the calculated 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

improvement benefit reached by information provided by 
him). 
To ensure fairness of the calculations, this might also be 
performed by the clearance body. 
 
VIII. THE ELECTRONIC SILVERBACK 
Most of the activities described above look like 
delivering short term results. Customers ask questions or 
search help for problems. Silverbacks help on questions and 
problems and suppliers will mainly use it to combine 
marketing with customer relationship. 
But, over time, the network will become a vault of 
knowledge. The more the network is used, the more 
information and knowledge will be available. This is the time 
to lift the treasure. 
Based on the questions asked and searches performed, 
standard question and search strategies can be designed. 
Based on the information structure and keywords, 
information can be grouped and combined. 
In the very end the network will become the Electronic 
Silverback: holding and improving application knowledge 
and establishing analysis and retrieval mechanisms to 
provide this knowledge in defined use cases. 
 
IX. 
CONCLUSION 
Companies are more and more using social networks. 
Whether it is Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter, the number of 
companies represented there is increasing every day.  
But the fields of application are still limited. Social 
networks are seen as marketing or recruiting platforms, but 
not to conserve knowledge. On the other hand everything 
required is already there – it just has to be used. 
The major challenge for using a social network is trust in 
the network provider. Companies have to rely that 
information is not distributed unauthorized. Therefore the 
network provider has still to ensure an independent clearance 
body trusted by all partners. 
 
X. 
OUTLOOK 
In the current stage, it still has to be proven that a social 
network approach for companies delivers benefits beyond 
marketing and recruiting. The approach described in this 
paper offers another field of application. 
Looking at the environment surrounding companies the 
way to social networking is irreversible: research is more and 
more performed in communities; innovative products are 
developed in open source communities; and even companies 
bring together experts from all over the world to improve 
their research, development and production capabilities. 
So why not trying this in the field of knowledge 
management? This approach and the upcoming project 
should prove this, and lead the way from a selected group of 
customers, suppliers and Silverbacks to a repository for a 
whole sector or industry. Who is not willing to share might 
not be able to survive. 
 
XI. 
REFERENCES 
This paper does not have any direct references to other 
publications. Reason for this is that the paper is an 
independent industry approach not relying on any academic 
pre-work.  
However basis of this paper are discussions with industry 
leaders on usage and possible benefits of social networks in 
industry. Major topics of these discussions were: 
 
How can we conserve expert knowledge? 
 
Can social media help? 
 
How do we get from expert knowledge to 
community knowledge? 
 
How do we get knowledge communities 
working in industry? 
 
How do we make this approach sustainable? 
 
During discussions we often came to the point where one 
of the participants said “you know, I read the book from…” 
– indicating the basic thoughts on and perception of social 
media and collaboration usage in industry. 
Knowing that the list below is neither complete nor 
comply with academic research requirements, it should give 
an overview, which topics already drive industrial decision 
makers. 
 
[1] C. Anderson, “The long tail”, Hyperion, New York, 2006 
[2] M. Gladwell, “The tipping point: How little things can make a 
big difference”, Hachette Book Group, USA, NY, 2000. 
[3] J. Howe, “Crowsdsourcing. Why the power of the crowd is 
driving the future of business”, Crown Business, NY, 2008. 
[4] J. Jarvis, “What would Google do?”, Harper Collins, UK, 
2009. 
[5] L. Lessig, “The future of ideas: The fate of the commons in a 
connected world”, Random House, 2001. 
[6] R. Levine, C. Locke, D. Searls, and D. Weinberger, “The 
cluetrain 
manifesto”, 
www.cluetrain.com, 
retrieved 
10.09.2011. 
[7] C. Li and J. Bernoff, “Groundswell: Winning in a world 
transformed by social technologies”, Harvard Business Press, 
Boston Mass., 2008. 
[8] L. Manovich, “The language of new media”, MIT Press, 
Cambridge, Mass., 2001. 
[9] R. Scoble and S. Israel, “Naked conversations”, John Wiley & 
Sons, 2006. 
[10] C. Shirky, “Here comes everybody. The power of organizing 
without organizing”, Penguin Books, New York, 2008. 
[11] J. Surowiecki, “The wisdom of crowds”, London, Abacus, 
2005. 
[12] D. Tapscott and A.D. Williams, “Wikinomics. How mass 
collaboration changes everything”, Penguin USA, 2007. 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

