How to Acquire Scientific Knowledge for 
University to Industry Knowledge Transfer 
Ioana Suciu, Christophe Fernandez, Amadou Ndiaye 
Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, 
INRA UMR 927 (Université Bordeaux 1 – CNRS – INRA) 
Bordeaux, France 
ioana.suciu@bordeaux.inra.fr, 
christophe.fernandez@bordeaux.inra.fr, 
amadou.ndiaye@bordeaux.inra.fr 
 
 
Benoit Le Blanc 
Institut Polytechnique de Bordeaux, ENSC 
Bordeaux, France 
benoit.leblanc@ensc.fr 
Catriona Raboutet 
Real Cognitic 
Bordeaux, France 
catriona.raboutet@gmail.com 
 
Abstract - This paper presents a framework dedicated to support 
the acquisition of useful and usable scientific knowledge that can 
be transferred to industrialists. It exposes the seven corpora of 
knowledge (Initial data, Problem, Hypothesis, Tests, Results, 
Interpretation and Conclusion) necessary both to acquire and to 
structure relevant scientific knowledge. The framework is used in 
the domain of design of tailored biscuits with optimized satiety 
benefit. The acquired scientific knowledge will be represented 
and next implemented in an electronic knowledge book that is the 
channel chosen to transfer it to biscuit-making industrialists. 
Keywords-scientific 
knowledge 
acquisition; 
university-to-
industry knowledge transfer; knowledge sheets;  electronic k-book. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Our work is situated in the field of university to industry 
knowledge transfer (U2I-KT). The objective of the U2I-KT 
research is to make the knowledge from scientific results 
available in a format that is directly accessible and exploitable 
by industrialists. However, scientific knowledge produced by 
academic research is intended to scientific communities for an 
academic use. It is commonly made available through scientific 
publications, which are not easy to be interpreted and used by 
industrialists. The difficulty comes from the difference that 
researchers produce scientific knowledge with the aim of 
understanding problematic phenomena, whereas industrialists 
demand this knowledge to manufacture their products. The 
challenge is to reformulate scientific knowledge created in 
university with respect to the industrial process of product 
manufacturing. The U2I knowledge reformulation issue will 
introduce new ways to structure, to access and to handle useful 
scientific knowledge, all oriented to its final industrial use. 
The U2I reformulation program requests a knowledge base 
(k-base) of relevant and useful scientific knowledge that should 
be constituted and made available in a form that eases its future 
treatment (easy access to knowledge should be envisaged, for 
example). Scientific knowledge should be captured, modelled, 
structured and represented within the k-base and then prepared 
for reformulation (re-structured) with respect to a configuration 
properly shaped for its industrial use. An appropriate-designed 
tool should be conceived and implemented to easily supply the 
scientific knowledge formerly reconfigured. It will be exploited 
to transmit this knowledge to the industrialists in order to be 
assimilated and used by them. An electronic knowledge book 
(e-k-book) is the tool chosen here for the U2I-KT. It is a 
hypermedia electronic document composed by a set of 
hierarchical concept maps and knowledge sheets (see Section 
V). The e-k-book has the principal advantage of providing to 
industrialists direct access and immediate use of knowledge 
within the k-base. It can be easily handled as being produced 
on, published through, and readable on a computational form. 
The work presented in this paper deals with the acquisition 
of scientific knowledge. The framework proposed here to 
Acquire scientific Knowledge (AsK) is intended to support the 
k-base constitution and its structuring from a scientific-oriented 
perspective. Further work will be carried out on scientific 
knowledge representation, its industry-oriented reformulation 
and e-k-book implementation. 
The paper is structured in six sections: Section I points out 
the context and the objective of our work. Section II refers to 
related works on knowledge acquisition and transfer. Section 
III depicts a structural view over the scientific knowledge. 
Section IV exposes the AsK framework based on this view. It 
proposes an aid to acquire and to structure scientific knowledge 
that will be reformulated. Section V discusses an application of 
AsK to acquire knowledge in the domain of design of satiety 
biscuits. Section VI exposes conclusions and future work. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
As cited by [1], knowledge transfer is a complex process, 
which includes knowledge transmission, absorption and use. 
Important types, methods and levels for its exploitation are 
cited in [2]. However, to transfer knowledge one has to acquire 
and make it available in a way that is suitable to its absorption 
and use [3]. The frequently used concepts [4] in the context of 
U2I-KT [5] are present in the knowledge acquisition, too. The 
absorptive capacity [6] depends on the ability of knowledge 
use, but also on the capacity to acquire and assimilate it. Prior 
knowledge and domain similarity [4] facilitate the absorption, 
but also the acquisition strategies. While a survey of tools and 
techniques for knowledge acquisition is presented in [7], the 
closest related work to our research is found in [8]. Here, 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

knowledge acquisition is “the activity of capturing, structuring 
and modelling knowledge from any source for the purpose of 
storing, sharing or implementing knowledge”. Thus, the overall 
objective of the acquisition process is to develop a k-base 
operational for the future processing. This k-base contains 
informal, structured, formal or computational know-ledge 
related to all the relevant and useful aspects. Accordingly to 
[9], lack of knowledge pertaining to research utilization can 
inhibit appropriate and effective use. In this background, the 
originality of our work consists in proposing a framework to 
acquire and to structure scientific knowledge for the U2I-KT. 
III. 
WHICH STRUCTURE FOR SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE 
Scientific knowledge is the key ingredient in the process of 
U2I-KT and the key object of our study. Published knowledge 
produced by scientist researchers as a result of their scientific 
research is evaluated by a scientific community and released 
through scientific publications. Scientific papers are thus the 
vehicle of spreading and supplying scientific knowledge. They 
are regularly structured into five formal parts: (a) Introduction 
and Literature Review; (b) Material and Method; (c) Results; 
(d) Discussion; (e) Conclusion and Future Work. Knowledge 
contained in these publications concerns existing data used for 
the research and new data provided by this. Inspired by [10], 
which cites the main steps commonly used in a hypothetical-
deductive scientific method, we assume that relevant scientific 
knowledge encloses data, information and knowledge related to 
the following corpora: Initial data, Problem, Hypothesis, Tests, 
Results, Interpretation and Conclusion. These corpora offer a 
structural perspective on the scientific knowledge. Commonly, 
Initial data, Problem and Hypothesis are found in the (a) 
section, Tests in the (b) section, Results in (c), Interpretation in 
(d) and Conclusion in the (e) section of a scientific publication.  
Initial data includes theories, models, facts, representations, 
observations, methods or concepts related to a specific domain. 
It reveals accepted shared knowledge of a scientific community 
that outlines the prior knowledge needed for the research. 
Problem suggests the hindrance raised from the contradictions 
between new facts and old ideas. It is formulated by a research 
main question. Hypothesis conveys assumptions formed on the 
basis of the research problem. Tests include Material (Product 
and Equipment used for experimentation, Instrument required 
to observe or to measure parameters and Operator to perform 
tasks) and Method (Protocol and Model used for investigation, 
or production). Tests (experimental, simulation- or modelling-
oriented) are set up to: i) test existing theories or probe results 
from the background observation, ii) answer a question or 
investigate a problem, or iii) test the hypothesis introduced, to 
support or to disprove them. Results present data or interesting 
observations made when handling data, and report the accurate 
results of tests. Interpretation renders the results explanations, 
analysis, reflexions and assimilations. Conclusion exposes the 
impact of the new research findings on the current knowledge 
and the restatement of the knowledge after their integration. 
These 7 corpora of knowledge are necessary to acquire and 
structure relevant scientific knowledge. Certainly, industrialists 
are in quest of accurate and well interpreted scientific results. 
Yet they are also interested in data, information and knowledge 
about essential methods and materials to use, parameters values 
to adjust, concepts and theories to be familiar with. These will 
provide them a better understanding of the scientific results and 
may ease the reproduction of the tests, if needed. Hence, all the 
available corpora of knowledge have to be collected and handy 
at the end of the acquisition. Otherwise, lost or unavailable 
pieces of knowledge can have a negative impact on the future 
absorption and exploitation of the scientific knowledge. This 
can produce an incomplete transfer of knowledge, which can 
instigate unnecessary rework and delay for industrialists. 
IV. 
ASK FRAMEWORK PRESENTATION 
The AsK framework aims to help a knowledge engineer to 
acquire and structure useful scientific knowledge into a k-base 
made available for future processing. 
Materials used in AsK are related to knowledge sources and 
tools. Knowledge sources include the available documentary 
(publications, reports, slides, work sheets...) and human expert 
resources (interviews). Knowledge tools include techniques 
and software used for knowledge collection, visualisation or 
modelling (diagrams, frames, trees, maps, tables, matrices). 
The method used in AsK is based on the assumption that to 
acquire and to structure relevant scientific knowledge, all the 7 
corpora of knowledge (Initial data, Problem, Hypothesis, Test, 
Results, Interpretation, Conclusion) have to be examined. 
The AsK framework proposes a three-phase protocol: i) 
acquire and structure knowledge from available resources, ii) 
identify the lacking necessary knowledge and then acquire it 
and iii) verify the conditions for acquisition completed. 
During the first phase, knowledge is collected and modelled 
from the initial sources, following the subsequent procedures: 
 
The research problems for each knowledge domain are 
identified. Each problem introduces an empty AsK-
frame entitled with regard to the given problem. This 
frame is a skeleton designed to offer a structured view 
on the scientific knowledge, as described in Section III. 
Each frame encloses seven layers, which correspond to 
the seven corpora of knowledge, as shown in Figure 1. 
 
Knowledge is collected from the initial sources and 
transcribed into suitable models. Glossaries, process 
diagrams, dependence relations, concept trees, process 
maps, attributes’ tables, relation matrices, dependence 
rules are potential knowledge models (k-models) [8] to 
be put within the k-base. As far as possible, process-
oriented models are used, as they ease the absorption 
by the industrialists. Knowledge modelling provides 
punctual views of the collected knowledge and delivers 
localised pictures within the k-base. The k-models 
reveal knowledge about concepts, hypothesis, methods, 
products, properties or results. They are placed into the 
corresponding AsK-frame, within the suitable layer. 
Knowledge collected and modelled is thus immediately 
located in its proper context. The procedure leads to a 
scientific-oriented structuring of the k-base. 
 
First interviews with experts are set up to confirm the 
initial AsK-frames titles with respect to their research 
domain. They can guide to the creation of new frames. 
This procedure provides the framing of knowledge 
(allows to assign one ore more experts to each frame, 
depending on the objective of their research work). 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

AsK-frame Title 
 
 
Initial data 
 
 
 
 
Problem 
 
 
 
 
Hypothesis 
 
 
                           
                      Tests 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
         Material 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
          Method 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Product 
 
 
Operator 
Equipment 
Instrument 
 
Results 
 
 
 
 
Interpretation 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 
 
 
Model 
 
Protocol 
 
Figure 1.  Seven necessary layers in the AsK-frame skeleton 
 
 
The initial established k-models are either confirmed 
or clarified, detailed or infirmed (if knowledge have 
evolved since then). New knowledge related to these 
models is collected and submitted to confirmation. The 
confirmed k-models are checked as relevant in the base 
 
The proper assignation of the confirmed k-models to a 
particular layer in the AsK-frame is confirmed as well. 
During the second phase, the lacking useful knowledge is 
first identified and then acquired. The main steps to follow are: 
 
For a given frame, lacks of useful data, information 
and knowledge in the corpora of Initial data, Product, 
Method, Equipment, Results and Interpretation are 
identified with respect to the AsK framework. 
 
New semi-structured interviews are set up in order to 
collect these corpora of lacking knowledge within each 
frame. For example, the questions are formulated so 
that the knowledge obtained from answers directly fit a 
corpora (AsK-layer), which was lacking in knowledge. 
 
This new collected knowledge is modelled and the k-
models are submitted for confirmation and checked 
following a similar procedure as cited formerly. 
 
The triple procedure (collect, model and confirm) is 
iterated for all the corpora of lacking useful knowledge 
requested for a given layer of an Ask-frame. Then, the 
procedure is iterated for all the layers within the frame 
and for all the frames created for the research domain. 
During the third phase, the knowledge engineer verifies all 
the conditions for “acquisition completed”, as drawn here: 
 
When all the corpora requested for a layer of an AsK-
frame are collected, modelled and confirmed, the layer 
is considered “completed” and checked in the k-base. 
 
When all the layers of an AsK-frame are “completed”, 
the AsK-frame is declared “completed” and checked. 
 
When all the AsK-frames within a given domain are 
“completed”, the acquisition of the knowledge related 
to that domain is considered “completed”. 
 
When all the domain acquisitions are “completed”, the 
global acquisition procedure is declared “completed”. 
When the final condition is satisfied, the k-base is finished. 
It contains relevant and useful scientific knowledge, structured 
in order to ease the access for representation and reformulation. 
V. 
ASK APPLICATION TO A BISCUIT-MAKING DOMAIN 
We have applied the AsK framework to acquire knowledge 
in the domain of design and manufacturing of biscuits with 
satiety benefit. The work is in progress and it is carried out 
within a research project with industrial and academic partners. 
The materials used as initial sources for collecting 
knowledge are available documentation (reports, presentations 
of domain research contributions, notes, and also transcriptions 
of recorded individual or collective interviews with experts). 
Three teams of scientific experts (in Formulation, Nutritional 
characterization and Sensory analysis) and an industrial partner 
(in the biscuit-making domain) take part in the project. 
The method employed to acquire and structure scientific 
knowledge for each of the expertise domain suits the steps of 
the protocol mentioned in Section IV. Various k-models are 
built from initial sources and then submitted to the experts, for 
individual and group confirmation. The experts are interviewed 
at different stages during the acquisition process. Figure 2 
illustrates one k-model built for dough texture’s descriptors. 
This k-model is confirmed and placed in the Product sub-
layer of the AsK-frame “Dough processability”, created for the 
Formulation domain. Additional and more specific knowledge 
is collected regarding to each of the descriptors of the dough 
texture shown in this k-model. This knowledge is modelled in 
well-formatted electronic files, which contain pictographic, 
textual and structure-related information (keywords, links and 
bibliography used). An example is given for the ‘adhesiveness” 
descriptor, as pointed out in Figure 3. These electronic files are 
called knowledge sheets (k-sheets) and match the [8] meta-k-
models. They are created using a specific computational tool 
that we have developed to assist the e-k-book implementation. 
Easy to be accessed, the k-sheets facilitate the knowledge 
visualization during the acquisition process. They will be 
properly treated and used as elements in the e-k-book. 
K-models and k-sheets are established and then confirmed 
for all of the texture descriptors. Lack of useful knowledge for 
“Dough Processability” frame is identified with respect to the 
AsK framework. Then, corpora of knowledge for Hypothesis, 
Method, Instrument, Equipment and Results are acquired by 
means of k-sheet models to fill the layers of the given frame. 
 
 
Dough Processability 
elasticity 
cohesiveness 
stability 
granulosity 
stickiness 
consistance 
adhesiveness 
aspect 
sensory descriptors 
greasiness 
dough texture 
is characterised by 
Product 
Material 
Test 
 
Figure 2.  AsK placement for dough texture’s characteristics map (k-model) 
 
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 3.  K-sheet collected for the “adhesiveness” descriptor 
 
The example related to the evaluation of dough texture’s 
sensitive descriptors is inspired by [11] and concerns published 
scientific findings. So far, two cases have been encountered in 
our project: i) scientific knowledge is already validated by the 
specific-oriented community and ii) scientific knowledge is in 
process to be produced and/or published (tests are in process, 
results are not yet available or published). In the first case, the 
scientific discourse is clear and it eases the acquisition process. 
In the second, the discourse is in construction and as a result, 
the knowledge acquisition can be significantly penalized. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We have proposed here a framework (named AsK), which 
defines the seven corpora of knowledge (Initial data, Problem, 
Hypothesis, Tests, Results, Interpretation and Conclusion) that 
are necessary to be collected and modelled in order to acquire 
relevant scientific knowledge in the context of a U2I-KT [12]. 
With regard to these corpora, Ask offers a scientific-oriented 
[10] way to structure knowledge within the k-base, throughout 
the collection and the modelling process. Thus, when the 
acquisition procedure is completed, an organized k-base [8] 
containing all the necessary [9] corpora of useful and usable 
scientific knowledge [1] is made available for future treatments 
(industry-oriented reformulation, representation, and transfer). 
The major advantages of using the Ask framework can be 
summarized as follows: i) it fits for multi-domain knowledge 
acquisition in parallel; ii) it offers to the knowledge engineer a 
strategy for planning and preparing the interviews during the 
acquisition procedure; it helps him to set questions during these 
interviews, which provide relevant knowledge, structured in a 
scientific-oriented view, as presented in scientific publications; 
iii) AsK supplies a global view over the k-base configuration 
and a granular view on a given k-model within the k-base; iv) it 
provides a helpful technique to instantly situate an already built 
k-model into its context within the k-base; v) Ask provides 
information about the vacant parts of the k-base; it detects lack 
of or not yet available useful knowledge necessary to acquire; 
vi) it gives information about the k-base local or global status 
(in process/completed) at any time of the acquisition process. 
Moreover, the Ask framework allows listing extra information 
potentially useful for further research (such as complementary 
methods to use, new hypothesis emerged, results to correlate). 
New research programs can be proposed and consequently new 
related knowledge can be generated, acquired and integrated in 
the (evolving-designed) e-k-book. 
Further work will be dedicated to finish the acquisition 
process so that all the scientific findings will be available into a 
relevant k-base. Reformulation strategies and representation 
formats will be set up to make the acquired knowledge usable 
by industrialists and an e-k-book will be built for its transfer. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was carried out with financial support from the 
ANR France. The authors thank the BISENS project partners 
for all their contributions to the knowledge acquisition process. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
T.H. Davenport and L. Prusak, Working knowledge-How Organization 
Manage What They Know, 1998, MA: Harvard BS Press, pp. 100-104. 
[2] 
J.M. Beyer, “Research utilization: Bridging the gap between commu-
nities” in Journal of Management Inquiry, vol. 6, 1997, pp. 17–22. 
[3] 
J. Kang, M. Rhee, and K.H. Kang, “Revisiting knowledge transfer: 
Effects on knowledge characteristics on organizational effort for 
knowledge transfer”, in Experts Systems with Applications, vol. 37, n° 
12, 2010, pp. 8155-8160. 
[4] 
A. Agrawal, “University-to-industry knowledge transfer: literature 
review and unanswered questions”, in International Journal of 
Management Reviews, vol. 3, issue 4, 2001, pp. 285-302. 
[5] 
A. Hughes, “University-Industry Links and U.K. Science and Innovation 
Policy” in How Universities Promote Economic Growth (eds. S.Yusuf 
and K. Nabeshima), ch. 4, 2007, pp. 71-91. 
[6] 
W.M. Cohen and D.A. Levinthal, “Absorptive Capacity: A new 
perspective on learning and innovation”, Administrative Science 
Quarterly, vol. 35, 1990, pp. 128-152. 
[7] 
J.H. Boose, “A survey of knowledge acquisition techniques and tools” in 
Knowledge Acquisition, vol. 1, n°1, 1989, pp. 39-58. 
[8] 
N.R. Milton, “Knowledge acquisition in practice. A step-by-step guide”, 
ed. Springer, 2007, pp. 69-110. 
[9] 
C.B. Stetler, “Updating the Stetler model of research utilization to 
facilitate evidence-based practice” in Nursing Outlook, n° 49, 2001, pp. 
272–278. 
[10] J.Y. Cariou,  “La formation de l’esprit scientifique: trois axes théoriques, 
un outil pratique: DiPHTeRIC”, Bull. APBG, n° 2, 2002, pp. 279-320. 
[11] C. Petitjean, P. Roussel, C. Simonnot, S. Berland, P. Aymard, and C. 
Michon, “Recherche des descripteurs prédictifs de la machinabilité des 
pâtes moulées”, Poster Presentation, 60èmes JTIC, 2009. 
[12] E. Rasmussen, O. Moen, and M. Gulbrandsen, “Initiatives to promote 
commercialization of University Knowledge”, in Technovation, n° 26, 
2006, pp. 518-533. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

