Systems of Systems Concept in Knowledge Management 
 
Alexander Petrovich Kamyshanov 
Accounting and Audit Department  
Plekhanov Russian Economic University 
Moscow, Russian Federation 
e-mail: a_kamyshanov@rbcmail.ru 
Peter Ivanovich Kamyshanov 
Accounting and Audit Department  
Plekhanov Russian Economic University 
Moscow, Russian Federation 
e-mail: a_kamyshanov@rbcmail.ru
 
 
Abstract — The development of new acquisition technologies is 
important function of knowledge management. They are 
realizing via powerful computer tools such as the Internet 
interactive hypermedia or the Large Knowledge Collider. But 
except powerful tools new cognitive concepts and procedures 
should be synthesized for knowledge evolution. The Systems of 
Systems approach gives the possibility to design knowledge 
bases network. In the framework of this concept meta-level 
knowledge base construction procedures are described for 
some problems solutions.  
Keywords-Systems 
of 
Systems; 
knowledge 
acquisition 
technologies  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Knowledge management (KM) appeared and developed 
as the new research area in computer science in dialectical 
conjunction with philosophy, epistemology, and theory of 
management. In modern economy KM is based on 
information technologies and cognitive science. Key 
concepts of KM are knowledge and education that can be 
treated as the business educational and innovative 
intellectual products and services, which can be transferred 
for a high value return. Otherwise they are looked as the 
productive assets for high competitive enterprise. Research 
methods of KM such as the construction of ontology for 
representing the main categories and entities in particular 
scientific domain, the rules formalization for logic inference 
to acquire new knowledge, and others give the possibility to 
get the new insight on already formed fundamental 
knowledge bases of the physics and the chemistry. The 
design of models for the knowledge evolution and 
development is one of the items in knowledge management. 
Spreading Piaget cognitive development theory for 
knowledge bases the two components model was proposed 
in [1]. One component is presented by ever changing 
content and structures as the other is realized by 
unchangeable functions. 
II. 
THEORETICAL BACKROUND AND TOOLS FOR 
KNOWLEDGE ACQUISITION 
The discovering of sources for stable and unchangeable 
true knowledge with the aim to incorporate them into 
ontology is one of the main problems in knowledge 
management. Inherently concepts in every area of research 
resulted democratic discussions of scientists with equal 
rights for the truth. However, every time it is not possible to 
consider the positions of different scientific schools via 
creation stable and unchangeable functions in ontology. 
Next 
example 
illustrates 
this 
thesis. 
In 
financial 
management and accounting the main categories and entities 
are defined by national legislations and standards. On the 
contrary in nature sciences such as the physics and the 
chemistry there are now laws and rules signed by the head 
of one or another state. Analysis has shown that in these 
cases most truthful, reliable, and confirmed by experiments 
knowledge are published in the textbooks for universities 
and encyclopedias. This statement is based as on multistage 
reviewing processes, numerous qualified readers, and free 
access for upper pointed publish sources, so on the great 
editors’ responsibility before the future generations of 
students and researchers. No one can deceive the future.  
On other side, in many problem domains ever changing 
content and structures of the ontology are representing by e-
textbooks and various Wiki systems in the Internet 
hypermedia space [2]. The characteristic feature of these 
knowledge acquisition tools is the cooperative creation of 
new knowledge and paradigms by realizing every user 
possibility to change the content and items relations.  
In the Internet hypermedia space knowledge are coming 
through 
Socialization, 
Externalization, 
Combination, 
Internalization (so-called SECI-process), which consider a 
spiraling evolution interaction between explicit and tacit 
knowledge resulted by their synergy [3]. But the young 
students with non formed stable knowledge component can 
be overloaded with information. 
Following the new knowledge development paradigm, 
in which everyone is creating hypermedia content and 
information for Wikipedia and other bases, a learner or 
researcher has millions of information pieces at his 
fingertips varying in quality and relevance to the actual 
scientific work. Great amount of information may lead to 
the inability to discern between facts and concepts. The 
reason is the significant number of conflicting positions. 
Nevertheless the appearance of new Internet tribune for 
scientific discussions was the greatest achievement in 
democratization of science that accelerates the knowledge 
evolution. New research projects and programs are 
developing with the aim to raise the efficiency of knowledge 
acquisition systems. In European Union (EU) Framework 
Program 7 manages and coordinates the activity for creation 
the Large Knowledge Collider (LarKC). It is determined as 
11
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

a platform for massive distributed incomplete reasoning 
directed to remove the scalability barriers of currently 
existing systems for Semantic Web [4]. 
So in our days two approaches for knowledge 
acquisition and development are realizing simultaneously. 
One is based on the Internet interactive multimedia 
hyperspace, 
while 
other 
is 
presented 
by 
LarKC 
technologies. 
Thus the procedures synthesis for acquisition new 
knowledge by utilizing the potentials of LarKC and the 
Internet becomes extremely important item of agenda. 
Epistemology methods and the history of science have 
demonstrated that new knowledge appears as the results of 
hard experimental work that causes the evolution of insight 
within the problem domain of particular science. Otherwise 
the emergence of new paradigm gives the possibility to 
develop new theories. In some sciences, for example in 
mathematics, new knowledge results the hard theoretical 
work with already existing knowledge bases.  
III. 
SYSTEMS OF SYSTEMS CONCEPT FOR KNOWLEDGE 
BASES  
A. Systems of Systems Engineering 
Every science can be looked as a complex system 
composed of subsystems. Each is characterized by hierarchy 
of interacting and networking components formed by 
concepts, laws, entities, and atomic terms described in 
ontology and united via logic inference constrains. 
Knowledge system of particular science is operating and 
coordinating as in conjunction with multiple objectives, so 
to evolutional perspectives. In the physics a hierarchy or 
continuum of laws as distinct systems or disciplines that are 
cooperating and interdependent was investigated in [5]. In 
biology system approach was introduced at the end of 
1960th decade by the fundamental works [6][7]. The 
philosophy of systems engineering applied to real world had 
been developed in [8]. 
Traditionally every science was the logically separate 
knowledge system with little interdependence with others. 
The progress in knowledge management and information 
technologies is rapidly changing our world. Close 
relationship of different sciences and their interactions are 
the topics of current agenda. 
Systems of Systems (SoS) engineering (SoSE) and 
analysis had appeared and developed in conjunction with 
space operations as well as large scale information systems 
and software design for them [9][10]. Research envisioned 
for SoS includes investigation oriented to the creation of 
new systems engineering methodologies to cope with SoS 
evolution and emergent knowledge associated with it.  
Meta-model design is one of the powerful tools worked 
out in the framework of systems research [11]. Creatively 
applying it to SoSE for knowledge management we can 
describe the problem in the form of monotonous knowledge 
base for particular scientific domain.  
Knowledge base KB constructed from logic declarations 
is considered monotonous, if for every declaration  and  
the following statements are correct: 
if KB |=   then KB   |=  .                       (1) 
In the case when declaration  breaks the KB 
monotonous property, in the ontology this declaration is 
considered as the new atomic term. The no contradiction 
logic is the main property for every scientific problem 
domain. It is ensured by collective efforts of researchers 
working all over the world in the various sciences. 
As the problem knowledge base has been constructed, 
new scientific domains necessary for the solution should be 
investigated. In these domains monotonous segments of 
knowledge bases related to the problem should be 
determined. After that all segments are united in new 
monotonous meta-level knowledge base. Finally solution of 
the problem can be defined in the form of theorem proving 
by resolution method. 
To illustrate the knowledge evolution model for the 
chemistry and the physics we can look at the category of the 
atomicity or the valence. The atomicity is important as for 
creation of semiconductor devices, so for determination the 
molecular structure of chemicals. It appeared at 1425 in the 
framework of medieval hermetic art. Later this category got 
the development in the chemistry and in the physics. In our 
days valence has found final formalization in quantum 
mechanics, where complex mathematical instruments and 
semantic phenomenological Pauli principle define it [12]. In 
this case, Pauli principle may be considered as an example 
of construction the meta-level knowledge base for 
description the atomicity properties.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
At the same time most other alchemy concepts modern 
chemists and physicists regard as pseudoscience.  
B. Systems of Systems Knowledge Engineering in Cardio 
Physiology 
There is one more example. At 1560th in Spain the great 
Renaissance doctor Andreas Vesalius tragically had 
discovered that human heart could operate independently 
from other systems of organism. Nevertheless, in this case 
the laws of hydromechanics for blood flow had to be 
realized.  
In quite mode the minute blood flow volume over the 
man healthy heart is about 3 ~ 4  10 –3 m3. The blood 
density () is approximately 1050 ~ 1064 kg/m3. The 
frequency of the cardiac rate at quite mode is near 72 strikes 
Quantum mechanics 
Hermetic Art 
Physics 
Chemistry 
Figure 1. Knowledge bases network for definition the atomicity. 
12
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

per minute. Under hard physical load the frequency of the 
cardiac rate may increase till 210 strikes per minute and the 
minute blood flow volume rises up to 4010–3 m3.  The 
square of the aortic valve, over which blood leaves the 
heart, is about 310–4 m2. If the circle with the same square 
approximates valve’s form, then the diameter of the circle d 
will be equal  
d = 2  (S / )0.5  210 –2 m .                   (2) 
Under this condition the blood flow (BF) over heart 
equals 3.610 –3 m3 and the initial velocity of the flow V0 
will be  
V0 =BF / S =3.610 –3 / 310–4 =1.2 m p.s. =720 m p. h. (3) 
For the minute blood flow volume equals 4010 –3 m3,  
V0  will be 8000 m p. h.  
In the vessels blood liquid flow is considered to be 
continuous. At the aorta, by which arterial vascular system 
begins, the mean value of the hydrodynamic pressure for 
healthy heart is about 100 mm hg. col. According 
cardiology data in the right heart atrium, where venous 
loops are ending, the hydrodynamic pressure approximately 
equals 0 mm hg. col. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In [13] the theorem had been proved that in the venous 
loop of blood circulatory system the flow’s pressure is 
defined by the laws of hydrostatics realizing in pulse mode.  
As the consequence from the theorem, the continuity of 
blood flow over different organs in the body is provided by 
the venous valves operating in the definite way. Errors in 
the algorithm controlling the valves activity or their damage 
can cause the diseases of venous system, the heart failure, 
and trophic ulcer. 
IV. 
META LEVEL KNOWLEDGE BASE AS HIDDEN 
VARIABLE 
A. Knowledge Base Engineering for Brain-Computer 
Interface 
At the beginning of 1990th IBM, Hewlett Packard, and 
Sony corporations started the sales of color monitors for the 
personal computers. These devices experimentally and 
publicly had demonstrated that human nerve fiber in optic 
track can transmit visual information (VI) with bit rate more 
than 135 109  1012 bit/sec. 
There are 1280 pixels over monitor horizontal and 1024 
over vertical. Machine word in 32 bits executes the colors 
and brightness code. It is known from physiology, that more 
than 24 Hertz frame frequency is required to create illusion 
of moving picture. Thus 
VI  24  1280  1024  (231 + 230 + 229 +...+ 20)  
 31 457 280  4.3  109  135 109  1012 bit/sec.     (4) 
From physics is known, that visual signals are 
transmitting in frequency spectrum spreading from 41014 
till 81014 Hertz [14][15]. In common case healthy man and 
woman can get visual information traffic with lowest 
probability magnitudes of the first and second type errors. 
At the same time, in [16] was pointed out that current 
brain–computer interface (BCI) had maximum information 
transfer rate up to 10 - 25 bits/min. This limited capacity 
could be valuable for people, whose severe disabilities 
prevent them from conventional communication method. 
There were declared, that future progress in multimedia 
neurophysiology interface development will be possible via 
involving neurobiology, engineering, mathematics, and 
computer science. 
It is interesting fact that significant number of 
neurophysiologists has quite reliable visual systems 
providing lowest probability magnitudes of the first and 
second type errors for visual perception. Nevertheless they 
are persisting in following the concepts that nerve signals 
are transmitting by electrical impulses with voltage in few 
mill volts and maximum frequency in 500 Hertz. There is no 
one computer or telecommunication engineer, who can 
provide reliable transmission of the electrical signals with 
such parameters. 
To solve this problem in [17] the next network with 
meta-level knowledge base as hidden variable was proposed 
[18]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The investigation of the Internet hypermedia space had 
shown that to overcome the emergent difficulties new 
knowledge 
bases 
of 
biochronotopology 
and 
psychronotopology should be executed as hidden variable 
[19]. Concepts and categories defining by these knowledge 
bases could be very important for new research. 
Cardio physiology 
Cardiology 
Hydromechanics 
Hydrostatics 
Hydrodynamics 
Figure 2. Knowledge bases topology for venous loop hydromechanics  
               in blood circulatory system. 
Meta-level knowledge 
base as hidden variable 
 
Einstein 
Theories 
Electrodynamics 
Information 
Theory 
Visual system 
physiology 
Figure 3. Cognitive model for visual system with meta-level 
knowledge base as hidden variable. 
 
13
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

Examination of bio chronotopology category had led to new 
problems.  
B. The Problems of the “Time” Category 
Three dimensions of space and one dimension time had 
formed human perception of environmental world. “Time-
dimension” is directed from past to present and from present 
to future. It is regarded, that such “time” direction is 
determined by “cause-effect” relation between events in 
physical world [20][21]. At another side the physical 
approach to the “time” category is not predetermined. In this 
science the “time” category has several different meanings.  
First of all, “time” is looked at as independent 
continuous parameter in mathematical equations describing 
evolutions of physical systems.  
The next, 
“time” is 
presenting the 
scale 
for 
determination the consequence of physical events. There are 
several types of such scales utilizing now. Astronomic scale 
is the main one. It defines the time intervals through the 
consequence of astronomic events, such as the rise and the 
setting of the Sun, consequent, following one after another 
two culminations of the observed star over the Earth 
particular meridian. Produced on the base of quantum 
frequency generators atomic “time scales” are also wide 
spread.  
Additional meaning of the category “time” was realized 
in quantum mechanics, where the “fifth”, the “sixth” and so 
on “time-dimensions” were introduced for “space-time 
continuum” [22][23]. These additional “time parameters” 
were orthogonal to traditional linear “time”, and so the 
attempts were done to overcome the quantum uncertainty 
relation. However, as this aim had been reached, new 
approach had born out uncertainty in Einstein relativity 
theories [24]. Under the condition of “three-dimensional 
time” there wasn’t presented any formula for the speed of 
light c determination. The speed of light c is considered as 
one of the fundamental physical constants. For authors’ 
opinion, these scientific ideas have a great potential for 
development [25]. 
While in mathematical equations “time” is continuous 
variable, “time” determined by various physical scales has a 
discreet property. 
Quantum physics characterizes atom as the system 
composed by nucleus with electrons’ shells. Atomic systems 
can be united into complex molecular systems (Systems of 
Systems) existing in volatile SoS environment. 
If the atomic quantum frequency standard determines the 
category “time” in molecular SoS, then serious problems 
can appear in description of molecular SoS evolution. 
Following N. Bohr postulates the frequency of the emitting 
radiation υ is equal to the quantity (Ei – Ej) / h [26]. 
Here Ei , Ej  - are the total energies of the stable 
electron’s orbits, h – is Planck constant. 
Under such approach, for physical “time” scale 
determined by atomic quantum frequency generator is 
impossible to define the “time” parameter characterizing 
evolution of the electron in atom at the stable energy state. 
Following modern quantum mechanics paradigm in the 
coordinate system connected with this electron it has neither 
past, nor future only present continuous. Moreover, in atom, 
for electron existing on the stable energy level the “cause-
effect” relation is undetermined. In our days there are no 
technical tools defining category “physical time” for 
electron in a stable atom system. 
Physical indetermination of “time” parameter for stable 
electrons’ orbits put forward the question about physical 
meaning of parameter t in Schrödinger equation for wave 
function Ψ (x, y, z, t) [27] 
     ħ2                                                            
(-  ×∆+W(x, y, z, t))×Ψ(x, y, z, t)=i×ħ   Ψ (x, y, z, t).(5) 
    2m                                                          t 
Here ∆ - is Laplace operator, x, y, z, m – are electron’s 
coordinates and mass, W (x, y, z, t) – is the potential energy 
of electron in atom, ħ= h /(2× ); i =  -1 . 
Chemical elements with significant atom numbers and 
protein macromolecules with complex three-dimension 
architecture have electrons’ shells with complex topology. 
Schrödinger equations should be integrated for them [28]. 
The problem is that in modern textbooks for universities the 
“time” scales construction procedures for quantum objects 
don’t determine. In control science this case is describing by 
fuzzy system paradigm [29][30][31]. 
V. 
PERSPECTIVES FOR KNOWLEDGE BASES SYSTEMS OF 
SYSTEMS CONCEPT 
A. Knowledge Management for Bio Cybernetics 
Bio cybernetics had demonstrated the possibility to 
model the complex biological system activity on the base of 
physical, chemical, hydromechanics’ laws and the theory of 
automatic control. The results exhibited the experimental 
proofs for modeling human blood circulation at the definite 
range of environmental parameters were published in [32] 
[33][34] at 1970. There were shown that circulatory system 
dynamic could be modeled by the system of linear 
differential equations 
                                                  
X = A (t) × X + B × u .                         (6) 
The research work for modeling cardio system activity 
continued in the next decades [35][36]. The electro-
chemical model for the cardiac cell utilizing the system of 
differential equations with more than 50 parameters was 
proposed in [37]. The software tool to simulate cardiac cell 
activity was described and demonstrated in [38]. 
But as 40 years had passed no experimental results were 
published concerning the biological organs or the systems of 
any animal or human providing the integration of 
differential equations demanded for the blood circulation 
control.  
The problem is extremely important for modern 
physiology. Several hundred millions of people are 
suffering from diseases of heart and circulatory system. To 
overcome the emergent difficulties the knowledge bases 
network is proposed, see Figure 4. 
For authors’ opinion, in nature the control algorithm for 
blood circulatory system is constructed on the base of fuzzy 
rules [30] in conjunction with multilevel qualitative  
14
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The problem is extremely important for mode 
 
reasoning trees [39] and qualitative induction logic 
inference [40]. Control signals are realizing as by 
bioelectrical impulses so by biochemical agents. With 
sufficient details they are described in the textbooks for 
medical universities. 
B. The Elementary Particles Physics Problems 
One more fundamental problem is studying in the 
modern textbooks for the chemistry and the physics. It is 
known from these sources that as hydrogen atom so neutron 
can be split on proton and electron. But while a hydrogen 
atom is considered to be a stable physical or chemical 
system, on the contrary, a free neutron has half life period 
about 10 minutes. The problem is that the properties of 
hydrogen atom are investigated by the chemistry or by the 
atomic physics, while properties of neutron are the subject of 
the elementary particles physics. This case also can be 
described by the network with monotonous meta-level 
knowledge base as hidden variable. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It was written in [41] that over the 20th century 
electronics had exhausted completely the atom model 
consisting of electrons orbiting the nucleus. New ideas are 
wanted to improve the matter structure model. Modern 
powerful computer tools such as the Internet interactive 
hypermedia space and LarKC can be utilized in the 
framework of SoSE concept to solve this problem. Scientific 
community 
has 
the 
real 
opportunity 
to 
estimate 
experimentally the efficiency of these acquisition tools and 
approaches. 
New computer technologies provide the possibility to get 
new insights, which are determining as the new type of 
knowledge. So they give a chance to modify the current 
theoretical bases in various sciences. New insights have to be 
represented in explicit symbolic form [42]. Therefore, for 
authors’ opinion, the Internet interactive hypermedia space is 
more suitable for discovering new scientific concepts than 
LarKC operating in the frame of monotonous logic 
formalism.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In general knowledge acquisition should be resulted by 
the development of new theories and their public 
recognition. Thus SECI processes will get their logical final. 
Modern computer technologies give the possibility to 
accelerate them. Systems of Systems engineering for 
construction the new knowledge bases can be applied for 
complex problems yet not solved. 
In knowledge management SoSE concept has not only 
the advantages but the difficulties as well. For example, 
there are very few cardiologists realizing that the existence 
of the correct elements is not sufficient condition for 
reliable, correct operation of the control system. Stable 
functioning automatic control system can be designed from 
unstable units. It is necessary to know that blood circulatory 
system is referred to nonlinear, multi loops control systems, 
in which auto oscillation and sliding modes can exist. Under 
these conditions the stable operation of the cardiovascular 
system is determined not by electrocardiogram signals 
registration, the arterial pressure and pulse frequency 
measurement but by the methods of control theory.  
On the other side, no more than one hundred researchers 
in the automatic control domain possess the knowledge 
about the structure of blood circulatory system, the 
peculiarities of the arterial and the venous vascular loops, 
about biophysical and biochemical processes in the blood. 
So in the case, when, for example, high level ontology in 
cardiology with great efforts and expenses will be created, 
none scientist will be able to work with full-scale version. 
To great concern, this statement is true for the problems of 
the Elementary particles physics and the fuzzy logic 
systems.  
Practice has shown, the collective research work is the 
most effective way for unification the ontology of different 
sciences. As the result, new knowledge management 
methods will appear. These methods must be published in 
the textbooks for universities.  
Now Systems of Systems engineering is intensively 
executed in financial management. For authors’ opinion, in 
this area international cooperation will be very fruitful.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Stickel, M. Ebner, and A. Holzinger, “Useful oblivion 
versus information overload in e-learning elxamples in the 
context of Wiki systems,” Journal of Computing and 
Informational Technology, vol. 16, Dec. 2008, pp. 271-277. 
Cardio physiology 
Circulatory system 
physiology 
Meta-level knowledge 
base as hidden variable 
Control theory 
Artificial 
Intelligence 
Figure 4. Cognitive model for circulatory system control with  
       meta-level knowledge base as hidden variable. 
Meta-level 
knowledge 
base as hidden 
variable 
 
Elementary 
particles 
Physics 
Atomic 
Physics 
Chemistry 
Figure 5. Cognitive model for hydrogen atom stability. 
15
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

[2] H. Maurer, “Web-based knowledge management,” IEEE 
Computer, vol. 31, (3), 1998, pp. 122-123. 
[3] I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi, The Knowledge Creating 
Company. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1995. 
[4] M. Witbrock, “Acquiring and using large scale knowledge,” 
Proc. 32nd Int. Conf. on Information Technology Interfaces 
(ITI2010), Univ. Comp. Centre, Univ. of Zagreb, Jun. 2010, 
pp. 37-42. 
[5] R. Feynman, The Character of Physical Law, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1965. 
[6] M. Mesarovic (Ed.), Systems Theory and Biology, New York: 
Springer-Verlag, 1968. 
[7] M. Mesarovic, D. Macko, and Y. Takahara, Theory of 
Hierarchical, Multilevel Systems, New York: Academic 
Press, 1970. 
[8] A. Gheorghe, Applied Systems Engineering, New York: John 
Wiley & Sons, 1982. 
[9] A. Sage, Systems Engineering, New York: John Wiley & 
Sons, 1992. 
[10] A. Sousa-Poza, S. Kovacic, and Ch. Keating, “System of 
Systems engineering an emerging multidiscipline,” Int. J. 
System of Systems Engineering, vol. 1, Jan. 2008, pp.01–17.  
[11] A. Hall III, Metasystem Methodology: A New Synthesis and 
Unification, New York: Pergamon Press, 1989.  
[12] J. Bell, Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987. 
[13] A. Kamyshanov, “Semantic model design for veins’ loop by 
the logic formalism of Artificial Intelligence,” Proc. 16th 
IASTED Int. Conf. on Applied Modelling and Simulation 
(AMS2007), ACTA Press, Aug. 2007, pp. 336-341. 
[14] J. Seleznev, The Bases of the Elementary Physics, Moscow: 
Nauka, 1974.  
[15] S. Palmer, Vision Science: Photons to Phenomenology, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1999. 
[16] J. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, D. McFarland, G. Pfurtscheller, 
and 
T.Vaughan, 
“Brain-computer 
interfaces 
for 
communication and control,” Clinical Neurophysiology: 
Official 
Journal 
of 
the 
International 
Federation 
Neurophysiology, vol. 113, Jun. 2002, pp. 767 – 791. 
[17] A. Kamyshanov, “Meta-model design for Internet multimedia 
neurophysiology interface,” Proc. of 3rdAMS2009, Asia 
International Conference on Modelling and Symulation 
(AMS2009), IEEE Com. Societ. CPS, May 2009, pp. 632-
636. 
[18] S. Russell, J. Binder, D. Koller, and K. Kanazawa, “Local 
learning in probabilistic networks with hidden variables,” 
Proc. of 14th International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence (IJCAI-95), Montreal: Morgan Kaufmann, 1995 
pp. 1146-1152. 
[19] A. Dubrov, Symmetry of Biorythms and Reactivity, New 
York, London, Paris: Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, 
1988. 
[20] J. Dorling, "The Dimensionality of time," American Journal 
of Physics, vol. 38, (4), 1970, pp. 539-540. 
[21] Yu.Vladimirov, N. Mitskievich, and J. Horsky, The Space, 
Time, and Gravitation, Moscow: Mir Publishers, 1987. 
[22] F. Tangherlini, "Atoms in higher dimensions," Nuovo 
Cimento, vol. 14, (27), 1963, pp. 636-651. 
[23] Xiadong Chen, “A New Interpretation of Quantum Theory | 
Time as Hidden Variable,” Department of Physics, University 
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT-84112, 1999. Available on: 
http://authors.aps.org/eprint/files/1999/Feb/aps1999feb10_00
4/auxiliary/New_Interp.ps 
[24] A. Einstein, The Collected Scientific Works, v. 1-4, Moscow: 
Nauka, 1965-1967. 
[25] R. Penrose, The Large, the Small and Human Mind, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.  
[26] N. Bohr, The Three Articles about Spectrums and Atom 
Structure, translated from German, Moscow, 1923. 
[27] Available on: http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/HBASE 
/quantum/  
[28] M. Lockwood, Mind, Brain, and the Quantum, Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell, 1989.  
[29] L. Zadeh, Fuzzy Sets and Application, New York: John Wiley 
& Sons, 1987. 
[30] R. Yager and L. Zadeh, An Introduction to Fuzzy Logic 
Applications in Intelligence Systems, New York: Kluwer 
Academy Publishers, 1991. 
[31] L. Zadeh, “Fuzzy logic, neural networks, and soft 
computing,” Comm. ACM, vol. 37, (3), 1994, pp. 77-84.  
[32] B. Petrovskij, V. Shumakov, V. Novoselcev, E. Shtengold, 
V.Baikovskij, L. and A. Dartau, “Vital important human 
organism functions providing is the base of Artificial Heart 
automatic control,” Proc. IFAC  1st Int. Symp. Technological 
and Biological Problems of Control, 1968, Erevan, USSR, 
Bioelectrical 
Control. 
Man 
and 
Automatic 
Systems, 
(Moscow: Nauka (Science), 1970, (in Russian), pp. 278-287. 
[33] J. Krasner, P. Nardella, and P. Voykydis, “Cybernetic 
problems of the device for physiological control of Artificial 
Heart,” Proc. IFAC  1st Int. Symp. Technological and 
Biological Problems of Control, 1968, Erevan, USSR,  
Bioelectrical 
Control. 
Man 
and 
Automatic 
Systems, 
(Moscow: Nauka (Science), 1970, (in Russian), pp. 265-275. 
[34] W. Pickering, P. Nikiforuk, and J. Merriman,  “The Use of 
analog computer for analysis of control mechanism in cardio 
vascular system,” Proc. IFAC  1st Int. Symp. Technological 
and Biological Problems of Control, 1968, Erevan, USSR,  
Bioelectrical 
Control. 
Man 
and 
Automatic 
Systems, 
(Moscow: Nauka (Science), 1970, (in Russian), pp. 408-421. 
[35] C. Luo and Y. Rudy, “A Dynamic model of the cardiac 
ventricular action potential,” Part I, II, Circulation Research, 
vol. 74, (6), 1994, pp. 1071-1113. 
[36] Y Lecarpentier, C. Coirault, and D. Chemla, “Regulation 
cellulaire et moleculaire de la contruction cardiaque,” 
Medecine Therapeutique, vol. 2, (2), 1996, pp. 113-122 
[37] R. Roche, R. Lamanna, M. Delgado, F. Rocaries, and Y. 
Hamman, “Calcium homestasis and membrane potential in 
cardiac myocite: an electrochemical model,” Proc. of 5th 
EUROSIM Congress on Modelling and Simulation, France, 
Paris, 2004. 
[38]  R. Roche, R. Lamanna, M. Delgado, F. Rocaries, Y. 
Hamman, and F. Peker, “A Software tool for the simulation of 
a cardiac cell,” Proc. 16th IASTED Int. Conf. on Applied 
Modelling and Simulation (AMS2007), ACTA Press, Aug. 
2007, pp. 336-341. 
[39] B. Kuipers, Qualitative Reasoning: Modeling and Simulation 
with Incomplete Knowledge, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT 
Press, 1994 
[40] D. Šuc, “Machine reconstruction of human control strategies,” 
Frontiers Artificial Intelligence Appl., vol. 99, Amsterdam: 
IOS Press, 2003. 
[41] D. Packard, The HP Way. How Bill Hewlett and I Built Our 
Company, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard Business 
School Press, 1995. 
[42] I. Bratko, “An Assesment of machine learning methods for 
robotic discovery,” Journal of Computing and Informational 
Technology, vol. 16, Dec. 2008, pp. 247-254. 
 
16
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

