Enhancing Knowledge Flow by Mediated Mapping 
Between Conceptual Structures 
 
Peteris Rudzajs 
Institute of Applied Computer Systems 
Riga Technical University 
Riga, Latvia 
peteris.rudzajs@rtu.lv 
Marite Kirkova 
Department of System Theory and Design 
Riga Technical University 
Riga, Latvia 
marite.kirikova@cs.rtu.lv
 
 
Abstract. Intra- and inter-institutional knowledge flow usually 
is hindered by a number of mutually related knowledge 
barriers. Removing some of these barriers may enhance 
knowledge flow and thus open new opportunities for 
cooperation. In this paper we illustrate how indirect 
conceptual mappings supported by a software tool can remove 
some of knowledge flow barriers and have a positive impact on 
the knowledge flow. The approach described in the paper is 
presented in the context of cooperation between industrial and 
educational institutions in the area of information and 
communication technologies. 
Keywords- knowledge flow, concept structures, competence 
framework; mediated comparison; study courses; job positions 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
Knowledge flow is a process whereby knowledge is 
passed 
between 
people 
or 
knowledge 
processing 
mechanisms [1], [2]. There are a number of barriers that may 
hinder the flow of knowledge. In [2] these barriers have been 
grouped into 5 categories: knowledge characteristics (such as 
causal ambiguity and non-valid knowledge), knowledge 
source barriers, knowledge receiver barriers, contextual 
barriers, and insufficient mechanisms. This paper addresses 
only two of these categories, namely, knowledge receiver 
barriers and contextual barriers. The knowledge receiver 
barrier is minimized by raising absorptive capacity of 
knowledge flow receivers. Insufficient mechanism is 
addressed by proposing an information technology solution 
that facilitates knowledge exchange between two parties. 
The issues are discussed in the context of Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) knowledge exchange 
between industrial organizations and educational institutions 
operating in European Union (EU) countries. The main focus 
is on the fit between knowledge/competence/skills demand 
of industrial organizations and knowledge/competence/skills 
offer by educational institutions. 
Industrial organizations (further in the text - Industry) 
usually maintain the so-called job position framework that 
consists of a list of positions and their descriptions in terms 
of responsibilities and competencies. On the other hand 
educational institutions (further – Universities) maintain 
course descriptions in terms of topics covered, learning 
outcomes, obtainable knowledge, and skills. Different 
concept systems are used for the description of Industry job 
positions and University courses. This causes a knowledge 
receiver barrier - low absorptive capacity (lack of sufficient 
related knowledge to assess the value of transferred 
knowledge) for both parties in exchanging competence 
knowledge. Because of this barrier University and Industry 
find it difficult to “understand” each other [3]. Taking into 
consideration that competence is becoming a kind of 
“currency” in the job market [4], there is a need to compare 
competence demand from Industry and competence offer 
from University in order to see if the university can satisfy 
competence needs of Industry. This requires improving 
absorptive capacity of both partners. The purpose of this 
paper is to show that comparison of competence demand and 
offer becomes possible (the absorptive capacity barrier can 
be lowered or removed) if standardized competence 
frameworks are utilized as a mediating conceptual structure 
between “languages” of Industry and University. The use of 
the framework is practically possible only if a supporting 
information technology is available. In other words – 
addressing the absorptive capacity as a cause of receiver 
barrier requires addressing the insufficient mechanism 
barrier, too. 
The method proposed in this paper extends the mediated 
comparison method described in [5] by utilization of several 
mediating frameworks. The extension is made in order to 
facilitate knowledge exchange not only about competencies, 
but also about ICT tools and technologies used in University 
and Industry. In the paper the main emphasis is on a 
developed prototype supporting mediated competence 
comparison with respect to Industry job descriptions and 
University courses. The prototype is a part of a collaboration 
support system that has been designed with the purpose to 
maintain and exchange information between University and 
Industry [3], [6], [7], [8], [9]. It helps to remove another 
Industry-University knowledge flow barrier, namely, the 
lack of mechanism for knowledge exchange [7]. 
The paper is structured as follows. Related work is 
briefly discussed in Section II. In Section III, we describe 
how conceptual structures which have a potential to be 
absorbed by actors (people and technologies) of knowledge 
36
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

flow [2] were identified. In Section IV, the method of 
mediated mapping between conceptual structures is 
discussed. In Section V, the prototype that is used for 
enhancing knowledge flow is described. In Section VI, 
preliminary results are presented. In Section VII, expected 
contributions, research limitations and some directions of 
future work are presented. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Research in the field of knowledge exchange between 
University and Industry has already been done by developing 
the architecture of University-Industry collaboration support 
system and its services [3], [6], [7], [8], [9]. The architecture 
identifies the main areas of action to support knowledge 
exchange, i.e., (1) knowledge acquisition services, (2) study 
course 
services 
(including 
services 
for 
developing 
standardized study course descriptions), (3) knowledge 
representation services, (4) repository services, and (5) 
analysis services for the analysis of collected information. 
The architecture incorporates the following approaches to 
bridge the gap between University and Industry [8]: (1) the 
use of standardized competence frameworks, (2) the use of 
tools that automatically interpret (“translate”) competences 
expressed in Industry terms into competences expressed in 
University terms, (3) giving an opportunity for industry to 
evaluate technology-oriented elective courses directly or 
indirectly (course evaluation prototype has been developed), 
(4) equipping Industry with University insights in skill 
development trends. The “gap” here means a difference 
between University and Industry in understanding the 
essence of knowledge, skills, and competences. The 
evaluation of technology-oriented elective courses revealed 
that Industry finds it hard to understand the terms used in 
course descriptions, thus in this paper we focus on 
knowledge exchange about knowledge/competence/skills 
demand and knowledge/competence/skills offer by utilizing 
(2), (3) and (5) areas of action: (2) by means of study course 
description with standardized competencies, (3) by using 
standardized competence frameworks and (5) by using 
prototype to identify courses corresponding to specific job 
position (see Section V).  
Since the knowledge representation services is the core 
for maintaining knowledge flow between University and 
Industry in the architecture of the collaboration support 
system, some standards for representing knowledge should 
be selected. In the case of competence information exchange, 
competence standards (frameworks) should be considered. 
Several competence frameworks have been developed by 
different professional and academic organizations and 
societies, such as European e-Competence framework (e-CF, 
developed in the European Union) [10], Skills Framework 
for Information Age (SFIA, developed in the United 
Kingdom) [11], Club Informatique des Grandes Entreprises 
Françaises framework for job profiles (CIGREF, developed 
in France, a short description available in [12]), Advanced IT 
Training System (AITTS, developed in Germany, a short 
description available in [12]) as well as curriculum models 
developed by ACM [13]. Some of these frameworks can be 
mapped both to the descriptions of University courses and 
job positions. Based on analysis of competence frameworks 
[5], [6] the e-CF was selected as the most appropriate 
framework because e-CF has from cooperation between 
representatives of Industry and University of several EU 
countries, therefore it can relatively easily be absorbed by 
Industry and University operating inside boundaries of EU 
[5], [14], [15].  Studies of related work did not reveal any 
approaches that would try to obtain mappings between 
University 
courses 
and 
Industry 
job 
positions 
by 
incorporating some standardized competence frameworks. In 
this paper we explain how mediated mapping is used to map 
courses and job positions. 
Domain ontologies are commonly used for representing 
conceptualizations [16]. If the job positions and study 
courses are represented as ontologies and we intend to 
identify how they are related, then mapping between 
ontologies should be established. Before establishing the 
mapping we propose to add the competence context [17] that 
states that mapping is done based on competencies, tools, 
and technologies required for job position and acquired in 
University courses. As a result, mapping between job 
positions and study courses is becoming indirect. Instead of 
using ontologies (the approach still requires deeper research 
of ontology matching problems [18]), we propose to use 
hierarchical conceptual structures representing controlled 
vocabularies [19] for job position frameworks, university 
study programs, tools and technologies, and competence 
frameworks. This leads to the use of simpler hierarchical 
structures which are easier to compare by means of initial 
mapping between element values of conceptual structures (in 
further text we use “mapping of conceptual structures”). 
Because Industry does not maintain their own ontologies to 
formally 
define 
knowledge 
and 
skills, 
standardized 
competence frameworks were used to facilitate initial 
knowledge exchange and to obtain initial mapping between 
courses and job positions. 
III. 
IDENTIFICATION OF  CONCEPTUAL STRUCTURES 
Basic conceptual structures relevant to University and 
Industry include: (1) a job position framework (which 
provides systematization of job descriptions), (2) University 
study programs and (3) a competence framework (e-CF in 
this case). Describing a job position in Industry, information 
about knowledge of existing tools and technologies (T&T) is 
often included in descriptions. A similar situation is in 
University – knowledge about specific T&T is included in 
course content. Therefore it is relevant to include 
information about T&T in course descriptions. Due to the 
fact that competence frameworks do not include information 
about specific T&T used in particular competence, the 
development of T&T catalogue or selection of existing one 
should be considered in order to bring conceptually closer 
the descriptions of job positions and University courses. 
Several catalogues for describing T&T are available, e.g., 
Google directory, Yahoo directory, O*net Resource Centre 
[20] tools & technologies etc. We have selected a catalogue 
provided by the O*net Resource Centre for its simplicity that 
is a very important feature of a catalogue used for developing 
basic approach for mapping conceptual structures. It should 
37
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

be mentioned that O*net has developed a list of job positions 
and the possible corresponding T&T used in the position. 
We have filtered out of it T&T used in job positions of ICT 
domain. 
The basic conceptual structures mentioned at the 
beginning of this Section (a total of 4) usually are 
hierarchical (see Fig. 1) and this structural similarity is 
utilized in mapping study courses and job positions to 
corresponding competence framework and T&T catalogue.  
IV. 
MEDIATED MAPPING  BETWEEN CONCEPTUAL 
STRUCTURES 
After the main conceptual structures (see Fig. 1) are 
identified, the next step is to consider how these structures 
could be mapped inside the organization to describe 
University study courses and Industry job positions. In 
general, two sets of structures are proposed. The first set 
(SET1) consists of conceptual structures used in Industry, 
and the second set (SET2) is used in University. Various 
competence frameworks and T&T catalogues can be used in 
organization, but in this paper we assume that Industry and 
University use the same conceptual structures for the 
description of job positions and courses (namely, e-CF and 
O*net T&T). 
Considering that SET1 consists of such elements as a job 
position framework, e-CF and T&T catalogue, the following 
mappings between the elements can be introduced (see SET 
1 in Fig. 2): 
 
Job position framework is mapped to e-CF  
(I1I2 in Fig. 2) because every position in the 
organization is described in terms of  standardized 
competences; 
 
Job position framework is mapped to T&T  
(I1I3 in Fig. 2) because every position in the 
organization requires the knowledge of some tools 
and technologies; 
 
e-CF is mapped  to T&T  (I2I3 in Fig. 2) 
because potentially every competence requires some 
knowledge of  tools & technologies. 
The same options are in SET2. 
Mapping between elements of SET1 and SET2 is necessary 
in order to identify courses relevant for a particular job 
position (and v.v.). The possible mapping options and 
explanation are considered in Table I. Options 2 - 4 identify 
the possible mediating conceptual structures that are needed 
to detect the courses relevant for a particular job position. 
“Mediating conceptual structure” implies that indirect 
mapping between a job position and university course is 
based on other conceptual structures, such as competence 
frameworks and T&T catalogues. Taking into consideration 
that different organizations can prefer different conceptual 
structures to formalize knowledge and skills, four mapping 
options have been identified to demonstrate that fact. The list 
of options can be extended by the needs of a particular 
organization. Further in the paper the focus is on option 2 
because of emerging value of competences required by 
Industry and offered by University. Options 3 and 4 are 
under investigation and are not discussed in this paper in 
detail.  
 
Figure 1.  Examples of hierarchical conceptual structures of a) job 
position framework, b) study program, c) comptence framework and d) 
T&T catalogue 
TABLE I.  
MAPPING OPTIONS 
Nr. 
Option 
Explanation 
1 
Direct mapping between 
job 
positions 
and 
university 
courses 
(see 
I1U1 in Fig. 2) 
This option of direct mapping is 
not considered as useful because 
we intend to use mediating 
hierarchical structures to obtain 
mapping between job positions 
and 
study 
courses 
indirectly 
ensuring the actuality of indirect 
mapping.  
2 
Direct mapping between 
competence 
frameworks 
used in University and 
Industry (see I2U2 in 
Fig. 2) 
Competence frameworks are used 
as mediating structures in order to 
indirectly map job descriptions to 
study courses. 
3 
Direct mapping between 
T&T catalogues used in 
University and Industry 
(see I3U3 in Fig. 2) 
T&T catalogues are used as 
mediating structures in order to 
indirectly map job descriptions to 
study courses. 
4 
Direct mapping of both 
competence 
frameworks 
and T&T catalogues used 
in University and Industry 
(see 
I2U2 
and 
I3U3 in Fig. 2) 
Competence 
frameworks 
and 
T&T catalogues are used as 
mediating structures in order to 
indirectly map job descriptions to 
study courses. 
 
 
U2
U1
SET 1
SET 2
?
!
U3
I3
I1
I2
OR
 
Figure 2.  Illustration of basic approach. I – conceptual structures used in 
Industry, U – conceptual structures used in Univesity 
 
38
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

V. 
THE PROTOTYPE FOR MEDIATED MAPPING 
The method discussed in Section IV is tested by 
implementing a prototype that serves as one of mechanisms 
for knowledge exchange between University and Industry. 
The prototype has the following basic functionality: 
 
Management of organizations – prototype allows 
managing information about various organizations 
that attempt to collaborate in the context of 
competence information exchange (for example, 
Universities, partners from Industry). 
 
Management of users - prototype allows managing 
prototype users belonging to available organizations. 
 
Management 
of 
hierarchical 
conceptual 
structures – prototype allows managing hierarchical 
structures such as job position frameworks, 
University study programs, competence frameworks. 
 
Management of mapping - prototype allows to 
define mapping between all hierarchical structures 
(example of mapping study courses to e-CF 
illustrated in Fig. 4). 
 
Establishment of mediated mapping – mediated 
mapping between information sources such as job 
positions and study courses based on mediating 
conceptual structure e-CF (see Fig. 5).  
In order to indirectly map job positions and University 
courses the following mapping of conceptual structures 
should be presented: 
 
Mapping of job positions to Industry competence 
framework (Nr. 1 in Fig. 3). 
 
Mapping of study courses to University competence 
framework (Nr. 2 in Fig. 3). 
 
Mapping of the competence frameworks of Industry 
and of University (Nr. 3 in Fig. 3). 
When the mapped structures (Industry job positions to a 
 
Figure 3.  Job position and university course mapping to competence frameworks using a common tool 
 
Figure 4.  Mapping study courses to e-CF 
39
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

competence framework and University study courses to a 
competence framework) are available, the next step is to 
establish mapping between competence frameworks. In this 
paper we illustrate the case when both University and 
Industry are using e-CF as a competence framework 
therefore mapping 1:1 was done using the developed 
prototype of the tool (see Fig. 3) available for Industry and 
University.  
We consider an example of knowledge exchange about 
courses corresponding to a particular job position based on 
e-CF as the mediating structure. Competences required in 
the job position of Industry job position framework “junior 
analyst” are mapped to the following e-CF competencies 
(see Fig. 5): Specification creation Level 2, Application 
design Level, Design and development Level 2, Testing 
Level 1, and Process improvement Level 3. 
The list of courses that include at least one of the 
requested competences is as follows: Business Analytics; 
Business Process Management and Engineering; Advanced 
Data Technologies; Service Science, Management, and 
Engineering; Enterprise Architecture and Requirements 
Engineering; Customer Relationship Management and Social 
Network Technologies; and Artificial Intelligence in 
Business (in Fig. 5 the course titles are in Latvian).  
VI. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
Several representatives of Industry and University were 
asked to evaluate the prototype.  In order to prepare the 
prototype for evaluation, representatives of one Industry 
were instructed how to use the prototype to produce mapping 
between competence framework and job positions/courses in 
Industry. The same was done on the university side. 
Afterwards the competence frameworks used in University 
and Industry were mapped (in the current situation when the 
representative from Industry and University uses the same 
competence framework, mapping between these frameworks 
is 1:1; the developed method and prototype can also support 
the case when University and Industry use different 
mediating competency frameworks). This mapping was used 
to demonstrate the potential of the prototype to show linkage 
between particular job positions and  corresponding study 
courses.  
The results of evaluation revealed the following impacts 
of the prototype on knowledge exchange between University 
and Industry: 
 
Use of a standard mediating conceptual structure 
improves absorptive capacity of both partners, 
University as well as Industry. 
 
Use of IT support brings in transparency in 
knowledge exchange and considerably shortens the 
time of comparing the knowledge/competence/skills 
demand and offer. 
 
Removal (at least partial) of the above-mentioned 
knowledge flow  barriers: (1) lack of absorptive 
capacity and (2) insufficient mechanism lower 
several other knowledge barriers [2] such as causal 
ambiguity, 
non-validated 
knowledge, 
lack 
of 
motivation, unawareness at both ends of knowledge 
flow, etc. 
These results show that the use of the prototype may 
enhance cooperation between University and Industry if it is 
systematically used for tuning study programs and 
developing demand-based courses according to industrial 
needs. 
VII. EXPECTED CONTRIBUTIONS, RESEARCH LIMITATIONS 
AND FUTURE RESEARCH AVENUES 
The method and the prototype presented in this paper 
were developed to help to remove some barriers of 
knowledge flow in University and Industry knowledge 
exchange about knowledge/competence/skills demand and 
knowledge/competence/skills offer. It was expected that (1) a 
mutually 
understandable, 
internationally 
recognized 
competence framework as the mediating conceptual structure 
 
Figure 5.   Establishment of mediated mapping 
40
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

will improve absorptive capacity of knowledge to be 
exchanged and (2) information technology support will make 
knowledge exchange less time consuming and more 
transparent.  
Preliminary results obtained from prototype evaluation 
show that ICT supported mediated mapping between 
conceptual structures can lower or even remove several 
knowledge flow barriers.  
This research is limited to two knowledge flow barriers 
only. Hypothetically there is a possibility to improve the 
method and the prototype to address other knowledge 
barriers. Additional research in knowledge flow barriers is 
needed to do this. The discussion in this paper is based on 
the classification of knowledge flow barriers used in domain 
of healthcare [2]. Experiments with the prototype revealed 
that the spectrum of and dependencies between knowledge 
barriers in ICT sector might differ from those in healthcare. 
Therefore, in order to target properly further investigations, it 
is necessary to analyze deeper cause consequence 
relationships between knowledge barriers in the specific area 
of application – domain of knowledge exchange between 
University and Industry in ICT sector. Another direction of 
further research is automatic mapping based on string 
similarity [21] incorporated in mapping of hierarchical 
structures. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
The method and prototype were developed with the 
support of Lattelecom Technology Ltd. and Riga Technical 
University in the context of research project No ZP-2009/15 
“Development of the method and the prototype for the 
normalization and linkage of computer-based competence 
descriptions”. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Ch. Lin and J-Ch Wu, “Exploring the influencing factors on inertia 
source of knowledge flow” in the Proceedings of the 11th 
International Conference on Electronic Commerce, P. Y. K. Chau, K. 
Lyytinen, Ch-P. Wei, Ch.C. Yang, and F-R. Lin (Eds), 2009, Tapei, 
Thailand, pp. 249-258. 
[2] C. Lin, B. Tan, and S. Chang, "An exploratory model of knowledge 
flow barriers within healthcare organizations," Information & 
Management, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 331-339, July2008. 
[3] P. Rudzajs, L. Penicina, M. Kirikova, and R. Strazdina, "Towards 
Narrowing a Conceptual Gap Between IT Industry and University," 
Scientific journal of Riga Technical university, Applied computer 
systems, vol. Computer Science. Applied Computer Systems - 2010, 
pp. 9-16, 2010. 
[4] M. Jarrar, D. Maynard, J. Hoppenbrouwers, and H. Zhiisheng, 
"Ontology Outreach to Industry," Knowledge Web Consortium, 2007, 
pp. 1-81. 
[5] P. Rudzajs and M. Kirikova, "Mediated competency comparison 
between job descriptions and university courses," Scientific journal of 
Riga Technical university, Applied computer systems, 2011.(in press) 
[6] P. Rudzajs, "Development of educational institution and employer 
collaboration support system's architecture and services," M.S.  
thesis, Riga Technical University, Riga, Latvia, 2010. 
[7] P. Rudzajs and M. Kirikova, "IT Knowledge Requirements 
Identification In Organizational Networks : Cooperation Between 
Industrial Organizations And Universities," in Proceedings of the 
18th International Conference on Information Systems Development 
(ISD 2009), Nanchang, China: Springer, 2010, pp. 187-199. 
[8] R. Strazdina, M. Kirikova, L. Penicina, and P. Rudzajs, "Knowledge 
Requirements Monitoring System: Advantages for Industry and 
University," in 2010 Second International Conference on Information, 
Process, and Knowledge Management, Ieee, 2010, pp. 120-125. 
[9] R. Strazdina, M. Kirikova, and P. Rudzajs, "Knowledge Integration 
Points in Contemporary Business Informatics," in Proceeding of the 
9th International Conference on Perspectives in Business Informatics 
Research (BIR 2010), Rostock, Germany: 2010,  pp. 33-42 
[10] European Committee for Standardization, "European e-Competence 
Framework 1.0," 2008. 
[11] SFIA FOUNDATION, "Framework reference SFIA version 4," 2008. 
[12] European Committee for Standardization, "User guidelines for the 
application of the European e-Competence Framework," CEN, 2008. 
[13] Association for Computing Machinery “CS 2008 Body of 
Knowledge”, 
2010, 
Available: 
http://www.acm.org/education/curricula/ComputerScience2008.pdf. 
[Accessed: Dec. 9, 2010].  
[14] M. Kirikova, R. Strazdina, I. Andersone, and U. Sukovskis, "Quality 
of Study Programs: An Ecosystems Perspective," in Proceedings of 
the Advances in Databases and Information Systems, Associated 
Workshops and Doctoral Consortium of the 13th East European 
Conference (ADBIS2009), Riga, Latvia: Springer Berlin/Heidelberg, 
2010, pp. 39-46. 
[15] R. Nikolov, "A Model for European e-Competence Framework 
Development in a University Environment," Stimulating Personal 
Development and Knowledge Sharing, 2008. 
[16] C. Sanin, E. Szczerbicki, and C. Toro, "Combining Technologies To 
Achieve Decisional Trust," Cybernetics and Systems, vol. 39, no. 7, 
pp. 743-752, Oct.2008. 
[17] F. Lin, J. Butters, K. Sandkuhl, and F. Ciravegna, "Context-based 
Ontology Matching: Concept and Application Cases," in 2010 10th 
IEEE International Conference on Computer and Information 
Technology, Ieee, 2010, pp. 1292-1298. 
[18] J. Ć. Euzenat and P. Shvaiko, Ontology Matching. New York: 
Springer-Verlag Inc, 2007, p. 333. 
[19] K. Janowicz and C. Kessler, "The role of ontology in improving 
gazetteer 
interaction," 
International 
Journal 
of 
Geographical 
Information Science, vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1129-1157, 2008. 
[20] Onet 
Center, 
"Onet 
resource 
center," 
2010. 
Available: 
http://www.onetcenter.org/supplemental.html. [Accessed: Sept. 25, 
2010]. 
[21] E. Schallehn, I. Geist, and K. U. Sattler, "Supporting Similarity 
Operations Based on Approximate String Matching on the Web," in 
On the Move to Meaningful Internet Systems 2004: CoopIS, DOA, 
and ODBASE, 3290 ed. R. Meersman and Z. Tari, Eds. Springer 
Berlin / Heidelberg, 2004, pp. 227-244. 
 
 
 
 
41
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

