A Study on Innovation Diffusion Understanding with Multi-Agent Simulation
Takao Nomakuchi
Faculty of Economics
Wakayama University
Wakayama, Japan
e-mail: tnoma@eco.wakayama-u.ac.jp
Masakazu Takahashi
Graduate School of Innovation and Technology
Management, Yamaguchi University
Ube, Japan
e-mail: masakazu@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp
Abstract— This paper describes the Innovation diffusions
with
Multi
Agent
Simulation.
Among
the
Innovation
diffusion theories, there are five classification types such as
Innovator, Early adopter, Early majority, Late majority,
and Laggard, so far. Among each classification, there are
cracks in the innovation adaptation. In particular, in the
high-tech industries, a big slot called Chasm, proposed by
Moor, is made between Early adopter and Early majority.
These
adaptations
are
based
on
human
homogeneous
behavior in social contacts from the results of observation in
the real world. This theory is even heuristics intelligence and
one cannot capture the conditions for the crack made. Based
on the innovation diffusion
backgrounds,
we made a
simulator for Chasm observation. The simulation results
confirmed that a Chasm crack was made in the industry
with Multi-Agent Simulation. We have attempted to acquire
new knowledge for the industry.
Keywords-Innovation; Innovation Diffusion; Multi-Agent
Simulation; Simulation; Chasm.
I.
INTRODUCTION
According to Matsuoka [1], the products diffused
generally a lose competitive power for catching up with
newly emerging countries, such as China, South Korea,
and Taiwan. As a result, the domestic industry is forced to
severe
market
competition
by
losing
their
global
competitiveness.
For
example,
there
are
household
electrical appliances and high tech products, such as cell
phone and television, which the Japanese companies are
good at making. Therefore, in Japan, producing an
innovation that will be prosperous for the high-tech
industry is advocated.
Although many policies for future industry generation
have been made by the Japanese Government, they have
not contributed to the recovery from the long term
recession in Japan. It is one of the reasons it is not
possible to identify under what kind of conditions
innovation starts so far. Then, the diffusion process of an
innovation is considered with the multi-agent simulation
that reproduces Chasm based on the diffusion theory of
the innovation by Moore [2].
According to the survey about mid- and long-term
research and development of companies in our country
that contributes to innovation creation by the Ministry of
Economy Trade and Industry Japan [3], mid- and long-
term research and development of the companies in Japan
contribute to innovation creation. In this survey report, it
is necessary for Japanese companies not to consider
business plans focusing on short-term profits. In addition,
future vision plans to create new venture business are
needed for Japanese companies.
Hasegawa [4] mentioned that there is a need to
emphasize the existing market for large companies.
Therefore, the creation of new markets is difficult for
large companies. Also, in these domains, there is a view
that a venture business is suitable depending on the
industry type. However, a venture business does not
develop easily in our country. As it became clear from this
investigation, it may be necessary to challenge to enter
into a new domain. Concentrated effort and investment by
industry, and administrative and academic sectors in these
domains are not being fully performed by either minor or
leading companies.
The advanced expansion to overseas markets that
correspond to an emerging country is also included in new
market creation. The reason why venture company’s
leading research does not develop is because of the
duration it takes to disseminate the technology. This is
because the body of knowledge stagnates and a gap
(called Chasm) opens. Since this stagnation exists and a
gap develops, destructive innovation is assumed and the
entire industry of one country is damaged. Therefore, in
order to be successful in venture businesses, a time
reduction method for diffusion of innovation is required.
Suggestions should be given to companies, including
venture companies, regarding stagnation and the gap in
the spread of innovation.
Suppose there are five adoptive type individuals, an
"Innovator," an "Early adopter," an "Early majority," a
"Late majority," and a "Laggard." These classification
types are seen in the spread theory of an innovation. There
are cracks among the five-adopter classifications. It is also
assumed that a big gap, which is called Chasm, exists
between an Early adopter and an Early majority. In this
paper, five adoptive type individuals are based on the
observation by Moore [2]. Therefore, differences among
five adoptive type behaviors can be realized by the
homogeneous behavior and the differentiation behavior
with the same kind adoptive type and the diffusion
preceded
type.
We
tried
to
reproduce
the
Chasm
phenomenon in a simulation, by using a Multi-Agent
Simulation
(MAS).
We
considered
whether
Chasm
existed, at what frequency Chasm was generated, and
what kind of case brings rise to Chasm generated by
performing simulation experiments using MAS.
This paper consists of the following components:
Section 2 presents the related work. Section 3 gives the
experimental setup for the simulation. Section 4 discusses
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

the results. Section 5 concludes the paper and describes
future work.
II.
PREVIOUS RESEARCH
This section, firstly, reviews the previous research of
the innovation.
We referred to the Chasm concept of
Moore [2] in order to create MAS. Therefore, this section
surveys the research regarding Chasm. Next, we review
the previous research that tried the development and
experiment
using
MAS
regarding
the
diffusion
of
innovations.
A.
Inovatinon
Schumpeter [5] defined innovation as “Producing
something that already exists by a new method, or
producing a new thing." Utterback and Abernathy [6]
divided innovations broadly into the product innovation
that destroys the existing technical concept, and the
process innovation that elaborates on the best at the lowest
price.
Rosenberg [7] insisted that a long-term ripple effect
does
not
exist
without
cumulative
and
continuous
innovation, and the qualitative development does not exist,
without an epoch-making innovation. Abernathy et al. [8]
and Abernathy and Clark [9] described four innovation
types based on both the technical and the market condition.
Those types are defined as follows:

Architectural innovation: The innovation that sets
a base to the systematized techniques that destroy
the existing systematized techniques, and reclaims
a completely new market.

Revolutionary innovation: The innovation which
reclaims the existing market while it is in the
systematized techniques which destroy the same
existing systematized techniques.

Niche creation: The innovation that reclaims a
completely new market while aiming to strengthen
the existing systematized techniques technically.

Regular
innovation:
The
innovation
that
strengthens the existing systematized techniques
and moreover cultivates the existing market.
Christensen [10] mentioned as follows: Big companies
think that the market for innovation is small and not
attractive when compared with the conventional large-
scale business. Since there is a risk of destroying the
conventional primary business, the adoption of innovation
is overdue. Therefore, the big company will lag behind the
new companies. Then he named the dilemma of the
innovation.
B.
Chasm
It is said that there is a deep gap which checks the shift
to the leading market from the initial market in the
diffusion of the innovations that makes new products and
new technology permeate a market in the high-tech
industry.
Moore [2] advocates the Chasm concept. The strategy
of overcoming the Chasm from the concept of the Chasm
is called the Chasm theory.
Rogers [11] classified the customer into five adoptive
types as Innovator, Early adopter, Early majority, Late
majority, and Laggard, in the innovation diffusion model.
In this theory, it is supposed that innovation spreads
rapidly from the Innovator to the Early adopter (more than
16% of diffusion rate).
Fig. 1. Technology Life Cycle by Rogers
Fig. 2. Chasm by Moore [2]
Then, it is assumed that the key to new product spread is
what is advertised to an innovator and an Early adopter.
Fig. 1 indicates the Rogers innovation spread model.
In the high-tech product that forces a user's behavioral
pattern change, Moore [2] discovered a crack among the
five-adopter classifications. He named this Chasm, and it
supposes that there is a deep gap between the Early
adopter and the Early majority. The gap in Fig. 2 indicates
the image of Chasm.
The Early adopter layer adopts new technology
positively. The Early majority layer tends to think about
stability and relief as important. Therefore, the uneasiness
of an Early majority layer is not canceled in the place
where the Early adopter layer is only a part of the adopted
market. Both demands differ fundamentally, and in order
to shift to a leading market from an initial market
exceeding Chasm, it is necessary to change the approach
of marketing according to the spread stage of an in-house
product. Moore [2] observed the following rates within
the five-adopter classifications:

Innovator: (2.5%) People and companies that
adopt technology aiming for differentiation from
novelty.

Early adopter: (13.5%) People and companies that
adopt technology in the first stage aiming at
differentiation not from technology but from an
actual profit position.

Early majority: (34%) People and companies that
check a preceding person's success example and
adopt by imitation.

Late
majority:
(34%)
Prudent
people
and
companies that copy large majority uses.

Laggard: (16%) People and companies that hate
new things technically and practically.
An Early adopter tends to adopt new technology as a
"means of change". They aim at the action of a
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

differentiation
strategy
by
staying
ahead
of
their
competitor and adopting new technology.
They introduce new technology with the determination
to overlook the risk, in order to obtain a competitive
advantage by differentiation. They also often make
excessive demands on previously trusted vendor.
On the other hand, the Early majority (utilitarian)
positions the product as a "means of an operational
efficiency improvement." This is the situation where a
trial-and-error method with unripe technology is avoided.
They also copy the example of the usage of the new
technology of the other companies in the same industry.
They want to take action with a strategy of homogeneous
behavior. However, since an Early majority specifies the
product and
technology that
were introduced
as a
company standard in many cases, technology vendors can
expect a high profit ratio. Therefore, Early majority is an
important customer for vendors. In the Chasm theory,
there are different demands for the Early adopter and the
Early majority, and in order to shift to a leading market
exceeding Chasm, the marketing approach needs to be
changed according to the diffusion stage of an in-house
product.
The differences among these five-adopter classes are
what is derived from the strategic activity principle in a
management
strategy
theory
called
differentiation
behavior (behavior by the snob effect), and homogeneous
behavior (behavior by the bandwagon effect). Strategic
behavior was mentioned by Leibenstein [12], Porter [13],
Porter et al. [14], and Asaba [15]. This paper examines the
conditions of generating Chasm based on two strategic
behaviors
such
as
differentiation
behavior
and
homogeneous behavior as agents activities.
Meaning of
homogeneous behavior is that of action to mimic the
behavior of others.
The snob effect definition is as
follows: People do not want the same product others
bought, and want something different from the product
others bought. The bandwagon effect definition is as
follows: More people support certain products and
services, and the effect of satisfaction and sense of
security that the customer obtained by the products and
services will increase.
Moreover, they mention that the technologies that
could not exceed Chasm are Video conference systems,
Artificial Intelligence, Pen computing system and so on.
Regarding music devices, Compact Discs (CDs) and
Digital Versatile Discs (DVDs) have exceeded Chasm,
but Laser disc and Mini Disc (MDs) have not. Chasm is a
big gap that exists before the diffusion of a high-tech
product through the mainstream market. In order to
exceed Chasm, the basic strategy that Moore [2] asserts is
responding to the utilitarianism of the Early majority who
is a customer segment of the beginning of the mainstream
market. However, he suggests that the innovation vendor
must not provide all early majorities with a product. The
concrete method exceeding Chasm is concentrating the
best in one area. It is important to complete the perfect
product quickly toward a certain specific customer
segment.
The greatest reason against the overall market is that the
demand level of Early majority who is utilitarian wants
100% of the solution.
He insists on that the Early adopter who is constitution
of
the
initial
market
expects
and
dreams
product
usefulness in the future.
This approach is explained by the lane of a bowling
alley metaphor. Each customer segment is also equivalent
to knocking over one pin. Knocking down one pin causes
all others to also fall.
In other words, success with one customer segment is
used as a springboard, and success with a new customer
segments is then gained.
Eventually a "strike" is made and it can create rapid
growth in whole market. The analogy of the bowling alley
lane serves as reference when developing MAS.
Moreover, the approaches for exceeding Chasm are
the following three steps.
1.
Though it is small, a positive foothold is made
somewhere in one mainstream market as soon as
possible.
2.
When innovation diffuses in the mainstream market,
the strategy that was conscious in the overall market
is promoted, and it should be remade to spread
widely as a standard product.
3.
Return to the approach of a client centered again and
append added value to a product through mass
customization. Mass customization is building the
product to individual specification in large quantities.
Moreover, Markides and Geroski [16] stated: If the
second runner is not called the“Fast Second,”then it
cannot generate "radical innovation." This is the reason
why there is this big gap called "Chasm" between
soliciting some Innovators, and public acceptance in a
market. This is also presupposed, because the second
runner has the advantage to exceed Chasm.
The second runner who has made the market expand
raises business that disturbs the existence of a customer's
customs and the existing company, such as in the mobile
phone and an online bookstore. It can be said that strategic
behavior called homogeneous behavior and differentiation
behavior show also that the second runner has taken
advantage of innovation.
C.
MAS of Innovation diffusion
Washida [17], Washida et al. [18], and Matsuka et al.
[19] developed MAS of innovation emergence in the
innovation diffusion processes. They are referring to the
diffusion model of the innovations from Rogers (1986) [8],
the Chasm from Moore [2], the small-world network
structure from Watts [20] and the scale-free network
structure
from
Barabsi
[21].
Small-world
network
structure is a small world character network structure that
appears in both a network natural and artificial (a nervous
system and a transmission network). Moreover, small-
world
network
structure
follows
"A
power
law
Distribution."
[17]
[18]
[19]
"A
"power
law
Distribution” is a network structure without a specific
type value. They stated that the innovation is not based on
the development of a supplier's technology, but the
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

discovery of the utility value by the consumer from the
experimental results of multi-agent simulation.
They develop the multi-agent model of innovation that
was generated by consumer user's conversion value
phenomenon. The developed multi-agent model assumes
that the case of the mobile phone which carried out
conversion to e-mail and a ringtone to identify a specific
caller and the case of the development of the station
wagon type car from a regular sedan . However these two
products were developed for a niche of the market, these
became mainstream goods in high demand.
Kitanaka [22] set up four kinds of agents, namely,
maker, wholesale, retail store, and consumer. Three
diffusion course networks were stretched for each agent
with MAS. Three spread courses were a distribution
channel network, an advertising and promotional network,
and a word-of-mouth network. The distribution channel
network was made into a tree structure. The advertising
and promotional route was made into an emanated type
network structure. The word-of-mouth network was also
made into the scale-free network. A distribution channel
network and an advertising and promotional network
spread innovation through a consumer agent according to
dropping resources. In the word-of-mouth network, it was
set up so that the consumer agent was recognized as a hub
because of the number of links it could use to dispense
innovation. By experimenting, the researchers were able
to reproduce the difference that appears between the
diffusion of innovations and the active degree of a word-
of-mouth network (the number of hub consumer agents)
by experiment.
Morioka [23] developed MAS of brand value. He set
up that an agent gave with the bandwagon effect (effect
which makes it take homogeneous behavior), and the snob
effects (effect which makes it take differentiation action)
by communicating market share information. As the result,
the change of the market share is reproduced with MAS.
A market share became higher, so that the threshold value
of a market share when giving the bandwagon effect is
higher as a result. However, it was found that the market
share is balanced with a fixed value.
D.
Suggestions from previous works
We considered that Moore [2] proposed a five-adopter
classification for the spread of an innovation. This spread
depends on how to take homogeneous behavior and
differentiation behavior into behavior called strategic
behavior. Therefore, after giving a definition to an agent
as to how to use strategic behavior differently with all
five-adopter classifications, MAS should be developed
with regard to diffusion of innovations. The purpose of
this paper was to obtain implications about the conditions
for generating Chasm from the experiment of MAS.
III.
CONFIGURATIONS OF CHASM IN MAS
In
this
paper,
we
used
Artisoc3.0
(http://mas.kke.co.jp/index.php) as Multi-Agent simulator.
Artisoc3.0 is a software simulator of the MAS that
KOZOKEIKAKU
Engineering
Institute
(http://www.kke.co.jp/en/) provides. We focused on the
consumer market as the simulation market for a group of
companies in a certain industry targeted for the diffusion
of innovations. The case where an innovation spread
through industry is assumed in this paper. The setup was
as follows:

Space Industry (as default setups) was added to the
Universe.

Agent
High
Tech1,
which
expresses
as
an
innovation of the Space Industry, was added.

As an agent showing a company as an Innovator,
Early adopter, Early majority, Late majority, and
Laggard were added.

The number of agents for each company could be
set from 0 to 200 in the control panel.

The real type variable, which expresses each
agent’s diffusion rate in the Universe, was added.
INDiffusion
was
added
to
Innovator
and
EADiffusion to Early adopter, EMDiffusion was
added to Early majority, LMDiffusion was added
to Late majority, and LADiffusion was added to
Laggard.

The output setup was the real type variable
Diffusion showing the entire diffusion rate was
added.

The real type variable speed which specifies the
speed that corresponds to each company agent was
added.

We added a real type variable SHIYA to specify
the size of the field of view to observe the
movement of intra-industry competitors by each
company agent. SHIYA means a field of view
company agent to look for other company agents.

We added a real type variable NAKAMA to
specify the number of others to observe as a
condition of taking the homogeneous behavior by
the bandwagon effect by each company agent.
NAKAMA means the number of peer company to
be homogenized by company agents.

We added a real type variable KYOGO to specify
the number of conflicts within the field of view as
a
condition
by
taking
the
behavior
by
differentiation, the snob effect on each company
agent. KYOGO means the number of competitors
that is the subject of differentiation by company
agents.

An output map of the Space Industry was added as
an element for each company agent on the map.
The diffusion from HighTech1 agent to each
company agent was set up as follows.

We have defined the state of Innovation diffusion
as the analogy that the company agent is facing the
direction of 0 degree the same as the high-tech 1
agent.

Agent High Tech1 acted in the direction of 0°,
and it added the function that made Innovator to
0 ° direction
as
a
function
to
transmit
an
innovation to the Innovator in the field of view
within less than 15.

Agent Innovator has the capability to make the
Early adopter to 0°direction in the field of view
within 3, as a function of diffusing the innovation.
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management


Agent Early adopter has the capability to make the
Early majority to 0°direction in the field of view
within 1, as a function of diffusing the innovation.

Agent Early majority has the capability to make
the Late majority to 0°direction in the field of
view within 1, as a function of diffusing the
innovation.

Agent Late majority has the capability to make
Laggard to 0°direction in the field of view within
1, as a function of diffusing the innovation.
Fig. 3 illustrates the innovation diffusion.
Fig. 3. Innovation Diffusion Model
Fig. 4. Homogeneous Behavior with MAS
Each company agent shall take homogeneous behavior
or
differentiation
depending
on
the
following
configuration.

As analogy that takes the homogeneous behavior
by the bandwagon effect, with every agent set up
as follows.

When number of company agents of the same kind
within a view size was more than the NAKAMA
number, it was made to progress at the same speed
and the same direction as a company agent of the
same kind.

When there were many agents of the same kind
who turned to and followed the same direction
behavior according to the snob effect, it was set up
as follows for every agent. When the number of
agents of the same kind within a view size was
more than the KYOGO number, it was made to
progress in a different direction in a range of 15 on
both sides.
Fig. 4 indicates homogeneous behavior with MAS.
The
flow
of
the
company
agents
contains
the
following configurations.
1.
At first, random position, direction, and speed was
used.
2.
If more than the fixed number (the number is the
Variable NAKAMA), of the other agents of the same
kind are within the surroundings (width of a view),
the company agents take the same direction and
speed as the other agents of the same kind, because
of the bandwagon effect. This action was defined as
homogeneous behavior.
3.
Unite the direction and speed of your company with
the direction and speed of one company of the
homogeneous partners (the number is the Variable
NAKAMA).
4.
If more than the number (Variable KYOGO) whose
agents of the same kind are in the surroundings
(width variable SHIYA of the view) , the company
agents take the different direction and speed as the
other agents of the same kind because of the snob
effect.
5.
Change the direction in the direction of another
company of the differentiation partners (the number
is the Variable KYOGO) to the direction of 15 on
both sides.
However, the present Speed is not
changed.
6.
There is neither a homogeneous partner nor a
differentiation partner, change of direction or speed
suitably.
7.
If there is an affecting target agent in the view, it will
turn in the direction of 0.
Fig. 5. Simulation Flow
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Fig. 6. Company Agent Activity Flow
The simulation flow is shown in Fig. 5. The flow of
the company agent activity is shown in Fig. 6.
IV.
EXPERIMENTS
We set 200 companies in the same industry with two
variables of KYOGO as the competitor and of NAKAMA
as another company and generated agents with the ratio
that Moore [2] proposed. Each agent takes homogeneous
behavior or without the judgment of agent’s sight
variables used in agent’s decision. The experimental set-
ups are shown in Table I.
Based on the above configurations, 10 times trials
within each 10,000 steps were operated. Figures 7 to 16
show the experimental results.
TABLE I. EXPERIMENTAL SET-UPS
Innov
ator
Early
Adopt
er
Early
Majo
rity
Late
Majo
rity
Lagg
ard
Sum
Total
SHIYA
2
2
2
2
2
NAKAMA
1
1
2
3
3
KYOGO
10
10
10
10
10
Existing
ratio
0.025
0.135
0.340
0.340
0.160
1.000
Number of
existence
5
27
68
68
32
200
The top line in gray color indicates the sum of
diffusion of innovation in the industry. Figures 7 to 16
indicate the result of ten trials. Only one trial was not
observed in the crack in Fig. 11.
Fig. 7 Simulation Result (1st trial)
Fig. 8 Simulation Result (2nd trial)
Fig. 9 Simulation Result (3rd trial)
Fig. 10 Simulation Result (4th trial)
Fig. 11 Simulation Result (5th trial)
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Fig. 12 Simulation Result (6th trial)
Fig. 13 Simulation Result (7th trial)
Fig. 14 Simulation Result (8th trial)
Fig. 15 Simulation Result (9th trial)
Fig. 16 Simulation Result (10th trial)
As seen in the simulation results in Figures 7 to 9 and
Figures 11 to 16 (except Fig. 10), we succeeded in crack
generation.
V.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
This paper described the Innovation diffusion with
MAS. In the Innovation diffusion theory, the market is
classified in five types, namely: Innovator, Early adopter,
Early majority, Late majority, and Laggard, so far.
Among each classification, there are cracks in the
innovation adaptation. Especially in High-tech industries,
a big gap called Chasm is made between Early adopter
and Early majority that were proposed by Moore (1991)
[2]. Since this paper proposes the innovation diffusion
model with MAS as a preliminary trial, we translated the
heuristic knowledge into a computer simulation model.
At first, we recounted the related work. Based on the
innovation diffusion theory, we defined parameters and
made a simulator for Chasm observation. From the results
of the simulation, we succeeded in crack generation. By
statistical
analysis
and
by
case,
we
identified
the
conditions for generating the Chasm within the spread of
innovation. In contrast, by utilizing MAS, the possibility
of identifying the condition is confirmed. As an example
of the Chasm in recent years, the mobile phone standard is
unique to Japan, but did not spread to the global market
while gaining the function of an Internet connection
terminal and the like. Currently, the mobile phones of
Japan's own standard are called Galapagos mobile phones.
We were able to recognize that Galapagos mobile phones
have fallen into a Chasm of innovation diffusion. We
believe that we reproduced such phenomena as the
Galapagos mobile’s Chasm by MAS.
Our future work is as follows: (a) Capture the
conditions for the crack generation, (b) Parameter tunings
of corporate indicators such as sales, costs, assets, and
capital and so on, and (c) Compose simulation for a new
technology as Innovation goes into the industry.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We wish to express our gratitude for the cooperation
and fruitful discussion from the companies we analyzed.
REFERENCES
[1]
H. Matsuoka, “Japanese consumer electronics manufacturers in
Asia and white goods market Efforts,” General Foundation Japan
Asia Pacific Ocean Institute Macroeconomic Analysis, project,
March, 2012.
http://www.apir.or.jp/ja/research/files/2013/03/423_02.pdf
(accessed on January 25th, 2014)
[2]
G. Moore, “Crossing the Chasm: Marketing and Selling Disruptive
Products to Mainstream Customers,” Collins Business Essentials,
Harper Business, 1991.
[3]
Ministry of Economy Trade and Industry, "Survey about mid- and
long-term research and development of company in our country
which contributes to innovation creation," Industrial Technology
Investigation Report in Heisei 23 fiscal year, 2011.
http://www.meti.go.jp/policy/economy/gijutsu_kakushin/innovatio
n_policy/kaihatu-hyoka-22.htm (accessed on November 5th, 2013)
[4]
H. Hasegawa,” Introduction to Venture Management business
creation,” Tokyo: Nikkei Publishing Inc., 2010.
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[5]
J. A. Schumpeter, “The Teory of Economic Development:An
Inquiry into Projits，Capital，Credit，Interest，and the Business
Cycle,” Cambridge: Harvard University Press,1934.
[6]
Utterback. J. M. and W. J. Abernathy, “A Dynamic Model of
Process and Product Innovation."Omega.Vol.3, No.6, ,1975, pp.
639-656.
[7]
N. Rosenberg, “Inside Black Box: Technology and Economics,”
New York: Cambridge University Press,1983.
[8]
W. J. Abernathy, K. B. Clark, and A. M. Kantrow, “Industrial
Renaissance: Producing a Competitive Future for America,” Basic
Books.1983.
[9]
W. J. Abernathy and K. B. Clark, "Innovation: Mapping the Winds
of Creative Destruction." Research Policy, vol. 14, no. 1, 1985, pp.
3-22.
[10] C.
M.
Christensen,
“The
Inovation's
Dilemma
when
New
Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail”, Boston: Harvard
Business School Press. 1997.
[11] E. M. Rogers, “Diffusion of Innovations,” Glencoe: Free Press.,
1962.
[12] H. Leibenstein, “Bandwagon, Snob, and Veblen Effects in the
Theory of Consumers' Demand,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics vol. 64, no. 2, 1950, pp. 183-207.
[13] M, E. Porter, ”What is Strategy” Harvard Business Review，
November-December, 1996, pp. 61-78.
[14] M. E. Porter, H. Takeuchi, and M. Sakakibara, ”Can Japan
Compete?,” Basingstoke Macmillan, 2000.
[15] S. Asaba, “Empirical Analysis of homogeneous behavior -
Competition of Japanese Companies,” Tokyo: Toyo Keizai Inc.,
2002.
[16] C. C. Markides and P. A. Geroski, ”Fast Second: How Smart
Companies Bypass Radical Innovation to Enter and Dominate New
Markets,” John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
[17] Y. Washida, ” The heterogeneity of an information propagation
network and structural analysis of a value conversion phenomenon
in a diffusion process :
Possibility of the innovation which the
demand side tows,” The University of Tokyo doctoral dissertation,
2008.
[18] Y. Washida and K. Ueda, ”Research on the demand side network
propagation structure that generates innovation ideas,” Journal of
Information Processing of Japan. vol. 49, pp. 1515-1526, 2008.
[19] T. Matsuka, Toshihiko, H. Honda, Y. Washida, and K. Ueda,
”Exploratory multi-agent modeling studies examining influence of
social structures on development of innovative ideas,” The 27th
Annual
Conference
of
the
Japanese
Society
for
Artificial
Intelligence, 2013, 4F1-4.
[20] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz, “Collective Dynamics of Small-
World Network,” Nature, vol. 393, pp. 440-442, 1998.
[21] A. L.Barabsi and R. Albert, ”Emergence of Scaling in Random,”
Network Science, Vol. 286, p509-512 ,1999.
[22] H. Kitanaka, “Diffusion of Strategic Innovation and Social
Network Structure: A Discussion Using Agent Based Approach,”
Takushoku management accounting research,81, 2007, pp.27-63.
[23] K. Morioka, ”An understanding by brand value generation and a
change, the explanation based on the dynamics social system
theory of a market share, and a multi-agent simulation,” The Mita
commercial science research, vol. 52, no. 1, 2009, pp. 87-110.
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

