A Knowledge Extraction from Epidemic Control Simulation
Masaaki Kunigami
Department of Computer Science
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Yokohama, Japan
0000-0001-7377-622X
email: mkunigami@gakushikai.jp
Takamasa Kikuchi
Graduate School of Business Administration
Keio University
Yokohama, Japan
0000-0002-9183-6457
email: takamasa_kikuchi@keio.jp
Takao Terano
Chiba University of Commerce
Ichikawa, Japan
0000-0002-2364-6950
email: terano@cuc.ac.jp
Abstract—In a social simulation of infection control policies
using an epidemic model, it is necessary to consider the latent
perspectives of stakeholders focusing on various costs or effects.
Therefore, we classify the simulation results produced by
various combinations of control policies from the perspective
of latent evaluation. In this paper, we use the data envelopment
analysis (DEA) method to classify the results of epidemic
control simulations. DEA is an analytic method that measures
and compares the efficiency of multiple input multiple output
systems' performance data. From various latent evaluation
perspectives, DEA classification allows us to endogenously
extract knowledge about the superiority of each control policy
over the others from various latent evaluation perspectives.
This approach is a good example of classification and
knowledge extraction for a set of social simulation logs.
Keywords- epidemic model; Data Envelopment Analysis;
DEA classification
I.
INTRODUCTION
It is impractical to evaluate the results of a simulation
using only a specific objective function when simulating the
control of a society with various stakeholders. In this paper,
we use an infectious disease model as an example to classify
a set of simulation output logs without assuming a specific
objective function. Furthermore, we extract the knowledge
about which output logs are dominant over others under
which the objective function, and which logs are not
dominant under any objective function.
Since Kermack-McKendrick's proposal of the proposal of
the Susceptible-Infectious-Recovered (SIR) model [1][2],
there have been numerous studies on epidemic modeling and
simulations describing the spread of infectious diseases in
society. The study of infectious disease control using those
epidemiology models has roughly directed two mutually
related directions. One direction is theoretical research,
which refines the social structure and diffusion process of
infectious diseases and discovers ways to control them. The
other direction is empirical research, which uses data on
infectious diseases incidence to estimate key parameters for
the spread and control of infectious diseases.
Many studies that use epidemic models focus on the
number of infected people as the primal state variable and
effective reproduction number as a key parameter. However,
for practical research, we must consider more state variables
as the model sophistication. We should also consider various
control variables such as policy costs for infection control
and economic side effects. For these multiple variables,
various stakeholders may have their objective functions with
different weights from different standpoints.perspectives.
Our problem is to extract the knowledge related to the
superiority or inferiority of simulation results for the various
possible objective functions.
This study does not target for a specific infection, such as
Corona-virus Disease (COVID). However, this methodology
is open to study into the actual control of current and future
infectious diseases.
Our approach is as follows. In Section II, we briefly
outlook data envelopment analysis (DEA), which is a
method for analyzing the efficiency of multiple inputs and
outputs
systems,
to
classify
the
results
of
epidemic
simulation runs. In Section III, considering that the epidemic
control simulation has multiple control and state variables,
we consider each run of the simulation as a multiple inputs
and outputs system. In Section IV, DEA allows us to extract
knowledge about which simulation runs are dominant over
others under what objective function, as well as which set of
runs is dominated by which dominant run.
II.
DATA ENVELOPMENT ANALYSIS
DEA [3][4], proposed by Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes
in 1978, is a method for efficiency comparison among
decision making units (DMUs) that have multiple inputs and
multiple outputs. In DEA, each DMU is characterized by a
reference set consisting of DMUs with greater optimal
efficiency. The envelopment generated by connecting the
reference sets allows us to compare the relative positions of
DMUs.
A.
Concept of Data Envelopment Analysis
Charnes Cooper and Rhodes (CCR) method [3] is the
most basic DEA method, its concept is as follows: a)
weighted efficiency of DMUs with multiple inputs and
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-874-7
eKNOW 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

outputs, b) efficiency comparison among DMUs through
optimization of the evaluative weights of the various DMUs,
and c) characterization by a reference set, which is a
collection of DMUs with greater optimal efficiency than the
DMUs under consideration.
Figure 1.
DMUs and efficiency Θ
The first step is to use a reference set to characterize the
DMUs. First, we assume that each DMUk (k = 1~K) of the K
DMUs generates an N-component output yk {ykn > 0 | n =
1~N} from an M-component input xk = {xkm > 0 | m = 1~M}.
At this point, the efficiency Θk of each DMUk can be
defined as Θk (ηk, ξk) ≡ (ηk·yk) /(ξk ·xk) = ∑n,m{(ηkn ykn) / (ξkm
xkm)} with the evaluative weights ξk ={ξkm > 0 (m = 1~M)}
and ηk (ηkn > 0 (n = 1~N)) attached to the input xk and output
yk (see Figure 1).
In this case, the evaluative weights ξk and ηk can be
moved as much as desired, changing the efficiency Θk. The
evaluative weights ξk and ηk are optimized so that the
efficiency Θk of each DMUk is the most advantageous while
maximizing the efficiency across all DMUs (Θk ≤ 1).
However, the key point is optimizing the evaluative weights
ξk and ηk so that no efficiency of other DMUh surpasses a
value of 1 (Θh ≤ 1). Therefore, DEA is formulated as the
fractional programming problem shown below (see Figure 2).
Figure 2.
Optimization problem to find the efficiency Θk of the kth DMU
If no optimization of the evaluative weights can bring the
efficiency Θk to 1 and it is less than the Θk’ values of other
DMUk’s, then DMUk is inefficient. In this case, the DMUk’
whose optimal efficiency is 1, is referred to as reference set
Ek of DMUk, and it can be used as a reference for improving
the efficiency of DMUk (see Figure 3).
Figure 3.
Reference set Ek of DMUk.
In Figure 2, the DEA optimization is formulated as a
fractional programming problem. In practice, it can be solved
by converting it into the equivalent linear programming
problem shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4.
The equivalent forms of the optimization (Figure 2) and the
reference set (Figure 3) as linear programming problem
One of the advantages of using DEA is that its
optimization process (described above) automatically solves
the problem of determining weights when measuring the
efficiency of a multiple inputs multiple-outputs system.
In addition to empirical research on organizational
efficiency, DEA is applied to simulation research for
optimization of production systems, etc. [5]-[8].
B.
Classification by Data Envelopment Analysis
DEA is also used for data classification.[9] As a data
classification methodology, DEA has a different approach
than other distance-based methodologies such as cluster
analysis.
In DEA, the reference set Ek of a given DMUk is an
object of reference for improving DMUk, the reference set of
an efficient DMU is itself. If we draw a scatter plot of DMUs
in the space of input-output variables, the envelopes of the
DMUs are shaped by all efficient DMUs. The minimal
convex region containing the efficient DMU and the origin
also contains inefficient DMUs whose reference set is the
efficient DMU. Therefore, this set of DMUs can be classified
as sharing the same reference set (see Figure 5).
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-874-7
eKNOW 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Figure 5.
Dividing the envelope by efficient DMUs (reference set) allows
classification of inefficient DMUs by common reference sets.
DMUs
with
the
same
reference
set
have
similar
weighting to improve efficiency. Those weightings are
generated by DEA. Thus, the advantage of using DEA is that
it allows for endogenous knowledge extraction on the
relationship between the DMUs dominating the others in the
group (the reference set and the optimal weights) and other
subordinated DMUs.
Another advantage of using DEA as a classifier is that it
is simple to consider group similarity. The number of
overlapping elements of two reference sets indicates the
similarity
between
those
groups.
The
more
common
reference sets are shared between two groups, the closer they
are.
DEA is applicable to data classification in fields other
than the social sciences. For example, Hoshino [10] attempts
to apply DEA to the classification of gene expression data.
III.
EPIDEMIC CONTROL SIMULATION
Here, we present a simple epidemic control simulation to
demonstrate knowledge extraction using DEA. As an
epidemic model, we use the SIR model for mortal infection
by Kermack-McKendrick [2]. Furthermore, we add input
variables
for
infection
control
and
medical
care,
to
implement multiple-input multiple-output decision-making.
A.
Epidemic Control Model
As an example, the epidemic control model used is a
system of difference equations (1)–(2). Figure 6 shows the
state transitions. Equation (3) shows the effects of social
infection suppression and medical care on patient survival.
Equation (1) shows the time variation of the state
variable, whereas (2) shows the initial values of the
dependent and state variables. Equation (3) shows the time
variation of the coefficients due to the control variable.
The state variables are S(t) for the uninfected susceptible
population, I(t) for the infected population, R(t) for the
recovered non-susceptible population, and D(t) for the
deceased population, where the dependent variable P(t) is the
surviving population. The infection rate c, healing rate h, and
mortality rate m are variables that can be changed by the
control variables u(t), v(t), and w(t). When there is no control
input, the positive constants c0, h0, and m0 denote the values
of c(t), h(t), and m(t), respectively.
Figure 6.
State transitions of the epidemic model
Among the control variable u(t), v(t), and w(t), u(t)
represents control measures to suppress the infection rate c(t).
With increasing u(t), c(t) asymptotically decreases. The
positive constants αu represents the sensitivities of u(t) to c(t).
The larger αu, c(t) steeper decreases with respect to u(t).
The variable v(t) represents control measures to improve
the healing rate h(t), which is an increasing function of v(t).
The positive constants αv is the sensitivities of v(t) to h(t).
The larger αv means steeper increasing h(t) with respect to
v(t).
Furthermore,
w(t)
represents
control
measures
to
suppress the mortality rate m(t). With increasing w(t), m(t)
asymptotically decreases. The positive sensitivity constants
αw means that the larger αw changes m(t) steeper with respect
to w(t).
Although the costs and effects of these measures differ,
the differences are expressed only in terms of the sensitivities
αu, αv, and αw without losing generality by standardizing on
costs, according to the cost constraint u(t) + v(t) + w(t) ≤ 1.
B.
Epidemic Control Simulation
The model is then run to obtain simulation data for
epidemic control. Table 1 shows the common initial
conditions and coefficients for the simulation run. Table 2
shows the simulation execution (RUN) settings following the
10 different control input assignments.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-874-7
eKNOW 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

TABLE I.
COMMON SIMULATION SETTING
TABLE II.
SIMULATION RUN SETTING(CONTROL VARIABLES)
The simulation summary values of the execution results
obtained from the above settings are shown in Table 3. The
summary values were used because the number of runs in
this example was small. Note that DEA requires that the
output variables be positive, and the larger output variables,
the better the characteristics.
Two control inputs and three outputs are used as
summary variables. The two control inputs are Cs and Cm,
and the three outputs are BtmActP, AvgActP, and AlvPE.
Here, Cs denotes the time average of the contact infection
control measure and its sensitivity (u·αu) for population P(t),
which means the social cost of measures (such as lockdown
or vaccination) to reduce the contact infection rate c(t). Cm
denotes the time average of cures and their sensitivity plus
life-saving measures and their sensitivity (v·αv + w·αw) for
the infected population I(t). It represents the medical cost of
promoting recovery and reducing deaths.
Furthermore, BtmActP is the minimum value of the sum
of
the
uninfected
population
S(t)
and
the
recovered
population R(t). It represents the depth of the trough of social
and economic activities. Furthermore, AvgActP is the time
average of the active population (P (t) - I (t)). It represents the
average of social and economic activities over the period.
Finally, AlvPE is the minimum value of the population P(t).
It represents the population that survived in the end.
TABLE III.
SIMULATION RESULTS (SUMMARY VALUE DATA)
Figure 7.
Clustering of input–output summary values
C.
Classification by Clustering
Before applying DEA, the simulation run was classified
by clustering. The results of hierarchical clustering of the
simulation run shown in Table 3 using the Ward method with
Euclidean metric are shown in Figure 7. Intuitively, as shown,
the runs with similar summary value data are clustered
together.
Nowadays, cluster analysis is a commonly used and
convenient method, and it is also used to classify results of
simulation runs [11][12]. However, when defining the
distances between data with multiple variables in cluster
analysis, we require exogenous weights on the variables.
Furthermore, the relationship between data in the same
cluster is explained only by the distance between them.
In empirical research, DEA and cluster analysis are
compared in studies of the efficiency of educational systems
[13].
IV.
KNOWLEDGE EXTRACTION BY DATA ENVELOPMENT
ANALYSIS
There are thousands of studies that use DEA. Some of
those DEA studies include optimization with simulation
models and clustering of data. However, in research on
epidemics and infectious diseases, the application of DEA is
limited to several empirical studies [14]-[20].
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-874-7
eKNOW 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

TABLE IV.
DEA RESULTS FOR THE SUMMARY VALUES IN TABLE III
Using DEA, we attempt to extract knowledge from the
results of the previous section’s epidemic control simulation
runs. The knowledge to be extracted here is, first, the
classification, reflecting the characteristics of the simulation
run results, and second, the information on which run results
are better than others under what evaluative weights.
Figure 8.
Classification and weight characterization by DEA
Table 4 shows the optimal efficiency Θ (DEA Score),
reference set (reference set), and optimized weights for the
input and output summary values (Input Weight, Output
Weight)
obtained
by
DEA (CCR
method)
from
the
simulation input-output summary value data (Table 3). For
calculation of the CCR method, we used the Python code by
Namiki [21].
The DEA results (Table 4) show that runs {0, 1, 2, 5, 8}
are efficient (Θ = 1) while runs {3, 6, 7} are inefficient (Θ <
1). Because those inefficient runs share runs {5} and {8} as
common reference sets, the weights ξ, η tend to be close in
value.
As for the efficient runs {0, 1, 2, 5, 8}, runs 8 and 5 serve
as reference sets for other classification groups. Runs 0, 1,
and 2 serve as reference sets for one another, indicating that
there is little difference between them. However, a large
difference is evident between runs {8} and runs {0} and {1},
as no common reference set shares between them.
Evaluative weight ξ, η characterize that these reference
sets are efficient under what posture. The runs {0, 1, 2} are
efficient under the posture that focuses on the lowest number
of the uninfected population divided by the medical cost.
However, run {8} is efficient under the posture that focuses
on the number of finally survived population divided by the
infection prevention cost.
These results are summarized in Figure 8. The execution
results are grouped according to their shared reference set.
This also reveals which data can be used as a reference to
improve group efficiency within the group.
This efficiency also characterizes the groups in terms of
what
posture
is
focused
on.
Thus,
by
endogenously
determining
these
evaluative
weights
without
prior
knowledge, DEA enables us to extract knowledge of latent
evaluative weights and the superiority or inferiority of
simulation results under the weights.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we used DEA to extract knowledge from
the results of epidemic control simulation. The DEA
classified epidemic simulation results using a method other
than cluster analysis. Furthermore, DEA endogenously
discovered evaluative weights that define the efficiency of
simulation results and shows the potential evaluative weights
and superiority of epidemic simulation results based on them.
This method was a good example of classification and
knowledge extraction for a set of social simulation results.
As a future research, we are going to apply DEA
classification to simulation log analysis for agent-based
social simulation and business gaming.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The ideas in this paper are inspired by Prof. Takeuchi’s
commentary [22]. We would like to express our deep
appreciation to him. This work is partly supported by the
Grant of the foundation for the Fusion Of Science and
Technology. The authors would like to thank Enago
(www.enago.jp) for the English language proofreading.
REFERENCES
[1]
W. O. Kermack and A. G. McKendrick, “A Contribution to
the Mathematical Theory of Epidemics”, Proceedings of the
Royal
Society,
vol.115A,
pp.700–721,
1927,
doi:10.1098/rspa.1927.0118,
(reprinted
Bulletin
of
Mathematical Biology, Vol.53, pp.33-55, 1991)
[2]
W. O. Kermack and A. G. McKendrick, “Contributions to the
Mathematical Theory
of
Epidemics-II.
the
Problem
of
Endemicity”, Proceedings of the Royal Society, Vol.138A,
pp.55–83, 1932, doi:10.1098/rspa.1932.0171, (reprinted in
Bulletin of Mathematical Biology, Vol.53, pp. 57-87, 1991)
[3]
A. Charnes, W.W. Cooper and E. Rhodes, “Measuring
Efficiency of Decision Making Units”, European Journal of
Operational
Research,
Vol.2
,
pp.429-444,
1978,
doi:10.1016/0377-2217(78)90138-8.
[4]
W.W. Cooper, L.M. Seiford and K. Tone, “Data Emvelopment
Analysis, A Comprehensive Text with Models, Applications,
References and DEA-Solver Software” (2nd. Ed.) , Springer,
2007, doi:10.1007/978-0-387-45283-8
[5]
A. Azadeh, T. Nazari and H. Charkhand, “Optimisation of
Facility
Layout
Design
Problem
with
Safety
and
Environmental Factors by Stochastic DEA and Simulation
Approach”, International Journal of Production Research,
Vol.53, pp.3370-3389, 2015.
[6]
D. Berre, J. Vayssières, J.P. Boussemart, H. Leleu, E. Tillard
and P. Lecomte, “A Methodology to Explore the Determinants
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-874-7
eKNOW 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

of Eco-efficiency by Combining an Agronomic Whole-farm
Simulation Model and Efficient Frontier”, Environmental
Modelling and Software, Vol.71, pp.46-59, 2015.
[7]
S. Hossein and A. Meysam, “A Simulation-Based Data
Envelopment Analysis (DEA) Model to Evaluate Wind Plants
Locations”, Decision Science Letters, Vol.4, pp.165-180,
2015.
[8]
E. Shadkam and M. Bijari, “Multi-Objective Simulation
Optimization for Selection and Determination of Order
Quantity in Supplier Selection Problem Under Uncertainty
and Quality Criteria”, The International Journal of Advanced
Manufacturing Technology, Vol.93, pp.161–173, 2017.
[9]
R-W. Po, Y-Y. Guh and M-S. Yang, "A New Clustering
Approach Using Data Envelopment Analysis", European
Journal of Operational Research, Vol,199, pp.276–284, 2009.
doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2008.10.022
[10] M. Hoshino, H. Oono and H. Inazumi, "A Step Towards New
Clustering Algorithm using DEA -for Gene Expression Data-",
The 19th Annual Conference of the Japanese Society for
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 3A1-01, 2005. (In Japanase)
[11] Y. Tanaka , M. Kunigami, T. Terano, “What can be Learned
from the Systematic Analysis of the Log Cluster of Agent
Simulation”, Studies in Simulation and Gaming Vol.27,
pp.31-41, 2017,.doi:10.32165/jasag.27.1_31. (In Japanese)
[12] T. Kikuchi,M. Kunigam, H. Takahashi, M. Toriyama and T.
Terano, “Explaining Log Data of Agent-Simulation Results
with
Managerial
Decision-Making
Description
Model”,
Studies in Simulation and Gaming Vol.29, pp.36-48, 2019,
doi:10.32165/jasag.29.1_36. (In Japanese)
[13] Y. Yuan, Q. Ying and M. Shan, “Using DEA and CA
Approachs for Educational Production Efficiency: Evidence
from ShangHai PISA Measurement”, International Journal of
Simulation:
Systems,
Science
and
Technology,
Vol.17,
pp.10.1-10.5, 2016.
[14] S.H. Zanakis, C. Alvarez and V. Li, “Socio-economic
determinants
of
HIV/AIDS
Pandemic
and
Nations
Efficiencies”, European Journal of Operational Research,
Vol.176, pp.1811-1838, 2007.
[15] A.L. Pakyz and Y.A. Ozcan, “Use of Data Envelopment
Analysis to Quantify Opportunities for Antibacterial Targets
for
Reduction
of
Health
Care–Associated
Clostridium
Difficile Infection”, American Journal of Medical Quality,
Vol.29, pp.437-444, 2014.
[16] M. Tsakas, “Management Evaluation of Public Hospital Units
Expenditures on Infections with the Use of Quantitative
Analysis Methods”,, Health Science Journal, Vol.5, pp.128-
136, 2011.
[17] S. Mazo, C. Emparan, M. Vallejo and P. Soriano, “Hospital-
In-The-Home Treatment of Surgical Infectious Diseases”, An
Economic Analysis. Surgical Infections, Vol.8, pp.567-574,
2007.
[18] C. Li, M. Sun, J.J. Shen, C.R. Cochran, X. Li and M. Hao,
“Evaluation on the Efficiencies of County-Level Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention in China: Results from a
National Survey”, Tropical Medicine and International Health,
Vol.21, pp.1106-1114, 2016.
[19] J.F. Liao, J. Wang, L. Liang, Y.D. Wu, M.J. Huang, T.Q. Liu,
L. Zhou and X.W. Wang, “An Evaluation Study of Research
Efficiency of the Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Diseases
Based on Malmquist Index”, Journal of Thoracic Disease,
Vol.8, pp.2709-2716, 2016.
[20] E.
Thanassoulis,
M.
Silva
Portela
and
M.
Graveney,
“Identifying the Scope for Savings at Inpatient Episode Level:
An
Illustration Applying
DEA to
Chronic
Obstructive
Pulmonary
Disease”,
European
Journal
of
Operational
Research, Vol.255, pp.570-582, 2016.
[21] M. Namiki, “Introduction to Mathematical Optimization with
Python” , Asakura, 2018. (in Japanese)
[22] T.
Takeuchi,
“Introduction
to
DEA”,
http://blog.livedoor.jp/lionfan/archives/52682140.html,
last
accessed 2021/7. (In Japanese)
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-874-7
eKNOW 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

