Recommendation Techniques on a Knowledge Graph for Email Remarketing
L´aszl´o Grad-Gyenge
Creo Group
Budapest, Hungary
laszlo.grad-gyenge@creo.hu
Peter Filzmoser
TU Vienna
Vienna, Austria
peter.filzmoser@tuwien.ac.at
Abstract—The knowledge graph, which is an ontology based
representation technique, is described to model the information
necessary to conduct collaborative ﬁltering, content-based ﬁlter-
ing and knowledge based recommendation methods. Spreading
activation and network science based recommendation methods
are presented and evaluated. The evaluation measures are calcu-
lated on top list recommendations, where rating estimation is not
necessary. In the experiment, click-through rates are measured
and presented based on the email based remarketing activity of
an electronic commerce system. Our primary result shows the
improved recommendation quality of spreading activation based
methods compared to the human expert.
Keywords–knowledge graph; recommender system; spreading
activation; network science; email remarketing
I.
INTRODUCTION
The traditional classiﬁcation of recommender systems [1]
proposes three main categories as collaborative ﬁltering,
content-based ﬁltering and knowledge based methods. By rep-
resenting the information in an ontology speciﬁcally designed
for the task, both the information necessary for collaborative,
content-based and knowledge-base techniques can be repre-
sented in one knowledge base, as we introduce it, in the
knowledge graph.
Graph based recommender systems are a promising alter-
native to representation learning and matrix factorization tech-
niques. In our work, we propose an information representation
technique, which is capable of representing heterogeneous in-
formation sources. Similar to ontologies, the knowledge graph
is a heterogeneous, labelled, restricted multigraph. The novelty
of our representation method is the ability to represent parallel
edges between two nodes. By utilizing a multigraph, our
primary intention is to be able to represent various interaction
types between users and items in one data structure as opposed
to existing knowledge representation techniques in this ﬁeld.
In our approach, we separate the representation of information
from the calculation methods. We think that the elimination
of these unnecessary interdependencies can lead to a clearer
approach on the theoretical side.
In this paper, we compare our spreading activation based,
personalized recommendations and the centrality measures of
network science to the performance of the human expert.
Our spreading activation based method deﬁnes an asymmetric
proximity measure between a source node and other nodes in
the network. As the method calculates the proximity of nodes,
it is not a rating estimation based method (as collaborative ﬁl-
tering) and it is utilized to generate a list of recommendations.
Network science based methods are applied in the cold start
case, and recommend central items in the ontology.
Next to Web based advertisements, a well known medium
of the remarketing era is the email. Sending offers to past or
potential customers in newsletters is a common practice of
the electronic commerce systems. The personalization of the
list of the offered products has the potential to increase the
performance of the newsletters. Also, the improvement of this
remarketing activity leads to a higher customer engagement,
hence it delivers a business value. On the other hand, as
products valuable to the user are presented, the personalization
of the newsletters leads to an increase in the service quality.
In our experiment, we evaluated recommender system
based
newsletters
utilizing
the
information
gathered
on
Booker [2], an electronic commerce system selling books. The
newsletters are sent with the industrial grade email remarketing
system, PartnerMail [3].
Related work is presented in Section II. Section III intro-
duces the graph based knowledge base. Section IV describes
the evaluated recommendation methods. A detailed description
of the dataset can be found in Section V. The evaluation
method is presented in Section VI. The results can be found
in Section VII. Section VIII concludes the paper.
II.
RELATED WORK
Graph based information representation is a known tech-
nique in this ﬁeld. Cantador et al. [4] deﬁne a multi-layered
graph approach and applies a clustering technique to derive
recommendations. Kazienko et al. [5] work with a layered
graph. In the ﬁeld of recommender systems, graphs are typi-
cally involved to represent the social network. Guha et al. [6],
Ziegler et al. [7], Massa et al. [8] and Jsang et al. [9] involve
trust networks to enhance recommendation quality. Guy et
al. [10], Konstas et al. [11] and He et al [12] calculate
recommendations with the help of a social network.
Spreading activation is a known method in the ﬁeld
of recommender systems. Blanco-Fernandez et al. present a
content based reasoning about the semantics of the user’s
preferences [13]. Their method is spreading activation based
and the recommendations are calculated with the Hopﬁeld Net
algorithm. They emphasize that spreading activation can be
helpful to avoid the overspecialisation. Hussein et al. introduce
SPREADR, a spreading activation based technique to close
the gap between context-awareness and self-adaptation [14].
Their method is also applied to adapt user interfaces [15]. Gao
et al. deﬁne a prototype in their position paper incorporating
user interests and domain knowledge in an ontology [16].
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Codina et al. show a semantic recommender engine and also
deﬁne a reasoning method to estimate user ratings on items
to enhance the quality of rating estimations [17]. They deﬁne
an item score as the weighted average of related concepts. An
important aspect of their work is that they distinguish between
explicit and implicit user feedback, which is also shown in
Section V. Troussov et al. deﬁne a tag aware recommendation
technique to investigate the decay and spreading parameters
of spreading activation methods [18]. Alvarez et al. introduce
ONTOSPREAD, a sophisticated, spreading activation tech-
nique in the scope of medical systems [19]. Jiang et al. present
an ontology based user model and a spreading activation based
recommendation technique [20].
III.
GRAPH BASED REPRESENTATION
Cold start is a widely known, common problem of rec-
ommender systems. The most problematic situation of rec-
ommender systems is the lack of information, when there is
no sufﬁcient data available to deliver personalized recommen-
dations for a newcoming user. To avoid this problem to the
farthest possible extent, a general information representation
method is used, which is capable of representing heteroge-
neous information. By representing heterogeneous informa-
tion, the amount of information sources is increased. Following
this strategy, our intention is to represent as much information
as possible, in order not to constraint the recommendation
methods in achieving high coverage.
The information is represented in a labelled, weighted,
restricted multigraph, as Ku = (TN, TE, N, Eu, tN) in the
undirected case and Kd = (TN, TE, N, Ed, tN) in the directed
case. TN is the set of node types, TE is the set of edge
types. N represents the set of nodes existing in the graph,
Eu ⊆ {{u, v, t}|u ∈ N ∧ v ∈ N ∧ t ∈ TE ∧ u ̸= v}
represents the set of undirected edges between the nodes,
Ed ⊆ {(u, v, t)|u ∈ N ∧ v ∈ N ∧ t ∈ TE ∧ u ̸= v}
represents the set of directed edges between the nodes. The
function tN ⊂ N × TN assigns a node type to each node.
At the moment, type assignments do not inﬂuence the ﬁnal
recommendation result and are introduced for completeness
and further research.
IV.
RECOMMENDATION METHODS
In our experiment, we compare personalized and non-
personalized recommendations. The personalized case is
spreading activation based. In the non-personalized case, net-
work science and human expert based recommendations are
evaluated.
A. Spreading Activation
A spreading activation [21] based recommendation tech-
nique is used operating on Ku as introduced in Section III.
Spreading activation is a well-known method in the ﬁeld
of semantic networks, neural networks and associative net-
works [22]. To recommend items with spreading activation, an
iteration is started. In the ﬁrst step the activation of the node
representing the person to generate recommendations for is set
to 1. This node is also called as source node. Then, in each
iteration step all nodes distribute a part of their activation to the
neighbouring nodes. The activation is divided equally along the
receiving nodes. The parameter that determines the amount of
activation distributed is called spreading relax. Before
distribution, the activation is multiplied by the value of the
parameter. A part of the activation is also kept at the node. The
parameter that determines this amount is called activation
relax. The iteration is conducted until the parameter step
limit is reached.
After the iteration is ﬁnished, a relevance order is set up on
the items. The relevance order is determined by the activation
of the nodes after the last iteration step in the graph. Nodes
of type item are selected and are sorted in descending order,
by relevance. It means that nodes with higher activation value
will be recommended with a higher priority.
B. Network Science
Network science [23] developed several centrality measures
for nodes of networks. The aim of these measures is to express
how central the position of a speciﬁc node is in a network by
assigning numeric values to the nodes. Such measures are for
example: degree centrality, closeness centrality, betweenness
centrality and eigenvector centrality. Degree centrality counts
the edges belonging to the node. Closeness centrality is the
inverse of farness, which is the sum of the length of paths
from the node to all other nodes. Betweenness centrality is
the count of how many times a node lays on the shortest path
between two nodes. Eigenvector centrality is proportional to
the sum of the eigenvector centralities of its neighbours.
To calculate global recommendations, the above mentioned
network science centrality measures are utilized on Kd and a
relevance order is set up on the nodes of the network. The
relevance order is prepared by sorting the nodes in descending
by the speciﬁc centrality measure value.
C. Human Expert
In order to provide a baseline for our methods, human
expert based newsletters are also involved in the experiment.
The recommendations of the human expert are based on
domain knowledge, experience on the market and publicly
available top selling lists of competing on-line shops. For
each campaign, the human expert provided a list of items to
recommend. The list of items is treated as non-personalized
recommendations; the same list of items is offered to all the
users. Human expert based personalized recommendation is
not feasible due to ﬁnancial and capacity restrictions.
V.
DATASET
In our experiment, the knowledge graph represents the
information collected in the electronic commerce system. A
representation method has been deﬁned, which is capable to
model all the available information present. Our software is
integrated with the electronic commerce system, meaning that
data is transferred to the knowledge base in real-time.
The knowledge graph contains persons, books, attributes,
attribute categories and the relations between these entities.
Each person and each book is represented with a node. Cus-
tomer attributes are home town and birth year. These attributes
are speciﬁed by the user and are not mandatory ﬁelds. Item
attributes are author, publisher, year of publishing, number of
pages and price. A book can have multiple authors. For each
attribute value, a node is created and is bound with an edge
to the appropriate node representing the person or item the
speciﬁc attribute belongs to. In the case of number of pages
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

TABLE I. TYPES AND OCCURRENCES.
(a) Node types
Type
Count
Person
17 134
HomeTown
105
BirthYear
7
Item
117 367
Author
45 918
Publisher
6 351
YearOfPublishing
67
NumberOfPages
5
PriceCategory
5
ItemCategory
598
(b) Relation types
Type
Count
PersonBirthYear
8
PersonHomeTown
175
ItemAuthor
127 613
ItemCategory
30 800
ItemNumberOfPages
112 524
ItemPriceCategory
212 473
ItemPublisher
116 746
ItemYearOfPublishing
96 653
BoughtItem
22 064
OnWishList
2 972
ItemVisited
4 590
SubCategory
486
and price, value intervals are deﬁned. In these cases, the nodes
are created to represent the intervals instead of values.
In the electronic commerce system, the books are organized
into categories. Such categories are for example “travel”,
“art” and “religion”. A book can be assigned to multiple
categories. The categories are organized into a hierarchical
structure, meaning that most categories are subcategories of
other categories. The category system and the book-category
relations are also represented in the knowledge base.
In order to represent user interest in speciﬁc items, relations
between persons and books are stored in the knowledge base. If
a user visits the detailed information page of a book, a relation
is inserted into the knowledge base to represent the implicit
(not explicitly speciﬁed) interest of the user. If a user purchases
an item (a more explicitly expressed interest), a relation is
inserted into the knowledge base. In the electronic commerce
system, users can put books on their wish-list to indicate that
they are interested in buying the speciﬁc books later. Wish-lists
are very useful information sources as they represent explicit
interest expressed by the users. Wish-list relations are also
stored in the knowledge base.
The information is represented in the knowledge base
as deﬁned in Section III. Table Ia presents the node types
and occurrence counts in the knowledge base. Nodes of
type Person represent people who are already users of the
electronic commerce system and people who only signed
up for the newsletter. Nodes of type HomeTown represent
the home town of the users. Nodes of type BirthYear
represent the birth year of the users, i.e. 1978. Nodes of type
Item represent the books available in the on-line shop, i.e.
Manga and Hieronymus Bosch. Nodes of type Author
represent the authors of the books, i.e. Kurt Vonnegut
and John Updike. Nodes of type Publisher represent
the publishers of the books, i.e. Osiris Publishing
and A & C Black. Nodes of type YearOfPublishing
represent the different years when books were published, i.e.
2007. Nodes of type NumberOfPages represent number
of pages intervals. The following intervals are deﬁned 0-60,
61-100, 101-200, 201-500 and 501-1000. Nodes of
type PriceCategory represent price intervals. The follow-
ing intervals are deﬁned by the expert of the electronic com-
merce system 0-1000, 0-3000, 1001-3000, 3001-6000
and 6001-10000. As the intervals are overlapping, a book
can belong to multiple price categories. In this case multiple
edge are created in the knowledge graph. Nodes of type
ItemCategory represent item categories, i.e. travel, art
and religion.
Table Ib presents relation types and occurrence counts in
the knowledge base. Relations of type PersonBirthYear
between
nodes
of
type
Person
and
nodes
of
type
PersonBirthYear represent that the person was born in
the speciﬁc year. Relations of type PersonHomeTown be-
tween nodes of type Person and nodes of type HomeTown
represent that the person lives in the speciﬁc town. Relations
of type ItemAuthor between nodes of type Item and
nodes of type Author represent the author(s) of the speciﬁc
book. Relations of type ItemCategory between nodes of
type Item and nodes of type ItemCategory represent
that the book belongs to the speciﬁc category. Relations of
type ItemNumberOfPages between nodes of type Item
and nodes of type NumberOfPages represent that the page
count of the book falls in the speciﬁc page count interval.
Relations of type ItemPriceCategory between nodes of
type Item and nodes of type PriceCategory represent
that the price of the book falls into the speciﬁed price category.
Relations of type ItemPublisher between nodes of type
Item and nodes of type Publisher represent that the
book is published by the speciﬁc publisher. Relations of type
ItemYearOfPublishing between nodes of type Item
and nodes of type YearOfPublishing represent that the
book has been published in the speciﬁc year. Relations of type
BoughtItem between nodes of type Person and nodes of
type Item represent that the person purchased the speciﬁc
book. Relations of type OnWishList between nodes of
type Person and nodes of type Item represent that the
person put the speciﬁc book onto their wish-list. Relations
of type ItemVisited between nodes of type Person and
nodes of type Item represent that the person visited the Web
page displaying details on the speciﬁc book. Relations of
type SubCategory between nodes of type ItemCategory
represent that the category is the sub-category of the speciﬁed
one.
Table Ib shows that the knowledge base is sparse on
person attributes but is rich on item attributes. The reason
behind this is that while item attributes are available from the
publishing companies, users do not take the time to specify
their personal details. Unfortunately the wish-lists are also
not densely populated. The knowledge base contains only a
small amount of ItemVisited relations. The reason for this
is that in order to maximize the book orders, the electronic
commerce system does not make it mandatory to authenticate
the users for purchasing or browsing. As the users are typically
not authenticated, they cannot be identiﬁed and most of the
ItemVisited relations are not recorded. Table Ib also shows
that there are books with multiple authors in the database as
the count of ItemAuthor relation is higher than the number
of Item nodes. The count of ItemNumberOfPages and
ItemPublisher is not the same. The reason for this is
that the item attributes are not speciﬁed for each item. The
relatively high number of ItemPriceCategory relations
can be explained with the overlapping PriceCategory
intervals.
The knowledge base is integrated with the electronic com-
merce system, meaning that changes made by the visitors in the
database are immediately transmitted to the knowledge base of
the recommender system. As the electronic commerce system
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

is a system in production, it has several transactions per day.
The node and relation counts per type indicated in Table Ia
and Table Ib were recorded on 23 January, 2015.
VI.
EVALUATION
In our experiment, the methods described in Section IV
are evaluated. As the recommender system software is inte-
grated with the electronic commerce system, the information
is transmitted to the knowledge base in real-time. The methods
are evaluated with newsletters offering books to the users
of the electronic commerce system. The books presented in
each newsletter is selected by one of the methods. During the
evaluation period, click-through events have been measured.
A. Newsletters Sent
To evaluate the recommendation techniques, 16 campaigns
were conducted between 23 Jul, 2014 and 14 Jan, 2015. During
the evaluation period 241 062 newsletters have been sent of
which 35 229 newsletters have been opened.
TABLE II. NEWSLETTER SEND DATES.
Type
Date sent
Type
Date sent
Recommender System
2014-07-16
Human Expert
2014-09-22
Human Expert
2014-07-23
Recommender System
2014-09-26
Recommender System
2014-07-26
Human Expert
2014-10-02
Recommender System
2014-08-01
Human Expert
2014-10-09
Human Expert
2014-08-06
Recommender System
2014-10-15
Human Expert
2014-08-27
Human Expert
2014-10-22
Recommender System
2014-08-29
Recommender System
2014-10-31
Recommender System
2014-09-12
Recommender System
2014-12-14
Table II lists the newsletter campaigns. Column type con-
tains the type of the campaign, column Date sent the date
when the newsletters have been sent. The following campaign
types are deﬁned.
Recommender system based campaigns involve a person-
alized and a non-personalized recommendation method. The
personalized method is utilized in the case, when there is
enough information to offer a personalized list of books to
the user. In this case, in our experiment, a spreading activation
based technique as described in Section IV-A is evaluated.
If there is not enough information to provide personalized
recommendations, a non-personalized method is used as a
fall-back solution. In this case, in our experiment one of the
network science based methods as described in Section IV-B
is evaluated.
Human expert based campaigns present the books selected
by the human expert as described in Section IV-C to the users.
In this case no fall-back solution is necessary as the human
expert based method is a non-personalized method.
B. Evaluation Method
The behaviour of the users in the purchase process can be
measured by several click-through events. In our experiment
the click-through events are sequential. The steps of the
process are the following: sending a newsletter, opening a
newsletter, clicking on an item in a newsletter, ordering an
item and paying for the item. During the evaluation period, the
sales process is recorded and is measured. According to the
mentioned steps, the following newsletter states are deﬁned:
sent, opened, clicked, ordered and paid.
In order to keep resource usage low, to conform industry
standards and to be able to measure the click-through rate,
the newsletters do not contain embedded images but image
references. For security and privacy reasons, most of the state
of the art email client software do not download remote images
automatically. If the user is interested in more details of
the message, the email client can be instructed to download
and show the remote content in the message. As the image
references point to our server, this user interaction will lead
to a download event on the server side. This event can be
monitored and the click-through event is recorded.
The next conversion, clicking on an book is an important
step. By clicking on a book in a newsletter, the users click
on a link. The links in a newsletter take the user ﬁrst to our
server. Each link in the newsletter contains a unique identiﬁer.
Based on this identiﬁer our software records the click-through
on the server and forwards the user to the detail page of the
book in the electronic commerce system.
The detail page of the book also lets the user order the
item, which event is forwarded to our software where the click-
through event is recorded as the next conversion. If the user
does not order the book in this work-ﬂow event but visits the
platform later and ﬁnalizes the order process, the order event
will be forwarded to the evaluation software and the click-
through event is to be recorded.
The electronic commerce system offers various payment
methods like credit card, money transfer and cash. Cash based
payments do not involve additional shipment cost, as in this
case the user personally visits the store. Due to the lack of
additional fees, in the economic environment the experiment
is conducted in, cash based payment is the most frequently
used method. The two consequences of cash based payment
are the delay between the order and payment and the case
of the unﬁnished purchase process. The ﬁrst case is managed
by our evaluation software. The latter case leads to a visible
conversion rate between the order and payment steps.
C. Method Conﬁgurations
Human expert and network science based methods do
not need conﬁguration. Spreading activation requires three
parameters as described in IV-A. Based on our past research
results [24], spreading relax, activation relax
is set to a constant value, 0.5. In the experiments various
spreading activation conﬁgurations are deﬁned as the value
of the step limit parameter varies between 3 and 7. In a
campaign only one method conﬁguration is evaluated.
D. Recommendation List Filtering
In order to increase the recommendation quality, a post-
processing is applied to the spreading activation and the
network centrality measure based recommendation lists. The
post-processing is speciﬁed by the human expert and is deﬁned
by the following rules
•
a newsletter can contain at most 2 books from the
same author,
•
if a book is once presented in a newsletter, it won’t be
included into consecutive newsletters for two months,
•
books already bought in the electronic commerce
system are not inserted into the newsletter.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

The above described rules can be understood as a ﬁltering
mechanism on the recommendation list. After the recommen-
dation list is ordered by relevance, those n items are inserted
into the newsletter, which items meet the described criteria,
while keeping the relevance order.
VII.
RESULTS
Table III summarizes the newsletters sent in the evalua-
tion period. Each row represents the appropriate state of the
newsletter according to the states described in Section VI-B.
The columns deﬁne the type of the recommendation method as
described in Section VI-A. The values present the number of
newsletters. Due to space limitations, the summarized results
are presented.
TABLE III. COUNT OF NEWSLETTERS PER STATE AND RECOMMENDATION
METHOD TYPE
State
Spreading Activation
Network Science
Human Expert
Sent
66 148
72 884
102 030
Opened
11 700
9 206
14 323
Clicked
1 265
260
772
Ordered
24
0
17
Paid
17
0
6
The ﬁrst row of the table shows an important property of
the dataset, the high number of the cold start cases. In total,
66 148 personalized newsletters and 72 884 non-personalized
newsletters were sent. It means that the proportion (52%) of the
cold start case is relatively high, compared to, for example our
experiments [24] on the MovieLens [25] dataset. The reason
for the high proportion of cold start cases can be found in
the high number of users signed up only to the newsletter as
mentioned in Section V. As the nodes representing these users
are not bound to the knowledge base by any edge, spreading
activation based methods are not able to ﬁnd a path between
these nodes and the nodes representing books.
The most visible and important result of our experiment
is visible in the last row of Table III representing newsletters
resulting in a sale event. Spreading activation based newsletters
lead to the highest number of purchase events, more than
the human expert based newsletters. Unfortunately, network
science based methods show a low performance, as network
science based recommendations do not lead to a purchase
event.
Table IV shows the click-through event rates between the
different states of the evaluation process in each method type
group presented in sub-tables. The rows represent the source
state, the columns represent the destination state of the state
transition. For example the value in the last column of the ﬁrst
row in Table IVa shows that 0.026% of all the sent, spreading
activation based newsletters resulted in a purchase event.
The click-through rates presented in Table IV show that
personalized newsletters clearly outperform the human expert,
as 0.026% of all the sent personalized newsletters resulted in a
purchase event, while this ratio is 0.006% for the human expert
based method. The detailed click-through rates of personalized
engines are higher than human expert based recommendations,
except for one case, the Clicked to Ordered case. In this
case, the click through rates are 1.897% compared to 2.202%.
We would like to mention here that this state transition is being
processed in the electronic commerce portal, which might
inﬂuence the experiment.
TABLE IV. CONVERSION RATES OF METHOD TYPE GROUPS
(a) Spreading activation
Opened
Clicked
Ordered
Paid
Sent
17.688%
1.912%
0.036%
0.026%
Opened
10.812%
0.205%
0.145%
Clicked
1.897%
1.344%
Ordered
70.833%
(b) Network Science
Opened
Clicked
Ordered
Paid
Sent
12.631%
0.357%
0.000%
0.000%
Opened
2.824%
0.000%
0.000%
Clicked
0.000%
0.000%
Ordered
0.000%
(c) Human Expert
Opened
Clicked
Ordered
Paid
Sent
14.038%
0.757%
0.017%
0.006%
Opened
5.390%
0.119%
0.042%
Clicked
2.202%
0.777%
Ordered
35.294%
Unfortunately, network science based methods show no
activity after the Clicked state, as there is no click-through
event from from the Clicked to the Ordered state for this
method type. While the Sent to Clicked state transition
rate of network science based methods (12.631%) is similar
to the transition rate of other method groups (17.688% and
14.038%), the Opened to Clicked state transition rate
(2.824%) is very low compared to other method types.
Comparing human expert based methods to spreading
activation based engines, spreading activation shows a much
higher conversion rate from the Opened to the Clicked state
as 10.812% compared to 5.390% and from the Ordered to
the Paid state as 70.833% compared to 35.294%. Referring to
Section VI-B, the latter click-through rate involves additional
resources from the users (picking up the books personally)
and this difference shows a more stronger commitment of the
users.
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
A graph based knowledge base containing heterogeneous
information is deﬁned. Three different groups of types of rec-
ommendation techniques are evaluated as spreading activation,
network science and human expert. The methods are evaluated
in an experiment with an electronic commerce system by send-
ing personalized newsletters. During the experiment, click-
through events are measured and presented in the paper. The
results show that personalized newsletters outperform human
experts and are also capable to increase business income.
Another important ﬁnding is that the application of network
science measure methods does not lead to a purchase event.
Jeong et al. [26] also conducted experiments in this ﬁeld,
and came to the conclusion that in order to increase the
recommendation quality, network science measures should be
combined with already existing methods. Our ﬁnding shows a
similar result as the application of network science methods
without combining with any additional information does not
lead to high quality recommendations.
The most signiﬁcant differences between the method types
can be found at the state transition between the Opened to
Clicked state and the Ordered to Paid state. In the case
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

of network science methods we have information only in the
case of Clicked to Ordered transition, as network science
based methods do not even reach the Ordered state. The
Opened to Clicked clicked transition rate shows somehow
how relevant the recommended items are to the particular user,
as this click-through event requires an explicit action from the
user regarding to the item in interest. Network science based
methods perform the worse at this state transition. Spreading
activation based methods perform much better than human
expert based methods indicating that spreading activation rec-
ommends more relevant items compared to the human expert.
As mentioned in Section VI, the last state transition in-
volves additional resources from the user. In the economic
environment the experiment is conducted in, the users are very
cost sensitive, meaning that to eliminate shipping costs, instead
of shipping, the personal pick-up is preferred. It means that the
last transition step involves time and transportation costs from
the users. The fact that spreading activation based methods
outperform the human expert shows that the interpretation
of the relevance of the recommended items draws additional
factors of the evaluation method.
One of our next steps is to implement and evaluate collab-
orative ﬁltering in the described evaluation environment. By
its nature, the dataset contains no rating information, hence a
binary variant of collaborative ﬁltering should be implemented.
Another interesting topic is the analysis of the impact of wish-
lists on the recommendation results.
A more technical problem is the user identiﬁcation or
authentication. We assume that by introducing a cookie or
ETag based technique to identify returning users in the
electronic commerce system, the number of edges of type
ItemVisited can be signiﬁcantly increased. Based on the
additional information available, the recommendation method
can be further investigated.
Utilizing neural networks and conditional random ﬁelds
is also a possible direction of future research. By deﬁning
relations between nodes of the network on a more sophisticated
level, the network can be able to more precisely adapt to the
training data. Neural networks can be utilized with directed
graphs.
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Jannach, M. Zanker, A. Felfernig, and G. Friedrich, Recommender
Systems An Introduction.
Cambridge University Press, 2011.
[2]
aLap. (2016, Apr.) Booker.hu Online Bookstore - Order a Book.
[Online]. Available: http://www.booker.hu/
[3]
CreoGroup.
(2016,
Apr.)
PartnerMail.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//www.partnermail.eu/
[4]
I. Cantador and P. Castells, “Multi-Layered Ontology-Based User
Proﬁles and Semantic Social Networks for Recommender Systems,”
in 2nd Int. Workshop on Web Personalisation, Recommender Systems
and Intelligent User Interfaces (WPRSIUI 2006) at the 4th Int. Conf.
on Adaptive Hypermedia and Adaptive Web-Based Systems (AH 2006),
Dublin, Ireland, June 2006.
[5]
P. Kazienko, K. Musial, and T. Kajdanowicz, “Multidimensional Social
Network in the Social Recommender System,” Trans. Sys. Man Cyber.
Part A, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 746–759, Jul. 2011.
[6]
R. Guha, R. Kumar, P. Raghavan, and A. Tomkins, “Propagation of
trust and distrust,” in WWW ’04: Proceedings of the 13th international
conference on World Wide Web.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2004,
pp. 403–412.
[7]
C.-N. Ziegler and G. Lausen, “Propagation Models for Trust and
Distrust in Social Networks,” Information Systems Frontiers, vol. 7,
no. 4-5, pp. 337–358, Dec. 2005.
[8]
P. Massa and P. Avesani, “Trust-Aware Collaborative Filtering for
Recommender Systems.” in CoopIS/DOA/ODBASE (1), ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, R. Meersman and Z. Tari, Eds., vol. 3290.
Springer, 2004, pp. 492–508.
[9]
A. Jøsang, S. Marsh, and S. Pope, “Exploring Different Types of
Trust Propagation.” in iTrust, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
K. Stølen, W. H. Winsborough, F. Martinelli, and F. Massacci, Eds.,
vol. 3986.
Springer, 2006, pp. 179–192.
[10]
I. Guy, N. Zwerdling, D. Carmel, I. Ronen, E. Uziel, S. Yogev, and
S. Ofek-Koifman, “Personalized recommendation of social software
items based on social relations.” in RecSys, L. D. Bergman, A. Tuzhilin,
R. D. Burke, A. Felfernig, and L. Schmidt-Thieme, Eds.
ACM, 2009,
pp. 53–60.
[11]
I. Konstas, V. Stathopoulos, and J. M. Jose, “On Social Networks
and Collaborative Recommendation,” in Proceedings of the 32Nd In-
ternational ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, ser. SIGIR ’09.
New York, NY, USA: ACM,
2009, pp. 195–202.
[12]
J. He, “A Social Network-based Recommender System,” Ph.D. disser-
tation, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2010, aAI3437557.
[13]
Y. Blanco-Fern´andez, M. L. Nores, A. Gil-Solla, M. R. Cabrer, and
J. J. P. Arias, “Exploring synergies between content-based ﬁltering
and Spreading Activation techniques in knowledge-based recommender
systems.” Inf. Sci., vol. 181, no. 21, pp. 4823–4846, 2011.
[14]
T. Hussein, D. Westheide, and J. Ziegler, “Context-adaptation based
on Ontologies and Spreading Activation,” in LWA 2007: Lernen -
Wissen - Adaption, Halle, September 2007, Workshop Proceedings,
A. Hinneburg, Ed.
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, 2007,
pp. 361–366.
[15]
T. Hussein and J. Ziegler, “Adapting web sites by spreading activation
in ontologies,” in ReColl ’08: Int. Workshop on Recommendation and
Collaboration (in conjunction with IUI 2008), Gran Canaria, 2008.
[16]
Q. Gao, J. Yan, and M. Liu, “A Semantic Approach to Recommendation
System Based on User Ontology and Spreading Activation Model.” in
NPC Workshops, J. Cao, M. Li, C. Weng, Y. Xiang, X. Wang, H. Tang,
F. Hong, H. Liu, and Y. Wang, Eds.
IEEE Computer Society, 2008,
pp. 488–492.
[17]
V. Codina and L. Ceccaroni, “Taking Advantage of Semantics in Rec-
ommendation Systems.” in CCIA, ser. Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Applications, R. Alqu´ezar, A. Moreno, and J. Aguilar-Martin, Eds.,
vol. 210.
IOS Press, 2010, pp. 163–172.
[18]
A. Troussov, D. Parra, and P. Brusilovsky, “Spreading Activation
Approach to Tag-aware Recommenders: Modeling Similarity on Multi-
dimensional Networks,” D. Jannach, W. Geyer, J. Freyne, S. S. Anand,
C. Dugan, B. Mobasher, and A. Kobsa, Eds., 2009, pp. 57–62.
[19]
J. M. Alvarez, L. Polo, P. Abella, W. Jimenez, and J. E. Labra,
“Application of the Spreading Activation Technique for Recommending
Concepts of well-known ontologies in Medical Systems,” 2011.
[20]
X. Jiang and A.-H. Tan, “Learning and inferencing in user ontology
for personalized Semantic Web search.” Inf. Sci., vol. 179, no. 16, pp.
2794–2808, 2009.
[21]
M. R. Quillian, “Semantic memory,” in Semantic Information Process-
ing, M. Minsky, Ed.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1968, pp. 227–270.
[22]
N. V. Findler, Ed., Associative Networks: The Representation and Use
of Knowledge of Computers.
Academic Pr, 1979.
[23]
D. Easley and J. Kleinberg, Networks, Crowds, and Markets: Reasoning
About a Highly Connected World.
Cambridge University Press, 2010.
[24]
L. Grad-Gyenge, P. Filzmoser, and H. Werthner, “Recommendations
on a Knowledge Graph,” in MLRec 2015 : 1st International Workshop
on Machine Learning Methods for Recommender Systems, 2015, pp.
13–20.
[25]
P. Resnick, N. Iacovou, M. Suchak, P. Bergstorm, and J. Riedl, “Grou-
pLens: An Open Architecture for Collaborative Filtering of Netnews,”
in Proc. of ACM 1994 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work.
Chapel Hill, North Carolina: ACM, 1994, pp. 175–186.
[26]
J. H. Jeong and J. W. Kim, “Personalized Recommendation Based on
Collaborative Filtering with Social Network Analysis,” in International
Conference on Information and Computer Applications, ser. ICICA
2012, vol. 24.
IACSIT Press, 2012, pp. 67–71.
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

