ODINet - Online Data Integration Network 
 An innovative ontology-based data search engine 
S. Pieroni, M. Franchini, 
S. Molinaro 
Institute of Clinical 
Physiology, CNR 
Pisa, Italy 
{s.pieroni, m.franchini, 
molinaro}@ifc.cnr.it 
A. Greco, F. Pitto 
Sistemi Territoriali S.r.l. 
Cascina (Pisa), Italy 
{a.greco, f.pitto}@sister.it 
 
M. Toigo 
Simurg Ricerche snc  
Livorno, Italy 
m.toigo@simurgricerche.it 
 
L. Caterino 
Rete Sviluppo S.C.  
Firenze, Italy 
caterino@retesviluppo.it 
 
 
Abstract— Along with the expansion of Open Data and 
according to the latest EU directives for open access, the 
attention of public administration, research bodies and 
business is on web publishing of data in open format. However, 
a specialized search engine on the datasets, with similar role to 
that of Google for web pages, is not yet widespread. This 
article presents the Online Data Integration Network (ODINet) 
project, which aims to define a new technological framework 
for access to and online dissemination of structured and 
heterogeneous data through innovative methods of cataloging, 
searching and display of data on the web. In this article, we 
focus on the semantic component of our platform, emphasizing 
how we built and used ontologies. We further describe the 
Social Network Analysis (SNA) techniques we exploited to 
analyze it and to retrieve the required information. The testing 
phase of the project, that is still in progress, has already 
demonstrated the validity of the ODINet approach. 
Keywords-Data search engine; domain ontology; semantic 
web; social network analysis. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The Online Data Integration Network (ODINet) project 
is a Research and Development Project, approved within the 
Italian Regional Operational Programme having as the main 
objective the "Regional Competitiveness and Employment" 
through the 2007-2013 European Regional Development 
Fund. The project involves the prototypal implementation of 
an innovative semantic search engine (SSE) able to catalog 
numerical data in an ontological graph, to extract from data 
the information most relevant to the user requests using 
Social Network Analysis (SNA) algorithms and to return 
that information in a highly usable way.  
The literature review indicates that there are multiple 
proposals for SSE, but none of them is specialized in 
finding information contained in alphanumeric datasets 
related to the user’s needs. On the other hand, there are 
some search engines for numerical datasets, such as Quandl 
(https://www.quandl.com) 
and 
datahub.io 
(http://datahub.io), but it seems they are neither based on a 
semantic knowledge base, nor they employ SNA techniques.  
Therefore, the ODINet's design is based on these 
prerequisites and its goal is to demonstrate the benefits of 
the combined use of these innovative principles. 
The application domain is connected to the social, 
economic and health fields, in order to cover most of the 
available data held by public bodies in the Italian context. 
Moreover, the three domains are closely linked to one 
another and offer the opportunity of cross-sectional 
cognitive investigations, through the identification of 
ontologies that describe interconnected concepts and links 
among various topics. Within each area, a kernel ontology 
has been designed for automatic and manual indexing 
purposes, bringing direct support to the SSE and enhancing 
retrieval accuracy. We further developed a data harvest 
component able to extract data from the web, interfacing to 
open data portals of Italian public administration.  
We indexed those datasets together with the thematic 
ontologies, building a Search Graph that constitutes the main 
support for the Search Engine. This component, that is 
available as a web service, exploits well-known algorithms 
based on SNA properties, such as the centrality of nodes and 
the clusterization factor, in order to identify those datasets 
that are more related to the search query inserted by the user.  
The search engine performs a semantic search on the 
graph: the semantic relations of our ontologies are enriched 
with two further procedures able to identify concepts in 
distinct ontologies that are semantically related one another. 
Finally, the identified datasets semantically connected to the 
user’s query are returned by the web interface. A diagram 
describing the overall organization of ODINet platform is 
shown in Figure 1. 
The focus of this paper is primarily the description of the 
semantic component of our platform, emphasizing the 
ontology-building process and how the ontologies have been 
used to build an index in form of a graph. We further present 
an in-depth description of our search engine component, 
explaining the whole process from a search query inserted by 
a user to the final results returned by the search engine.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the knowledge resources and the ontology building 
process. Section III describes the technological platform and 
Section IV shows the main results. A final discussion closes 
the article. 
II. KNOWLEDGE RESOURCES AND ONTOLOGY BUILDING 
Building specialized ontologies from scratch through the 
support of domain experts’ knowledge, requires a huge effort 
of conceptualization and a long editing time [1], especially in 
complex domains. Therefore, our choice was to rely on 
existing standard resources starting from EuroVoc [2], a 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 1.  Overall organization of the technological platform 
 
multilingual, multidisciplinary thesaurus, managed and 
maintained by the European Union’s Publications Office, 
which 
moved 
forward 
to 
ontology-based 
thesaurus 
management and semantic web technologies as Simple 
Knowledge Organization System (SKOS) conformant to 
W3C recommendations. EuroVoc has been widely used for 
classification software and indexers development [3], 
therefore starting from the SKOS [4] version of EuroVoc and 
relying on other standard resources, three specialized 
ontologies have been developed and linked in order to 
support the SSE. Since the ODINet's main objective is to 
access and classify a large amount of data and to present it to 
a wide range of users, EuroVoc has been chosen as it covers 
an exhaustive set of fields related to the activities of the 
European institutions, as shown in Figure 2. Therefore, in the 
initial phase of our work, the ontologies have been projected 
to have a wide horizontal spectrum, rather than a vertical 
one, using a top-down approach aimed to develop precise 
definitions of high-level concepts, and postponing to the 
validation phase a bottom-up approach necessary for analytic 
use-cases. After a deep analysis of the various sectors, we 
have chosen the ‘Social Questions’ domain as the core 
resource for both social and health ontologies. Actually, this 
domain copes with various relevant topics for the ODINet 
project as health, family, migration, demography, social 
framework and affairs, culture and religion and social 
protection.  
 
 
Figure 2.  EuroVoc main structure 
Regarding the economic domain, we have chosen the 
sectors 
Economics, 
Trade, 
Finance, 
Business 
and 
Competitions, Employment and working conditions, Industry 
as core resources. 
For the ontology editing, we adopted Protégé [5], which 
provides a conceptual development environment and an 
interactive graphical tool for the design and implementation 
of ontologies. Because of the project implementation and 
validation is conducted on data provided by Italian public 
institutions, the Italian version of EuroVoc sectors 
mentioned above, was transferred into Protégé creating one 
class, both for each sector and for each micro-thesaurus. In 
order to respect the original hierarchy, every micro-
thesaurus has been linked to its broader/narrower terms 
through the native Protégé property SubClassOf. In 
coherence with EuroVoc specification, the relations 
hasBroader, 
hasNarrower 
and 
isRelated 
have 
been 
implemented inside Protégé. The annotation process has 
been mainly driven by the SKOS definitions of 
preferredLabel, hiddenLabel, seeAlso, isDefinedBy. Some 
overlapping concepts were present in the three domain 
ontologies. In the merging phase, this was addressed by 
means of SKOS's mapping properties used to define links 
between concepts in different ontology schemes, as 
exactMatch, closeMatch, narrowMatch, broadMatch and 
relatedMatch properties.  
A. Health domain ontology 
The main objective of Health domain ontology is to 
provide information about chronic diseases, with focus on 
cardiovascular disease and address 1) general questions 
coming from citizens, 2) specific questions coming from 
health system actors. In addition to EuroVoc, other 
specialized resources have been accessed in order to meet 
specific domain requirements, in particular the Unified 
Medical Language System [6] meta-thesaurus, a repository 
of biomedical concepts and the Medical Subject Headings 
[7] thesaurus, often used in document indexing. Efforts have 
been made to migrate the EuroVoc ‘2841 health’ micro-
thesaurus (i.e., health policy, health care profession, illness, 
medical science, nutrition, pharmaceutical industry) and a 
part of MESH Heading related to the Cardiovascular 
Diseases ‘Tree C14’ to the standard formal web ontology 
language OWL [8], that became a World Wide Web 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Consortium Recommendation in 2009. This migration step 
was crucial to performing ontology editing through Protégé 
and creating an initial interoperable ontology file. Then, we 
identified several extensions, the main ones regard drugs and 
disease: the extension related to drugs implied the migration 
of the first two levels of Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical 
(ATC) classification system. The extension related to 
diseases implied the migration of the International 
Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical 
Modification (ICD-9-CM). The annotation process was 
implemented with the support of MESH thesaurus. A final 
extension was carried out to model measures and indicators 
of health and quality of care in Tuscany, developed by 
Health Regional Agency (ARS Toscana). Relations have 
been established between concepts of the different sub-
hierarchies, e.g., given a diagnosis as Acute Myocardial 
Infarction, the ontology provide links with indicated drugs 
and with related diagnosis and symptoms. 
B. Economic domain ontology 
In recent years, the economic domain has shown several 
points of contact and overlap with the themes of health and 
social services. This partly because of the negative climate 
resulting from the world economy crisis, with strategies on 
spending review, compression of costs of health care, the 
links between income (individual and family) and access to 
health and social services [9]. These issues represent crucial 
points in the agenda of policy makers, due to the structural 
traits of economic crisis and it will become even more 
important to allocate resources in an optimal way, working 
on recovery aspects based on a cognitive framework in 
which the economic aspects will necessarily communicate 
with the aspects more directly related to the supply of 
services.  
The economic domain ontology has been based on 
EuroVoc and some extensions have been identified. 
Primarily, metadata and the ontology of the Linked Open 
IPA public network and cooperation [10]. This resource 
contains the index of the national Public Administrations and 
the index of companies wholly owned by public authorities 
or with majority public capital included in the consolidated 
statement of public administration, as identified by the 
National Institute for Statistics (ISTAT). Secondly, the 
ISTAT Statistical Glossary [11] that provides classification 
and definitions of indicators and statistical terms used in the 
most open databases available in Italy. The final ontology 
has provided extension of several EuroVoc main sectors: 
sector 16 Economics, sector 20 Trade, sector 24 Finance, 
sector 40 Business and competition, sector 44 Employment 
and working conditions and sector 68 Industry.  
C. Social domain ontology 
Starting from the preliminary need to define the contours 
of the "social" in accordance with the objectives of ODINet, 
we have made an initial assessment of the Eurovoc resource. 
The nature of the instrument created to classify texts and 
documents could restrict the construction of an ontology that 
will mainly serve to classify and correctly interpret statistical 
data. So, we also considered the classification system defined 
by the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe 
(UNECE), used as a base to build the structure of the 
Statistical Data and Metadata eXchange (SDMX) guidelines 
for the thematic classification of official statistics. UNECE 
has developed a classification of activities of statistics 
production (Classification of statistical activities - CSA 
2009) based on three levels, the first of which consists of 5 
main domains 1) Demographic and social statistics, 2) 
Economic statistics, 3) Environment and multi-domain 
statistics, 4) Methodology of data collection processing, 
dissemination and analysis, and 5) Strategic and managerial 
issues of official statistics. Within the domain Demographic 
and social statistics, we selected the three sectors Population 
and Migration, Social Protection and Social Policy and other 
community activities; within the domain Environment and 
multi-domain statistics, we chose the sub-sector living 
conditions, poverty and cross-cutting themes. We then 
entered all the specific concepts used in the production of 
official statistics, identifying them from ISTAT and 
comparing with Eurostat articulation [12] [13] [14]. The 
definitions have been built with the aid of additional 
glossaries and thesauri, such as United Nation Common 
Database [15] and the International Statistical Institute 
Multilingual Glossary [16]. Subsequently, we have enriched 
the concepts and definitions drawn from the statistical 
glossaries and we have extended the theme of social 
protection by referring to the European system of integrated 
social protection statistics (ESSPROS), with its annotations 
and relations. Preferred and alternative labels and definitions 
have been incorporated by reference to EuroVoc and to 
terminology and correlations themes taken from the 
"Thesaurus for the Social Sciences" developed by the 
Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences.  
III. TECHNOLOGICAL PLATFORM 
In this section, we describe ODINet technological 
platform main components. 
A. Data Harvesting 
We designed and developed a complex module able to 
interface with existing portals and to find accessible datasets 
in the web. The module, can be periodically scheduled and 
manages to automatically import meta and content 
information from a wide variety of formats, such as CSV, 
XLS, MDB, DBF, SHP and RDF. Data were drawn mainly 
from I.Stat (database of statistics produced by ISTAT), 
dati.toscana.it (an open data platform developed by the 
Tuscany Region) and dati.gov.it (an open data portal 
developed by the Italian Ministry for Public Administration 
and Innovation) portals. Stakeholders who joined the project 
and provided data for the validation scenario are ARS 
Toscana (the Regional Health Agency), IRPET (the Regional 
Institute Planning Economic of Tuscany) and Rete 
Osservatori Sociali Regione Toscana (a Social Observers 
Network in Tuscany). 
B. Data Indexing 
A search graph was built as main support for the search 
engine by combining the concepts identified during the 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

ontology-building process and adding relationships between 
them according to ontologies’ predicates. Since the graph 
was sparse, two procedures were designed and implemented 
to improve its semantic information. Finally, the data 
component was added to the graph and linked to the 
concepts contained in it. In such a way, the complete domain 
knowledge is summarized in a single graph, which can be 
used as the basis of the reasoning mechanism of the Search 
Engine to answer users’ queries. 
1) From the ontologies to the Search Graph 
In order to produce an effective and useful search engine 
we built a search graph combining the previously described 
ontologies and the data harvested. Having a weighted graph 
representing our model of knowledge is a key element in our 
project, since it allows to answer users’ search queries by 
browsing the graph through well-known algorithms based on 
distance metrics, centrality of nodes and clustering 
coefficient, that were partially developed and tested in a 
previous research project [17]. We decided to store into 
different graph entities the concepts corresponding to the 
various concepts identified inside ontologies, as well as 
datasets (corresponding to collections of data organized in a 
single table), literals (corresponding to labels associated to 
concepts or keywords associated to datasets) and categories 
(corresponding to generic themes grouping datasets from the 
same semantic area). Each concept has at least one 
associated literal, corresponding to its name, but can also be 
associated 
with 
multiple 
literals, 
corresponding 
to 
alternatives synonyms for that concept. For example, the 
concept identified by the url “http://eurovoc.europa.eu/5565” 
has as its preferred label the literal “cyclone” but has three 
further associated literals, namely “hurricane”, “tornado” and 
“typhoon”. In the current graph we have ~10K concepts, 
~24K literals, 22 categories and ~9K datasets. All these 
entities are the nodes of our graph. Afterwards, we 
introduced into the graph several relationships between 
nodes. The relationships are established on the basis of the 
ones identified in the domain ontologies and SKOS 
predicates. Each type of relationship has a specific weight in 
the search engine process. In the current graph we have 
~100K relationships. 
2) Enriching 
the 
Search 
Graph 
with 
semantic 
information: concept-concept matching. 
Analysing the search graph we have described so far, we 
noticed that it was extremely sparse, as we had few edges 
compared to the number of nodes. Since the activity of 
finding connections between concepts that belong to 
different ontologies takes a long editing time even to domain 
experts, we explored automated methods for discovering 
those links. Our main goal was to identify concepts and 
literals semantically connected to one another: in this way, 
given a search string it would be possible to identify a group 
of concepts semantically connected to the string searched by 
the user, identifying not only datasets containing the string, 
but also the ones connected to a concept semantically related 
to it. To identify entities semantically connected to one 
another we implemented two separate procedures named 
WikiSimilarityDistance and WikiConceptConnection. 
a) WikiSimilarityDistance  
This procedure produces an estimate of the semantic 
distance between two concepts through an approximation of 
the Google Similarity Distance: this measure calculates the 
semantic similarity between two words (or two sentences) on 
the basis of the number of pages indexed by Google in which 
the two words (sentences) appear together, in relation to the 
number of pages in which they appear singularly. The 
formula to calculate the (Normalized) Google similarity 
Distance (NGD) is the following: 
NDG(x,y) = 
max{log f(x),log f(y)} – log f(x,y) 
log M – min {log f(x), log f(y)} 
where f(x) and f(y) are the number of hits for words x and y 
respectively, f(x,y) is the number of pages in which both x 
and y occur and M is a parameter to take into account the 
order of magnitude of the number of results. Since Google 
APIs to access a search result are not free, we approximated 
this measure by indexing in Solr [18] a dump of the whole 
Italian Wikipedia and performing search queries against the 
indexed Wikipedia pages for concepts and literals that are 
neither too general nor too specific. Couples of concepts with 
an NGD value below a given threshold are said to be 
semantically correlated. We managed to identify, through 
such a procedure, ~10K semantic correlations between 
entities, enriching our search graph with semantic 
connections of different weights, according to their NGD 
values. 
b) WikiConceptConnection 
Through this procedure we managed to find further 
semantic associations between couple of entities exploiting 
the items in the “See Also” section of Wikipedia pages. The 
procedure associates concepts and literals in our graph to 
Wikipedia pages with the same name, then it parses those 
pages and retrieves the links in the “See Also” section, which 
contains a list of pages that are correlated to the current one. 
If a concept (or a literal) with the same name of one of the 
pages in the “See Also” list exists, a new edge between the 
two correlated entities is inserted into the graph. Through 
such a procedure we managed to add about 3.5K further 
relationships to the Search Graph. 
3) Inserting datasets into the Search Graph and dataset-
concept matching 
For each dataset, we decided to import its title (so as to 
identify it), its keywords (literals to which the dataset is 
connected) and its description (so as to get more information 
about its content). Then, we connected each dataset to the 
concepts expressed in it. Since semantic correlations between 
concepts were already stored into the graph, we decided to 
perform a purely-syntactic matching between datasets and 
concepts and to index all the information about a dataset 
using Solr [18]. We performed a Solr query for every 
concept in our graph, searching its associated preferred label 
in the title, in the keywords and in the description of the 
indexed datasets. A new relationship was created between a 
concept and each dataset in which the concept was found to 
be expressed. We further assigned different weights to each 
of those relationships according to where and how many 
times the concept was found in the dataset. One of our 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

assumptions was, for example, that if a concept was found in 
the dataset’s title the connection with the dataset is stronger 
than if it was found in the description. Finally, we ran a 
similar procedure to match datasets with literals whose 
names were not the same as the one of the concepts. In total 
we managed to add ~20K further relationships to the Search 
Graph.  
4) Visual representation 
The visual representation of the Search Graph is shown 
in Figure 3. A zoom-in snapshot of the graph is depicted on 
the left side: the cloud icon identifies a concept, the table one 
represents a dataset, the one similar to a label represents a 
literal and the green one identifies a category. A zoom-out 
snapshot of part of the graph is shown on the right. 
C. Data Search Engine 
This paragraph explains how the search process works, 
starting from a search query entered by a user up to the final 
output returned by the Search Engine. 
1) Full-text Search 
In this step, we aimed to find concepts, literals and 
datasets that are related to the search string entered by the 
user. A SQLServer [19] query, performed a full-text search 
to find entities containing all the meaningful words (articles, 
prepositions and common words are deleted) entered by the 
user. A list of datasets containing all the search words is 
memorized and returned in the final results subsequently. If 
neither concepts nor literals are found, the datasets obtained 
with the query is directly returned as the final result and the 
procedure ends. 
2) Page Ranking and Semantic Propagation with SNA 
a) 1st propagation 
In this step, we aimed to find concepts and literals 
semantically connected with the ones returned by the 
previous phase. For this purpose, we implemented a variant 
of the PageRank algorithm [20] to identify concepts and 
literals most strongly connected with the preceding ones. 
This algorithm executes a propagation on the search graph 
by taking into account the strength of a link to an entity 
(represented by its associated weight) in order to determine a 
rough estimate of how important the entity is. This step 
produced a list of concepts and literals semantically 
connected with the search query. 
 
 
Figure 3.   Visual representation of the Search Graph 
b) 2nd propagation 
We used the PageRank algorithm to find datasets directly 
connected to literals and concepts returned by the previous 
step. At the end we got a list of datasets connected to 
concepts related to the search query. 
3) Final Results 
The final result returned to the user is the union between 
the datasets identified with the full-text search and those 
returned at the end of the second propagation phase. The 
datasets are ordered by their rank value, a measure calculated 
during the search process that estimates the dataset’s 
relevance for the search query. The flowchart of the search 
engine process is shown in Figure 4.  
IV. RESULTS  
As a first result, the ontologies may function 
independently and by themselves as separate knowledge 
basis. They provide about 4000 distinct concepts, 
corresponding relations and labels for synonyms.  
In order to validate the overall research, we defined some 
contexts and use cases based on real issues identified with 
stakeholders. The Caring for the elderly use case is shown in 
Figure 5. The list of concepts found by the semantic search is 
Zonal user rate for elderly home care, Health and social care 
for the elderly, Taking care of elderly people for the health 
service, Caring for the elderly, Elderly person, Gerontology, 
Elderly people, Family solidarity, Pension scheme, Care 
allowance, Retired person, Home help, Facilities for the 
disabled, Older worker. 
 
Figure 4.  Flowchart of the search engine process 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 5.  Use case Caring for the elderly 
The top five datasets returned are Recreation center for 
the elderly, Rehabilitation institutes outside the hospital for 
the elderly, List of day care accredited center for the elderly, 
Social services for the elderly and List of residential 
structures for the elderly. A dynamic web interface which 
displays the search results organized in semantic clusters is 
under testing: the user will be able to see graphical 
representations of the results, to select only those datasets 
that are more strongly connected with his search (making a 
dynamic disambiguation) and to navigate the associated 
graph. 
Our platform has a number of strengths. Firstly, our 
search engine is both reliable, being based on well-known 
SNA algorithms working on graphs, and innovative, being 
the ontologies and the numerical datasets included in a single 
tool that constitutes the knowledge base of the whole system. 
Further, the knowledge representation’s component and the 
search engine’s module are decoupled, guaranteeing a high 
level of reuse and adaptivity. In fact, with proper changes to 
the underlying ontology, the tool can be used in completely 
different contexts with respect to the current ones. Moreover, 
the harvest procedure can be periodically scheduled and 
manages to automatically import data and to index the newly 
found datasets.  
Another innovative aspect of our tool is to extend the 
semantic component of the system to the whole knowledge 
base. Our SSE is based on an ontological graph of entities, 
among which there are generic concepts and datasets, 
semantically connected to one another. This fact lets the SSE 
to identify datasets relating not only to the search query but 
also to concepts semantically related to those contained in 
the search text. Lastly, differently from other systems, the 
user can directly interact with the tool, making a dynamic 
disambiguation on the results and identifying those datasets 
that are more strongly connected to his search. 
V. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS 
In this paper, we have mainly presented the semantic 
component 
of 
the 
ODINet 
project 
(http://www.odinet.sister.it), which provides an innovative 
technological framework for data search engine. 
Specifically, we have first created a unified ontology 
which models the conceptual hierarchies that describe the 
major aspects of social, economic and health fields and the 
main connections between them. We have designed and 
developed a complex module able to interface with existing 
portals and to find accessible datasets in the web. A search 
graph was built as main support for the SSE by combining 
the concepts identified during the ontology-building process 
and adding relationships between them according to 
ontologies’ predicates. A dynamic web interface was 
developed to display the search results in an intuitive way, 
allowing the users to play a part of the answers and perform 
disambiguation. 
The validation phase of the project is still in progress. 
Different stakeholders offered validation scenarios on 
thematic portals, correspondent to ODINet domains. The 
tests carried out so far have shown that our platform achieves 
higher performances on those portals than on generic 
datasets: on a number of test cases performed so far, we 
found that more than 80% of the datasets returned by the 
SSE are actually related to the search query. This percentage 
rises to about 90% for queries related to the ODINet's 
domain ontologies. In fact, our search graph was built 
combining thematic ontologies containing specific concepts 
that belong to those thematic areas.  
Our system also has some weak points, among which we 
found that connections between concepts and datasets are not 
always strong enough. This mainly depends on the level of 
detail of the meta information associated to the datasets. 
Further, ODINet ontology is in Italian. However, as EuroVoc 
and every used resource are also available in other 
languages, an English version can be provided with moderate 
effort in the future.  
Moreover, in the next few months, the technologies 
implemented by the ODINet data search engine will be 
integrated 
in 
“StatPortal 
Open 
Data” 
(http://www.opendata.statportal.it), an open source platform 
for developing open data portals.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by the Italian Tuscany Regional 
Operational Programme - 2007-2013 European Regional 
Development Fund (ODINet project D57I12000710007). 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Gedzelman, M. Simonet, D. Bernhard, G. Diallo, and P. 
Palmer, “Building an Ontology of Cardio-Vascular Diseases 
for Concept-Based Information Retrieval”, Computers in 
Cardiology, vol. 32, 2005, pp. 255−258. 
[2] Office 
for 
Official 
Publications 
of 
the 
European 
Communities, “Thesaurus EUROVOC” Annex to the index of 
the Official Journal of the EC, Luxembourg Publications of 
the European Communities, 1995.  
[3] R. Steinberger, M. Ebrahim, and M. Turchi, “JRC EuroVoc 
Indexer JEX - A freely available multi-label categorisation 
tool” Proc. LREC'2012, May 2012, pp. 798-805. 
[4] N. Ivezic, A. Farhad, K. Khosrow, and B. Kulvatunyou, 
“Ontological Conceptualization Based on the Simple 
Knowledge Organization System (SKOS)”, Journal of 
Computing 
and 
Information 
Science 
in 
Engineering, 
doi:10.1115/1.4027582, vol. 14, issue 3, May 2014, pp. 11.  
[5] M. Horridge, “A Practical Guide To Building OWL 
Ontologies Using Protege 4 and CO-ODE Tools”, The 
University Of ManchesterEdition 1.3, March 2011 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[6] O. Bodenreider, “The Unified Medical Language System 
(UMLS):integrating biomedical terminology”, Nucleic Acids 
Res. doi:10.1093/nar/gkh061, vol. 32, 2004, pp 267–270 
[7] W. D. J. Stuart, J. Nelson, and B.L. Humphreys, 
“Relationships in Medical Subject Headings (MeSH).” 
National Library of Medicine,Bethesda, MD, USA, 2002. 
Available from: http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/meshrels.html 
[retrieved: 12, 2014] 
[8] D. L. McGuinness, and F. van Harmelen, “OWL Web 
Ontology Language Overview”. W3C Recommendation, 
February 
2004. 
Available 
from 
http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-owl-features-20040210/ 
[retrieved: 12, 2014] 
[9] World Health Organization on behalf of the European 
Observatory on Health Systems and Policies, “Health, health 
systems and economic crisis in Europe: impact and policy 
implications”, 2013. Available from http://www.euro.who.int 
[retrieved: 12, 2014] 
[10] Italian Public system of connectivity and cooperation, 
“Guidelines for semantic interoperability through linked open 
data”, 2012 Agency for Digital Italy 
[11] M. Frustaci, “Glossary Economic-Statistical Multilingual”. 
Italian National Institute for Statistics ISTAT, Doc 8/2004, 
Available from http://www.istat.it [retrieved: 12, 2014] 
[12] European Commission - Eurostat, “Eurostat: The Statistic 
Explained 
Glossary”. 
Available 
from 
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/statistics_explained/index.php
/Thematic_glossaries [retrieved: 12, 2014] 
[13] European Commission - Eurostat, “RAMON Eurostat's 
Metadata 
Server”. 
Available 
from 
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/ramon/index.cfm [retrieved: 12, 
2014] 
[14] European Commission - Eurostat, “Coded - The Eurostat 
concepts 
and 
definitions 
database”. 
Available 
from 
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/ramon/nomenclatures/index.cfm?
TargetUrl=LST_NOM_DTL_GLOSSARY&StrNom=CODE
D2&StrLanguageCode=EN [retrieved: 12, 2014] 
[15] United Nations Statistics Division, “United Nations Common 
Database – Methods and classifications”. Available from 
http://unstats.un.org/unsd/methods.htm [retrieved: 12, 2014] 
[16] The International Statistical Institute ISI, “The multilingual 
ISI 
glossary 
of 
statistical 
terms”. 
Available 
from 
http://isi.cbs.nl/glossary/ [retrieved: 12, 2014] 
[17] M. Baglioni, S. Pieroni, F. Geraci, S. Molinaro, M. Pellegrini, 
and E. Lastres, “A New Framework for Distilling Higher 
Quality information from Health Data via Social Network 
Analysis”. 13th International Conference on Data Mining 
(ICDMW.2013) IEEE, December 2013, pp. 48-55, DOI 
10.1109/.142. 
[18] T. Grainger and T. Potter, “Solr in Action”. Manning 
Publications, 2014. 
[19] R. Mistry and S. Misner, “Introducing Microsoft SQL Server” 
2014. Microsoft Press, 2014. 
[20] L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Winograd, “The 
PageRank Citation Ranking: Bringing Order to the Web”, 
Technical report, Stanford Digital Library Technologies 
Project,1998
 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

