Experiments to Verify How Robust the Collective Intelligence is
When Summarizing Story Manga
Toshihiko Takeuchi
Faculty of Education
Tokyo University of Social Welfare
Tokyo, Japan
email: totakeuc@ed.tokyo-
fukushi.ac.jp
Yuuki Kato
Faculty of Arts and Sciences
Sagami Women’s University
Kanagawa, Japan
email: y-katou@star.sagami-
wu.ac.jp
Shogo Kato
School of Arts and Sciences
Tokyo Woman’s Christian University
Tokyo, Japan
email: shogo@lab.twcu.ac.jp
Abstract—We conducted experiments in which we asked large
samples of Japanese students to read approximately 100
frames of story manga. We then requested that the students
select between 5-20% of the frames necessary for the abstract.
Once completed, we reviewed the n-th frames where the
selectivity was the highest to see if it was an accurate summary,
regardless of n.
Our goal was to investigate whether it is
possible to summarize comics by collective intelligence. In this
experiment, we made the students read an English version of
the Manga. We wanted to see if the collective intelligence still
worked if read in a different language. The results obtained
show that how robust the collective intelligence is.
Keywords-collective
intelligence;
manga;
summarizing;
English.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The authors previously proposed a method to summarize
story
manga as one of the test methods to measure
intelligence. In the test, to summarize the story manga of
about 100 frames, the subject selects about 5% to 20% of the
frames. We conducted an experiment involving 113 female
university students [1]. Hereafter, this experiment is called
experiment A.
After Experiment A, we sorted each frame in descending
order of the rate selected by the 113 students. Next, we
rearranged the top k frames in manga frame order. Then, no
matter what number k is, it became a good summary of the
original
manga.
From
this result,
we
concluded
that
collective intelligence worked very well in the summary of
manga "The taste of that day".
We were interested in how robust collective intelligence is,
so we conducted an additional experiment on another day [2].
The subjects were 60 university students. Other conditions
are the same as in Experiment A. 30 are male and 30 are
female. Hereafter, this experiment is called experiment B.
As a result of experiment B, the summary by collective
intelligence also became a good summary overall.
Furthermore, compared with the result of Experiment A
with respect to "The taste of that day", the selectivity of each
frame is almost the same. The selectivity of each frame in
Experiment A and Experiment B is shown in Figure 1.
When summarizing comics, collective intelligence was
more effective than our expectation. So, we decided not to
think that "summarizing manga with collective intelligence
would be nearly a correct answer", but rather "think
collective intelligence is the correct answer to manga
summary". In other words, we assumed that "A person's
summary ability can be measured by how alike it is to the
summary of collective intelligence". Consequently, we
proposed an index to measure the summarizing ability of
story manga [1].
Figure 1.
Selectivity of each frame of manga "The taste of that day" in
Experiment A and Experiment B
II.
PURPOSE
We translated the manga "The taste of that day" into
English and we conducted experiments to have Japanese
students read the manga under almost the same conditions as
experiment A. We compared summaries of manga by
collective intelligence between the English version and the
Japanese version. The reason for doing the experiment is to
investigate whether collective intelligence works even when
Japanese students read the English version of manga.
III.
METHOD
The experiment participants were 60 university students
living in Tokyo.
The materials we used during the experiment are as
follows.
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

(i) Preliminary survey questionnaire paper
(ii)
English version and Japanese version of the manga
booklet ("Today's Burger Volume 1" second episode "The
taste of that day" first 108 flames)
(iii) Paper to fill in the selected flames number
(iv) Pre-questionnaire paper
(v) Post-questionnaire paper
The experiment schedule is shown in Table 1.
TABLE I.
THE EXPERIMENT SCHEDULE
Time
Contents
5 minutes
Answer preliminary survey
questionnaire and pre-
questionnaire
25 minutes
Summary of manga
5 minutes
Write the numbers of the
selected frames on the paper
3 minutes
Collect paper
2 minutes
Distribute Japanese version of
manga
10 minutes
Read Japanese version of manga
10 minutes
Answer post-questionnaire
Figure 2 compares the selectivity of each frame in the
experiments of this English version (Experiment C) and the
past Japanese version (Experiment A + Experiment B).
The difference in the selectivity of each frame is larger in
Figure 2 than in Figure 1. This shows that when the subjects
read the English version, they failed to select frames as
accurately as they did for the Japanese version.
Figure 2.
Selectivity of each frame of this experiment (English version)
and "Taste of that day" in past two experiments A + B (Japanese version)
Figure 3 shows a plot of the frame numbers from 1st to
108th selectivity in Experiment A (Japanese version) with
the horizontal axis and the plots corresponding to the frame
numbers on the horizontal axis of Experiment B and
Experiment C.
From the viewpoint of the order of selectivity of each
frame in collective intelligence, as can be seen from Figure 3,
there is no big difference.
Even in the English version, it was a good summary to
rearrange the top k of the selectivity in the order of comics in
manga. This means that collective intelligence works well
even in the English version when summarizing comics. But
for individuals, selecting frames to create a summary of the
English version became more difficult than for the Japanese
version.
Figure 3.
Selectivity ranking of each frame of Experiment B, Experiment
C with the selectivity rate ranking of experiment A as the horizontal axis
IV.
CONCLUSION
In order to verify the robustness of collective intelligence,
we gave about 60 Japanese university college students the
story manga, English version, which was about 100 frames
in length. The students were asked to summarize the story
using 5% to 20% of the frames. Then, we compared the
result obtained here with the result of the Japanese version
for the story manga from our previous studies.
Choosing the n-th highest selectivity resulted in a
excellent summary of n. That is, in the summary of comics,
collective intelligence also worked in the English version.
However, the summary by collective intelligence was
slightly less accurate in the English version than the Japanese
version.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was funded by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific
Research (foundation C "Establishment of manga summary
test by collective intelligence and development of manga
summary software using its evaluation criteria" assignment
number 17K01142). Also, we got subsidies from CRET for
our experiments. In addition to using the manga in the
experiment, we also had the cooperation of Houbunsha
Comics.
REFERENCES
[1]
T. Takeuchi，Y. Kato，and S. Kato, “An experiment to investigate
the relationship between the ability to summarize manga and
collective intelligence”, Proseedings of Japan Society of Educational
Information，pp328-329, 2016a.
[2]
T. Takeuchi，Y. Kato，and S. Kato, “Verification experiment on the
robustness in measurement method for an ability of summarizing
comics”, Japan Association for Educational Media Study Proceedings
of the 23rd Annual Conference，pp28-29, 2016b.
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

