An Intelligent Robotic Engine Using Digital Repository of the DSpace Platform
Rafael Luiz de Macedo, Elvis Fusco
Computing and Information Systems Research Lab
Center University Euripides of Marilia
Marilia, Brazil
e-mails: {rafaelldemacedo@gmail.com, fusco@univem.edu.br}
Abstract - This article presents an Artificial Intelligence
Markup Language as a set of eXtensible Markup Language,
which is able to represent and relate expressions in natural
language. This will allow the creation of intelligent robotic
engines capable of maintaining a simple dialogue; however,
robotic engines are limited in the amount of questions they can
answer, thus, failing to maintain a simple dialogue for a long
time. This paper solves the problem of the limitation of robotic
engines with the development of a software that will perform a
search in the repository to find information on files for
generating new questions and answers for robotic engines.
Keywords-Artificial Intelligence; Engines Robotic; Semantic
Web; Repository.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Current technologies have increasingly allowed the
perception that it is possible to make a machine be intelligent
enough to answer questions asked by the user through
robotic engines built with AI (Artificial Intelligence).
The ways in which humans and computers normally
communicate are very different. Humans tend to spend a lot
of time in chit-chat and informal dialogue with little or no
effect. Computers are known to give accurate answers, true
and logical. The rate of exchange of information of most
human dialogues is very low, no more than 1kbit per second,
but the computer communication is faster. Alicebot/AIML is
an attempt to bridge this divide [2][10][18][19][20].
One of the languages that enables the creation and
development of these intelligent robotic engines capable of
maintaining a dialogue is the Artificial Intelligence Markup
Language (AIML) [10][12][19][20].
Robotic engines developed in AIML language have a
great limitation on the amount of questions they can answer;
the main reason is that they were developed based on one or
more contexts and are not able to dynamically extend the
amount of questions and answers in an information bank.
With the emergence of the Internet, information is
increasingly accessible, so that, only with a machine that has
access to the Internet it is possible to search for new
information.
The amount of information that is available daily on the
Web has facilitated an increasing access for people.
Consequently, the number of online stores that have articles,
monographs, newspapers, magazines and other types of
digital files has grown. A platform that offers that kind of
repository is the DSpace [14][15][17], which is rather used
as an open source platform and has several tools available to
be used in the repository, such as search engine, to access
files through search requests to Web servers.
The main objective of this paper is to develop a metadata
parser software of digital repositories of DSpace platform,
which performs searches of digital files in repository
metadata to find the files related to the topics the users are
seeking
[13][14][15][17].
The
Analyzer
software
will
generate new knowledge database of questions and answers
for the engines on top of these robotic metadata from the
repository; this new information might be useful for
debugging purposes, or resolving the limitation of robotic
engines in only answering questions that are contained in the
context that were developed.
For the development of the metadata Analyzer software,
the digital repository of Center University Euripides of
Marilia – UNIVEM, called Univem Aberto [1] will be used.
This is because the digital repository of Univem Aberto is
based on the DSpace platform.
This article is structured as follows. Section 2 presents a
preview of AIML. Section 3 shows the importance of
institutional repository (university). In Sections 4 and 5, the
types of metadata utilized in this work and in the repository
of platform DSpace are shown. In Section 6, the results
obtained in this work are presented. Section 7 presents a
conclusion of the article.
II.
METHODOLOGY
In this paper, the methodology used for the development
is divided into a few steps, as follows: (i) the bibliographical
study of languages AIML and XML, (ii) a survey of the
types
of
institutional
repositories
platforms
(iii)
the
development of the application, and (iv) the related works,
testing and validating the results.
A.
The Bibliographical study of languages AIML and XML
The study of markup languages are required for the
knowledge on how intelligent robotic engine work and for
the development of the application proposed in this paper.
B.
The survey of the types of institutional repositories
platforms
Among the types of repository platforms, we will choose
only one to be used as a basis of collecting scientific files,
and we specifically use an institutional repository to develop
the application on this work platform.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

C.
The development of the application
In this work, an application was developed that searches
files in the server of an institutional repository; for the
development of the application, the programming language
Java was used.
D.
Related works
The related research is an important step. The articles and
documents found helped in understanding markup languages
AIML and XML. The study also helps to evaluate the results
obtained in this work.
E.
Testing and validation of the results
The application developed in this work was tested in a
real scenario to search files from the institutional repository
at Univem Open of Center University Euripides of Marilia.
III.
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE MARKUP LANGUAGE
The AIML language is a set of XML elements capable of
representing
and
linking
natural
language expressions,
allowing the creation of engines capable of maintaining a
simple dialogue. Each set of AIML elements has one or more
elements
referred
to
as
category.
The
categories
are
developed on top of a context; a category is formed by all the
elements and template pattern, which are the elements
responsible for interpreting the message sent by the user and
send a reply message back to the user.
The Chatterbots (Chat = Chat and bot = Bot), as currently
known, are robotic intelligent engines that interact with users
by means of questions and answers. Currently, the amount of
intelligent robotic engines used in online consultations and
through voice communication devices is growing.
Companies have used these robotic engines to perform an
auto-customer service for the purpose of improving the
attendances and saving time. The use of these robotic
engines is because they recognize the issue the customer
wants to deal with in the company and redirect the customer
towards the competent sector. Robotic engines are used for
online sessions and for telephone calls.
A very well known robotic engine used to educate people
in caring for the environment is the Ed robot, belonging to
the
company
Conpet,
along
with
the
support
of
PETROBRAS [21].
The emergence of the AIML language was the result of
the development of the software of PLN known as The
Artificial Linguistic Internet Computer Entity (ALICE) [2];
the license of AIML is under the GNU GPL.
The robotic engines developed in AIML have two
modules, namely, language and engine. The language is all
the knowledge that these engines have, natural language and
information developed in AIML language. The engine
performs the communication between the two languages,
natural and AIML, the recognition of the information
contained in the two languages, so that the robotic engines
can recognize written questions made by humans and answer
these questions.
Robotic engines are limited in the amount of questions
they can answer because the robotic engines can not reshape
new questions dynamically, as a human. With this limitation,
the robotic engines do not maintain a long dialogue with a
human.
Alan
Turing
(1912-1954),
in
his
famous
essay
Computing Machinery and Intelligence [12], suggested that,
instead of asking whether machines can think, we must ask if
machines can undergo a behavioral intelligence test, which
came to be called the Turing test [11].
The Turing Test is performed by means of questions and
answers made to a machine with robotic and intelligent
engine for a human; the machine and the human are located
in separate rooms. An evaluator will hold the questions for
these two rooms, but the evaluator does not know in which
room is the machine with the robotic engine.
According to the responses that the evaluator will
receive, one can find out which one is the machine room and
which one is the room with the human. Intelligent robotic
engines that recognize natural language can't create new
questions and answers autonomously, causing a disadvantage
by not being able to recognize a question that is outside of
the knowledge or repeat an answer already used in different
questions.
The machine that can pass the Turing test is considered
smart. However, currently, there are no machines capable to
go through this test.
The AIML language is open source [2][19][20], thus
enabling the use in research of improvement in creations of
robotic intelligent engines able to recognize information
written in natural language.
To create a robotic motor using the artificial intelligence
markup language, you need the use of a development
platform. There are several open sourceplatforms, paid and
developed in various programming languages such as Java,
Python, C and C + +.
The platform ProgramD is the most used platform when
it comes to developing robotic engines in AIML language
and the most complete resource on the language, because the
platform being developed in Java language and be open
source [4].
A.
Funcionality of engine with AIML
In
this
subsection,
we
present
some
commands
(elements) of AIML used in the creation of a new base of
questions and answers for robotic motors.
In the creation of a new base of questions and answers, it
is necessary to utilize standard elements of the language
AIML.
The
standard
elements
are:
category,
pattern,
template, star, aiml and xml.
Figure 1 shows the base of questions and answers
organized with elements of AIML language, utilized for
robotic engines.
A new database of questions and answers is started with
elements XML and AIML. These elements define which
versions of XML and of AIML language is being used at the
base [20].
The category element is a set of questions and answers;
each category has elements pattern and template.
The pattern element is where a possible question is
declared that the human can ask to chatterbot.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

The template element is localization of an answer of a
question declared on a pattern element.
Figure 1.
Based of questions and answers.
IV.
DIGITAL REPOSITORY
With the need to disseminate the works produced by
institutions, without relying on a Publisher to publish the
work, institutions began to spread this information on the
Internet on their own by creating several tools called digital
repositories [13][14][15][17].
The first digital repositories by institutions began to be
developed in 2002; the digital institutional repositories
began to play the role of the Publisher.
Digital repositories have the main functions of storage,
dissemination and durability of digital files, making it easy
to access the files that are submitted to these tools.
The institutions have used the repositories of different
platforms,
disseminating
their
scientific
journals,
monographs, Ph.D. theses and other work carried out in the
institutions over 11 years; after the development of the first
digital repository, repositories used is the platform DSpace.
DSpace is an Open Source software platform, responsible
for the storage, dissemination and durability of digital files.
It
was
created
by
MIT
(Massachusetts
Institute
of
Technology) and Hewlett-Packard [14].
The DSpace platform is geared to the academic area, the
purpose of which is serving as a basis for the future
development to address the long-term preservation of files
and access problems [14].
The registration site of providers of OPEN ARCHIVES
repositories is a table with information where digital
repositories are registered; they are currently registered and
the record repository #2140 is the Center University
Euripides of Marilia, Univem Aberto Repository.
The Center University Euripides of Marilia-DATA has
deployed in 2012 the digital repository DSpace platform for
the
purpose
of
disseminating
the
scientific
papers,
monographs, theses of master's and doctoral degrees from
the faculty and other work carried out by its students,
teachers and researchers.
The Institutional Repository of UnB is a set of services
offered by the Central Library for the management and
dissemination of scientific and academic production of the
University of Brasilia. The content is publicly available; it is
widely accessible [8].
To include their scientific production in the repository,
teachers, researchers and students graduating from UnB
must complete and sign a term of authorization and return it
to the Management of Digital information (GID). This
document is signed, scanned and sent along with the file by
email.
With the huge amount of files that are made available in
institutional
digital
repositories,
it
is
necessary
to
standardize rules to manage and identify each file that is
submitted in the repositories.
When a file is submitted for digital repository DSpace
platform, some information about the file is needed.
All the information entered in the fields of metadata is
used to catalog a file in the repository, using the standard
Dublin Core metadata (DC) [3][13].
To integrate intelligent robotic engines developed in
AIML, questions with the information about the files that the
repository user is seeking should be defined. With this
information
collected,
robotic
engines
integrated
with
metadata Analyzer software developed in this work carry out
requests for search of Univem Aberto files in the repository.
Metadata Analyzer software called XML2AIML treatment
will apply to the information that is contained in the response
from the digital repository Univem Aberto in order to
generate new knowledge bases to intelligent robotic engines,
in the form of questions and answers.
V.
THE STANDARD METADATA DUBLIN CORE
With the great increase of digital files posted on the
Internet, there was the need to develop standards that
identify the exact description of each piece of information
from the files, i.e., to develop metadata standards.
Metadata means data about data. The metadata are forms
of cataloging all information from a file, the same way they
are made in real libraries: each book has a tumble of
identification, are arranged by area and alphabetically by
title. The metadata are intended to document and organize
digital files in a structured way, making it possible to
identify files through standardized data such as author, title,
and summary.
Metadata is defined here as given that describe attributes
of a resource, characterized their relations, and enables its
recovery and effective use and its existence in electronic
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

environment. Metadata usually consists of a set of data
elements, where each element describes an attribute of the
resource, its administration or use [5][9][16].
All the reasons why the indexing and cataloging are
required for printed sources apply even more strongly to the
metadata for electronic documents [6][7].
Digital repositories have metadata for cataloguing all
files that are submitted. The standard used in digital
repositories
is
the
standard
Dublin
Core
which
are
collections of metadata [6][7].
DC is not for replacing some richest models with
AACR2/MARC Code, but only provides basic sets of
elements of description, which can be used by catalogers or
non-catalogers for a simple description of information
resources [3][20].
With the files catalogued on the use of metadata, the
same files end up being most used by users than the files that
have no metadata cataloging, because of the ease in which
the metadata provide the tools of Internet searches to find
these files.
The concept of metadata is not something new, but the
use of this term in digital environments and a variety of
patterns and shapes is new. The bibliographic records that
have been created by information workers in a long time
must be regarded essentially as metadata. They provide
analytical and descriptive information about an object [5].
Some different metadata standards to identify certain
files are presented below:

Government Information Locator Service (GILS) –
Government information;

Federal Geographic Data Committee (FDDC) –
description of geospatial data;

Machine Readable Card (MARC) – bibliographical
cataloging;

Dublin Core (DC) – data on Web pages, and

Consortium for the Interchange of Museum
Information (CIMI) – information about Museums.
New standards of metadata can be created according to
the informational needs of an organization and contribute to
documenting the data of the digital file.
These patterns can be viewed as metadata content
standards, standards for exchanging data by electronic means
and, in lastly, standards for data models [9].
Metadata is structured data blocks; each block contains
information, such as author, title, where it was published,
etc.; also, some information is a field that can be set for field
name, type of field information, the format that is accepted
by the field and other descriptions that identifies the
information passed in this field.
Creating a metadata schema must establish a standard
framework and terminology. Declarations of labels such as
creator,
author,
sculptor
or
composer
have
little
representatively if these fields, who all have the same
function, cannot be mapped to the same unique concept. A
form should be established, either through a list of authority
or Affairs of a controlled vocabulary standard and so
relationships will map out alternative ways to the established
form [5].
In digital repositories, it is possible to develop software
able to get files through requests made to repositories. These
requests make use of DC metadata sets that are passed by the
request.
VI.
DUBLIN CORE
The DSpace platform enables the digital repository web
server to receive requests from external media, off the
server. With requests, we are able to have access to all
digital files that are submitted to the repository.
When we perform a request, sets of metadata elements
are used, i.e., Dublin Core is used to define what are the
parameters that will be passed by the address, the values
passed by all parameters will be used to identify which file,
or group of files is being sought in the repository.
The request made to the web server is parsed by the
repository and all files that fit the information passed by
DCs will generate an XML response that is sent to the agent
(software) that made the request. The software developed in
this work is called XML2AIML; it will be responsible for
making requests to the web servers of the repositories,
which in this case is the open repository web server.
An
XML
response
from
the
repository
contains
information from the catalog file, such as author (s), title,
and publication date, date on which it was submitted to the
repository, summary, keywords and other information used
to catalogue. This information is recorded in fields defined
the DC.
The DCs are used for adding in the DSpace platform
keywords
(metadata)
that
reference
the
main
catalog
information from a file, i.e., it is possible to locate a
particular file via their own metadata.
The variables used in the request address of search of the
web servers of the repositories are standardized by the
DSpace platform, but you can create new metadata (DC)
directly from a function that offers digital repositories. This
way,
each
institution
may
define
multiple
metadata
according to each need, but for which the XML2AIML
software that is developed in this paper can do search request
to the servers of the repositories, you will use the metadata
already created standards for the DSpace platform.
VII.
RESULTS
The main objective of this work is to cover the
knowledge of robotic engines developed in AIML language,
with new bases of knowledge created autonomously by
software responsible for seeking information in digital
repositories, via metadata, and treated to generate the new
bases.
Digital repositories have a limitation in the material
search tool, for not being very precise in finding the files
when a user uses the repository. So, the software developed
in
this
paper
solves
two
problems:
making
use
of
Chatterbots to help repository users in searches of files and ,
with the deployment of Chatterbots in repositories, the
information contained in the Dublin Core (metadata) of the
repositories will be used by the software to cover with new
AIML knowledge bases.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

The creation of new questions and answers to the robotic
AIML language engines are required to use new bases of
information in order to analyze and treat, to generate new
questions and answers on top of new information.
Figure 2 presents the operation of the chatterbot with
metadata software analyzer XML2AIML.
Figure 2.
Model search functionality in digital repository file through a chatterbot AIML.
The functionalities are divided into four steps, namely (i)
collecting
user
data, (ii) requesting
files
search,
(iii)
presenting questions and answers, and (iv) creating new
knowledge base. The scenario creating (to test) a file search
conversation in the repository is shown below.
A.
Collecting user data
The first step is to gather as much information from the
user about the material he/she is looking for. One could get
this information as the chatterbot already contains questions
that were created to make this collection. As the search will
be driven by DC variables, the chatterbot has to collect
information that can be used in these variables, that is,
information such as author, title, publication date, area or a
period of publication.
In the test scenario, chatterbot explains to the user
whether he/she wants to look for a material, and what rules
to follow. These rules were set for the chatterbot as it can
understand
what
kind
of
information
the
user
is
passing/willing to obtain.
When a user is looking for materials development in
AIML, the chatterbot saves that information in a variable and
then to asks the user if he has any more information about
this area. As the user does not have any more information,
the chatterbot triggers a script element, which is responsible
for calling the method colect_information (author, title,
start_date, end_date, area); this method passes all the
information of the chatterbot to XML2AIML software.
B.
Request files search
The user information was passed to the XML2AIML
software; with this information, the software analyzes what
types of information was received, according to the type of
information, and the correct method is called.
In this scenario, the user passes information to the
chatterbot on the material sought, then the software will
invoke the method responsible for creating an ADDRESS
that contains the variables parameter DC author and title
area; even though the chatterbot has not passed information
about the author and title. The XML2AIML is already
scheduled to put DC in the ADDRESS; only the variables
that are assigned some value in time to call the method are
created in the scope of the parameter passing method.
The software with the address ready will call the
functions InputStreamReader and BufferedReader of the
Java library, which are responsible for making the request to
the repository server and receive the response from the
server. [22] is a link generated by software XML2AIML for
search about the articles on institutional repository.
The server receives the values of variables from
parameters passed in the address and searches the repository
database for any file related to that information; after the
search, it generates an XML to send as reply for the
machine that made the request.
Figure 3 presents a response of a request from a server
for software XML2AIML. The response received is in XML
format.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Figure 3.
Response received of server of institutional repository [22].
The software XML2AIML, with the request response
assigned to a variable of type BufferedReader, first parses
the response that contains information on any file. In the case
when it does not contain the response, the software will pass
to the next step, which is to create the new information base;
only after containing this new basis of questions and answers
related to the point that no file was found in the repository
within the information the user passed to the chatterbot.
C.
Preset questions and answers
When the XML2AIML software parses and generates
the new questions and answers on the information contained
in the metadata of the XML response, consultations are held
to a MySQL database; only information for pre-defined
questions and answers is used in this work.
The database contains parts of questions and answers,
which
will
be
concatenated
with
certain
kinds
of
information from the metadata that is contained in the XML
to generate the questions and answers that will be used in
the new AIML knowledge bases.
The goal of the use of a database in the software
XML2AIML is to focus the new predefined questions and
answers in a single location, using the database, to make it
faster and to improve and increase the amount of these
questions and answers that will be generated for each file
found in the search of the repository.
This database also uses a table to focus the questions and
answers, which are responsible for collecting information
about the material that the repository user is seeking. These
questions and answers have suffered many changes during
the development of the software, to make the user clearly
understand the questions and answers that the chatterbot will
use during the dialogue.
D.
Creating new knowledge base
The XML2AIML software parses the XML for the
metadata for each file that is contained in the response. As
seen in Sections 2 and 3, metadata is used to catalog every
file, and, in the digital repository DSpace platform, the
default DC metadata is used.
XML digital repositories are described according to the
type of information about the file found, such as dc: title, dc:
creator, dc: date, dc: type and other types of DC. DCs are
passed
by
parameter
to
the
method
responsible
for
generating the questions and answers.
The parameter responsible for receiving the information
about the file found in the digital repository performs a
query to MySQL database software to pick up words that
will be part of each set of questions and answers.
The questions and answers already concatenated with
the information on the file are inserted automatically in the
new AIML knowledge base; but, for each set of question
and answer, XML2AIML inserts the elements that are part
of the structure of a category to which the chatterbot can
recognize and use these new questions and answers.
Each set of metadata represents a file found in the search
in the repository. For each set, the software generates the
same questions and answers that were used in the first set of
metadata.
When the software has finished doing all the analyzing
and applying the treatment of questions and answers, in all
the sets of metadata, the software completes the new AIML
knowledge base, with the element </aiml>.
Figure 4 presents a new base of questions and answers
generated by XML2AIML software after analyzing the
response received from the server.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Figure 4.
New base of questions and answers generated by software
XML2AIML.
The software generated XML2AIML file is passed to the
chatterbot, which submits the search result to the user from
the repository. The chatterbot will continue with the
conversation telling the user who found the material.
In the test scenario, the user askes questions about the
material found by chatterbot, and the user terminates with the
question that he wants to access the complete material. The
chatterbot gives an answer the access link to the page of the
material.
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The AIML markup language has a limitation in creating
robotic conversational engines, limiting the number of
questions these robotic engines can be asked. Due to this
limitation, the robotic engines cannot keep a simple
dialogue with a human for a long time because the questions
are held outside the context of knowledge in which these
robotic engines were developed, and cannot be answered.
Another problem is users accessing digital repositories
of DSpace platform; the users encounter difficulties in being
able to obtain the materials. Then, with the help of a
chatterbot to interact with users and gather information
about the desired materials, users can learn in a short time if
the repository has a particular material or not.
The objective of this work was to encompass the
knowledge of robotic AIML language engines with new
bases of knowledge generated by the XML2AIML Analyzer
software, using the data contained in the metadata of digital
repositories of DSpace platform. In addition, we also
improved the search of files the user can perform in these
digital repositories.
As future work, XML2AIML will be implemented in
repository server at the Center University of Euripides
Marilia and it will be an available software to users of the
repository of the university.
Another future work is to enable the XML2AIML to find
files in others institutional repositories.
REFERENCES
[1]
http://aberto.univem.edu.br/ [retrieved: March 13, 2014]
[2]
http://www.alicebot.org/aiml.html, [retrieved: March 13, 2014]
[3]
Rachel C. V. A. Semantic Web: A Focused Analisy using metadata,
Dissertation (Master of Science in Information) – Faculty of Sciences
– University Estadual Paulista – UNESP, Marilia, 2005.
[4]
http://aitools.org/Programd, [retrieved: March 13, 2014].
[5]
E. Fusco, Conceptual data models as part of the process of cataloging:
use
of
FRBR
perspective
in
developing digital bibliographic
catalogues, Doctor thesis, UNESP – Marilia, pp. 60-74, 2010.
[6]
D. Hillmann, Using Dublin Core – The Elements, Making it easier to
find information, DCMI, 2005.
[7]
J. Milstead and S. Feldman, Metadata Projects and Standards, vol. 23,
no. 1, pp. 32-40, 1999. ISSN : 0146-5422.
[8]
http://repositorio.unb.br/, [retrieved: March 13, 2014].
[9]
G. P. Ribeiro, Digital Geospatial Metadata, Workshop on non-
conventional databases, Niterói, Brazil, 1995.
[10] E. Rich and K. Knight, Artificial Intelligence – Second Edition. São
Paulo, 1993.
[11] S. Russell and P. Norvig, Artificial Intelligence – Translation of
Second Edition. Rio de Janeiro, 2004.
[12] http://apprendre-math.info/portugal/historyDetail.htm?id=Turing,
[retrieved: March 13, 2014]
[13] M. I. F. Souza, and L. G. Vendrusculo and Geane C. Melo, Metadata
for the description of electronic information resources: using the
Dublin Core standard, Ci. Inf., Brasília, vol. 29, no. 1, p. 93-102,
jan./abr, 2000.
[14] R. Tansley, et al. The DSpace Institutional Digital Repository
System: Current Functionality, Joint Conference on Digital Libraries,
pp. 87-97, EUA, 2003.
[15] M. I. Tomael and T. E. of Silva, Institutional Repositories: guidelines
for information policy, VIII ENANCIB – National meeting of
research in information science, Salvador, Bahia, Brazil, 2007.
[16] S. L. Vellucci, Bibliographic relationships. International Conference
On The Principles And Future Development Of AACR. Toronto:
American Library Association: Library Association Publishing, pp.
105-147, 1998.
[17] A. M. M. Vieira and G. David, Digital Repository and process
management
Platform:
an
integrated
architecture,
Faculty
of
Enginneering, University of Porto FEUP, 2011.
[18] R. S. Wallace, The Element of AIML Style, © ALICE A. I.
Foundation, Inc., October, 2003.
[19] http://www.alicebot.org/documentation/aiml-reference.html,
[retrieved: March 13, 2014]
[20] S. Weibel, The Dublin Core: a simple content description model for
electronic
resources.
Bulletin
of
the
American
Society
for
Information Science, pp. 9-11, Oct/Nov, 1997.
[21] http://www.ed.conpet.gov.br/br/converse.php [retrieved: March 13,
2014]
[22] http://aberto.univem.edu.br/oai/request?verb=ListRecords&from=201
2-11-22T00:00:01Z&until=2012-11-
23T08:00:01Z&metadataPrefix=oai_dc [retrieved: March 13, 2014]
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

