Center for Scientific and Technical Information –  
Library Services for Business and Science at Wroclaw Univeristy of Technology 
 
Anna Walek 
Wroclaw University of Technology 
Wroclaw, Poland 
anna.walek@pwr.edu.pl 
 
 
Abstract - Wroclaw University of Technology is situated in 
Lower Silesia – the dynamically developing region of Poland. 
Focusing on adopting its own offer to the market needs had 
been selected as a strategy. Due to that, a synergy effect has 
been achieved with the development of segments strategic for 
the region. The University is strongly oriented to cooperation 
with the economy and industry. One of the key initiatives was 
establishment within the University structure the Center for 
Scientific and Technical Information on January 1, 2014. This 
is the unit responsible for collecting and providing scientific 
and technical information for the needs of performing 
scientific research and supporting didactics, as well as 
coordinating cooperation with the economy and technology 
transfer. Within the structure of the Center, the Traditional 
and Electronic Libraries were established, providing the 
library-information services and creating also the digital 
library, knowledge repository and the data base for scientific 
achievements. Besides the library resources, data bases and 
electronic periodicals, the Center makes available the patent 
and standardizing information, as well as the information on 
new technologies both, for the needs of scientific society and 
industry representatives. Tasks of the Center involve, among 
others, also collecting knowledge on technologies developed at 
the 
University, 
conducted 
projects, 
available scientific 
equipment 
and 
informing 
on 
opportunities 
for 
commercialization of the research results. In the paper, the 
genesis of formation of the Center for Scientific and Technical 
Information and its basic tasks directed in particular at 
cooperation of science with economy and industry have been 
presented. Changes in the library and information system of 
the University and establishment of the Center reveal the new 
role of libraries and centers of scientific and technical 
information. 
 
Keywords-digital 
libraries; 
Wroclaw 
University 
of 
Technology; open repository; electronic resources; library 
services; technology transfer; knowledge commercialization. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Wroclaw University of Technology is one of the best 
technical universities in Poland. For many years it has been 
on top of Polish university rankings [1]. It was founded in 
1946 in Wroclaw. The same year Wroclaw University of 
Technology Library was established. Ever since then, it has 
been the largest library in Lower Silesia region collecting 
and circulating materials in the area of technical and exact 
sciences. In 1970s, Wroclaw University of Technology 
Library became a pioneer library as far as automating and 
computerizing library and information processes and 
implementing new information technologies are taken into 
account. In that period, the Library conducted scientific and 
research work in the above areas. Thus, it developed pioneer 
solutions nationwide in terms of registration, collecting and 
circulating scientific-research information [2].  
In 1990s, the first Polish Integrated Library System 
(APIN) was created and implemented here, too. Its role was 
to provide services for all library processes. Moreover, in 
2004, one of the first digital libraries in Poland was founded 
here as well [3]. 
Activities in the area of digitization, development and 
providing access to modern electronic resources of 
information has been limited for many years due to space 
shortage and lack of appropriate equipment.  Rooms which 
have been occupied by the Library in a historic building from 
early 20th century made it impossible to develop 
comprehensive patron services in the area of providing 
electronic resources of information. 
II. 
BIBLIOTECH PROJECT 
For many years,  the University authorities and scientific 
circles were aware of the necessity of building a modern 
scientific library at Wroclaw University of Technology. 
Eventually, the university managed to obtain EU funds for 
building it and in 2007 within Operational Program 
Innovative Economy. The funds covered the costs of 
constructing and fitting a modern building of “Library of 
Exact and Technical Sciences for the purposes of Innovative 
Economy” (Bibliotech) [4]. Bibliotech building was finished 
and handed over to the university by the contractor in 
October 2013.  
Specific nature of Wroclaw University of Technology as 
a technical university which closely cooperates with the 
industry and develops a number of solutions and 
technologies implemented in the industry defines yet 
another, additional role of the library. It is a place of 
collecting and providing access to scientific and technical 
information for students and academic teachers. Moreover, 
it’s another role is to serve business entities and innovative 
entrepreneurs from the region of Lower Silesia. 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

New library, already at the stage of planning, was meant 
to be a modern, electronic unit. Electronic resources, such as 
e-books, e-journals and databases both shared and developed 
in modern and well-equipped laboratories were supposed to 
be the basis for its activities. It was decided that the 
Electronic Library will become the foundation for the 
university library and information system. Its activities will 
be supported by other university units, which collect and 
circulate standardization and patent information, as well as 
information on new technologies aimed in particular at 
business entities cooperating with the university within 
knowledge commercialization. All the above assumptions 
have been included in Bibliotech project.  
It is an ambition of Wroclaw University of Technology 
Library to once more become a leader and a nationwide 
pioneer as far as implementing new technologies and modern 
IT solutions are considered. More than 10 modern buildings 
of scientific libraries have been built in Poland within the last 
several years. However, to a great extent, they moved their 
previous tasks, collections and services to new premises 
only. Within the Bibliotech project, we decided to move a 
step forward.  We brought together in one place all library 
services, units of scientific and technical information, 
standardization, patent, new technologies information office, 
computer and multimedia laboratories, group work rooms, 
individual projects laboratories, and above all, new research 
laboratories working on data collection, warehousing, 
processing and sharing. All of the above will constitute a unit 
supporting research work in the areas of exact and technical 
sciences and improving access to scientific achievements by 
entrepreneurs. 
III. 
THE CENTER FOR SCIENTIFIC AND 
TECHNICAL INFORMATION 
 
On January 1st 2014, the university launched the Center 
for Scientific and Technical Information of Wroclaw 
University of Technology. It is a unit serving the whole 
university performing scientific, research and service-
oriented tasks. The new unit includes departments included 
within the project and located in Bibliotech premises 
(Electronic Library, digital laboratory, Regional Patent 
Information Center, New Technologies Information Office 
and IT research laboratories) [4]. Furthermore, it includes 
also other units dispersed within the campus, yet providing 
similar services for the sake of academic environment (e.g. 
Department Libraries). The aim of this procedure was 
gathering within one structure the previously dispersed 
units, restructuring them and reintegrating their activities as 
well as improving their functioning. At present, the Center 
is being organized. The new Bibliotech building is being 
provided with new generation equipment and cutting-edge 
data center. 
A. Library Services 
The university library-information system in the form of 
Traditional Library and e-Library operates within the 
structure of the Center for Scientific and Technical 
Information. 
Traditional Library is aimed at students in particular. Its 
main goal is to circulate printed sources (journals, books, 
academic text books) and providing basic information 
regarding library collection and electronic resources.  
The e-Library is the basis for the university library-
information system.  Within the structure of the e-Library 
there will be units responsible for collecting and circulating 
electronic resources, testing and organizing access to 
databases and scientific information services, as well as 
providing comprehensive information services for users 
representing scientific and business environment. The 
Center, along with the Libraries, will also serve as an 
information center, where highly-qualified information 
brokers will collect, verify and prepare sets or resources in 
various areas for the sake of users. Within the e-Library, 
current activities connected with registering scientific 
achievements will be performed (bibliographic database – 
DONA). Furthermore, the Laboratory of Scientometrics will 
be 
performing 
research 
in 
the 
area 
of 
scientific 
achievements analysis and citation analysis. 
The Center continuously expands its offer of electronic 
sources, data bases, standards and patent data bases to meet 
the needs of present and future users. In 2013, the then Main 
Library (the present Center) was providing access to over 90 
thousand titles of electronic books, over 45 thousand of 
periodicals and 92 specialist data bases. About 37 thousand 
of registered users are making use of those resources [5]. 
The specialist data bases and electronic periodicals provided 
by the Center, serve preparing the comprehensive 
information services, thematic sets and elaborations. 
The services are offered both, for workers, doctoral 
students 
and 
students 
of 
Wroclaw 
University 
of 
Technology, as well as other interested parties, such as 
economic entities and industry representatives. 
The Center is a key venture for the University 
development which defines library as the institution linking 
various functional structures related to scientific and 
research activity of the University workers. 
B. Knowledge Commercialization and Technology 
Transfer 
Within frames of the Center operate also the units 
dedicated for cooperation of science with the economy such 
as the Center for Scientific Cooperation with Economy. Its 
activity is focused on tasks supporting and initiating 
undertakings of all types in cooperation with representatives 
of business environment. The Center is running also a 
Contact Point for Technology Transfer. By creating a 
network of mutual relations with business and industry 
representatives, it identifies individual needs of enterprises 
in innovation, enabling that way development of solutions 
facilitating functioning of mechanisms of knowledge 
commercialization and widely understood cooperation of 
the University with businesses [6]. 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

An important agenda in the structure of the Center is 
also a Department of Intellectual Property and Patent 
Information, where the Regional Center of Patent 
Information incorporated into the European network 
PATLIB is operating. It is also consulting intellectual 
property issues, and provides legal services for the 
commercialization process. 
Guidelines of the European Commission [7][8] and 
Polish national and regional strategies [9] underline the 
importance of cooperation between science and the 
economy. The aim is to introduce innovative solutions to 
enterprises, and on the other hand, directing the scientific 
research performed in universities to the market needs. In the 
elaboration „Program assumptions of the conference Science 
for Business, Business for Science” [10] of 2013, Andrzej 
Rabczenko says about necessary changes to be introduced by 
universities to meet the challenge. Most of the assumptions 
have already been implemented in the Wroclaw University 
of Technology just due to activity of the Center and its 
particular units. Rabczenko underlines the necessity of 
establishing the Knowledge Center, and within its structure 
the Knowledge Transfer Office. Units of the Center 
responsible for cooperation between science and business 
have already conducted actions defined as necessary. They 
stimulate research aimed at results commercialization, 
associate individual laboratories with enterprises and 
participate in evaluating the commercialization potential of 
projects [10]. The Center operates two-ways – on the one 
hand, it is observing results of scientific research and is 
taking care for their dissemination including finding specific 
applications, and on the other hand supports relations with 
interested enterprises by placing orders with the University 
for the specific solutions [6]. 
C. Knowledge Repository and Digital Library 
A new unit established within the Center is the 
Knowledge Repository.  Wroclaw University of Technology 
is open towards the idea of Open Access. This is expressed 
by publishing an open mandate and supporting the Berlin 
Declaration. As a result, the necessity to create a multi-
functional platform to collect and archive university 
scientific achievements, to promote research done at 
Wroclaw University of Technology and to support research 
results transfer between industry appeared. The system 
developed in the Library currently exists in a beta version. It 
allows for archiving and searching scientific publications of 
employees, PhD students and degree students of Wroclaw 
University of Technology. It will also enable to personalize 
thematic search and full-text search. Moreover, it will 
include an expert search, helping to find and contact an 
author specializing in a given research area and doing 
particular research projects.  Author profiles deposited in the 
Repository will include a scientific resume, list of 
publications, citation information, grant and project 
information. The Repository will be closely integrated with 
other databases developed at the University with the aim to 
support research commercialization, developed by the 
Center for Science and Business Cooperation among others: 
the laboratories, project database, key equipment database 
[11].  
Within the Center there are laboratories of Lower 
Silesian Digital Library and the Laboratory of Digitization 
Methods. Lower Silesian Digital Library was founded in 
2004 as The Digital Library of Wroclaw University of 
Technology. In 2006, on the basis of a contract with 
Ossolinski National Institute and other higher education 
institutions from Wroclaw and Lower Silesia, the library was 
renamed and a Consortium of Lower Silesian Digital Library 
was created. The Consortium constitutes the common, 
regional electronic resources [12]. For nearly 10 years, 
Wroclaw University of Technology Library and the 
Consortium have been scanning library resources using their 
own, not always professional, scanners. They also 
outsourced digitization services from other companies. In 
Lower Silesian Digital Library laboratory, as well so far have 
been only 2 scanners. One Minolta PS 7000 scanner is 
scanning in grayscale and a flat Flex 50i full color scanner is 
scanning using the so-called cold light. For modern 
laboratories of the Lower Silesian Digital Library in 
Bibliotech building, the cutting-edge digitization equipment 
has been bought.  Twelve scanners and posts to take 
photographs of resources (using 3D technology, among 
others) will be used to scan library and archive collections of 
Wroclaw University of Technology and other Consortium 
Libraries, research project documents, doctoral dissertation, 
diploma papers and other documents which are created at the 
University. Digitization laboratories will provide services for 
other companies and institutions. The variety of digitization 
equipment will allow for digitization of cultural heritage 
resources, large scale maps and 3D objects. It will also 
enable the Library to perform mass digitization of current 
resources, doctoral dissertations, documents and academic 
text books, which will be partly accessible through the 
Lower Silesian Digital Library or the Repository. 
D. Laboratories 
A group of modern research laboratories has been 
provided within the structure of the Center: 
 
 
Laboratory of Remote Access to Digital Resources – 
conducts research related to development and 
implementation of new technologies, among others 
for safe and fast sharing of library resources, as well 
as access to digital repositories through computer 
network (including the wireless one). 
 
Laboratory of Protection and Safety of Digital 
Repositories 
– 
conducts 
research 
related 
to 
development and implementation of technologies 
(methods, equipment, procedures) for providing 
secure and confidential storing of digital data, as 
well as widely understood protection of digital 
repositories. 
 
Laboratory of Data Bases and Warehouses – is 
focused on research of data mining technology use, 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

among others for defining relations between user 
attributes and type of knowledge sought by him. 
 
Laboratory of Extraction and Acquisition of 
Knowledge – is designated for conducting research 
concerning development and implementation of new 
technologies for extraction of knowledge from 
digital resources, determining methods of collecting 
knowledge and application of knowledge extraction 
methods in e-learning. 
 
Laboratory of Exploration and Analysis of Digital 
Resources 
– 
conducting 
research 
concerning 
development and implementation of technologies 
(methods, procedures, applications) for providing 
control over plagiarism, as well as creating 
intelligent systems of searching for information in 
network and  Internet systems. 
 
Laboratory of e-Learning Technology – aimed at 
development 
and 
implementation 
of 
new 
technologies in e-learning for the needs of 
university, companies and governmental sector. 
 
Laboratory of Utilitarian Quality of Information 
Systems – the Laboratory is designated for testing 
the quality in use (usability) of information systems. 
According to standards proposed in the ISO 9241 
and ISO 9126 Standards the quality in use is being 
considered in the aspects of effectiveness and 
satisfaction. The Laboratory will enable application 
of tests with users both, in the subjective evaluation 
mode and recording of the selected physiological 
parameters during the tests. Innovative and unique in 
the world equipment for automatic recognition of 
human emotional behavior during operation of 
information systems will allow for  inclusion of the 
laboratory to the world research trends in that field.  
 
Laboratory 
of 
Tyfloinformatics 
– 
conducting 
innovative in the country research over modern 
methods and techniques of making knowledge 
available to blind and partially sighted persons. 
 
Research 
and 
Development 
Laboratory 
for 
Multimedia – the reference laboratory designated, 
among others, for self-testing of various tele-
information equipments in the functionality and 
suitability in creating wideband networks and 
services. 
 
Laboratory of Service Oriented Systems – the 
laboratory 
will 
develop 
and 
implement 
test 
methodology of service quality offered within SOA 
architecture 
(Service 
Oriented 
Architecture), 
participate in development of Polish standards of 
software quality and methodology of their use in 
practice, as well as creating own standards of 
product certification [4]. 
 
The Laboratories are to be run by scientific workers of 
the University, among others from the Department of 
Computer Science and Management and Department of 
Electronics. They will offer services and applications 
suitable for implementation by various economic entities 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The Center for Scientific and Technical Information of 
Wroclaw University of Technology has gone into 
development phase. Particular departments are gradually 
moving to the modern building. Tender procedures for the 
purchase of computer and digitization equipment, as well as 
research laboratories equipment are in progress. Official 
opening of the Center is planned in autumn 2014. It will 
then become the most modern academic and library 
institution 
this 
type 
in 
Poland 
serving 
collection, 
management and circulation purposes of knowledge 
produced at Wroclaw University of Technology. 
 
At the basis of establishment the Center of Knowledge 
and Technical Information lay the need for cumulating in 
one place the whole knowledge and information both, 
acquired 
and 
produced 
at 
Wroclaw 
University 
of 
Technology. The  Bibliotech building, where the key 
agendas of the Center are located, is to be a place where the 
scientific workers, doctoral students and students may come 
seeking for information sources for the conducted scientific 
research, as well as those looking for opportunities of 
commercialization of the innovative solutions developed by 
them. This is also to be a friendly place for entrepreneur, 
who is seeking in the university the innovative technology, a 
possibility of cooperation or a specific knowledge or 
information. So far, the tasks performed by the individual 
units of the Center were scattered and therefore the quality of 
that type services was insufficient. Project of the Center for 
Scientific and Technical Information redefines the role of 
library in the university of technology. The library of future 
integrates access to various type resources and provides 
services tailored to the user needs. Moreover, it is not only 
the unit disseminating knowledge but also cresting it 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Perspektywy 
University 
Ranking, 
http://www.perspektywy.pl/portal/index.php?option=com_content&vi
ew=article&id=724:uczelnie-akademickie&catid=93&Itemid=230 
[retrieved: 10 February, 2014]. 
[2] Biblioteka 
Politechniki 
Wrocławskiej 
1946-2011 
- 
historia, 
działalność, organizacja, Henryk Szarski (red.), Jadwiga Wojtczak 
(red.), 
Wrocław 
2011, 
http://www.dbc.wroc.pl/publication/14819[retrieved: 15 February, 
2014].  
[3] H. Szarski, “Komputeryzacja w Bibliotece Głównej i OINT 
Politechniki Wrocławskiej. Stan obecny i kierunki zmian”, Przegląd 
Biblioteczny, nr 3/4, 1991, pp. 305–315. 
[4] Studium Wykonalności projektu Biblioteka Nauk Ścisłych I 
Technicznych na potrzeby Innowacyjnej Gospodarki, Wroclaw 2010. 
[5] Działalność 
Systemu 
Biblioteczno-Informacyjnego 
Politechniki 
Wrocławskiej w roku akademickim 2012/2013, Raport Seria: U nr 
226, unpublished.  
[6] Opracowanie modelu współpracy Nauki z Gospodarką w Politechnice 
Wrocławskiej, 
Wrocław: 
Politechnika 
Wrocławska, 
2014, 
unpublished. 
[7] University 
Business 
Dialogue: 
a 
new 
partnership 
for the 
modernisation of Europe’s universities P7_TA(2010)0187, European 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Parliament resolution of 20 May 2010 on university-business 
dialogue: a new partnership for the modernisation of Europe’s 
universities 
(2009/2099(INI)) 
2011/C 
161 
E/15.  
http://ec.europa.eu/prelex/detail_dossier_real.cfm?CL=en&DosId=20
2297 [retrieved: 12 February, 2014]. 
[8] Communication from the Commision to the European Parliament, the 
Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the 
Committee of Regions Entrepreneurship, 2020 Action Plan, 
Reigniting the entrepreneurial spirit in Europe COM(2012) 795 final, 
http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2012:0795:FIN:
en:PDF [retrieved: 12 February, 2014]. 
[9] Strategia Rozwoju Województwa Dolnośląskiego 2020,  Wrocław 
2013. 
[10] A. Rabczenko, Założenia programowe konferencji Nauka dla 
Biznesu, Biznes dla Nauki, 10.12.2013, unpublished. 
[11] A. Wałek, Wroclaw University of Technology Knowledge Repository 
– project objectives, in press. 
[12] A. Wałek, Biblioteki cyfrowe na platformie dLibra, Warszawa: 
Stowarzyszenie Bibliotekarzy Polskich, 2009.  
 
 
 
 
 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

