Taste It! Try It! – A Semantic Web Mobile Review Application 
 
Monika Kaczmarek, Agata Filipowska, Jakub Dzikowski, Szymon Łazaruk, and Witold Abramowicz 
Department of Information Systems, Faculty of Informatics and Electronic Commerce, Poznan University of Economics, 
Poznań, Poland 
{ m.kaczmarek; a.filipowska; j.dzikowski; s.lazaruk; w.abramowicz}@kie.ue.poznan.pl
 
 
Abstract—Web-based review systems provide a valuable 
service to consumers allowing them to share opinions on 
various goods and services. In order to improve the 
comparability of opinions as well as their retrieval and 
further application, systems more and more often take 
advantage of semantic annotations and Semantic Web 
technologies. However, as users are not really interested in 
delivering semantic annotations of content, specific tools 
incorporating incentives' mechanisms are needed to 
transform 
the 
syntactic 
content 
into 
the 
machine 
understandable one. This paper presents a Semantic Web 
mobile review application, supporting semantic-based user 
profiling and contextual semantic search, benefiting from 
linked data and equipped with Web 2.0 motivations 
mechanisms.  
Keywords – Semantic Web; semantic annotation; Linked Open 
Data; incentives; Web 2.0; review systems. 
1. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION 
There exists an enormous amount of reviews on goods 
and services published by users on the Web every day. 
Reviews made by consumers, shared opinions and 
experience, have become an important source of valuable 
information that can be used by recommendation systems. 
However, as many consumers prefer to use free text to 
express their opinions, the difficulty in structuring these 
reviews using information extraction techniques [3] makes 
opinions‟ selection and retrieval processes as well as 
utilization of retrieved opinions not accurate enough [15].  
Therefore, in order to improve the accuracy of 
mentioned processes, review systems more and more often 
take advantage of semantic annotations and Semantic Web 
technologies [6]. However, the interest of users to 
contribute to the creation of the semantic content is rather 
low, due to [8][9]:  
 rather high barrier of entry - creation of semantic 
annotations requires specific skills and expertise in the 
domains such as ontologies, logic and knowledge 
representation; 
 lack of incentives - most of the semantic applications 
are difficult to use and lack built-in incentives inducing 
users to use them;  
 lack of clear benefits - the benefits of using semantic 
content are in many applications decoupled from the 
effort of creating the semantic content.  
Thus, in order to address the problem of data structuring 
and engage users in the process of creating semantic 
annotations, tools need to incorporate adequate incentives, 
e.g., benefiting from the Web 2.0 paradigm [17].  
In addition, the Web has evolved “from a global 
information space of linked documents to one where both 
documents and data are linked” [12]. This evolution is 
supported by a set of best practices for publishing and 
connecting structured data on the Web known as Linked 
Data. The most visible example of adoption and 
application of the Linked Data principles is the Linking 
Open Data project [13] aiming at identifying existing data 
sets that are available under open licenses, converting 
them to RDF [14] according to the Linked Data principles, 
and publishing them on the Web (as Linked Open Data 
(LOD)). Thus, instead of developing new standalone 
ontologies to be used within review systems, it is desirable 
to take advantage of the LOD paradigm. The machine-
readable data coming from various data sets with explicitly 
defined meaning can provide better access to various 
information sources 
(by supporting comprehensive 
answers to queries over aggregated data), thus, leading to 
enhanced user experience.  
In this paper we present a Semantic Web mobile 
application for reviewing objects supporting semantic-
based user profiling and contextual semantic search, 
benefiting from LOD sets and equipped with Web 2.0 
motivations mechanisms. The application is being 
developed within the INSEMTIVES project [10] focusing 
on mechanisms motivating users to dedicate more time 
and resources in the participation in the process of 
semantic content creation.  
The goal of the developed application is to make 
annotating process sufficiently easy for end-users' 
acceptance while providing added value through the ease 
of integrating data and reasoning on it. The work 
conducted encompassed both the research and practical 
related aspects. On the one hand, the aim was to contribute 
to a general understanding of the problem and on the other 
hand, the aim was to develop a system that could not only 
be used as a proof for testing, but also could constitute a 
fully fledged tool to be used by users. Thus, the System 
Development Method (SDM) was utilized [11] that 
“allows the exploration of the interplay between theory 
and practice, advancing the practice, while also offering 
new insights into theoretical concepts” [11]. The approach 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

followed consisted of three main steps. First, the concept 
building phase took place, which resulted in the theoretical 
concepts presented in this paper. The next step is the 
system building encompassing development of a system 
based on the theoretical concepts established. The last step 
will be the system enhancement and evaluation.  
The paper is organised as follows. Next section 
presents shortly the related work. Within the following 
section, the general framework of the proposed solution is 
presented including the vision of the tool, approach to the 
semantic annotation followed, supported functionalities 
and the motivations mechanisms applied. Finally, the 
paper concludes with final remarks.  
2. RELATED WORK  
Recommendation systems attempt to predict items a 
user may be interested in, given some information about 
user‟s preferences and past behaviour i.e., a user profile 
[1][15]. Most existing recommender systems take 
advantage either of: 
 collaborative filtering techniques i.e., analyzing past 
actions and behaviour of all users in order to identify 
interesting associations between them or between the 
objects, which can be used to make recommendations 
to a single person (memory-based collaborative 
filtering (e.g., [18]) and model-based collaborative 
filtering (e.g., [19])); 
 content-based methods i.e., recommending objects by 
analyzing the associations between user's past choices 
and descriptions of new objects [2][16] or 
 hybrid filtering methods combining two previous ones.  
A typical recommendation mechanism analyzes the 
user context (a user profile, if available), and presents to 
the user one or more descriptions of objects that may be of 
their interest. Recommendation mechanisms may be used 
in pull (recommendations are explicitly requested) or push 
mode (recommendations are made when a user did not ask 
for them). In either way, the recommendation should be 
personalized [20]. Following [16], different levels of 
personalization can be distinguished starting from coarse 
grained ones (e.g., relying on the country of residence) to 
fine-grained (e.g., based on the recent search history). The 
process of personalization is accurate, if the system 
possesses accurate information on a user as well as the 
object/topic the user is interested in, and the information is 
machine-understandable.  
As online reviews are increasingly becoming the de-
facto standard for measuring the quality of various goods 
and services, their sheer volume is rapidly increasing so 
that processing and extracting all meaningful information 
manually in order to make an educated purchase becomes 
impossible [32]. As a result, there has been a trend towards 
systems automatically summarizing opinions from a set of 
reviews and displaying them in an easy to process manner 
[32][33][34]. One of the approaches followed is the 
aspect-based sentiment summarization taking as an input a 
set of users‟ reviews for specific goods and producing a set 
of relevant aspects, an aggregated score for each aspect, 
and supporting textual evidence [32]. The quality of this 
aspect-based summarization may be highly increased, if an 
a priori knowledge domain and the labelling of the portal 
are also considered [32]. 
Although much has been done, the current generation 
of 
recommender 
systems 
still 
requires 
further 
improvements including methods representing user 
behaviour, incorporation of various contextual information 
into the recommendation process, utilization of multi-
criteria ratings [1] as well as extracting information from 
free-text comments left by customers [3]. Although much 
progress has been made in the area of tools automatically 
producing structured reviews from unstructured text 
[3][32][33][34], human involvement is still required. 
Therefore, the application of semantics and the idea to 
apply appropriate incentives to encourage people to create 
semantic annotations should be considered [9]. 
According to [5], semantics is one of top ten most 
promising technologies of the future. The Semantic Web 
paradigm constitutes a major step in the evolution of the 
Web. It is to enable machines to understand the meaning 
of information on WWW via extending the network of 
hyperlinked human-readable web pages by inserting 
machine-readable metadata about the Web content and 
information on how they are related to each other, thus, 
enabling automated reasoning [6]. Its main goal is to make 
the Web content not only machine-readable, but also 
understandable by using semantic annotations. A semantic 
annotation is machine understandable, if it is explicit, 
formal, and unambiguous and this goal is usually reached 
by using ontologies [7]. Semantic review systems are those 
whose performance is based on some knowledge base 
defined as e.g., ontology [1][4]. The application of 
ontology within the review system: semantically extends 
descriptions of user opinions; allows to complete the 
incomplete information through inferences; semantically 
extends descriptions of user contextual factors; allows for 
the dynamic contextualization of user preferences and 
opinions 
in 
specific 
domains; 
guarantees 
the 
interoperability of system resources and the homogeneity 
of 
the 
representation 
of 
information; 
improves 
communication processes between agents and between 
agents and users [4]. 
As already mentioned, the Web has also evolved into 
the Web of Data [12] by using a set of best practices for 
publishing and connecting structured data on the Web 
known as Linked Data. The Linking Open Data project 
[13] identifies existing data sets that are available under 
open licenses, converts these to RDF [14], and publishes 
them on the Web. The examples of datasets encompass 
well-known DBPedia, Geonames or Freebase. The content 
of the Linked Data cloud is diverse in nature, comprising 
e.g., [12]: data about geographic locations, people, 
companies, books [21], scientific publications, movies, 
music, television and radio programmes, genes, proteins, 
drugs and clinical trials, online communities, statistical 
data, census results, and reviews (Revyu system [22]). 
Currently, because of the rising popularity of Web 2.0 
tools, product review forums have become ubiquitous and 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

more and more websites provide platforms and tools for 
customers allowing them to share with others their 
personal evaluations and opinions on products and 
services, e.g., Yelp, Goodrec Urban or Tripadvisor. These 
systems provide large amount of reviews and offer 
recommendations on goods and services. Although quite 
successful, the precision of browsing and searching the 
reviews previously submitted is far from being perfect and 
usually no summary of existing reviews is provided. 
However, there exists few solutions incorporating 
semantic technologies and therefore providing more 
precise search results e.g., [23][24][3]. However, they 
suffer from a lack of user-generated content. The most 
promoted semantic recommender system seems to be the 
Revyu system – a generic reviewing site based on the 
Linked Data principles and the Semantic Web technology 
stack. Although the tool itself is worth noting, it also lacks 
on focus (a user may review anything he wants) and on 
incentives mechanisms encouraging users to provide 
semantic content of high quality.. 
The social phenomenon of Web 2.0 is well recognised 
in the literature and well visible in the everyday life [17]. 
With mobile-multimedia devices capable of continuum 
data transmission, social interactions on the Web are to be 
moved to the new level as big numbers of different 
individuals who wish to contribute towards some joint 
project or community may be easily linked together 
[25][26]. This trend is also visible when it comes to social 
tagging sites like Flickr and Delicious or already 
mentioned 
various 
recommendation 
sites. 
People 
sometimes work for free, motivated either out of intrinsic 
enjoyment [27], social reward [28] or by using financial 
compensation (e.g., Mechanical Turk). The key for success 
of every user-contribution based system is the incentives 
mechanism applied. The gratification system should be as 
attractive as possible and each award should motivate a 
user towards further contribution. The success of Farmville 
on Facebook showed the power of funny badges and 
medals published on the Facebook wall. When it comes to 
review systems, some applications use simple flat points to 
award users for their contribution (e.g., Gastronauci), some 
use complex system of badges (e.g., Foursquare) or stamps 
(e.g., Gowalla). In addition, some of them offer publishing 
information on user activity on the Facebook wall (e.g., 
Urban spoon, mygoodeats), which additionally motivates 
users and is a great way of attracting new users to sing up. 
Taste it! Try it! is to provide the following additional 
value in comparison to the currently existing solutions: 
structuring and disambiguation of the reviews by using 
domain knowledge, complex ontology-based description 
of objects integrated with the LOD cloud; semantic-based 
user profiling and personalization of search results; 
incentives to contribute to the system following 
appropriate usability and social design guidelines. 
3. TASTE IT! TRY IT! APPLICATION 
The Taste it! Try It! application is targeted at two 
groups of end-users: data producers (contributors) - 
providing reviews of places, and data consumers 
(beneficiaries) - interested in the content produced by the 
application, i.e., looking for opinions on various places.  
3.1 STORYBOARD 
The Taste It! Try It! Application supports the creation 
of semantically annotated reviews using mobile devices in 
a user-friendly manner. The storyboard supported by the 
system is as follows. A user goes to a restaurant. While 
being at the restaurant, the user decides to share his 
opinion on the restaurant and its quality of service factors 
with other members of the community. He uses Taste It! 
Try It! to express this opinion. The application starts from 
capturing the position of the place (using the GPS system 
in a mobile device). This enables associating the 
semantically annotated review that is created afterwards 
with a specific point in space. Then, the user creates a 
review by providing values to selected features suggested 
by the application. Additionally, the user may create a 
free-text comment regarding the object being reviewed. 
The review is then uploaded to a Taste it! Try it! server 
and in the background the semantic representation is 
created. Based on the quantity and quality of created 
annotations, the user may be awarded with a special title 
e.g., Polish-cuisine expert, International-food expert. This 
title is visible to his friends at the community portal, in our 
example the Facebook portal, with which the application is 
integrated. In addition, based on the user behaviour and 
data made available by the Facebook portal, the user 
profile is created, which is then used in the personalization 
process. As data acquired from Facebook and other 
sources is structured, it can be directly mapped to the 
ontology used by the application. The created annotations 
are then further on used by a semantic-based recommender 
system while searching for restaurants fulfilling certain 
criteria, e.g., vegetarian, low budget, and high quality, in 
the neighbourhood of a user. As the semantically 
annotated reviews are linked to LOD sets [12], some more 
sophisticated reasoning over the data is to be possible and 
extends the possibilities offered by the system. 
Thus, the application is to fulfil the following goals: 
 provide 
semantically-enabled 
reviews 
that 
are 
sufficiently easy to create for end-user acceptance - the 
process of attaching the machine understandable 
semantics should be invisible to the end user;  
 keep a user entertained - integration of the proposed 
application with the social portal such as Facebook and 
badges, are some of the incentives that are utilised to 
make the system more attractive to users. 
 offer 
the 
personalized, 
semantic, 
context-aware 
recommendation process (both push and pull).  
3.2 SEMANTIC ANNOTATION AND SUPPORTED 
FUNCTIONALITIES 
Within our work, we followed a hybrid approach to the 
review creation and in consequence, also to a semantic 
annotation process. Firstly, we decided to include into our 
model a feature-based review relying on labelling. Thus, 
the domain knowledge was utilised in order to identify the 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

most important dimensions of reviewed objects users may 
be interested in, e.g., details of the place, food (the quality 
of served food, how the food tastes, and comments about 
specific dishes, items or selection); service (such as mainly 
politeness and timeliness of order delivery); atmosphere 
(information on the venue such as: decoration, parking, 
cleanliness, music, etc.), value related (e.g., the quality of 
goods in comparison to their price). 
Our dimensions encompass both the quantitative and 
qualitative information at the feature/aspect level. The 
quantitative ones are appropriately aggregated and 
translated into a “star rating” between one and five stars. 
The qualitative ones are represented by a set of possible 
values representing the key sentiments that may be used to 
express the value of the aspects. Thus, while delivering the 
review, besides providing specific rates of a restaurant in 
the various categories, users may specify the restaurant‟s 
cuisine, 
available 
entertainment, 
payment 
options, 
Internet-access 
possibility, 
etc., 
by 
selecting 
the 
appropriate values from the lists.  
All information is expressed in a formal semantic 
manner in the background. The specific dimensions are 
linked to the internal ontology developed within the 
project, with the central concept review. The mentioned 
ontology provides flexible categorization scheme that 
assist in further integration of reviews (to produce a 
consistent description of an object e.g. restaurant) as well 
as recommendation and search. In addition, the specific 
concepts in the ontology are linked to the LOD cloud; e.g., 
the dimension object city is linked to concept city from 
GeoNames and local is linked to the restaurant concept 
from DBpedia. Each review made by a user produces 
additional RDF triples that may be published in the LOD 
cloud (e.g., „Quality Restaurant‟ is located in Paris).  
The second approach to the semantic annotation, 
allows users to introduce into the application the free-text 
comments regarding any selected aspect of an object 
being reviewed. While the user is typing the comments, 
the system on the fly checks the words used and tries to 
disambiguate them and link them  to the existing concepts 
in the LOD. This is done on the mobile device, if a user is 
online or at the Facebook portal in other case. In this way 
additional RDF statements are created – annotating 
restaurants and their different aspects selected by a user. 
Free text comment is disambiguated using Wordnet or 
DBPedia and bootstrapping algorithm developed within 
the Insemtives project [31][35][36].  
The above mentioned semantic annotations and 
additional information gathered about a user is then used 
in order to offer two groups of functionalities: 
personalized recommendations (push) and search (pull).  
Within the system twofold personalization has been 
applied. The first one is solely based on the information 
known on a single user (so called atomic personalization 
[15]), e.g., geo-location, outcomes from analysis of 
preferences based on the previous reviews. Based on the 
current location of a user or his interests (user profile), the 
recommendations of different objects to visit are to be 
provided. 
While 
providing 
the 
context-based 
recommendation, this context influences the results. 
However, as atomic personalization may sometimes lead 
to over-specialization [15], also other information is 
considered e.g., users who similarly rated the given object, 
outcomes of analysis of the friends network. This is called 
collaborative personalization and it can also help 
overcome the problem of a cold start, when little or no 
information is known about an individual. In addition, 
semantic based clustering of users is performed, where the 
reasoning is to be applied in order to compute the distance 
between different tags and users. The information on 
which aspects a user usually points to is also used by a 
system in order to perform user clustering and conduct 
personalized search. This is to be used while providing 
suggestions of places to visit and ranking search results.  
As semantic annotations allow overcoming problems 
derived from the ambiguous nature of the natural 
language and from the specificity gap between 
annotations and queries, the system may ensure a higher 
precision to its users (e.g., [35]). In order to take 
advantage of the semantic annotations, a specific search 
interface is to ensure the correspondence of the user query 
with 
the 
underlying 
semantic 
annotation 
model. 
Therefore, the bootstrapping algorithm is also used while 
formulating a query by a user. In addition, the interface 
allows a user to formulate a query using building blocks, 
thus, giving him a full control on the extent of 
personalization and constraints used in the query. In this 
way, the undesired limitation of the world is avoided (e.g., 
localised search is desirable when a user is searching for 
restaurants locally, but is not as desirable when one just 
wants to find the best restaurant worldwide). Once a user 
clicks the submit button, the formulated query is resolved, 
and the SPARQL query is created and executed on the 
Insemtives 
platform 
[37] 
that 
retrieves 
the 
recommendation 
results. 
Resolving 
spatial-queries, 
recommended by my friends, or people of similar interests 
or having some specific aspects annotated is also 
supported by the Taste it! Try it! application. The user is 
also able to influence the ranking of search results by 
ranking different search dimensions.  
To summarize, the application exhibits the following 
features: ontology-based structuring of text reviews using 
additional domain knowledge and taking advantage of the 
LOD data sets, multi-layer semantic-based user clustering 
and context-aware personalization of search results. 
3.3 MOTIVATION LAYER APPLIED 
The social aspect of user gratification is expected to 
solve one of the motivational problems that social software 
based on user contribution is facing. This is the problem of 
decoupling users' roles of a contributor and beneficiary of 
the system. A written and submitted review of a given 
restaurant can, of course, be valuable for its author in the 
future. However, he is most likely to benefit more from 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

contribution of other users, not from his/her own. The time 
of investment is then often much different from the time of 
benefit, this is known as  the "curse of prepayment" [29]. 
Within the INSEMTIVES project, the issue of 
motivating users to contribute to the semantic content 
creation was investigated and relevant guidelines and 
models have been provided [30].   
As it was already mentioned, the goal of the Taste it! 
Try it! is also to motivate users to create semantic 
annotations of restaurants. The annotations assigned to a 
restaurant by the application, are derived from collective 
decisions of reviewers. Thus, it is required to motivate 
users to produce reviews in considerable amounts and with 
a substantial level of details. The incentives models and 
methods within the application may be summarised 
according to two dimensions: usability design related 
incentives, such as user-friendliness and easiness of 
creation of semantic annotations; and sociability design 
manifested through the integration of the application with 
the Facebook portal and usage of badges and points to 
award users for the activities. 
The first mentioned dimension of incentives relates to 
the design of the application and its interface. It covers 
such usability design aspects as controllability, self-
descriptiveness, error-tolerance, expectation conformity, 
suitability for task and individualization. While developing 
the application, our main motivation was to hide the 
complexity of semantics being the backbone of the 
application. The semantic annotations that are created are 
template based annotations, thus, the entire process of 
creating annotations is more user friendly and resembles 
typical interaction with the Web 2.0 application. Even the 
creation of the semantic annotations based on the free text 
concepts is more user friendly thanks to the application of 
the bootstrapping algorithm, already mentioned.  
The second groups of mechanisms include the 
sociability design aspects, that manifest themselves by 
awarding badges to users being the most active or reaching 
certain thresholds e.g., for each review submitted, users are 
awarded with points. In turn, badges show the status of a 
user, his/her hobby as well as current achievements. The 
gratification rules define when a user is eligible to get a 
certain badge. Both badges and points are displayed in the 
profile and on the wall of the user on the Facebook portal. 
It allows taking advantage of the following motivation 
levers: reputation, competition, conformity to a group, 
usefulness, altruism, reciprocity and self-esteem. 
3.4 ARCHITECTURE AND THE INSEMTIVES PLATFORM 
To fulfil goals defined for the application, five major 
components of the application were distinguished, namely: 
server, Android client, Facebook client, Facebook and the 
Insemtives platform. The Android client provides a user 
with a mobile front-end to manage reviews. The server 
component performs the semantic annotation process and 
publishes the prepared LOD using the Insemtives 
platform. The server also provides an interface for the 
Facebook client that enables retrieval of information on the 
user interactions with the application, as well as on 
restaurants and reviews. 
 
          
 
Figure 1. The Android client interface 
 
The server also updates information on statistics, 
granted badges and uses the Facebook Graph API to post 
information on the Facebook wall of the user e.g., about a 
new review or a new badge granted to the user. The 
Facebook client is another front-end to the application and 
is embedded in the Facebook canvas. It uses the Facebook 
JavaScript API to retrieve basic information about the user 
including Facebook user ID, user name, friends, location, 
locale, etc. This data may be used in the Facebook side 
calls. The Insemtives platform enables publishing data in 
the LOD cloud, offers SPARQL support while accessing 
the data from the cloud, as well as provides the 
bootstrapping component.  
 
Figure 2. System schema 
4. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
The Taste It! Try It! application presented in this paper 
is to support users in creating semantically annotated 
reviews. This goal is achieved by providing an application 
similar to what users already use and applying incentives 
mechanisms to motivate them. These social incentives 
mechanisms taking advantage of the Web 2.0 ideas are to 
guarantee the appropriate quantity and quality of the 
created semantic annotations of objects. This will in turn 
allow offering personalised and more accurate search 
possibilities 
leading 
to 
creation 
of 
a 
valuable 
recommendation system, thus, constituting additional 
incentive for users to use the application. The Taste It! Try 
It! Application offers the added value towards the existing 
recommendation systems especially in the area of 
personalization of search results and contextual semantic 
search. Worth mentioning is also the integration with the 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

LOD cloud. We believe that features of the Taste It! Try 
It! application provide a reasonable compromise between 
functionality, usability, simplicity and attractiveness from 
the user point of view. However, only an evaluation of the 
proposed solution being a part of our future work will 
show, whether the application constitutes a good 
compromise between the power of semantic annotations 
and difficulty of creating and maintaining them.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been partially funded by the FP7 project 
INSEMTIVES, EU Objective 4.3 (grant no.FP7-231181). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
 Adomavicius, G., “Toward the Next Generation of Recommender 
Systems: A Survey of the State-of-the-Art and Possible 
Extensions”, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data 
Engineering, vol 17, no. 6, 2005. 
[2] 
 Yang, W., Wang, Z., and You, M. “An improved collaborative 
filtering method for recommendations' generation”, in Proc. of 
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 
2004. 
[3] 
Carrillo de Albornoz, J,, Plaza, L., Gervás, P., and Díaz, A.,” A 
joint model of feature mining and sentiment analysis for product 
review rating”. In Proceedings of the 33rd European conference on 
Advances in information retrieval (ECIR'11), Paul Clough, Colum 
Foley, Cathal Gurrin, Hyowon Lee, and Gareth J. F. Jones (Eds.). 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 55-66. 
[4] 
Peis, E., J. M. MMorales del Castillo, J.M., and Delgado-Lpez, J. 
A., . Semantic recommender systems. analysis of the state of the 
topic,. Hipertext.net, no. 6, 2008. 
[5] 
 Gartner‟s Report, Emerging Trends and Technologies Roadshow 
for 2008 to 2012, 2007, last access date: 13.09.2011. 
[6] 
Berners-Lee, T., Hendler, J., and Lassila, O.,  (2001). The semantic 
web. “Scientic American”, no. 284(5) 2001, pp. 34-43. 
[7] 
Uschold, M. and Gruninger, M., Ontologies: principles, methods, 
and applications, “Knowledge Engineering Review”, no. 11(2) 
1996, pp. 93-155. 
[8] 
Shadbolt, N., Berners-Lee, T., and Hall, W., The semantic web 
revisited, “IEEE Intelligent Systems”, no.21. 2006, pp. 96-101. 
[9] 
 Siorpaes, K. and Simperl, E., Human intelligence in the process of 
semantic content creation, “World Wide Web Journal”, no. 13(1), 
2010, pp. 33-59. 
[10] http://insemtives.eu last visited: 13.09.2011 
[11] Burstein, F “Systems Development in Information Systems 
Research”. In: Williamson, K(ed.), Research Methods for Students, 
Academics and Professionals: Information Management and 
Systems, 2nd edition. Wagga Wagga, New South Wales, 2002 
[12] Bizer, C., Heath, T., and Berners-Lee, T., Linked data - the story so 
far., “ International Journal on Semantic Web and Information 
Systems”, no. 5(3) 2009, pp. 1-22. 
[13] http://esw.w3.org/topic/SweoIG/TaskForces/CommunityProjects/L
inkingOpenData - last visited 13.09.2011 
[14] Resource Description Framework - http://www.w3.org/RDF/, last 
visited: 13.09.2011 
[15]  Garcia-Molina, H., Koutrika, G., Parameswaran, A., “Information 
Seeking: 
Convergence 
of 
Search, 
Recommendations 
and 
Advertising, Communications of the ACM, 2009 
[16] Pazzani M. and Billsus D.. “Learning and revising user profiles: 
The identification of interesting web sites”. Machine Learning, 
27:313-331, 1997.  
[17] O'Reilly, T. and Battelle, J., “Web squared: Web 2.0 five years 
on”, 2009. 
[18]  Breese, J.S., Heckerman, D., and Kadie, C.. “Empirical analysis of 
predictive algorithms for collaborative filtering”. In 14th UAI 
Conf., 1998. 
[19] Hofmann, T.. “Latent semantic models for collaborative filtering”. 
ACM TOIS, 22(1), 2004. 
[20] Micarelli, A., Gasparetti, F., Sciarrone, F., and Gauch, S. “The 
Adaptive Web”, volume 4321 of LNCS, chapter Personalized 
Search on the World Wide Web. 2007. 
[21] Bizer, C., Cyganiak, R., and Gauß, T.: The RDF Book Mashup: 
From Web APIs to a Web of Data. Proceedings of the 3rd 
Workshop on Scripting for the Semantic Web , 2007 
[22] Heath, T. and Motta, E. “Revyu: Linking reviews and ratings into 
the Web of Data”. Journal of Web Semantics, 6(4):266-273, 2008. 
[23] Aciar, Silvana, Zhang, Debbie, Simoff, Simeon, and Debenham, 
John. Recommender System Based on Consumer Product Reviews. 
In Proceedings of the 2006 IEEE/WIC/ACM International 
Conference on Web Intelligence (WI '06). IEEE Computer Society, 
Washington, DC, USA, 719-723. 
[24] Sugiki, Kenji and Matsubara, Shigeki.“Product retrieval based on 
semantic similarity of consumer reviews to natural language 
query”. Int. J. Knowl. Web Intell. 1, 3/4 (July 2010), 209-226. 
[25] Benkler, Y. The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production 
Transforms Markets and Freedom. Yale University Press, New 
Haven, CT, 2007.  
[26] Malone, T. W., Laubacher, R. Dellarocas, C., Harnessing Crowds: 
Mapping the Genome of Collective Intelligence. MIT, City, 2009.  
[27] von Ahn, L. Games with a purpose. Computer, 39, 6, 2006, 92-94 
[28] Nov, O., Naaman, M. and Ye, C. What drives content tagging: the 
case of photos on Flickr. In Proceedings of the Proceeding of the 
twenty-sixth annual SIGCHI conference on Human factors in 
computing systems (Florence, Italy, 2008). ACM 
[29] Zacharias, V. and Braun, S. (2008). Tackling the curse of 
prepayment 
collaborative 
knowledge 
formalization 
beyond 
lightweight. In 1st Workshop on Incentives for the Semantic Web , 
7th International Semantic Web Conference ISWC2008, October 
27th, 2008, Karlsruhe, Germany, CEUR Workshop Proceedings 
[30] Cuel, R., Tokarchuk, O., and Zamarian, M.: Mechanism Design for 
Designing Annotation Tools. Proceedings of Sixth International 
Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services, St. 
Maarten, The Netherlands Antilles, March 20-25, 2011. 
[31] D4.3.2Bootstrapping tools for image files (final version), 
Insemtives 
Project 
FP7-ICT-2007-3, 
30.03.2011; 
http://www.insemtives.eu/deliverables/INSEMTIVES_D4.3.2.pdf; 
last visited: 13.09.2011 
[32] Blair-Goldensohn, S.,  Hannan, K., McDonald, R., Neylon, T., 
Reis, G., and Reyna, J. “Building a Sentiment Summarizer for 
Local Service Reviews”, r, WWW Workshop on NLP Challenges 
in the Information Explosion Era (NLPIX), 2008. 
[33] Beineke, P., Hastie, T., Manning, C., and Vaithyanathan S.. “An 
exploration of sentiment summarization”. In Proceedings of 
National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI), 2004 
[34] Hu M. and Liu. B. “Mining opinion features in customer reviews”. 
Proceedings of National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence 
(AAAI), 2004 
[35] Andrews, 
P., 
Pane, 
J., 
and 
Zaihrayeu, 
I., 
“Semantic 
Disambiguation in Folksonomy: a Case Study”. to appear in 
Advanced Language Technologies for Digital Libraries, Springer's 
Lecture Notes on Computer Science, Hot Topic subline, 2011 
[36] Andrews, P., Kanshin, S., Pane, J., and Zaihrayeu, I.:”Semantic 
Annotation of Images on Flickr”. Demo Proceedings of the 8th 
Extended Semantic Web Conference (ESWC 2011), Springer 
LNSC, Heraklion, Greece, May 29th - June 2nd, 2011 
[37] D3.2.2 Deliverable - Semantic Content Management platform 
(final version), Insemtives Project FP7-ICT-2007-3, 30.03.2011; 
http://www.insemtives.eu/deliverables/INSEMTIVES_D3.2.2.pdf; 
last visited: 13.09.2011. 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

