Technological Support for Correcting Exams: The Continuum Paradigm 
Next step forward to build a holistic continuous audit model 
Ed Curfs and Eric Mantelaers 
Future-Proof Auditor 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, the Netherlands 
ed.curfs@zuyd.nl
eric.mantelaers@zuyd.nl
Martijn Zoet and Clint Wolfs 
Future-Proof Financial 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, the Netherlands 
martijn.zoet@zuyd.nl
clint.wolfs@zuyd.nl
Abstract—Continuous 
Monitoring, 
Continuous 
Auditing, 
Continuous Assurance, Continuous Reporting and the 
Continuum Paradigm (CP) are the elements in which research 
has been performed over 30 years. A major part of the 
research was focused on individual elements of the CP. 
However, no research has been performed with the purpose to 
identify if it is possible to build a holistic audit model based on 
the CP. Researchers noticed that there are no global standards 
available yet, approved by the stakeholders in relation to 
Continuous Assurance or Continuous Reporting. In this paper, 
we developed and built a simplified and holistic CP, the case 
study, for the four building blocks of the CP: Continuous 
Monitoring, Continuous Auditing, Continuous Assurance and 
Continuous Reporting. The case study is based on an exam for 
the post-doc education program for Financial Auditing at 
Dutch Universities. An exam has been selected as this makes it 
possible to verify the performance of the model by verification 
of the machine (case study) versus the manual results. The 
overall conclusion is that there is a correlation between the 
results of the machine and the manual results of the 
examinators. However, the score of the machine is structurally 
lower than the manual scores of the examinators. The case 
study proves that it is possible to build an audit model, with 
reference to the technological support for correcting exams, 
based on the CP. 
Keywords–case study; continuous monitoring; continuous 
auditing; continuous assurane; continuous reporting; continuum 
paradigm; reporting; forensic; financial auditing; financial data 
and non-financial data; machine review; manual review; 
sustainability reporting; testscripts. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Due to cost-reduction programs, the increase of the labor 
costs, the shortage of skilled and educated professional 
financial auditors, increase the need for implementation (AI), 
ChatGTP, data analytics, process mining and also the further 
development of the CP. These advances are resulting in the 
creation of added value for the management of organizations 
and their stakeholders.  
However, the process of the implementation of the CP is 
on-going for more than three decades [1] [8] [9]. 
Nonetheless, a holistic continuous audit model based on the 
CP has not yet been designed, built, and implemented. In the 
past, research has mainly been focused on non-financial data 
[1]-[3] although the first goal of the CP is to provide 
assurance of financial data, the annual statement of a 
company or even ‘continuous’ published financial figures of 
the company. Based on the current development in law and 
regulation, the importance to get insight in a holistic 
continuous audit model increases. For the individual 
elements of the CP, a lot of research has been performed [1]-
[3][5][6][8]. The goal of this case study is to develop the CP 
as a holistic system in a pragmatical way. Based on the 
outcome of the case study, professionals and researchers will 
gain a better understanding of the actual status and the 
missing 
building 
blocks 
to 
achieve 
a 
successful 
implementation of the CP at a larger scale.  
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. 
Section 2 summarizes the results of the literature review. The 
research method is described in Section 3. In Section 4 the 
data collection is described. The results are described in 
Section 5. Section 6 describes the conclusion. Finally, the 
paper concludes in Section 7 with the limitations and future 
research. 
II.
LITERATUE REVIEW
The four building blocks of the CP are (1) Continuous 
Monitoring (CM), (2) Continuous Auditing (CA), (3) 
Continuous Assurance (CAss), and (4) Continuous Reporting 
(CRe). A lot of research has been performed to each element 
from several different views and perspectives, however, so 
far, no research has been performed on all the elements of 
the CP as a whole. 
The need for ongoing, timely assurance of data and 
information utilizing CM, CA, CAss, and CRe is becoming 
more apparent. To improve the readability of the article the 
abbreviations are presented in Table I.  
In the last decades, Vasarheyli, Kuenkaikaew, Alles and 
Willems performed research in the area of CM, CA, CAss, 
and CRe [1]. This research was mainly related to financial 
data and limited to one single element of the CP, e.g., CM or 
CA. Due to new applicable law and regulation non-financial 
data becomes more and more relevant. These new 
developments,  in combination with the IT developments and 
the shortage on the labor market, place pressure on further 
development of a holistic system of the CP as an audit 
model.  
To build a holistic CP [1][8][9], making use of real data, 
has not been achieved yet since the following standards are 
missing. Global accepted standards with regards to CM, 
audit and assurance standards related to classification of CA, 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-082-7
eKNOW 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

and reporting standards for CRe are not yet defined and 
approved by the related international bodies.  
Alles et al. performed research in the area of Continuous 
Monitoring of Business Process Controls (CMBPC) [2]. 
Architecture has been developed to build a complete 
independent CMBPC system running on top of the Siemens’ 
own enterprise information system. This pilot showed that it 
is feasible for a large internal audit department to implement 
a vast array of CA-type procedures to mitigate business risks 
in certain high impact areas, and to achieve labor savings 
through automation of internal audit tasks. Based on a 
detailed investigation of this pilot the outcome is that certain 
SAP reports related to logical access, including all 
parameters and changes of these parameters, have been 
developed, including red flags. These red flags require 
further investigation of the internal auditor of Siemens. This 
task results in a judgment of the auditor, is related to CA and 
is associated to audit the reliability and sustainability of the 
internal control system. This is one of the four so-called 
General IT controls. The elements CM, CAss and CRe were 
not part of this pilot. 
Kogan, Sudit and Vasarhelyi investigated the status of 
Continuous Online Auditing (COA) in 1999 [3]. The 
outcome of the program of research was that further research 
needed to be performed in the areas of general architecture. 
In addition, future research should explore and design 
standard formats for enterprise data to facilitate data capture 
for COA. Furthermore, future research should focus on 
investigating the trade-offs, exploring the extent to which the 
auditor can rely on COA and investigating whether the use 
of COA is more likely to be initiated by internal than 
external auditors. 
Recent research has been performed by Canning et. al [4] 
in the area of processes of auditability sustainability 
assurance. The purpose of the case study was to provide a 
better understanding of how financial audit concepts are 
translated in the sustainability assurance arena. A total of 
fourteen semi-structure and in-depth interviews were 
conducted with sustainability assurors who had financial 
audit training and experience or were specialists in other 
areas. These interviews were conducted between the period 
March and July 2013. Based on the information received, the 
audit of non-financial data is mainly performed manually, 
making limited use of IT solutions. Furthermore, it became 
clearer that financial auditors also choose to switch from 
financial audit in order to specialize in non-financial audit 
domains as for example corporate sustainability reporting. 
Explicitly 
examining 
their 
intrinsic 
motivations 
for 
switching, their experiences, and the influence they seek to 
bring to bear on assurance practices in new spaces, including 
materiality assessments, would be a fruitful avenue for future 
research. 
The interest for the CP increases and research has been 
performed also regarding Forensic Continuous Auditing 
(FCA) by Kearns and Barker [5]. The conclusion of the 
research was that there are cogent reasons for adopting a 
system of forensic continuous auditing. Experience has 
shown that the traditional financial audit is not an effective 
mechanism for uncovering fraud [5]. The forensic 
continuous audit system resulted in creation of control 
reports.  
Eulerich and Kalinichenko [6] investigated the current 
state and future directions of CA research and one of the 
conclusions was that very specific applications for CA were 
investigated and the pragmatical added value for a general 
internal audit function may be limited. This situation cannot 
be acceptable and requires further research and investigation. 
The focus should be on pragmatical and practical 
applications for CA. Based on our review of the available 
research, we noted that limited results have been booked 
regarding the development and design of a holistic audit 
model based on the CP. We would like to investigate if there 
are pragmatical simplified cases available to perform a 
holistic test that takes all elements of the CP into account.  
TABLE I. OVERVIEW RELEVANT ABBREVIATIONS OF THE ARTICLE
Abbreviation 
Description 
CA 
Continuous Auditing 
CAss 
Continuous Assurance 
CM 
Continuous Monitoring 
CMBPC 
Continuous Monitoring of Business Process Controls 
CP 
Continuum Paradigm 
COA 
Continuous Online Auditing 
CRe 
Continuous Reporting 
Based on the literature review it can be concluded that all 
elements of the CP have been heavily investigated as stand-
alone components. No attempt has been made to investigate 
several elements simultaneously or build a simple model to 
prove the CP design and concept as a holistic audit model. 
The main reasons that no integrated holistic research has 
been performed are: (1) there are no global standard for 
monitoring internal controls, (2) there are auditing standards, 
for internal and external auditors, however these are always 
tailored per engagement / customer, (3) there are assurance 
standards, for internal and external auditors, however the 
professional judgment of the auditor is a complex process, 
based on data of several sources, and (4) there are reporting 
standards, auditors opinion, however these are the results of 
the auditing standards and the professional judgement of the 
auditor.  
The goal of this research is to build, an audit model based 
on a case study. The model of the case study and the relation 
with the basic principles of the CP will be explained in detail 
in Section 3.  
III.
RESEARCH METHOD
The goal of this research is to build a holistic audit model 
based on the CP. The first step was to find an example or 
process that could be used to investigate all or nearly all 
buildings blocks of the CP. To make this possible, the team 
of three researchers investigated the options for simple 
processes that currently are performed manually. The team 
of researchers existing of 1) a junior researcher, with broad 
experience in internal and external auditing, 2) a senior 
researcher (PhD) with broad experience as external auditor 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-082-7
eKNOW 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

and 3) a senior researcher with broad experience on business 
rules management has been established. In addition, the 
processes should contain both financial as well as non-
financial data. Moreover, it should be technically possible to 
automate the manual process. Lastly, the manual tasks 
should be linked to the building blocks of the CP. 
The case study should provide insight in how a manual 
process could be transferred to a holistic audit model, based 
on the building blocks of the CP. This manual process should 
be based on the following tasks, (1) monitoring of a subject, 
(2) auditing of a subject, (3) defining achieved level of 
assurance based on the pre-defined standard and (4) 
reporting of the outcome. A manual process that could be 
used, is for example the review and judgment of written 
exams. By automating this process, it would be possible to 
compare the results of the manual process and the results 
automated process. The most important reasons for selecting 
the process of a written exam are (1) this is a simple process 
and (2) the tasks to be performed manually can be linked one 
to one to the building blocks of the CP. 
In the manual process, an examiner is reading ten or 
more written exams, exam by exam and answer by answer. 
In practice, this task is performed over a period of several 
days as a stand-alone task. If the task can be performed for 
more than two exams simultaneously, it could be defined as 
a continuous task. The next task, the assessment of the 
content on one answer versus the content of the standard 
solution guidance has been linked to the building block CA. 
Audit is the verification of an outcome, result versus a pre-
defined accepted standard. For the case study, the standard 
used is the standard examination guidance. The following 
manual task, calculation of the result of a written exam has 
been linked to the building block CAss. The outcome of an 
exam can be compared to the outcome of a financial audit. 
The auditor provides a certain level of assurance. In basic 
terms, there are two options (1) a qualified opinion or (2) a 
not-qualified opinion. The next manual task of recording the 
final result of a written exam per candidate corresponds to 
the building block CRe. More specifically, the knowledge 
level per topic per candidate is reported.  
The CP includes the judgement process in the 
combination of the building blocks CM, CA and CAss. In 
Table II a high-level overview is presented with regard to the 
relationship between the building blocks of the CP and the 
manual tasks performed by reviewing written exams. There 
is a one-to-one relationship between the assessment process 
and the four building blocks of the CP.  
The goals of the public auditor exams (as applicable in 
the Netherlands) are development to verify the level of actual 
competences about e.g., risk management, internal control, 
customer acceptance, materiality, audit approach, law and 
regulation, audit methodology, audit techniques, and 
professional judgement. The development of professional 
judgement is to improve the process as well as the quality of 
decision making, as investigated by Vaassen and Bröcheler 
[7]. Their research has been performed in 1996 and is based 
on the internal control exams. The research approach has 
partly been used as a reference for the development of the 
script. The script is a computer script that automates the 
manual assessment process. The script makes use of 
predefined topics. A topic is related to a task a financial 
auditor performs. Table V provides an overview of the 18 
defined topics. The script also contains the counting 
mechanism per question and the counting mechanism in 
total, based on the allocated points per word, figure and 
abbreviation per question. This results in a standard score per 
question, is shown inTable III. In addition, this results in a 
score per topic, which illustrates the knowledge level per 
topic.  
TABLE II. ELEMENTS IN SCOPE TEST SCRIPT 
Since this research is based on the internal control exams, 
we searched for exams with more or less the same design, 
structure and review process. The researchers decided to 
select the evaluation process of Financial Auditing exams 
made by students of the Dutch post-doc program Auditing. 
The reasons that this evaluation process has been selected are 
that the following data are available: (1) a case and written 
exams as input and subjects to be audited, (2) the rating 
methodology and method, (3) a standard examination 
guidance prepared by an independent audit professional, (4) 
general accepted guidance and rules for evaluation of the 
cases and defining the final judgement.  
The next step was to select a representative exam to build 
the case study. Based on the selected exam, universities can 
be contacted to request the results made by the student for 
that specific exam. The Dutch National Exam Auditing of 
summer 2022, Exam Gambit, has been selected to build a 
model for the four building blocks (CM, CA, CAss and CRe) 
of the CP. 
The main reason for selecting the Exam Gambit is that 
this is the most recent exam and represents the instances 
required by the auditing profession as well as the program of 
requirements defined by the Dutch Auditing Profession. This 
exam has also been selected as this relates to financial data 
as well as non-financial data. Exams in the context of, for 
example, psychology studies, teacher training, law studies, 
engineering studies, construction studies, chemical studies, 
languages, are less suitable because they often do not relate 
financial and non-financial data. The researchers are of the 
opinion that the CP should be created via a case study for 
both types of data. In the near future, due to developments 
related to the development of global law and regulation, both 
will require continuous attention. Furthermore, the data 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-082-7
eKNOW 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

elements of the Exam Gambit (two parts, morning, and 
afternoon session) are available. These are the exam, the 
standard examination guidance of the Exam Gambit, the 
valuation of the questions of the morning and afternoon 
Exam Gambit, the rating / assurance level of the National 
Exam (the regulation), the exams made by the students and 
the guidance how the results are presented to the accountable 
Professor of the university and the students.  
The researchers are aware of the fact that building a case 
study for one exam of a post-doc program still is not a fully 
continuous 
process 
of 
monitoring 
the 
results 
and 
performance of a student during the whole post-soc program. 
However, this will be a simpler task to be automated. A 
calendar, a timetable of the post-doc program and results of a 
student are the data elements to be combined into one 
dashboard.  
A.
Manual Judgement Process
The case for the Auditing exam is prepared by one of the 
seven universities in the Netherlands accountable for the 
post-doc program Auditing. Cases are made on a rotation 
base. Each exam exists of a morning session and an 
afternoon session. For each session, the candidates can spend 
3 to maximum 3,5 hours, depending on the standard defined 
by the exam developer. The morning and afternoon session 
of the Exam Gambit counted each four questions and for 
each session, 50 points were allocated. In case the candidate 
collects for one session more than 27.5 points in total and for 
the other more than 22.5 points in total, resulting in 50 points 
out of 100, the candidate passes the exam Auditing 
successfully. 
The evaluation and judgement process for the exams 
Auditing have been the same process for several decades. 
The team of examinators are receiving the exams of 
maximum 10 students. Each case is reviewed by two 
independent examinators. One of the examinators is in the 
lead and receives the results of the second examinator. 
B.
Automated Judgement Process
The script designed is based on the standard examination 
guidance. The standard examination guidance (the answer) is 
based on two components per question. One component is 
referring to the regulation and standards and the second 
component is referring to the activities to be performed. The 
professional international auditing standards as well as the 
Dutch, ‘Controle en Overige Standaarden’ (COS), and the 
Dutch 
laws 
and 
regulations 
such 
as 
‘Richtlijnen 
Jaarverslaggeving’ (RJ) are applicable. For each question, 
the applicable regulations have been defined and per 
regulation a decision rule has been created.  
In the standard scheme guidance is provided regarding 
the standards, financial figures and per question a description 
of the correct answer in general. Per answer the standards, 
the main key-words and the financial figures have been used 
to define the decision rules. One standard or one man key-
word or one financial figure results each in a decision rule. 
For question 1 in total 102 decisions rules have been 
developed.  
For each question, the total points to be granted, based on 
the standard examination guidance, have been divided by the 
defined number of decision rules per answer. In Table III, the 
final maximum score per question is presented. 
The draft script has been prepared by one researcher and 
two researchers reviewed independently the (draft) scripts, 
during each stage of the development process. The first 
version of the script, existing of 1,004 decision rules for the 
Exam Gambit, has been tested making use of the 6 cases of 
University I. Out of the 33 cases ad-random the cases of 
three candidates have been selected that passed the exam and 
three candidates that did not pass the exam. Based on the 
analysis performed, the researchers notified that 249 
predefined decision rules were not mentioned in one of the 6 
cases prepared by these candidates. These 249 decision rules 
influence negatively the score per candidate with 17.5 points 
out of 100. The first test script has been validated and 
cleansed, resulting in 755 decision rules 
TABLE III. STANDARD SCORE AND SCORE TEST SCRIPT
The outcome of the second test was reliable and could be 
used for the total population of 33 candidates, 66 cases. The 
designed CP has been accomplished for the 66 cases. The 
results and outcome have been presented in this article. 
C.
Relationship manual versus automated Judgement 
Process
The manual process consists of providing the cases to the 
reviewers, the manual review, the manual calculation of the 
rating, the manual judgement and manual reporting of the 
outcome. This process normally takes several weeks. The 
relation between the automated versus the manual process is 
that based on the case study, it can be concluded that the 
monitoring task (collection of the written exams), the review 
task (audit), the judgement task (assurance) and the final 
outcome (reporting) of exams (monitoring) can be performed 
simultaneously and continuous for an unlimited number of 
exams. The automated process takes less than one minute for 
66 exams. The automated process can be repeated at any 
time, any moment and at any location.  
D.
Link to future performance of the auditor
During the evaluation of the first version of the test script 
the researchers thought that it might be also possible to 
define a relationship between the tasks a financial auditor 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-082-7
eKNOW 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

performs on a day-to-day basis and the Exam Gambit. The 
defined topics are related to audit elements, audit work, audit 
approach, audit techniques. These are all tasks that a 
financial auditor will perform during an engagement. For 
each decision rule (in total 755) a topic has been defined 
During the first attempt accomplished by one of the 
researchers’ 25 topics were defined and allocated. The 
review of the other two researchers resulted in final 18 
topics. See Table V the 18 topics that have been defined. 
About these 18 topics the same rating methodology has been 
used as for the 755 decision rules. 
IV.
DATA COLLECTION
There are seven universities in the Netherlands providing 
educational skills and training for the post-doc program 
Auditing. We contacted the University I with the request to 
provide to us the cases Gambit prepared by the candidates.  
University I provided us with the following data: (1) the 
total population of the candidates are 35. Two of the 
candidates did not participate in the Auditing exam summer 
2022, (2) the exams of 33 candidates who completed the 
morning and afternoon session of the Case Gambit, summer 
2022, (3) the results per candidate for the Exam Gambit. The 
results according to the first, as well as the second examiner 
have been provided. All the provided data have been 
anonymized in line with applicable global law and 
regulation. 
The overall exam results of all seven universities in the 
Netherlands normally varies between 60% and 75% of the 
total population that passes the Auditing exam. The 
candidates are a mix of candidates that make the Auditing 
exam for the first time and repeaters. The number of 
repeaters per auditing exam is a small part of the population. 
For the auditing Exam Gambit at University I, 19 candidates 
passed the Exam successfully (58 %) and 14 candidates did 
not (42 %).  
V.
RESULTS
By designing and building a script for an exam, it is 
possible to combine the following building blocks of the CP: 
CM, CA, CAss and CRe into one model. The case study 
proves that it is possible to achieve a holistic audit model 
based on the CP. The manual process of reviewing written 
exams can be automated based on the CP. The case study 
can be repeated for all written exams during the complete 
study program of several years at any university. However, 
this was not part of the case study as this is only one the 
many exams a student needs to pass. 
TABLE IV. CORRELATION RESULTS
FIGURE 1. RELATIONSHIP RESULTS AUTOMATED VERSUS MANUAL
The results of the case study based on the population of 
33 cases University I are (1) there is a correlation between 
the results of the machine (case study) and the results of the 
corrector (value of 0.6237030, see Table IV), (2) the scores 
of the machine are structurally lower than manual scores of 
the examinators (see Figure 1.) and (3) it has been proven 
that it is possible to build a pragmatic integrated CP. 
 Out of the original defined 1,004 decision rules, 249 
decision rules have been removed after the review of the 
other two researchers. 
TABLE V.KNOWLEDGE LEVEL PER TOPIC FOR ALL EXAMS 
Based on the 18 topics and the evaluation of the scores of 
these topics, it is possible to provide insight in the average 
knowledge of the total population of these (individual) 
students. For example, the topic (0) Initial audit engagement 
results in a score of 65 %. The result 65 % implies that the 
average knowledge level per student is good. In case the 
result for a topic is below 50 % it could mean that the current 
knowledge of the student regarding this topic is not up to 
standard or that the education of this topic is not sufficient. 
VI.
CONCLUSION
Based on the results of the investigation, it became clear 
that building a holistic audit model, useful for financial 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-082-7
eKNOW 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

auditing is a very complex process and that global standards 
regarding monitoring, auditing, assurance and reporting for 
building a model are missing. Due to these factors, the 
researchers decided to find options and scenarios to be used 
to design a holistic audit model based on the CP. On the 
other hand, because global accepted standards for CM, CAss 
and CRe are missing, and that each organizations have its 
own tailor-made processes and systems in place, one 
standard CP for example the automotive industry will not fit 
in. The boundary condition will be that all companies of a 
specific industry need to align their business standards with 
the specific elements of their processes and systems of the 
industry. 
The outcome of the case study is that this is the first time 
that the building blocks of the CP have been developed as a 
holistic audit model. This is a simplified model and provides 
insight in the missing elements per building blocks for 
further successful developments in the area of the 
implementation of the CP for auditing.  
The results of the case study are (1) there is a correlation 
between the results of the machine (case study) and the 
results of the corrector (value of 0.6327030, see Table IV), 
(2) the scores of the machine are structurally lower than 
manual scores of the examinators (see Figure 1). There is 
also a correlation between total decision rules and result 
machine (value 0.8329330) and the result manual (value 
0.5669460). The correlation of the machine result is higher 
than the manual result. The next result (3) it has been proven 
that it is possible to build almost a holistic audit model based 
on the CP model.  
By an automated evaluation of an exam, the researchers 
made it possible to also provide insight in the development 
level of students about specific tasks a financial auditor 
performs during the operational process of auditing the 
financial statements of a client. Automated evaluation of 
written exams makes it possible to provide insights over 
more demission’s than the standard evaluation. This data 
could be used to improve the overall quality of the education 
program as part of the post-doc program and to coach the 
student in a more focused and tailor-made approach. The 
long-term result could be that the maturity level of the next 
generation of Certified Public Auditors increases.  
VII.
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESREACH 
The case study is the first attempt to design and build a 
holistic audit model based on the CP, for financial as well as 
non-financial data. However, there still are several 
limitations that should be taken into consideration while 
interpreting the results. 
The first limitation is related to the representation – the 
significancy of the correlation. The difference between the 
machine and examinators has not been verified based on 
statistical testing. This testing is needed to achieve the 
representatives of our results. A second limitation relates to 
the validation of the decision rules. Out of the 755 decision 
rules, 128 decision rules have still not been used in the tested 
66 cases. This could imply that the knowledge level of the 
students is low or that the decision rules are not valid. 
Moreover, it could also be that the standard examination 
guide provided by an independent professional in auditing is 
incomplete or overcomplete. Another explanation could be 
that the expectation level of the professional is not in line 
with the achieved knowledge level.  
Based on this research and the case study, further 
research is needed to identify if the CP is the best way for 
continuous monitoring the performance of processes of 
organizations and more specifically, the financial audit 
process. Another option could be that the money part of the 
good and money model of Starreveld [10] will be a better 
and more practical hybrid option. This conceptual model has 
the advantages that the continuous monitoring is based on 
the following data: (1) incoming payments, (2) outgoing 
payments and (3) development of one or several general 
ledgers accounts: for example, bank and external obligations 
(loans). These financial data are available on a minute-to-
minute base and a major part of the data are structured, 
which is founded on global standards. These financial data 
are transferred from the company and the external finance 
companies daily. Therefore, all the related process risks, 
internal controls and data transfer do not need to be 
continuous monitored, audited, and assured to achieve 
reasonable 
assurance 
of 
these 
financial 
data. 
Correspondingly, data of previous years is available, and 
these data can be used as an assurance framework to identify 
major deviations or out of the benchmark postings.  
REFERENCES
[1]
M. A. Vasarhelyi, M. Alles, S. Kuenkaikaew, and J. Littley, 
“The acceptance and adoption of continuous auditing by 
internal auditors: A micro analysis,” International Journal of 
Accounting Information Systems, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 267–281, 
Sep. 2012, doi: 10.1016/j.accinf.2012.06.011. 
[2]
M. Alles, G. Brennan, A. Kogan, and M. A. Vasarhelyi, 
“Continuous monitoring of business process controls: A pilot 
implementation of a continuous auditing system at Siemens”, 
International Journal of Accounting Information Systems, vol. 
7, Issue 2, pp. 137-161, June 2006. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S14670
89506000273 (accessed Mar. 21, 2023) 
[3]
A. Kogan, E.F. Sudit, and M. A. Vasarhelyi, “Continuous 
Online Auditing: A Program of Research”, Journal of 
Information Systems, vol. 13, pp. 87-104, 1999, doi: 
10.1108\/9781787434134. 
[4]
M. Canning, B. O’dwyer, and G. Georgakopoulus, “Processes 
of auditability in sustainability assuranace – the case of 
materiality construction”, Accounting and Business Research, 
vol. 
49, 
no. 
1, 
pp. 
1-27, 
2019. 
doi: 
10.1080/00014788.2018.1442208. 
[5]
G. S. Kearns, and K. J. Barker, “Developing a Forensic 
Continouos Audit Model” , ADFSL Conference on Digital 
Forensics, 
Security 
and 
Law, 
2011, 
doi:
10.15394/jdfsl.2011.1094.
[6]
M. Eulerich and A. Kalinchenko, “The Current Stae and 
Future Directions of Continuous Auditing Research: An 
Analysis of the Existing Literature”, Journal of Information 
Systems, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 31051, 2018, doi: 10.238/isys-
51813. 
[7]
E.H.J. Vaassen and V.K. Bröcheler, “The influence of a 
decision support tool and experience on the assessment of 
AO/IC descriptions”, De Accountant, nr. 1, September 1996. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://pure.uvt.nl/ws/portalfiles/portal/1399788/Invloed.pdf
(accessed Mar. 23, 2023). 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-082-7
eKNOW 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[8]
E. Curfs, E. Mantelears, and M. Zoet, "How to Plot Current 
Pilots on the Audit Maturity Model? The CP," in Proc. 
eKNOW 2022, pp. 12-17. 
[9]
E. Mantelaers and M. Zoet, “Association for Information 
Systems AIS Electronic Library (AISeL) Continuous 
Auditing: A Practical Maturity Model,” 2018. [Online]. 
Available: https://aisel.aisnet.org/mcis2018/40 (accessed Feb. 
01, 2023). 
[10] R.W. Starreveld, O.C. van Leeuwen and H. van Nimwegen, 
“Administrative information management”, Deel 1: Algemene 
grondslagen, 5th edition, 2002, ISBN 90 207 3052 5.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-082-7
eKNOW 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

