How to Plot Current Pilots on the Audit Maturity Model? 
The Continuum Paradigm 
Ed Curfs 
Future-Proof Auditor 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, the Netherlands 
ed.curfs@zuyd.nl  
Eric Mantelaers 
Future-Proof Auditor 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, the Netherlands 
eric.mantelaers@zuyd.nl 
Martijn Zoet 
Future-Proof Financial 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, the Netherlands 
martijn.zoet@zuyd.nl 
Abstract—Continuous 
monitoring, 
continuous 
control 
monitoring, continuous auditing, continuous assurance and 
continuous reporting and the Continuum Paradigm are topics 
in which research has been performed for more than 30 years. 
The possibilities and challenges of these elements have been 
researched. However, limited studies focused on the holistic 
view and the status of an pilots, financial as well as non-
financial data, in relationship with the Audit Maturity Model 
have been performed. Based on the existing studies, we defined 
the following research question: What is the actual status 
regarding the Continuum Paradigm? Based on a review of 
pilots and plotting the results of the pilots on the Audit 
Maturity Model by a focus group, further insight is provided 
regarding the actual status. The overall conclusion is that the 
average maturity level for Continuous Monitoring and 
Continuous Assurance reaches nearly stage 3: Maturing and 
no research has been performed based on a holistic and fully 
integrated continuous process.  
Keywords-Audit Maturity Model; Continuous Monitoring; 
Continuous Auditing; Continuous Assurance; Continuous 
Control 
Monitoring; 
Continuous 
Reporting; 
Continuum 
Paradigm; Financial and Non-financial Data; Sustainability 
Reporting. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Scientific papers in the context of the Continuum 
Paradigm have often been descriptive in nature in recent 
years. Common concepts within this research area are 
Continuous 
Monitoring 
(CM), 
Continuous 
Control 
Monitoring (CCM) Continuous Auditing (CA), Continuous 
Assurance (CAss) and Continuous Reporting (CRe). This 
whole is now referred to as the Continuum Paradigm [1]. 
The definition of the Continuum Paradigm is a holistic and 
pragmatical CA maturity model, which facilitates the 
assessment of CA capabilities [1]. 
Only a few studies have been conducted in practice 
within Continuum Paradigm, combined with results of pilots. 
What is the actual status regarding the Continuum Paradigm? 
Based on earlier research the aim is to provide insight in the 
actual status. 
Maturity models [1] [2] can be helpful to provide insight 
in the actual status. Maturity models enable organizations to 
assess their current situation and provide handholds for 
improving and future research. An example of the maturity 
model is the Audit Maturity Model (AMM) proposed by, 
Vasarhelyi, Alles, Kuenkaikaew and Littley [2]. For the 
purpose of our research, we assessed and plotted the 
outcomes of a number of selected pilots on a maturity model. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. 
Section two summarizes the results of the literature review. 
The research method is described in section three. Section 
four, the data collection is described. The results are 
described in section five. Section six describes areas for 
future research.  Finally, the paper concludes in section 
seven with the conclusion. 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
The need for ongoing, timely assurance of data and 
information utilizing CM, CCM, CA, CAss and CRe is 
becoming more and more apparent.  
In the last decades, Vasarhelyi, Kuenkaikaew, Alles and 
Kattie Willems [3] performed research in the area of CCM, 
CM, CA, CAss. However, this research was mainly related 
to financial data. Nowadays management needs more and 
more data to provide assurance of non-financial data, driven 
by regulation e.g., regarding climate change and the appetite 
of stakeholders to be timely informed. 
Due to these developments the interests for CM, CA, 
CAss and CRe grow. When assessing the reliability of data 
produced by the system, the auditor will review 
confidentiality, integrity, and availability and how the data is 
ensured by the system of internal controls. IT technology and 
the AMM can be used to allocate the current status of CM, 
CCM, CA, CAss and CRe. The allocation provides insight in 
the actual level of auditing. This is relevant information to 
guide research and further developments of these elements. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

There are several ideas of what continuous concepts and 
systems are, and how they work. Each of the concepts has 
their own definition. CM is “the process and technology used 
to detect compliance and risk issues associated with an 
organization's financial and operational environment” [4]. 
The financial and operational environment consists of 
people, processes, and systems, working together to support 
efficient and effective operations. Controls are put in place to 
address risks within these components. Through CM of the 
operations and controls, weak or poorly designed or 
implemented controls can be corrected or replaced – thus 
enhancing the organization's operational risk profile. 
Investors, governments, the public and other stakeholders 
continue to increase their demands for more effective 
corporate governance and business transparency. 
The most widely accepted definition for CA is the one 
released in 1999 by CICA/AICPA and reads as follows: “a 
methodology for issuing audit reports simultaneously with, 
or a short period of time after, the occurrence of the relevant 
events” [5]. The definition for CAss released by Vasarhelyi 
is therefore “an aggregate of objectively provided assurance 
services, derived from continuous online management 
information structures—the objective of which is to improve 
the accuracy of corporate information processes. These same 
services may also provide different forms of attestation 
including point-in-time, evergreen, and continuous” [6]. 
CAss and CRe are closely linked. There is no CAss without 
monitoring and intense measuring of the data and data 
sources. 
The AMM classifies the audit evolution into four stages, 
which are traditional audit, emerging, maturing, and 
continuous audit. Per stage seven domains have been 
considered: objective, approach, IT / data access, audit 
automation, audit and management sharing, management of 
audit functions, and analytical methods [7].  
The first domain is related to a “level of internal audit 
organization providing financial reports and monitoring 
internal controls”. The second domain approach is related to 
a “method of audit review, frequency and technique”. The 
third “domain IT / data access” is related to level and 
frequency of access to the information system and data. The 
fourth domain “audit automation” is related to the automated 
level of auditing, usage of technology to assist the audit 
review cycle. The fifth domain “audit and management” 
sharing is related to an internal audit department shares 
systems and resources with management. They have access 
and utilize the system together. The sixth domain 
“management and audit function” is related to the degree of 
cooperation 
between 
financial 
audit 
and 
IT 
audit, 
collaboration with other compliance departments. The 
seventh domain “analytic methods” is related to the level of 
analytical procedure that an internal auditor performs, 
techniques, and details. The general purpose of maturity 
model 
is 
to 
provide 
guidance 
for 
a 
sustainable 
implementation and growth for organizations [8]. See Table 
IV: Audit Maturity Model. 
To improve the readiness of the article, all relevant 
abbreviations are presented in Table I below. 
 
TABLE I.  
OVERVIEW RELEVANT ABBREVIATIONS OF THE ARTICLE 
Abbreviation 
Description 
AMM 
Audit Maturity Model 
CA 
Continuous Auditing 
CAss 
Continuous Assurance 
CM 
Continuous Monitoring 
CMM 
Continuous Control Monitoring 
CRe 
Continuous Reporting 
III. RESREARCH METHOD 
The goal of this study is to create an overview of the 
actual status of the separate elements of the Continuum 
Paradigm. Maturity models are a well-known instrument to 
support the improvement of functional domains. 
A focus group is a group interview involving a small 
number of participants who have other common experiences. 
The focus group should be based on the group of individuals 
that best represents the phenomenon studied. A focus group 
existing of 1) a junior researcher, with broad experience in 
internal and external auditing, 2) a senior researcher (PhD) 
with broad experience as external auditor and 3) a senior 
researcher with broad experience on business rules 
management has been established. Before a focus group is 
conducted, a number of topics need to be addressed: 1) the 
purpose of the exercise, 2) the selection of the participants, 
3) the number of participants, 4) the protocol of the focus 
group, 5) the AMM model, 6) the protocol for plotting the 
pilots on the AMM model and 7) useful pilots for research. 
Based on the research performed in the past there are 
different AMM models available. First, we needed to select 
which AMM model could be used as reference model for 
this study. The AMM as described by Mantelaers & Zoet [1] 
and the AMM as described by Vasarhelyi [2] have been 
selected as starting point. Both AMM’s have been compared. 
The AMM of Vasarhelyi has been used intensively in 
research articles since 1990. This AMM has also been used 
as reference for one other similar study (Metcash’s). For that 
reason, it has been decided to use the AMM of Vasarhelyi.  
The next step was to define what pilots could be used to 
perform this study. Research articles during the period 1990 
until 2011 have been selected using the following separate 
and combinations of the key words: audit, auditing, 
assurance, combined, control, continuous, data, external, 
financial, integrated, internal, maturity, model, monitoring, 
non-financial, pilot(s) and studies. The results have been 
reviewed by the focus group resulting in seven useful 
articles. Based on the review of the articles there are limited 
articles published containing sufficient detailed data and 
information to make it possible to rank and plot the results in 
the AMM of Vasarhelyi. The content of the selected articles, 
the level of detail of the data, level of detail of description of 
the data collection have been investigated. Based on the 
defined seven sections of the AMM and the data in the 
articles we searched for relationships and references. In case 
identifying that there were sufficient relationships and 
reference these articles were selected to rank and plot the 
results in the AMM. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

In the article of Hardy and Laslett, the results of the study 
have been plotted in the AMM [8]. The aim of this paper is 
to report on the implementation of CA and CM at Metcash 
Limited, an Australian wholesale distribution and marketing 
company (hereafter, Metcash). The results for this 
organization are so far notable: over 100 fully automated 
tests performed daily, a fully integrated exception 
management system, advancement from data to predictive 
analytics, and the use of visualization technologies for 
enhanced reporting. The results of this study have been used 
as reference to compare the results. 
Every participant followed the same protocol, each 
starting with an introduction and explanation of the purpose 
and procedure of the meeting. After the introduction, ideas 
were generated, shared, discussed, and refined by the 
participants. Furthermore, the participants were invited to 
submit secondary data regarding CM, CA, CAss and CRe in 
the AMM.  
Based on the pre-work, two pilots have been identified 
by the participants useful for plotting the results on the 
AMM. Each participant plotted the pilots individually. The 
results have been collected and the average results have been 
calculated for all three pilots. The average results of the two 
pilots have been compared with the reference pilot of 
Metcash’s. The results have been shared and discussed with 
the Focus Group. During this meeting conclusions have been 
defined and agreed.  
IV. DATA COLLECTON 
Per pilot further information will be provided as well as 
the reason why the data has not been used for further 
research.  
A. Reference Pilot: Metcash’s 
The goal of the Metcash pilot (the subject) was to 
provide key lessons relating to the adoption and 
implementation of CA and CM because of its advanced 
maturity. A maturity assessment of Metcash’s CA/CM 
activities was conducted [2]. The results are mapped onto the 
four stages and seven dimensions.  
This research has been performed during 2015 and the 
articles provided detailed information how to plot the results 
of a pilot or study [8]. For that reason, the outcome of this 
study has been used as reference to provide insight in the gap 
and deviations with other pilots or studies. 
Reference research three Pilots: SAPSECURE, CAMAP 
and BAGHEERA-S™ 
The goal of this study of the three studies (1) 
SAPSECURE. (2) CAMAP and (2) Bagheera-S™ is to 
collect evidence from actual implementations for the need of 
CA and CM [9]. SAPSECURE was developed to permit 
auditors to review SAP security settings on a regular basis. It 
may also be used to provide answers to questions such as, 
‘‘Who can create a vendor, enter an invoice, and pay it?’’ 
SAPSECURE was implemented and tested in a large public-
sector organization. The design of CAMAP is based on 
surveillance of financial transaction data with the intention of 
profiling and identifying users that violate Segregation of 
Duties. This CA/CM solution provides an automated, 
independent mechanism for monitoring key business 
processes within an organization. Bagheeera-S™ has the 
capability to report on three key business processes: (1) 
Payroll / Human Resources, (2) Procurement and (3) 
Finance. The results of the three studies SAPSECURE, 
CAMAP and BAHEERA-S™ could not be used to plot the 
results on the AMM as data was missing with regard to 
approach, IT/Data Access, audit and management sharing 
and management of the audit function.  
B. Pilot: VODAFONE 
The AICAP published a booklet Audit Analytics and 
Continuous Audit. In this booklet reference is made to the 
Vodafone 
Iceland 
pilot: 
Implementing 
Continuous 
Monitoring [5]. The scope of the project was to implement 
exMon for revenue assurance as revenue leakage is a known 
issue in the telecom industry, to decrease the time required to 
process the financial closing month-end, fraud detection and 
to enhance the quality of the Customer Relationship 
Management. The data of the Vodafone Iceland project was 
limited and for that reason this could not be used to prepare a 
AMM rating. 
C. Pilot: Siemens 
Working 
with 
Siemens 
presented 
an 
excellent 
opportunity to test how CA would move from concept to 
implementation. Vasarhelyi predicted both that ERP-enabled 
firms are the environments most suited to first deploy CA, 
and that the course of the implementation would begin with 
automation of existing audit procedures and then, once the 
feasibility and value added has been demonstrated, move on 
to re-engineering the audit to make it more CA ready [3].  
At Siemens several hundred procedures regarding Audit 
Action Sheets are be made up of which describe in 
considerable detail what the internal auditor is supposed to 
test for in each SAP system environment. After examination 
of 25-30 Audit Action Sheets, twelve were chosen as 
representative of the challenges on automating and 
reengineering. The Audit Action Sheets are related to 
inadequate protection for SAP access. Testing one of the 
major general IT controls, logical access, which is non-
financial data. In Visual Basic a prototype has been 
developed. The Siemens experience indicates that in 
environments characterized by highly automated business 
processes, CA can be defined as a process that continually 
tests controls based upon criteria prescribed by the internal 
auditor and identifies exceptions for the internal auditor to 
perform additional procedures. During this project the CM of 
internal control settings into the CA concepted model have 
been achieved. This included the treatment of transactional 
level data (non-financial).  
D. Pilot: HSP 
The HSP project is based on modeling processes required 
data at a highly disaggregate level, far below the level of 
account balances that are used in the standard audit 
analytical procedures. Due to fact that there was access to the 
full richness of the dataset, it was feasible to create the 
process-based audit models using as benchmarks. Continuity 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Equations (CE), which has been defined by Rogers as stable 
probabilistic models of highly disaggregated business 
processes [10]. The CE defined is related to the following 
strictly enforced business rule of the procurement process: no 
deliveries are to be accepted without a cross reference to a 
purchase order. The existence of a deterministic relationship 
between the counts of purchase orders sent and of the 
shipments received can be tested. The HSP experience 
indicates that for CE systems of this level of complexity 
requires powerful statistical techniques which allow for 
dynamic set of CEs with multiple time lags and feedback 
loops. The experience also made clear that CEs to become an 
essential component in the future CA systems, they will have 
to be sufficiently easy to implement. This which means that 
generic CE models developed in the laboratory must be 
generally applicable to different firms and processes.  
E. Plotting Pilots Results on AMM 
The focus group used the data of the Siemens Project and 
HSP project to complete the AMM as the provided data was 
sufficient to make plotting possible. The outcome is 
presented in the Table II, which contains an overview of the 
results per pilot, the reference pilot and average for the seven 
sections of the AMM.  
TABLE II.  
RESULTS PILOTS AND AVERAGE AMM 
 
Table III provides insight in the elements that have been 
in scope of the pilot. The first column of Table III refers to 
the main scope of the pilot, Assurance, Audit or Monitoring.  
The second column of Table III relates to the part of the 
Continuum Paradigm in scope of the pilot e.g. CRe, CAss, 
CA, CM and in addition related elements such as process 
data, general IT controls, Internal Control System and 
Enterprise Risk Management system. The elements process 
data, general IT controls, Internal Control System and 
Enterprise Risk Management system are added as these are 
relevant for the external audit to decide the final level of 
assurance of the audit. The elements process data and general 
IT controls are defined further in detail. In case ‘In scope’ is 
mentioned the related element was part of the pilot. All the 
other elements were not part of the pilot and for that reason 
no research has been performed to the Continuum Paradigm 
based on a holistic view.  
 
 
TABLE III.  
SCOPING PILOTS ELEMENTS CONTINUOUS 
 
V. RESULTS 
The overall outcome of plotting both pilots including the 
reference pilot is that the overall average maturity level is 
nearly stage 3: Monitoring. Stage 4: Continuous Audit has 
still not been achieved yet. 
There are limited pilots and studies with sufficient 
detailed data and information available to plot the results and 
outcome on the AMM.  The analysis of the two projects 
makes clear that the research on CM and CA is still scarce 
and in maturation and mainly related to non-financial data. 
Both pilots used for this experiment are related to CM of 
non-financial data. CAss and CRe are not part of the selected 
pilots. No pilots or studies based on actual implementations 
have been set up to perform research in the fields of CM, 
CA, CAss and CRe as one holistic and fully integrated 
process. To achieve a successful implementation of the 
continuous concept it requires an integrations and alignment 
of all elements of the chain from the start of selection of the 
data until providing CAss and deliver CRe.  
VI. FUTURE RESEARCH 
There is an increased need and growing pressure from 
stakeholders for receiving a continuous flow of assured data 
and information, specific non-financial data will become 
more relevant. Compliance, new laws and regulations will 
become applicable requesting assurance services of financial 
and non-financial data. As example the development of 
Corporate Sustainability Reporting, the EU regulation 
applicable as of 2025 regarding Environmental Social and 
Governance (ESG), the monitoring of General Data 
Protection Regulation and current developments regarding 
Process Robotic Automation. All these new developments 
included reporting reliability of financial data as well as non-
financial data. 
CCM can be applied to achieve insight in the existing 
level of assurance, to make the internal audit function more 
efficient and possibly, more effective. Auditors are skeptical 
about reliability of automated controls. There is a need for 
general audit and assurance models which fit system-based 
auditing approaches and a Continuous Integrated Assurance 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Concept for financial as well as non-financial data. Further 
research is needed, e.g., blockchain solution, to increase the 
reliability of the data, financial as well as non-financial data, 
and the overall level of trust. The outcome could be used to 
fine-tune the AMM. 
New guidance and standards should be defined and 
implemented in close cooperation and partnership with the 
developers, producers, users and end users of CM, CA, CAss 
and CRe to control and manage the levels of expectation. 
Further research is needed to get insight in the 
bottlenecks of why CA has yet not as a fully holistic process 
been implemented. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The overall outcome was that the average maturity level 
for CM and CA reaches nearly stage 3: Maturing. 
No research was performed based on a holistic and fully 
integrated process including the status and maturity level of 
the Line of Assurance at the client. 
Limited research has been performed on CMM, CM, CA, 
CAss and CRe of financial data. 
A certain minimum level of the LoA at the client will be 
required to implement CMM, CM, CA, CAss and CRe.  
The holistic and fully integrated process could be very 
helpful for organizations accountable for reporting of 
sustainability, non-financial data across the organizations, 
e.g. usage of CO² in the supply chain process or energy 
process, waste water management, employees (own) and 
contractors Lost Time Injury Frequency Rate (LTIFR). 
Research could be performed in combination with automated 
audit standards is an option to achieve continuous assurance 
across the organizations and their business processes. 
To meet the upcoming requirements of CM, CA, CAss 
and CRe a comprehensive holistic and fully integrated 
approach would need to address Line of Assurance testing, 
CCM testing, continuous internal control testing, continuous 
data testing, continuous transaction testing and continuous 
assurance testing.  
The AMM could support academics by research and the 
business by further development of new IT concepts and IT 
solutions. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Mantelaers and M. Zoet, “Association for Information 
Systems AIS Electronic Library (AISeL) Continuous 
Auditing: A Practical Maturity Model,” 2018. [Online]. 
Available: https://aisel.aisnet.org/mcis2018/40 
[2] M. A. Vasarhelyi, M. Alles, S. Kuenkaikaew, and J. Littley, 
“The acceptance and adoption of continuous auditing by 
internal auditors: A micro analysis,” International Journal of 
Accounting Information Systems, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 267–281, 
Sep. 2012, doi: 10.1016/j.accinf.2012.06.011. 
[3] M. A. Vasarhelyi, S. Kuenkaikaew, J. Littley, and K. Katie 
Williams, “Continuous Auditing technology adoption in 
leading internal audit organizations,” 2008. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/229004600 
[4] G. Locke and P. D. Gallagher, “Guide for Applying the Risk 
Management Framework to Federal Information Systems,” 
2010. [Online]. Available: http://csrc.nist.gov/publications. 
[5] AICPA, Audit Analytics and Continuous Audit: Looking 
Toward the Future. 2015. 
[6] M. 
A. 
Vasarhelyi, 
“Chapter 
12 
CONCEPTS 
IN 
CONTINUOUS ASSURANCE.” 
[7] M. G. Alles, A. Kogan, and M. A. Vasarhelyi, “Putting 
Continuous Auditing Theory into Practice: Lessons from Two 
Pilot 
Implementations,” 
2008. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
www.businessfinancemag.com 
[8] C. A. Hardy and G. Laslett, “Continuous auditing and 
monitoring in practice: Lessons from Metcash’s business 
assurance group,” Journal of Information Systems, vol. 29, 
no. 2, pp. 183–194, Jun. 2015, doi: 10.2308/isys-50969. 
[9] K. Singh, P. J. Best, M. Bojilov, and C. Blunt, “Continuous 
auditing and continuous monitoring in ERP environments: 
Case studies of application implementations,” Journal of 
Information Systems, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 287–310, 2014, doi: 
10.2308/isys-50679. 
[10] C. Rogers, “Continuous monitoring of business controls: A 
pilot implementation of a continuous auditing system at 
Siemens Discussant’s comments,” International Journal of 
Accounting Information Systems, vol. 7, no. 2. Elsevier Inc., 
pp. 167–169, 2006. doi: 10.1016/j.accinf.2006.03.006. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

TABLE IV.  
AUDIT MATURITY MODEL 
Stage
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 4
Domain
Traditional audit
Emerging
Maturing
Continuous audit
Objectives
-  Assurance on the 
financial reports 
presented by 
management
- Effective control 
monitoring
- Verification of the 
quality of controls and 
operational results
-  Improvements in the 
quality of data 
- Creation of a critical 
meta-control structure
Approach
- Traditional interim, 
and year-end audits
- Traditional approach 
with some key 
monitoring processes
- Usage of alarms as 
evidence
- Continuous control 
monitoring
-  Audit by exception
IT/Data access
- Case by case basis
- Data is captures during 
the audit process
- Repeating key 
extractions on cycles
- Systematic monitoring 
of processes with data 
capture
-  Complete data access
- Audit data warehouse. 
Production, finance, 
benchmarking and error 
history
Audit 
automation
- Manual processes & 
separate IT audit
- Audit management 
software
- Work paper 
preparation software
- Automated monitoring 
module
- Alarm and follow up 
process
- Continuous monitoring 
and immediate 
response
- Most of audit 
automated
Audit and 
management 
sharing
- Independent and 
adversarial
- Independent with 
some core monitoring 
shared
- Shared systems and 
resources with natural 
process synergies
- Purposeful parallel 
systems and common 
infrastructures
Management 
of the audit 
function
- Financial organization 
supervises audit and 
Matrix to Board of 
Directors
- Some degree of 
coordination between 
the areas of risk, 
auditing and compliance 
- IT audit works 
independently
-  Internal Audit and IT 
audit coordinate risk 
management and share 
automatic audit 
processes
- Auditing links financial 
data to operational 
processes
-  Centralized and 
integrated with risk 
management, 
compliance and SOX / 
layer with external 
audit
Analytical 
methods
- Financial ratios
-Financial ratios at 
sector level / account 
level
- KPI level monitoring
- Structural continuity 
equations
-Monitoring at 
transaction level
- Corporate models of 
the main sectors of the 
business
- Early warning  system
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

