Commonsense Knowledge Acquisition Using Compositional Relational Semantics
Hakki C. Cankaya
Dept. of Computer Engineering
Izmir Univ. of Economics, Izmir, Turkey
Email: hakki.cankaya@ieu.edu.tr
Eduardo Blanco and Dan Moldovan
Dept. of Computer Science
Univ. of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, Texas
Email: {eduardo, moldovan}@hlt.utdallas.edu
Abstract—A method for the acquisition of commonsense
knowledge based on instantiations of metarules is presented.
The metarules refer to some properties and objects that have
those properties. Metarules are instantiated by automatically
identifying objects that have those properties. In order to
increase the applicability of a commonsense property to objects,
composition of semantic relations is used. The method has
been implemented and tested over WordNet. Results show that
a commonsense metarule can produce many knowledge base
axioms.
Keywords-knowledge acquisition; commonsense knowledge;
semantics.
I. INTRODUCTION
Commonsense knowledge encompasses information peo-
ple use everyday and it is assumed known by an average
person; thus, it is not communicated most of the time. This
makes more difﬁcult to automate the acquisition of com-
monsense knowledge. To alleviate the problem of automat-
ically extracting commonsense knowledge, semiautomatic
approaches have been studied, where the system is given
some seed information and is expected to generate more
knowledge. There have been proposals to acquire common-
sense knowledge from different sources by using different
techniques. Some used collaborative efforts of experts and
general public over the Web [1], [2]. There are other similar
distributed human projects to collect commonsense knowl-
edge [3]. Some proposals link the information obtained by
the collaborative effort to known ontologies to expand and
structure the commonsense knowledge [4], [5]. Some other
proposals used text and World Wide Web as the source for
commonsense knowledge acquisition [6], [7]. Despite these
and other attempts, there is still a need for developing robust
methods for automatic commonsense knowledge acquisition.
In this paper, we introduce a new method for extracting
commonsense knowledge by using metarules that contain
user given commonsense rules and semantic relations.
II. APPROACH
The approach for extracting commonsense knowledge is
based on metarules that contain commonsense rules provided
by the user. These are then instantiated on a lexical knowl-
edge base to identify large number of objects to which a
high level commonsense rule applies. Commonsense rules
refer to some common properties well known by average
people. For example one can see-thru objects that have the
transparency property.
To infer more commonsense knowledge of this type, the
method automatically identiﬁes in WordNet, or any other
lexical source, the objects that have a property by searching
for certain semantic relations. For example the object glass
has the transparency property encoded by semantic relations
in a lexical database. The inference mechanism used in the
method concludes that one can see-thru glass since it has the
transparency property. These instantiations of commonsense
rules generate commonsense knowledge axioms.
The proposed method can accommodate potential restric-
tions and exceptions of a given commonsense rule. For
example, some types of glass, like opaque glass, have to
be excluded from the commonsense rule as they may not
be see-thru. In order to ﬁnd more objects that display a
property the method searches for hyponyms of the objects
that possess a given property since these also inherit that
property, unless there is an exception. For example, the
method extracts round glass as an object one can see-thru.
The mechanism for linking an object with other objects
that have the same property relies on composition of se-
mantic relations. The same mechanism is used to expand
commonsense rules by cause and goal semantic relations.
For example, see-thru causes more objects to be visible.
The method offers different metarules, because there
are cases where semantic gaps cannot be bridged by the
composition of semantic relations. For example, cars have
windshields that are transparent. Even though cars are not
transparent, one can see-thru a car. So, some objects don’t
inherit the property from their parts by using a Part-Whole
relation in composition of semantic relations; however they
inherit the rule and generate commonsense knowledge of the
same type. The method can simply bridge those semantic
gaps by using different metarules.
III. SEMANTIC RELATIONS AND COMPOSITIONAL
RELATIONAL SEMANTICS
A. Semantic Relations
Semantic relations are the underlying relations between
concepts expressed by words. They are implicit associations
between chunks of text. Formally, a semantic relation is
42
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

Entity [ent]
Situation [si]
State [st]
Event [ev]
Quality [ql]
Object [o]
Concrete [co]
Abstract [ao]
Figure 1. The ontology of sorts used to deﬁne DOMAIN(R) and RANGE(R).
represented as R(x, y), where R is the relation type, x the ﬁrst
argument and y the second. R(x, y) should be read as x is R
of y, e.g., ISA(gas guzzler, car) should be read gas guzzler
ISA car. The inverse of the relation is deﬁned by R−1(x,
y), which is equal to R(y, x). Given R, we can deﬁne DO-
MAIN(R) and RANGE(R) as the set of sorts of concepts that
can be part of the ﬁrst and second argument, respectively.
R(x, y) is formally deﬁned by stating: a) relation type R,
b) DOMAIN(R); and c) RANGE(R).
In order to deﬁne DOMAIN(R) and RANGE(R), we use the
ontology depicted in Figure 1, which is a reduced version
of [8]. The root corresponds to entities, which refer to
all things about which something can be said. Situation
is anything that happens at a time and place. Simply put,
if one can think of the time and location of an entity, it is
a situation. If they change the status of other entities,
they are called events (e.g. mix, grow), otherwise states
(e.g. be standing next to the door, account for 10% of the
sales). Objects can be either concrete or abstract.
The former occupy space, are touchable, tangible (e.g. John,
car). The later are intangible, they are somehow product of
human reasoning (thought, music). Qualities represent
characteristics that can be assigned to entities, e.g., tall,
heavy.
In this work, we use a particular set of ﬁve relations that
are useful for commonsense extraction. This set, depicted in
Table I, does not encode all the semantics in a text by any
means. However, these relations help inferring commonsense
knowledge as shown in the next section.
REASON(x, y) [REA] is deﬁned as a broad relation in
which x has a direct impact on y1, eg, [They don’t smoke]y
because [it is forbidden]x. GOAL(x, y) [GOA] encodes in-
tentions, purposes, plans and intended consequences, e.g.
[Half of the garage]y is used for [storage]x. [PRO] captures
the fact that x is a characteristic, property or value for y,
eg, PRO(tall, John). PART-WHOLE(x, y) [PW] encodes the
meronymy relation, i.e., x is a constituent part or a member
of y. For example, PW(engine, car). ISA(x, y) [ISA] encodes
x is a specialization of y, e.g., ISA(adult, human).
B. Commonsense Rules as Pseudo Relations
Sometimes it is useful to deﬁne and treat a particular
connection between two entities like a semantic relation even
though it is not one in the pure sense. By doing so we
can use the formal framework of Compositional Relational
1It includes relations usually named CAUSE and INFLUENCE.
Table I
THE SET OF SEMANTIC RELATIONS USED IN THIS PAPER
Relation
Abbr.
DOMAIN × RANGE
REASON
REA
[si]×[si]
GOAL
GOA
[si ∪ ao]×[si ∪ o]
PROPERTY
PRO
[ql]×[o]
PART-WHOLE
PW
[o]×[o]
ISA
ISA
[o]×[o]
Semantics and combine it with any other given semantic
relations. We call this kind of connection pseudo relation,
since they are not pure relations but are treated as such.
In this work, we deﬁne the pseudo relation COMMON-
SENSE RULE (CS R). CS R(r, p) deﬁnes a connection be-
tween a situation r that applies given a certain property p.
The connection has to have a commonsense nature, meaning
that it is rarely explicitly stated. The complete deﬁnition is
DOMAIN(CS R) = [si], RANGE(CS R) = [ql].
C. Compositional Relational Semantics (CRS)
The goal of composing, or linking semantic relations is to
acquire new semantic relations by applying inference rules
over already identiﬁed relations. An inference rule takes
as input a set of semantic relations, called premises, and
yields a conclusion. We deﬁne an inference rule by using
the composition operator (◦). Formally, R1(x, y)◦R2(y, z) →
R3(x, z), where R1 and R2 are the premises and R3 is the
conclusion.
In order to apply the composition operator over R1 and R2
they must fulﬁll the following necessary conditions: (a) R1
and R2 must be compatible; and (b) the second argument of
R1 and the ﬁrst of R2 must be the same concept, y.
a)
Two
relations
R1
and
R2
are
compatible
iff
RANGE(R1)∩ DOMAIN(R2) ̸= ∅. Say, we have an inference
rule, PRO(p, x) ◦ISA−1(x, y) → PRO(p, y), which means
that if p is a property of x and x is the hypernym of y,
then y inherits the property p. This inference rule actually
holds because PRO and ISA−1 are compatible in this case,
RANGE(PRO) ∩ DOMAIN(ISA−1) = [o].
b)
In
an
instance
of
the
inference
rule
above,
PRO(sharpness,
knife)
◦ISA−1(knife,
butcher-knife)
→
PRO(sharpness, butcher-knife), there is a common concept
knife that links the premises of the inference rule, which ful-
ﬁlls the second requirement of the compositional relational
semantics. The conclusion is if knife has property sharpness,
then any hyponym of knife, like butcher-knife inherits the
property unless stated otherwise.
IV. METHOD
The proposed method for commonsense extraction fol-
lows a semiautomatic approach. Given a commonsense rule
that applies to a certain property, the method uses metarules
in order to extract commonsense knowledge. The method
exploits properties of objects, the rules that apply to them
43
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

and how they can be transferred thru a chain of semantic
relations. Extensions to the method have been studied to
automatically infer more properties and commonsense rules,
signiﬁcantly increasing the amount of knowledge extracted.
All the inferences are performed within the framework of
Compositional Relational Semantics.
A. Metarules
Two main metarules are used to obtain commonsense
knowledge.
1) Metarule 1: CS R(r, p) ◦ PRO(p, x) → CS(r, x).
Rationale: rule r applies to property p; p is a property
of x; therefore, r applies to x.
Example: Given the commonsense rule you cannot check
in for ﬂight sharp objects, CS R(cannot check in for ﬂight,
sharp), and the fact that knifes are sharp, PRO(sharp, knife),
we obtain the commonsense knowledge that knifes cannot
be checked in for ﬂight,
CS(cannot check in for ﬂight,
knife). Formally,
CS R(cannot check in for ﬂight, sharp) ◦
PRO(sharp, knife) → CS(cannot check in for ﬂight, knife).
The columns rule(r), property (p), and concepts (x) in
Table II shows examples of knowledge extracted using this
metarule.
Some objects x are parts or members of larger objects y.
Metarule 1 can be expanded by adding a part-whole relation
to the premise, resulting in a new metarule, Metarule 2.
2) Metarule 2:
CS R(r, p) ◦ PRO(p, x) ◦ PW(x, y) →
CS(r, y)
Rationale: rule r applies to property p; p is a property
of x; x is a part of y; therefore, r applies to y.
Example: Given the commonsense rule electric objects
need power to operate, CS R(need power, electric), electric
is a property of electric motors PRO(electric, motor), the
fact that electric motors are components of electric fans,
PW(motor, fan), we obtain CS(need power, fan), i.e., the
commonsense knowledge that fans need power to operate.
Formally, CS R(need power, electric)◦PRO(electric, motor)◦
PW(motor, fan) → CS(need power, fan).
B. Restrictions and Exceptions
The metarules introduced so far do not have any re-
strictions on the kind of concepts they link. However, a
closer inspection leads to the conclusion that sometimes
restrictions and exceptions have to be imposed in order
to guarantee a high accuracy in the inferences performed.
Restrictions and exceptions are indicated between brackets
and added at the end of the premises with an & operator.
Formally, we denote restrictions for an axiom as R1(x, y) ◦
R2(y, z)&[restrictions] → R3(x, z). An axiom performs an
inference only if all the restrictions are fulﬁlled.
For example, something portable can be carried, but
constraints on the weight and the person carrying the object
are necessary. A child can carry a watch, but will have
trouble carrying a portable television set. Consider the com-
monsense rule
eating sweets excessively results in weight
gain. An exception to this rule is saccharin which is sweet
but calorie-free. Thus, an exception is attached to the rule.
The Metarule 2 makes the wholes inherit the rules that
apply to the properties of its parts. Several restrictions should
be placed in order to avoid invalid inferences.
First, r should not describe any physical property such
as weight or size. One can lift light objects, and car seat
cushions are light and part of cars, and yet one cannot lift
cars. In other words, rules that state physical properties of
parts do not transfer to their wholes.
Second, r should not encode an event (ev). Following
Table II, only the rules encoding a state (st) can be used
with Metarule 2. For example, one can not see alive animals
that are extinct CS R([cannot see alive]st, extinct.j.1). Since
it encodes a state, the wholes inherit the rule: if y has a
part x which is extinct, one cannot see y alive. On the other
hand, consider CS R([will roll on inclined path]ev, round.j.1).
Just because y (mouse.n.2) has a round part x (ball.n.3), y
will not roll on an inclined path. Similarly, a removable cup
holder (x) is portable (p) and part of a car (y), and one
[can carry]ev (r) portable objects. Because r is an event,
we cannot instantiate Metarule 2 and infer CS(can carry with
you, car).
Formally, the ﬁnal deﬁnition of both metarules are:
• CS R(x, y) ◦ PRO(y, z)&[rest(x)] → CS(x, z)
• CS R(r, p) ◦ PRO(p, x)◦PW(x, y)&[r is a st, no physical
properties] → CS R(r, y).
C. Extensions using Compositional Relational Semantics
In this section, we aim to automatically extend the
commonsense rules (CS R) and object properties (PRO) by
chaining semantic relations. The result is more inferences
performed by both metarules and therefore more common-
sense knowledge is extracted. We do so by combining
CS R and PRO with semantic relations and the rules of
compositional semantics.
1) Rule Extension: Given a rule r that applies to a certain
property p, one can also infer that a) actions whose goal is to
achieve p; and b) the goals and effects of r also apply to p.
Formally CS R(x, y)◦GOA(y, z) → CS R(x, z), CS R(x, y)◦
GOA−1(y, z) → CS R(x, z) and REA−1(x, y)◦ CS R(y, z) →
CS R(x, z).
For example, given
CS R(can-be-seen, visible), and
knowing
that
one
foregrounds
(foregrd)
in
order
to
make visible (GOA(visible, foregrd)), we obtain CS R(can-
be-seen, foregrd). Formally,
CS R(can-be-seen, visible) ◦
GOA(visible, foregrd) → CS R(can-be-seen, foregrd). Simi-
larly, as seen in Table II given CS R(spills if not in container,
liquid.j.1), and knowing that something ﬂows if spilled,
REA−1(ﬂow, spill), we obtain CS R(ﬂow if not in container,
liquid.j.1).
44
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

Table II
EXAMPLES OF KNOWLEDGE EXTRACTED USING THE METARULE 1, CS R(r, p) ◦ PRO(p, x) → CS(r, x) AND EXTENSIONS.
sort
rule extension
rule (r)
property (p)
concept (x)
property extension
st
cannot be blind
can see thru
transparent.j.1
window.n.1,
lens.n.1
rear window.n.1, quarterlight.n.1,
contact lens.n.1, condenser.n.4
-
cannot check in for ﬂight
sharp.j.1
knife.n.1,
parer.n.2
slicer.n.3, carving knife.n.1
-
cannot see alive
extinct.j.1
dinosaur.n.1,
moa.n.1
trachodon.n.1,
ornithomimid.n.1,
anomalopteryx.n.1
-
cannot touch
imaginary.j.1
bogeyman.n.1,
equator.n.1
-
-
not likable
annoying.j.1
pest.n.1,
trial.n.6
nudnik.n.1
ev
-
excess results in weight
gain
sweet.j.1
jimmies.n.1,
mufﬁn.n.1
popover.n.1, corn mufﬁn.n.1
-
you can carry with you
portable.j.1
watch.n.1,
ﬂashlight.n.1
pocket watch.n.1,
digi-
tal watch.n.1, penlight.n.1
will move on inclined
path
will roll on inclined path
round.j.1
ball.n.1
golf ball.n.1, polo ball.n.1
ﬂows if not in a con-
tainer
spills if not in container
liquid.j.1
beverage.n.1,
soup.n.1,
draft.n.8
softdrink.n.1, coke.n.1, potage.n.1,
gazpacho.n.1, vichyssoise.n.1
can cater, can cook
can eat / consume
edible.j.1
potato.n.1,
radish.n.1
french ﬁres.n.1,
mashed potato.n.1
2) Property Extension: Given the fact that a certain p is a
property of x, one can also infer that all hyponyms (ISA−1)
of x have that property. Formally, PRO(x, y)◦ISA−1(y, z) →
PRO(x, z). For example, in Table II given PRO(liquid.j.1,
beverage.n.1), and knowing that ISA−1(beverage.n.1, soft
drink.n.1) and ISA−1(beverage.n.1, coke.n.1), we obtain
PRO(liquid.j.1, soft drink.n.1) and PRO(liquid.j.1, coke.n.1).
One might be tempted to follow the intuition that wholes
inherit the properties of its parts. However, closer inspection
reveals that this plausible axiom does not hold: cars have as
parts windows, windows are transparent, and yet cars are
not transparent.
V. IMPLEMENTATION AND RESULTS
In order to automatically instantiate the metarules to
identify objects x that have properties p and beneﬁt from the
power of the method described in Section 4, it is necessary to
have semantic relations readily available. In our experiments,
the commonsense rules were provided by humans, including
corresponding restrictions and exceptions. For the semantic
relations that are necessary for instantiations and extensions,
we used an annotated resource called eXtended WordNet-
Knowledge Base (XWN-KB).
A. eXtended WordNet Knowledge Base (XWN-KB)
The XWN-KB is an upper ontology built as an extension
to eXtended WordNet (XWN) which is derived from Word-
Net (WN) [9]. The novelty that XWN-KB offers is that the
glosses of synsets have been transformed into semantic rela-
tions by using a reliable semantic parser and partly veriﬁed
by human annotators. The result is a knowledge base that
is highly interconnected. Unlike a domain speciﬁc ontology
Table III
XWN-KB REPRESENTATION OF A CONCEPT
Knife#2: a weapon with a handle and blade with
a sharp point
ISA(knife, weapon)
PW(handle, knife)
PW(blade, knife)
PRO(sharp, knife)
that is narrow, the XWN-KB uses deﬁnitional glosses of
WordNet synsets which are regarded as universal knowledge.
WordNet and its extensions offer a large and reliable world
knowledge source for extracting commonsense knowledge
by applying metarules.
For example, the WordNet concept knife in sense #2 has
the following gloss: a weapon with a handle and blade with
a sharp point. In XWN-KB this text deﬁnition has been
transformed into a set of semantic relations as shown in
Table III. For us important are PRO(sharp, knife), PW(handle,
knife), and ISA(knife, weapon). When CS-R(cannot check in
for ﬂight, sharp) is given, the method searches for a property
relation and this instantiates the concept knife#2 by locating
its PRO(sharp, knife) relation. For extensions, it uses the
mechanism of composition of semantic relations over the
annotated semantic relations provided by the XWN-KB.
B. Implementation
The implementation is coded by perl and python scripts
that interface with XWN and WN. The set of commonsense
rules are given to the code. The code applies metarules to
the given commonsense rules following the procedure below.
Input: A set of commonsense rules.
45
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

Figure 2.
Results for Metarule1
Output: Collection of commonsense axioms for all given rules: Sx[] +
Sy[].
Main-Procedure: For each commonsense rule, repeat the steps below:
1. Apply Metarule 1 to the commonsense rule. Instantiate all concepts
cx[] that have the property given in the commonsense rule.
1.1. For each concept in cx[], process the property extension and ﬁnd all
hyponyms, hx[]. Accumulate all hx[],
Hx[] ← Hx[] + hx[]
1.2. Process rule extension for the commonsense rule and calculate all
other rules, kx[]. Apply the new rules to all concepts and store the ﬁnal
commonsense axioms,
Sx[] ← Sx[] + {Hx[] + cx[]} × kx[]
2. Apply Metarule 2 to all cx[]. Instantiate all concepts cy[] that inherit
the rule.
2.1. Apply Metarule 2 to all Hx[] (calculated previously) and ﬁnd all
concepts hy[] that inherit the rule. Accumulate all hy[],
Hy[] ← Hy[] + hy[]
2.2. Process the rule extension and calculate all other rules ky[] for
Metarule 2. Apply the new rules to all concepts and store the ﬁnal
commonsense axioms,
Sy[] ← Sy[] + {Hy[] + cy[]} × ky[]
C. Results on XWN-KB
Following the procedure, a set of 32 commonsense rules
was provided as input to the implementation. Metarule 1
has instantiated 1015 commonsense axioms for the given set
without any extensions (see Table IV). Then, the property
extension was performed by using composition of semantic
relations and 2833 axioms were generated this way. Human
validation was performed and only 46 generated axioms
were tagged as incorrect yielding a precision of 0.984. As
explained in earlier sections, the rule extension augments the
commonsense rule that applies to the property. All new rules
that are generated by the rule extension can also apply to all
property inheriting objects including those that are generated
by the property extension. Therefore, the cardinality of
this rule augmentation becomes a multiplying factor. For
example, for a commonsense rule i, CS-Ri(pi,ri), the number
of concepts that are instantiated and applied to the rule is
Si and the number of extra objects that are found by the
property extension is Li. If the number of new rules that are
generated by the rule extension is Ri, the total number of
generated axioms is T = P
i(Si+Li)∗Ri. Therefore, the rule
extension is a rather powerful factor. In the implementation,
for Metarule 1, the total number of axioms is 4938 (see
Table IV). Figure 2 plots for all rules Si (no ext.), Si+Li
(property ext.), and Ti (property ext. + rule ext.) values.
The observation of the results reveals that there is quite some
variation among the commonsense rules in terms of their Si,
Si+ Li, and Ti values. The variation in Si is caused by the
frequency of the property and is related with the number of
concepts in the knowledge base that in fact has the property
in its gloss and semantic relations. The Li depends on the
hyponmym connectivity of the concept that has the property.
Basically more hyponyms result in larger Li value for rule
i.
We also looked at precision values for all 32 com-
monsense rules and compared them in Figure 3 with and
without extensions for Metarule 1. In the experiment, while
extensions increased the generated commonsense axioms
signiﬁcantly, the precision did not deteriorate. However, this
purely depends on the resource used. And the propagation of
errors depends on the hyponym connectivity of the concepts.
For example, if the incorrect concepts that are initiated
by the metarule have high hyponym connectivity, then the
chances are high for obtaining a poor precision, since the
error has the ripple effect. So, the authors’ suggestion for
potential implementations of the method is to introduce an
annotation step between the metarule instantiations and the
extensions, so that incorrect concepts are weeded out before
they ripple and adversely affect the performance.
Experiments showed that with the given set of common-
sense rules, Metarules work differently. Even though there
were some instantiations where rule applied to the concept
without inheriting the property. However, those few results
were augmented by the rule extension, increasing the ﬁnal
count for the commonsense knowledge.
The results of the numerical study seems promissing.
Starting with 32 commonsense rules provided by the user,
the method generated 4950 commonsense axioms, more than
two orders of magnitude increase.
VI. APPLICATIONS
Commonsense knowledge can be used in many applica-
tions that require some form of reasoning. It is used to
bridge knowledge gaps and leads to solutions which may
not be possible otherwise. Such applications are question
answering (Q/A), text entailment systems (RTE), search
engines, multi agent systems, etc. In question answering
systems, the commonsense knowledge can play a signiﬁcant
role in answering questions that seem trivial for humans but
are nearly impossible for machines. Below is an example
46
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

Table IV
NUMERICAL RESULTS
No Extension
Extension 1
Extension 2
Extension 1 & 2
Conclusion
Precision
Conclusion
Precision
Conclusion
Precision
Conclusion
Precision
Metarule 1
1015
0.974
2833
0.984
1696
0.972
4938
0.985
Metarule 2
7
0.714
7
0.714
12
0.666
12
0.666
Total
1022
0.972
2840
0.983
1708
0.970
4950
0.984
Figure 3.
Precision for Metarule 1
from TREC2007. Even though the system used was a high
performance system, it could not compute an answer for the
question:
Question, Q2.21600004: (Paul Krugman) What is Krug-
man’s academic specialty?
Answer: Economics
Text in BLOG06-20051213-068-0019517474: ”..Paul
Krugman is Professor of Economics at Princeton Univer-
sity,.....”
To answer this question a connection has to be made
between academic and economics. This cannot be done
using basic lexical chains in WordNet alone. An axiom
establishing this connection was generated by using the
proposed method. We run the program of the proposed
method with a rule that has academic as the property and
received a list of concepts that have this property in XWN-
KB. One of the concepts in the list is economics-department
which claimed academic as an inherited property. This easily
bridges the semantic gap to reach the answer stating that
Krugman is Professor of Economics in Princeton.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
The resource used in this paper is eXtended WordNet
Knowledge Base, simply because it has already synset
glosses transformed into semantic relations and it contains
information that is widely applicable. Any corpora, including
the Internet, that is semantically parsed and transformed into
semantic relations can be used in our method. The accuracy
of the results is highly correlated to the accuracy of the
semantic relations extracted from text.
The method presented here has the disadvantage that
users need to provide commonsense rules that are then
automatically instantiated to a large number of objects. We
found that an average person can come up rather quickly
with many commonsense rules but it is nearly impossible
for humans to quickly think of many possible instantiations
of these rules. In this sense the method introduced here
automates the most difﬁcult part of commonsense knowledge
acquisition. The method proposes entensions of metarules
that rely on compositional relational semantics a powerful
technique to increase its generative power.
REFERENCES
[1] D. B. Lenat, “Cyc: Large-scale investment in knowledge in-
frastructure,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 38, no. 11, pp.
28–32, 1995.
[2] P. Singh, T. Lin, E. T. Mueller, G. Lim, T. Perkins, and W. L.
Zhu, “Open mind common sense: Knowledge acquisition from
the general public,” in Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Ontologies, Databases, and Applications of
Semantics for Large Scale Information Systems. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, No 2519, Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag,
2002.
[3] L. V. Ahn, M. Kedia, and M. Blum, “Verbosity: A game for
collecting common-sense knowledge,” in ACM Conference on
Human Factors Computing System, 2006, pp. 75–78.
[4] H. Liu and P. Singh, “Conceptnet: a practical commonsense
reasoning toot-kit,” BT Technology Journal, vol. 22, no. 4, pp.
211–226, 2004.
[5] F. Gomez, “The acquisition of common sense knowledge by
being told: An application of nlp to itself.”
Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, Vol. 5039 2519, Heidelberg, Springer-
Verlag, 2008.
[6] V. C. Storey, S. V., and Y. Ding, “A semi-automatic approach to
extracting common sense knowledge from knowledge sources.”
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3513, Heidelberg,
Springer-Verlag, 2005.
[7] Y. Zhui, L.-J. Zhan, D.-S. Wang, and C.-G. Cao, “Manual
experiment on commonsense knowledge acquisition from web
corpora,” in Proceedings of International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning and Cybernetics, 2008.
[8] H. Helbig, Knowledge Representation and the Semantics of
Natural Language, 1st ed.
Springer, 2005.
[9] C. Fellbaum, WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database and
Some of its Applications.
The MIT Press, 1998.
47
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

