A Novel Ontology-Based Smart Service Architecture for Data-Driven Model
Development
Gernot Steindl, Bernhard Heinzl, Wolfgang Kastner
Institute of Computer Engineering
Research Unit Automation Systems
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
Email: gernot.steindl@tuwien.ac.at
Abstract—In the proposed concept, an ontology-based infor-
mation model is designed to support the data-driven model
development process of industrial energy systems. Smart Services
for data-driven model development are conceptually deployed in
the context of the Reference Architecture Model for Industry 4.0
(RAMI4.0) residing inside the information layer. The ontology-
based Smart Service architecture provides interoperability by
means of data integration and data exchange between for various
applications, part of the functional layer. Due to its modular struc-
ture, these Smart Services and their functional enhancements can
easily be extended and used by a variety of other applications at
different layers of the RAMI4.0.
Keywords–data-driven model development; ontology; Smart Ser-
vice; industrial energy systems; Industry 4.0; RAMI4.0
I.
INTRODUCTION
Currently, a number of research projects and development
efforts address the further digitalization in the industrial sector
[1], which is often called the fourth industrial revolution or
Industry 4.0. Besides digitalization, the main goals of Industry
4.0 are optimization and customization of production as well as
enhanced automation and adaption [2]. In this context, Industry
4.0 can also facilitate the sustainable energy transition [3].
Technology of Industry 4.0 is a forerunner to let the plant’s
energy demand become more controllable and providing means
for ﬂexibility, which helps to integrate a higher share of
volatile renewable energy sources into the energy system. To
utilize this ﬂexibility of industry processes, model-based and
predictive control strategies are suitable to handle the conﬂicts
between different objectives and constraints [4]. This allows a
factory to react, for example, to a demand response request,
while meeting the production constraints. Accurate process
models are obligatory for this kind of applications. Developing
such process models, however, is the most challenging and
time-consuming task in an implementation process [4] [5].
One reason for this is the cumbersome manual analysis of
data from heterogeneous sources, which often have insufﬁcient
data quality, are only partly available [6] or stored in different
formats, encodings and databases. Data-driven model develop-
ment also relies on implicit domain knowledge [7], which is
often scattered and not clearly communicated by the domain
experts or hard-coded into various applications. In order to
reduce the model development effort and facilitate knowledge
reuse, systematic data and information management is a vital
part in oder to increase data quality and consistency, as well
as make it available over the whole plant life-cycle.
The goal of this work is to develop a framework for
systematic support of data-driven model development in the
context of industrial energy systems. Comprehensive infor-
mation management is achieved explicitly by stating domain
knowledge and making it available for different services in a
formal ontology-based information model. This ontology will
act as a semantic abstraction layer, to facilitate integration of
different kinds of data.
In Section 2, the data-driven model development process
will be discussed. It will be stated how information, which
is stored in a formal ontology, could support the individual
process steps. A service architecture will be introduced in
Section 3, that facilitates the reuse of stored knowledge in
the context of Industry 4.0.
II.
DATA-DRIVEN MODEL DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
Data-driven models are usually identiﬁed during the opera-
tional phase of the plant using process data and are developed
for a certain purpose or application, like plant control, mon-
itoring, optimization, prediction or performance assessments.
The main steps in the data-driven model development process
for industrial processes are described in [8].
The ﬁrst step is to decompose the process and its data
based on process knowledge, like location of the components
and the plant topology. If this knowledge is available in a
machine-readable form or formal ontology, this step can be
automated.
Afterwards, pre-processing of the data has to be performed,
like removing outliers, normalizing the data, ﬁlling or esti-
mating missing data and synchronizing the sampling rates of
different process variables. Data analysis methods can be used
in combination with domain knowledge from the proposed
ontology to analyze and semantically enrich the time series
data, e.g. to add reliability metrics to the data points. Also,
inconsistencies like falsely labeled data or outliers can be
identiﬁed automatically, if semantic information of a certain
data point is available.
The subsequent step of sample and variable selection is
very crucial as different operating conditions can occur in the
monitoring data. The samples should be chosen with regard to
the scope of application, in order to be able to train an accurate
model. Therefore, domain knowledge has to be applied which
should also be made explicitly available in the ontology to
support this step.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

The ﬁnal model selection and identiﬁcation can be per-
formed in an iterative way by the control engineer. Design
decisions, used training and evaluation data, as well as model
performance are also important information, which should be
stored in an ontology, to enable comparison and reuse of
different component models.
III.
ONTOLOGY-BASED SMART SERVICE ARCHITECTURE
For
Industry
4.0,
an
architectural
reference
model
(RAMI4.0) is available, which combines all elements and IT
components in a layered model, taking into account life-cycle
aspects [9]. In the context of RAMI4.0, a service-oriented
architecture for ”Smart Services” was proposed in [10]. We
build on this idea and apply it to support the data-driven model
development process by offering services, which can be located
on different layers and hierarchies in RAMI4.0, in particular
on the Information and Functional Layer.
Figure 1 shows the architecture of the proposed services at
different layers of RAMI4.0. The data is available in various
databases an formats. An ontology-based information model is
used as a foundation for interoperability and data integration.
Engineering data as well as operational data are integrated with
the help of this ontology. The information model is one of the
main components, which consists of smaller, interlinked on-
tologies. These are specialized for certain services or describe
general concepts, like plant topology, plant components, etc.
Existing information models, like the P&ID speciﬁcation of
the DEXPI initiative [11] should be reused and adapted. These
ontologies manage data access and data exchange between
different services. Process data, which typically occurs as time
series, will stay in their databases, as these are optimized for
this kind of purpose, but are accessible through the ontology
to facilitate data integration. Thus, the ontologies can be
connected to a ”Linked Factory Data” repository and new
information can easily be added into the modular ontology.
The available services and their capabilities can also be stated
in the ontology itself, to enhance interoperability.
The base service for data-driven model development is the
”Smart Data” service, which is able to automatically analyze,
pre-process and validate the available data, utilizing informa-
tion from the ontology. For data-driven model development,
a ”Model Identiﬁcation” service will be established, which
uses domain knowledge from the ontology to ﬁnd related
input data to a certain model component and to support the
model developer with information of the plant’s operating
conditions and perform proper sample selection. Information
on the identiﬁed model will be stored in the ontology as well,
to enable model comparison and reuse. The ”Linked Data
Management” service is the central point for entering and
maintaining the ontology-based information model itself.
Based on the proposed architecture, additional services and
applications on the different layers of RAMI4.0, like ”Op-
timized Control” or ”Fault Detection”, can be implemented,
which are also able to use and contribute to the information
stored in the ”Linked Factory Data”.
IV.
CONCLUSION
The goal of this work is to develop a systematic support
for a data-driven model development process in the context
of industrial energy systems. The proposed ontology-based
architecture can help to reduce the manual and error-prone
Figure 1. Ontology-based Smart Service Architecture
modeling effort and increase the quality, consistency and
expressiveness of the available data. The next steps will be
to specify the information which has to be included into
the ontology and evaluate different methods for ontology-
based data access. Afterwards, a real use case of an industrial
production plant will be used to implement a ”Smart Data”
and ”Model Identiﬁcation” service as proof-of-concept.
REFERENCES
[1]
Y. Lu, “Industry 4.0: A survey on technologies, applications and open
research issues,” Journal of Industrial Information Integration, vol. 6,
2017, pp. 1–10.
[2]
V. Roblek, M. Meˇsko, and A. Krapeˇz, “A Complex View of Industry
4.0,” SAGE Open, vol. 6, apr 2016.
[3]
UNIDO,
“Accelerating
clean
energy
through
Industry
4.0:
Manufacturing
the
next
Revolution,”
United
Nations
Industrial
Development Organization, Vienna, Austria, Tech. Rep., 2017.
[4]
M. Killian and M. Kozek, “Ten questions concerning model predictive
control for energy efﬁcient buildings,” Building and Environment, vol.
105, 2016, pp. 403–412.
[5]
M. Morari and J. H. Lee, “Model predictive control: past, present and
future,” Computers & Chemical Engineering, vol. 23, may 1999, pp.
667–682.
[6]
Y. Zong, S. You, J. Hu, X. Han, C. Jiang, Y. Zhang, and G. M. B¨oning,
“Challenges of using model predictive control for active demand side
management,” 4th International Conference on Microgeneration and
Related Technologies, 2015.
[7]
G. A. Silver, O. Al-Haj Hassan, and J. A. Miller, “From domain
ontologies to modeling ontologies to executable simulation models,”
Proceedings - Winter Simulation Conference, 2007, pp. 1108–1117.
[8]
Z. Ge, “Review on data-driven modeling and monitoring for plant-
wide industrial processes,” Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory
Systems, vol. 171, 2017, pp. 16–25.
[9]
P. Adolphs, H. Bedenbender, D. Dirzus, and E. Martin, “Reference
Architecture Model Industrie 4.0 (RAMI4.0),” VDI/VDE-Gesellschaft,
Tech. Rep. July, 2015.
[10]
G. Koschnick, “Industrie 4.0: Smart services,” German Electrical and
Electronic Manufacturers’ Association, Frankfurt am Main, Germany,
Tech. Rep. July, 2016.
[11]
M. Theißen and M. Wiedau, “DEXPI Data Exchange in Process
Industry P&D Speciﬁcation,” DECHEMA, Tech. Rep., 2016.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

