A Text Mining Approach to Studying Matsushita’s Management Thought 
 
Xiaojun Ding 
Graduate School of Management 
Kyoto University 
Yoshida-honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan 
xjding@gsm.kyoto-u.ac.jp 
 
Abstract— The development of technology in text data 
collection and handling and the increasing use of textual 
knowledge applications caused a boost in text mining research 
of various fields like sociology, business science, and so on. In 
recent years, the research approach has also been applicable to 
the field of management philosophy and management principle. 
In this study, with the use of text mining approach, we analyze 
text data in Collected Sayings of Konosuke Matsushita, which 
involves more than 100 lectures and remarks delivered by 
Konosuke Matsushita, a distinguished and influential business 
executive in Japan, between 1940 and 1987. The text data were 
compiled and edited by PHP Research Institute, Inc. In this 
paper, we categorized these lectures and remarks into two 
groups: lectures delivered for external business people and 
remarks delivered for employees of the Matsushita Electric 
Group (Later known as Panasonic Corporation). By doing so, 
the study aims to condense the content of lectures and remarks 
delivered by Konosuke Matsushita over the past few decades, 
to determine the recognizable patterns of the keywords spoken 
on these lectures or remarks, and to understand the possible 
characteristics and changes in his management thought as 
indicated by the text data. This study is an interdisciplinary 
research attempt between the field of management philosophy 
research and the field of text mining, textual knowledge 
applications, and knowledge discovery. It systematically 
integrates elements of science, such as statistical mathematics 
and the ability to analyze text data, and humanities, such as 
management thought, perceptiveness to understand concepts, 
and ability to comprehend. The establishment of scientific and 
objective methodologies in the field of management philosophy 
has facilitated the effective utilization of text data and 
information. 
 
Keywords—Konosuke Matsushita; management thought; 
management philosophy; text mining  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Recent years have seen various efforts to identify the 
fundamentals of business management. This has directed 
attention to studies on management philosophy and 
management thought of business executives not only in 
Japan, but also from more global perspectives. The number 
of researchers and business managers interested in this study 
field is also increasing.  
The field of management philosophy research involves 
various qualitative and subjective factors, such as 
comprehension, reasoning, and explanation. There has not 
been 
much 
quantitative 
and 
objective 
analysis 
on 
management thought and philosophy done in the past owing 
to the difficulty in analyzing a large amount of accumulated 
text data. Meanwhile, in today’s era of a knowledge-based 
society of the new century, the progress of information 
digitization has facilitated the utilization of vast amounts of 
text data.  
The technique of analyzing text data with various 
quantitative methods, mining the patterns from natural 
language rather than from structured database of facts, and 
discovering new and useful knowledge and information from 
textual document repositories is called text mining. It is a 
process that employs a set of algorithms for converting 
unstructured text data into structured data conveying the 
insightful information [1]. On the basis of the idea this study 
aim to discover useful information related to management 
philosophy or management thought hidden in textual records 
of some famous business executives. 
Post World War II, Japan has experienced periods of 
reconstruction, high economic growth, stable growth, and the 
bubble economy, followed by the collapse of the bubble 
economy. In addition, the twenty-first century is said to be 
the era for creating a mechanism for the establishment of a 
sustainable society. In such an era, corporations are under 
pressure to demonstrate sustainability. It seems necessary to 
consider and analyze management thought backed by the 
experience of distinguished Japanese entrepreneurs and 
executives, as well as the impact of such thought in order to 
clarify best practices and attitudes that can be adopted by the 
next generation of executives and applied to their activities 
in the future. 
The text data in Collected Sayings of Konosuke 
Matsushita between 1940 and 1987 are the object of this 
study. Konosuke Matsushita (1894–1989) was one of the 
most famous Japanese industrialists. He is the founder 
of Panasonic 
Corporation, 
a 
Japanese 
multinational 
electronics corporation, and a global leader in the 
development and manufacture of consumer, professional and 
industrial electronics. Since his name has never been 
prominently displayed, Konosuke Matsushita is not as well 
known as Henry Ford or Honda or any of the other business 
giants who used their names on their products. But his 
company generated more revenue during his lifetime than 
any of the others. For many Japanese, he is known as "the 
God of Management". His business books have sold more 
than 18 million copies in Japan alone. Konosuke 
Matsushita’s management philosophy is widely adopted 
among Japanese enterprises and laid the foundation of 
economic growth in Japan. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

The organization of this study is as follows. In the next 
section, we describe the research method and approach of 
our study for analyzing Konosuke Matsushita’s management 
thought. The third section brings in the discussion and 
consideration about the results of our analysis. Finally, the 
fourth section closes with a midterm summary and an 
outlook for the next step.  
II. 
RESEARCH METHOD AND APPROACH 
Text data are data with no numeric values. In the past, 
such data were often analyzed using a method in which the 
analyst quoted parts of data and added interpretation and 
insights. In contrast, text mining approach involves a 
quantitative analysis of the text data through a numerical 
conversion process, which includes text preprocessing, 
feature generation and selection, pattern extraction, and 
result analyzing [2]. 
The main purpose of performing a quantitative text 
analysis is twofold: to explore the data and to improve 
objectivity. For instance, one can read the content of 
presentations and remarks in order to grasp the overall 
impression of the message, but how can this impression be 
objectively conveyed to a third party? What if the sheer 
amount of text data poses a difficulty? Furthermore, how can 
one examine possible changes in lecture content that are 
influenced by a variety of factors, including different years, 
different durations of lectures, and different audiences? By 
taking advantage of the quantitative analysis of text mining, 
you can deal with these issues.  
There are three very important components in actually 
utilizing text mining: the first is extraction of information, 
the second is analysis of the extracted information, and the 
third is visualization of the results. In other words, three 
points must be considered: the first is how do you collect 
only the necessary information by minimizing the noise? The 
second is what analytic technique do you use in order to 
correctly examine and understand the information collected? 
The third is what visualization do you use in order to 
facilitate examination and understanding of the analysis 
results? 
In order to accomplish the research objective of 
scientifically 
and 
objectively 
analyzing 
the 
overall 
management 
thought 
of 
Konosuke 
Matsushita 
and 
examining the characteristics and their changes over 
different time periods, this study goes through the procedure 
in the following key steps: data preparation, data analysis, 
and result discussion.  
 
Data preparation. A research platform is constructed. 
More specifically, records of lectures delivered by 
Konosuke Matsushita to external business managers 
as well as his talks within the Matsushita Electric 
Group between 1940 and 1987 were used to compile 
a database [3]. Besides, the text data were 
categorized into two groups: 52 lectures delivered 
for external business people between 1953 and 1983 
and 54 talks or remarks delivered for employees of 
the Matsushita Electric Group between 1940 and 
1987. With the help of KH Coder, which is a text 
mining software package for quantitative content 
analysis or text mining [4], a library of relevant 
keywords was created from the database. 
 
Data analysis. On the basis of the research platform, 
a variety of analyses are performed from both an 
overall view of the keywords and the perspective of 
characteristic keywords. 
 
Result discussion. The discussion and consideration 
about the results are summarized, furthermore, scope 
for further research is also considered.  
III. 
DATA ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION 
Analysis of the text data can be carried out from various 
angles. In this section we make some analysis mainly from 
both an overall view of the keywords (such as frequently-
appearing-keyword analysis, network analysis, etc.) and the 
perspective of characteristic keywords (such as trend 
analysis of characteristic keywords, analysis of related 
keywords, etc.). 
A. An Overall View of the Keywords 
1) Morphological analysis and frequently-appearing 
keywords: Text mining is an approach that assigns numeric 
values to text data for analysis. It does not refer to a specific 
analytic method or process flow. Therefore, there are 
various types of analytic methods, such as extraction of  
frequently-appearing 
keywords 
from 
the 
text 
data, 
categorization of observed data, and analysis of the 
emerging tendency of specific keywords in the text data, 
and so on. These are all based on morphological analysis. A 
morpheme is the smallest semantically meaningful unit of 
language; breaking it down further will make the unit 
meaningless. By using morphological analysis, we can 
divide a sentence into morphemes and obtain basic statistics 
as to what type of words, or more accurately, morphemes, 
are being used. 
 In this study, we first conducted morphological analysis 
on all lectures and remarks selected for the study, and 
performed noise reduction (eliminating irrelevant and less 
frequently appearing words). We then extracted the most 
frequently appearing keywords; summarized aspects such as 
the number of involved lectures that means the number of 
lectures and remarks in which those keywords appeared, and 
the total appearance frequency of the keywords. We also 
conducted analyses such as comparison between the lectures 
for external business managers and the remarks within the 
Matsushita Electric Group as well. 
The differences and similarities were summarized as 
follows. Firstly, the results show that there is relativity 
between the total appearance frequency of the keywords and 
the number of involved lectures. In addition, frequently 
appearing keywords were diverse, including “management”, 
“politics”, “region”, “business”, “labor and employment”, 
and so on. However, it is observed that the characteristic 
keywords used by Konosuke Matsushita do not appear 
frequently. Meanwhile, the results of the frequently 
appearing keywords indicate that external lectures are largely 
based on macro perspectives, while internal remarks are 
often based on micro perspectives such as employees, staff, 
and individuals. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

2) Trend analysis of keyword groups by year: The 
extracted keywords were categorized into several different 
categories, such as “business”, “manufacturing”, “religion”, 
“moral and value”, “management”, and “labor and 
employment”. Then the trends and changes in each keyword 
category by year were summarized separately for internal 
remarks and external lectures.  
The results show that the appearance frequencies of 
keywords falling under the categories of “business”, 
“manufacturing”, “moral and value”, and “management” are 
not a function of year and time period, while the appearance 
frequencies of keywords falling under the “religion” and 
“labor and employment” categories varied depending on the 
time period. The trends and changes in the “religion” and 
“labor and employment” categories are considered to be 
related to Konosuke Matsushita’s religious background and 
the history of the labor movement in Japan. 
3) Analysis of co-occurrence networks for keywords in 
different time periods: Co-occurrence relations of keywords 
can be described by a network graph, where the lines link 
the keywords with a high degree of co-occurrence together. 
In addition, co-occurrence relations between the keywords 
and time periods can be connected as well. In other words, it 
is possible to examine how much attention is being paid to 
an extracted keyword in different time periods and how 
these keywords are linked each other.  
On the basis of the next two different perspectives, the 
perspective of the career of Konosuke Matsushita and the 
perspective of the economic fluctuation in Japan, the lectures 
and remarks that were delivered over a period of more than 
40 years were divided into the different time periods for 
analysis as follows: 
 
The perspective of the career of Konosuke 
Matsushita. First, the 1940s to the 1950s, when 
Konosuke 
Matsushita 
was 
the 
President 
of Panasonic Corporation. Second, the 1960s to the 
early 
1970s, 
when 
he 
was 
the 
Chairman 
of Panasonic Corporation. Third, the late 1970s to 
the 1980s, when he was the executive adviser 
of Panasonic Corporation. 
 
The perspective of the economic fluctuation in Japan.  
Economic fluctuation includes the period marking an 
increase in the activities of economic society 
(expansion) and the period marking the stagnation of 
the economic society (recession). Because economic 
fluctuation occurs as repeated cycles over several 
years alternating expansion and recession, it is also 
called the economic cycle. First, the economic boom 
of the mid-1950s. Second, the Inventory recession of 
1957-1958. Third, the economic boom of 1958-1961. 
Fourth, the recession of 1961-1962. Fifth, the 
economic boom of 1962-1964 created by the Tokyo 
Olympic Games. Sixth, the Securities depression of 
1964-1965. Seventh, the economic boom of 1965-
1973. Last, the recession of 1973-1986.  
The analysis results indicated that although there were 
some common words across time periods, Konosuke 
Matsushita focused on different keyword groups during the 
lectures and remarks in different time periods. In particular, 
the text mining analysis made it clear that the economic 
fluctuation in Japan strongly influenced changes in the 
keywords used.  
B. The Perspective of Characteristic Keywords 
1)  Trend analysis of characteristic keywords by year: 
The popularity of Konosuke Matsushita’s management 
philosophy stems from his practical thoughts and ideas on 
real-life management practices, assuming a form of 
aphorism in his lectures and writing. In this section, we 
mainly focus on the following characteristic keywords of 
Konosuke Matsushita’s management philosophy [5] and 
verify in detail the change in usage of these keywords in 
internal remarks and external lectures.  
 
Management 
through 
collective 
wisdom. 
A 
management approach that takes advantage of 
collective wisdom obtained from as many employees 
and persons as possible. 
 
Coexistence and mutual prosperity. 
 
The right person in the right place. 
 
Appropriate management. Accurately understanding 
the company’s comprehensive abilities, such as 
technical 
capabilities, 
financial 
strength, 
and 
management skills, and striving to manage the 
business realistically within one’s own capability. 
 
Autonomous responsible management.  
The time periods when the characteristic keyword 
attracted attention and the relevant background information 
are analyzed and made into a line graph. 
2) Analysis of related keywords: Some specific topic-
related keywords (i.e., related keywords of some intriguing 
topics) are the focus in this section. This relation is 
determined on basis of calculating conditional probability, 
that is to say, the keywords that are highly likely to appear 
in lecture texts involving a specific topic are so-called the 
topic-related keywords. For example, the results showed 
that in the case of the analysis of keywords related to the 
topic “business manager”, the “business manager”-related 
keywords turned out to be “productivity”, “industry”, 
“business world”, “business people”, “social conditions”, 
“employees”, “labor union”, “politician”, and so on. 
Examining such results from various perspectives based on 
concept of business manager, roles of business manager in 
economic society, etc., it became clear that for Konosuke 
Matsushita, important matters strongly associated with 
business managers, or leaders in business, are pluralistic and 
multilayered, including factors such as industry, production, 
economy, society, employees, politics, etc.. 
In addition to creating a list of keywords highly 
associated with a particular topic, the analysis of topic-
related keywords can help draw a co-occurrence network 
diagram of a specific topic. Such a diagram places the 
specific topic selected for discussion in a double-border 
square and links the topic-related keywords with lines. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Furthermore, in order to better illustrate the characteristics, 
we can use a thicker line to indicate a stronger co-occurrence 
relationship, or place keywords that appear more often in 
larger circles, and so on. 
IV. 
SUMMARY AND FUTURE DIRECTION 
This study aims to show that text mining is a new and 
effective research approach to the field of management 
philosophy and management principle. The present results 
confirmed that the keywords in Konosuke Matsushita’s 
lectures or remarks changed over the course of time and also 
depending on the person he was talking about. By analyzing 
the accumulated text data using text mining, some existing 
interpretation can be verified in a more objective manner. 
For the next step, there are a lot of open problems and 
research directions for further developing this study. First, 
we plan to focus on adding discussions about other keyword 
categories and notable characteristic keywords. Moreover, 
we hope to concentrate on some factors such as the depth of 
keywords, inter-area analysis, etc. as well.  In the future, we 
will attempt to make analysis from the macro-level and 
global perspectives. In addition, we are going to work on a 
comparative study of Konosuke Matsushita’s management 
philosophy and management philosophy of other influential 
business leaders, such as Kazuo Inamori, who ranks 
alongside Sony's co-founder, and Soichiro Honda as one of 
the great Japanese postwar entrepreneurs.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by Kyocera Chair of Management 
Philosophy and financially supported by the Young 
Researchers Startup Grant from Graduate School of 
Management, Kyoto University. The author also would like 
to thank PHP Research Institute for its support of providing 
the original materials and data. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. S. Segall, Q. Zhang, and M. Cao, “Web-Based Text 
Mining of Hotel Customer Comments Using SAS Text Miner 
and Megaputer Polyanalyst,”  Proc. SWDSI 2009 Annual 
Conference, Oklahoma City, Feb. 2009. 
[2] J. W. Liang, “Introduction to Text and Web Mining,” Seminar 
at 
North 
Carolina 
Technical 
University, 
http://www.database.cis.nctu.edu.tw/seminars/2003F/TWM/sl
ides/p.ppt, 2003. 
[3] PHP Research Institute Publication: Collected Sayings of 
Konosuke Matsushita (in Japanese), 1996. 
[4] http://khc.sourceforge.net/. 
[5] PHP Research Institute Publication: A Dictionary of 
Matsushita’s Life and Thought (in Japanese), 1999. 
 
 
 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

