Everything Was Good! 
The Influence of Sentiment and Product Category on Aspect Choice in German Customer Reviews 
Amelie I. Metzmachera, Verena Heinrichsa, Björn Falka, Robert H. Schmitta 
a Laboratory for Machine Tools and Production Engineering (WZL), RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany 
E-mail: A.Metzmacher@wzl.rwth-aachen.de, V.Heinrichs@wzl.rwth-aachen.de, B.Falk@wzl.rwth-aachen.de, 
R.Schmitt@wzl.rwth-aachen.de 
 
 
Abstract— Studies dealing with the use of pronouns in 
customer reviews in social media against the background of 
sentiment analysis do not consider the role attributed to the 
pronoun within an evaluative sentence. The following paper 
addresses the question of when and why customers choose 
pronouns instead of nouns or proper nouns to function as 
aspects within an evaluative sentence. To this end, two 
influencing factors on aspect choice have been investigated: 1) 
The sentiment of the evaluative sentence (positive, neutral, 
negative); 2) The category of the evaluated aspect (product, 
service). The results reveal that, particularly within positive 
statements, there exist differences between customer reviews 
evaluating products to those evaluating services.  
Keywords-NLP; sentiment analysis; social media. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
With respect to the growing demand for individualized 
products and services, understanding the Voice of the 
Customer (VoC) becomes increasingly important for 
companies. To better survive competition and fulfill 
customer demands, it is crucial for companies to develop 
customer-oriented solutions based on precise knowledge 
about customer requirements [1].  
Knowledge about customer requirements can be captured 
by studies, interviews, ethnographic research, customer visit 
teams, customer brainstorming, or lead user analysis [2]. 
However, these methods are most often time consuming and 
costly while suffering from low response rates.  
Social media provide an alternative to gain knowledge 
about customer requirements. Information relating to 
customer requirements derived from social media is more 
authentic as customers in discussion forums usually 
uninhibitedly and immediately provide their opinion about 
products and services [3]. Moreover, the amount of data 
available online is steadily increasing. 
In consideration of the steadily increasing number of 
available data, it is not possible to extract relevant 
information from customer reviews in social media 
manually. Thus, it is necessary to develop a method to 
automatically extract only the beneficial information from 
customer reviews, i.e., information about the perceived 
quality of products and services [4]. 
Aiming at a supervised machine-learning based solution, 
an annotation study was conducted to obtain an annotated 
corpus of German customer reviews from social media. 
Although there already exist such corpora, e.g., cf. [5], these 
corpora only include reviews relating to material products.  
Within our approach, we focus on both, reviews relating 
to products and to services. The consideration of products 
and services is particularly helpful regarding the application 
for companies. Often reviews about products, as well as 
services need to be taken into account for customer-oriented 
product development and design. An example for this is a 
company producing domestic appliances while at the same 
time offering services for maintenance, repair and 
operations. 
The corpus at hands consisted of 3,767 German customer 
reviews, which have been extracted from 38 different social 
media platforms. Three subjects were asked to annotate the 
sentiment of each given sentence (positive, neutral, negative) 
while labelling the aspect (the item that is evaluated, e.g., 
“room”). 
Developing a supervised machine-learning algorithm, we 
focus on the use of linguistic salience. Our approach 
comprises a detailed analysis of the language used within the 
reviews taking into consideration the differences with respect 
to the distribution of part-of-speech (POS) tags between 
product reviews and service reviews, as well as differences 
occurring with respect to the sentiment.  
Concerning the annotated aspects, nouns and proper 
nouns constitute 82% of all POS tags: 
- 
“Das Zimmer jedoch war sehr enttäuschend.“ (Engl. 
“However, the room was very disappointing.”) 
- 
“Nutella ist super lecker.“ (Engl. “Nutella is super 
yummy.”) 
 The aspect category occurring second most was 
pronouns (5.5%): 
- 
“Alles perfekt.” (Engl. “Everything perfect.”) 
- 
“Er war noch pampig zu mir.” (Engl. “He even was 
stroppy with me.”) 
 This raises the question of when and why customers 
choose pronouns instead of nouns or proper nouns to 
function as aspects within an evaluative sentence.  
Within our paper, we will examine the role of the 
following two influencing factors on aspect choice:  
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

1) The sentiment of the evaluative sentence (positive, 
neutral, negative) 
2) The category of the evaluated aspect (product, service) 
In the following, Section 2 deals with related literature 
covering psychological and linguistic research relating to the 
use of pronouns including sentiment analysis. In Section 3, 
the procedure of the annotation study is presented, leading to 
the presentation and discussion of results in Section 4. 
Finally, Section 5 finishes this contribution with a brief 
conclusion and information about future research questions. 
 
II. 
LINGUISTIC AND PSYCHOLOGICAL RESEARCH 
As opposed to psychologically derived linguistic 
dimensions such as emotion words, pronouns constitute a 
closed class of standard grammatical units [6] [7]. The use of 
pronouns in verbal behavior has been studied from various 
linguistic and psychological viewpoints.  
Substituting an anteceding noun or noun phrase, 
pronouns establish coherence in a text [8]. Crawley et al. [9] 
state that there is a preference for pronominal coreference if 
the antecedent is mentioned prominently (subjecthood, first 
position, clefted phrase). Bosch and Umbach [10] found out 
that for non-subject antecedents, the preference for 
demonstrative pronouns is stronger than for personal 
pronouns with subject antecedents. 
With regard to personality measures, findings suggest 
that the use of first person singular pronouns (e.g., I, me, my) 
correlates with the degree of self-involvement and self-
awareness of the speaker [11] [12]. A person who is focusing 
attention on himself is more likely to use first person singular 
pronouns [13]. For example, depression was found to be 
related to an increased use of first person singular pronouns 
in patients, reflecting a weakness in connecting to others 
[14]. However, the more the health of the patients improved, 
the more the individuals shifted in their use from first person 
to second and third person pronouns [15].  
Following Sillars et al. [16], married couples who live in 
a satisfying and long lasting relationship are more likely to 
use first person plural pronouns (e.g., we, us, our) to 
demonstrate their sense of belonging. 
Against the background of lying and truth-telling, studies 
found out that truth-tellers use a higher rate of first person 
singular pronouns than liars [17]. Liars use less first person 
singular pronouns to detach themselves from the lie being 
told [18]. Knowledge about the increased use of first person 
singular pronouns in truth-telling has led to the fact that liars 
and fake reviewers nowadays tend to overuse first person 
singular pronouns to persuade others [18][19].  
Relating to research dealing with social interaction and 
politeness, Brown and Levinson state that in order to keep 
one’s face while conveying a negative message, people 
impersonalize their opposite by avoiding the pronouns “I” 
and “you” [20]. In order to motivate others, people formulate 
statements, which are characterized by a low degree of first 
person singular pronouns emphasizing the spirit of 
collaboration needed [21]. 
Although pronouns carry no sentiment as such in [8], 
they function as linguistic markers for sentiment analysis. 
Ofek et al. [22] used pronouns to predict whether a statement 
contains objective or subjective content stating that 
subjective statements contain more personal pronouns than 
objective statements. Similar Moen et al. [23] found out that 
when angry, people use more second and third person 
pronouns to focus on others than themselves. However, 
studies dealing with the use of pronouns against the 
background of sentiment analysis do not consider the role 
attributed to the pronoun within an evaluative sentence.  
 
III. 
ANNOTATION STUDY 
As described in our previous work [24], 38 different 
social media platforms have been chosen for data extraction. 
The open-source Java library jsoup [25] was implemented to 
extract 3,767 German customer reviews relating to products 
and services. The reviews were parsed into single sentences 
and tokenized using the Stuttgart-Tübingen TagSet (STTS) 
[26] and Stanford Parser [27].  
Three German native speakers familiar with the process 
of annotation have been asked to annotate the customer 
reviews. Subjects were asked to annotate the sentiment of 
each given sentence (positive, neutral, negative) while 
labelling the aspect (the item that is evaluated, e.g., “room”). 
In case of ambiguous or sub-clause sentences, subjects were 
allowed to mark more than one aspect and sentiment value. 
For instance, within the sentence “Die Lage ist gut, aber der 
Raum sehr klein.” (Engl. “The location is good, but the room 
is very small.“), subjects were able to label two aspects and 
two sentiment values. The first part of the sentence was 
labelled positive (“good”) relating to the aspect “location” 
and the second part dealing with the aspect “room” was 
labelled negative (”small”). This ensures that all information 
provided in a sentence are gathered.  
Prior to annotation, the annotation process was explained 
to the subjects with three exemplary sentences. The 
sentences varied with respect to the level of complexity. This 
guarantees consistency amongst annotators, i.e., it should 
ameliorate the interrater reliability. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Starting with analyzing the interrater reliability, Fleiss’ 
Kappa values for aspect choice and sentiment values range 
between 0.5 and 0.8. Thus, they are located in moderate level 
of agreement [28]. 
Investigating the influence of sentiment on aspect choice, 
Figure 1 depicts the distribution of pronouns with respect to 
the sentiment. As the class for neutral sentiment value is with 
approximately 5% very low, we will not consider this class 
in our further analyses. Moreover, previous studies revealed 
that the class of neutral sentiment has to be examined 
separately [24].  
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 2. Distribution of pronouns as aspects with respect to sentiment and 
product category. 
 
Figure 1. Distribution of pronouns as aspects with respect to the sentiment. 
Figure 1 illustrates the distribution of pronouns denoting 
the aspect of an evaluative sentence against the sentiment of 
the sentence. Of all pronoun-as-aspect occurrences, 60% 
occur in positive sentences. The use of pronouns as aspects 
tends to be most prominent in evaluative sentences 
containing a positive sentiment. One first explanation could 
be that customers use more detailed forms of language, i.e., 
actual product parts or certain aspects of a service, if they 
formulate critique or evaluate the product with a negative 
outcome. In contrast to that, while formulating a positive 
review, customers tend to generalize. 
Figure 2 depicts the distribution of pronouns denoting the 
aspect of an evaluative sentence against the sentiment of the 
sentence and the product category. It is striking that within 
the category service reviews, the number of pronouns-as-
aspect occurrences is equal with respect to the sentiment of 
the sentence. When evaluating services, the sentiment of the 
sentence has no influence on the selection of the POS to 
represent the aspect. However, relating to reviews referring 
to products there exists a difference in the number of 
pronouns used as aspects between positive and negative 
sentiments. If a product is evaluated with a positive 
sentiment, the aspect is more likely to be realized by a 
pronoun. 
Taking a closer look at the actual pronoun tokens, which 
function as aspects within evaluative sentences, Figure 3 
illustrates the words, which have been chosen to represent 
the aspect of an evaluative sentence. In most cases, 3rd 
person singular pronouns (“er, sie, es”, “der, die, das“) were 
attributed the role of the aspect.  
 
 
Figure 3. Distribution of used pronouns in product reviews with respect to 
the sentiment. 
 
However, 
the 
indefinite pronoun 
“alles” 
(Engl.: 
“everything”) is exclusively used in positive evaluative 
sentences. Our assumption is that when evaluating products 
with a positive sentiment, customers differentiate less and 
summarize their positive impression and experience using 
indefinite pronouns. On the other hand, when expressing 
anger within a negative evaluative sentence, customers 
reflect on single features and details describing precisely 
what has led to the negative impression and experience. 
Following this idea we cross-read the sentences labelled as 
positive and which contain the indefinite pronoun “alles” as 
aspect. As a result, more than 75% of the sentences 
contained the statement “everything was good” or words to 
that effect. Thus, one could argue that these pronouns 
functioning 
as 
aspects 
in 
product 
statements 
are 
representative for the general customer satisfaction regarding 
the given product.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
The results obtained in our study strengthen the 
assumption that there exists a difference in the use of 
pronouns as aspects for negative and for positive evaluative 
sentences within customer reviews relating to material 
products. However, customer reviews dealing with services 
do not show these differences.  
Pronouns are more often chosen as aspects if the 
evaluative sentence is positive. Positive reviews have a 
tendency to be longer in text length and token number. 
Therefore, one might argue that pronouns functioning as 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

aspects are mainly used in longer comments to establish 
coherence within a text. Although, it is very likely that this 
argument is not true for the indefinite pronoun “alles” (Engl.: 
“everything”), it might make sense to investigate the number 
of sentences per comment, too. In addition, while enlarging 
the database, the use of pronouns within service reviews 
should be examined as well.  
Whereas there is still a lot of potential for further 
research from the linguistic point of view within customer 
reviews in social media, our results already reveal the 
necessity to use POS information in automatically analyzing 
these data. Thus, within our objective to develop a 
supervised machine-learning algorithm to extract relevant 
information, this information will be taken into account. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The support of the German National Science Foundation 
(DFG) through the funding of the research project 
“Entwicklung eines Sensors für ungerichtete Beschwerden 
aus Online Foren” (SCHM 1856/69-1) is gratefully 
acknowledged. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] R. Schmitt, S. Schmitt, A. Linder, M. Rüßmann, and V. 
Heinrichs, “Fehlerinformationen nutzen – Produkte nachhaltig 
absichern (in English: The usage of failure information – 
safeguarding products sustainably).” In: 18. Business Forum 
Qualität. Daten für die Qualität von morgen - generieren, 
interpretieren und nutzen (in English: 18th Business Forum 
Quality. 
Data for 
tomorrow’s 
quality 
– 
generation, 
interpretation and usage). September 2014. Apprimus 
Aachen, pp. 2-22, 2014.  
[2] R. G. Cooper and S. J. Edgett, “Ideation for product 
innovation: What are the best methods." PDMA visions 
magazine 1(1), pp. 12-17, 2008. 
[3] F. T. Piller, A. Vossen, and Ch. Ihl, “From Social Media to 
Social Product Development: The Impact of Social Media on 
Co-Creation of Innovation.” Die Unternehmung, 65(1), pp.1 – 
22, 2012. 
[4] K. Schouten and F. Frasincar, "Survey on aspect-level 
sentiment analysis." IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and 
Data Engineering 28(3), pp. 813-830, 2016. 
[5] K. Boland, A. Wira-Alam, and R. Messerschmidt, “Creating 
an annotated corpus for sentiment analysis of german product 
reviews.” GESIS - Leibniz-Institut für Sozialwissenschaften. 
Mannheim, GESISTechnical Reports 2013/05, May 2013. 
[6] B. Hall Partee, “Opacity, coreference, and pronouns.” 
Synthese, 21(3), pp. 359-385, 1970. 
[7] J. W. Pennebaker, M. R. Mehl, and K. G. Niederhoffer. 
"Psychological aspects of natural language use: Our words, 
our selves." Annual review of psychology 54(1), pp. 547-577, 
2003. 
[8] H. W. Cowles, "The influence of ‘aboutness’ on pronominal 
coreference." ZAS Papers in Linguistics, 48, pp. 23–38, 2007. 
[9] R. A. Crawley, R. J. Stevenson, and D. Kleinman, "The use of 
heuristic strategies in the interpretation of pronouns." Journal 
of Psycholinguistic Research 19(4), pp. 245-264, 1990. 
[10] P. Bosch and C. Umbach, "Reference determination for 
demonstrative pronouns." ZAS Papers in Linguistics 48, pp. 
39 – 51, 2007. 
[11] W. Ickes, S. Reidhead, and M. Patterson, “Machiavellianism 
and self-monitoring: as different as ‘me’ and ‘you’” Soc. 
Cogn. 4, pp. 58–74, 1986.  
[12] L. Scherwitz and J. Canick, “Self reference and coronary 
heart disease risk.” In: Type A Behavior Pattern: Research, 
Theory, and Intervention, ed. K Houston, CR Snyder, New 
York: Wiley, pp. 146–167, 1988.  
[13] D. Davis and T. C. Brock , “Use of first person pronouns as a 
function 
of 
increased 
objective 
self-awareness 
and 
performance feedback.” J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 11, pp. 389–
400, 1975. 
[14] W. Bucci and N. Freedman, “The language of depression.”, 
Bull. Menninger Clin. 45, pp. 334–358, 1981.  
[15] R. S. Campbell and J. W. Pennebaker, "The secret life of 
pronouns: Flexibility in writing style and physical health." 
Psychological science 14(1), pp. 60-65, 2003. 
[16] A. Sillars, W. Shellen, A. McIntosh, M. Pomegranate, 
“Relational characteristics of language: elaboration and 
differentiation in marital conversations.” West. J. Commun. 
61, pp.403–422, 1997.  
[17] M. L. Newman, J. W. Pennebaker, D. S. Berry, and J. M. 
Richards, “Lying words: Predicting deception from linguistic 
styles.” Personality and social psychology bulletin, 29(5), pp. 
665-675, 2003. 
[18] B. Liu, “Sentiment analysis: Mining opinions, sentiments, and 
emotions”,  Cambridge University Press, 2015. 
[19] E. Cambria, D. Das, S. Bandyopadhyay, and A. Feraco, 
“Affective Computing and Sentiment Analysis.” In A 
Practical Guide to Sentiment Analysis, Springer International 
Publishing, pp. 1-10, 2017.  
[20] P. Brown, and S. C. Levinson, “Politeness: Some universals 
in language usage.” Cambridge university press, 1987. 
[21] J. W. Pennebaker & L. A. King, “Linguistic styles: language 
use as an individual difference.” J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 77, 
pp. 1296–1312, 1999. 
[22] N. Ofek, L. Rokach, C. Caragea, and J. Yen, “The Importance 
of Pronouns to Sentiment Analysis: Online Cancer Survivor 
Network Case Study.” Proceedings of the 24th International 
Conference on World Wide Web. ACM, pp. 83 – 84, 2015. 
[23] M.- F. Moens, J. Li, and T.-S. Chua, “Mining user generated 
content.” CRC Press, 2014. 
[24] A. I. Metzmacher, V. Heinrichs, B. Falk, and R. H. Schmitt, 
„Use of Negation Markers in German Customer Reviews“, 
The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in 
Semantic Processing (SEMAPRO 2017), IARIA, November 
2017, pp. 37 - 41. 
[25] J. Hedley “jsoup: Java HTML Parser”, 2009. [Online] 
Available from: https://jsoup.org/ [Retrieved: November, 
2017]. 
[26] Insitut 
für 
Maschinelle 
Sprachverarbeitung, 
“German 
Tagsets”, 2013. [Online] http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de 
/forschung/ressourcen/lexika/GermanTagsets.html [Retrieved: 
November 2017]. 
[27] A. N. Rafferty and C. D. Manning, “Parsing three German 
treebanks: Lexicalized and unlexicalized baselines”. In 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Workshop 
on 
Parsing 
German. 
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 40-46, 2008. 
[28] M. L. McHugh, “Interrater reliability: the kappa statistic”, 
Biochemia medica, 22(3), pp. 276-282, 2012. 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

