Analyzing the Effectiveness of Investment Strategies through Agent-based Modelling:
Overconﬁdent Investment Decision Making and Passive Investment Strategies
Hiroshi Takahashi
Graduate School of Business Administration
Keio University
Email: htaka@kbs.keio.ac.jp
Abstract—This article analyzes the effectiveness of investment
strategies through agent-based modeling. In this analysis, we will
focus on the performance of a passive investment strategy (which
is one of the most popular investment strategies in the asset man-
agement business) under conditions where overconﬁdent investors
trade. As a result of intensive experimentation, it was concluded
that overconﬁdent investors could achieve a positive excess return
in the market where there are no passive investors. However, our
agent-based simulation shows that overconﬁdent investor could
not survive in a market where passive investors exist. These
results suggest the effectiveness of a passive investment strategy.
The results are of both academic interest and practical use.
Keywords-Finance; Agent-based Modelling; Behavioral Eco-
nomics; Overconﬁdence; Asset Management.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The ﬁnancial system plays a signiﬁcant role in society and
the economy. The role of investors providing capital to compa-
nies has become more important than ever. Financial markets
contribute to efﬁcient capital allocation, and a great amount of
research regarding ﬁnancial markets has been carried out.
In the last years, there has been rising interest in a ﬁeld
called behavioral ﬁnance, which incorporates psychological
methods in analyzing investor behavior. There are numerous
arguments in behavioral ﬁnance that investors’ decision mak-
ing bias can explain phenomenon in the ﬁnancial market which
until now had gone unexplained. Such arguments often point
out the limit of arbitrage and the existence of systematic biases
in decision-making [12][23][24][32]. Behavioral ﬁnance has
examined a wide range of phenomena in the market and among
investors, drawing a number of provocative conclusions. There
are, for example, studies which suggest that overconﬁdent
investors could survive in the market.
Market efﬁciency is a central hypothesis of traditional
ﬁnancial theory. Indeed, the efﬁciency of the market lies at
the heart of traditional ﬁnancial theory. For example, in the
Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), one of the most popular
asset pricing theories, equilibrium asset prices are derived on
the assumption that markets are efﬁcient and investors rational
[21]. CAPM indicates that the optimal investment strategy
is to hold a market portfolio. Since it is very difﬁcult for
investors to get an excess return in an efﬁcient market, it is
assumed to be difﬁcult to beat a market portfolio even if the
investment strategy is ﬁrmly based on public information. A
passive investment strategy, which tries to maintain an average
return using benchmarks based on market indices, is consistent
with traditional asset pricing theories and is considered to be
an effective method in efﬁcient markets.
With this background in mind, the purpose of this research
is to analyze the performance of overconﬁdent investors in a
market where passive investors exist. To address this problem,
we have employed agent-based modeling in this analysis
[2][3][7][8]. Agent based modeling is an effective method of
analyzing the relationship between Micro-rules and Macro-
behavior. Agent-based modeling is an attempt to explain the
macro-behavior of systems by local rules. As a result of
applying this model to Social Science, it has been found
that a variety of different macro-behaviors emerge bottom-
up from local micro-rules. Agent-based modeling has many
applications, and none more suitable than for the creation of
an artiﬁcial market. For example, Arthur et al. [1] analyse the
market under conditions where heterogeneous investors trade
and concluded that complex conditions emerge. Using agent-
based modeling, Takahashi et al. [25] found that irrational
traders could survive in the market. Takahashi [29] suggests
that the combination of behavioral biases and ﬁnancial con-
straints causes a signiﬁcant deviation from fundamental values.
Analyses which attempt to replicate realistic market conditions
and dynamics present a greater challenge to the researcher than
traditional forms of research. Due to the efﬁcacy of this type
of advanced analysis, there is a greater demand for research
conducted employing these kinds of models. There is, there-
fore, a need for analyses using this more current approach, in
addition to original methods. Agent-based modeling is making
an increasingly valuable contribution to ﬁnancial research.
The next section describes the model used in this analysis.
Section III shows the results of the analysis. Section IV
summarizes this paper.
II.
MODEL
A computer simulation of the ﬁnancial market involving
1000 investors was used as the model for this research.
Shares and risk-free assets were the two types of assets used,
along with the possible transaction methods. Several types of
investors exist in the market, each undertaking transactions
based on their own stock evaluations [1][13][28][30][31].
(see Fig. 1). This market was composed in three major
stages; (1) generation of corporate earnings, (2) formation
of investor forecasts, and (3) setting transaction prices. The
market advances through repetition of these stages (see Fig. 2).
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Figure 1.
Basic architecture of ﬁnancial market simulator
Figure 2.
Simulation steps of market transactions
The following sections describe negotiable transaction assets,
modeling of investor behavior, transaction price setting, and
rules of natural selection in the market.
A. Negotiable assets in the market
This market has both risk-free and risk-associated assets.
There are risk-associated assets in which all proﬁts gained
during each term are distributed to shareholders. Corporate
earnings (yt) are expressed as yt = yt−1 · (1 + εt). However,
they are generated according to the process of εt ∼ N(0, σ2
y)
with share trading being undertaken after the public announce-
ment of proﬁts for the term [5][19]. Each investor is given
common asset holdings at the start of the term with no limit
placed on debit and credit transactions (1000 in risk-free assets
and 1000 in stocks). Investors adopt the buy-and-hold method
for the relevant portfolio as a benchmark to conduct decision-
making by using a one-term model. The buy-and-hold method
[20] is an investment method to hold shares for medium to
long term.
B. Modeling investor behavior
Each type of investor handled in this analysis is organized
in Table I. This analysis covers most major types of investor
[6][24]. The investors can be classiﬁed into two categories:
active investors (Type 1-4) and a single passive investor type
(Type 5). Active investors in this market evaluate transaction
prices based on their own forecasts of market movements,
taking into consideration both risk and return rates when
making decisions. Passive investors employ a buy-and-hold
strategy [14]. A passive investment strategy is one of the
most popular investment strategies in the asset management
business. Each active investor determines the investment ratio
(wi
t) based on the maximum objective function(f(wit)), as
shown below [10][15].
f(wi
t) = rint,i
t+1 · wi
t + rf · (1 − wi
t) − λ(σi
t−1)2 · (wi
t)2.
(1)
Here, rint,i
t+1 and σi
t−1 in the eq. (1) express the expected rate
of return and risk for stocks as estimated by each investor i. rf
indicates the risk-free rate. wi
t represents the stock investment
ratio of the investor i for term t. λ shows degree of investor risk
aversion. The value of the objective function f(wi
t) depends on
the investment ratio(wi
t). The investor decision-making model
here is based on the Black/Litterman model that is used in the
practice of securities investment [4][16][17][18].
The integrated expected rate of return for shares is calcu-
lated as follows [4]:
rint,i
t+1
=
c−1(σi
t−1)−2rf,i
t+1 + (σi
t−1)−2rim
t
c−1(σi
t−1)−2 + (σi
t−1)−2
.
(2)
Here, rf,i
t+1，rim
t
in the eq. (2) express the expected rate of
return, calculated from short-term expected rate of return, and
risk and gross current price ratio of stocks respectively. c is
a coefﬁcient that adjusts the dispersion level of the expected
rate of return calculated from risk and gross current price ratio
of stocks [4].
The short-term expected rate of return (rf,i
t ) is obtained
where (P f,i
t+1, yf,i
t+1) is the equity price and proﬁt forecast for
term t + 1 is estimated by the investor, as follows: rf,i
t+1 =
((P f,i
t+1 + yf,i
t+1)/Pt − 1).
The price and proﬁt forecast(P f,i
t+1, yf,i
t+1) includes the error
term (P f,i
t+1 = P f,typej
t+1
· (1 + ηi
t), yf,i
t+1 = yf,typej
t+1
· (1 + ηi
t),
where ηi
t ∼ N(0, σ2
n)) reﬂecting that even investors using the
same forecast model vary slightly in their detailed outlook. The
stock price (P f,i
t+1), proﬁt forecast (yf,i
t+1), and risk estimation
methods are described in the following paragraph.
The expected rate of return obtained from stock risk and so
forth is calculated from stock risk (σi
t−1), benchmark equity
stake (Wt−1), degree of investor risk aversion (λ), and risk-
free rate (rf), as follows [22]: rim
t
= 2λ(σi
t−1)2Wt−1 + rf.
1) Stock price forecasting method: The fundamental value
is estimated by using the discounted cash ﬂow model (DCF),
which is a well known model in the ﬁeld of ﬁnance. Funda-
mentalists estimate the forecasted stock price and forecasted
proﬁt from proﬁt for the term (yt) and the discount rate (δ)
as P f,typej
t+1
= yt/δ, yf,typej
t+1
= yt.
Forecasting based on trends involves forecasting the next
term ’ s stock prices and proﬁt through extrapolation of the
most recent stock value ﬂuctuation trends. Stock price and
proﬁt of the next term are estimated from the most recent
TABLE I.
LIST OF INVESTOR TYPES
No.
Investor types
1
Fundamentalist
2
Forecasting by past average (most recent 10 days)
3
Forecasting by trend (most recent 10 day)
4
Latest Price
5
Passive investor
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

trends of stock price ﬂuctuation (at−1) from time point t − 1
as P f,typej
t+1
= Pt−1 · (1 + at−1)2, yf,typej
t+1
= yt · (1 + at−1).
Forecasting based on past averages involves estimating the
next term stock prices and proﬁt based on the most recent
average stock value.
C. Risk Estimation Method
Stock risk is measured as σs,i
t−1 = si · σh
t−1. In this case,
σh
t−1 is an index that represents stock volatility calculated from
price ﬂuctuation of the most recent 100 steps, and si is the
degree of overconﬁdence. The presence of a strong degree of
overconﬁdence can be concluded when the value of si is less
than 1, as estimated forecast error is shown as lower than its
actual value. The investors whose value of si is less than 1
tend to invest more actively. For example, when such investors
predict that stock prices will increase, they invest more in stock
than ones whose value of si is 1.
D. Determination of transaction prices
Transaction prices are determined as the price where stock
supply and demand converge (∑M
i=1(F i
t wi
t)/Pt = N). In
this case, the total asset (F i
t ) of investor i is calculated
from transaction price (Pt) for term t, proﬁt (yt) and total
assets from the term t − 1, stock investment ratio (wi
t−1),
and risk-free rate (rf), as F i
t = F i
t−1(wi
t−1(Pt + yt)/Pt−1 +
(
1 − wi
t−1
)
(1 + rf)).
E. Natural Selection in the Market
Investors who are able to adapt to and, hence, proﬁt from
the market as it ﬂuctuates will remain in the market and their
position will grow stronger. Conversely, investors who are
unable to do this will drop out of the market. Such a pattern
is very suggestive of what might be termed Natural Selection
in the market. The driving force behind this Natural Selection
is the desire for cumulative excess proﬁt [9]. Two aspects of
this pattern are of particular interest: (1) the identiﬁcation of
investors who alter their investment strategy, and (2) the actual
alteration of investment strategy [25].
Each investor must decide whether he should change
investment strategies based on the most recent performance
of each 5 term period (after 25 terms have passed since
the beginning of market transactions). The higher the proﬁt
rate obtained most recently is, the lesser the possibility of
strategy alteration becomes. The lower the proﬁt, the higher
the possibility becomes. (In the actual market, evaluation
tends to be conducted according to baseline proﬁt and loss.)
Speciﬁcally, when an investor could not obtain a positive
excess proﬁt for the benchmark portfolio proﬁtability, they are
likely to alter their investment strategy with the probability
below:
pi = min(1, max(−100 · rcum
i
, 0)).
(3)
Here, however, rcum
i
in the eq. (3) is the cumulative excess
proﬁt for the most recent benchmark of investor i. Measure-
ments were conducted for 5 terms, and the cumulative excess
proﬁt was calculated as a one-term conversion. For example, if
excess proﬁt over a 5 term period is 5 %, a one term conversion
would show this as a 1 % excess for each term period.
Figure 3.
Price Transitions (Fundamentals)
When it comes to deciding on a new investment strategy,
an investment strategy that has a high cumulative excess proﬁt
for the most recent ﬁve terms (forecasting type) is ’naturally’
more likely to be selected. Where the strategy of the investor i
is zi and the cumulative excess proﬁt for the most recent ﬁve
terms is rcum
i
, the probability pi that zi is selected as a new
investment strategy is given as pi = e(a·rcum
i
)/∑M
j=1 e(a·rcum
j
).
Selection pressures on an investment strategy become higher as
the coefﬁcients’ value increases. Those investors who altered
their strategies make investments based on the new strategies
after the next step.
III.
RESULTS
The ﬁrst set of results is from a model in which no passive
investors are analyzed. The second set presents a situation in
which passive investors are present.
A. Case 1: No Passive Investors
At ﬁrst, this section analyzes a situation where all investors
make investment decisions based on fundamental values (Table
1, Type 1). Fig. 3 shows the transitions of transaction prices.
The horizontal axis in the graph shows time steps and the
vertical axis shows stock prices. Two transitions are shown:
Fundamental values and transaction prices, and it can be
seen that transaction prices are consistent with fundamental
values throughout the entire transaction period. These results
are consistent with traditional ﬁnancial theory. Looking at
transitions in the degree of overconﬁdence, a strengthening
degree of overconﬁdence can be seen in the behavior of the
remaining investors as market transactions move forward (Fig.
4). These results suggest that there is something going on in
the market which allows overconﬁdent investors - with their
biases in investment decision-making - to survive. This would
be in clear contradiction of traditional ﬁnancial theory.
Similar results are seen when there are equal numbers of
four types of investors (Table 1, Type 1-4). Figs. 5-7 show
these results. Fig. 5 shows the transitions of transaction prices
and Fig. 6 shows the transitions of the numbers of each
type of investor. Fig. 7 shows the transition in the degree of
overconﬁdence and shows that investors with a strong degree
of overconﬁdence tend to survive in the market even under
these conditions. These results further support the suggestion
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Figure 4.
Transition of degree of overconﬁdence (Fundamentals)
Figure 5.
Price Transitions (Fundamentals, Latest, Trend, Average)
that overconﬁdent investors can survive in the market. For
details of the inﬂuence of overconﬁdent investors, refer to [27].
B. Case 2: Passive Investors
1) Fundamentalists and Passive Investors: This section
analyzes a situation where passive investors invest in the
market. At ﬁrst, this section analyzes the market where the
Figure 6.
Transitions of Number of Investors (Fundamentals, Latest,
Trend, Average)
Figure 7.
Transition of degree of overconﬁdence (Fundamentals, Latest,
Trend, Average)
Figure 8.
Price Transitions (Fundamentals, Passive)
same number of fundamentalists and passive investors trade
(Table 1, Type 1 and 5). Figs. 8, 9, and 10 show the transition
of share prices, the number of investors, and the degree of
overconﬁdence, respectively. Fig. 9 shows that, as time steps
go, the number of passive investors increases. These results
speak to the effectiveness of passive investment strategies.
However, it is also the case that market prices reach a point
where they begin to deviate from fundamental values (see Fig.
8). These latter result indicates possible drawbacks of passive
investment strategies. As for the details of the analysis focusing
on passive investment strategies, please refer to [26]. Yet from
the data (see Fig. 10), a clear conclusion may be drawn: in this
model overconﬁdent investors do not survive, and a passive
investment strategy is superior in its effectiveness.
2) Introducing extra investor types: This section analyzes
the case where the same number of ﬁve types of investors
including passive investors trade in the market (Table 1, Type
1-5). Figs. 11-13 show the results (Transitions of stock prices,
number of investors and the degree of overconﬁdent). Fig.
12 shows that passive investors survive in the market, and
Fig. 11 shows that market prices reach a point where they
begin to deviate from fundamental values, as is in the previous
section. Fig. 13 shows that investors who survive in the
market do not have a tendency towards overconﬁdence. These
results also suggest the effectiveness of passive investment
strategies. Although very simple, passive investment strategies
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Figure 9.
Transitions of Number of Investors (Fundamentals, Passive)
Figure 10.
Transition of degree of overconﬁdence (Fundamentals, Passive)
show impressive ﬂexibility, adaptability and resilience.
IV.
SUMMARY
This article examines the effectiveness or otherwise of
passive investment strategies, utilizing agent-based modeling.
As a result of intensive experimentation, this paper conﬁrms
that a passive investment strategy is effective under conditions
where overconﬁdent investors invest. This conclusion is of
interest in itself and merits further study. Future analyses will
focus on examining the effect on markets of practical changes.
Figure 11.
Price Transitions (Fundamentals, Latest, Trend, Average, Passive)
Figure 12.
Transitions of Number of Investors (Fundamentals, Latest, Trend,
Average, Passive)
Figure 13.
Transition of degree of overconﬁdence (Fundamentals, Latest,
Trend, Average, Passive)
This research focuses on passive investors and overconﬁdent
investors. A more detailed analysis would consider both types
of investment behavior under more realistic market conditions.
This is a matter for further research.
APPENDIX
This section lists the major parameters of the ﬁnancial
market designed for this paper. The explanation and value for
each parameter is described.
M: Number of investors (1000)
N: Number of shares (1000)
F i
t : Total asset value of investor i for term t (F i
0 = 2000: common)
Wt: Ratio of stock in benchmark for term t (W0 = 0.5)
wi
t: Stock investment rate of investor i for term t (wi
0 = 0.5: common)
yt: Proﬁts generated during term t (y0 = 0.5)
σy: Standard deviation of proﬁt ﬂuctuation (0.2/
√
200)
δ: Discount rate for stock(0.1/200)
λ: Degree of investor risk aversion (1.25)
σn: Standard deviation of dispersion from short-term expected rate
of return on shares (0.05)
c: Adjustment coefﬁcient (0.01)
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

REFERENCES
[1]
W. B. Arthur, J. H. Holland, B. LeBaron, R. G. Palmer, and P. Taylor,
“
Asset Pricing under Endogenous Expectations in an Artiﬁcial Stock
Market, ” in The Economy as an Evolving Complex System II, W. B.
Arthur, S. N. Durlauf and D. A. Lane, Eds. Addison-Wesley, 1997, pp.
15-44.
[2]
R. Axelrod, The Complexity of Cooperation -Agent-Based Model of
Competition and Collaboration, Princeton University Press. 1997.
[3]
R. Axtell,“
Why Agents? On the Varied Motivation For Agent Com-
puting In the Social Sciences, ” The Brookings Institution Center on
Social and Economic Dynamics Working Paper, November, 17, 2000.
[4]
F. Black and R. Litterman,“ Global Portfolio Optimization,” Financial
Analysts Journal, September-October, 1992, pp. 28-43.
[5]
R. Brealey, S. Myers, and F. Allen, Principles of corporate ﬁnance 8th
edition, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc., 2006.
[6]
M. Brunnermeier, Asset Pricing under Asymmetric Information, Bub-
bles, Crashes, Technical Analysis and Herding, Oxford University Press,
2001.
[7]
J. M. Epstein and R. Axtell, Growing Artiﬁcial Societies Social Science
From The Bottom Up, MIT Press, 1996.
[8]
N. Gilbert, Agent-Based Models, Sage Publications: London, 2007.
[9]
D. Goldberg, Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine
Learning, Addison-Wesley, 1989.
[10]
J. E. Ingersoll, Theory of Financial Decision Making, Rowman &
Littleﬁeld, 1987.
[11]
R. Jarrow,“ Heterogeneous expectations, restrictions on short sales, and
equilibrium asset prices,” Journal of Finance, 35 (1980) pp. 1105-1113.
[12]
D. Kahneman and A. Tversky, “
Prospect Theory of Decisions under
Risk, ” Econometrica, 47, 1979, pp. 263-291.
[13]
M. Levy, H. Levy, and S. Solomon, Microscopic Simulation of Financial
Markets, Academic Press, 2000.
[14]
B. G. Malkiel,“
Passive investment strategies and Efﬁcient Markets, ”
European Financial Management, 9, 2003, pp. 1-10.
[15]
H. Markowitz,“ Portfolio Selection, ” Journal of Finance, 7, 1952, pp.
77-91.
[16]
L. Martellini and V. Ziemann, “
Extending Black-Litterman Analysis
Beyond the Mean-Variance Framework: An Application to Hedge Fund
Style Active Allocation Decisions, ” Journal of Portfolio Management,
33, 2007, pp. 33-45.
[17]
A. Meucci, “
Beyond Black-Litterman in Practice, ” Risk, 19, 2006,
pp. 114-119.
[18]
A. Meucci,“ Enhancing the Black-Litterman and Related Approaches:
Views and Stress-test on Risk Factors,” Journal of Asset Management,
10, 2009, pp. 89-96.
[19]
P. O’Brien,“
Analysts’ Forecasts as Earnings Expectations, ” Journal
of Accounting and Economics, January, 1988, pp. 53-83.
[20]
R. G. Clarke, M. T. FitzGerald, P. Berent, and M. Statman, “
Mar-
ket Timing with Imperfect Information, ” Financial Analysts Journal,
November-December, 1989, pp. 27-36.
[21]
W. F. Sharpe,“ Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium
under condition of Risk, ” The Journal of Finance, 19, 1964, pp. 425-
442.
[22]
W. F. Sharpe,“ Integrated Asset Allocation,” Financial Analysts Journal,
September-October, 1987, pp. 25-32.
[23]
R. J. Shiller, Irrational Exuberance, Princeton University Press, 2000.
[24]
A. Shleifer, Inefﬁcient Markets, Oxford University Press, 2000.
[25]
H. Takahashi and T. Terano, “
Agent-Based Approach to Investors’
Behavior and Asset Price Fluctuation in Financial Markets, ” Journal
of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation, 6, 2003.
[26]
H. Takahashi, S. Takahashi, and T. Terano, “
Agent-Based Modeling
to Investigate the Effects of Passive Investment Strategies in Financial
Markets, ”
in Social Simulation Technologies: Advances and New
Discoveries(Representing the best of the European Social Simulation
Association conferences), Bruce Edmonds, Cesario Hernandes, and
Klaus Troitzsch, Eds. Idea Group Inc., 2007, pp. 224-238.
[27]
H. Takahashi and T. Terano,“ Analyzing the Inﬂuence of Overconﬁdent
Investors on Financial Markets Through Agent-Based Model,” Lecture
Note in Computer Science 4881, Springer-Verlag, 2007, pp. 1042-1052.
[28]
H. Takahashi, S. Takahashi, and T. Terano,“ Analyzing the Validity of
Passive Investment Strategies Employing Fundamental Indices through
Agent-Based Simulation, ” in Agent and Multi-Agent Systems: Tech-
nologies and Applications, Lecture Note in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, J. O’
Shea, N. T. Nguyen, K. Crockett, R. J. Howlett, and L. C. Jain Eds.
Springer-Verlag 6682, 2011, pp. 180-189.
[29]
H. Takahashi,“ An Analysis of the Inﬂuence of dispersion of valuations
on Financial Markets through agent-based modeling, ”
International
Journal of Information Technology & Decision Making, 11, 2012, pp.
143-166.
[30]
H. Takahashi,“ A Analyzing the inﬂuence of dispersion of fundamen-
talists’ valuations on the effectiveness of passive investment strategy
under ﬁnancial constraints,” International Journal of Intelligent Systems
Technologies and Applications, 2, 12, 2013, pp. 111-127.
[31]
L. Tesfatsion, “
Agent-Based Computational Economics, ” Iowa Sate
University Economics Working Paper, 1, 2002.
[32]
A. Tversky and D. Kahneman,“ Advances in. prospect Theory : Cumu-
lative representation of Uncertainty, ” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,
5, 1992, pp. 297-323.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

