 A Context-Aware Framework for Semantic Indexing of Research Papers   
 
 
Maryam Tayefeh Mahmoudi(1,2, Fattaneh Taghiyareh(1 , Koushyar Rajavi(1,  Mohammad Saleh Pirouzi(1 
 
1) School of ECE, College of Engineering 
University of Tehran, Iran  
2) Knowledge Management & E-Organizations Group 
 IT Research Faculty, Research Institute for ICT (ITRC), Tehran, Iran 
Emails: {mahmodi@itrc.ac.ir, ftaghiyar@ut.ac.ir, k.rajavi@ece.ut.ac.ir, s.pirouzi@ut.ac.ir}
 
 
Abstract—Automatic indexing and annotation of publications 
have a significant role in retrieving and processing required 
papers from the massive amount of existing papers in the  
databases. In this paper, a framework for indexing research 
papers based on domain ontology is represented. The domain 
ontology, which is constructed for this purpose, is on agent 
science and technology. The initial step to indexing is to 
recognize the major concerns and the basic constituents in the 
title of papers, which has been accomplished through 
proposing a few NLP-based rules. To annotate each paper, the 
mentioned 
ontology 
and 
WordNet 
are 
employed.  
Experimental results on about 155 research papers lead us to 
estimate that our framework is capable of semantic indexing in 
about 80 percent of the situations. Since we have considered 
the ontology separately from the constituents of the whole 
system, the proposed framework is domain-independent and 
can be applied to any other domain ontology. 
Keywords-Indexing; domain ontology; research paper; 
WordNet; incremental learning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Semantic Indexing has an influential role in managing 
tremendous amount of publications in databases. The goal of 
semantic indexing is to offer more effective search and 
categorization services. There exist various methods for this 
purpose such as Latent semantic indexing (LSI) and concept 
indexing (CI), which are among information retrieval 
techniques [1, 2]. Although they have empirical success, they 
suffer from the lack of interpretation for the low-rank 
approximation and, consequently, the lack of controls for 
accomplishing specific tasks in information retrieval [3]. To 
overcome the existing deficiencies, there is a tendency to 
more potential schemes like ontology and semantic web. 
Domain ontology seems to be an appropriate tool for 
supporting indexing methods which can be widely used for 
knowledge and content processing applications [4, 5, 6]. In 
the meantime, the construction of domain ontology relies on 
domain modelers and knowledge engineers that are typically 
overwhelmed by the potential size, complexity and 
dynamicity of a specific domain [7]. To overcome the barrier 
of constructing exhaustive domain ontology, annotating or 
indexing may again be an appropriate alternative to enable 
the ontology with the potential of learning [8].  Thus, close 
examination of the issue reveals that indexing plays a major 
role both in publications' storage management and 
consequently incremental ontology learning. 
Taking the rapid growth in the number of research papers 
into account, turns into deployment of appropriate indexing 
method for facilitating both storage and retrieval purposes 
[9]. 
In this paper, we propose a context-aware framework for 
semantically indexing research papers based on domain 
ontology and NLP-based rules. The domain ontology which 
is constructed for this purpose is on agent science and 
technology issue, while the NLP-based rules are achieved 
through processing huge amount of research papers' titles. 
The main reason that titles of publications are considered as 
the basis of indexing is that they are informative enough that 
there is no need to process the whole text. Determining 
major concern and basic constituent behind the title leads 
into semantically indexing each paper. By major concern, we 
mean the major objective and concern of the title that 
illustrates why and for what reason it is under consideration, 
while by basic constituent we mean how to realize the major 
concern, by applying special tools or means [10, 11]. Having 
a review on existing approaches using major concern and 
basic constituent reveals the potential of these concepts in 
indicating the main objective behind the whole text [12, 13].   
To automate the above mentioned process, some NLP-based 
rules are proposed. It is no doubt that by matching the major 
concern and basic constituent with the existing concepts in 
the domain ontology, annotation will be accomplished. It is 
to be added that WordNet can also be a supportive tool for 
finding the closest concepts in an unmatched cases. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
reviews some of the previous works which have been done 
in the area of indexing and annotating. Section 3 describes 
our suggested framework. In Section 4, experimental results 
are analyzed and Section 5 sketches out the conclusion and 
future works. 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

II. 
RELATED WORK 
Due to the rapid growth in number of publications, 
organizing papers and documents in a certain database has 
become more important than before, especially for store, 
search and retrieval purposes [14].  
In the meantime, there exist various indexing or 
annotating methods which are discussed as follows: 
Some focus on phrase-based document similarity via 
index graph model. This method has the potential of 
detecting any-length phrase match from the current 
document to all the previously seen documents in the data set 
by just scanning it and extracting the matching phrases from 
the document index graph [15]. Index-Filter is another 
method, which uses indexes built over the document tags to 
avoid processing large portions of the input document [16]. 
In addition to data structure for indexing XML documents 
based on relative region coordinates which describe the 
location of content data in XML documents is also 
mentionable [17]. With respect to managing the large spatial 
ontologies, spatial index for improving the efficiency of the 
spatial queries are deployed [18].  
In addition to the methods discussed above, Latent 
Semantic Indexing (LSI) or Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) 
and also concept indexing (CI) are mentionable.  Those 
methods improve the detection of relevant documents on the 
basis of terms found in queries [19]. The most challenges to 
LSI focused on scalability and performance. LSI requires 
relatively high computational performance and memory in 
comparison to other information retrieval techniques [20]. 
PubSearch uses a citation based retrieval system [14] 
which generates a web citation database from online 
scientific publications that are available over the internet. 
Random indexing is another method which is based on an 
incremental word space model [21]. The basic idea of 
Random Indexing is to accumulate context vectors based on 
the occurrence of words in documents. 
It is not to be disregarded that ontologies have significant 
role in semantic annotation, too [5, 22]. They are being 
widely used in information retrieval (IR) either for 
performing semantic indexing of documents or to produce a 
better organization of retrieved documents [23]. In this 
respect, document indexation methods, specifically in large-
scale web search engines, support the retrieval of documents 
that might contain some parts related to the query [24]. 
Linguistic annotation is also an important field in natural 
language processing that involves classification of text into a 
predefined set of values [25]. Improving the semantic 
capability of ontology-based indexing method by major 
concern and basic constituent is our concern in this paper.  
 
III. 
SUGGESTED FRAMEWORK 
A. The overall Structure of Proposed Framework 
As it has been mentioned before, in large-scale databases 
of research papers, applying a well–defined indexing method 
plays a significant role to retrieve desired papers. In this 
respect, we propose a context-aware framework that seems 
to be capable enough to facilitate such a process.  Figure 1 
illustrates the details of proposed framework.   
As it is illustrated in Figure 1, each time that a paper is 
uploaded to the database, it is necessary to be indexed. For 
this purpose, extracting the title of the paper and parsing it is 
required in order to find major concern and basic constituent. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Flowchart of proposed indexing framework 
 
Defining suitable rules as well as domain ontology can 
realize the indexing process appropriately.  For this purpose, 
we are employing the ontology of agent science and 
technology that we have developed in Multi Agent Science 
Laboratory of University of Tehran for this purpose. 
Searching the desired combination of major concern and 
basic constituent in agent science and technology ontology 
and finding the related nodes reveals the appropriate 
keywords for tagging and indexing the paper.  It is to be 
noted that in cases where the major concern and basic 
constituent do not match any node of ontology, WordNet 
Uploading a new paper
Extracting title’s MJs & BCs 
based on existing rules 
Searching the desired combination of 
MJ & BC in MAS ontology 
Found it? 
Search for its 
synonyms in WordNet 
Searching the desired 
combination of synonyms 
in MAS ontology 
N
Found 
them? 
Tagging the paper based on the 
abbreviation of its title, MJ & BC 
Y 
Y 
Terminating the 
process as a failure 
N 
Data   
Base
Extracting the title of the paper 
Rules 
Indexing paper based on 
found nodes 
Indexed-based storing of the 
paper in database 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

seems to be a good realm for substituting alternative words.  
If the related words, in any of the mentioned ways be found, 
the paper will be tagged, indexed and respectively stored in 
the database. Otherwise, the process will be terminated as a 
failure. In the following sections, we briefly discuss each 
major constituent of proposed framework illustrated in 
Figure 1 including the functionality of major concern and 
basic constituent in indexing process. Followed by 
explaining the role of ontology and WordNet to support 
appropriate semantically indexing of papers and respectively 
storage of them.  
 
B. The proposed indexing method based on major 
concerns and basic constituents 
As previously mentioned, each title usually has two parts; 
major concern (MJ) and basic constituent (BC). Major 
concern is the part which explains about the main objective 
of the paper, while Basic Constituent mainly focuses on the 
methods, techniques or tools which were used to reach the 
objective in major concern [10, 12]. 
Reviewing several numbers of titles lead us to the 
following structure for MJ and BC. Four main parts are 
considered for MJ as follows:  
1) Action part; which is mainly a verb.  
2) Direct object; which is a noun or a pronoun that receives 
the action of a verb or shows the result of the action. It 
answers the question "What?" or "Whom?" after an action 
verb.  
3) Indirect object; which is the recipient of the direct object 
and answers the question "To whom?" or "For whom?". It 
usually follows a preposition  
4) Adverb/ Adjective part; which can modify verbs, 
adjectives, clauses, sentences, and other adverbs. It typically 
answers questions such as "how?", "in what way?", "when?", 
"where?", and "to what extent". 
It has to be mentioned that some conjunctions like "in" 
and "for" followed by a verb usually yield into having two 
layers for MJ, which follow the same structure as mentioned 
above. Obviously, one or some of these parts may be absent 
in a title. 
For BC, most of the time, maximum of one layer seems 
to be sufficient.  
Having studied several titles, we gathered some rules, 
which were used to extract MJ and BC from a title. Certain 
conjunctions and prepositions can be signs of MJs and BCs. 
We prioritized some prepositions and conjunctions over 
others. Table 1 is a list of some of these prepositions and 
conjunctions. 
TABLE I.  LIST OF PRIORITIZED PREPOSITIONS AND CONJUNCTIONS 
 
Preposition/ Conjunction 
 
 
Priority 
 
Based on, on the basis of, on the ground of, using, 
making use of, taking into, …. 
 
PR1 
(BC) 
 
With the purpose of, with the aim of, in order to, in 
order that, … 
 
PR2 
(MJ) 
 
with, by, in, for, via, at, from, about,  across, after, 
against, along, among, around, before, behind, 
beside, during, inside, instead of, onto, outside, 
over, since, through,  under,  within,   … 
 
PR3 
(BC, MJ) 
and, of, into, like, without, both, together with, as, 
neither, either, as well as,  rather than, than, … 
 
PR4 
 
 
Using the prepositions and conjunctions in the table 
above, we are able to detect BC and MJ before or after these 
words.  
Employing a NLP parser can facilitate this process. For 
example, consider the title "Extending process automation 
systems with multi-agent techniques", as it is illustrated in 
the table, basic constituent can be found after "with", while 
before "with" we have major concern. It is to be noted that in 
MJ part, "extending" plays the role of action while the 
"process automation system" refers to direct object. 
Processing some complicated titles, necessitate more rules. 
For instance, "An agent-based signal processing in node 
environment for real-time human activity monitoring based 
on wireless body sensor networks" is a complicated title 
including several conjunctions and prepositions. Figure 2 
illustrates MJ and BC of the title in detail. 
 
   MJ 
 
MJ1 
Action- 
part 
 
processing 
 
Adverb-part 
 
 
agent-based 
Direct Obj. 
 
 
signal 
Indirect 
Obj. 
 
Node 
environment 
MJ2 
Action-part 
 
monitoring 
Adverb-part 
 
Real time 
Direct Obj. 
 
Human 
activity 
Indirect Obj. 
 
- 
 
  BC 
 
1st Layer : 
 
wireless body sensor networks 
2nd Layer 
 
- 
Figure 2.  An example of major concern & basic constituent 
Having reviewed large amount of titles, yield several 
rules for distinguishing MJs and BCs, Such as: 
- 
If we find “via” or “based on” in the title, the 
following word or phrase will be BC. 
- 
If we find “for” in the title, with a verb following, 
the rest of the title will be accounted as the 2nd layer 
of MJ. 
 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

C. Ontology Processing 
After extracting MJ and BC based on the rules discussed 
in the previous section, combinations of MJ and BC are 
applied for seeking in the domain ontology. If the 
corresponding node is found, the keyword for annotating is 
achieved; otherwise closely related words or synonyms from 
WordNet have to be extracted for the same purpose. In this 
manner, indexing process based on the active nodes of 
ontology is realized. Vise versa, in the cases where not any 
related node is found, the process will be terminated and a 
failure notice will be issued. In situations where hierarchical 
ontology learning is considered, the new concept will be 
added in to the closest node of ontology. This would be our 
future trend of research in this subject. 
Our domain ontology contains 200 nodes, with the depth 
of eight, describing agent science and technology. Figure 3 
reveals a part of that ontology. 
 
Figure 3.  Part of the agent science & technology 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
In order to evaluate the proposed approach, a data set of 
about 155 research papers in domain of agent science and 
technology which are collected from different conferences is 
considered.  
We have indexed the research papers using the proposed 
framework. Figure 4 shows the pseudo code of the proposed 
framework.  
Table 2 represents some examples of what our system 
produced for MJ, BC and related nodes in ontology. The 
papers which are shown in Table2 are as follows:  
 
1: Group Communication based approach for Reliable 
Mobile Agent in information Retrieval Applications 
2: Using a Dynamic Swarm of Intelligent Agents for 
Advising Farmers-AgroAgent 
3: An Intelligent Inter Database Retrieval System Based on 
Multi-agent 
4: The Personalized Information System of Lib2.0 Based on 
Agent 
 
 
Extract Title; 
  Parse (Title); 
     Extract (MJ, BC); 
        Search in Ontology (MJ, BC); 
           Mark Related Nodes in Ontology; 
              If (Marked Nodes == empty) 
           Find Synonyms (MJ, BC); 
        Search Synonyms in Ontology; 
    Mark Related Nodes in Ontology; 
Indexed-based Storage; 
 
Figure 4.  Psuedo code for proposed indexing framework 
 
TABLE II.  MJ, BC & ACTIVATED NODES IN ONTOLOGY FOR SOME 
PAPERS 
Title 
Major Concern    
(1st layer) 
Major 
Concern        
(2st layer) 
Basic 
Constituent 
Activated 
nodes in 
Ontology 
1 
Group 
Communication 
based approach 
 
Reliable 
Mobile Agent 
in information 
Retrieval 
Applications 
 
- 
Application, 
Mobile, 
Communication 
2 
Advising 
Farmers-Agro 
Agent 
- 
a Dynamic 
Swarm of 
Intelligent 
Agents 
Dynamic, 
Reasoning 
3 
An Intelligent 
Inter Database 
Retrieval 
System 
- 
Multi-agent 
Reasoning, 
Agent 
4 
The 
Personalized 
Information 
System of 
Lib2.0 
- 
Agent 
- 
 
As it is shown in table 2, our system has failed in finding 
an appropriate node for the 4th title because it wasn’t able to 
find any of the words (and their synonyms) in our ontology. 
In the first two titles, our system has done very good in 
detecting MJ, BC and also in activating related nodes in 
ontology. For the 3rd title, despite having correctly extracting 
MJ and BC, our system mistakenly activated “Reasoning” 
node because of its similarity to the word “intelligent” which 
was in MJ of the title. For this reason, in future works, we 
have to apply better rules to avoid these mistakes.  
Our system also shows great ability in finding MJ and 
BC of second layer. For example, for the title “Scalability 
and Load Balancing for Multiplatform Communication 
System Architecture based on Intelligent Agents”, it gives 
“scalability and load balancing” as the MJ of the first layer 
and “Multiplatform Communication System Architecture” as 
the second layer of MJ, and therefore is able to detect 
“scalability, communication, architecture, reasoning” as the 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

corresponding nodes in the ontology. Overall, we were 
satisfied by the results our framework produced in 
processing MJ and BC for about 130 papers of the 155 
papers. 
In this paper, we used precision and recall measurements 
to judge the efficiency of our method. The “Precision” is 
calculated as the proportion of relevant retrieved documents 
to the number of retrieved documents and “Recall” is defined 
as the proportion of relevant retrieved documents to total 
number of relevant documents [26, 27].  
 
Precision = TP/ (TP + FP)                                                  (1) 
Recall = TP/ (TP+FN) 
 
where TP, TN, FP and FN denote true positives, true 
negatives, false positives, and false negatives, respectively. 
Experimental results reveal that our system was able to 
index 118 number of papers correctly, while for 9 papers, our 
system issued a failure. It also made mistake in indexing 28 
of the papers. Therefore, as it is illustrated in Figure 5, the  
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Precision and recall of experimental results 
precision ratio is equal to 118/(118+28)= 0.81, while the 
recall ratio is 118/(118+9)=0.93. 
In essence, our framework was able to correctly index 
3/4 of the papers. The failures were mainly because of the 
following reasons: 1) Incompleteness of our ontology. 2) 
Lack of rules for extracting MJ and BC. 3) WordNet’s 
inability to find scientific and agent-related words and 
phrases, and therefore not finding their synonyms. These 
problems can easily be resolved in future and as a result, the 
efficiency and correctness of our framework will be 
improved.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed an ontology-based indexing 
framework that can be used for managing the storage of 
papers in database. The proposed approach can also be an 
appropriate method for investigating the incremental learning 
of ontology. Distinguishing major concern and basic 
constituent of the title is our mean to find the corresponding 
nodes of ontology. To implement the proposed approach 
some NLP-based rules are proposed. It is mentioned in the 
paper that, in cases where there is no corresponding node in 
the ontology, WordNet is an appropriate supportive tool. 
Improving the rules from one perspective, and applying the 
proposed method for incremental ontology learning from 
another perspective are our future researches in this issue. 
REFERENCES 
   
[1] T. Hofmann, "Probabilistic latent semantic indexing," Proc. of 
the 22nd annual Intl. ACM SIGIR conference on Research and 
development in information retrieval, 1999, pp. 50-57. 
[2] J. M. Gómez, J. C. Cortizo, E. Puertas, and M. Ruiz, "Concept 
Indexing for Automated Text Categorization," Natural 
Language Processing and Information Systems, Lecture Notes 
in Computer Science, Vol.136, 2004, pp. 495-502. 
[3] J. Dobsa, " Comparison of information retrieval techniques: 
Latent semantic indexing (LSI) and Concept indexing (CI)," 
Solomonovi 
seminarji, 
Faculty 
of 
Organization 
and 
Informatics, Varazdin, University of Zagreb, Feb. 25, 2007. 
[4] T. B. Lee, J. Hendler, and O. Lassila, “The semantic web,” 
Scientific American, Vol. 284, No. 5, 2001, pp. 35–43. 
[5] J. Kohler, S. Philippi, M. Specht, and A. Ruegg, “Ontology 
based text indexing and querying for the semantic web,” 
Knowledge-Based Systems, Vol. 19, 2006, pp. 744–754. 
[6] J. J. Chen and R. Sison, “Domain ontology learning,” 5th  
Philippine Computing Science Congress, 2005, pp. 161-165. 
[7] D. Sánchez, “Domain ontology learning from the web,” The 
Knowledge Engineering Review, Vol. 24, Issue 4, 2009, pp.  
413-413.  
[8] M. Hazman, S. R. El-Beltagy, and A. Rafea, “A survey of 
ontology learning approaches,” Intl. Journal of Computer 
Applications,Vol. 22, No.9, May 2011, pp. 36-43. 
[9] L. Feigenbaum, M. N. Roy, and B. H. Szekely, W.C.Yung, 
“Ontology based text indexing,” United States Patent 
Application 20080288442.   
[10] K.Badie & M.T.Mahmoudi, “ An approach to generating new 
ideas based on linking frames of concepts,” ECCBR’04, 
Computational creativity workshop, 7th  European Conf. In 
Case-based reasoning, Madrid, Spain, Aug 30- Sep 2, 2004. 
[11] M.T.Mahmoudi & K.Badie, “Content determination for 
composite concepts via combining attributes’ values of 
individual frames”, IKE’04, Intl. Conf. On Information & 
Knowledge Engineering, Las Vegas, USA, Jun 21-24, 2004. 
[12] K.Badie. M.T.Mahmoudi, “A Computational Framework for 
Manipulating an Issue from the View-Point of Other Issues,” 
14th  Intl. Cong. of Cybernetics and Systems of WOSC – 
ICCS’08 ,Wroclaw, Poland, 2008, pp. 9 – 12. 
[13] K.Badie, 
M.T.Mahmoudi, 
“View-Point 
Oriented 
Manipulation of Concepts: A Matching Perspective”, IEEE 
Second International Conference on the Digital Society, ICDS 
2008, Sainte Luce, Martinique, February 10-15, 2008.  
[14] Y. He, S. C. Hui, and A. C. M. Fong, “Mining a web citation 
database for document clustering,” Applied Artificial 
Intelligence Journal, Vol.16,  2002, pp. 283-302. 
[15] K. M. Harnmouda and M. S. Kamel, “Phrase-based document 
similarity based on an index graph model,” Second IEEE Intl. 
Conf. on Data Mining (ICDM'02), 2002, pp. 203-210. 
[16] N. Bruno, L. Gravano, N. Koudas, D. Srivastava, “Navigation 
vs. 
index-based 
XML 
multi-query 
processing,” 
19th 
International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE'03), 
2003, pp. 139-150. 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[17] D. D. Kha, M. Yoshikawa, and S. Uemura, “An XML 
indexing structure with relative region coordinate,” 17th  Intl. 
Conf. on Data Engineering, 2001, pp. 313-320. 
[18] E. Dellis and G. Paliouras, “Management of large spatial 
ontology bases,” Workshop on Ontologies-based techniques 
for DataBases and Information Systems (ODBIS) of the 32nd  
Intl. Conf. on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB 2006), 2006,  
pp. 102-118. 
[19] S. T. Dumais, T. K. Landauer, and M. L. Littman,  
“Automatic cross-linguistic information retrieval using Latent 
Semantic Indexing,” SIGIR'96, Workshop on Cross-
Linguistic Information Retrieval, 1996, pp. 16-23. 
[20] G. Karypis and E. Han, “Fast Supervised Dimensionality 
Reduction Algorithm with Applications to Document 
Categorization and Retrieval,” 9th  International Conference 
on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM), 2000, 
pp. 12 – 19. 
[21] M. Wan, A. Jonsson, C. Wang, L. Li, Y. Yang, “A random 
indexing approach for web user clustering and web 
prefetching,” 2011 Workshop on Behavior Informatics, 
Shenzhen, China, 2011. 
[22] N. Sugiura, K. Masaki, F. Naoki, I. Noriaki, and Y. Takahira, 
“A domain ontology engineering tool with general ontologies 
and text corpus,” 2nd  Workshop on Evaluation of Ontology 
based Tools, 2003. 
[23] A. J. Yepes, R. B. Llavori, and D. R. Schuhmann, “Ontology 
refinement for improved information retrieval,” Information 
Processing and Management, Vol. 46, 2010, pp. 426–435 
[24] P. Martin and P. Eklund, “Embedding knowledge in Web 
documents,” Computer Networks, Vol. 31, 1999, pp. 1403–
1419. 
[25] W. W. Chapman and J. N. Dowling, “Inductive creation of an 
annotation schema for manually indexing clinical conditions 
from emergency department reports,” Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics, Vol. 39, 2006, pp. 196–208. 
[26] D. L. Olson and D. Delen, “Advanced data mining 
techniques,” Springer, 1st  edition, February 1, 2008, pp. 138-
138. 
[27] C. D. Manning, P. Raghavan, and H. Schütze, “Introduction 
to information retrieval,” Cambridge University Press., 2008. 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

