Usage of Audit Data Analytics within the Accountancy Sector
 
Lotte Verhoeven and Eric Mantelaers 
Research Centre – Future-proof Auditor 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences & RSM Netherlands 
Accountants N.V. 
Sittard/Heerlen, the Netherlands 
lotte.verhoeven@zuyd.nl 
eric.mantelaers@zuyd.nl 
 
 
 
Martijn Zoet 
Research Centre – Future-proof Financial 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, the Netherlands 
martijn.zoet@zuyd.nl
 
 
Abstract— Evidence from the various reports and articles as 
well as the importance of the audit process shows that 
adjustment and/or improvement of the current approach 
within the accountancy sector is necessary. Research 
demonstrates 
that 
technology 
can 
contribute 
to 
an 
improvement of audit quality. Additionally, previous research 
increasingly recognizes that audit data analytics is likely to 
transform the conduct of the audit significantly. The goal of this 
research is to study how Audit Data Analytics is currently used 
within the audit. In order to answer this question, a survey was 
distributed via the Dutch National Accountants Association, 
focusing on how Audit Data Analytics is used in the accountancy 
sector. However, the results and the non-chronological order of 
the data analysis types indicate a misinterpretation or lack of 
understanding of the data analysis types (implemented in the 
survey) and their chronological order. 
 
Keywords-audit data analytics; audit quality; process mining; 
process mining algorithms. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Audit quality consistently received substantial attention 
from regulators and academics over the past years due to 
numerous audit scandals. Caused by a lack of independent 
oversight and enforcement, various accounting and audit 
scandals took place in the beginning of the 21st century. 
Recent reports from the Dutch Authority for the Financial 
Markets (AFM), and recent published reports from, among 
others, the Future Accountancy Sector Committee (CTA) and 
the Accountancy Monitoring Committee (MCA), show that 
the quality of annual audits is inadequate [1]–[4]. 
Internationally the lack of audit quality is also visible. In the 
Brydon report, Brydon states that the audit quality is 
insufficient and improvements including new reporting duty 
with respect to fraud and more auditor transparency are 
recommended [5]. Evidence from the various reports and 
articles as well as the importance of the audit process shows 
that adjustment and/or improvement of the current approach 
within the accountancy sector is necessary [6]. Research 
demonstrates that technology can contribute to an 
improvement of audit quality [7].  
This research, therefore, focuses on the current usage of 
Audit Data Analytics (ADA) within the audit. The goal of this 
research is to achieve a view of the application of ADA within 
the financial audit. To achieve this, this paper answers the 
following main question: How and to what extent is Audit 
Data Analytics currently used by auditors/accountants? 
 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: 
Section II describes the relevant literature regarding audit 
quality and ADA. In Section III, the research method is 
described, followed by the data collection and analysis in 
Section IV. Finally, the results, conclusion and future work 
are presented in Sections V and VI respectively. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Audit quality is a very broad concept and can be defined 
in various ways. DeAngelo describes audit quality as “the 
market assessed joint probability that a given auditor will 
both discover a breach in the client’s accounting system and 
reports the breach” [8]. Whereas the Government 
Accountability Office uses a more extensive approach and 
states that high audit quality is achieved when performed 
according to the corresponding standards and no material 
misstatements due to error or fraud are present [9]. The legal 
definition of audit quality is on the other hand very concise, 
as it states audit quality as either “audit failure” or “no audit 
failure” [10]. In conclusion, audit quality is a broad concept 
and difficult to summarize in a single definition. Next to that, 
these different definitions show that audit quality is not yet 
recognized universally across the world. As mentioned 
before, evidence from the various reports and articles as well 
as the importance of the audit process shows that adjustment 
and / or improvement of the current approach within the 
accountancy sector is necessary [1]–[4][6].   
Previous research shows that technology/ADA can 
contribute to an improvement of audit quality [7]. By 
automating certain audit analyses, more time and resources 
can be allocated to the interpretation of these analyses. This 
maximizes the dual aspects of audit quality: independence 
and expertise [7][8]. Additionally, previous research 
increasingly recognizes that ADA is likely to transform the 
conduct of the audit significantly [11]–[13]. As Barr-Pulliam 
et al. state: “The use of advanced testing methods such as 
ADAs can occur at any stage of the audit and can significantly 
transform the process of auditing financial statements, 
resulting in enhanced audit effectiveness and audit efficiency 
– both elements and signals of audit quality” [11]. To support 
the individual and personal judgement of the auditor, ADA 
could provide a solution. ADA is a method of using data 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-082-7
eKNOW 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

analysis techniques to evaluate financial information and 
assess the accuracy and reliability of an organization's 
financial statements. This involves collecting and examining 
large amounts of data, and using statistical and computational 
tools to identify patterns, trends, and anomalies that may 
indicate potential problems or issues. Data-driven audits are 
becoming increasingly familiar within the accountancy 
sector, due to innovation, increase in technology/data and the 
pursuit of continuous assurance [14]. Data-driven ‘control’ is 
also used by the AFM (regulator), as they want to implement 
data-driven supervision to enhance the efficiency and 
effectivity of the supervision of audit firms. To achieve this, 
the AFM will structurally request data from the audit firms to 
gain insight into the current quality control and risk 
characteristics [15]. 
Despite the fact that the use of ADA within the audit 
practice is relatively new, various previous research has been 
performed. The Financial Reporting Council (FRC), regulator 
to auditors, accountants and actuaries and setter of UK’s 
Corporate Governance and Stewardship Codes, conducted a 
review of the use of technology in the audit of financial 
statements. Within this review, the FRC found that ADA was 
currently used mostly for risk assessment and the audit of 
revenue and that advanced ADA was only used sporadic [16]. 
This was also highlighted by Eilifsen et al. who explored the 
use of ADA in current audit practice in Norway. Eilifsen et al. 
found that despite the positive attitude with regards to the 
usefulness of ADA, the use of ‘advanced’ ADA is rare [17]. 
Eilifsen et al. also found that this is caused by its complexity 
and lack of implementation guidelines and confidence in the 
ability of ADA to provide sufficient and appropriate audit 
evidence. It is suggested that this is likely to persist until ADA 
will be incorporated in the audit methodologies and ADA is 
explicitly supported and accepted by supervisory bodies and 
standard-setters [17]. However, this research focuses not only 
on the use of ADA, but also on the sequentially of its use. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
The goal of this research is to study how ADA is currently 
used within the audit. In order to answer this question, a 
survey was distributed focusing on how ADA is used in the 
accountancy sector. The survey is distributed via the Dutch 
National Accountants Association (NBA) across members of 
the Accounttech working group, a total of 7,008. The 
members of the NBA are spread over several accountancy 
firms in the Netherlands and consists out of accounting 
consultants/auditors (AA in Dutch), chartered auditors (RA in 
Dutch) and people working in the accountancy sector.  
      The survey consists of 20 questions which are divided into 
seven 
subsections. 
These 
subsections 
relate 
to 
1) 
composition/descriptive (general), 2) the scope of ADA, 3) 
assessing the possibility  to detect misstatements, 4) 
sequentially, 5) possibility to assist decisions, 6) materiality 
and 7) phase of the audit in which ADA is used. The questions 
are answered on a likert-scale basis [18], in which answers 
range from ‘1 – I never use it’, to ‘7 – I always use it’. Likert 
scales are considered a good fit for analytical purposes, due to 
their relatively large number of categories [19]. In addition, 
the respondents were able to answer: ‘I don’t know’ or ‘Not 
relevant’. For the purpose of this research the latter two are 
classified as ‘1 – I never use it’.  
By formulating the survey questions, the Value Through 
Analytics (VTA) model from Zoet is used [20]. This model 
concretizes data analytics into subtypes. The VTA model 
incorporates the six different types of analyses from Leek and 
Peng (2015), namely: The 1) descriptive, 2) explanatory, 3) 
inferential, 4) predictive, 5) causal, and 6) mechanistic [21]. 
The VTA model also includes the three types of process 
mining as described by Van der Aalst (2011): discovery, 
conformance and improvement [22]. 
The VTA model is a tool to classify data analytics into 
different categories [23] and is shown in Figure 1. The VTA 
model distinguishes 54 different types of data analysis which 
can be derived by walking through the three circles within the 
model. The inner circle starts with the question: “What do I 
want to analyze?” In which a 1) process, 2) decision or 3) 
object can be chosen. The second circle questions “Why do I 
want to analyze?” Which can be answered by 1) discovery, 2) 
conformance, and 3) improvement. Finally, the outer circle 
asks the question “To what extent do I want to analyze it?” 
The last question indicates the choice to the following types 
of data analytics: 1) descriptive, 2) explanatory, 3) inferential, 
4) predictive, 5) causal, and 6) mechanistic. Additionally, the 
types of analysis within the VTA model are layered in 
sequence, which indicates that if an inferential analysis can be 
carried out, one should also be able to carry out a descriptive 
and explanatory analysis. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Value Through Analytics model [20] 
To assess which competences can be utilized with the 
help of ADA, a so-called analysis quotient can be computed, 
which visualizes the type of questions that can be answered 
[23]. An example of this is shown in Figure 2, in which the 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-082-7
eKNOW 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

questions are set against audit organizations. Grey indicates 
that an audit organization cannot perform the analysis, green 
indicates that the type of analysis is standard procedure 
within each audit. Blue indicates that the analysis is used 
within every audit, but expertise is needed. Purple indicates 
that the analysis is executed by only one employee for their 
own use, but the results are not communicated throughout the 
team. Finally, yellow indicates that it is not executed for 
every audit [23].  
The survey questions were set up by Dr. Mantelaers 
(chartered auditor) and Dr. Zoet, founder of the VTA model 
[20]. In order to validate and refine the survey questions and 
to ensure the correct questioning a pilot test was conducted 
by five master students (Accounting and Control – 
Maastricht University). Moreover, the pilot test was executed 
by two members of the Accounttech group, of which one is 
related to the Post-Master IT-Auditing & Advisory (Erasmus 
University Rotterdam).  
 
 
Figure 2.  Periodic system types of analyses [23] 
Within the survey questions, a particular sequence is 
followed related to several ‘levels’ of ADA usage in practice, 
which can be linked to the data analysis types/levels in the 
VTA model. In Table I the survey questions are linked to the 
type of data analyses derived from Figure 2. Each question 
focuses on the frequency of use of the ADA types as 
mentioned in Table I. As the questions and data analysis 
types, are listed in a chronological order, this implies that if 
an auditor uses ADA type five, the auditor will also be 
expected to be able to perform ADA type two and four. 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I. SURVEY DESIGN 
Survey 
question 
ADA 
type 
ADA description 
7.1 
2 
Object – Discover – Explanatory 
7.2 
4 
Object – Discover – Predictive 
7.3 
5 
Object – Discover – Causal 
7.4 
7 
Object – Discover – Descriptive 
7.5 
8 
Object – Discover – Explanatory 
8.1 
19 
Process – Discover - Descriptive 
8.2 
20 
Process – Discover – Explanatory 
8.3 
25 
Process – Conformance – Descriptive 
8.4 
26 
Process – Conformance – Explanatory 
8.5 
37 
Decision – Discover – Descriptive 
8.6 
43 
Decision – Conformance - Descriptive 
 
The sequentially of the data from the survey will be 
analyzed with the help of process mining algorithms. For the 
use of this research, a heuristic analysis will be performed 
due to the scope of possible responses and outcomes. A 
heuristic analysis eliminates any redundant details and 
exceptions and focuses on the main behavior [24]. 
IV. 
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS 
The survey was distributed to a population of 7,008 
respondents in total, of which 203 responded, a response rate 
of 2,90%. The response rate is relatively low, possibly caused 
by the non-committal nature and scope of the survey. 
Moreover, surveys are frequently distributed within the 
Accounttech working group and NBA, which also causes the 
low response rate. From a NBA perspective this can be 
considered a representative response rate. The survey was 
distributed in the first half of 2021. The respondents consist 
out of 167 males and 36 females, of which 72 are a chartered 
auditor (RA in Dutch) and 39 accounting consultants (AA in 
Dutch). Around 25%  of the respondents works for one of the 
Big 4 Auditing Firms (EY, PWC, Deloitte and KPMG). The 
most common jobs within the respondents are external auditor 
(chartered auditor and accounting consultants), accountant in 
business or public/internal auditor. However, the work 
experience varies across the respondents as is shown in Table 
II. 
TABLE II. WORK EXPERIENCE RESPONDENTS 
Work experience  
(in years) 
Number of 
respondents 
< 5  
3 
5 - 10  
22 
10 – 20 
72 
20 – 30 
58 
> 30 
48 
Total 
203 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-082-7
eKNOW 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
     To analyze the outcomes of the survey a heuristic process 
mining algorithm is applied by using three input variables. 
These input variables consist out of 1) case concept name, 
represented by the respondents ID, 2) concept name, 
represented by the question number and 3) the timestamp, 
represented by the answer based on the likert scale. To ensure 
the chronological order a timestamp is added to the data by 
converting the likert scale. In which ‘7 – I always use it’ is 
matched to the earliest timestamp, as it is always used (used 
now). ‘1 – I never use it’ is matched to the latest timestamp, 
since its use will be furthest in the future. The options in 
between (two to six) are matched accordingly. 
V. 
RESULTS 
The analysis distinguishes 132 types of unique variants 
within a total of 203 respondents (65.0%). A total overview 
of the data analysis types in order of usage is shown in Figure 
3. The numbers 7.1 until 8.6 refer to the questions of the 
survey, the link to the data analysis types is shown in Table 
II. As the likert scale was converted to a timestamp in order 
to perform these analyses, the order of the questions depends 
on the usage of the specific ADA. For example, question 7.1 
relates to the use of data analysis: Object – Discover – 
Explanatory. 60.6% of the respondents (n=123) indicated 
that this analysis is always used (likert scale – 7). Due to the 
rating of ‘7 – I always use it’, this data analysis type is 
matched to the earliest timestamp and therefore shown at the 
start of the path in Figure 3.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Result heuristic miner. 
Due to the high number of unique variants (65,0%), an 
overview of the top ten variants is shown in Table III. For 
clarity purposes, the number of occurrences per unique 
variant is added.  
TABLE III. TOP 10 VARIANTS 
 
 
The most common variant (variant 1) occurs 58 times. 
This variant is, also chronologically seen, the most logical 
variant, as the occurrence of the questions are in a 
chronological order (7.1 to 8.6). This means that the data 
analysis types, intertwined in the questions, are used in the 
(expected) chronological order. However, this is only 
applicable to 28.6% of the respondents (n=58). The number 
of occurrences for the other variances is widely spread as can 
be seen for variant two to ten (max. four occurrences per 
variant). The results from variant two show that question 8.1 
(related to data analysis type Process – Discover – 
Descriptive) is used less compared to question 8.2 to 8.6 
(related to the more advanced data analysis types). In variant 
three to ten a non-chronological order is also apparent, 
indicating that the more ‘basis’ analysis types are carried out 
less frequently than the more ‘advanced’ types. However, 
variant four indicates that analyses with regards to a process 
and/or decision (questions 8.1-8.6) are frequently used, and 
analysis regarding an object (questions 7.1-7.5) less 
frequently, despite the fact that most of the analyses 
regarding ‘Objects’ are expected to be used standard in every 
audit, as can be derived from Figure 2.  
As the results vary widely, an additional analysis solely 
on the external auditors (chartered auditor and accounting 
consultants) as they are expected to have the most experience 
with regards to audits. Within the total sample, 111 external 
auditors and  79 unique variants are identified (variance of 
71.2%). Compared to the total sample, an even higher 
variance can be recorded. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-082-7
eKNOW 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 4.  Result heuristic miner external auditors. 
Due to the high number of unique variants (65.0%), an 
overview of the top ten variants is shown in Table IV. For 
clarity purposes, the number of occurrences per unique 
variant is added.  
TABLE IV. TOP 10 VARIANTS EXTERNAL AUDITORS 
 
The most common variant (variant 1) occurs 31 times. 
This variant is, also chronologically seen, the most logical 
variant, as the occurrence of the questions are in a 
chronological order (7.1 to 8.6). However, this is only 
applicable to 27.9% of the respondents (n=31). The number 
of occurrences for the other variances is widely spread as can 
be seen for variant two to ten (max. two occurrences per 
variant). 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this article, we aim to answer the main question: “How 
and to what extent is Audit Data Analytics currently used by 
auditors/accountants?” With the help of a survey distributed 
across members of the NBA working group Accounttech, an 
overview was given of the use (and its extent) of ADA. The 
insights derived from our study provide a better 
understanding of how and to which extent ADA is currently 
used by auditors/accountants and specific external auditors. 
However, the results and the non-chronological order of the 
data analysis types indicate a misinterpretation or possible 
lack of understanding of the data analysis types 
(implemented in the survey) and their chronological order. 
Remarkable are the similar results within the external auditor 
group, as they are expected to have the most experience 
regarding audits. Future research could therefore focus on 
concretizing (and creating an understanding of) the data 
analysis types. This could be achieved by creating a more 
practice-oriented survey.  Moreover, in future research we 
would like to include the answers: ‘I don’t know’ or ‘Not 
relevant’ in the results and follow up on these answers to 
identify 
the 
underlying 
reasons 
and 
expand 
our 
results/knowledge. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We would like to thank Michelle van Wamelen for 
collecting the data. Moreover, we would like to thank the 
NBA working group Accounttech for collaborating on this 
survey.   
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
MCA, “Accountancy Monitoring Committee,” 2020. 
https://www.monitoringaccountancy.nl/ (accessed Mar. 
24, 2023). 
[2] 
Future Accountancy Sector Committee, “Confidence in 
Control Final Report of the Committee on the Future of the 
Accountancy Sector | Parliamentary Document | Central 
Government,” 
2020. 
https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/
2020/01/30/vertrouwen-op-controle-eindrapport-van-de-
commissie-toekomst-accountancysector 
[3] 
AFM, “AFM supervisory agenda 2022,” 2022. 
[4] 
AFM, “Research reports on supervision of audit firms | 
Audit firms | AFM Professionals.” https://www.afm.nl/nl-
nl/sector/accountantsorganisaties/rapporten-publicaties 
(accessed Mar. 24, 2023). 
[5] 
D. Brydon, “Assess, assure and inform: improving audit 
quality and effectiveness,” UK Government, 2019. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-quality-
and-effectiveness-of-audit-independent-review 
[6] 
Future Accountancy Sector Committee, “Reliance on 
Audit,” Minist. van Financ., 2020, [Online]. Available: 
https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/
2020/01/30/vertrouwen-op-controle-eindrapport-van-de-
commissie-toekomst-accountancysector 
[7] 
E. Mantelaers, “An Evaluation of Technologies to Improve 
Auditing,” Open University, 2021. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-082-7
eKNOW 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[8] 
L. E. DeAngelo, “Auditor Size and Audit Quality,” J. 
Account. Econ., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 183–199, 1981, doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-4101(81)90002-1. 
[9] 
Government Accountability Office, “Public Accounting 
Firms: Required Study on the Potential Effects of 
Mandatory Audit Firm Rotation,” Government Printing 
Office, Washington D.C., 2003. 
[10] 
J. R. Francis, “What do we know about audit quality?,” 
British Accounting Review, vol. 36, no. 4. pp. 345–368, 
2004. doi: 10.1016/j.bar.2004.09.003. 
[11] 
D. Barr-Pulliam, H. L. Brown-Liburd, and K. A. 
Sanderson, “The Effects of the internal control opinion and 
use of audit data analytics on perceptions of audit quality, 
assurance, and auditor negligence.,” A J. Pract. Theory, 
vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 25–48, 2022, [Online]. Available: 
https://doi.org/10.2308/AJPT-19-064 
[12] 
G. Salijeni, A. Samsonova-Tadderu, and S. Turley, “Big 
Data and changes in audit technology: contemplating a 
research agenda,” Account. Bus. Res., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 
95–119, 2019. 
[13] 
M. Cao, R. Chychyla, and T. Stewart, “Big Data analytics 
in financial statement audits,” Account. Horizons, vol. 2, 
no. 29, pp. 423–429, 2015. 
[14] 
J. van Buuren and W. Wijma, “On quality assurance of 
data-driven control methodology,” Maandbl. Voor 
Account. en Bedrijfsecon., vol. 96, no. 1/2, pp. 15–25, 
2021. 
[15] 
AFM, “Legislative letter.” 2021. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/
2021/04/21/kamerbrief-wetgevingswensen-dnb-en-afm 
[16] 
FRC, “The use of technology in the audit of financial 
statements,” 2020. 
[17] 
A. Eilifsen, F. Kinserdal, W. F. J. Messier, and T. E. 
McKee, “An Exploratory Study into the Use of Audit Data 
Analytics on Audit Engagements,” Am. Account. Assoc., 
pp. 1–23, 2020. 
[18] 
R. Likert, “A Technique for the Measurement of 
Attitudes,” rchives Psychol., no. 140, pp. 1–55, 1932. 
[19] 
L. H. Kidder, C. M. Judd, and E. R. Smith, Research 
methods in social relations, 5th ed. CBS College 
Publishing, 1986. 
[20] 
M. 
Zoet, 
“VTA-model,” 
2018. 
https://martijnzoet.com/2018/10/22/het-value-through-
analytics-vta-model/ (accessed Feb. 01, 2023). 
[21] 
J. Leek and R. D. Peng, “What is the question?,” Science 
Magazine, pp. 1314–1315, 2015. 
[22] 
W. M. P. Van Der Aalst, “Process Mining,” in Discovery, 
Conformance and Enhancement of Business Processess, 
2011, pp. 215–217. 
[23] 
E. Mantelaers and M. Zoet, “Data-analysis (III),” 2021. 
https://www.accountant.nl/vaktechniek/2021/1/data-
analyse-nader-geanalyseerd-iii/ (accessed Mar. 27, 2023). 
[24] 
A. J. M. M. Weijters, W. M. P. van der Aalst, and A. K. A. 
de Medeiros;, “Process Mining with the HeuristicsMiner 
Algorithm,” Beta Work. Pap., no. May, 2006. 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-082-7
eKNOW 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

