WordNet Exploration and Visualization in Neo4J -
A Tag Cloud Based Approach
Enrico Giacinto Caldarola∗†, Antonio Picariello∗, Antonio M. Rinaldi∗‡
∗Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technologies
University of Naples Federico II, Napoli, Italy
†Institute of Industrial Technologies and Automation
National Research Council, Bari, Italy
‡IKNOS-LAB Intelligent and Knowledge Systems
University of Naples Federico II, LUPT
Email: enricogiacinto.caldarola@unina.it, antonio.picariello@unina.it, antoniomaria.rinaldi@unina.it
Abstract—In the Big Data era, the visualization of large data sets
is becoming an increasingly relevant task due to the great impact
that data have from a human perspective. Since visualization is
the closer phase to the users within the data life cycles phases,
there is no doubt that an effective, efﬁcient and impressive
representation of the analyzed data may result as important as
the analytic process itself. Starting from previous experiences in
importing, querying and visualizing WordNet database within
Neo4J and Cytoscape, this work aims at improving the WordNet
Graph visualization by exploiting the features and concepts
behind tag clouds. The objective of this study is twofold: ﬁrst,
we argue that the proposed visualization style is able to put
order in the messy and dense structure of nodes and edges of
WordNet, showing as much as possible information from the
lexical database and in a clearer way; secondly, we think that
the tag cloud approach applied to the synonyms rings reinforces
the human cognition in recognizing the different usages of words
in a language like English. The ultimate goal of this work is, on
the one hand, to facilitate the comprehension of WordNet itself
and, on the other hand, to investigate techniques and approaches
to get more insights from the visual representation and analytics
of large graph databases.
Keywords–WordNet; Big Data; Data and Information Visual-
ization; Neo4J; Graph Database; NoSQL.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A subtle difference exists between data and information.
The ﬁrst is raw, it simply exists and has no signiﬁcance beyond
its existence (in and of itself) [1]. Data are just numbers,
bits of information, which ‘...have no way of speaking for
themselves. We speak for them. We imbue them with meaning.’
[2]. On the contrary, information is data that has been given
meaning by way of relational connection, by providing context
for them. Even more subtle is the distinction between Data
Visualization and Information Visualization. If the main goal
of the ﬁrst one is to communicate information clearly and
efﬁciently to users, involving the creation and study of the
visual representation of data – i.e., “information that has been
abstracted in some schematic form, including attributes or
variables for the units of information” [3] – the main task of the
second one is the study of (interactive) visual representations
of abstract data to reinforce human cognition. The abstract
data may include both numerical and non-numerical data,
such as text and geographic information. Beyond Information
Visualization, an other outgrowth ﬁeld is Visual Analytics that
can be deﬁned as ‘the science of analytical reasoning facilitated
by interactive visual interfaces.’ [4]. Today, in many spheres
of human activity, massive sets of data are collected and
stored. As the volumes of data available to various stakeholders
such as business people or scientists increase, their effective
use becomes more challenging. Keeping up to date with the
ﬂood of data, using standard tools for data management and
analysis, is fraught with difﬁculty. The ﬁeld of visual analytics
seeks to provide people with better and more effective ways
to understand and analyse these large datasets, while also
enabling them to act upon their ﬁndings immediately, in real-
time [5]. Thus, the challenges that the Big Data imperative
[6][7] imposes to data management severely impact on data
visualization. The “bigness” of large data sets and their com-
plexity in term of heterogeneity contribute to complicate the
representation of data, making the drawing algorithms quite
complex. Just to make an example, let us consider the popular
social network Facebook, in which the nodes represent people
and the links represent interpersonal connections; we note
that nodes may be accompanied by information such as age,
gender, and identity, and links may also have different types,
such as colleague relationships, classmate relationships, and
family relationships. The effective representation of all the
information at the same time is really challenging. The most
common solution is to use visual cues, such as color, shape,
or transparency to encode different attributes. In this regard,
tag clouds are a popular method for representing variables
of interest (such as popularity, frequency of occurrence of a
term, and so on) in the visual appearance of the keywords
themselves using text properties such as font size, weight, or
color [8]. Since the study conducted in this paper consists
in the visual representation of WordNet as a large graph in
Neo4j [9] and Cytoscape [10], a particular attention is paid
to Graph Visualization, referring to other well-known works
in the literature for a complete review of the techniques and
theories in Information Visualization [11][12].
Graphs are traditional and powerful tools for visually
representing sets of data and the relations among them by
drawing a dot or circle for every vertex, and an arc between
two vertices if they are connected by an edge. If the graph is
directed, the direction is indicated by drawing an arrow. The
pioneering work of W. T. Tutte [13] was very inﬂuential in the
subject of graph drawing, in particular he introduced the use of
linear algebraic methods to obtain graph drawings. Basically,
there are generally accepted aesthetic rules to draw a graph
[14], which include: distribute nodes and edges evenly, avoid
edge crossing, display isomorphic substructures in the same
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

manner, minimize the bends along the edges. However, since
it is quite impossible to meet all rules at the same time, some of
them conﬂict with each other or they are very computationally
expensive, practical graphical layouts are usually the results of
compromise among the aesthetics. There exists different graph
visualization layouts in literature, such as: the Tree Layout,
the Space Division Layout, the Matrix Layout and the Spring
Layout[15], to mention a few. The latter will be used in this
work and it is worth to spending few words on it. Spring
layout, also known as Force-Directed layout, is a popular
strategy for general graph visualization. The strategy consists
in modeling the graph as physical systems of rings or springs.
The attractive idea about spring layout is that the physical
analogy can be very naturally extended to include additional
aesthetic information by adjusting the forces between nodes.
As one of the ﬁrst few practical algorithms for drawing general
graphs, spring layout is proposed by Eades in 1984 [16].
Since then, his method is revisited and improved in different
ways [17]. Mathematically, Spring layout is based on a cost
(energy) function, which maps different layouts of the same
graph to different non-negative numbers. Through approaching
the minimum energy, the layout results reaches better and
better aesthetically pleasing results. The main differences be-
tween different spring approaches are in the choice of energy
functions and the methods for their minimization. Speciﬁcally
concerning the visualization of WordNet, there are not many
works in the literature. In [18], the authors make an attempt
to visualize the WordNet structure from the vantage point of a
particular word in the database, this in order to overcome the
down-side of the large coverage of WordNet, i.e., the difﬁculty
to get a good overview of particular parts of the lexical
database. An attempt to apply design paradigms to generate
visualizations which maximize the usability and utility of
WordNet is made in [19], whereas, in [20] a radial, space-
ﬁlling layout of hyponymy (IS-A relation) is presented with
interactive techniques of zoom, ﬁlter, and details-on-demand
for the task of document visualization, exploiting the WordNet
lexical database. The visualization approach used in this work
uses the Spring layout to draw the graph-based representation
of WordNet in Cytoscape and a tag cloud-based strategy to
represent the synonim rings from WordNet. Moreover, as a
general rule the principled representation methodology we
agree on is the Visual Information Seeking Mantra presented
by Scheiderman in [21]. It can be summarized as follows:
“overview ﬁrst, zoom and ﬁlter, then details-on-demand”.
The reminder of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II describes the WordNet meta-model, while Section III, after a
clariﬁcation of ground concepts related to WordNet landscape,
describes how WordNet has been imported in Neo4J and its
visualization in Cytoscape. Section IV goes to the hearth of this
work rationale by illustrating the way a tags cloud approach
is used to effectively draw the graph of WordNet synonyms
rings in Cytoscape. Finally, Section V draws the conclusion
summarizing the major ﬁndings and outlining future investi-
gations.
II.
WORDNET CASE STUDY
The case study presented in this paper consists in the reiﬁ-
cation of the WordNet database inside the Neo4J GraphDB.
WordNet [22][23] is a large lexical database of English.
Nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs are grouped into sets
of cognitive synonyms (synsets), each expressing a distinct
concept. Synsets are interlinked by means of conceptual-
semantic and lexical relations. In this context, we have deﬁned
and implemented a meta-model for the WordNet reiﬁcation
using a conceptualization as much as possible close to the way
in which the concepts are organized and expressed in human
language [24]. We consider concepts and words as nodes in
Neo4J, whereas semantic, linguistic and semantic-linguistic
relations become Noeo4J links between nodes. For example,
the hyponymy property can relate two concept nodes (nouns to
nouns or verbs to verbs); on the other hand a semantic property
links concept nodes to concepts and a syntactic one relates
word nodes to word nodes. Concept and word nodes are con-
sidered with DatatypeProperties, which relate individuals with
a predeﬁned data type. Each word is related to the represented
concept by the ObjectProperty hasConcept while a concept
is related to words that represent it using the ObjectProperty
hasWord. These are the only properties able to relate words
with concepts and vice versa; all the other properties relate
words to words and concepts to concepts. Concepts, words
and properties are arranged in a class hierarchy, resulting from
the syntactic category for concepts and words and from the
semantic or lexical type for the properties. The subclasses
have been derived from the related categories. There are
some union classes useful to deﬁne properties domain and
codomain. We deﬁne some attributes for Concept and Word
respectively: Concept hasName that represents the concept
name; Description that gives a short description of concept.
On the other hand Word has Name as attribute that is the
word name. All elements have an ID within the WordNet
offset number or a user deﬁned ID. The semantic and lexical
properties are arranged in a hierarchy. in Table I some of the
considered properties and their domain and range of deﬁnition
are shown.
TABLE I. PROPERTIES
Property
Domain
Range
hasWord
Concept
Word
hasConcept
Word
Concept
hypernym
NounsAnd
NounsAnd
VerbsConcept
VerbsConcept
holonym
NounConcept
NounConcept
entailment
VerbWord
VerbWord
similar
AdjectiveConcept
AdjectiveConcept
The use of domain and codomain reduces the property
range application. For example, the hyponymy property is
deﬁned on the sets of nouns and verbs; if it is applied on
the set of nouns, it has the set of nouns as range, otherwise,
if it is applied to the set of verbs, it has the set of verbs as
range. in Table II there are some of deﬁned constraints and
we specify on which classes they have been applied w.r.t. the
considered properties; the table shows the matching range too.
Sometimes the existence of a property between two or
more individuals entails the existence of other properties. For
example, being the concept dog a hyponym of animal, we can
assert that animal is a hypernymy of dog. We represent this
characteristics in OWL, by means of property features shown
in Table III.
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

TABLE II. MODEL CONSTRAINTS
Costraint
Class
Property
Constraint range
AllValuesFrom
NounConcept
hyponym
NounConcept
AllValuesFrom
AdjectiveConcept
attribute
NounConcept
AllValuesFrom
NounWord
synonym
NounWord
AllValuesFrom
AdverbWord
synonym
AdverbWord
AllValuesFrom
VerbWord
also see
VerbWord
TABLE III. PROPERTY FEATURES
Property
Features
hasWord
inverse of hasConcept
hasConcept
inverse of hasWord
hyponym
inverse of hypernym; transitivity
hypernym
inverse of hyponym; transitivity
cause
transitivity
verbGroup
symmetry and transitivity
III.
IMPORTING WORDNET IN NEO4J AND VISUALIZING
IT IN CYTOSCAPE
The WordNet lexical database has been imported in Neo4J
[25] and afterward visualized in Cytoscape according to a
procedure similar to that described in a previous work by the
authors [26]. In a nutshell, the procedure consists in accessing
the WordNet ﬁles through the JWI (Java Wordnet Interface)
APIs [27][28], collecting all the information about synsets,
words and word senses in four different csv ﬁles, and ﬁnally,
loading all the csv lines in Neo4J through the Neo4J LOAD
CSV macro. Compared to the previous one, this work focuses
on the visualization of WordNet and the most expensive part
of the work has consisted in deﬁning a Cytoscape custom
style to represent the synonyms rings as tag clouds in an
effective and clear way. This surely represents the novelty of
this approach. We preferred to load WordNet objects from JWI
APIs and serialize them in custom csv ﬁles, which were then
imported throughout Cypher macros, instead of using already
existing WordNet RDF serialization [29], because, this way,
we could add some useful information in the csv lines like
the word frequency, the polysemy, and so forth, for the sake
of the successive representation in Cytoscape. And that is also
why we prefer to create a custom tool to import the WordNet
database in Neo4J instead of using already existing tools.
Before diving into the procedure details, it is worth to clarify
the distinction and provide some useful deﬁnitions coming
from JWI APIS about synsets, synsets (or synonyms) rings,
index words and word senses. Figure 1 try to put light on this.
As discussed in the previous section, a synset is a concept,
i.e., an entity of the real world (both physical or abstract)
meaning something whose meaning can be argued by reading
the gloss deﬁnition provided by WordNet. Its meaning can be
also understood by analysing the semantic relations linking
it to other synsets or by the synset (or synonyms) ring. This
one is a set of words (hereafter mentioned as index words)
generally used in a speciﬁc language (such as English) to refer
to that concept. The term synset itself is used to refer to set
of synonyms meaning a speciﬁc concept. On the contrary, an
index word is just a term, i.e., a sign without meaning; so
that, only when we link it to a speciﬁc concept we obtain a
word sense, i.e., a word provided with a meaning. An index
word has got different meanings according to the context in
which it is used and because of a general characteristic of
languages: the polysemy. For example, the term home has nine
different meanings if it is used as noun, and so, it belongs to
nine different synsets. In fact, the WordNet answer when we
search for home is the following:
1 .
(430) home ,
place −− ( where you
l i v e
a t
a
p a r t i c u l a r
time ;
” d e l i v e r
the
package
to my home ” ;
” he doesn ’ t
have a home to
go
to ” ;
” your
place
or
mine ?”)
2 .
(350)
dwelling ,
home ,
domicile ,
abode ,
h a b i t a t i o n ,
dwelling
house −− ( housing
t h a t
someone
i s
l i v i n g
in ;
” he
b u i l t
a modest
dwelling
near
the
pond ” ;
”
they
r a i s e
money to
provide
homes
f o r
the
homeless ”)
3 .
(116) home −− ( the
country
or
s t a t e
or
c i t y
where you
l i v e ;
” Canadian
t a r i f f s
enabled
United
S t a t e s
lumber
companies
to
r a i s e
p r i c e s
a t home ” ;
” h i s
home
i s New J e r s e y ”)
4 .
(43) home −− ( an
environment
o f f e r i n g
a f f e c t i o n
and
s e c u r i t y ;
”home
i s
where
the
h e a r t
i s ” ;
” he grew up
in
a good
C h r i s t i a n
home ” ;
” there ’ s no
place
l i k e
home ”)
5 .
(38) home ,
n u rsi n g home ,
r e s t
home −− ( an
i n s t i t u t i o n
where
people
are
cared
f o r ;
” a home f o r
the
e l d e r l y ”)
6 .
(36)
base ,
home −− ( the
place
where you
are
s t a t i o n e d
and from which
missions
s t a r t
and end )
7 .
( 7 )
family ,
household ,
house ,
home ,
menage −− ( a
s o c i a l
u n i t
l i v i n g
t o g e t h e r ;
” he moved h i s
family
to
V i r g i n i a ” ;
” I t
was a good
C h r i s t i a n
household ” ;
” I
waited
u n t i l
the
whole
house was
a s l e e p ” ;
” the
t e a c h e r
asked how many
people made up
h i s home ”)
8 .
( 7 ) home p l a t e ,
home base ,
home ,
p l a t e −− ( ( b a s e b a l l )
base
c o n s i s t i n g
of a
rubber
s l a b
where
the
b a t t e r
s t a n d s ;
i t
must be
touched by a
base
runner
in
order
to
score ;
” he
r u l e d
t h a t
the
runner
f a i l e d
to
touch home ”)
9 .
( 3 ) home −− ( place
where
something
began and
f l o u r i s h e d ;
” the
United
S t a t e s
i s
the home of
b a s k e t b a l l ”)
Figure 1. WordNet synsets, index words and word senses.
In addition to synsets glosses, WordNet gives us some
useful statistic information about the usage of the term home
in each synset. The position of the term in each synonyms
ring tell us how usual is the use of the term to signify that
concept. The position of the term in each synset is a measure
of the usage frequency of the term for each concept: higher
the position, higher the frequency. Moreover, by counting the
number of synsets which a term belongs to, it is possible to
obtain its polysemy (e.g., the number of possible meanings
of home). JWI is able to tell us all this information about
synset and word senses. In particular, for each synset we have
collected the following ﬁelds in the csv ﬁles:
1)
Id: the univoque indentiﬁer for the synset;
2)
SID: the Synset ID as reported in the WordNet
database;
3)
POS: the synset’s part of speech (POS);
4)
Gloss: the synset’s gloss which express its meaning;
5)
Level: the hieararchical level of synset in the whole
WordNet hierarchy.
For word senses we have collected the following ﬁelds:
1)
Id: the univoque indentiﬁer for the word sense;
2)
POS: the word’s part of speech (POS);
3)
polysemy: the word polysemy;
4)
frequency: the word frequency of the word sense as
previously explicated.
A third csv ﬁle stores the semantic links existing between
synset by reporting the IDs of the source and target synset
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

and the type of semantic link existing between them, such as
hypernym, hyponym, meronym, etc.
In addition to the previous ﬁles, a ﬁnal ﬁle lists the links
between each word sense and each synset. This ﬁle is very
simple, it just contains a line for each pair (Word Sense,
Synset) in WordNet. Other minor and not signiﬁcant ﬁelds
have been added for the sake of the visualization in Cytoscape,
such as label (a human readable label for the nodes) and
dimension (used to suggest a plausible diameter for the Synset
node representation according to its depth in the WordNet hier-
archy). The code to convert WordNet synsets into csv tables is
available at https://github.com/eureko/WordNetToCSVFiles/.
In order to import all the information contained in the csv
ﬁles and translate them into a graph data structure inside Neo4J
[9], the meta-model described in Section II has been used.
Each synset and word sense have been converted into a node
of the graph with label respectively: Synset and WordSense.
Each semantic relation has become an edge between two synset
nodes with the type property expressing the speciﬁc semantic
relation holding between the concepts. Finally, the word sense
nodes have been connected to their related concepts nodes
through a speciﬁc relation. This allows to effectively represent
synonyms ring through the Neo4J web visualizer. For example,
Figure 2 shows the results of the following Cypher query:
match (a: WordSense {POS: ’NOUN’})-[r]->(c: Synset)
where (c)<-[]-(: WordSense {label: ’home’})
return a,r,c
The ﬁgure reports nine synset rings for the term home. The
ﬁlled circles represents the synset and contain the synset gloss
deﬁnition, while the white circles around contain the word
terms used to signify such synset.
Figure 2. WordNet synset rings containing the ’home’ word
IV.
THE TAG CLOUD-BASED REPRESENTATION OF
WORNET SYNONYMS RINGS
The work described in this paper has encountered challenges
that are quite close to the typical Big Data scenario. In fact,
this version of WordNet graph (v. 2.1) includes 117597 synsets
rings containing 207106 word senses conveyed by 155327
index words, 283837 semantic relations (cfr., Section II)
linking synsets each other and 207016 semantic-lexical links
between index words and synsets. With these big numbers,
Figure 3. Large scale representation of 5000 relations and 3404 synsets in
WordNet
the manipulation, the querying and the visualization of the
graph become quite challenging. The visualization of the entire
structure of WordNet in terms of all synsets, words, semantic
and lexical relations in a way that is elegant and intelligible at
the same time, is a chimera, due to the performance issues
of the visualization tools, in particular when sophisticated
drawing algorithms are used, and to the strongly connected
nature of information to be represented, which often results in
a messy and dense structure of nodes and edges. Just to have an
idea, Figure 3 shows a representation of an excerpt of WordNet
(5000 semantic relations over 3404 synsets) obtained from
Cytoscape v.3 graph visualization tool. The Neo4j running
instance has been accessed via a speciﬁc plug-in, namely
cyNeo4j, that converts the query results into Cytoscape table
format and then create a view according to a custom style
and a selected layout like the Force-directed graph drawing
algorithm before mentioned. The resulting ﬁgure is more con-
siderable for global analysis, or for its look and feel, than for
actual information that you can retrieve from it. Nevertheless,
thanks to the force-directed algorithm, it is possible to observe
agglomerates of nodes and edges which correspond to speciﬁc
semantic categories and can help users in zooming the desired
semantic area.
Thus, it is necessary to simplify the representation of the
network by following some functional and esthetic criteria.
In this regard, we have selected some simple representation
criteria, listed as follows:
1)
the efﬁciency of the visualization, i.e., avoid the in-
formation redundancy and the proliferation of useless
signs and graphics as much as possible;
2)
the effectiveness of the visualization, i.e., grant that
the graphical representation of the network covers
the whole informative content of the WordNet graph-
based implementation;
3)
the clearness of visualization, i.e., use light colors,
such as gray, light blue, dark green, etc. with a proper
level of brightness and with an appreciable contrast.
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Figure 4. WordNet synset rings containing the ’home’ word with the customized style in Cytoscape
(a) Something about book.
(b) Something about time.
Figure 5. WordNet excerpts in Cytoscape with custom style.
Furthermore, the adoption of tag cloud based representation
for the synonyms rings brought us to use the statistical linguis-
tics measures of polisemy and frequency of a term as visual
cues in drawing the word signs attached to a certain synset.
Technically, higher the frequency of the word sense, larger
is the font used to represent such word in the corresponding
synonym ring, as well as, higher is the polysemy of a word
in the whole WordNet, lighter is the shade of gray used to
tag such word. All the word senses are connected to the
corresponding synset through a blank gray line and each
synset is represented through a short text containing its gloss.
Semantic relations between synsets are represented through a
transparent green arc showing a label that report the type of
the semantic link (e.g., hypernym, hyponim, meronym, etc.).
Figure 4 shows the application of the style rules described
above to the same cypher query from home mentioned in the
previous section. For each sense of the term home, the ﬁgure
shows the tag cloud based representation. Some considerations
arise from the ﬁgure above. The lighter gray used for the
term ’home’ is due to its high polysemy (9). This color is
intentionally weak to demonstrate how vague is the term alone
without a context making it meaningful. Things get worse, for
example, with terms like head or line with a polysemy equal to
33 and 29 respectively. On the contrary, the term home plate
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

is large in size and as a strong gray shade because of its low
polysemy (1) and high frequency when used in the context of
baseball.
Figures 5(a) and 5(b) show more representations of Word-
Net excerpts to fully demonstrating the customized style
resulting from this work. The ﬁgure are obtained through the
following Cypher query where ’keyword’ is substituted with
book and time:
MATCH (a: WordSense {label: ’<keyword>’})-[r]->
(b: Synset)-[t: semantic_property]->
(f: Synset)<-[s]-(c: WordSense)
return a,r,b,t,f,s,c
The ﬁgures above also highlights the semantic relations
existing between synsets showing a more complete represen-
tation of WordNet with the new visualization style described
in this work.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Starting from previous experiences in importing, querying
and visualizing WordNet in Neo4J and Cytoscape, a tag cloud
based approach has been proposed in this paper as a new solu-
tion to make more effective and intelligible the representation
of the WordNet graph. The results shown in this work are
twofold: ﬁrst, the new visualization style is able to put order in
the messy and dense structure of nodes and edges of WordNet,
showing as much as possible information from the lexical
database and in a clearer way; secondly, the tag cloud approach
is able to reinforce the human cognition in recognizing the
different usages of words in English, w.r.t. the concepts they
are related to. In fact, the proposed solution not only shows the
synsets and the semantic relations holding between them, but
also gives clues about the frequency of use of the synonyms
for each synset. Future investigation may surely go in the
direction of improving the criteria to simplify the WordNet
representation with an evaluation for the visualization methods
also validated by usability tests in which the user can express a
consensus whether the representation is friendly or not, and the
information inside WordNet is easily accessible or not. Finally,
according to other studies, which aim at improving the tag
cloud with semantics [30] and adding multimedia information
to the knowledge representation model [31], we will investigate
on the use of semantic properties and more efﬁcient metrics to
measure the relatedness among WordNet terms, also applying
other visual features to combine these information and improve
the quality of WordNet visualization.
REFERENCES
[1]
G. Bellinger, D. Castro, and A. Mills, “Data, information, knowledge,
and wisdom,” 2004.
[2]
N. Silver, The signal and the noise: Why so many predictions fail-but
some don’t.
Penguin, 2012.
[3]
M. Friendly, “Milestones in the history of data visualization: A case
study in statistical historiography,” in Classiﬁcationthe Ubiquitous Chal-
lenge.
Springer, 2005, pp. 34–52.
[4]
J. J. Thomas and K. A. Cook, Illuminating the Path: The R&D
Agenda for Visual Analytics National Visualization and Analytics
Center. National Visualization and Analytics Center - U.S. Department
of Homeland Security, 2005.
[5]
D. A. Keim, J. Kohlhammer, G. Ellis, and F. Mansmann, Mastering
the information age-solving problems with visual analytics.
Florian
Mansmann, 2010.
[6]
E. G. Caldarola, A. Picariello, and D. Castelluccia, “Modern enterprises
in the bubble: Why big data matters,” ACM SIGSOFT Software
Engineering Notes, vol. 40, no. 1, 2015, pp. 1–4.
[7]
E. G. Caldarola, M. Sacco, and W. Terkaj, “Big data: The current wave
front of the tsunami,” ACS Applied Computer Science, vol. 10, no. 4,
2014, pp. 7–18.
[8]
S. Bateman, C. Gutwin, and M. Nacenta, “Seeing things in the clouds:
the effect of visual features on tag cloud selections,” in Proceedings of
the nineteenth ACM conference on Hypertext and hypermedia.
ACM,
2008, pp. 193–202.
[9]
Neo Technology Inc. Neo4j: The world’s leading graph database.
[Online]. Available: http://neo4j.com (2016)
[10]
M. E. Smoot, K. Ono, J. Ruscheinski, P.-L. Wang, and T. Ideker,
“Cytoscape 2.8: new features for data integration and network visu-
alization,” Bioinformatics, vol. 27, no. 3, 2011, pp. 431–432.
[11]
R. Spence, Information visualization.
Springer, 2001, vol. 1.
[12]
R. Mazza, Introduction to information visualization.
Springer Science
& Business Media, 2009.
[13]
W. T. Tutte, “How to draw a graph,” Proc. London Math. Soc, vol. 13,
no. 3, 1963, pp. 743–768.
[14]
H. Purchase, “Which aesthetic has the greatest effect on human under-
standing?” in Graph Drawing.
Springer, 1997, pp. 248–261.
[15]
T. M. Fruchterman and E. M. Reingold, “Graph drawing by force-
directed placement,” Softw., Pract. Exper., vol. 21, no. 11, 1991, pp.
1129–1164.
[16]
P. Eades, “A heuristics for graph drawing,” Congressus numerantium,
vol. 42, 1984, pp. 146–160.
[17]
E. R. Gansner and S. C. North, “Improved force-directed layouts,” in
Graph Drawing.
Springer, 1998, pp. 364–373.
[18]
J. Kamps and M. Marx, “Visualizing wordnet structure,” Proc. of the
1st International Conference on Global WordNet, 2002, pp. 182–186.
[19]
C. Collins, “Wordnet explorer: applying visualization principles to
lexical semantics,” Computational Linguistics Group, Department of
Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada,
2006.
[20]
——, “Docuburst: Radial space-ﬁlling visualization of document con-
tent,” Knowledge Media Design Institute, University of Toronto, Tech-
nical Report KMDI-TR-2007-1, 2007.
[21]
B. B. Bederson and B. Shneiderman, The craft of information visual-
ization: readings and reﬂections.
Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.
[22]
C. Fellbaum, “Wordnet,” The Encyclopedia of Applied Linguistics,
1998.
[23]
G. A. Miller, “Wordnet: a lexical database for english,” Communications
of the ACM, vol. 38, no. 11, 1995, pp. 39–41.
[24]
A. M. Rinaldi, “A content-based approach for document representation
and retrieval,” in Proceedings of the eighth ACM symposium on
Document engineering.
ACM, 2008, pp. 106–109.
[25]
J. Webber, “A programmatic introduction to neo4j,” in Proceedings of
the 3rd annual conference on Systems, Programming, and Applications:
Software for Humanity.
ACM, 2012, pp. 217–218.
[26]
E. Caldarola, A. Picariello, and A. M. Rinaldi, “Big graph-based data
visualization experiences - the wordnet case study,” in Proceedings
of the 7th International Joint Conference on Knowledge Discovery,
Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management, 2015, pp. 104–
115.
[27]
M. A. Finlayson, MIT Java Wordnet Interface (JWI) User’s Guide,
Version 2.2.x, 2013.
[28]
——, “Java libraries for accessing the princeton wordnet: Comparison
and evaluation,” in Proceedings of the 7th Global Wordnet Conference,
Tartu, Estonia, 2014.
[29]
Wordnet RDF. [Online]. Available: http://wordnet-rdf.princeton.edu/
(2016)
[30]
A. M. Rinaldi, “Improving tag clouds with ontologies and semantics,”
in IEEE International Workshop on Text-Based Information Retrieval
(TIR’12) in conjunction with DEXA12.
IEEE, 2012.
[31]
——, “A multimedia ontology model based on linguistic properties and
audio-visual features,” Information Sciences, vol. 277, 2014, pp. 234–
246.
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

