Analysis of Blockchain in Solar Energy Systems 
 
Nidhal Taferguennit, Seyf El Islam Boussiouda, Samia Aitouche, Rees Mangena, Fadhila Djouggane, Nesrine Sersa 
Laboratory of Automation and Manufacturing, Industrial Engineering Department, University Batna 2, Batna, Algeria 
e-mail: nidhaltaferguennit@gmail.com, bousioudaseyfelislam@gmail.com, s.aitouche@univ-batna2.dz, mangenarees@gmail.com, 
djougganefadhila@gmail.com, nesrinesersa05@gmail.com 
 
Abstract— This paper is a descriptive review of utilisation of 
blockchain technology in solar energy (photovoltaic) systems. 
The 42 studied papers where extracted from the database 
SCOPUS using the research expression “Blockchain AND (PV 
OR photovoltaic OR “solar energy”)”, in titles of the papers, at 
April 22nd, 2022. A quantitative analysis is elaborated about 
authors, affiliation, journals, countries and authors keywords. 
A qualitative analysis of papers is more elaborated manually 
extracting the main problems encountered in solar energy 
systems and how blockchain technology brings some solutions. 
This study may help researchers and practitioners to direct 
their studies and solutions in a way to take advantage to the 
emergent blockchain technology. 
Keywords- blockchain; renewable energy; solar energy system; 
photovoltaic; PV, solar energy trading. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
By this review, we are trying to shed light on the usage of 
the blockchain technology in the solar energy systems 
represented by the photovoltaic systems. The information is 
extracted from 42 papers from SCOPUS database. We used 
abstracts and full papers to study quantitative and qualitative 
aspects.  The general principle is self-consuming [1] the solar 
energy and trading the surplus, this system is called 
prosumer. Other papers combine PV (Photovoltaic) operators 
and consumers of energy (Fig.1). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Schema of an example of generation for trading solar energy [8] 
The paper treats two aspects. Section 2 offers a 
quantitative study of the papers (scientific production by 
year, author, affiliation, country, document type, subject area 
and citations). Section 3 is a citation analysis of papers, 
Section 4 is an authors’ keywords analysis, then a qualitative 
analysis containing problematics and their solutions is 
presented in Section 5. The final section is a conclusion 
about the limits and trends on applying blockchain on solar 
systems.  
II. 
 
SCIENTIFIC PRODUCTION ANALYSIS 
In this section we’ll show which year was the most 
productive in term of literature, which authors contributed 
more, which country is more interested in this topic and 
many other quantitative properties. 
A. Scientific production by year 
In the collection of papers, 2019 was the most productive 
year (13 papers). The decrease of production in 2020 is 
explained by the crucial pandemic situation.  The increase in 
2021 comes from the transformation of scientists and 
industrials to teleworkers. An increasing is expected in 2022, 
in a post-pandemic situation due to the awareness of 
industrials and governments about the importance of 
digitalization and comfort of the citizen’s sides of life. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Production by year 
B. Number by source  
The shape of the graph is monotone; all sources are ex 
aequo in number of papers (1 paper per source), only one 
source (the journal of energy reports) has 2 papers related to 
the blockchain used in PV system. This fairness is explained 
by the consciousness of all the scientific communities about 
the advantages of blockchain in the management of PV 
energy. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 3.   Papers by year by source 
C. Number by author   
The analysis of authors (Fig. 4) shows that the first 
author in blockchain in PV energy (5 papers) is “Kim 
Taesic” affiliated to “Texas A and M University-
Kingsville, Kingsville, United States” since 2017. His 
research interests are principally: engineering, energy, 
computer science and Mathematics. 
 
Figure 4.  Papers per author 
He has an h-index of 16 and 1033 citations on 71 
published papers (Fig.  5), on energy and other domains. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Scientific metrics of the author Kim Taesic in SCOPUS  
The second most productive in this collection of papers is 
“Hadi, Abdullah Al” by 4 papers, also affiliated to “Texas A 
and M University-Kingsville, Kingsville, United States”. 
Even his novelty (since 2019) in research, He has 8 papers 
cited 52 times and an h-index of 4 (Fig.  6). His interests of 
research are: Engineering, Energy, Computer Science and 
Chemical Engineering. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Scientific metrics of the author Hadi, Abdullah Al in SCOPUS  
In the Third position (with 3 papers in the studied 
collection), comes the authors shown in Table 1. 
 
TABLE I.  
AUTHORS IN THIRD POSITION  
Author 
Affiliation 
Papers h-index Citations 
Bere, 
Gomanth 
 Texas A and M University-
Kingsville, Kingsville, United 
States 
11 
3 
24 
Pipattana
sompon, 
Manisa 
Chulalongkorn 
University, Bangkok, Thailand 
105 
35 
5362 
Rahman, 
Saifur 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State 
University, Blacksburg, United 
States 
365 
48 
11155 
 
We notice that the fifth and the last author in table 1, has 
the highest number of citations. Even He is the low 
productive in Top 5 authors, He has the highest impact on 
scientific  community. 
D. Number by affiliation 
The universities and laboratories look for the primary 
ranking positions, to be more visible and attractive to the 
international scientific competencies of lecturers and 
researchers.  
 
 
Figure 7.  Papers by affiliaion  
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

The first productive university with 5 papers is “Texas A 
and M University-Kingsville”. The university has a hole 
institute 
“institute 
for 
sustainable 
energy 
and 
the 
environment” interested in the issues of renewable energy 
and blockchain. It is followed by “Virginia Polytechnic 
Institute and State University” with 3 papers, and, the third 
position with 2 papers by 8 universities (Fig.  7), and then 
come the remaining affiliations by 1 paper. 
E. Number by country 
United States is the most productive country (Fig. 8) with 
12 papers among 42, followed by China (10 papers) and 
India (5 papers). 
 
 
Figure 8.  Papers by country 
F. Number by document type 
The conference papers are majority (64,3%), ie 27, 
followed by journal articles (31%), ie 13 papers. It is 
remaining 1 paper as a review and 1 paper as a note (Fig.  9). 
 
 
Figure 9.  Papers by document type 
G. Papers by subject area 
The papers are divided fairly on the subject areas of 
energy (27 papers) and Engineering (26 papers), in third 
position comes the computer science (20 papers). The 
remaining papers (Fig.  10) are shared on mathematics (8 
papers), social science (5 papers), environmental science (4  
papers)…etc.  
 
Figure 10.  Papers by subject area 
III. 
CITATION ANALYSIS 
The citation analysis is the examination of the frequency 
and impacts of a scientific document over time. In this 
section we’ll show different citation criteria to determine 
which paper contributed the most and in which year it 
appeared the most in others scientific documents.  
A. Citations by year 
Figure 11 shows that the citations are increasing over the 
years, showing a growing interest in strong and valid papers 
about energy, energy trading and blockchain technology.  
This was especially true in 2021 where all eyes were headed 
towards cryptocurrency and blockchain.  
 
 
Figure 11.  Citations per year 
B. Citations by papers 
The most cited paper (86 citations) is entitled “Energy 
trading 
for 
fun 
and 
profit 
buy 
your 
neighbor's 
rooftop solar power or sell your own-it'll all be on 
a blockchain”. The reasons are: (1) the notoriety of the 
paper (2012), (2) the usage of blockchain in managing the 
photovoltaic system was relatively new, (3) the paper 
responded to the questions: Would you pay slightly more 
for your electricity if you knew it was sourced from 
photovoltaic panels on your neighbor's roof? Or, if you are 
that neighbor, would you use your solar power to charge a 
battery and dump that energy back onto the grid at peak 
hours, when the price was highest? [24]. The second most 
Energy 
27 
Engineering 
26 
Computer Science 
20 
Mathematics 
8 
Social Sciences 
5 
Environmental Science 
4 
Decision Sciences 
3 
 
Conference paper 
27 
Article 
13 
Note 
1 
Review 
1 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

cited paper [11] is entitled “Applying the blockchain 
technology to promote the development of distributed 
photovoltaic in China” (31 citations). Even though it is 
relatively recent (2018), but it was cited thanks to: (1) it is a 
review paper, it is more read than other papers, (2) it gives 
strengthens and weakenesses of the distributed PV system, 
by region and several environments like economic, social 
and technical one, (3) It explains what are the threats and 
how blockchain comes to improve the existing PV system. 
The third position of citations are two papers concerning the 
trading of PV energy in a hybrid system (self consumption 
and injection in a public grid) [23] [25], with 28 and 27 
citations respectively (Fig. 12). 
 
 
Figure 12.  Most cited papers  
IV. 
KEYWORDS ANALYSIS 
The keyword analysis is a quantitative and qualitative 
analysis of a paper.  The most used words in the titles are 
“blockchain” and “solar energy”; of course, they are 
contained in the request introduced in the research zone in 
SCOPUS database.  “block-chain” is appeared 10 times. 
The remaining keywords are “Smart contracts” to explaiin 
the automated rules concerning the generation and trading 
of the solar energy (Solar power generation, Electric power 
transmission networks, power markets,…etc.). 
 The 
keywords also concern “Internet Of Things”, consensus and 
the most used cryptocurrency in them “ethereum”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13.  Authors’ keyword frequencies 
We can notice that blockchain is appeared like 
“blockchain” (38) and like “block-chain” (10) and like 
“blockchain technology” (4), in total 52 times. We find also 
that “peer to peer network” (4) is appeared because it 
supports the blockchain solution.  
V. 
QUALITAIVE ASPECTS OF THE ANAYSIS 
The remaining of the paper concerns a qualitative study, 
concerning aspects extracted after a full exploration of the 
papers.   
A. Energy generation or energy trading 
Twenty papers treat the problem of trading solar energy 
jointed to self-consumption.  Two among them are surveys 
and eighteen papers treat the self-consumption of solar 
energy and other aspects. 
Figure 14 shows the sequence diagram for the energy 
trading. 
 
 
Figure 14.  Sequence diagram for the energy trading [2]. 
keyword 
Nbr 
Blockchain 
38 
Solar energy 
15 
Smart contracts 
14 
Solar power generation  
12 
Electric power 
Transmission networks 
11 
block-chain 
10 
Commerce  
10 
Power markets 
8 
Energy trading 
7 
intenet of things 
7 
Smart power grds 
7 
Electric inverters 
5 
IOT 
5 
Photovoltaic cells 
5 
Blockchain technology 
4 
Energy market 
4 
Ethereum 
4 
Intenet of things (IOT) 
4 
Peer to Peer networks 
4 
Photovoltaic systems 
4 
Consensus  
3 
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

In the energy trading platform, some participants have 
superfluous energy that they wish to sell to the platform as 
sellers, whereas others do not have sufficient energy to meet 
their demands and must buy the shortfall from the platform 
as buyers. Specifically, first, the buyer defines and sends 
Etherium and code so that smart contracts can be created. 
B. Solar Energy System 4.0 (IOT and Blockchain) 
Establishing a system using IOT (Internet Of Things) 
devices that produce the excess of energy. It consists of two 
parts: energy generation which maximizes the produced 
energy and energy trading using blockchain trading model 
ethereum based application. Enegy generation gains 35% 
[2]. There are 6 papers related to the IOT. [20] Provides 
continuous monitoring, data exchanging, and optimal 
operation in smart grid environments and in the IOT-
enabled PV systems. 
C. Other treated Ploblematics And Solutions 
This section illustrates the encountered problems in solar 
energy systems, proposed solutions and the findings after 
applying these solutions. To avoid similarities, only 13 
papers are explicited. 
In [1], none of the existing studies provides a complete 
blockchain-based 
multi-dimensional 
P2P 
transaction 
mechanism. Fully open P2P trading mode and decentralized 
electricity price mechanism are adopted in day-ahead market, 
and P2P pool trading mode and electricity price mechanism 
based on supply/demand ratio are adopted in real-time 
market. The transaction mechanism designed can effectively 
realize P2P power transactions between producers and 
consumers, and promotes the enthusiasm of producers and 
consumers to participate in the P2P day-ahead market in 
order to maximize the benefits for prosumer target to achieve 
transactions 
between 
users 
according 
to 
different 
transactions. The objective of [2] is balancing power 
supplement from the solar energy’s intermittent and 
unpredictable generation. A solar energy generation and 
trading platform EggBlock is proposed. It achieves reliable 
and transparent energy trading on the blockchain and 
converges to the optimal direction with short iterations. The 
average energy generation gain of 35% is obtained.  How to 
optimise energy exchanges on a local energy community in a 
distributed way? [5]. It is possible to solve the optimization 
problem also with a distributed method using game theory, 
where each element of the grid tries to reach its own 
objectives, using real consumption and production data. It is 
possible to determine not only anomalies but also to create 
clean dashboards that can help on reporting how each 
classroom/auditorium is being used and who are the biggest 
offenders when it comes to power consumption and warning 
with alarms. The integration of distributed energy resources 
(DER) into centralized power markets on the large scale is 
challenging. The contribution of [6] is meeting future 
electricity demand. It provides valuable guidelines for the 
integration of DER into future sustainable energy markets. 
How to manage surplus PV output? The aim of [8] is to find 
consumers of surplus PV output and to match electricity 
supply and demand with market mechanism. Authors 
propose a new contract processing algorithm to calculate the 
nodal price in the area with surplus power transaction. 
Abandoning solar energy in rural regions and increasing 
voltage fluctuation have become more prominent [3]. To 
increase 
the 
local 
electricity 
consumption 
of 
the 
photovoltaic generation, the incentive mechanism using an 
optimal internal electricity price is proposed with 
blockchain technology. The simulation result shows that the 
comprehensive revenue is increased, and the local electricity 
consumption rate of distributed photovoltaic generation is 
significantly raised. 
Alao and Cuffe [12] investigate the impact of the delay 
resulting from a blockchain, and proposes a promising 
security measure, for a hierarchical control system of 
inverters 
connected 
to 
the 
grid. 
The 
blockchain 
communication network is designed at the secondary control 
layer for resilience against cyberattacks. A temperature-
based weather derivative swap DeFi instrument is proposed 
in [13], it can serve as an effective volumetric risk hedging 
instrument at a negligible cost. It is only elucidative of the 
type of flexible hedging arrangements that can be enabled 
by blockchain, as any other weather index could be 
employed if required. In the same context [15], simulation 
method for smart inverters and blockchain network using a 
proposed framework as cooperative control approach, 
responded to different operating conditions.  
In [16], authors adopt an appropriate mechanism that 
allows benefiting from the excess energy produced by these 
base stations and simplifies the process of energy trading 
while also making it cost-optimal.  
A direct communication-based LCOE (BLCOE) is 
proposed in [17]; it is a model as the least-cost solution that 
measures the impact of energy reliability on generation cost. 
It considers daily variations in the cost of solar modules and 
battery storage across sub-Sahara Africa (SSA). Simulation 
results show the reduction of energy costs by approximately 
95% for battery and 75% for the solar modules. 
To avoid repetitions, the remaining papers are not 
presented because of the similarities with the presented 
ones. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
We saw in this paper how fast intrests in energy are 
growing. Many papers are published about this topic and 
many other technologies other than blockchain are 
integrated, which will lead to a mass distribution of the idea 
of exchanging excess solar energy with neighbours via a 
blockchain network using a proper coin.  The main barrier  
here is how to transform a simple consumer to a prosumer. 
A P2P network is the most adequate architecture to support 
this platform. A cryptocurrency will make the trading more 
fluent. The prices of energy generally depend to the rules of 
offer/demand of the local or metropolitan market of solar 
energy. Knowing that the blockchain technology itself is a 
big consumer of  energy, it is important to be autonome and 
a consumer of renewable energy like solar energy. This 
work may be usefull to developper of blockchain platforms 
and the producer of energy solar to take benefits both from 
their combination and to find exactly how to do so since the 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

word blockchain can be difficult to combine with energy 
production In a future work, we will show other studies 
aspects from this collection of papers like: used protocols 
and consensuses, smart contracts, statistical methods, used 
data in blockchains…etc. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  X  Xiong, G. Qing,., and H Li,. “Blockchain-based P2P power 
trading mechanism for PV prosumer. Energy Reports”, vol 8, 
pp. 300-310, 2022. 
[2]  S Kwak, J. Lee, J. Kim, and H. Oh, “EggBlock: Design and 
Implementation of Solar Energy Generation and Trading 
Platform 
in 
Edge-Based 
IoT 
Systems 
with 
Blockchain”, Sensors, vol 22(6), 2410, 2022. 
[3]  T. Zhang, J. Yang, J. Li, Z. Yang, and K. Jin, “Research on 
local consumption method of distributed photovoltaic 
generation 
for 
benefits 
of 
multi 
parties 
based 
on 
blockchain”, Energy Reports, vol 7, pp. 185-190, 2021. 
[4]  F. M. Enescu, N. Bizon, A. Onu, M. S. Răboacă, P. 
Thounthong, A. G. Mazare, and G. Șerban, “Implementing 
blockchain technology in irrigation systems that integrate 
photovoltaic energy generation systems”,  Sustainability, vol 
12(4), 1540, 2020. 
[5] A. Labrunie, and B. Robyns, “Increasing Photovoltaic Self-
consumption: An Approach with Game Theory and 
Blockchain. In Sustainable Energy for Smart Cities: First EAI 
International Conference, SESC 2019, Braga, Portugal, 
December 4–6, 2019, Proceedings (Vol. 315, p. 180). 
Springer Nature., 2020. 
[6] A. Wörner, A. Meeuw, L. Ableitner, F. Wortmann, S. 
Schopfer, and V. Tiefenbeck, “Trading solar energy within 
the neighborhood: field implementation of a blockchain-based 
electricity market”, Energy Informatics, vol 2(1), pp. 1-12., 
2019. 
[7] R. Jain, and A. Dogra, “Solar energy distribution using 
blockchain and IoT integration”, In Proceedings of the 2019 
International Electronics Communication Conference, pp. 
118-123.‏ 2019, July. 
[8] T. Nagatsuka, K. Kushino, M. Sano, and N. Yamaguchi,  
“Congestion Dissolution of Distribution Systems in Local 
Power Exchange Systems for Surplus Photovoltaic Output 
Using Blockchain”, In 2019 3rd International Conference on 
Smart Grid and Smart Cities (ICSGSC), pp. 193-199. IEEE,‏ 
2019, June. 
[9] Y. Huang, P. Yang, Z. Liu, Y. Lyu, and Y. Chen, “A design 
of photovoltaic plants financing platform based on blockchain 
technology”, In 2018 International Conference on Power 
System Technology (POWERCON), pp. 4251-4256, IEEE, ‏ 
2018, November. 
[10] C. Gao, Y. Ji, J. Wang, and X. Sai, “Application of 
blockchain 
technology 
in 
peer-to-peer 
transaction 
of 
photovoltaic power generation”, In 2018 2nd IEEE Advanced 
Information Management, Communicates, Electronic and 
Automation Control Conference (IMCEC), pp. 2289-2293, 
IEEE.‏, 2018, May. 
[11] J. Hou, H. Wang, and P. Liu, “Applying the blockchain 
technology to promote the development of distributed 
photovoltaic in China”, International Journal of Energy 
Research, vol 42(6), pp. 2050-2069, 2018. 
[12] N. Gajanur, M. Greidanus, G. S. Seo, S. K. Mazumder, and 
M. A. Abbaszada, “Impact of blockchain delay on grid-tied 
solar inverter performance”, In 2021 IEEE 12th International 
Symposium on Power Electronics for Distributed Generation 
Systems (PEDG), pp. 1-7, IEEE., 2021, June. 
[13] O. Alao, and P. Cuffe, “Towards a Blockchain Weather 
Derivative Financial Instrument for Hedging Volumetric 
Risks of Solar Power Producers”, In 2021 IEEE Madrid 
PowerTech, pp. 1-6, IEEE., 2021, June. 
[14] K. S. Thu, and W. Ongsakul, “Simulation of Blockchain 
based Power Trading with Solar Power Prediction in 
Prosumer 
Consortium 
Model”, 
In 2020 
International 
Conference and Utility Exhibition on Energy, Environment 
and Climate Change (ICUE), pp. 1-10,  IEEE., 2020, October. 
[15] A. A. Hadi, G. Bere, B. Ahn, and T. Kim, “Smart Contract-
Defined Secondary Control and Co-Simulation for Smart 
Solar Inverters using Blockchain Technology”, In 2020 IEEE 
CyberPELS (CyberPELS), pp. 1-6, IEEE, 2020, October. 
[16] V. Hassija, V. Gupta, V. Chamola, and S. Kanhare, “A 
blockchain-based framework for energy trading between solar 
powered base stations and grid”, In Proceedings of the 
Twenty-First 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Theory, 
Algorithmic Foundations, and Protocol Design for Mobile 
Networks and Mobile Computing, pp. 315-320, 2020, 
October. 
[17] O. Samuel, N. Javaid, R. Khalid, M. Imran, and M. Guizani, 
“Case Study of Direct Communication based Solar Power 
Systems in Sub-Saharan Africa for Levelled Energy Cost 
Using Blockchain.”, In ICC 2020-2020 IEEE International 
Conference on Communications (ICC), pp. 1-6, IEEE, 2020, 
June. 
[18] A. A. Hadi, G. Bere, T. Kim, J. J.  Ochoa, J. Zeng, and G. S. 
Seo, “Secure and cost-effective micro phasor measurement 
unit (pmu)-like metering for behind-the-meter (btm) solar 
systems using blockchain-assisted smart inverters”, In 2020 
IEEE Applied Power Electronics Conference and Exposition 
(APEC), pp. 2369-2375, IEEE, 2020, March. 
[19] A. A. Hadi, U. Sinha, T. Faika, T. Kim, J. Zeng, and M. H. 
Ryu, “Internet of Things (IoT)-enabled solar micro inverter 
using blockchain technology”, In 2019 IEEE industry 
applications society annual meeting, pp. 1-5. IEEE, 2019, 
September. 
[20] U. Sinha, A. A. Hadi, T. Faika, and T. Kim, “Blockchain-
based communication and data security framework for IoT-
enabled micro solar inverters”, In 2019 IEEE CyberPELS 
(CyberPELS), pp. 1-5, IEEE, 2019, April. 
[21] M. Pipattanasomporn, M. Kuzlu, and S. Rahman, “A 
blockchain-based platform for exchange of solar energy: 
Laboratory-scale 
implementation”, 
In 2018 international 
conference and utility exhibition on green energy for 
sustainable Development (ICUE), pp. 1-9, IEEE., 2018, 
October. 
[22] J. Lin, M. Pipattanasomporn, and S. Rahman, “Comparative 
analysis of blockchain-based smart contracts for solar 
electricity exchanges”, In 2019 IEEE Power & Energy 
Society Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference 
(ISGT), pp. 1-5, IEEE., 2019, February. 
[23] C. Plaza, J. Gil, de F. Chezelles, and K. A. Strang, 
“Distributed solar self-consumption and blockchain solar 
energy exchanges on the public grid within an energy 
community”, In 2018 IEEE International Conference on 
Environment and Electrical Engineering and 2018 IEEE 
Industrial 
and 
Commercial 
Power 
Systems 
Europe 
(EEEIC/I&CPS Europe), pp. 1-4, IEEE., 2018, June. 
[24] M. E. Peck, and D. Wagman, “Energy trading for fun and 
profit buy your neighbor's rooftop solar power or sell your 
own-it'll all be on a blockchain”, IEEE Spectrum, vol 54(10), 
pp. 56-61‏, 2017. 
[25] B. Qi, Y. Xia, B. Li, D. Li, Y. Zhang, and P. Xi, “Photovoltaic 
trading mechanism design based on blockchain-based 
incentive mechanism”, Autom. Electr. Power Syst, vol 43(9), 
pp. 132-139, 2019. 
[26] SCOPUS database, www.scopus.com for the extraction of 
papers and some metrics, visited at April 22th, 2022.  
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

