Web Services Integration with Regard to the Metrics of Data Believability  
 
Adam L. Kaczmarek  
Faculty of Electronics, Telecommunications and Informatics  
Gdansk University of Technology 
ul. G. Narutowicza 11/12, 80-233 Gdansk, Poland 
e-mail: adam.l.kaczmarek@eti.pg.gda.pl  
 
 
Abstract—The paper is concerned with estimating the 
believability of data acquired from web services. In the paper, 
a new method for believability estimation is introduced. The 
method is designed for integrating web services. The 
believability estimation is based on the following metrics: 
quantity, reputation, approval, independence, traceability, 
maturity, authority and objectivity. In the method, data 
trustworthiness is determined by the credibility of the data 
source. In the believability estimation, information about data 
provenance is used. Moreover, the method is based on the 
consideration that it is possible to increase the data 
believability not only by finding more believable sources of 
data, but also by acquiring the same kind of data from many 
different sources and analyzing this data. It is possible in the 
field of web services because there are many vendors of the 
same kind of services. 
Keywords-data believability; web services; data processing 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
When new data is acquired, the problem with data 
credibility occurs. Human beings practice various ways to 
estimate the trustworthiness of information and sources of 
information. There is a growing need to develop techniques, 
which can enable computer applications to automatically 
estimate the believability of information. These techniques 
should make it possible to identify and exclude unlikely 
information. It is particularly important in the case of 
applications collecting data from external sources through 
the Internet. These kinds of applications embrace software 
based on web services architecture [1]. 
This paper is concerned with data believability in web 
services. Applications using web services in order to achieve 
their goals receive data from services provided by vendors, 
which may not be reliable. It is particularly important for 
applications, in which integration of different kinds of web 
services is performed. If data collected by an application is 
wrong, the application will not produce proper results. Thus, 
it is necessary to verify the believability of data.  
Data believability was defined by Wang and Strong as 
“the extent to which data are accepted or regarded as true, 
real and credible“ [2]. The notion of believability is also 
referred to by the terms credibility, trustworthiness and 
plausibility. It needs to be stressed that data believability 
differs from data security. Security is related to problems of 
authentication, authorization and access to data. Data 
corruption may be caused by an undesirable influence of 
people or malicious programs as a result of poor data 
security. However, even if security is ensured and data is 
safely delivered from the source it is supposed to come from, 
problems with the truthfulness of this data may still exist: the 
source may spread incorrect information. Data believability 
is thus an issue, which goes beyond data security and it 
occurs even if problems with security are resolved. 
The paper consists of five sections. The section following 
the introduction contains an overview of related work 
concerning data quality, believability and provenance. The 
third section presents the method for data believability 
estimation designed by the author of this paper. The fourth 
one contains an evaluation of the method. The last section 
refers to conclusion and future work. 
II. 
DATA BELIEVABILITY 
Estimation of data believability requires regarding of data 
not only by meaning, but also in the context of its 
provenance. Data provenance is an integral feature of data. 
On the basis of who created data, how it was stored, and how 
it was processed, conclusions can be drawn about data 
believability. Recently, there has been a significant amount 
of research on acquiring and storing information about data 
provenance in web services. Tsai et al. presented a profound 
description of requirements and solutions concerning data 
provenance problems [3]. Techniques for solving these 
problems include the use of metadata, databases and new 
types of protocols. Moreover, an in-depth description of data 
provenance problems was presented by Moreau [4]. Storing 
information about data provenance makes possible to use 
this information in order to estimate data believability. 
Information about data provenance indicates a web 
service, which is the source of that data. The quality of this 
web service can be taken into account in estimating data 
believability. Some web services’ parameters are objective 
and they can be determined on the basis of statistics about 
the behavior of web services. Such parameters include web 
service availability, fees and latency in data transmission [5]. 
The quality of a web service can be also evaluated by its 
users in the same way as on eBay or Amazon, where 
customers provide their feedback about products and 
suppliers. It is possible to prepare ratings concerning the 
quality of web services. Such ratings can be based on both 
objective metrics, referring to the performance of a web 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

service and the opinions of the service users. In the field of 
data believability estimation, the most important are ratings 
concerning users’ feedback about trustworthiness and 
believability of data delivered by web services. Various 
methods for rating web service quality and managing trust in 
web services were described by Golbeck [6].  
Another important problem concerning data believability 
estimation is determining the metrics of data quality. Wang 
and Strong wrote an influential paper, in which they 
presented a detailed list of data quality attributes [2]. They 
also specified 20 dimensions characterizing data quality. 
Problems with measuring data quality are also the main 
subject of a book by Khan [7]. Furthermore, a paper [8] 
wrote by the same author as this paper, presents a method for 
evaluating the credibility of information in semantic web and 
knowledge grid. 
III. 
A NEW METHOD FOR RATING DATA BELIEVABILITY 
This section presents a new method for rating data 
believability. It was designed by the author of this paper and 
it is intended to be used in the integration of web services. 
The method consists of determining the level of data 
believability. This level is calculated on the basis of multiple 
metrics.  
Common methods for rating data believability focus on 
determining the believability of individual sources, in order 
to select the most believable information provided by one or 
other of those available sources. The method introduced in 
this paper represents a different approach. It is designed to 
acquire the same kind of data from many different sources. 
On this basis conclusions about data believability are made. 
In the method, a level of data believability is calculated. The 
value of this level can be higher than 1. The level of 
believability 
is 
not 
like 
the 
probability 
of 
data 
trustworthiness. It is a perceived believability estimated by 
the method. In the case of one source of information, the 
value of the level ranges from 0 to 1. When there are more 
sources the level can be higher than 1.  
In order to define metrics, which indicate the level of 
believability, a distinction between a claim and data, needs to 
be made. When some source of information publishes data, it 
cannot be assumed that this data is definitely true. Data 
provided by sources will be, in this paper, called claims, 
similarly as in [9]. Claims are also a kind of data, but there 
are two additional features of a claim:  
 
The source of a claim is specified.  
 
It is not resolved whether a claim is true or false.  
Claims will be, in this paper, denoted by the symbol ζ. 
The data corresponding to claim ζ, but without a specified 
source, will be denoted by dζ. 
It also needs to be considered what the granularity of 
data, being a claim, is. In the method, it is assumed that a 
claim is a portion of data of any size. A claim can be either 
one logical sentence, a sequence of such sentences, or the 
whole portion of data received from a web service. The size 
of the data does not affect the process of determining its 
believability. The only difference is that the level of 
believability concerns different data. The general formula for 
calculating the data believability level is given by (1). 


































0
1
1
m
i
i
M
k
i
k
k
M
w m
b d





where b is the believability level, m0 is the number of 
sources supporting claim ζ, which corresponds to data dζ, 
symbol ζi refers to claim ζ announced by source i, symbol mk 
denoted metrics used in calculating the believability level, wk 
is the weight of a metric mk, letter M stands for the number of 
considered metrics, letters i and k are indexes used in 
additions. Symbol |ζi| in (1) represents the influence of a 
single claim given by the source number i to the level of data 
believability without the use of any metrics. Expression |ζi| is 
similar to the cardinality of a set. Every claim stands for a 
single portion of data, so the value of |ζi| is always equal to 1. 
This kind of notation is used in order to indicate that only 
claims, which correspond to data dζ, have influence on the 
level of this data believability.  
Equation (1) states that the level of believability is equal 
to the number of claims supporting data dζ with regard to the 
metrics. Each source providing claim ζi increases the 
believability level of data dζ. The extent of this increase is 
equal to the weighted average of all metrics concerning the 
claim. Weights used in calculating the weighted average 
correspond to the importance of the metrics.  
The following metrics are taken into account: quantity, 
reputation, approval, independence, traceability, maturity, 
authority and objectivity. The values of all metrics used in 
the method presented in this paper, apart from metric 
quantity, range from 0 to 1.  
In the method presented in this paper, data believability is 
estimated on the base of attributes of the data source. There 
is also a possibility to estimate data believability on the basis 
of the data content. Several attributes of the data itself can be 
taken into account; like data validity, its accuracy and the 
context to which the data applies. In the method presented in 
this paper it is not considered. Data is only evaluated on the 
basis of the believability of its source. Nevertheless, it is 
possible to enhance the method with these attributes. 
A. Quantity 
The quantity of claims acknowledging the data being 
under verification is denoted with m0. Although this value is 
not present in (1) in the same way as the other values of the 
metrics, it in fact refers to one of the metrics considered in 
determining the believability level. The value of m0 defines 
the upper bound of the first summation presented in (1). The 
metric quantity represents the principle that the more sources 
are announcing the data, the greater is the level of 
believability. An assumption was made that the relationship 
between the number of claims and the level of believability, 
is linear when no other metrics are taken into account. All 
sources are then treated equally. The believability based only 
on the metric quantity is presented by (2).  
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management






0
1
0
0
m
d
b
m
i
i
m

 





where bm0 stands for the level of believability when 
quantity is the only metric considered. In this case, the 
believability level is equal to the number of sources 
providing claims corresponding to data dζ. 
B. Reputation 
In this method for determining the believability level, 
sources are not treated as if they were equal. Their influence 
on the level of believability is biased by various factors. First 
one is the reputation of the source. The value of the metric’s 
reputation is denoted by m1. 
The reputation of a web service is defined as “a general 
opinion i.e., it aggregates the ratings of the given service by 
other principals. Typically, a reputation would be built from 
a history of ratings by various parties” [10].  Principals are 
understood here as service providers or requesters. In the 
method for estimating believability presented in this paper 
these kinds of opinions are taken into account in the form of 
a metric reputation. The value of this metric is calculated on 
the basis of a web services’ rating system. There are a large 
variety of such systems. However, they are most often 
concerned with many web services’ parameters, such as 
performance, reliability, latency, fees etc. The reputation 
concerned in this paper is based only on the opinion about 
the believability of data provided by a web service.   
The level of reputation can be acquired from web 
services collecting data about the quality of other web 
services and web services’ ratings. The quality of web 
service, in the context of data believability, needs to be given 
in the form of a numerical rating (e.g., 6 using a scale 0 to 
10). Such a rating is converted to scale from 0 to 1 and it is 
directly used as a value for a metric reputation. In the 
presented method the metric reputation can also be based on 
ratings acquired from many sources and rating systems. In 
this case the value of the metric is equal to the average of 
ratings adjusted to a scale from 0 to 1. 
C. Approval 
Approval is a metric, which is similar to the metric 
reputation in the way that it is also concerned with the 
behavior of a web service in the past. Whereas metric 
reputation is indicated by third parties, metric approval is the 
own opinion of a customer of a web service. The customer 
can, and should, store data about cooperation with web 
services. In the case where a web service provided data, 
which appeared to be wrong, the believability of this web 
service is decreased. On the other hand, the believability of 
proven web services should be increased.  
The metric approval has three parameters: q, p and T. 
Parameter p is the influence of providing by a web service 
appropriate data, parameter q represents the impact of 
publishing wrong data and parameter T is concerned with the 
time, after which the influences caused by wrong and right 
data are no longer valid. It is assumed that the change in the 
value of metric approval is not perpetual and after some time 
the impact of providing wrong, or right, data is eliminated. 
The impact is diminished linearly, starting from the initial 
level of parameters p and q until there is no influence when 
time T has elapsed. The formula for calculating the metric 
approval is presented by (3). 

























p
T
t
p
q
T
t
q
m
m
l
N
l
k
N
k
base
p
q
1
1
1
1
2
2
 
where m2base is the default value of metric approval, Nq is 
the number of valid influences of providing wrong data, Np is 
the number of valid influences of providing right data, q is 
the initial level of influence for wrong data, p is the initial 
level of influence for right data, tk and tl are times since the 
event of providing wrong or right data occurred and T is the 
parameter indicating the time, after which occurrence of 
wrong or right data is no longer taken into account.  
The values of m2base p, q and T included in (3) need to be 
specified. Parameter m2base is the value of the metric when 
there is no experience in cooperation with the web service. 
The attitude to such a web service is neutral. Thus, the value 
of that metric is then equal to 0.5. In setting the value of 
parameter q it needs to be stated how severely the 
believability of a web service should be diminished when a 
web service provided wrong data. The parameter q can have 
various values. For example, it can be assumed that when no 
other metrics are taken into account, two web services, 
which once provided wrong data are as believable as one 
unknown web service. In this case, the value of metric 
approval is reduced by a half when a web service provides 
wrong data. When data acquired from a web service is right, 
the value of metric approval can be increased by half of its 
previous value. Thus, possible values of parameters are 
q=0,5 and p=1,5. For example, a web service, which once 
provided wrong data and once right, would have the level of 
metric approval equal to m2base×p×q=0,5×0,5×1,5=0,375. 
The value of parameter T can be selected arbitrarily and 
it can be set to 365 days. Values of tk and tl can be then 
changed once a day. They would indicate the number of days 
since wrong, or right, data was extracted from a web service. 
D. Independence 
The metric independence arises from the remark that data 
confirmed by two independent sources is more believable 
than data provided by two sources when one of those sources 
obtains data from the other one. A similar rule is applied by 
press agencies, assuming that information is true when it is 
confirmed by two independent sources.  
In the method presented in this paper, the metric 
independence indicates the number of independent sources 
of data. If there is only one source of some information and 
other web service providers supply data on the basis of that 
one source, the value of metric independence is as minimal 
as possible. It is then equal to 0. On the other hand, a 
maximum value of metric, i.e., 1, indicates that there is an 
unlimited number of independent sources. In order to satisfy 
these conditions, the metric’s value is increased because of 
subsequent independent sources in a similar way as a 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

geometric progression. The value of metric independence is 
presented in (4).  

1
3
1
1



au
m


where m3 stands for the metric independence, a is the 
parameter determining the level of the increase caused by the 
existence of subsequent independent sources and u is the 
number of independent sources providing data. The value of 
a can be set to 2. Then, the medium value of the metric 
would mean duplication of data by two independent sources. 
The metric independence also applies to situations more 
complicated than repeating data provided by an independent 
source. Web services are based on acquiring data from 
various sources. When there is a group of web services, there 
is also a group of independent sources, from which data is 
acquired. In the group of web services some part of data may 
be derived from a smaller group of independent sources than 
the other parts.  Different parts of data can be confirmed by a 
different number of independent sources. There is a part 
confirmed by the smallest number of sources: the number of 
a source confirming this part is assigned as the value of 
parameter u from (4). Thus, when there is some data, which 
all web services acquired from the same source, the value of 
parameter u is set to the same level as if there was only one 
independent source. The value of u would be equal to 1. 
E. Traceability 
Metric traceability is another metric used in the method 
presented in this paper. The value of the metric is denoted by 
m4. It depends on whether a web service specifies sources of 
information, which were used to make the service available, 
or there is no such information. If web services base their 
results on data acquired from other parties, they should 
provide information about that. For web services preparing 
all data by themselves, there should also be a notice that no 
external sources were used. Providing data about sources of 
information is possible due to the researches concerning 
storing information about data provenance. 
Providing 
source 
information 
is 
similar 
to 
the 
bibliographies presented at the end of scientific manuscripts. 
When bibliography is not present or it is poor, a paper is 
treated as less credible. When a web service does not provide 
any data about its sources of information, the value of metric 
traceability is the smallest possible, i.e., equal to 0. If full 
information is available, the value of metric traceability is 
equal to 1. It is also possible that information about sources 
is partly present. In this case, metric traceability corresponds 
to the extent of source information availability. 
F. Maturity 
Another metric used in the method presented in this 
paper is maturity. The metric is based on the premise that 
web services, which are operational for some period of time 
are more believable than those, which are new and not tested 
by customers. Similarly, companies with tradition are more 
respected than the new, and unproven, ones.  
The value of the metric maturity depends on the time 
elapsed since the release of a web service. The time, after 
which a web service is treated as fully believable, can be 
determined differently. It can be assumed that the 
believability of web services, which are available for over 
one year, is no longer reduced by the metric maturity. Web 
services, which are absolutely new, have the lowest value of 
metric maturity equal to 0. The values of this metric are 
changed linearly, for those web services whose time of 
service is in between these limits. Thus, the value of metric 
maturity is given by (5).  








1,
min
5
T
t
m


where t is the time, which elapsed since the release of a 
web service and T is the period of time, after which the 
believability of a web service is not reduced by the metric 
maturity. The parameter T can be set to 365 days and the 
value of the parameter t can be changed daily. 
G. Authority 
The value of metric authority is denoted by m6. This 
metric refers to the sources’ competence to provide data. In 
particular, it concerns data that sources claim to have 
obtained themselves. In the case where there is a doubt that 
the source does not have qualifications to provide a certain 
kind of data, the value of metric authority is reduced. For 
example, when a web service provides data concerning the 
number of people on Earth, claiming that this data was 
acquired by itself, there is a reasonable basis to distrust such 
information. 
It is problematic to estimate the value of metric authority. 
Methods of storing provenance data do not reach a complex 
enough level to correlate the possibility of sources of 
information with data they provide. The value of metric 
authority needs to be assessed partly manually. In particular, 
this metric would concern data that only some kinds of 
sources are able to obtain. For example, information about 
population in countries can mainly be derived only from 
government sources. The value of metric would be equal to 0 
for sources, which do not satisfy the requirements and it 
would be equal to 1 otherwise. A list containing specific 
kinds of data with corresponding sources can be prepared. 
When a list is available, applications using the believability 
estimation method presented in this paper can automatically 
use this previously prepared list. 
H. Objectivity 
The value of metric objectivity, denoted with m7, is in 
most cases equal to 1. This value is changed for data that can 
be biased by the source due to its own interests. The value of 
metric objectivity is lowered for information that vendors 
claim about their products and their quality. Companies, on 
the basis of marketing needs, tend to modify information in 
order to improve their image. In such cases the metric 
objectivity is set to 0, as the source is not objective. It is 
possible to determine the value of this metric automatically 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

on the basis of metadata concerning product, their 
manufactures and resellers. In case no such data is available, 
these metrics can be set on the basis of a manually prepared 
list similarly as with metric authority. 
I. 
Weights of metrics 
The influence of metrics on the level of believability is 
modified by the weights of these metrics. Some metrics are 
treated as more important than others. Apart from metric 
quantity there are seven metrics with weights. The sum of 
weights has to be equal to one, because when there is only 
one source of information and all metrics are equal to one, 
then the level of believability needs to be also equal to one.  
The most important metrics are reputation and approval. 
In fact, conclusions about the web service believability can 
be drawn only on the basis of own opinion about a web 
service and opinion of others. Moreover the values of other 
metrics in many cases will be the same for different web 
services. The weight of metrics reputation and approval need 
to be higher than other weights. Weights of metrics 
reputation and approval can be set to 0,25 and weights of 
other metrics can be equal to 0,1. Thus, w1=w2=0.25 and 
w1=w2= w3=w4= w5=0.1. 
J. 
Application of the method  
There are three types of information sources used when 
the method is applied: web services, third parties and own 
knowledge. Third parties provide information about the 
quality of web services, such as their reputations. When an 
application needs a certain kind of information it collects 
claims from different web services concerning this 
information. It is like stating a question and seeking for the 
answer. The application also collects information from third 
parties and takes into account its own knowledge. The level 
of believability of each kind of the answer is rated with the 
use of the method. As the result, the answer with the highest 
level of believability is regarded as truthful. Acquiring data 
from many sources is more expensive then taking into 
account only one source, however the idea of the method is 
to improve the quality of data despite increased cost. 
IV. 
EVALUATION  
The method is based on the assumption that in general 
information provided by web services are truthful. The 
method resolves the problem of excluding information from 
untruthful, low quality web services (on the basis of metrics 
reputation, approval, maturity, authority and objectivity). It 
also manage the problem of providing wrong data by a noble 
web service due to some accidental mistake (on the basis of 
metrics quantity). In such cases, without using the method, 
false information would be regarded as truthful.  
However the method does not guarantee the truthfulness 
of information. In case false information is universally 
regarded as truthful the method will also accept the 
truthfulness of information. Nevertheless the method 
attempts to disregard such information (on the basis of 
metrics independence and traceability). In case of such 
information there are some sources, which published it. If 
information concerning data provenance were commonly 
provided the spread of untruthful information could be 
limited. The results of the method in case of this kind of 
untruthfulness depend on the availability of information 
about data provenance.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
The method presented in this paper makes it possible to 
automatically estimate the data believability level on the 
basis of information about data provenance and web 
services’ ratings. In further work, we are planning to enhance 
the method with metrics referring not only to the 
believability of the source of data but also to the data itself.  
One of the significant problems related to the presented 
method is that web services should provide information 
about sources of data, which were used to make the service 
available. This would protect other applications from 
propagation of wrong data in case some source is publishing 
not truthful information. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported in part by the Polish Ministry 
of Science and Higher Education under research project 
N N519 172337. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Booth, H. Haas, F. McCabe, E. Newcomer, M. Champion, 
C. Ferris, and D. Orchard (eds.), Web Services Architecture, 
W3C Working Group Note 11 February 2004, W3C, 2004. 
[2] R. Y. Wang and D. M. Strong, “Beyond accuracy: What data 
quality means to data consumers” Journal of Management 
Information Systems Vol. 12, No. 4, , Spring 1996, M. E. 
Sharpe, Inc., pp. 5-34. 
[3] T. Tsai, X. Wei, Y. Chen, R. Paul, J.-Y. Chung, and D. 
Zhang, “Data provenance in SOA: security, reliability and 
integrity,” Service Oriented Computing and Applications, vol. 
1, no. 4, Springer-Verlag, Dec. 2007, pp. 223-247. 
[4] W. Moreau “The Foundations for Provenance on the Web” 
Foundations and Trends in Web Science, Now, 2009, 
submitted for publication. 
[5] M. Ouzzani and A. Bouguettaya, “Efficient Access to Web 
Services” IEEE Internet Computing, Mar./Apr. 2004, IEEE 
Computer Society, pp. 34-44. 
[6] J. Golbeck, “Trust on the World Wide Web: A Survey,” 
Foundations and Trends in Web Science, Vol. 1, No. 2, Now, 
2006, pp. 131-197. 
[7] K. M. Khan (ed.), Managing Web Service Quality: Measuring 
Outcomes and Effectiveness, IGI Global, 2009. 
[8] A. L. Kaczmarek, “Automatic Evaluation of Information 
Credibility in Semantic Web and Knowledge Grid, “Proc. of 
the 4th International Conf. on Web Information Systems and 
Technologies (WEBIST 2008), vol. 2, Funchal, Madeira-
Portugal, INSTICC, May 2008, pp. 275-278. 
[9] C.Bizer and R.Oldakowski, “Using Context- and Content-
Based Trust Policies on the Semantic Web,” WWW 2004, 
New York: ACM, May 2004, pp. 228-229. 
[10] E. M. Maximilien and M. P. Singh, “Conceptual Model of 
Web Service Reputation” ACM SIGMOD Record: Special 
section on semantic web and data management, Vol. 31 , No. 
4,  Dec. 2002, pp. 36-41. 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

