The Influence of IT Features on M-commerce User Behaviors 
 
Philippe Marchildon and Pierre Hadaya 
Department of Management and Technology 
ESG-UQÀM  
Montréal, Canada 
e-mail: marchildon.philippe@courrier.uqam.ca 
hadaya.pierre@uqam.ca 
 
 
Abstract— M-commerce research suffers from critical 
shortcomings due to an extensive reliance on TAM. As such, 
little is known about mobile IT artifacts, their features and 
their influence on m-commerce user behaviors. Based on 
evidence which suggests that the use of IT artifact features 
vary over time and that it is the specific features used at any 
point in time that determine work outcomes, it is important 
that we better understand the influence of mobile IT artifact 
features over time. To do so, we propose to use a different 
theoretical lens than TAM, to study sensory mobile IT 
artifact features and to distinguish between stages of the m-
commerce adoption process. Accordingly, the literatures on 
IT artifacts, Kaplan and Kaplan’s (1982) framework and 
mobile IT artifact features are examined to propose a 
research model, its related hypotheses, and methodological 
aspects regarding its empirical validation. Finally, the 
proposed model’s anticipated contributions are discussed. 
Keywords-component; M-commerce; IT features; Kaplan 
and Kaplan’s preference framework; longitudinal 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
M-commerce, defined as “the use of mobile 
information technologies, including the wireless Internet, 
for 
communication 
and 
coordination 
within 
an 
organization, 
between 
an 
organization 
and 
other 
organizations and/or customers, and for management of 
the firm” [1, p. 3], is an emerging trend in today’s business 
reality [2]. As with many other IS research topics, the 
Technology 
Acceptance 
Model 
(TAM) 
has 
been 
extensively used by m-commerce researchers to support 
their theoretical reasoning. This overwork of TAM has 
brought unexpected side effects that now undermine 
further knowledge development [3]. More precisely, to this 
day, most m-commerce researches have failed to study the 
different stages, as well as the tangible antecedents of 
individual behaviors throughout the m-commerce adoption 
process. Thus, despite the increasing importance of this 
new way of doing business, little is presently known about 
mobile IT artifacts (e.g. Internet-enabled PDAs and smart 
phones), their features and their influence on m-commerce 
adoption individual behaviors throughout the m-commerce 
adoption process  [4]. As such, despite evidence which 
suggests that the use of IT artifact features may not only 
increase but also decrease over time [5], and that it is the 
specific features in use at any point in time that influence 
and determine work outcomes achieved trough IT artifacts 
[6, 7], no sound explanation has yet been provided for 
variations in the use of mobile IT artifact features. Since 
the success of m-commerce hinges on mobile IT artifact 
features, the users’ willingness to adopt them, and to 
engage in activities requiring their usage, a better 
understanding of their design characteristics and their 
influence on user behaviors over time is needed [8].  
The objective of this study is thus to investigate the 
influence of mobile IT artifact features on m-commerce 
users over time. More specifically, the present research 
aims at answering the following research question: Why 
does the usage of mobile IT artifact features vary over 
time? In particular, this study will investigate whether 
differences exist between features that influence the 
behavior of m-commerce adopters and those that influence 
the behavior of post adopters. To do so, a longitudinal 
stance is proposed which departs from previous m-
commerce research by leaving aside the TAM framework 
and by focusing on a new theoretical lens: Kaplan and 
Kaplan’s preference framework.  
The paper proceeds by first examining the literature on 
IT artifact conceptualizations, Kaplan and Kaplan’s [9] 
preference framework and mobile IT artifact features. 
Based on these theoretical underpinnings, a research 
model and its related hypotheses are then developed. This 
is followed by a discussion that addresses several key 
research methodological aspects. The paper concludes by 
presenting the anticipated theoretical and practical 
contributions of the research. 
II. 
THEORETICAL DEVELOPMENT 
A. Conceptualization of the IT Artifact 
Early attempts to differentiate artifacts from one 
another led to the identification of two different sets of 
distinguishing characteristics: primary and secondary 
attributes [10]. Primary attributes are those which are 
“essential to the object or substance and so are inherent in 
it whether they are perceived or not” whereas, “secondary 
attributes are those which are perceived by the senses, and 
so may be differently estimated by different percipients” 
[11, p. 702]. Subsequently, Griffith and Northcrafth [7] 
proposed a similar categorization by differentiating 
between objective and psychological features. As noted by 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Downs and Mohr [11] and later on by Griffith and 
Northcraft [7], because secondary characteristics are better 
understood as descriptions of users, not of artifacts, and 
because primary features are highly idiosyncratic, studying 
artifacts by using either sets of attributes alone leads to 
critical shortcomings. As such, these authors have 
suggested that scholars should develop interactive models 
that 
combine 
both 
primary/objective 
and 
secondary/psychological sets of attributes to assess the 
defining features of IT artifacts and their impacts. 
Recognizing the potential of interactive models and 
anchoring their pioneering work on structuration theory, 
DeSanctis and Poole [6] were the first to insightfully probe 
and characterize both artifacts and the work environment 
within which they are applied. These authors introduced 
Adaptive Structuration Theory (AST) and a framework 
anchored on its tenets which assesses the role of IT 
artifacts from two vantage points: (1) the types of 
structures that are provided by advanced technologies, and 
(2) the structures that actually emerge in human action as 
people interact with these artifacts. DeSanctis and Poole’s 
[6] work not only allows the assessment of each sets of 
attributes independently but also permits the assessment of 
interaction effects between these sets of attributes (i.e. the 
mutual influence of artifacts and social processes) [12]. 
Drawing from Giddens [13], DeSanctis and Poole [6] first 
posited the concepts of social structures embedded in 
technology and social structures in action, and then 
considered the interplay between them [12]. The concept 
of social structures embedded in technology is crucial to 
the characterization of IT artifacts, and includes two 
dimensions: “structural features” (i.e. specific types of 
rules and resources, or capabilities, offered by the system) 
and “spirit” (the general intent with regard to values and 
goals underlying a given set of structural features) [6].  
More recently, Markus and Silver [12] refined 
DeSanctis and Poole’s [6] work in an attempt to address 
the criticisms made to the concepts of “structural features” 
and “spirit” as well as to account for the following two 
observations: (1)“variations in the social structures in 
technology were seen as encouraging different forms of 
social action”, and (2) “the ways in which people actually 
used the social structures of technology (i.e. appropriated 
them) were seen as influencing the outcomes actually 
observed” [12, p. 612]. More precisely, Markus and Silver 
noted that people might appropriate a system’s features 
faithfully (i.e. in a manner consistent with the spirit and 
structural feature design) or unfaithfully, leading to 
different consequences [5]. As such, Markus and Silver 
[12] suggested to unpack DeSanctis and Poole’s [6] 
concepts and to redefine them as three new concepts: 
technical objects, functional affordances, and symbolic 
expressions. The technical objects concept pertains to the 
artifacts themselves whereas the functional affordances 
and symbolic expressions concepts refer to relations 
between technical objects and users. Specifically, the term 
“technical 
objects” 
refers 
to 
artifacts 
and 
their 
components, while the term “functional affordances” 
refers to the possibilities for goal-oriented action afforded 
to specified user groups by the technical objects and the 
term “symbolic expressions” refers to the communicative 
possibilities of a technical object for a specified user 
group. A key element in this reconceptualization is the 
establishment of a link between artifacts and their potential 
users through functional affordances and symbolic 
expressions. As a result, the interactions between artifacts 
and users can now be more clearly defined.  
However, despite DeSanctis and Poole’s pioneering 
work, little empirical research has been undertaken to test 
and validate their theoretical assertions and evaluate the 
influence of IT artifacts on users. As a result, few schemes 
are available to provide a sound theoretical grounding for 
further research. An exception is Rosen and Purinton’s 
[14], empirical study which is based on Kaplan and 
Kaplan’s [9] preference framework, and which theorizes 
and operationalizes the relationships between Web site 
features and users. Indeed, it is interesting to note that 
although Kaplan and Kaplan [9] did not explicitly build 
their framework on the tenets proposed by either Markus 
and Silver [12] or DeSanctis and Poole [6], the similarities 
between the different approaches are striking and provide 
a sound setting for future research 
B. Kaplan and Kaplan’s Preference Framework 
The “Preference Framework” developed by Kaplan 
and Kaplan [9] is based on knowledge in psychology, 
architecture and design. Its basic premises are that artifacts 
provide users with information (i.e. signs, icons, etc.) and 
that this information inscribed in artifacts influences theirs 
behaviors. The influential role of inscribed information in 
artifacts lies in the assumed informational needs of 
individuals that are triggered when they interact with 
artifacts. In other words, Kaplan and Kaplan’s [9] 
“Preference Framework” describes how individuals use 
the information inscribed in an artifact’s design to satisfy 
their informational needs when interacting with it. As 
such, the “Preference Framework” is congruent with the 
tenets proposed by Markus and Silver [12] and DeSanctis 
and Poole [6] since it recognizes not only the 
characteristics of the artifacts (i.e. the information 
inscribed in them) and the characteristics of the users (i.e. 
their informational needs) but also their mutual interaction 
by assessing the fulfillment or not of the individual’s 
informational needs. Put differently, by identifying and 
defining the fulfillment of needs, Kaplan and Kaplan [9] 
acknowledge the critical role of affordance and symbolism 
in linking artifacts to individuals. 
Kaplan and Kaplan’s [9] “Preference Framework” is 
rooted in a sequence of studies that asked participants to 
look and assess photographs of physical landscapes and 
landmarks against a list of items. Through these 
experiments, the researchers were able to categorize 
individuals’ informational needs when interacting with 
artifacts along a cognitive and a time dimension, resulting 
in a 2x2 matrix of informational needs (see figure 1). The 
cognitive dimension reflects the different types of needs 
that compose individual informational needs while the 
time dimension captures the order in which informational 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Figure 1.  Kaplan and Kaplan’s Preference Framework. 
needs arise in an individual. More precisely, Kaplan and 
Kaplan suggest that an artifact can create understanding 
and exploring individual information needs which arise 
sequentially according to their assessment of immediate 
(i.e., two dimensional needs) versus longer-term (i.e., three 
dimensional needs). As such, four different informational 
needs exist (i.e., coherence, complexity, legibility and 
mystery), each representing a certain type of need 
(understanding vs. exploring) at a certain time (two vs. 
three dimensional). 
Kaplan and Kaplan’s preference framework posits that 
an individual’s IT artifact usage behavior stems from the 
sequential fulfillment or not of his informational needs. As 
such, the behavior of an individual is first defined by the 
fulfillment of his immediate needs (i.e. two-dimensional 
needs) which arise from the instantaneous interaction with 
an artifact. As seen in table 1, these are coherence and 
complexity informational needs, which, when fulfilled, 
allow an individual to proceed to a rapid assessment of an 
artifact based upon a relatively superficial examination. 
Coherence informational needs refer to the degree to 
which the artifact features hang together. Thus, coherence 
needs can be fulfilled through the redundancy of the 
artifact’s elements and/or textures, where, for example, the 
coordinated elements of an IT artifact give it a 
“minimalist” feel since few colors and elements are 
integrated in its design (e.g., Motorola MOTOPHONE3). 
On the other hand, complexity informational needs refer to 
the richness of the artifact features. For example, in a 
smart phone, the number of buttons or colors on the 
keyboard, the variety of icons available on the screen, the 
array of hands-free functionalities, amongst other things, 
would all contribute to the complexity of the artifact. It is 
important to note that both coherence and complexity 
informational needs must be fulfilled first for an individual 
to follow his course of action when interacting with an 
artifact.  
Subsequently, an individual’s usage behavior will be 
dictated by the fulfillment of longer-term needs (i.e., three-
dimensional needs). These are legibility and mystery 
informational needs. Legibility informational needs refer 
to whether or not an artifact possesses a memorable 
component, a landmark facilitating the finding of one’s 
way. This is similar to having a menu bar that is always 
positioned at the bottom of the screen no matter which 
application is used in a smartphone or PDA. Mystery 
informational needs refer to the extent to which an artifact 
conveys the feeling that many more features can be found. 
A smartphone could, for example, prompt users to 
discover new functionalities through certain feed-forward 
or feedback information. 
Kaplan et al. [15] equated the transition an individual 
makes between immediate and longer-term needs to 
moving from a two-dimensional space to a three-
dimensional space or as the difference between standing at 
the gate of a garden and actually walking through the 
garden. Finally, Kaplan and Kaplan’s [9] “Preference 
Framework” implies that individuals will have a 
preference for artifacts that fulfill all four informational 
needs, an assumption that has been validated by several 
researchers who showed that people favor artifacts that 
answer coherence and legibility informational needs [16], 
while at the same time accommodating a desire for some 
complexity [17] and mystery [24]. 
C. Mobile IT Artifact Features 
The notion of features, although well defined at the 
conceptual level (i.e. the building blocks or component 
parts of a technology [19]) remains rather elusive at the 
operational level. Recognizing this conundrum, Griffith 
[19] suggested that it is only through theoretical anchoring 
that researchers will be able to rightfully operationalize the 
concept of artifact features. Therefore, because individuals 
interact with artifacts through their senses [20] and 
because this study focuses on the interactions between 
mobile IT artifacts and their users, the present study 
defines features at the sensory level. That is, any building 
block or component directly triggering one of the five 
human senses (i.e., sight, hearing, smell, touch, and taste) 
is considered to be a feature.  
Mobile IT artifact features have traditionally been 
investigated along three dimensions: (1) visual, (2) tactile 
and (3) audio [21], since smell and taste features have yet 
to be effectively developed and incorporated into m-
commerce artifacts. In general, visual features have been 
the main focus of m-commerce and IS researchers. 
Findings from these research initiatives underline the 
significant impact of visual features on user behaviors and 
perceptions. For example, Karvonen [22] found a 
relationship between “aesthetic beauty” and e-trust. Rosen 
and Purinton [14] found that minimalist visual design drew 
users further into their task and increased perceived 
artifact efficiency. Furthermore, although early studies 
which thought that individuals perceived an artifact’s 
visual informational cues in a holistic manner [23], recent 
findings from Lavie and Tractinsky [24] demonstrate that 
online users perceive visual informational cues along two 
sub-dimensions, namely classical aesthetics and expressive 
aesthetics. The first sub-dimension is associated with clean 
and orderly design, while the second represents the 
originality and creativity of the artifact’s design, as 
Time Dimension!
!
!
Cognitive Dimension!
!
!
Two Dimensional Needs!
!
!
Three Dimensional Needs!
!
!
Understanding Needs!
!
!
Exploring Needs!
!
!
Coherence!
 Needs!
!
!
Legibility!
 Needs!
!
!
Complexity!
 Needs!
!
!
Mystery!
 Needs!
!
!
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

User’s level of !
m-commerce use!
Coherence  needs!
Two dimensional needs!
Complexity needs!
Legibility needs!
Three dimensional needs!
Mystery needs!
Fulﬁllment of M-commerce user’s informational needs!
Mobile IT artefact features!
Visual features !
Tactile features !
Audio features !
 
Figure 2.  Research Model. 
perceived by the users [24]. Altogether, these findings on 
visual features are in line with Kaplan and Kaplan’s [9] 
framework, which identifies similar perceptual factors in 
the dimensions of coherence and complexity, and 
recognizes individual perceptions of artifacts to be 
multidimensional [25].  
In addition, just as Kaplan and Kaplan [9], Tractinsky 
and Lowengart [25] acknowledged that while these sub-
dimensions are distinct, they are not necessarily 
orthogonal. More precisely, Tractinsky and Lowengart 
[25] argued that “conceptually, the correlation between the 
two sub-dimensions reflects a fundamental relation to 
aesthetic design and perceptions” and that empirical 
correlations amongst the sub-dimensions “reflect an 
ecological phenomenon in which capable designers are 
good at creating balanced designs high on both sub-
dimensions, whereas incompetent Web design tends to fail 
on both”. These findings regarding visual features 
reinforce Kaplan and Kaplan’s [9] assertion that 
individuals will prefer artifacts, which fulfill all four 
informational needs. However, although the strong 
emphasis on visual features has brought important insights 
on these specific characteristics of artifacts, this 
unbalanced attention has also meant that the IS field has to 
some extent neglected the study of tactile and audio 
features. Such features are also important as interaction 
effects across various features may also have significant 
impacts on users [19]. Furthermore, insights from the 
literature on virtual environments suggest that while 
adding auditory and tactile cues are likely to increase a 
user's perception in doing a certain task, increasing the 
level of visual fidelity will not produce similar outcomes 
[26]. Such findings suggest a potential tradeoff between 
features and limitations to feature enhancements (i.e., 
more is not always better). Therefore, a thorough 
investigation of all mobile IT artifact features and not just 
their visual characteristics is needed to better understand 
their role and influence on individuals. 
III. 
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
A. Research Model 
As described above, Markus and Silver [12] have 
theorized that IT artifacts influence users through their 
functional affordances and symbolic expressions. On the 
other hand, Kaplan and Kaplan [9] provide an 
operationalization of these concepts by defining the 
linkages between an IT artifact’s features and an 
individual’s behaviors through IT artifact informational 
cues and their fulfillment of informational needs. Based on 
these ideas, the following research model and related 
hypotheses are proposed (see figure 2) 
B. Hypotheses 
1) Two vs. three dimensional informational needs 
Individuals are believed to depend on their visual sense 
for 80% of their external information, and presumably for 
even more than 80% of their external information when 
working with a GUI [27]. As such, visual features of 
mobile IT artifacts, which are likely to fulfill most of the 
informational needs, are extremely important when 
individuals are first introduced to the technology. 
However, such an unbalanced reliance on visual 
informational cues can heavily tax an individual’s sense of 
vision and render the conveyance of additional information 
through this specific sense more difficult [28]. Consistent 
with this idea, Huong et al. [26] found that visual 
informational cues, although more important then tactile 
and audio informational cues, were in fact limited in their 
impact on users due to visual saturation and limited 
computational power. As such, several researchers have 
suggested [29], and have empirically validated [28] the 
idea that other senses should also be put to contribution to 
overcome the limits of visual informational cues. Results 
from these studies showed that adding tactile and audio 
feedback while users interact with IT artifacts did in fact 
increase their performance. As such, and based on the fact 
that individuals heavily rely upon visual informational 
cues, visual features are likely to play a more important 
role in fulfilling an individual’s two-dimensional needs 
than tactile and audio features. However, since an 
individual’s visual sense is already heavily taxed, leaving 
limited room for additional informational cues, tactile and 
audio features are likely to fulfill three-dimensional needs 
more effectively than visual features. These arguments 
lead to the first two hypotheses. 
 
Hypothesis 1: The relationship between visual features 
and the fulfillment of an individual’s informational needs 
will be stronger for two dimensional needs than three 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

dimensional needs in both adoption and post adoption 
settings. 
 
Hypothesis 2: The relationship between audio and 
tactile features and the fulfillment of an individual’s 
informational needs will be stronger for three dimensional 
needs than two dimensional needs in both adoption and 
post adoption settings. 
 
2) Adoption vs. post-adoption informational needs 
In developing their preference framework, Kaplan and 
Kaplan [9] recognized that individuals assess new 
situations and the information available to them in a two-
phase, sequential manner. At first, individuals reflect on 
their immediate and direct perception of the setting’s 
elements. These initial preoccupations are translated into 
coherence and complexity informational needs that must 
be fulfilled for the individuals to feel at ease in their novel 
environment and to follow their course of action. This 
primary assessment is subsequently followed by a 
secondary appraisal which emphasizes deeper needs (i.e. 
legibility and mystery informational needs) [14]. In order 
words, individuals move from a two-dimensional space, 
where coherence and complexity informational needs are 
pre-dominant, to a three-dimensional space, where 
legibility and mystery informational needs prevail [15]. 
As such, the sequential manner in which individuals 
assess a new situation suggests that the importance of each 
informational need evolves over time and that their 
influence on individuals varies accordingly, with two-
dimensional needs being more important at first, and three-
dimensional needs being more important later on. This 
idea was empirically supported by Rosen and Purinton 
[14] who used Kaplan and Kaplan’s [9] preference 
framework to assess the quality of website design. More 
precisely, 
these 
authors 
demonstrated 
that 
two-
dimensional needs were more important than three-
dimensional needs when individuals were first introduced 
to a new website. Their results showed that users’ 
intentions to revisit a web site after a brief initiation were 
largely explained by coherence (30.59% of variance 
explained) and complexity (20.87 % of variance 
explained) informational needs than legibility (17.8 % of 
variance 
explained) 
and 
mystery 
(not 
significant) 
informational needs. Thus, two-dimensional needs are 
likely to be more important for adopters who have limited 
experience with mobile IT artifacts than for experienced 
users (i.e., post adopters). Conversely, and again because 
of differences in experience with using mobile IT artifacts-
commerce device, three-dimensional needs are likely to be 
more important for post adopters than for adopters. These 
arguments lead to the last two hypotheses. 
 
Hypothesis 3: The relationship between the fulfillment 
of an individual’s two-dimensional needs and his level of 
use of mobile IT artifact features will be stronger for 
adopters than for post adopters 
 
Hypothesis 4: The relationship between the fulfillment 
of an individual’s three-dimensional needs and his level of 
use of mobile IT artifact features will be stronger for post 
adopters than for adopters. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
A. Data Collection 
To empirically test the proposed research model we 
propose to investigate the rollout of an m-commerce 
solution to a group of pilot users within a company for a 
one-year period. Two surveys will be administered, one at 
the beginning of the rollout, after an initial training 
session, and another at the end of the project. The surveys’ 
instruments will include measures drawn and/or adapted 
from the literature as well as measures that will be 
specifically develop for the purpose of this study. At each 
data collection point, users will be asked about their level 
of use of mobile IT artifact.. Users will also be interviewed 
on their informational needs and the features that enable 
them to fulfill these needs. 
B. Statistical Analyses 
Structural equation modeling (SEM) will be used to 
analyze the study data. As such, for each of the two data 
collection, a two-phase analytical procedure will be 
employed. In the first phase, a confirmatory factor model 
(i.e., the measurement model) will be used to measure the 
fit between the theorized model and observed variables, 
whereas the results of the measurement model will be used 
to create a path-analytic model to investigate the 
relationships hypothesized between the study constructs in 
the second phase [30]. Subsequently, we’ll rely on the 
procedure proposed by Karahanna et al. [31] to compare 
the results from the two surveys, identify differences and 
test the research hypotheses. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The present research aims to answer the following 
research question: “Why does the usage of mobile IT 
artifact features vary over time?” and to validate the 
premise that individuals use different features at different 
points in time because the information inscribed in mobile 
IT artifact features is stable and their informational needs 
evolve over time. To do so, we propose a research model 
anchored on Kaplan and Kaplan’s [9] preference 
framework to test the influence of mobile IT artifacts 
features on the behavior of m-commerce adopters and post 
adopters. The results obtained are expected to provide 
important theoretical and practical contributions. 
First, this study departs from previous research in the 
IS field by being one of the few to open the IT artifact 
black box and to empirically investigate the role of IT 
artifact features on individual behaviors. As such, the 
present research, which defines IT artifact features along 
three dimensions (i.e., visual, tactile, and audio), will 
improve our understanding of concrete and tangible 
technology 
acceptance’s 
antecedents. 
Second, 
the 
longitudinal stance of this study that will permit an 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

assessment of the varied influence of IT artifact features 
over time is likely to provide additional insights on the 
influence of time and IT artifact features on individuals’ 
behaviors. Third, this research relies on a different 
theoretical lens than the traditionally used TAM 
framework and as such can contribute to the IS field in 
validating and providing IS scholars with a new research 
tool.  
From a practical standpoint, the proposed study can 
help managers to better design and manage m-commerce 
apparatuses and improve the various outcomes tied to their 
use. For example, anticipated insights from this study 
could suggest that training to novice users should focus on 
visual features while training to experienced users should 
focus instead on tactile and audio features. Also, if 
practitioners plan to implement upgrades to the m-
commerce devices used in their organizations, insights 
from this study can inform them on which features to 
upgrade and at what time in each apparatus’ life cycle. 
Such guidance can be of significant importance as 
upgrading IT artifact features often entail tradeoffs and 
represent significant investments in both time and money 
[26].  
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Scornavacca and S. J. Barnes, “M-banking services in 
Japan: A strategic perspective,” International Journal of 
Mobile Communications, vol. 2, 2994, pp. 51-66. 
[2] Y.-S. Wang and Y. W. Liao, “The conceptualization and 
Measurement 
of 
m-commerce 
User 
Satisfaction, 
Computers in Human Behavior”, vol. 23, 2007, pp. 381-
398. 
[3] I. Benbasat and H. Barki, “Quo Vadis TAM,” Journal of 
the AIS, vol. 8, 2007, pp. 211-218. 
[4] D. Cyr, M. Head and A. Ivanov, “Design aesthetic leading 
to m-Loyalty in Mobile Commerce,” Information & 
Management, vol. 43, 2006, pp. 950-963. 
[5] J. Jasperson, P. E. Carter and R. W. Zmud, “A 
Comprehensive 
Conceptualization 
of 
Post-Adoptive 
Behaviors 
Associated 
with 
Information 
Technology 
Enabled Work Systems,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 29, 2005, pp. 
525-557. 
[6] G. DeSanctis and M. S. Poole, “Capturing the Complexity 
in Advanced Technology Use: Adaptive Structuration 
Theory,” Organization Science, vol. 5, 1994, pp. 121-147. 
[7] T. L. Griffith and G. B. Northcraft, “Distinguishing 
Between the Forest and the Trees: Media, Features, and 
Methodology in Electronic Communication Research,” 
Organization Science, vol. 5, 1994, pp. 272-285. 
[8] G. Bruner and A. Kumar, “Explaining consumer 
acceptance of handheld Internet devices,” Journal of 
Business Research, vol. 58, 2003, pp. 115–120. 
[9] S. Kaplan and R. Kaplan, Cognition and environment. New 
York, NY: Praeger Publishers, 1982. 
[10] J. H. Jeans, Physics and Philosophy. Ann Arbor, MI: 
University of Michigan Press, 1966. 
[11] G. W. Downs Jr. and L. B. Mohr, “Conceptual Issues in the 
Study of Innovation,” Administrative Science Quarterly, 
vol. 21, 1976, pp. 700-714. 
[12] L. M. Markus and M. S. Silver, “A Foundation for the 
Study of IT Effects: A New Look at DeSanctis and Poole’s 
Concepts of Structural Features and Spirit,” Journal of the 
AIS, vol. 9, 2008, pp. 609-632. 
[13] A. Giddens, Central Problems in Social Theory. Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press, 1979. 
[14] D. E. Rosen and E. Purinton, “Website design: viewing the 
web as a cognitive landscape,” Journal of Business 
Research, vol. 57, 2004, pp. 787–794. 
[15] R. Kaplan, S. Kaplan, and R. L. Ryan, With people in 
mind. Washington, DC: Island Press, 1998. 
[16] K. Lynch, The image of the city. Cambridge, England: MIT 
Press, 1960. 
[17] J. F. Wohlwill, “Environmental aesthetics: the environment 
as a source of affect,” In Human behavior and environment,  
vol. II, I. Altman and J. F. Wohlwill, Eds. New York: 
Plenum, 1976, pp. 37-86. 
[18] R. Kaplan, “Predictors of environmental preference: 
designers and clients,” in Environmental design research, 
vol. 1., W. F. E. Preiser, Ed. Stroudsburg, Dowden, 
Hutchinson and Ross, 1973, pp. 265-274. 
[19] T. L. Griffith, “Technology Features as Triggers for 
Sensemaking,” Academy of Management Review, vol. 24, 
1999, pp. 472-488. 
[20] R. Jain, “Experiential Computing,” Communication of The 
ACM, vol. 46, 2003, pp. 48-54. 
[21] H. Kiljander and J. Jarnstrom, “User interface styles,” in 
Mobile Usability: How Nokia Changed the Face of the 
Mobile Phone, C. Lindholm, T. Keinonen, H. Kiljander, 
Eds. McGraw Hill, 2003, pp.15-44. 
[22] K. Karvonen, “The beauty of simplicity,” Proc. ACM 
Conference on Universal Usability, 2000, pp. 85-90. 
[23] H. Van der Heijden, “Factors Influencing the Usage of 
Websites: The Case of a Generic Portal in the 
Netherlands,” Information & Management, vol. 40, 2003, 
pp. 541-549. 
[24] T. Lavie and N. Tractinsky, “Assessing Dimensions of 
Perceived Visual Aesthetics of Web Sites,” International 
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 60, 2004, pp. 
269-298. 
[25] N. Tractinsky and O. Lowengart, “Web-Store Aesthetics in 
E- Retailing: A Conceptual Framework and Some 
Theoretical Implications,” Academy of Marketing Science 
Review, vol. 11, 2007, pp. 1-19. 
[26] Q. D. Huong, N. Walker, C. Song, A. Kobayashi and L. F. 
Hodges, “Evaluating the Importance of Multi-sensory Input 
on Memory and the Sense of Presence in Virtual 
Environments,” IEEE explore, 2008, pp. 1-8. 
[27] H. Takao, S. Kaoru, J. Osufi and I. Hiroaki, “Acoustic User 
Interface (AUI) for auditory displays,” Displays, vol. 23, 
2002, pp. 65-73. 
[28] J. Jacko, K. V. Emery, P. J. Edwards, M. Ashok, L. 
Barnard, T. Kongnakorn, K. P. Moloney and F. Sainfort, 
“The effects of multimodal feedback on older adults' task 
performance given varying levels of computer experience,” 
Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 23, 2004, pp. 
247-264. 
[29] G. Fontaine, “The experience of a sense of presence in 
intercultural and international encounters,” Presence: 
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, vol. 1, 1992, pp. 
482-490. 
[30] G. S. Kearns and A. L. Lederer, “A Resource-Based View 
of Strategic IT Alignment: How Knowledge Sharing 
Creates Competitive Advantage,” Decision Sciences, vol. 
34, 2003, pp. 1-29. 
[31] E. Karahanna, D. W. Straub and N. L. Chervany, 
“Information Technology Adoption across Time: A Cross-
Sectional Comparison of Pre-Adoption and Post-Adoption 
Beliefs,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 23, 1999, pp. 183-214. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

