Reflective Case-Writing Environment using a Multi-representation Schema for 
Medical Service Education 
Wei Chen, Masaki Fujii, Liang Cui, Mitsuru Ikeda 
School of Knowledge Science 
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 
Nomi, Japan 
{wei.chen; masaki.fujii; cui-liang; ikeda}@jaist.ac.jp 
Noriyuki Matsuda 
Department of Computer and Communication Sciences, 
Faculty of Systems Engineering 
Wakayama University 
Wakayama, Japan 
matsuda@sys.wakayama-u.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract — In this research, by developing a learning support 
system for medical services, we will establish an approach that 
supports medical profession novices to improve proficiency 
understanding patient-centered medical services. Using an 
ontology in this paper, as a first step of the project, we 
organized a learning model which promotes reflective learning 
of the case-method for medical service education. As an 
implementation of the learning model, we established a 
learning environment that support learners to reflect on their 
thinking process in their experiences by a learning strategy 
which consists of three case-writing phases: the description 
phase, the cognitive conflict phase, and the knowledge building 
phase. 
Keywords-Thinking skill; Case-Method; Ontology; Medical 
Service Education. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
There are always many difficult problems continually 
appearing from various viewpoints in medical practice. 
Actually, medical staff always feels a vague anxiety that 
their dedicated efforts could not catch up with the increasing 
problems. Moreover, to provide high quality medical 
services that can respond to the various and high-degree 
increasing patients' demands is becoming an important and 
urgent issue in medical service practice. The subjects in 
medical service education in a broad sense include both the 
medical knowledge/skills for the medical diagnosis or the 
treatment and the interpersonal skill to facilitate the prompt 
and smooth implementation of medical services. In this 
research, we focus on the latter as the matter of medical 
service sciences in a narrow sense, while we address the 
former as the matter of "medical education" and will not be 
deeply involved in it. 
We believe that the service science approach can make a 
contribution to establish a methodology to improve the 
quality of Medical Services in a narrow sense. One of the 
pioneers in the field of Service Science, Yoshikawa has 
proposed that the model for service improvement is that the 
knowledge circulation of intellectual collaboration by the 
persons concerned in the service promotes to create and 
refine the service knowledge. Moreover, he implies that the 
knowledge circulation will cause the ideal of societal 
innovation [1]. In the medical viewpoint, we think it is 
necessary to refine the education approaches for supporting 
the medical knowledge circulation by improving the medical 
practitioners’ thinking ability to collaboratively create and 
refine a medical service knowledge. 
In this research, by developing the learning support 
system for medical services, we will establish an approach 
that supports the medical profession novices to improve their 
proficiency in understanding patient-centered medical 
services. The current goal of this research is to make a 
rational learning model for medical service education and try 
to establish a methodology to create design loop for medical 
service educational program development but not to make 
strong contributions to technological medical service 
education. 
II. 
 DIFFICULTIES IN MEDICAL SERVICE EDUCATION 
In  recent medical practice, the traditional apprenticeship-
style on-the-job training system, so-called of, “seniors train 
novices strictly on the job” is vanishing gradually because of  
mental resistance for novices to accept the evidence-lacking, 
experience-based guidance of implicit medical service 
knowledge from seniors. Moreover, newcomers who have 
poor insight and sensitivity to people are increasing, and 
there appears to be an increasingly pronounced tendency for 
the medical staff to be unable to learn medical service 
knowledge or skills to understand patients’ minds through 
communication with other medical staff.  
Difficulty of problem formulation
Complexity of object problems
Difficulty of theory application
Low explicitness of theory
Complexity of selection
criteria to hypothesis
Low explicitness of learning 
objective
Difficulty of generalizing 
experience
Difficulty of learning skill of
self reflection
Lack of representation of
thinking process
Difficulty of making rhetorical 
discussion
Difficulty of learning thinking
Characteristics
Difficulties of Learning
Complexity of psychological
characteristics of  patients
 
Figure 1.  Characteristics of medical service and difficulties of learning 
the knowledge required for it 
For example, when a novice nurse takes charge of 
pediatrics, he may be puzzled by the complexity of 
emotional engagement between the child patients who are 
weaker than himself, their parents who are exceptionally 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

anxious about their children’s health and the doctors who 
conduct medical treatment. In order to have an acute insight 
into the complex structure of emotional engagement, it is 
necessary to have a rich sensitivity for understanding others’ 
minds and, a rational attitude of the acceptance of and 
respect for the immature hearts of the pediatric patients. That 
is typical tacit knowledge which is not easy to acquire for 
novice medical staff.  
For the purpose of developing medical human resources 
with higher cognitive ability as shown in Figure 1, a variety 
of educational methods to foster the tacit knowledge or tacit 
skill by coaching the thinking process has been offered to the 
medical staff. For example, in the field of nursing education, 
teaching approaches such as clinical conferences, reflective 
journals, narrative methods, case-method, etc. are conducted 
on a routine basis at many hospitals. However, in such a 
practical learning environment, it is said that the major 
difference between the learners who can learn what should 
be learned and the learners who cannot learn very well 
comes from differences in learners' sensibility or insight to 
others' minds. Moreover, even though learners have 
successfully taught tacit knowledge in the practical learning 
environment, most of them face more serious difficulties to 
assimilate the knowledge to their own existing knowledge 
and organize it as general knowledge to be applicable to  
future similar situations. The difficulties are caused by lack 
of the experience of making “thinking about others’ minds” a 
subject for meta-level logical thinking, while most people 
guess others’ minds only by intuition. Therefore, to foster the 
ability of meta-level logical thinking seems to be 
accompanied by an essential difficulty caused by the 
essential nature of humanity. In addition, the complexity of 
the matters of minds, the low explicitness of theory, the 
complexity of selection criteria for hypotheses, a lack of 
representation of thinking process, etc., make it difficult for 
novices to learn the knowledge required for medical services 
(Figure 2). 
Case-method
Reflective journal
Conference
Narrative method
Education Methods Being 
Practiced
Skills building of problem 
formulation
Development of argument 
skill
Skills building of knowledge
generalization and systematization
Development of meta-cognitive 
ability
Development of problem 
solving
Purposes of Development
 
Figure 2.  Fostering tacit knowledge/skills by coaching-thinking process 
In this research, we focus on the case-method as an 
approach to Medical Service Education. One of the 
educational principles behind the case-method in business 
management education is “if you want to teach how to deal 
with a new problem that you have not yet experienced, we 
should teach them how to think. In fact, the ability of 
thinking about thinking and the ability of dealing with new 
problems can be regarded as different issues in principle but 
they are completely the same issue in practice.” [2]. 
III. 
OVERVIEW OF CASE-METHOD 
In the case-method, in order to acquire “skills to deal 
with new problems that have not been experienced yet”, the 
learners are assigned the task to think how to deal with the 
"real" problems that have occurred in their own practices and 
write their thoughts and behavior to cope with the problems 
as "cases". Then, they join a group discussion on the case 
with other learners to investigate the validity of their own 
thinking process from various viewpoints and co-create new 
solutions to the “real” problem. Through these learning 
experiences, they learn the learning ability to deal with 
highly-non-deterministic 
and 
highly-complex 
practical 
problems [2]. 
The actual flows of the case-method in business 
management education are as follows: (1) the instructor 
distributes the prepared case materials to the learners in 
advance. (2) The learners organize the contents of the case to 
analyze and identify the core issues. The analysis should be 
made based on the facts in the case, the assertion inferred 
from the facts, insight into the thinking processes of the 
agents in the case, and the learners’ own knowledge. (3) 
According to the analysis, they think out their own solutions 
to the problem. After that, (4) the learners join the discussion 
on the validity of each learner’s solution, where the 
instructor will not join the discussion actively but just raise 
the topic to be discussed and lead the flow of the discussion 
[3]. 
When designing learning materials for the case-method, 
it is necessary to (1) write down the events that actually 
occurred, (2) to consider how the learners think about the 
case and how they will discuss it. Therefore, it is essential 
for a case-writer to be able to estimate how learners think or 
how their discussion goes on from the deep understanding of 
written issues on the case [4]. 
A.  Learning in Case-Method 
In the survey paper on the argument study, Maruno and 
Tomita [5] claim that most researchers focus on the 
argumentative skills to examine the rationality or validity of 
information or knowledge used in the discussion. On the 
other hand, the skills to produce or externalize ideas in the 
discussion have not been studied in the research field. 
However, based on the empirical and the theoretical research 
so far, the former skills cannot be acquired without the latter 
ability. It implies that by participating in activities in which 
the latter skills in required repeatedly, the former skills can 
be acquired. 
Moreover, they support the Kuhn(1991) model of 
internal thinking process as a dynamic internal dialogue base 
on Billig’s idea that “people engaged in problem solving or 
decision making, try to make the best judgment of selecting 
one from some possible options by justifying each of them 
from many different viewpoints and comparing the 
justifications to the options” [6] [7]. The reason why they 
strongly rely on Kuhn’s model is that the model shows clear 
socio-cultural explanation of how the argument guides the 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

thinking process, which is, one regards 
the thinking developing process as a more 
dynamic 
and 
clarifies 
the 
tight 
relationship between individual internal 
process of thinking and social process of 
thinking such as exchanging position with 
others and the individual process. 
Standing on this viewpoint, the case-
method can be used as a concrete 
educational approach for learning internal 
dialogue. On the other hand, it is difficult to learn the 
dynamic internal dialogue associated with social interaction 
for the reason (shown in Figure 1) that particularly higher 
cognitive ability is required. In our research project, in 
parallel, we have been developing an educational program 
that can reduce the learner’s load in learning the association 
between internal dialogue [8] and social interaction [9]. 
B. Learning by Designing Case Learning Materials 
Ito proposed, by analyzing of effect of the verbalization 
as a learning strategy, a model of learning goals achievement 
by verbalization as an integrated model of three learning 
mechanisms, that is, tutoring that focuses on the learning 
effect of the teaching activities, self-explanatory quality 
(nature?) of learning activities, and collaborative learning 
among learners [10]. 
We believe that learners can be active entities who can 
find a meaningful entity for the goal of knowledge 
acquisition by themselves, and they can achieve the goal by 
externalizing their self-explanatory of their thinking process 
to other learners. The externalization processes consist of the 
two phases of the knowledge description phase, and 
knowledge building phase and the cognitive conflict can be 
bridging activities of the two phases as shown in Figure 3. 
We will discuss the three phases in detail below. 
The description phase is an iteration of the internal 
learning activities to achieve the goal of verbalization by 
externalizing one’s thought in his own experiences. The 
cognitive conflict is a trigger cognitive process for learners 
to go into the knowledge building phase by facing the 
conflict states (realization of cognitive gap among learners’ 
mental models, cognitive differences with other learners, or 
errors in their knowledge) through the verbalization of their 
thought and interaction with others. And then, in the 
knowledge building phase, the learners aim at achieving 
the goal of resolving those conflict states. The goal of 
verbalization in the knowledge building phase is to resolve 
the conflicts and is essentially different from the goal of 
verbalization in the knowledge description phase. This goal 
achievement model can be regarded as a learning model 
that includes the model of thought for dynamic internal 
dialogue mentioned above. 
As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, the design of 
case materials requires: (1) writing the case, (2) preparing 
the content that should be considered and the set of branch 
points for discussions. In this research, we aim at 
developing learners’ meta-cognitive skills by imposing the 
design tasks of case-method learning materials on the 
learners and promoting cognitive interaction with others. 
Figure 3.  A goal-attainment model of verbalization as a learning strategy 
In particular, as an educational program for the medical 
professions (the nurses in this paper), we developed a 
learning environment for realizing a model of learning goals 
achievement by verbalization. Using the environment, the 
nurses write down (the description) their own thinking 
process in their experience as cases, guess others’ different 
thoughts, find a cognitive conflict from the thoughts and try 
to resolve the conflicts by building new knowledge [11] [12]. 
IV. 
ENVIRONMENT SUPPORTING LEARNING IN DESIGN 
LEARNING MATERIALS 
In Figure 3, in the learning strategy, learners engage with 
verbalization activities in the description phase and the 
knowledge building phase, and the activities are externally 
observable at the behavioral level. Meanwhile, the activities 
of making goals, plans, cognitive conflicts, resolving 
conflicts etc., are not externally observable internal cognitive 
activities. 
Since those activities are relatively abstract and 
ambiguous, it is difficult for the learners to achieve the 
learning goals. The difficulties of learning shown in Figure 1 
can also be considered as a reason for this ambiguity and 
abstraction. Our idea of a learning model to reduce the 
cognitive load for learners to achieve the learning goal is to 
provide an easy-to-use environment to support learners to 
reflect their thinking process in their medical services 
practices. The ontology for patient psychology, medical 
services, thinking activities and learning activities are 
incorporated in the environment. And a user-friendly 
interface for writing case learning materials is provided. 
 
Figure 4.  Thinking skill ontology (partial) 
Verbalization
Goals
Plan
Evasion
Plan
Knowledge
Telling
Cognitive
Conflict
One-Self
Subject
Other 
People
The Standards of 
Conflict
Optimum
Target Solution
Unfit → Target Evasion
→
Target Conflict
Solution (Evasion)
Knowledge 
Building
Not Effective
Solution
Effective
To target
verbalization
Description Phase
Knowledge Building Phase
Planning
Execution
Assessment
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Figure 5.  An example of thinking representation in case learning material 
designing 
V. 
THINKING REPRESENTATION IN CASE DESIGN 
Figure 4 shows an overview of a part of the ontology for 
the thinking process in medical services [8]. Using the 
concepts in the ontology, the learners externalize the 
reflection of their thinking process in their experiences in the 
graphic representation as shown in Figure 4. 
Figure 5(A) shows the reflection description of thinking 
in one’s own experience and Figure 5(B) shows its graphic 
representation. The square nodes represent the assertions and 
the elliptic nodes represent thinking activities such as 
“hypothesizing”, “finding cause and effect” and so on. 
Figure 5(C) shows the estimated thinking process of another 
nurse with a different stance from the learner. Figure 5(D) 
shows the intended issues (cognitive conflict) to be discussed 
in the case materials, where a nurse wanted to provide more 
care, but the patient resisted out of pride, even though this 
added to the burden of the family in caring for the patient. 
Meanwhile, she guesses that there may be a nurse who thinks, 
on the assumption of “care priority”, that she should provide 
more care to the patients even though it may cause strong 
stress on the patient’s mind. Then the learner investigated the 
advantages and disadvantages of the results of different 
assumptions. 
Associating with the discussion in the previous chapter, 
(B) the visualization of one’s own self-reflection can 
correspond to the description phase. And (C) according to 
the assumptions at different standpoints, (D) the discussion 
set up can correspond to the evocation of knowledge 
building by cognitive conflicts. 
VI. 
LEARNING ENVIRONMENT FOR THINKING PROCESS 
TRAINING IN MEDICAL SERVICE EDUCATION 
Boud (1985) claims reflection is needed at various 
points: at the start in anticipation of the experience, during 
the experience as a way of dealing with the vast array of 
inputs and coping with the feelings that are generated, and 
following the experience during the phase of writing and 
consolidation [13]. 
Combining the learning strategies based on the goal-
attainment model of verbalization (Chapter 3) and the 
thinking representation in case design (Chapter 4), we 
developed a learning environment that can conduct the 
externalization of thinking processes using a model of 
thinking process for self-dialogue consists of three phases, 
where the learners are required to be able to conduct high 
quality thinking for self-dialogue which, to describe high 
quality reflection on ones' own thinking, to find meaningful 
conflicts, and to create high quality knowledge in order to 
overcome the conflicts, by continuously developing their 
ability using tags. 
For the different purposes, we have designed two 
separate 
thinking 
representations 
for 
the 
learning 
environment. One is the text representation. In medical 
practice, medical professions are used to writing documents 
with a similar form of representation, such as the electronic 
medical records. The other is the graphical representation 
that provides a learner with an easy-to-reflect overview of 
the logical structure of the thinking process. 
We have developed two thinking support tools, Sizhi and 
Wuzhi, which correspond to the two representation forms. 
Moreover, in order to integrate these two forms of 
representation, we have been developing a bidirectional 
transformation 
mechanism 
between 
these 
two 
representations. 
Figure 6.  Description phase in Sizhi 
Figure 6 shows an example of a case written by a nurse 
with Sizhi. As shown in the figure, there are three tabs that 
correspond to the description phase, the cognitive conflict 
and the knowledge building phase in learning strategies. 
Each line consists of a statement ID (number), a Sizhi tag, 
and statement, and may have an additional tag and ID that 
refer to the logical foundation of the statement in the line. 
The tags play an important role in encouraging learners to be 
aware of the logical structure of their own thinking process. 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Statement
Logical 
Structure
 
Figure 7.  Description phase in Wuzhi 
For Sizhi, we will use the thinking ontology mentioned in 
the above section to clarify the constituents of thoughts, and 
the learner is required to express the thinking processes using 
a set of tags as a framework to express the structure of 
thinking. The set of tags is designed for nurses to reflect on 
their thinking process for self-dialogue and consists of nine 
tags: 
fact 
(patient), 
fact 
(medical), 
policy/principle, 
assumption, decision, medical decision, conflicts, reflect and 
resolve. The nurses’ learning task in the case writing is to 
reflect on their own thinking process in nursing patients and 
clarify the structure of the thinking process using the tags. 
The most important aspect in designing Sizhi is for 
learners to clearly write their own cases by reflecting on their 
thinking process using Sizhi tags, and reflect on the thinking 
process to find meaningful conflicts. To promote learners to 
gain deep insight into conflicts, for instance, Sizhi 
encourages learners to find conflicts between the statements 
with the policy/principle tag, because the policy/principle tag 
implies the statement is one of logical foundation of the 
thinking process.  
Wuzhi is a learning representation supporting tool that 
has the same functionalities for supporting the internal 
dialogue as Sizhi. But the difference between them is that 
Wuzhi uses a graphical representation at the description 
phase. For the reason expressed above, the graphical 
representation can enhance the effect of the descriptions for 
clarifying their logical structures. Figure 7 shows a medical 
case written with Wuzhi. Each node in Wuzhi contains the 
same form of information (tag, statement and reference) as 
the line in Sizhi. 
In summary, for visualizing the invisible, shapeless, 
complex structure of thinking processes to support 
knowledge creation, Sizhi provides learners with tags which 
clarify various thinking processes, and a tab which 
encourages awareness of the thinking phases, and is designed 
with the intent to encourage externalization and careful 
investigation of ideas that follow those processes. Moreover, 
Wuzhi gives a clear view of representation for description 
writing and revising. With the help of a thinking ontology, 
the representation transformation can be conducted smoothly 
and firmly.  
VII. PRELIMIANRY TRIAL USE OF SIZHI 
A preliminary experiment was conducted with the help of 
medical specialists including medial advisors, nurses, 
medical examination managers, researchers and directors 
from the Faculty of Medicine, Miyazaki University and the 
Juntendo University Hospital Group. 
Because of the time limitation in the preliminary 
experiment, the participants could not use Wuzhi. So we 
focus on the evaluation of the effectiveness of Sizhi. In order 
to investigate the participants’ motivation and their self-
evaluation, we conducted two questionnaires, before and 
after using Sizhi. Based on the analysis of the answers to the 
questionnaires, we have made the following two findings. 
A.  Change in Cognition of the Importance of Thinking 
Skills 
We investigated the participants’ perception of the 
importance of thinking skills and the effects it has by self-
evaluation. We measured the learners’ self-evaluation of 
how important they think the thinking skills are (perception 
of importance), and how efficiently they have been using 
thinking skills before and after the use of Sizhi. To measure 
the perception of importance, the participants were asked 
about the target (ex. closely examine whether one's opinions 
are accurate) which is not related with self-dialogue process, 
and the distractor (ex. finding flaws in one self), participants 
were asked to select one from the options: 1- not important at 
all, 2- not very important, 3- neither, 4- is important, 5- very 
important. The Figure 8 describes the mean difference in the 
target column and distractor column before and after using 
Sizhi. As a result, we found that as the preliminary 
experiment progressed, the target became higher and the 
distractor became lower.  This result suggests that the 
understanding of the importance of thinking skills increased 
by using Sizhi. 
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Before
After
target
distractor
 
Figure 8.  Changes in cognition of the importance of thinking skills before 
and after using Sizhi 
 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
Before
After
Large growth
Medium growth
Small growth
 
Figure 9.  Changes in self-evaluation for each growing before and after 
using Sizhi 
B. The Change in Self Evaluation of Thinking Ability 
We asked the learners for a self-evaluation of their 
thinking ability. When we checked the differences in the 
mean after using Sizhi, the self-evaluation improved. 
Additionally, we split the learners into 3 groups of 5 (large 
advance, medium advance, low advance) people according to 
the magnitude of the change in cognition of importance 
before and after using Sizhi, and analyzed the self-evaluation 
(Figure 9).  As a result, we saw an improvement in self-
evaluation in the medium advance group and low advance 
group, but we could not see any change in the large advance 
group. The numbers of subjects were too few for this 
analysis so we could not conclude any statistically significant 
differences, but the lack of change in self-evaluation in the 
large advance group suggests that the bigger the advance, 
reflecting and evaluating oneself becomes more difficult. To 
support long term thinking skill mastery, it is important to 
consider how we can help people like this. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we organized a learning model which 
promotes reflective learning of the case-method for medical 
service education. As an implementation of the learning 
model, we have established a learning environment that 
supports learners to reflect on their thinking process in their 
experiences by a learning strategy which consists of three 
case-writing phases: the description phase, the cognitive 
conflict phase, the knowledge building phase. The final goal 
of this research is not to make contributions to technological 
improvement in medical service education but to conduct a 
proposal of a rational learning model for medical service 
education. The full educational program we have been 
developing consists of two parts, that is, one for training 
thinking skills for internal dialogue and one for training  
thinking skills for discussion. In this paper, concerning the 
former part, we have discussed the design rationale of two 
learning environments, Sizhi and Wuzhi. In our project, as an 
implementation of the latter part, we have also conducted  
educational discussion-style workshops at three hospitals. 
Currently, to shift from face to face discussion to ICT-
mediated collaborative learning by integrating, we are 
developing a learning environment which includes Sizhi and 
Wuzhi as functional components. In a future paper, we will 
discuss the design rationale of the learning environment and 
show evaluation of educational effectiveness through trial 
use and report on our efforts to put it to practical use in 
medical service education. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Grateful thanks are expressed to Prof. Nobuhiro SATO of 
Juntendo University, Prof. Kenji ARAKI and Associate Prof. 
Muneou SUZUKI of Miyazaki University, Dr. Tomohiro 
NABETA and Dr. Taisuke OGAWA of JAIST for their 
cooperation. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Yoshikawa, H. , “Introduction to Service Science”, Journal of 
the Japanese Society for Artificial Intelligence, vol. 23, No. 6, 
pp. 714-720, 2008. (In Japanese) 
[2] Keio Business School: “Theory and Practice of Case Method”,  
Toyo Keizai Inc., Tokyo, 1977. (In Japanese) 
[3] Hyakkai, S, “Learning by Case Method”, Gakubunsha Inc., 
Tokyo, 2009. (In Japanese) 
[4] Ishida, H., Hoshino, H., and Okubo, T., “Case Book 1: 
Intorduaction to Case-Method”, Keio University Press, Tokyo, 
2007. (In Japanese) 
[5] Tomida, E., and Maruno, J., “The Current Study to 
Arguments as Thinking”, Japanese Psychological Review, vol. 
24, No.2, pp. 187-209, 2004. (In Japanese) 
[6] Billig, M., “Arguing and thinking: A rhetorical approach to 
social psychology”, Cambridge University Press, Cambridege, 
UK, 1987. 
[7] Kuhn, D., “The skills of argument”, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, UK, 1991. 
[8] Cui, L. et al., “A Model of Collaborative Learning for 
Improving The Quality of Medical Services”, Proceedings of 
The 6th International Conference on Knowledge, Information 
and Creativity Support Systems, pp.112-121, 2011. 
[9] Morita, Y., Cui, L., and Kamiyama, M. “Learning program 
that makes thinking the outside and presses knowledge 
collaboration skill development”, The Institute of Electronics, 
Information and Communication Engineers Technology 
Research Report, vol. 111, No. 98, pp.7-12. (In Japanese) 
[10] Ito, T., “Effects of Verbalization as Learning Strategy: A 
Review”, Japanese Journal of Educational Psychology, vol. 
57, pp. 237-251, 2009. (In Japanese) 
[11] Argyris, C. and Schön, D., “Theory in Practice: Increasing 
Professional Effectiveness,” Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, 1974 
[12] Boud, D. and Walker, D., “Experiencing and Learning: 
Reflection at Work,” Deakin University Press, Geelong, 1991 
[13] Boud, D., “Introduction: What is Reflection in Learning,” In: 
Boud, D., Keogh, R. and Walker, (eds.) Reflection: Turning 
Experience into Learning, Kogan Page Ltd, London, 1985, 
pp.7-10.
 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

