Recommender Systems for Spoken Word Radio 
A Research-in-Progress of Requirements and Solutions 
 
Stefan Hirschmeier, Roman Tilly, Detlef Schoder 
Department of Information Systems and Information Management  
University of Cologne  
Cologne, Germany  
email: {hirschmeier, tilly, schoder}@wim.uni-koeln.de
 
 
Abstract—The radio broadcasting industry had less innovation 
pressure compared to the music industry over the last years. 
But in the meantime, broadcasting agencies are increasingly 
competing with new music streaming services for listeners' 
limited attention and time. Radio broadcasting agencies react 
by building up personalized radio next to their linear playout, 
but have to face the difficulty that spoken word radio 
recommendation is more complex than music recommendation 
due to the heterogeneity of contents. We depict the 
requirements for radio recommendation, present the current 
data situation of broadcasters and a rough sketch of an 
architecture for a radio recommender system.  
Keywords—radio recommender system; radio broadcasting; 
individualized radio; non-linear radio; interstate broadcasting 
agreement 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Recommender Systems are on their way to enter a wide 
field of applications, and now also reach industries that had 
less innovation pressure in the last years, such as the radio 
broadcasting industry. Radio broadcasters are currently 
facing the challenge to build up a personalized experience 
for mobile radio on smartphones, next to their traditional 
linear program which comes out of the kitchen radio. 
Radio broadcasters have their traditional business model 
and for many years did not feel much pressure to innovate. 
But in the meantime, broadcasting agencies are increasingly 
competing with new music streaming services for listeners' 
limited attention and time. Spotify had 100 million active 
users in mid 2016 [1] and 40 million subscribers in 
September 2016 [2] and is the market leader for music 
streaming services in many countries. As the music and film 
industry made significant advances, the radio broadcasting 
industry also more and more feels the pressure to innovate. 
Increasing music consumption might drain listeners from 
radio consumption, as time and attention of listeners are 
limited. Music and radio may find themselves competing for 
the attention of the same listeners. Radio broadcasters react 
by creating new channels to distribute their content, and one 
of the most promising new ways to bring content to users is a 
personalized radio experience on smartphones. Furthermore, 
personalized playlists have already become an expected 
standard for the younger generation, and the usage patterns 
that music and video streaming services established will very 
likely be expected of radio apps as well. Some broadcasters 
fear that if they do not manage to serve these usage patterns 
and keep up with state-of-the-art digital products, a 
generation tear-off might take place and broadcast 
organization will lose certain segments of listeners. 
Especially recommender systems will become an 
important part of a radio broadcaster’s new digital strategy. 
Few radio broadcasters like the U.S. National Public Radio 
(NPR) have already made advancements in the area of 
designing 
radio 
specific 
recommender 
systems 
and 
personalized radio. 
Although radio broadcasting is a billion-euro-industry 
(134 billion US$ revenues of the U.S. broadcasting industry 
in 2014) [3][4] and reaches from 60 up to 90 percent of the 
population of all ages [5], there has been surprisingly little 
research on radio recommender systems. 
The contribution of this paper is threefold: first, we 
present the most relevant requirements with respect to radio 
recommender systems; second, we present the current 
situation in broadcasting agencies, and third, we depict a 
generic solution approach for radio recommender systems. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: In 
the next Section, we resume on related work. In Section 3, 
we depict the requirements we elicited with focus on 
recommender systems for radio and the current data situation 
of broadcasters in Section 4. We present an appropriate 
solution design in Section 5. We follow up with a discussion 
and limitations in Section 6 and conclude with future 
research. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Not much research has been done on radio recommender 
systems. Hirschmeier et al. state challenges of radio 
recommendation in contrast to music recommendation [6]. 
Publications about radio recommendation sometimes cover 
music recommendation only, e.g., [7]–[12], as the term radio 
is also frequently used for pure music streaming services. 
Focusing on radio in terms of spoken work, Liu et al. [13] 
propose an approach about recommender systems that 
suggest which linear radio channel to switch to in the car. 
Also Moling et al. propose a client side recommender system 
that suggests which radio channel to switch to [14]. 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-542-5
eKNOW 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

In 
this 
work, 
however, 
we 
focus 
on 
radio 
recommendation in terms of a non-linear playout of spoken 
word radio content. 
Xie et al. [15] propose a mobile application that allows 
users to listen to personalized radio with focus on news. 
Casagranda et al. propose a hybrid content radio [16], 
enhancing the traditional broadcast radio experience and 
augmenting it with context-aware and personalized audio 
content from the internet, considering context like the 
listener's emotional state and activity, geographical position, 
and weather.  
Schatter and Zeller [17] research on radio recommender 
systems with the focus on Digital Audio Broadcasting 
(DAB). Ala-Fossi et al. [18] and Anderson [19] also present 
studies about future delivery technologies of radio, but 
without placing a lot of emphasis on personalized content.  
Considering radio program management, the book of 
Eastman and Ferguson presents an in-depth view on media 
programming [20]. Keith [21] specifically outlines program 
management for radio purposes. 
III. 
REQUIREMENTS FOR RADIO RECOMMENDER SYSTEMS 
In the following, we sum up the requirements that we 
elicited over the last months in discussions with 
representatives of broadcasting agencies, from presentations 
and talks, and from published articles. All requirements 
presented have a specific impact on the design of 
recommender systems for radio broadcasting. We however 
neglect all requirements that deal with the user interface and 
the appearance of personalized radio. 
R1. Radio recommender systems need to reflect that radio 
is a mix of diverse contents 
Radio is a mixture of diverse formats, such as news, 
talks, interviews, stories, radio plays, audio dramas, concerts, 
biographies, and long features. In contrast to music 
recommendation, where pieces are mainly characterized by a 
genre and an interpreter, radio pieces are much more 
multifaceted [6]. Apart from the diversification in formats, 
we also find diversification in topics (sports, music, politics, 
science, etc.), topicality (news vs. timeless content), depth 
with regard to content (funny, serious, in-depth, etc.), and 
duration (from less than a minute to more than one hour). 
A radio recommender system has to cope with this 
diversity of content. Also, practitioners have the requirement 
that subgroups of content have their own recommendation 
technique or, at least learn the user’s behaviour independent 
from each other. A user not interested in biographies of 
musicians might well be interested in other content about 
music. The diversity of radio content therefore feeds the 
assumption that groups of contents should be built, each 
having their own recommendation algorithms. 
R2. Personalized radio also needs program management 
In traditional radio, editors assemble the sequence of 
radio content, and over the years have built up personal or 
organizational knowledge how to assemble a good radio 
program. The program management of traditional radio is 
reflected in several levels: First, the broadcast schedule 
determines, which radio shows are being sent early in the 
morning, which ones in the evening, and on which day. It is 
the macro level structure of radio shows throughout the 
week and typically does not change a lot over time. Second, 
every hour in the week has a special clock – the broadcast 
clock – which is a template of contents being sent. The hour 
from Friday 3 pm to 4 pm, e.g., may start with a 3 minute 
newscast, continue with a 30 seconds music bed, then radio 
show segment A for 13 minutes, followed by an optional 
music bed for 2 minutes, radio show segment B, etc. Third, 
every show has its own clock and templates which editors 
use to structure their radio show. 
The broadcast schedule at the macro level reflects what 
editors believe what suits their target group best, like a 
breakfast radio show in the morning or a newscast every full 
hour. On the other hand, the broadcast schedule represents a 
fixed timetable that listeners might integrate into their daily 
routine, so they know they can turn on the radio every 
morning at 7 am for their favorite radio show. Apart from 
the macro level program management, the micro level 
program management determines the contributions within a 
show. Radio editors decide from show to show, which 
contributions to send, and in which order. Radio editors 
have a certain feeling of how to assemble the parts of their 
radio show, and how to make the show enjoyable. 
Assumably, the program management is one of the 
major factors what makes radio radio. Therefore, program 
management has to be reflected in personalized radio as 
well. Radio programming denotes the processes of selecting, 
scheduling, promoting and evaluating programs, and it does 
not matter, whether the programmer is a paid employee or 
the user [20]. Whereas in linear radio, the program 
management has been done by editors only, in personalized 
radio, the programming shifts to a multi-component issue, 
where three acting parties are involved: Editors, users, and 
algorithms. Whereas editors choose, which content is 
available for listening, recommender algorithms assemble a 
personalized selection and sequence of contents, and users 
give their input that makes the algorithms improve the 
playouts. Whereas users take over part of the programming, 
they still expect a ready-to-consume playlist, as Eastman 
and Ferguson state: “Viewers tend to choose channels and 
websites, but expect someone else to have filled those 
channels/sites in an expert way” [20]. 
R3. Interstate broadcasting treaties bring in special 
requirements 
Considering personalized radio experiences, radio 
broadcasters have diverse objectives, depending on their 
mission and their funding. The question arises what 
determines the target function of a recommender system for 
radio. 
“The main function of commercial media is to deliver an 
audience to advertisers” [20] one might say. In this regard, 
recommender systems help building exact profiles of 
listeners in order to keep them as long as possible engaged 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-542-5
eKNOW 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

with digital products and to present them relevant 
advertisements. This is however not the target function of all 
radio broadcasters, especially not of publicly financed 
broadcasters. Those see their target function written down in 
the interstate broadcast agreement, usually referring to a 
formation of mature opinions of the public and balanced 
reporting. Whereas maximizing the length of stay on a digital 
product and maximizing the revenues from a listener’s 
engagement seems a straight-forward goal for recommender 
systems, the normative influence of interstate broadcasting 
agreements on personalized playouts needs to be reflected in 
radio recommender systems as well. 
With these objectives in mind, personalized radio faces a 
specific filter bubble challenge. Personalized radio may 
easily end up with users being trapped in an echo chamber, 
contradicting with the ideas of a public radio. As a 
consequence, radio broadcasters need to have special control 
over the program composing algorithms that assemble the 
personalized sequence of radio contents. The resulting 
sequence should therefore not only be a mix of 
recommended items, but also include externally induced 
items, allowing for serendipity and a wider horizon. 
R4. Context-sensitivity 
Whereas the previous requirements bear the intention to 
hold on to the characteristics of linear radio and transfer 
them to personalized radio, context sensitivity supports the 
idea to make personalized radio a richer experience than 
linear radio. As of today, only time of day and day of week 
can be reflected in the linear radio program. For mobile 
radio, more context factors are relevant like location, habits 
of the user, surrounding noise, surrounding light, activity, 
movement, temperature, weather, availability of bandwidth, 
output device, and other context parameters. Context-
sensitivity may therefore influence both which content is 
played and in which sequence. A rich context-sensitivity is 
still more on the wish list of broadcasting agencies than on 
the requirements list. But broadcasters will move towards 
the goal to provide their personalized listening experience in 
a sophisticated, context-sensitive way.  
IV. 
DATA SITUATION OF RADIO BROADCASTERS 
Current technical infrastructures of radio broadcasters are 
optimized for linear distribution of the content. These 
systems have not been designed to bring rich metadata along 
with the content. Typically, at the time when content goes on 
air for linear distribution, only few to none metadata about 
radio shows is available. Figure 1 shows the availability of 
metadata along the lifecycle of radio content in a typical 
scenario. Even if metadata is generated afterwards, e.g., for 
enriching the digital representation of content on the website 
or for archiving purposes, the dominance of linear 
distribution structures complicates the provisioning of digital 
content on websites, media centers, and especially for 
recommender systems. Whereas few broadcasters have 
already overthought their metadata generating processes, the 
situation depicted in Figure 1 still holds for many 
broadcasting agencies. 
 
t0
Minutes to
hours
Manuscripts
WebCMS
Archive
Create 
content
Edit 
program
On 
Air
Put content
on website
Archive 
content
t1
t2
Within Days
Manual generation ofmetadata
 
Figure 1.  Availability of metadata along the lifecycle of content 
The non-availability of metadata has two major 
implications: First, radio broadcasters will most likely focus 
on collaborative filtering techniques when initially building 
up a recommender system, and second, if they want to enrich 
the personalized listening experience with content-based 
recommendation approaches, they need to change processes, 
organization, and technical infrastructure accordingly, so 
metadata will be available in time.  
V. 
SOLUTION APPROACH 
In the following, we present a generic architecture for 
radio recommender systems that match the requirements 
presented before. The architecture also reflects experiences 
that have already been made by innovative broadcasters that 
force the development of recommender systems. 
The generic architecture foresees the division of all radio 
content into several groups. Each of these groups has its own 
recommendation algorithms and may also incorporate 
context information. Next to content groups, for which 
recommender algorithms are applied, there is also content 
which should be kept out of the recommender system, e.g., 
news. A program composer component assembles a 
personalized playout in the end. Figure 2 depicts the generic 
architecture. 
 
Recommender
component
Automatic classification or
manual curating component
User context information
Program
composer
component
Recommender C
Recommender D
Recommender B
Recommender A
Personalized playout
c e b a d
d a c b e
a e d c b
b c a e d
a b c d e
a e d b e d
All radio
content
Content group A
Content group B
a b c d e
a b c d e
Non-Recommender
Content
Content group C
Content group D
a b c d e
a b c d e
Automatic classification or
manual curating component
Recommender
component
Program
composer
component
 
Figure 2.  A generic architecture for radio recommender systems 
A. A recommender algorithm for each content group 
To meet requirement R1, all radio content should be 
subdivided into homogeneous groups. It is the broadcaster’s 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-542-5
eKNOW 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

decision which and how many groups to build. This decision, 
how many and which groups of content to build, and which 
recommender algorithms to implement, may well differ 
according to the needs and the orientation of the broadcaster 
and to the individual understanding what makes a good 
program. 
Experiments have shown that with respect to listening 
satisfaction, 
recommender 
with 
curating 
outperforms 
recommendation alone. That is, the content is manually 
curated into groups (e.g., lead stories, core stories, break 
stories and invest stories, in the case of NPR [22]), and each 
group has its own recommendation technique. 
B. A separate program composer component 
To meet requirement R2, a separate program composer 
component exists that enables a sophisticated program 
management. The program composer algorithm, which 
defines the individual radio program sequence, then 
assembles the personalized radio program according to 
broadcaster-specific rules or patterns. In this program 
sequence, also non-recommender content such as newscast 
can be embedded. This way, the broadcaster not only 
maintains full control over how to assemble the 
recommended items from each content group, but also over 
the integration of content that prevents the user get into a 
filter bubble, in order to meet requirement R3. 
As of current research, BBC Research & Development 
puts efforts in understanding what makes a good mix, and 
how to put this into templates or algorithms [23]. 
C. Context awareness for both recommender algorithms 
and the composer component 
To meet requirement R4, context information may both 
influence the recommender algorithms and the program 
composer component. Ideally, context factors are already 
reflected in the recommender algorithms. But as the context 
of the user might change unexpectedly, the program 
composer component might adapt to the changed context 
much quicker, as it is the final sequence generator. Also for 
non-recommender content, the program composer can make 
use of context information. 
Whereas a lot of knowledge about content-aware 
recommender systems already exists [24], more research has 
to be done specifically for the spoken word radio domain. 
The same holds for the architecture presented in general; it 
is still generic, as we still lack research results in detail. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
The requirements, situations and solution approaches 
depicted in this paper represent our view on the status quo of 
recommender systems in the radio broadcasting industry. 
Both requirements and solution approaches might still 
develop, as recommender systems for radio are just emerging 
and our perspective might not be all-embracing. More 
research has to be done on the questions what makes up a 
good radio program, and how to incorporate this into 
algorithms. The answers to these questions will presumably 
be case-centric, as every broadcaster might find an individual 
solution depending on their specific profile. The insight 
about the ingredients for a good program in turn determines 
which 
groups 
of 
contents 
to 
build 
before 
the 
recommendation takes place. Especially for publicly funded 
radio broadcasters, the question arises how exactly the 
influence of the interstate broadcast agreements should be 
shaped. 
Further, practitioners and researchers have to think about 
the feedback channel of radio recommender systems. 
Whereas the feedback channel of the user’s interactions is 
crucial for every recommender system in order to iteratively 
improve 
on 
the 
recommendation 
quality, 
in 
radio 
recommender systems the feedback goes far beyond the pure 
algorithmic improvement – it reaches back to the sphere of 
activities of the editors and producers. In other words, radio 
recommender systems should inform the editors and 
producers which content to produce more/less, how to 
improve meta-data, and how recommendations were taken 
up 
by 
listeners, 
i.e., 
gauge 
effectiveness 
of 
the 
recommendation algorithms. The feedback could also 
include explicit questions and comments from the consumers 
voiced through a mobile app.  
Thus, radio recommendation should not be considered as 
a unidirectional communication like traditional radio – from 
producer to consumer – but as the possibility to enable the 
interaction of producer and consumer with respect to content. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Spotify, “Number of global monthly active Spotify users 
from 
July 
2012 
to 
June 
2016,” 
2016: 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/367739/spotify-global-
mau/. [Accessed: 30-Jan-2017]. 
[2] 
VentureBeat, “Number of paying Spotify subscribers 
worldwide from July 2010 to September 2016,” 2016: 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/244995/number-of-
paying-spotify-subscribers/. [Accessed: 30-Jan-2017]. 
[3] 
US Census Bureau, “Estimated expenses of the U.S. 
broadcasting 
industry 
from 
2007 
to 
2014,” 
2014: 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/185403/estimated-
expenses-of-the-us-broadcasting-industry-since-2005/. 
[Accessed: 30-Jan-2017]. 
[4] 
Ofcom, “International Communications Market Report,” 
2015: 
https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/ 
0020/31268/icmr_2015.pdf. [Accessed: 30-Jan-2017]. 
[5] 
IfD Allensbach, “Population in Germany per frequency of 
radio consumption in the years 2012 to 2016,” 2016: 
https://de.statista.com/statistik/daten/studie/170993/umfrage/
haeufigkeit-von-radiohoeren/. [Accessed: 30-Jan-2017]. 
[6] 
S. Hirschmeier, D. A. Döppner, and D. Schoder, “Stating and 
Discussing Challenges of Radio Recommender Systems in 
Contrast to Music Recommendation,” in Proceedings of the 
2nd International Workshop on Decision Making and 
Recommender Systems, Bozen Bolzano, 2015. 
[7] 
V. Zaharchuk, D. I. Ignatov, A. Konstantinov, and S. 
Nikolenko, “A New Recommender System for the 
Interactive Radio Network FMhost,” Jan. 2012. 
[8] 
F. V. Hecht, T. Bocek, N. Bär, R. Erdin, B. Kuster, M. 
Zeeshan, and B. Stiller, “Radiommender: P2P on-line radio 
with a distributed recommender system,” in IEEE 12th 
International Conference on Peer-to-Peer Computing, 2012. 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-542-5
eKNOW 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[9] 
C. Hayes and P. Cunningham, “Smart radio — community 
based music radio,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 14, no. 
3–4, pp. 197–201, Jun. 2001. 
[10] G. Dziczkowski, L. Bougueroua, and K. Wegrzyn-Wolska, 
“Social Network - An Autonomous System Designed for 
Radio Recommendation,” in 2009 International Conference 
on Computational Aspects of Social Networks, 2009, pp. 57–
64. 
[11] D. I. Ignatov, S. I. Nikolenko, T. Abaev, and J. Poelmans, 
“Online recommender system for radio station hosting based 
on information fusion and adaptive tag-aware profiling,” 
Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 55, pp. 546–558, Aug. 
2016. 
[12] D. R. Turnbull, J. A. Zupnick, K. B. Stensland, A. R. 
Horwitz, A. J. Wolf, A. E. Spirgel, S. P. Meyerhofer, and T. 
Joachims, “Using Personalized Radio to Enhance Local 
Music Discovery,” in CHI ’14 Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, New York, 2014, pp. 2023–
2028. 
[13] N.-H. Liu, “Design of an Intelligent Car Radio and Music 
Player System,” Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 72, 
no. 2, pp. 1341–1361, Sep. 2014. 
[14] O. Moling, L. Baltrunas, and F. Ricci, “Optimal Radio 
Channel Recommendations with Explicit and Implicit 
Feedback,” in Proceedings of the Sixth ACM Conference on 
Recommender Systems, New York, 2012, pp. 75–82. 
[15] Y. Xie, L. Chen, K. Jia, L. Ji, and J. Wu, “iNewsBox: 
Modeling and Exploiting Implicit Feedback for Building 
Personalized News Radio,” in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM 
International Conference on Information & Knowledge 
Management, New York, 2013, pp. 2485–2488. 
[16] P. Casagranda, A. Erk, S. O’Halpin, D. Born, and W. 
Huijten, “A framework for a context-based hybrid content 
radio,” in The best of the IET and IBC, 2015, pp. 41–47. 
[17] G. Schatter and B. Zeller, “Design and Implementation of an 
Adaptive Digital Radio DAB using Content Personalization 
on the Basis of Standards,” IEEE Transactions on Consumer 
Electronics, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1353–1361, Nov. 2007. 
[18] M. Ala-Fossi, S. Lax, B. O’Neill, P. Jauert, and H. Shaw, 
“The Future of Radio is Still Digital—But Which One? 
Expert Perspectives and Future Scenarios for Radio Media in 
2015,” Journal of Radio & Audio Media, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 
4–25, Mai 2008. 
[19] J. N. Anderson, “Radio broadcasting’s digital dilemma,” 
Convergence: International Journal of Research into New 
Media Technologies, Sep. 2012. 
[20] S. T. Eastman and D. A. Ferguson, Media Programming: 
Strategies and Practices. Wadsworth Publishing, 2012. 
[21] M. C. Keith, The Radio Station, 8th ed. Focal Press, 2012. 
[22] Z. Brand, “NPR Digital Media: lessons learned in creating 
and delivering a digital listening experience,” presented at 
the 
Radio 
2.0 
Keynote, 
Paris, 
2015: 
http://de.slideshare.net/NicolasMoulard/npr-digital-media-
lessons-learned-in-creating-and-delivering-a-digital-
listening-experience-radio-20-2015. 
[Accessed: 
02-Feb-
2017]. 
[23] K. Sommers, “Understanding Editorial Decisions,” BBC 
Research 
& 
Development, 
06-Feb-2016: 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/rd/blog/2016-05-understanding-
editorial-decisions. [Accessed: 02-Feb-2017]. 
[24] F. Ricci, L. Rokach, and B. Shapira, Eds., Recommender 
Systems Handbook. Springer, 2015. 
 
 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-542-5
eKNOW 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

