 
The Effects of Social Capital on Individual Adaptation to New ICT 
Kee-Young Kwahk 
College of Business Administration / Graduate School of Business IT 
Kookmin University 
Seoul, South Korea 
e-mail: kykwahk@kookmin.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract—This study examines how the social capital derived 
from social networks influences individual adaptation to a new 
information and communication technology system and its 
related performance levels. On the basis of social capital theory, 
we establish a research model that combines social network 
variables with psychometric ones. The proposed research 
model was empirically tested using the Partial Least Squares 
method. The results reveal that individuals’ adaptation 
mechanisms can be explained in terms of their positions within 
social networks. We conclude by discussing the implications of 
the research findings. 
Keywords-social networks; social capital; adaptation; ICT 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Most of today’s organizations have used Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) to achieve their 
competitive advantage as well as to operate daily work 
practices, which makes the effective use of ICT by 
organization members a necessary condition for successful 
business. As a consequence, a primary challenge facing 
organizations with the intent of introducing a new ICT for the 
business purposes is how to adapt organization members to 
the major technological changes that have an impact on their 
business operations and strategy.  
Despite the growing attention to the effective utilization 
of the ICT system in the workplace, however, there is an 
accumulation of evidence from the literature indicating that 
organizations do not utilize newly introduced ICT systems to 
their full functional potential and a number of new 
implementations continue to fail [2][4]. We explore the 
reasons for the underutilization of new ICT by focusing on 
the two barriers related to individual’s coping process for 
adapting to ICT-induced changes. On one hand, from the 
technical perspective, today’s ICT is complex and raises 
significant challenges for organization members, particularly 
by overwhelming them with numerous features and the 
accompanying learning requirements [5]. Users thus face 
knowledge barriers to system adaptation even after a formal 
introduction of the system [3]. On the other hand, from the 
organizational and social perspective, the introduction of new 
ICT tends to bring a disruptive workplace change, for 
example, a new way of order fulfillment process induced by 
a new ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) system, which 
might lead to a sense of anxiety and uncertainty about the 
future among organization members. Users thus face emotion 
barriers to system adaptation even though they are 
knowledgeable about the system. Therefore, understanding 
the effective use of ICT with a focus on an individual’s 
coping mechanism towards knowledge and emotion barriers 
will help us in devising ways to manage individual adaptation 
processes and thereby achieve the enhanced performance. 
With the aforementioned motivation and background, this 
paper has the following research objectives: First, this study 
develops a research model of system adaptation and how it 
affects performance and reflects on individual coping 
mechanisms. Second, this paper introduces key social 
network constructs into the research model, thereby 
extending the applicability of social network research into the 
information systems field. Third, the proposed research 
model demonstrates a role of social network perspective in 
explaining system adaptation by combining traditional 
psychometric constructs with ones from social network 
domain and empirically validating the model. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 
2, we present the research model and hypotheses. In Section 
3, we describe the research methodology. Section 4 presents 
the analysis and results. Finally, we conclude the work in 
Section 5. 
II. RESEARCH MODEL AND HYPOTHESES 
We developed a research model to explain the coping 
mechanism towards ICT-induced changes based on the 
perspectives of social capital theory. We propose the 
following hypotheses. 
 
H1a.  Supportive network position has a positive effect on 
self-efficacy. 
H1b. Supportive network position has a positive effect on 
absorptive capacity. 
H2a.  Informational network position has a positive effect 
on self-efficacy. 
H2b.  Informational network position has a positive effect 
on absorptive capacity. 
H3. Self-efficacy has a positive effect on absorptive 
capacity. 
H4. Self-efficacy has a positive effect on individual 
adaptation. 
H5. Absorptive capacity has a positive effect on 
individual adaptation. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
H6. Individual adaptation has a positive effect on 
individual performance. 
III.  RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
The questionnaire administered in this study largely 
consisted of two parts, which investigated social network 
constructs and traditional psychometric constructs. We 
collected social network data using a two-step name 
generator/name interpreter method that elicits and then 
characterizes respondents’ (egos’) relationships with others 
(alters). In this study, a social network is seen as a set of 
individuals and the relationships between them in which the 
relationships represent communication or interaction directed 
towards exchanging task-related information (informational 
networks) or gaining emotional support (supportive 
networks). Traditional social network studies have devised 
various measures to assess the extent to which individuals 
have such kinds of relationships [6][7]. Based on those 
studies, we propose that individuals’ social network positions 
are determined by size, closeness, frequency, and density 
derived from individuals’ social networks. The items used to 
operationalize the psychometric constructs included in this 
study were adopted and modified primarily from previous 
studies, with necessary changes for the research context. All 
question items except for the performance measurement were 
measured using a seven-point Likert-type scale with anchors 
ranging from strongly disagree (=1) to strongly agree (=7).  
IV.  ANALYSIS AND RESULTS 
The proposed hypotheses were tested using PLS (Partial 
Least Squares) [1]. We selected PLS for the following 
reasons. First, PLS simultaneously explains the theoretical 
relationships between latent variables and indicators. Second, 
PLS does not assign the same weight to all indicators of a 
latent variable; it assigns different weights according to the 
indicators’ degrees of contribution to the latent variable [8]. 
Third, PLS does not impose strong constraints on sample size 
compared with other structural equation modeling techniques, 
such as LISREL [1].  
According to the two-step analytical procedure, we first 
conducted confirmatory factor analysis in order to evaluate 
the measurement model, and then we examined the structural 
model. The results of the structural model analysis are 
described with standardized path coefficients and t-values. 
The significance values of all the paths in this model were 
generated using the bootstrap resampling procedure. Self-
efficacy was significantly influenced by supportive network 
position (β = 0.263; t = 4.176) but not informational network 
position (β = 0.021; t = 0.284), which accounted for 7.4 
percent of the variance in self-efficacy. Absorptive capacity 
was significantly related to informational network position (β 
= 0.227; t = 4.274) and self-efficacy (β = 0.801; t = 26.302) 
but not supportive network position (β = -0.013; t = 0.367), 
which explained 72.8 percent of the variance in absorptive 
capacity. Self-efficacy (β = 0.193; t = 2.071) and absorptive 
capacity (β = 0.693; t = 8.027) were significantly related to 
individual adaptation, and accounted for 73.8 percent of the 
variance in individual adaptation. Finally, individual 
adaptation 
was 
significantly 
related 
to 
individual 
performance (β = 0.601; t = 13.500), explaining 36.2 percent 
of the variance in individual performance. 
V. CONCLUSION 
This research has shown that the social capital derived 
from organization members’ social network positions aids in 
our understanding of coping processes toward the 
introduction of a new ICT system. The proposed research 
model suggests that emotion-focused coping processes are 
associated with individuals’ positions within supportive 
networks, while problem-focused coping processes are 
related to individuals’ positions within informational 
networks. The empirical results show that individual 
adaptation is enhanced by organization members’ self-
efficacy and absorptive capacity, which in turn are influenced 
by their supportive and informational network positions, 
respectively. The results of this study also revealed that the 
social network perspective might play an important role in 
investigating various IS (Information Systems)-related issues 
by integrating with the traditional research perspective. Such 
an approach would provide an alternative lens through which 
to view the domain of IS research, as well as an alternative 
instrument for managerial intervention. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Chin, W.W. The Partial Least Squares Approach to Structural 
Equation Modeling. In G. A. Marcoulides (Ed.), Modern methods for 
business research (pp. 295-336). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 1998. 
[2] 
Davis, F. D., and Venkatesh, V. “Toward Preprototype User 
Acceptance Testing of New Information Systems: Implications for 
Software Project Management,” IEEE Transactions on Engineering 
Management, Vol. 51, No. 1, 2004, pp. 31-46.  
[3] 
Fichman, R.G. and Kemerer, C.F., “The Illusory Diffusion of 
Innovation: An Examination of Assimilation GAPs,” Information 
Systems Research, Vol. 10, No. 3, 1999, pp. 255-275. 
[4] 
Jasperson, J., Carter, P. E., and Zmud, R. W., “A Comprehensive 
Conceptualization of Post-Adoptive Behaviors Associated with 
Information Technology Enabled Work Systems,” MIS Quarterly, Vol. 
29, No. 3, 2005, pp. 525-557. 
[5] 
Kanter, J., “Have We Forgotten the Fundamental IT Enabler: Ease of 
Use?” Information Systems Management, Vol. 17, No.3, 2000, pp. 70-
77. 
[6] 
Scott, J., Social Network Analysis: A Handbook, Sage Publications, 
London, 2000. 
[7] Wasserman. S., and Faust, K., Social Network Analysis. Methods and 
Applications, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1994. 
[8] 
Wold, S. “Multivariate Data Analysis: Converting Chemical Data 
Tables to Plots,” In Computer Applications in Chemical Research and 
Education, Heidelberg: Dr. Alfred Huetithig Verlag, 1989. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

