If Experience is Worth, How Experts Behave in a Manga Case 
 
Satoshi Takahashi 
Department of Computational Intelligence and Systems 
Science 
Tokyo Institute of Technology 
Kanagawa, Japan 
e-mail: takahashi.s.bh@m.titech.ac.jp 
Toru B. Takahashi 
Department of Management Science 
Tokyo University of Science 
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: takahashi.toru@rs.tus.ac.jp 
Atsushi Yoshikawa 
Department of Computational Intelligence and Systems 
Science 
Tokyo Institute of Technology 
Kanagawa, Japan 
e-mail: at_sushi_bar@dis.titech.ac.jp 
Takao Terano 
Department of Computational Intelligence and Systems 
Science 
Tokyo Institute of Technology 
Kanagawa, Japan 
e-mail: terano@dis.titech.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— To develop and put in place effective training 
methods in business, discovering how experts and novices 
differ is important. However, it is difficult to measure these 
differences in an actual work environment. In this study, that 
problem is resolved by using a manga case, in which business 
scenarios are illustrated in a distinctive Japanese comic book 
form. The characteristics of the manga case provide the reader 
with a hypothetical business situation experience. In the study, 
experts and novices were placed in a simulated business 
situation using a manga case and were asked to evaluate the 
leadership skills of one of the characters. From those 
evaluations and participant interviews, two differences were 
observed: 1) The experts paid attention not only to what the 
leader did and said, but also to background information, such 
as what staff members did and said and the description of the 
office; 2) The breadth of information considered was larger for 
the experts than the novices in terms of “scale” and “time.” 
“Scale” refers to the number of individuals and organizational 
factors, etc., considered as they weigh the effects of events and 
the cause-and-effect relationships. “Time” refers to the 
chronological spans considered when weighing the effects of 
events and the cause-and-effect relationships. 
Keywords-business; expert assessment; manga case; case 
method; leadership. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
For companies, the speed of technological change 
continues to accelerate. One effect of that acceleration is that 
businesses are searching for more effective training methods 
[1]. To develop and put in place effective training in business, 
discovering how experts and novices differ is important. 
Once such differences are understood, it will be possible to 
conduct research regarding an educational approach that can 
effectively address these differences. In this study, these 
differences mean the different ways experts and novices 
behave and perceive work-related situations. 
One obstacle, however, is that in reality it is difficult to 
measure the behavior and perception of experts and novices 
as they engage in work. As a result, in past research on 
business experts, accomplishments, years of service, and 
psychological measures have been studied [2]. This makes it 
difficult to use such results to develop more effective 
business training methods.  
However, studies on experts in sports and in education 
have been conducted by Kato et al. and Chi et al., 
respectively [3] [4]. Kato et al. had participants simulate 
sports play and, by measuring changes in line of sight, 
discovered that there were differences between experts and 
novices. Chi et al. had participants solve a physics problem 
while verbalizing their thought process (Think-aloud 
protocol). Their study found that there were differences 
between the experts and the novices in how they perceived 
the problem. In both studies, a simulated context was devised 
for the experiment to discover the differences between 
experts and novices and measure behavior and perception. 
In this study, a manga case was used to simulate business 
situations in order to discover expert-novice differences in 
behavior and perception.  
Manga cases are designed for educational purposes and 
present typical business situations in a comic book format [5] 
[6] [7] [8]. Manga cases can be defined as case materials in a 
comic book form. They can provide simulated business 
experiences for experiment participants via the illustrated 
format.  Further explanation about manga cases is provided 
in Section II.  
In this study, Section I is the introduction; Section II 
provides an explanation of manga case characteristics; 
Section III explains the experiment’s methodology; Section 
IV presents the results ; Section V presents the discussion; 
and, Section VI presents the conclusion.  
 
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

II. 
THE MANGA CASE 
This Section describes the characteristics of manga cases 
and how they are used. A manga case is a genre of 
educational material that presents scenes and story lines 
important to business. Manga case topics and usage are 
similar to those found in case method. To date, we have 
created manga cases to illustrate topics, such as worker-
management 
conflicts 
and 
negotiations 
with 
client 
companies. 
Compared to case materials in which the business scenario 
is described in words, manga cases describe the scenario 
through a sequence of panels that make up a comic strip. In a 
manga case, information is embedded in the material via use 
of characteristic comic techniques of expression; that is, 
facial expressions and words of characters, and background 
drawings of the office furniture and cityscapes. The reader 
discovers pieces of information embedded in the educational 
content and interprets them to build a hypothesis. In this way, 
the reader can come close to experiencing a real business 
situation. 
A few examples of embedded information and hypothesis 
building are given below from “Website Flaming!” used in 
this study. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Information embedded in expressions, words, and actions. 
 
A. 
Communication through Facial Expression, Words, 
and Action 
An 
example 
of 
communication 
through 
facial 
expressions, words, and action is shown in Figure 1, 
depicting a meeting at a startup company. In scenes from that 
meeting, elements, like the characters’ words and facial 
expressions, communicate the nature of the relationships 
among the characters and how they share information: 
Woman (Systems Engineer): “So, in order to get stable 
profits for the company…” 
Man 1 (Second in command): “Hold on, if you think 
about VC....” 
Man 2 (President): “OK, OK” 
The reader can see from the woman’s expression and 
from what she says that she is unhappy with a recent 
organizational decision; and, gather from the president’s 
expression and words, that he is the type of character who 
wants the meeting to proceed amicably. 
 
B. 
Communication via Background Depictions 
Figures 2 and 3 illustrate communication via background 
depictions. Figure 2 depicts a whiteboard in the startup 
company’s office. From the schedule written on it, the reader 
can interpret the method and status of information sharing 
within the company. Specifically, at this company, 
transaction negotiations with a major client and a briefing 
session for a venture capital Board are scheduled to take 
place in the near future, but those events are not written on 
the schedule. From that information, the reader can infer that 
management information in this company is not shared with 
the staff. 
Figure 3 depicts the startup company's office space. From 
this scene, the reader can extrapolate the office size, 
equipment, the number of employees, the amount of capital 
invested in equipping the office, the working hours, etc. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Background depicting a whiteboard. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Background depicting the office. 
C. 
Information Discovery and Hypothesis Building 
The reader gathers and synthesizes information from 
panels, such as those shown in Figures 1, 2, and 3, and builds 
a hypothesis about what is happening. An example of this 
hypothesis development follows.  
Hypothesis: From the investment in equipment, the 
number of employees, and earnings issues, it appears that the 
company’s finances are not healthy. On the other hand, in the 
near future, there is going to be a meeting with the venture 
capital Board. That means that tonight’s negotiations with 
the major client company need to be successful. However, 
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Man 2, the president, has not shared that information with 
the staff, and is trying to resolve the problem alone. 
 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
This Section explains the details of the methodology used 
in the study. Business experts and novices were recruited as 
participants, provided with the manga case, and asked to 
respond to a set of problems. After responding to all the 
problems, they were then interviewed. The interviews 
consisted of questions about the participants’ thinking and 
what they paid attention to as they responded to the 
problems. More details are provided below regarding the 
manga case, the participants, the problems, and the 
interview questions. 
A. 
The Manga Case 
For the experiment, the manga case used was “Website 
Flaming!” which explores the case of an IT startup company. 
The main characters are Mr. Tanaka, the president of the 
startup company, Ms. Isaka, the company’s systems engineer, 
and Mr. Chiyokura, the company’s second in command. 
Other characters include the company’s other staff and the 
staff of the major client company. The general story line is 
that the website of the startup company is about to go up in 
flames and though they have made various attempts to 
prevent this from happening, it eventually catches fire and 
takes down the company’s servers.  
B. 
The Participants 
The participants in this study consisted of four university 
students as business novices (N1, N2, N3, N4) and four 
company employees as experts (E1, E2, E3, E4). The experts 
were selected referencing the 10-year rule, and, therefore, 
had 10 years or more of working experience [9]. 
C. 
The Problems 
The following three problems were set up related to 
leadership skill evaluation: 
 
Problem 1: Choose 20 or more panels that are relevant to 
evaluating Mr. Tanaka’s leadership. 
 
Problem 2: Use the provided leadership evaluation scale to 
assess Mr. Tanaka’s leadership.  
 
Problem 3: Based on your evaluation in problem 2, select 
additional panels to those you chose in problem 1 that are 
relevant to your assessment. 
  
There are two reasons why the evaluation of leadership 
was chosen as the theme for the problems. First, in business, 
leadership evaluation is considered a necessary skill 
regardless of business type. Second, knowledge specific to a 
particular business is not a necessary factor in leadership 
evaluation. “Knowledge specific to a particular business” 
refers to the knowledge learned after joining and working at 
a company. The knowledge about financial operations in a 
startup company would be an example of this. Basing a 
problem on this type of knowledge would likely introduce 
bias into the results regarding the differences between 
working participants and student participants, by including 
an effect from such knowledge.  
The reasoning behind problem 2 was to prevent bias from 
the differences in the participants’ perceptions regarding 
leadership. By using a common measure of leadership to 
evaluate Mr. Tanaka’s skills, participants were forced to 
somewhat share the same leadership standards. More 
specifically, the initial selection of panels in problem 1 was 
created as a separate step to enable an examination of how 
exposure to problem 2 might affect expert and novice 
participants differently. The results of that analysis are 
omitted here since they fall outside of the purpose of this 
study. 
For problem 2, the Performance-Maintenance (PM) 
Leadership Scale was employed because it is standard 
leadership evaluation scale. The scale evaluates leadership 
based on performance and maintenance items [10]. 
Although there are a few versions of the PM Leadership 
Scale, in this study the scale for top management leadership 
was used [11]. The top management scale has 77 items. Part 
of the scale is shown in Table I. For each PM evaluation 
item, the participants were to choose one out of four ratings: 
“good,” “bad,” “seen in some panels but no judgment is 
possible for the whole story,” and “not seen in any panel.”  
TABLE I.  PM LEADERSHIP SCALE(TOP MANAGEMENT LEADERSHIP) 
Item # 
Evaluation Item 
1 
Demands the accomplishment of priority objectives. 
2 
Requires that decision-making has an objective and 
quantitative basis. 
3 
Once an objective has been set, it is pursued, even when 
difficulties are encountered. 
D. 
The Interviews 
Interviews were performed after all the problems had 
been answered. In the interviews, participants were asked 
about Mr. Tanaka’s leadership evaluation and the reasons 
for their choices when answering problems 1 and 3. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
This Section presents the results obtained from the 
methodology explained in Section III, followed by a 
discussion. First, the answers to problems 1 and 3 were 
quantitatively analyzed. Next, the interview answers were 
qualitatively analyzed. 
A. Quantitative analysis 
This Section presents a quantitative analysis of the 
answers to problems 1 and 3. Figures 4 and 5 show the 
results of problems 1 and 3. The horizontal axis of Figure 4 
shows each participant and the vertical axis shows the 
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

number of panels selected. The number of panels related to 
Mr. Tanaka’s words and actions was tabulated separately 
from those panels without his words and actions (referred to 
below as “background information panels”). In Figure 5, the 
ratio of background information panels to the total number of 
panels selected is shown on the vertical axis against the 
horizontal axis showing the novices and experts. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
N1
N2
N3
N4
E1
E2
E3
E4
Number of Panels Selected
Participants
Paneles Related to Mr. Tanaka’s Words and 
Actions
Background Information Panels
 
Figure 4.  Number of panels selected by participants 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Ratio of Background 
Information Panels
Participant Group 
Novices
Experts
 
Figure 5.  Ratio of background information panels. 
In Figure 4, a difference can be seen in the number of 
background information panels that the novices selected, 0–8 
(with an average of 4), compared to the experts’ selecting 7–
16 (with an average of 13). In addition, in Figure 5, a 
difference can be seen in the ratio of background information 
panels to the total selected, 0.000–0.242 (avg. 0.126), by the 
novices, compared to 0.242–0.500 (avg. 0.338) for the 
experts.  
The ratios of background information panels to the total 
number of panels selected were tested for variance in the 
means of the novice and expert groups. First, in order to test 
for equal variance, an F-test was performed. The result of the 
F-test showed that the variance between novices and experts 
was not significant with a one-tailed P=0.41>0.05 result. 
Next, a t-test was performed assuming an equal variance for 
the two samples. The t-test showed a significant difference in 
the means between the novice and expert groups with two-
tailed P=0.03<0.05 result.  
 
B. Qualitative Analysis 
In this Section, the qualitative analysis is presented. The 
analysis consisted of a repetitive process of: 1) segmenting 
of the interview results; 2) coding; and 3) thematic grouping. 
The results showed two key themes in the interviews: 
“scale” and “time.” 
“Scale” is the scale of items being considered at the time of 
the interview. The four items discovered, from a small to a 
large scale, were: Mr. Tanaka’s personal attitude and nature, 
Mr. Tanaka’s relationships with staff, Mr. Tanaka’s 
relationship with the outside world, and the overall 
organization.  
“Time” is the chronological relationship between the 
events in the story line and the events the participants were 
considering at the time of their comments. The three periods 
identified were: the past, during the story line, and the future. 
To clarify, “the past” refers to an event the participant 
considered had already happened before the story began. 
“The future” refers to an event the participant considered 
will happen after the story ends. 
Against the themes of “scale” and “time,” the interview 
results are shown in Tables II and III. As can be seen in 
these tables, novice comments rarely related to the “overall 
organization,” to the “past,” or to the “future.” 
The next few paragraphs give examples of expert 
comments, accompanied by the panels they refer to. These 
illustrate three themes with differences between the experts 
and novices: the “overall organization,” the “past,” and the 
“future.”  
1) The “overall organization” 
The first example is shown in Figure 6, a scene where 
employees are having a conversation. For this scene, one 
expert commented, “They are not on the same page,” 
implying that, the leader is neglecting to pay attention to 
enabling smooth communication among staff. 
 
 
Figure 6.  A conversation between staff members. 
Second in Command: “Weren't you listening?” 
 
A second example is shown in Figure 7, a panel depicting 
a whiteboard in the office. Regarding this panel, one expert 
commented, “Even though it is year-end and there must be 
meetings with the venture capital Board and banks, that 
hasn’t been shared.” By this, he meant that, when 
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

information important to the operation of the organization is 
not internally shared, a gap in awareness arises between the 
leaders and staff. 
 
Figure 7.  The whiteboard. 
As in these examples, experts evaluated Mr. Tanaka’s 
leadership skills based on information related to the entire 
organization. Elsewhere, some experts, noticing elements 
like the office equipment, threw doubt on the firm’s balance 
in allocating funds. Additionally, there were comments 
pointing to the immaturity of the systemic response to the 
server problems.  
On the other hand, novice comments were largely limited 
to Mr. Tanaka’s individual behavior. The only exception 
was one comment stating that, “Good benefits” in response 
to a scene in which Mr. Tanaka is explaining about bonuses.  
2) The “Past” 
Figure 8 depicts a business dinner scene with a client in 
which the president’s response to the situation is 
questionable. Regarding this scene, an expert commented 
that, “They didn’t prepare for the meeting by working out an 
integrated approach internally beforehand.” By this he meant, 
usually, before an external meeting, an integrated approach is 
worked out internally, including roles and conversation 
content. However, because Mr. Tanaka does not trust his 
staff, that probably never happened.  
 
Staff member: “He should 
push the word-of-mouth side 
as we do that. Do they want 
us to simply do subcontract 
work?” 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  A lack of trust from staff. 
In these comments, the expert is looking for cause-and-
effect relationships from the past that preceded the story’s 
timeline. Another expert made comments implying that, a 
strategy to deal with the server problems (in the story) 
should have been put together before the story, not during it. 
On the other hand, novices tended to identify causes or 
measures only in actions or events within the story line and 
they had no comments on the past before the story’s time 
line.  
 
3) The “Future” 
The first example of the future theme is depicted in Figure 
9, in a scene in which Mr. Tanaka responds to a question 
from the client. In this scene, he replies that there are no 
problems, in response to the client’s question regarding 
whether there have been problems with the website. 
Regarding this scene, an expert commented that, “If there 
really were problems, to respond that way is a bad idea,” 
meaning that, if there were truly problems, there could be 
situations later on when it would be difficult to explain these 
to the client and the client’s trust would be completely lost. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Response to a client. 
Tanaka: “There's no problem. It's something that happens all the time. I 
always tell the staff to keep in touch even about the slightest things.” 
 
A second example, in Figure 10, is a scene of an internal 
meeting where Mr. Tanaka is giving an explanation about 
the business going forward. Regarding this scene, an expert 
commented that, “He’s thinking about new business,” by 
which he meant, Tanaka is thinking not only about the 
current business but about future business. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Tanaka’s future business vision. 
Tanaka: “So, we've started website management of 'word-of-mouth 
websites' in order to expand the company, and its finally started to achieve a 
little turnover this year. We're a long way from operating in the black on a 
year-to-year basis with just this project, and the management costs aren't 
cheap, but if you think about the spinoff business which can be derived from 
word-of-mouth, it's clear that it will grow. No, we have to make it grow.”  
 
In these examples, without limiting their evaluation to the 
results of actions within the story, the experts appreciated the 
possible impact on the company’s future after the story 
ended.  
In contrast, the novices tended to look for results and 
evaluations of Tanaka’s actions only within the story line, 
and made no comments about the future beyond the story’s 
time frame.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The qualitative analysis showed that when evaluating 
leadership, experts referred to a larger amount of background 
information, defined as information other than the words and 
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

actions of the leader. Examples of this were conversations 
between staff and information written on the whiteboard.  
The results of the qualitative analysis showed that the 
experts referred to information broad in scale and time in 
order to evaluate leadership skills. Being “broad in scale” 
meant that the experts focused not only on the leader’s 
actions and words but also on the situation of the overall 
organization. Being “broad in time” meant that the experts 
did not limit themselves to considering actions and results 
within the story, but rather found causes in past behavior 
(before the story) and also evaluated the impact of actions in 
the future after the story.  
Synthesizing the results of the quantitative and 
qualitative analyses, thinking that was “broad in scale” 
seemed to result in the experts paying attention to 
background information, such as conversations between staff 
members in Figure 6 and the whiteboard in Figure 7. 
Additionally, thinking that was “broad in time” seemed to 
result in the experts paying attention to background 
information, such as a lack of trust from staff in Figure 8. 
The results can be summarized as follows: It may be seen 
that the experts tended to consider information more broadly 
in terms of scale and time, and as a result, the ratio of 
background information they used was larger. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This study used a manga case to identify differences 
between expert and novice assessments in the evaluation of 
leadership skills. The results of this study suggest two points 
regarding how experts and novices differ as they evaluate 
leaders. First, experts may tend to observe not only the 
actions and words of leaders, but also background 
information, namely, information, such as what staff 
members do and say, and how the office looks. On the other 
hand, novices may tend to depend more on observations of 
the leader’s actions and words. Second, the breadth of 
information taken into consideration by experts may be 
larger than that of novices in two ways, “scale” and “time.” 
“Scale” 
refers 
to 
the 
number 
of 
individuals 
and 
organizational factors, etc., considered as they weigh the 
effects of events and cause-and-effect relationships. “Time” 
refers to the chronological spans considered when weighing 
the effects of events and cause-and-effect relationships. It 
may be that because experts have a broader sense of scale 
and time, they pay more attention to background information.  
We hope that in the future the methodology used in this 
study can contribute to the development of more effective 
learning methods for novices in business. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
“Website Flaming!” used in this study was a fiscal 2009–
2010 Chuo University Joint Research project, funded by the 
Chuo University Joint Research Grant for “advanced case 
study research in education for the acquisition and exchange 
of practical knowledge.” Contributors to the creation of 
“Website Flaming!” were Assistant Professor Mikako 
Ogawa of the Tokyo University of Marine Science and 
Technology, Director Akihiko Yanagizaka, and Manga 
Artist Haruki Ogawa. 
 
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Numbers 26750088, 23501059, 25240048. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. 
Easterby-Smith, 
R. 
Snell, 
and 
S. 
Gherardi, 
“Organizational 
Learning: 
Diverging 
Communities 
of 
Practice?,” Management Learning, vol. 29, pp. 259-272, 1998. 
[2] M. Matsuo and T. Kusumi, “Salesperson's Procedural 
Knowledge, Experience and Performance: An Empirical 
Study in Japan,” European Journal of Marketing, vol. 36, pp. 
840-854, 2002. 
[3] T. Kato and T. Fukuda, “Visual search strategies of baseball 
batters: eye movements during the preparatory phase of 
batting,” Perceptual and Motor Skills, vol. 94, pp. 380-386, 
2002. 
[4] M. T. H. Chi, R. Glaser, and E. Rees, “Expertise in problem 
solving,“ Advances in the psychology of human intelligence, 
vol. I, R.J. Sternberg, Ed. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, pp. 7-75, 
1982. 
[5] A. Orita, A. Yoshikawa, and T. Terano, “Conducting Situated 
Intelligence Training ? Practices of executive training using 
manga,” Proceedings of International Conference Rethinking 
Business and Business Education, Chois, Greece, University 
of Aegean, 2011. (CD-ROM) 
[6] A. Orita, A. Yoshikawa, and T. Terano, “Practical IS-
Education using manga,” OASIS2011 IFIP8.2 Pre-ICIS 
Workshop , Shanghai, China, 2011 
[7] A. Yoshikawa, A. Orita, and  T. Terano, “Design of Situated 
Intelligence Training - A method for executive training using 
manga,” Proceedings of International Conference Rethinking 
Business and Business Education, Chois, Greece, University 
of Aegean, 2011. (CD-ROM) 
[8] A. Orita, A. Yoshikawa, and T. Terano, “Workshop on 
Business Csse Studies Using Narrative Approach With 
Manga 
Text,” 
KMO2011 
Sixth 
International 
KMO 
Conference, Knowledge Management in Organizations, 
2011.(workshop) 
[9] K. A. Ericsson and A. C. Lehmann, ”Expert and exceptional 
performance: Evidence of maximal adaptation to task 
constraints,” Annual review of psychology, vol.47, pp. 273-
305, 1996.  
[10] J. Misumi and M. F. Peterson, “The Performance-
Maintenance (PM) Theory of Leadership: Review of a 
Japanese 
Research 
Program,” 
Administrative 
Science 
Quarterly, vol. 30, pp. 198-223 , 1985. 
[11] J. Misumi, “トップマネジメントリーダーシップの PM ス
ケ ー ル 作 成 と そ の 妥 当 性 の 研 究 (Development and 
validation of  PM scale of top management leadership),” 
Hakutoshobo, Shoshikikagaku, vol. 20, pp 91-104, 1987. (in 
Japanese) 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
TABLE II.  CATEGORIZATION OF NOVICE INTERVIEW RESPONSES 
Tanaka's Attitude and Nature
Tanaka's Relationship with Staff
Tanaka's Relationship
with the Outside World
Overall Organization
The Past
Within the  Story
・I can imagine what he is thinking.
・He didn't do it early enough.
・He should move earlier.
Etc.
・Pushes the ultimate responsibility onto his
staff.
・Runs meetings efficiently.
・He gives his management opinion and he
shares it.
Etc.
・He's good at external PR.
・He knows how to talk to people outside the
company.
・He's a vigorous salesman.
Etc.
・Good benefits.
The  Future
Scale
Time
 
TABLE III. 
CATEGORIZATION OF EXPERT INTERVIEW RESPONSES 
Tanaka's Attitude and Nature
Tanaka's Relationship with Staff
Tanaka's Relationship
with the Outside World
Overall Organization
The Past
・They didn’t prepare for the meeting by
working out an integrated approach
internally beforehand.
・The server should have been reinforced.
・If it's known beforehand that usage is
going to suddenly increase, shouldn't they
devise some way like  using filters so that,
for at least that day, the servers are down
as little as possible?
・They're not going to let the servers go
down, but the whole system is broken.
Within the  Story
・He is not up to the job.
・He tries to handle difficult situations alone.
・On the positive side, it's good that he tries
to take responsibility for problems.
Etc.
・He proactively adopts proposals from
staff.
・He communicates with staff over yakiniku
dinners.
・He is surprisingly well liked by his staff.
Etc.
・Shouldn't he be clearly questioning the
business model?  They would be overlooking
something, because they don't have  B to C
experience. He goes around impressing
them with his strong points.
・He is concerned about social issues.
・His excuses are long-winded!
Etc.
・Awareness of the company's  financial
struggles is not shared.
・Considering the revenue, expenses are too
high (the building, conference rooms) .
・Staff members are not on the same page.
Etc.
The  Future
・He's thinking about new businesses
・If there really were problems, to respond
that way is a bad idea.
Time
Scale
 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

