Knowledge Cluster Development through Connectivity:
Examples from Southeast Asia
Hans-Dieter Evers
Center for Development Research (ZREF)
Rheinische Friedrich Wilhelms Universität Bonn,
Germany
e-mail: hdevers@gmail.com
Thomas Menkhoff
Lee Kong Chian School of Business
Singapore Management University (SMU), Singapore
e-mail: thomasm@smu.edu.sg
Abstract— Whereas since the 1990s national and regional
planners saw the creation of knowledge clusters as a panacea
for gaining a competitive advantage to propel a region or
country into a higher stage of industrial development, recent
research suggests that connectivity (e.g. through broadband
penetration or joint research connections with collaborators
elsewhere)
is
one
of
the
enablers
for
socio-economic
development. This paper will draw on the results of studies on
knowledge clusters in Southeast Asian countries (Malaysia,
Brunei, Singapore) as well as the relevant current literature to
ask the question, whether knowledge clusters really contribute
to regional development and if yes, under what circumstances.
The paper will also draw on lessons learned from knowledge
cluster initiatives in Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) countries and highlight policy
options to enhance connectivity in the context of knowledge
cluster development.
Keywords-knowledge clusters; connectivity; Southeast Asia.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Not too long ago, Frances Anne Cairncross, a British
economist, journalist, academic and a member of the Council
of
Economic
Advisers
for
the
Scottish
Government,
announced the “Death of Distance” [1]. She argued that the
advances in telecommunications would effectively eliminate
distance as a perceptible concept from our lives. This "death
of distance," a determinant of the cost of communications,
“will become the single most important economic force to
reshape society over the next half century”. Nothing could be
further from the truth. Nobody will today negate the impact
of the Internet and of broadband communications on society,
culture and the economy, but space still matters. Industrial
clusters, knowledge clusters and conceptions of space are
still important factors, shaping economy and society. Why
does distance still matter?
There are many answers to this intriguing question, but
two stand out. The first has been propagated by Harvard
Professor Michael Porter [38] [39] [40]. The competitive
advantage of nations and regions depends on the formation
of
industrial
clusters.
“Clusters
are
geographic
concentrations of interconnected companies, specialized
suppliers and service providers, firms in related industries,
and
associated
institutions
(e.g.
universities,
standard
agencies, and trade associations) in particular fields that
compete but also cooperate. Such clusters are a striking
feature of virtually every economy, especially those of more
economically advanced areas” (Porter 2000:253). Not only
that, the degree of clustering determines the competitiveness
of a nation or region. Firms located in a cluster have an
enhanced chance of profitability and are more competitive in
contrast to firms located outside a cluster in splendid
isolation. The main argument of earlier industrial location
theory
of
Alfred
Weber
is
resurrected,
namely
that
transaction costs are lower in clusters than outside [49].
This mantra has been repeated over and over again by
Porter and his followers and has led to massive research
programmes figuring out the degree of clustering, the
location of clusters and the best way to create and manage
industrial clusters.
Meanwhile, a great number of studies have been
conducted. According to the disciplinary home of the
authors, there are coloured
results. Geographers have
emphasized location and proximity, sociologists emphasized
social networks and knowledge sharing, and economists tend
to look at economies of scale and transaction costs. At this
stage it is extremely difficult to bring together the results of
these studies and to draw final conclusions. It has, however,
become
clear
that
cluster
formation
and
cluster
competitiveness
is
a
good
deal
more
complex
and
complicated than advocates of Porterian cluster policies
would have it. So far, it is not entirely clear whether clusters
make firms more productive and thus more competitive, or
more productive and competitive firms come together to
form a cluster. This poses a dilemma for cluster policies or
cluster governance. “Natural” clusters are possibly formed
by
highly
competitive
firms,
but
firms
induced
by
government subsidies or active cluster management may not
turn out to be more competitive at all despite being co-
located in a cluster.
One finding of Porter type cluster analysis still holds,
namely that despite increased broadband penetration and
Internet
connectivity
clusters
still
emerge.
The
basic
hypothesis that the higher the economic development of a
country or region (in terms of the usual measurements), the
higher the degree of industrial clustering appears to hold.
The big gap in our understanding of both the clustering
process and the outcome of clustering still lies in a precise
analysis of the inner workings of a cluster. In short, we need
to know more about what makes a cluster tick, before a
robust cluster policy can be designed. In Section II we
highlight the importance of tacit knowledge in knowledge
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

clusters, followed by what it takes in terms of knowledge
management for clustering in close proximity to enable
higher productivity (Section III+IV). Section V examines
Singapore’s maritime cluster and discusses the various
ingredients for a cluster to become an innovation hub. In the
conclusion, we make a case for the importance of governing
connectivity as part of knowledge governance.
II.
FROM INDUSTRIAL TO KNOWLEDGE
CLUSTERS
Current cluster analysis is the foster child of industrial
agglomeration theory, as developed by Alfred Weber a
century ago [49] [50]. Taking the Ruhr District, the home of
German heavy industries, as an example, he could show that
the use of raw materials, like coal, water and iron ore,
enticed basic industries and metal industries to crowd
together to reduce transportation costs. Raw materials were
heavier and therefore costlier to transport than finished
products to customers. Markets and materials decide location
of industries.
This “reduction of transaction cost” argument is still
valid for manufacturing industries, but less so for the new
and increasingly important raw material called “knowledge”
[48]. Data, information and explicit knowledge can be
transmitted through the Internet at low cost. Outsourcing
data intensive work, like banking, bookkeeping, design and
many other tasks has become frequent practice for both the
manufacturing and service sectors. It is therefore surprising
that in contradiction to the transaction cost argument,
knowledge intensive industries still tend to cluster.
Knowledge clusters do not just consist of information
and
communications
technology
(ICT)
or
high-tech
production units, but have to be combined with research
institutes, R&D divisions of companies (incl. test-beds and
labs), institutions of higher education and learning, like
colleges and universities, and government support services.
With
the
rapid
development
of
information
and
communication technology and the spread of fast Internet
connection, knowledge is increasingly seen as the most
important driver of development. While reaching the state of
an industrial society is seen as the aim of many developing
countries, the move towards a knowledge based economy
and society has already engulfed the industrial world. The
ICT based service sector is expanding and knowledge is
regarded as a prime factor of production. Though production
chains extend throughout the world, successful knowledge
intensive industries are still found primarily in closely-knit
knowledge clusters. The Silicon Valley, the Hyderabad ICT
cluster or the biotech research cluster in Singapore are just a
few of many examples of vibrant knowledge clusters. The
cost for producing knowledge may be high, the cost of
transferring data, information and knowledge is extremely
low. If the venerable transaction cost argument does not
hold, what then explains the emergence of knowledge
clusters?
One argument refers to Nonaka’s distinction between
tacit and explicit knowledge [36]. Tacit knowledge is seen as
the main ingredient of innovation in the fields of industrial
production, marketing and organizational behaviour. While
explicit
knowledge
can
be
easily
transmitted,
tacit
knowledge or experience needs personal contacts to be
disseminated [9] [19]. A concentration of experts and
scientists
leads
to
a
“knowledge
spill-over”
between
companies and in social networks and face-to-face contacts.
This allows the transmission of valuable tacit knowledge,
which is hard to pass on through the Internet. Even
broadband enabled video conferencing is apparently not able
to get tacit knowledge across and replace the stimulating
excitement of personal encounters.
Porter and his followers, on the other hand, seem to be
skeptical of this argument. Groupthink, for example, can
discourage creativity and prevent the process of innovating
[42]. Following Granovetter’s distinction between strong and
weak ties it could, indeed, be argued that weak social ties of
pluralistic, open-ended networks are more likely to be
innovative than tightly knit networks of like-minded persons
[23]. In other words, clusters integrated by social networks
are not necessarily more productive and innovative than
clusters with
broadband Internet communicating
units.
Empirical evidence is still scarce and a good deal more
research will be necessary to draw robust conclusion.
Another still open issue is the scale and regional impact
of clusters. As mentioned above, there appears to be a strong
correlation between cluster formation and economic growth
at the national level. The impact of cluster formation within
regions or beyond is less well established.
III.
K-CLUSTERS AS DRIVERS OF REGIONAL
DEVELOPMENT
One important assumption of the European Cluster
Initiative or the U.S. Cluster Mapping Project is that creating
or supporting industrial clusters guarantees economic growth
[13].
A
study
of
the
European
Cluster
Observatory
concluded, “there is plenty of evidence to suggest that
innovation and economic growth is heavily geographically
concentrated” [47]. As summarized by Mitchell et al. as
recently as 2014 “considerable evidence indicates that
knowledge plays a key role in the performance and
innovation of firms in clusters” (Mitchell et al. 2014:2198).
This, they argue, is also true for small and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs), though they often lack the absorptive
capacity to assimilate new knowledge, unless there are
“knowledge brokers” using their social capital of contacts
into their field of expertise (Mitchell et al. 2014:2204).
Another assumption is related to innovations as a driver
of growth. Innovations are presumably more likely to occur
in clusters rather than elsewhere. A survey of the European
Commission (Europe INNOVA / PRO INNO Europe Paper
N° 9, Commission
Staff Working Document,
p. 22)
concluded, “cluster firms are more innovative than non-
cluster firms. These innovative cluster companies are more
than twice more likely to source out research to other firms,
universities or public labs than were the average European
innovative firms in 2004. This supports the view that clusters
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

are encouraging knowledge sharing which may further
stimulate innovation. Moreover, cluster firms patent and
trademark their innovations more often than other innovative
companies” (p. 22-23). The statistical evidence provided in
these reports shows that most, if not all, clusters support
innovations and regional economic growth [14].
Despite the robust statistical evidence, this assumption
has recently come under attack. Clustering may even hinder
innovations. As Maskell has pointed out [31], cognitive
distance may be small in clusters, but when disparate
knowledge is required, strong clustering may even prevent
the exchange of necessary knowledge and therefor reduce
innovative capacity (p. 924). When disparate knowledge is
required, it will just not be available in a narrowly focused
knowledge cluster because it might be blocked by a
competing or differing school of thought.
In a review of the literature, Wolman and Hincapie draw
attention to the fact that “all regions have clusters, but not all
clusters
produce
high
growth”
[51].
The
question
is
therefore: Why are some clusters and their companies and
research institutions more innovative than others? What
factors
stimulate
innovative
behaviour
and
regional
economic growth?
These questions have, despite Porterian rhetoric during
the past 25 years [37-42], not yet be answered in full. The
Porter doctrine can be summarized as follows:
•
Cluster participation: (a) increasing the current
productivity of constituent firms or industries, (b) increasing
innovation and productivity growth, and (c) stimulating new
business formation that supports innovation and expands the
cluster [42]
•
Clusters drive productivity and innovation. Firms
that are located within a cluster can transact more efficiently,
share technologies and knowledge more readily, operate
more flexibly, start new businesses more easily, and perceive
and implement innovations more rapidly [41]
•
Clusters Drive Regional Performance: Job growth,
higher wages, higher patenting rates; greater new business
formation, growth and survival; resilience in downturns [37].
By repeating over and over again that clusters stimulate
innovations and are a necessary precondition for growth, not
all questions are automatically answered. Some doubt
remains and many questions have been left open for further
research. We will use examples from the existing extensive
literature as well as from our own studies on the relatively
under-researched areas of clusters in Southeast Asia and
point into directions, in which answers may be found or
where additional research will be necessary.
IV.
BROADBAND AND K-CLUSTERS AS DRIVERS OF
REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT
The
existence
of
stable
broadband
connections
is
assumed by some authors to act as a driver for cluster
formation.
Fast
Internet
connections
make
video
conferencing viable and an immediate exchange of data and
information possible. Indeed it could be assumed that the
extension
of
broadband
connection
makes
firms
less
dependent
on
proximity
externalities,
i.e.
on
cluster
formation.
From
a
different
perspective
broadband
connections could also be helpful in spreading the impact of
cluster productivity to neighboring regions. The results of
empirical studies are, however, not clear-cut. In a recent
study, Mack concludes that “in some places, broadband
appears to be an essential link that enables knowledge firms
to strategically locate in lower cost counties and in close
proximity to major knowledge centres. In other places, the
availability of broadband Internet connections is unable to
mitigate the negative externalities associated with locations
in more remote areas of the country. From a policy
perspective, this suggests that broadband should be viewed
as a key component, but not the only component, of
comprehensive local economic development plans” [30]. Her
findings are depicted in a map, showing US counties with or
without good broadband provision in relation to knowledge
intensive industries.
A. Networks and Knowledge Hubs
As
various
surveys
have
shown,
sharing
and
dissemination of knowledge within clusters is a major driver
of innovations and growth [9] [19] [33] [45]. Several authors
see this as a more or less automatic process. Knowledge
workers and experts working in proximity in one location
easily transmit knowledge, so the argument goes. There is a
“knowledge spillover”, leading almost automatically to
higher productivity [1] [10]. Our studies in Indonesia [44]
and
Vietnam
[6]
show
otherwise.
Though
automatic
knowledge-spillover may happen, there are knowledge
clusters with high kernel density, where knowledge sharing
is low or totally absent. This is the case in Hoh Chi Minh
City, which has a great number of research institutes and
universities in close proximity, but hardly any knowledge
exchange takes place [6] [16] [17].
This means that clustering in close proximity is not a
sufficient precondition for higher productivity. Knowledge
has to be managed, cooperation needs stimulation and
appropriate institutions for knowledge sharing, on which
productivity rests, have to be formed [9].
The Malaysian government has pursued an active cluster
development agenda [20] by declaring several regions as
“development
corridors”
[4]
and
creating
a
massive
Multimedia Super Corridor next to the newly founded
federal capital of Putrajaya [7] [25]. The two other successful
knowledge driven industrial clusters are found in Penang and
in Johore.
In our studies in Penang we found a high degree of
clustering including ICT industry, universities and local and
international research institutes and companies. Several
companies had relocated to Penang from other countries,
because of the availability of high-level manpower and
access to services of support companies. Government
agencies supported research projects and supported start-up
companies [13] [15] [22] [26].
Another interesting case is Brunei Darussalam, a small
resource rich country with practically no industrial base [2]
[3] [18] [27]. We could identify only one dense knowledge
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

cluster in the commercial district of the capital Bandar Seri
Begawan,
but
the
two
major
knowledge
producing
institutions University Brunei Darussalam, including several
research institutes and the Institute Technology Brunei are
actually located outside the major knowledge cluster [4].
Ongoing research by Purwaningrum (Institute of Asian
Studies, UBD) shows that there is very little, if any,
knowledge sharing between UBD, industry and government
agencies. The so-called “triple helix” is not functioning and
urgently needs to be managed.
V. SINGAPORE’S MARITIME CLUSTER (SMC): SUCCESS
THROUGH CONNECTIVITY AND COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH
& DEVELOPMENT (R&D)
Quite a different story is the development of Singapore’s
maritime cluster enabled through decisive and visionary
knowledge governance by institutions such as Singapore’s
Economic Development Board (EDB), the Maritime and
Port Authority (MPA), Agency of Science, Technology and
Research (A*Star) in collaboration with Jurong Town
Corporation (JTC) as well as the Urban Redevelopment
Authority (URA). JTC, for example, continues to offer
future-oriented
infrastructure
solutions
to
its
cluster
customers in order to maintain and improve competitiveness.
As far as the offshore sector is concerned, works are under
way to increase Singapore’s limited water land resource by
building new wharves and jetty facilities.
A major corporate actor within the SMC is the Keppel
group of companies [46], which employs over 30,000
employees in more than 30 countries (its workforce in
Singapore comprises 1,500 people). Keppel Offshore &
Marine’s companies and yards are situated relatively close to
each other within Singapore’s SMC, which facilitates
knowledge sharing, and creation, arguably key success
factors in this business [5]. Incorporated in 2002, Keppel
Offshore & Marine has over 300 years of combined
experience from the three companies under its wings, namely
Keppel Fels, Keppel Shipyard and Keppel Singmarine. With
its key competency in the area of offshore engineering,
Keppel FELS is the world’s leader in offshore oil rig
fabrication for international clients such as Petrobras in
Brazil.
Keppel Offshore & Marine is well known for its
innovative
ultra
deepwater
solutions
such
as
semisubmersibles, drilling tenders, or compact drill ships.
Located in the tropics, it built icebreakers for customers in
the West and fabricates ice-worthy jack-ups in collaboration
with
an
international
business
partner.
Its
innovation
capability
in
designing
oil
rigs
is
based
on
several
specialized
R&D
departments
such
as the
Deepwater
Technology Group (DTG).
Keppel
has
forged
R&D
linkages
with
various
stakeholders, which helps to create new knowledge and to
innovate. Local collaboration partners include A*Star, Ngee
Ann Polytechnic (NP), Nanyang Technological University
(NTU) and National University of Singapore (NUS). The
latter has established an offshore engineering program for
young talent at the new Centre for Offshore Research &
Engineering (CORE) in the Faculty of Engineering (NUS)
together with the endowment of the Keppel Professorship in
Ocean, Offshore and Marine Technology. An example of a
joint Keppel-CORE project is: ‘Improved Guidelines for the
Prediction
of
Geotechnical
Performance
of
Spudcan
Foundations during Installation and Removal of Jack-up
Units (InSafeJIP)’. To further enhance Singapore’s leading
role in the global market for oil and gas drilling units and
offshore support vessels, Keppel collaborates with several
international partners such as the Centre for Offshore
Foundation Systems (COFS) at the University of Western
Australia. Joint research areas include jack-up spudcan
analysis, deep water anchoring systems and the application
of geotechnical models in wind farm design.
A. Mapping the Density of the Increasingly Diverse SMC
According to industry observers, Singapore’s status as a
“dominant
force
in
the
offshore
marine
sector”
in
conjunction with related services does support the growth of
the
industry
across
the
region
(Indonesia,
Malaysia,
Philippines), “positioning it as a regional offshore marine
hub for the Asia-Pacific” [24]. Like Dubai in the Middle
East, Abuja in West Africa or Houston in the USA,
Singapore is seen a “natural choice” for Asia driven in-part
by a growing demand for oil and gas, the desire across Asia
to be self-sufficient in oil and gas, offshore marine
capabilities, business incentives and strong support for
innovation and the development of R&D talent in key areas.
Over the past few years, Singapore’s offshore marine
cluster has expanded as evidenced by the emergence of
several (complementary) sub-clusters such as oil companies,
oilfield and seismic survey services, oil & gas equipment,
shipyards and
drilling contractors as
well
as oilfield
chemicals.
However,
increasing
diversity
does
not
automatically
imply
new
knowledge
creation
and
collaborative
innovation.
One
way
of
exploring
the
collaborative
knowledge
creation
potential
of
such
agglomerations and to delineate a knowledge cluster is to
compile directories of firms (incl. research centres and
institutions of higher learning). When combined
with
geospatial coordinates, this method helps to identify potential
areas of agglomeration of knowledge transferring and
producing organisations, which we define as knowledge
clusters [21].
Our studies [33] show that there is a dense clustering of
marine firms in the West of Singapore (Tuas) near the sea,
which offers certain location advantages with potentially
good linkage effects to other related industries in subclusters
within the cluster. Proximity can have a positive effect on
knowledge
sharing
which
in
turn
can
enhance
new
knowledge creation [9]. The density of Singapore’s offshore
marine cluster has been proactively shaped by various
planning agencies such as URA, JTC and EDB who are
doing their best in anticipating firms’ long-term strategic
business
interests.
Good
knowledge
governance
and
potential cluster synergies rest on strategic physical and
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

economic planning approaches adopted by the respective
planning agencies driven by Singapore’s land scarcity.
The performance of a cluster depends on the extent of
innovation related exchanges of knowledge, the quality of
relationships to partners within and beyond the cluster as
well as intra-organisational knowledge flows within cluster
firms. Our findings suggest that firms located in the cluster
comprising the central area / old harbour front might be a bit
disadvantaged in the mid-term because they might lose their
location advantages eventually in case the Tanjung Pagar
port facilities will be moved closer to Tuas in the West to
free up (valuable) land for expanding the business district
further south [33].
B. From Cluster to ‘Hub’ Status
Increasing
diversity
does
not
automatically
imply
problem-free knowledge flows, new knowledge creation and
collaborative innovation. For Singapore’s offshore marine
sector to become a powerful knowledge hotspot (hub) with
regional
and
global
significance,
a
sustainable
local
innovation system has to be nurtured characterised by high
connectedness and high internal and external networking as
well as knowledge creation and sharing capabilities. While
empirical studies on the hub status of Singapore’s offshore
marine cluster are difficult to come by, there is some
evidence that policy-makers continue to support and drive
innovation in this sector. A key role is performed by the new
Singapore Maritime Institute (SMI), a joint effort by MPA,
the
Agency
for
Science,
Technology
and
Research
(A*STAR) and the Economic Development Board (EDB) in
partnership with local institutes of higher learning. SMI is
developing
strategies
and
programmes
related
to
the
academic, policy and R&D aspects of the maritime industry
with an emphasis on shipping, port and maritime services, as
well as offshore and marine engineering. It coordinates and
aligns the strategic activities of the various maritime
institutes at local institutes of higher learning and works to
attract renowned academics and researchers to work in
Singapore. It grooms local maritime talent and kickstarts
more industry R&D projects. Collaborative R&D and
capability development in key strategic areas such as subsea
systems with local and international partners is seen as a
viable strategy to achieve and retain Singapore’s role as a
global player in the offshore marine industry.
How is Singapore’s quest to become a ‘real’ offshore
technology hub progressing? Cluster theory argues that
knowledge in form of innovations, patents and research
papers as well as close cooperation between relevant
knowledge institutions (both locally and internationally) are
important to provide evidence for the knowledge hub
function, including high knowledge productivity. We tried to
shed light on the global standing of Singapore’s offshore
R&D as well as the external connections of Singapore-based
researchers with the help of an output indicator of published
journal
articles.
Only
scientific
research
results
in
internationally recognized journals are counted. As a result
not all projects of cooperation with local and international
institutions
are
measured;
only
those
documented
in
publications that are recognized, visible and accessible on
the Web of Science. In the following, we shall present
preliminary results of our analysis to better understand the
global offshore R&D landscape.
Using the Web of Science and keywords such as offshore
rigs, offshore engineering and dynamic positioning yielded
7,439 journal articles published between 2001-2011 spread
over
several
categories
such
as
Computer
Science
Information
Systems,
Electrical
Engineering,
Applied
Mathematics,
Automation
Control
Systems
or
Ocean
Engineering. In terms of journal output, the top 5 countries
appear to be the United States, the People’s Republic of
China, England, Germany and Japan. The top five research
institutions are the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Russian
Academy of Sciences, University California Berkeley,
Indian Institute of Technology and the National University of
Singapore (NUS).
In terms of external cooperative science connections
(using an output indicator of joint journal articles to which
Singapore researchers have contributed) between researchers
from Singaporean institutions and elsewhere, India emerged
on top of the list (4), followed by the People’s Republic of
China (2), Australia (2), Norway (2) and the United States
(2). Important Singaporean educational institutions include
the
National
University
of
Singapore
(Faculty
of
Engineering,
Department
of
Electrical
&
Computer
Engineering; Centre for Offshore Research & Engineering;
Department of Civil Engineering), Ngee Ann Polytechnic
(Centre of Innovation - Marine & Offshore Technology) and
corporate institutions such as Keppel Offshore & Marine and
KeppelFELS.
A key capacity builder is the Centre for Offshore
Research & Engineering (CORE) at the National University
of Singapore (NUS) which has helped to enhance offshore
geotechnical engineering according to observers. As in other
clusters, building a full-time, world class academic group to
work on offshore engineering, the transfer of knowledge
from visiting experts to local talent and large-scale private
sector engagement in terms of R&D funding are seen as
important measures to further expand this field. While
agencies continue to build up capacities in terms of offshore
marine R&D, Keppel already has strong capabilities as
indicated by the firm’s reputation in the fabrication of jack-
ups. Particular strengths with regard to knowledge-intensive
technical ingredients/elements of offshore oil rig fabrication
include Singapore’s project management experience, the
ability to deploy systems effectively, steel fabrication know
how and availability of motivated manpower at competitive
cost. Future (R&D) opportunities may include diversification
into areas such as floating production systems and subsea
production systems beyond the traditional focus on jack-ups,
which bring in the revenues.
Our preliminary analysis suggests that Singapore is
working hard towards becoming a global leader in offshore
R&D. The ongoing investments into this sector and growing
number of companies expanding their presence in the city-
state such as Maersk Drilling are a result of turning visionary
policy goals with regard to the country’s enhanced (global)
role in offshore marine R&D into reality. However, there are
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

also challenges. As in other sectors, foreign scientists require
certain incentives to set up shop in Singapore. While
requirements for laboratory space and similar needs are
relatively easy to fulfill in sectors such as biotechnology and
life sciences, offshore marine scientists require special (at
times huge) infrastructural facilities which in turn require
space, sea water and land resources etc.
Furthermore one has to acknowledge the necessary
organisational readiness in terms of being able to effectively
absorb [11] [34] [52] new ideas generated within the
organisation or ‘externally’ by cluster partners, for example
through research & development, and to apply them in order
to achieve innovation outputs. Key enablers to do so
according to the two academics include exposure to relevant
knowledge qua relentless networking, the presence of prior
related knowledge so as to recognise the value of new
knowledge and diversity of experience (the latter increases
the scope for acknowledging external ideas and stimuli).
Most if not all innovation frameworks propagated by
innovation experts around the world have integrated research
insights with regard to the power of absorptive capacity into
their conceptual structure. Nevertheless, there are still many
organisations ‘out there’ that remain weak or unsuccessful
innovators, because they fail to absorb and make use of
knowledge, learning opportunities and value networks.
If one translates the theory of absorptive capacity into
practical recommendations for managers tasked to making
innovation work, for example, qua innovative business
models, the following recommendations emerge: Rethink the
ways you deliver and capture value as well as how you
deliver and monetize it! Leverage on your value networks
and (re-)assess how you connect your organization with
others (and their know how) to create more value! If
innovation gaps are spotted, modify your value networks,
e.g. by changing and innovating the supply chain as
practiced by Samsung which developed a digital, more
efficient operating model in order to better integrate its large
and diverse number of logistic service providers (incl.
carriers) globally or P&G
famous
for its continuous
replenishment
approach.
Other
‘older’
supply
chain
innovations include the ocean shipping container (1956), the
universal
product
code
(1974),
Toyota’s
integrated
production system or FedEx’ computerised tracking system
developed from the mid-1980s onwards which provided near
real-time information about package delivery.
VI. CONCLUSION: KNOWLEDGE CLUSTER GOVERNANCE
We have looked critically at basic assumptions of the idea
that cluster formation is a precondition for competitiveness,
productivity,
innovation
and
ultimately
regional
development. This position, promoted by Michael Porter, is
summarized on the Website of the Harvard Business School
as follows (as of November 2014): “Today’s economic map
of the world is characterized by “clusters.” A cluster is a
geographic
concentration
of
related
companies,
organizations, and institutions in a particular field that can
be present in a region, state, or nation. Clusters arise
because they raise a company's productivity, which is
influenced by local assets and the presence of like firms,
institutions, and infrastructure that surround it”. The basic
assumption is that geographic concentration, e.g. clustering
increases productivity, innovations and competitiveness.
This assumption pervades the business literature. But is this
assumption true? Yes and no. Clustering does, indeed, seem
to have all these positive aspects, but the degree of
clustering does not necessarily correlate with the degree of
innovativeness
or
competitiveness.
In
other
words,
clustering is one, but not the only factor in translating
clustering
into
regional
economic
development.
One
important aspect is “knowledge”. Industrial clusters must
contain knowledge clusters, but these knowledge clusters
only
function
if
they
contain
innovative,
networked
“knowledge hubs”, i.e. if knowledge sharing takes place
within
a
cluster
and
with
other
knowledge
clusters
elsewhere. For this to happen, connectivity in form of
broadband connections, science cooperation, knowledge
flows and so on as well as physical proximity via exchange
of information in conducive ‘places’ such as coffee shops
are some of the essential preconditions.
The availability of broadband connections has been
identified as one important factor in turning cluster policies
into a success [29] [30]. A recent macro study in the US
evaluates the relationship between the spatial distribution of
broadband
providers
and
the
presence
of
knowledge
intensive firm clusters in US counties as “heterogeneous”
and “localized”: “From a policy perspective, this suggests
that broadband should be viewed as a key component, but
not the only component, of comprehensive local economic
development plans” [29]. Broadband provision is the
technological backbone of social networking and knowledge
sharing. Proximity within clusters is still an important factor
of
productivity
and
regional
development,
if
these
conditions are fulfilled. Furthermore, one can not ignore the
importance of absorptive capacity of both firms and
individuals in recognizing the value of new information
generated internally or sourced externally aimed at applying
it effectively to value creation in business and society.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Achtenhagen and R. Picard, "Challenges and success
factors
in
media
cluster
development:
a
review
of
contemporary
knowledge,"
Agglomeration,
Clusters
and
Entrepreneurship:
Studies
in
Regional
Economic
Development, pp. 221-251, 2014.
[2]
M. N. I. Afzal and R. Lawrey, “KBE frameworks and their
applicability to a resource-based country: The case of Brunei
Darussalam," Asian Social Science, vol. 8(7), pp. 208-18,
2012a.
[3]
—, "KBE frameworks and empirical investigation of KBE
input-output indicators for ASEAN," International Journal of
Economics and Finance, vol. 4(9), pp. 13-22, 2012b.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[4]
S.
Ariff
Lim,
H.-D.
Evers,
A.
B.
Ndah,
and
Farah
Purwaningrum, “Governing Knowledge for Development:
Knowledge Clusters in Brunei Darussalam and Malaysia."
ZEF Working Paper Series 125, 2013.
[5]
R.
Boschma,
“Role
of
proximity
in
interaction
and
performance: Conceptual and empirical challenges,” Regional
Studies, vol. 39, pp. 41-45, 2005.
[6]
T. Bauer, The Challenge of Knowledge Sharing – Practices of
the Vietnamese Science Community in Ho Chi Minh City and
the Mekong Delta, Berlin: LIT, 2011.
[7]
T. Bunnell, Malaysia, Modernity, and the Multimedia Super
Corridor: A Critical Geography of Intelligent Landscapes,
London: RoutledgeCurzon, 2004.
[8]
F. Cairncross, The Death of Distance, Cambridge,Mass.:
Harvard Business School Press, 1997.
[9]
Y. W. Chay, T. Menkhoff, B. Loh and H.-D. Evers, "What
makes
knowledge
sharing
in
organizations
tick?-
An
empirical study, " in Governing and Managing Knowledge in
Asia, T. Menkhoff, H.-D. Evers and Y. W. Chay, Eds..
Singapore: World Scientific Publishing, pp. 301-326, 2010.
[10] Y. L. Chyi, Y. M. Lai and W. H. Liu, "Knowledge spillovers
and firm performance in the high-technology industrial
cluster," Research Policy, vol. 41(3), pp. 556-64, 2012.
[11] W. M. Cohen and D.A. Levinthal
D. A., "Absorptive
capacity: A new perspective on learning and innovation,"
Administrative Science Quarterly, vol. 35, pp. 128-152, 1990.
[12] A.
B.
Eisingerich,
O.
Falck
and
S.
Heblich,
“Firm
innovativeness across cluster types,” Industry and Innovation,
vol. 19(April), pp. 233-248, 2012.
[13] D. K. Eiteman, "Multinational firms and the development of
Penang, Malaysia," The International Trade Journal, vol.
11(2), pp. 169-85, 1997.
[14] European Commission, Innovation Clusters in Europe: A
statistical analysis and overview of current policy support.
Brussels: European Commission, Enterprise and Industry
Directorate-General, 2013.
[15] H.-D. Evers, "Penang as a knowledge hub," Penang Economic
Monthly, vol. 6(11), pp. 36-38, 2011.
[16] H.-D. Evers and T. Bauer, "Emerging Epistemic Landscapes:
Knowledge Clusters in Ho Chi Minh City and the Mekong
Delta,” ZEF Working Paper Series 48, 2009.
[17] —, "Emerging epistemic landscapes: Knowledge clusters in
Ho Chi Minh City and the Mekong Delta," in Beyond the
Knowledge
Trap:
Developing
Asia's
Knowledge-Based
Economies, T. Menkhoff, H.-D. Evers, Y. W. Chay, and E. F.
Pang, New Jersey: World Scientific, 2011.
[18] H.-D. Evers, A. Banyouko and L. Yahya, "The Governance of
Knowledge: Perspectives from Brunei Darussalam," Working
Paper,
Institute
of
Asian
Studies,
Universiti
Brunei
Darussalam, 2013.
[19] H.-D. Evers, S. Gerke and T. Menkhoff, Knowledge clusters
and knowledge hubs: Designing epistemic landscapes for
development," Journal of Knowledge Management, vol.
14(5), pp. 678 – 89, 2010.
[20] H.-D. Evers, R. Nordin Hans-Dieter and P. Nienkemper,
"The Emergence of an Epistemic Landscape: Knowledge
Cluster Formation in West-Malaysia," ZEF Working Paper
Series 62., 2010.
[21] H.-D. Evers, P. Nienkemper and B. Schraven, “Measuring
spatial density – Knowledge clusters in Malaysia”, in: Beyond
the Knowledge Trap: Developing Asia's Knowledge-Based
Economies, T. Menkhoff, H.-D. Evers, Y. W. Chay, and E. F.
Pang, New Jersey: World Scientific, 2011.
[22] T. Menkhoff, H.-D. Evers, Y. W. Chay and E. F. Pang eds.,
“Beyond
the
Knowledge
Trap:
Developing
Asia’s
Knowledge-based Economies”, New Jersey: World Scientific
Publishing, pp. 129-154. 2011
[23] S. Gerke and H.-D. Evers, "Looking East, Looking West:
Penang as a Knowledge Hub," ZEF Working Paper Series No.
89, 2011.
[24] M. Granovetter, "The strength of weak ties," American
Journal of Sociology, vol. 78, pp. 1360-80, 1973.
[25] C. Hayman, “Asia-Pac offshore marine potential – Singapore,
with its commitments and leadership in sector, can help bring
about collaborative development,” Business Times, February
17, 2012.
[26] T. Huff, "Malaysia's Multimedia Super Corridor and its first
crisis of confidence," Asian Journal of Social Science, vol.
30(2), pp. 248-70, 2002.
[27] M. Kies and J. Revilla Diez," Regionale Innovationspotentiale
in Südostasien - empirische Ergebnisse aus Singapur, Penang
(Malaysia) und Bangkok (Thailand)," Geographica Helvetica
vol. 59(1), pp. 7-19, 2004.
[28] R. Lawrey, "KBE frameworks and their applicability to a
resource-based country: the case of Brunei Darussalam,"
Unpublished Ms., 2013.
[29] E. A. Mack, "Productivity and broadband the human factor,"
International Regional Science Review, vol. 36(3), pp. 392-
423, 2013.
[30] —, "Broadband and knowledge intensive firm clusters:
Essential link or auxiliary connection?" Papers in Regional
Science, vol. 93(1), pp. 3-29, 2014.
[31] E. Mack and T. H. Grubesic, "Broadband provision and firm
location in Ohio: An exploratory spatial analysis," Tijdschrift
Voor Economische En Sociale Geografie, vol. 100(3), pp.
298–315, 2009.
[32] P. Maskell, "Towards a knowledge-based theory of the
geographical cluster," Industrial and Corporate Change, vol.
10(4), pp. 921-20, 2013.
[33] T. Menkhoff, H.-D. Evers, Y. W. Chay and E. F. Pang (Eds.),
Beyond the Knowledge Trap: Developing Asia's Knowledge-
Based Economies. New Jersey, London, Singapore, Beijing:
World Scientific, 2010.
[34] T. Menkhoff and H.-D. Evers, "Knowledge diffusion through
good knowledge governance,” in Human Capital Formation
and Economic Growth in Asia and the Pacific, edited by
Wendy Dobson, London; New York: Routledge, Taylor and
Francis Group, 2013.
[35] T. Menkhoff, "Using new external ideas to make innovation
work," Business Times (August 15), 2014
[36] R. Mitchell, B. Boyle, J. Burgess, and K. McNeil, "“You can't
make a good wine without a few beers”: Gatekeepers and
knowledge flow in industrial districts," Journal of Business
Research, vol. 67, pp. 2198-206, 2014.
[37] I.
Nonaka,
The
Knowledge-Creating
Company:
How
Japanese Companies Create the Dynamics of Innovation, New
York: Oxford University Press, 1995.
[38] M. Porter, "Reshaping Regional Economic Development:
Clusters and Regional Strategy (powerpoint presentation),"
Harvard Business School: U.S. Cluster Mapping Launch
Event, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, September
29th, 2014.
[39] M. Porter, "The economic performance of regions," Regional
Studies, vol. 37, pp. 6-7, 2003.
[40] M. Porter, The Competitive Advantage of Nations, New
York: The Free Press, 1990.
[41] —,"Clusters
and
the
new
economics
of
competition,”
Harvard Business Review, vol. 76(6), pp. 77-90, 1998.
[42] —, "Clusters and Economic Policy: Aligning Public Policy
with the New Economics of Competition," in ISC White
Paper, November, Harvard Business School, 2007.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[43] —"Location, competition, and economic development: Local
clusters in a Global Economy," Economic Development
Quarterly, vol. 14(15), pp. 15-34, 2000
[44] R. C. Porter, The Economics of Water and Waste. A Case
Study of Jakarta, Indonesia, Aldershot: Avebury Press, 1996.
[45] F. Purwaningrum, Knowledge Governance in an Industrial
Cluster.
The
Collaboration
between
Academia-Industry-
Government in Indonesia, Berlin and Zürich: LIT Verlag,
2014.
[46] F. Purwaningrum, H.-D. Evers and Yaniasih, "Knowledge
Flow in the Academia- Industry Collaboration or Supply
Chain Linkage? Case Study of the Automotive Industries in
the Jababeka Cluster," Procedia - Social and Behavioral
Sciences, vol. 52, pp. 62-71, 2012.
[47] M. Sabnani, More than Mettle by Keppel Offshore & Marine.
Editions Didier Millet in association with Keppel Offshore &
Marine Limited, 2007.
[48] Ö. Sölvell, C. Ketels and G. Lindqvist, The European Cluster
Observatory: EU Cluster Mapping and Strengthening Clusters
in
Europe,
Stockholm:
Center
for
Strategy
and
Competitiveness, CSC, n.y..
[49] G. M. P. Swann, M. Prevezer and D. Stout (Eds.), The
Dynamics of Industrial Clustering: International Comparisons
in Computing and Biotechnology, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1998.
[50] A. Weber, Reine Theorien des Standortes, Tübingen: Mohr
Siebeck, 1990.
[51] —, Theory of the Location of Industries. Chicago: University
ofn Chicago Press, 1981
[52] H. Wolma and D. Hincapie, "Clusters and Cluster-Based
Development: A Literature Review and Policy Discussion,"
Working Paper, George Washington Institute of Public
Policy, 2010.
[53] S. A. Zahra and G. George, "Absorptive capacity: A review,
reconceptualization,
and
extension".
Academy
of
Management Review, vol. 27(2), pp. 185-203, 2002.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

