Modeling the Interpretation of Sources of Norms  
 
Tom M. van Engers 
Leibniz Center for Law 
University of Amsterdam 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
e-mail: vanengers@uva.nl 
Robert van Doesburg 
Immigration and Naturalisation Service 
Rijswijk, The Netherlands 
e-mail: r.v.doesburg@ind.minvenj.nl
 
Abstract—In this paper, the authors present their work on the 
development of a formal method for the interpretation of 
norms. This research is a continuation of the work reported in 
the eKNOW 2015 conference where we focused on a formal 
method to relate a set of norms described in natural language 
to the specification of a service based on these norms. In this 
paper, we focus on the modeling of the explicit interpretation 
of norms. These interpretation models are aimed to become 
components in our agent-role based simulations that allow to 
reason about the effect of norms in social reality. The method 
has been tested in a governmental organization for the 
specification of digital services. The method preserves the 
original concepts in sources of norms described in natural 
language, and delivers a translation of these norms to formal 
computational models. These models can be used to support 
institutional reasoning, i.e., reasoning about institutional facts 
and normative positions. 
Keywords-AI and Law; knowledge acquisition; knowledge 
representation; formal representation of norms; legal analysis; 
legal engineering; rule governance. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Every organization’s behavior is, in some way or the 
other, impacted by norms. These norms are either set by the 
organization's policies, by contractual agreements, or they 
are externally imposed. Governmental agencies that have 
responsibility for implementing law in various client-
handling processes, have a particular interest in correct 
execution of norms.  
Formalizing sources of norms, into formal computational 
models that can be used in information technology (IT), has 
been done in many different ways, and this has been object 
of study in the Jurix community and the Artificial 
Intelligence and Law (AI and Law) community. Both 
communities consist of experts from the field of Information 
Science and Law. For an overview of approaches, we refer to 
Bench Capon et al. [2].  
While some of the approaches described by Bench Capon 
made it outside academia and resulted in practical 
applications, large-scale application within industries and 
government has not yet been accomplished due to various 
open issues. We will discuss some important issues, before 
we present our solution for some of these issues. 
Marek Sergot was one of the first scholars that worked 
on legal knowledge based systems that were supposed to be 
closely aligned with sources of law [15][16]. He used the 
British Nationality Act as study case, a domain related to the 
field of Immigration Law, used in this paper.  
Sergot used logic programs as his language for 
specifications. This language, based upon first order logic 
representation, can be used to express and reason with 
norms, but at the expense of sacrificing accuracy and 
reusability. This is a result of the task orientation of the 
method used.  
Also, modal logics have been applied to the field of law. 
Next to their computational unattractiveness, thus far no one 
has been able to find the right translation of ‘legal abilities’. 
Wierenga and Meijer [18] point at various approaches using 
some form of modal logic and give examples of problems 
that come with using modal logic for expressing norms.  
A general problem for translating rules in logic is the 
disability to handle contrary positions and multiple 
contradictory interpretation models. Within the AI and Law 
community 
different 
conceptualizations 
have 
been 
developed, including formal models for argumentation and 
factor analysis of cases, also see [2].  
With the approach presented in this paper, the authors 
aim to support large-scale applications in complex 
organizational contexts. Besides the problems addressed in 
literature, we also gathered requirements from our 
experience building large-scale applications of artificial 
intelligence (AI) in the legal domain for many years. The 
formal method for the interpretation of norms described in 
this paper, can be used to enable organizations to design IT-
systems that support their business processes in a systemic 
way, and should allow for easy maintenance and easy 
implementation of changes. While developing our method, 
we have tested to what extent these requirements could be 
met, and we will report on our experiences in a future paper. 
Specifications of normative systems can also be used to 
control whether systems comply with norms or to support the 
internal and external communication on the interpretation of 
norms. 
In this paper, we explain our method and its application 
in one concrete case: the application for a residence permit 
for international students in the Netherlands. Applying for 
and deciding on application is a process bounded by legal 
norms set by law. Though legal norms have some specific 
properties, the method presented in this paper holds for any 
organization applying norms. 
Currently, many organizations recognize the huge 
economical potential that such a method could have. This 
most 
certainly 
holds 
for 
governmental 
institutions 
responsible for the execution of the law and applying legal 
norms to a massive number of cases. This allows us to 
cooperate with, and test our approach in many governmental 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

agencies joined in the Manifesto Group, and in collaborative 
networks, such as the Blue Chamber [8] and the Netherlands 
Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) [4].  
Before going into the details of our approach, we will 
shortly sketch the general framework that has also been 
partly described in [6][7]. 
In section 2, a general framework of the work presented 
in this paper, is given. Section 3 contains an overview of the 
methods used. Section 4 contains an outline of a method for 
the interpretation of sources of norms, expressed in natural 
language. In section 5, a study case is presented, to illustrate 
the method for a formal interpretation of norms. In section 6, 
the results of the study case are presented. Section 7 contains 
a discussion on the results and an overview of future work. 
II. 
THE GENERAL FRAMEWORK 
In our approach, we separate three layers of reality that 
are interconnected (see figure 1). This model is an extended 
version of the three layers of reality model presented in [5]:  
 
1. Sources of Norms 
This layer describes the components, structure 
and referential mechanisms that allow us to 
refer to the natural language sources describing 
the norms we want to ‘translate’ into formal 
computational models.  
2. Institutional Reality 
This layer describes the interpretation of the 
sources of norms in the previous layer, using: 
states representing situations; legal positions; 
and acts regulated by norms. In this paper, we 
focus on this layer. 
3. Social Reality 
The Social Reality layer describes agents, agent-
roles, collaboration of agents, coordination, 
message passing, and other behavioral aspects 
of agents. This layer is used to describe and 
simulate behavior in societies regulated by 
norms. These norms can be used, e.g., to test 
(non-) compliance scenarios, and to predict 
effectiveness. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The Three Layers of Reality model. 
In order to build a method for describing these three 
different layers, we have reconceptualized norms and 
normative systems, allowing us to model and analyze 
conflicting interpretations and to allow for simulating 
multiple 
interpretations 
in 
agent-role 
model 
based 
representations of social reality, see Sileno, Boer and Van 
Engers [17]. 
In the next section, we will briefly introduce the methods 
we use for modeling these three layers of reality. 
III. 
METHODS 
A. Representing sources of law 
The way we represent the normative sources is 
completely according to the state of the art standards (see 
CEN/Metalex [3]). 
B. Fundamental legal concepts 
The method for modeling the institutional content of 
normative sources is based upon the work of Wesley 
Newcomb Hohfeld, who introduced a set of fundamental 
legal conceptions in 1913, see Hohfeld and Cook [10]. 
Hohfeld’s conceptualization of norms was meant to provide 
a solution for the ambiguity of the concepts ‘right’ and 
‘duty’. Hohfeld introduced a smallest set of legal 
conceptions to which, according to him, any and all 'legal 
quantities' could be reduced. But while Hohfeld was mainly 
aiming at understanding the positions between two 
adversarial parties in law cases, we aim to describe, analyze 
and understand (the consequences of) normative systems in 
general. This obviously includes individual cases consisting 
of two adversarial parties. 
Hohfeld distinguished four, what he called Jural, or 
sometimes Legal, Relations: Power-Liability (1), Immunity-
Disability (2), Duty-Claimright (3), Liberty-Noright (4). The 
term Jural Relation is probably chosen because Hohfeld, 
being a judge and professor in law, was mainly interested in 
applying his conceptual framework to cases of law in a 
judicial context. Other authors have chosen to either use the 
Legal or Jural Relations. Some have mixed these terms in 
their work, without giving an explanation for the difference 
between them, see for example [9]. For people in the field of 
law the terms legal and jural do have different meanings. 
We, however do not limit the application of our framework 
to either legal or jural norms. We address norms in general, 
including policies and social norms, therefore we use the 
term Normative Relations. 
The Hohfeldian legal conceptions can only exist in pairs 
and describe relations between two people, each holding one 
of the rights in a pair. The Power-Liability and Immunity-
Disability relations are generative: they can generate new 
Normative Relations. The Duty-Claimright and Liberty-
Noright relations are situational: they can only be created 
and terminated by an act based on a generative Normative 
Relation. 
C. Acts and facts 
To be able to conceptualize normative systems in 
general, we express functional relations between complex 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

objects (i.e., accessibility relations between possible worlds). 
To be able to do so we use acts and facts that are recognized 
by an institution: Institutional Acts and Institutional Facts. 
Institutional Acts play a pivotal role, as these acts connect 
the worlds in which certain Institutional Facts hold and 
certain Normative Relations exist. Generative Normative 
Relations (i.e., Power-Liability and Disability-Immunity) are 
expressed in a functional way, having a precondition, and a 
postcondition.  
The formalization of norms stated in sources of norms, 
expressed in natural language, is being made explicit in an 
interpretation model derived from the original Hohfeldian 
framework. The resulting model contains the institutional 
interpretation of legal norms in a way that can be directly 
validated by legal experts (1), it can be used as a basis for a 
comprehensive representation of norms for clients of an 
institution (2), it is defeasible for clients and their legal 
representatives (3) and, it can be used to make a specification 
for IT services to support business processes (4). We have 
tested the applicability of this approach by modeling 
examples of various sources of law over the last couple of 
months and validated the results with experts.  
D. Agent-base modeling 
To model social reality, we have worked on different 
representation models enabling agent-role modeling and 
modeling social interaction between agents adapting such 
agent-roles. Also, various architectures and implementations 
of agent-role simulation environments have been tested, but 
as this is still quite preliminary work, in this paper, we will 
focus on the interpretation of norms from sources of norms, 
expressed in natural language and representing these in 
models of Institutional Reality.  
IV. 
OUTLINE OF OUR METHOD TO MODEL A FORMAL 
INTERPRETATION OF SOURCES OF NORMS  
Applying Hohfelds conceptualization for formalizing 
rules has been done before, e.g., by Allen and Saxon [1]. But 
rather than taking logic as formalization language like Allen 
and Saxon did, we have made a functional interpretation of 
the generative Normative Relations. The Institutional Reality 
model, describing an interpretation of the semantics of the 
content of the sources taken into scope, consists of two parts. 
First, the generative part describes the generative Normative 
Relations, i.e., Power-Liability and Disability-Immunity 
relations, as introduced by Hohfeld. Second, the situational 
part describes the Institutional Facts and situational 
Normative Relations, i.e., the Duty-Claimright and Liberty-
Noright 
relations. 
The 
Generative 
Relations 
are 
conceptualized as functions with a precondition expressed in 
terms of Institutional Facts (iFACTs) and Situational 
Normative Relations, and a postcondition describing which 
iFACTs and/or Normative Relations are created or 
terminated. These Normative Relations can be either 
Situational or Generative Normative Relations. The function 
can only be executed if an Institutional Act (iACT) is 
recognized while the precondition is fulfilled.  
As a result, we can build a graph of possible worlds, in 
which certain iFACTs and/or Normative positions hold, and 
in which every possible world has exits to other possible 
worlds that can be reached only by performing Institutional 
Acts while meeting the required precondition of that act. 
Institutional reasoning thus becomes a means-ends analysis 
problem that is commonly used in AI research since the early 
1950s. Also, we can use graph analysis (topology) to inspect 
models of Institutional Reality, we can look for conflicts, 
missing iFACTs and so on. In this paper, we will focus on 
the 
creation 
of 
interpretation 
models, 
representing 
institutional reality. We will use a realistic example case 
from the domain of immigration as an illustration. The case 
addresses the issue of international students that apply for a 
study permit in the Netherlands. In the next section, we will 
explain the case and show interpretation models of the 
applicable legislation. The interpretation model shown, is 
actually used for realizing an eService at the Dutch 
Immigration and Naturalisation service (IND).  
V. 
STUDY CASE 
Students who do not have the Dutch Nationality and do 
not have the nationality of a EU Member state, have to apply 
for a residence permit to be able to study in the Netherlands. 
The application process for international students is one of 
the first services in a program that aims to digitalize all IND 
services. In an effort to support accountable services and 
agile implementation of policy changes, the IND is working 
on a formal method for the interpretation of norms. The 
analysis of the admission of, and the decisions on, 
applications for residence permits for international students, 
is one of the study cases used to develop a method for 
representing a formal interpretation of norms. 
A. Applying for a residence permit in steps 
In order to present our method for formalizing the 
interpretation of norms, the procedure for applying for a 
residence permit is described in steps. For every step, a short 
description of the legal context is given. 
An international student that wants to come to the 
Netherlands has to apply for a residence permit. Applying for 
a residence permit, results in the creation of a liability for the 
IND to decide on the application. The liability to decide 
creates new duties for the IND: 
1. When preparing a decision the administrative 
authority has the duty to acquire the necessary 
knowledge of relevant facts and of the interests 
to be weighed. 
2. A decision must be based on sound reasoning. 
3. A decision must be given within the time limit 
set by law.  
 
Article 14, Alien Act (AA) gives Our Minister of Justice 
the power to grant, reject, or to disregard the application for 
granting a residence permit. Article 16, Alien Act explicitly 
states 11 grounds to reject an application. Article 4:5 of the 
General Administrative Law (GAL) gives the procedure of 
disregarding an application. Article 24, paragraph 2 the Alien 
Act gives Our Minister the power to disregard an application 
if no payment for the handling of the application has been 
made. Article 26 of the Alien Act gives Our Minister the 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

duty only to grant a residence permit if the applicant fulfills 
all conditions. As a result the grounds for granting a 
residence permit can be derived from de absence of grounds 
to reject or disregard an application.  
The relevant norms for the actions described above are 
described in natural language in sources of law. These 
sources do not have a functional structure and they include a 
lot of implicit references. 
B. A formal analysis of norms 
The formal analysis of norms requires the explicit 
description of an initial legal state. This state is the 
precondition that enables a legal act. Preconditions and legal 
acts are described in such a way that this act will always 
result in a one, and only one, postcondition. The 
postcondition can contain: the creation of new iFACT’s 
and/or Normative Relations (1), and/or the termination of 
existing iFACT’s and/or Normative Relations (2). 
C. Examples of Normative Relations for deciding on 
applications for residence permits 
The study case described above will now be presented in 
terms of our formal interpretation model. We present two 
representation formalisms, a vertical one and a graphical 
notation. 
LEGAL SOURCE: Article 4:1 General Administrative 
Law 
TEXT: “The application to issue a decision is submitted 
in writing to the administrative authority competent to 
decide on the application, unless otherwise provided by 
law.” 
NORMATIVE RELATION: NR.GAL.4:1 
iACT: [to submit] 
OBJECT: [the application to issue a decision] 
POWER: [administrative authority] 
LIABILITY: [applicant] (implicit) 
PRECONDITION: (iFACT.GAL.4:1.written 
[the application to issue a decision is submitted in 
writing]) 
AND 
(iFACT.GAL.4:1.competent 
[the 
application is submitted to the administrative authority 
competent to decide on the application]) AND NOT 
(iFACT.GAL.4:1.provided [unless otherwise provided by 
law]) 
CREATING POSTCONDITION: 
(iFACT.GAL.4:1.application [the application to issue a 
decision]) AND (NR.GAL.3:2 (DUTY: [the 
administrative authority] | CLAIMRIGHT: [the 
applicant]) [during the preparation of a decision the 
administrative authority acquires the necessary 
information concerning the relevant facts and the 
interests to be weighed]) AND (NR.GAL.3:46 (DUTY: 
[the administrative authority] | CLAIMRIGHT: [the 
applicant]) [a decision must be based on a valid 
motivation]) AND (NR.GAL.4:13.1.timelimit (DUTY: 
[the administrative authority] | CLAIMRIGHT: [the 
applicant]) [a decision must be given within the time 
limit set by law]) 
 
LEGAL SOURCE: Article 14, first paragraph, point a, 
Aliens Act 
TEXT: “Our Minister is authorized to accept, to reject or 
to disregard the application for granting a temporary 
residence permit.” 
 
Notice that this sentence contains three acts. As a result 
the sentence describes three separate NORMATIVE 
RELATIONS to maintain a functional perspective: 
granting (1), rejecting (2) and disregarding (3).  
 
1. NORMATIVE RELATION: NR.AA.14.1.a.grant 
iACT: [to grant] 
OBJECT: [the application for granting a temporary 
residence permit] 
POWER: [Our Minister] 
LIABILITY: [the alien] 
PRECONDITION: (iFACT.AA.14.1.a.application 
[the application to grant a temporary residence permit]) 
AND (iFACT.AA.26.1.a [the alien has demonstrated that 
he fulfills all conditions for granting a residence permit]) 
CREATING POSTCONDITION: 
(iFACT.AA.14.1.a.grant [the application to grant a  
temporary residence permit is disregarded]) 
TERMINATING POSTCONDITION: 
(iFACT.AA.14.1.a.application [the application to grant a  
temporary residence permit]) 
2. NORMATIVE RELATION: NR.AA.14.1.a.reject 
iACT: to reject 
OBJECT: [the application for granting a temporary 
residence permit] 
POWER: [Our Minister] 
LIABILITY: [the alien] 
PRECONDITION: (iFACT.AA.14.1.a.application 
[the application to grant a temporary residence permit]) 
AND (iFACT.GAL.3:46 [a valid motivation]) AND 
(iFACT.GAL.3:4.2 [the adverse consequences of a 
decision are not disproportionate to goals served by the 
decision for one or more parties involved]) 
CREATING POSTCONDITION: 
(iFACT.AA.14.1.a.reject [the application to grant a 
temporary residence permit is rejected]) 
TERMINATING POSTCONDITION: 
(iFACT.AA.14.1.a.application [the application to grant a  
temporary residence permit]) AND (NR.GAL.3:46 
(DUTY: [the administrative authority] | CLAIMRIGHT: 
[the applicant]) [a decision must be based on a valid 
motivation])  
  
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
Figure 2.  The graphical representation of the Normative Relation decribed in article 16, paragraph 1, point b of the Aliens Act. 
 
3. NORMATIVE RELATION: NR.AA.14.1.a.disregard 
iACT: [to disregard] 
OBJECT: [the application for granting a temporary 
residence permit] 
POWER: [Our Minister] 
LIABILITY: [the alien] 
PRECONDITION: (iFACT.AA.14.1.a.application 
[the application to grant a temporary residence permit]) 
AND (iFACT.AA.24.2.disregarding [if payment is not 
made, the application will be disregarded]) 
CREATING POSTCONDITION: 
(iFACT.AA.14.1.a.disregarded [the application to grant a  
temporary residence permit is disregarded]) 
TERMINATING 
POSTCONDITION: 
(iFACT.AA.14.1.a.application [the application to grant a 
temporary 
residence 
permit]) 
AND 
(NR.GAL.4:5 
(POWER [to disregard] [application])  
 
LEGAL SOURCE: Article 16, first paragraph, point b, 
Aliens Act 
TEXT: “An application to grant a temporary residence 
permit as referred to in Article 14 may be rejected if:  
b. the alien does not possess a valid border-crossing 
document.” 
NORMATIVE RELATION: NR.AA.16.1.b 
iACT: to grant 
OBJECT: [the application to grant a  
temporary residence permit] 
POWER: [Our Minister] 
LIABILITY: [the alien] 
PRECONDITION: (iFACT.AA.14.1.a.application [the 
application to grant a temporary residence permit]) AND 
(iFACT.AA.16.1.b [the alien does not possess a valid 
border-crossing 
document]) 
AND 
NOT 
((iFACT.AD.3.72.vreemdeling [the alien proofs that he 
can not (any longer) be put in possession of a valid 
border-crossing document due to the government of his 
country]) OR (iFACT.AAIG.B1.4.1.sent.4.1 [the alien is 
citizen of Somalia]) OR (iFACT.AAIG.B1.4.1.sent.4.2 
[children born in this country born who apply for stay 
with their parents, provided they meet the conditions])) 
CREATING POSTCONDITION: 
(iFACT.AA.16.1.b.reject [the application to grant a 
temporary residence permit is rejected because the alien 
does not possess a valid border-crossing document]) 
Figure 2 gives the graphical representation of Normative 
Relation NR.AA.16.1.b. 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 3.  The graphical representation of de derivation of creation of iFACT.AA.16.1.b: ‘the alien does not possess a valid border-crossing document. 
 
Figure 4.  The grapical representation of the termination of iFACT.AA.16.1.b: ‘the alien does not possess a valid border-crossing document. 
  
 
  
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 5.  The grapical representation of the inconclusive policy descisions on traveldocuments that are not a ‘passport’. 
 
Figure 6.  The grapical representation of the inconclusive policy descisions on traveldocuments that are not a ‘passport’. 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

D. Establishing the existence or non-existence of iFACT’s 
The Normative Relations described above are practical 
because: 
1. They can be traced back to specific words in 
legal sources. 
2. They give an overview on the condition under 
which an iACT has a legal status and on 
exemptions. 
3.  The effect of the iACT is fully described, 
making it possible to formally describe the 
postcondition of the act. 
 
 However, the question what it takes for an iFACT to 
exist, or not, is still unclear. To answer this question a 
notation for deriving iFACTs, is developed. The derivation 
of iFACTs should be backed by legal sources or by policy 
statements. This can be illustrated by the derivation of the 
existence of iFACT.AA.16.1.b: [the alien does not possess a 
valid border-crossing document]. 
To be able to derive the existence or non-existence of 
iFACT.AA.16.1.b 
the 
following 
questions 
must 
be 
answered: 
1. What is a border-crossing document? 
2. What determines the validity of a border-
crossing document? 
3. How can an alien proof he possesses a border-
crossing document? 
 
Figure 3 shows the graphical representation of the 
derivation of the creation of the iFACT.AA.16.1.b. Figure 3 
contains the concepts iFACT.16.1.b.IND.PD.opportunity and 
iFACT.16.1.b.IND.PD.notproven. These iFACTs represent 
policy decisions (PD) that do not yet exist, but are a 
formalization of the common knowledge procedure followed 
by IND employees to derive iFACT.AA.16.1.b [the alien 
does not possess a valid border-crossing document], The 
question whether iFACT.AA.16.1.b.IND.PD.opportunity and 
iFACT.AA.16.1.b.IND.PD.notproven should be formally 
established as IND implementation guidelines, is not yet 
answered. 
Figure 4 shows the graphical representation of the 
derivation of the termination of iFACT.AA.16.1.b. It 
contains a breakdown of the sentence ‘the alien does not 
possess a valid border-crossing document’ into three parts: 
the document is ‘a document belonging to the alien’ (1), the 
document is ‘a border-crossing document’ (2) and the 
document is ‘a valid document’ (3). 
Article 
3.102 
Aliens 
Decree 
(AD) 
gives 
three 
possibilities for the alien to proof he possesses a valid 
border-crossing document. 
Figures 5 and 6 show the derivation of answer to the 
question what is ‘a border-crossing document’. Figure 5 
shows that any document that is a travel document 
recognized by the Netherlands, which contains the term 
‘passport’ is considered to be a border-crossing document, 
based on Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines (AAIG) 
Volume B1, Chapter 8, paragraph 3.4, sentence 8. The list of 
travel documents recognized by the Netherlands can be 
found in three lists that are published under the authority of 
the European Commission. Figure 6 shows that the question 
whether a travel document that is recognized by the 
Netherlands and that does not contain the term ‘passport’ can 
not be answered based on sources of norms. Answering this 
question is, at present, left to the discretionary powers of 
IND officials. 
Of all the aliens possessing a travel document and 
applying for a residence permit, more than 99% possesses a 
passport. In special situations, aliens possess a travel 
document that is not a passport – i.e., a refugee document or 
a seamen’s book. To decide whether these travel documents 
are border-crossing documents, contextual information will 
be taken into account. For example: a seamen’s book will 
probably not be accepted as a border-crossing document for 
an international student, because fulfilling the conditions for 
residing as an international student implies that the alien will 
leave the ship to study and doing so he will loose his valid 
seamen’s book. The official will probably ask for a passport 
as proof for the possession of a valid border-crossing 
document. But this norm is not explicitly written down, 
probably because it concerns a situation that does not occur 
or is extremely rare. 
VI. 
RESULTS 
The method presented has been tested by analyzing 
regulations relevant for application of residence permits for 
foreign students and making decisions on these applications. 
The results are being used in the Digital Service Program of 
the IND that aims to have digitalized all IND services in 
2017. 
The analysis resulted in knowledge representations of 
legal knowledge that proofed to be comprehensible for 
multidisciplinary teams consisting of legal experts, policy 
advisors, administrators, knowledge workers and IT-experts 
(1), a list of anomalies in sources of law (2), specifications 
for executable knowledge models traceable to sources of law 
for inference engines (3), reusable components for 
specifications of related services (4). 
A. Comprehensible representation of Normative Relations 
Being able to validate the interpretation of norms with 
experts is an essential requirement of a formal method for the 
interpretation of norms in natural language. We have tested 
the comprehensiveness of the representations in sessions 
with legal domain experts and policy advisors. Legal experts 
and policy advisors considered the representation of norms in 
a 
functional 
perspective 
by 
determining 
a 
unique 
postcondition for an iACT, performed in an explicit 
precondition usefull. They understood the interpretation 
models without training and only needed some additional 
explanation. In some cases the models even caused changes 
in interpretations these experts acquired based on the sources 
of norms in natural language. Quantative information on the 
validation of models is not yet available. Also autonomous 
validation of legal experts without support, has not yet been 
tested. The first experiences suggest that autonomous 
validation is possible for legal experts that received some 
training using the method. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

B. Anomalies in sources of law 
Making an explicit interpretative model exposed 
anomalies in sources of law that, until now, remained 
undetected. The most important anomalies found are: 
1. Mistakes in the registration of changes in 
sources of law. This results in faults in 
punctuation and in the adequate processing of 
changed references due to changes in sources of 
law. In article 16, paragraph 1, point e. we 
found a reference to the Infectious Diseases Act, 
that was replaced by the Public Health Act in 
2008. The list of purposes of stay in article 3.4 
Alien Decree (study is mentioned under point l.) 
refers to article 14, paragraph 2, Alien Act. 
Since a new paragraph 2 was introduced on 
June first 2013 the reference should have been 
changed to paragraph 3.  
2. Incorrect interpretations due to multiple step 
implicit references. An example of this is the 
legal basis for accepting scholarships as 
independent means of support for students. The 
implementation guideline on which the power to 
recognize a scholarship as independent means of 
support refers to article 3.22 Alien Regulation 
that deals with sustainability. As a result there is 
no legal basis for accepting scholarships as 
means of support for students. 
In current practice substantial investments in time and 
efforts are being made in order to detect and repair 
anomalies. Despite these efforts many anomalies remain 
undetected due to the lack of a proper method for 
interpreting sources of law, like the one presented in this 
paper. 
These 
anomalies 
result 
in 
ambigious 
implicit 
interpretations, which may lead to incorrect judgments of 
cases. Incorrect judgements may lead to expensive lawsuits.  
VII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
In [7], we described the scoping process that would 
enable us to efficiently work our way through the 
voluminous sources of norms. We discovered that the 
detailed modeling of the content of these sources helped us 
to discover ‘lose ends’, i.e., missing parts in these sources 
explaining essential things we needed to understand the 
meaning of the norms or the context in which those norms 
could/should be applied. Also, we discovered flaws in the 
referential structure of those sources.  
The method presented in this paper, enabled us to make 
the interpretation of sources of norms, expressed in natural 
language, explicit. Domain experts, both legal experts and 
policy advisors, could not only work with those models, they 
were able to validate them and used them to start repairing 
the anomalies presented in Section 4 on the results of our 
analysis. 
The method described in this paper, fits within a 
framework that also includes structuring sources of norms 
and modeling Social Reality. It is our aim to be able to 
understand how people understand norms, how we reason 
about them and how norms affect our society. The model of 
Institutional Reality is just a small step towards a better 
understanding of norms governed societies. 
It is within our aims to set-up an ecological system where 
the agencies responsible for implementing regulations will 
make their models available to who ever wants to 
incorporate them in systems that are designed for other 
purposes. We have tested this with one of our master 
students, see [11], who has build a tax planning application 
for one of the big accountancy firms in the Netherlands, 
using an interpretation model that was made with help of the 
Dutch Tax Administration. This application, that was the 
result of a master thesis research project, of course was 
limited to a small piece of legislation, international Value 
Added Tax. But it showed that such an ecosystem is viable. 
To develop such an ecosystem is future work. 
With this paper we hope to contribute to society, by 
allowing 
governmental 
agencies, 
non-governmental 
organizations and citizens to understand how norms are 
interpreted. This will also allow us to exchange ideas about 
solving conflicts in a civilized way, in case different opinions 
exist on the interpretation of sources of norms. Furthermore, 
it helps us to understand how one derives a different 
conclusion of the same set of facts, using a different 
interpretation model. 
This brings us to the next topic, the role of the models of 
Social Reality that we develop using agent-role models. In 
most cases norms are created within a context where the 
people creating them have the power to enforce these norms, 
at least to a certain extend. It was outside the scope of this 
paper to discuss reward and punishments as instruments to 
promote certain behavior and discourage other. However if 
one creates norms, one would expect that these norms affect 
society in some way. In practical situations, e.g., in the field 
of law making, one would expect law-makers first to think 
well about the consequences of norms, before imposing them 
upon society. Nowadays, we have the computer power to 
actually simulate the effects of norms on society. The 
interpretation models of sources of norms described in this 
paper, play a pivotal role in creating the agent-role based 
simulations that we can develop to reason about the effects 
of norms in social reality. 
The method presented in this paper, has been tested in a 
governmental organization for the specification of digital 
services. Also, we have applied it in other, smaller domains. 
Further application is planned, and we hope to learn from the 
experience with it. We have also planned to report on coder-
independencies and natural language processing to support 
our method, similar to the work of De Maat [12][13][14], in 
the near future.  
The method presented in this paper, preserves the 
original legal concepts described in natural language in 
sources of law, and delivers a formal translation of the norms 
contained in sources of law. This gives us a good basis for 
improving the agility of governmental agencies and others 
that use IT systems impacted by norms. At this stage we 
cannot give any numbers, but it would be interesting to 
measure the effect of using normative interpretation models 
for the explicit specification of actions by employees or 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

requirements for IT-solutions in comparison to existing 
practices.  
As for now, we have created a way to produce models 
that explicitly describe the interpretation of sources of 
norms, models that support institutional reasoning, i.e., 
reasoning about Institutional Facts and legal positions, and 
accounting for the reasoning.  
In the future we will continue our work on completing 
our method. Constructing components that will allow us to 
simulate scenarios in social reality are amongst the new 
developments planned. We will also extend the domains in 
which we will test the usability of the current parts of our 
method. Foreseen extensions are in the field of tax 
administration, labor law (regulating flexible working hours 
in employment relations). Furthermore, we will work on the 
development of IT support for our method in co-operation 
with governmental organizations, businesses and the 
scientific community. 
Our quest continues. In the spirit of Leibniz, who once 
dreamt of creating a calculus to solve disputes between 
people, we dream of offering the tools that help us to better 
understand the mechanisms of interpreting norms and settle 
disputes about them, thus keeping our society a civilized one.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research reported upon in this paper, would not have 
been possible without the support of the Dutch Immigration 
and Naturalization Service. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. E. Allen and C. S. Saxon, “Analysis of the logical structure 
of legal rules by a modernized and formalized version of 
Hohfeld fundamental legal conceptions”, in A.A. Martino and 
F.S. Natali, editors, Automated Analysis of Legal Texts, pp. 
385–450, 1986. Edited versions of selected papers from the 
Second International Conference on “Logic, Informatics, 
Law,” Florence, Italy, September 1985. 
[2] T. Bench-Capon et al., “A history of AI and Law in 50 
papers: 25 years of the international conference on AI and 
Law”, in Artificial Intelligence and Law Volume 20, Issue 3, 
pp. 215-319, 2012, doi: 10.1007/s10506-012-9131-x tt.  
[3] CEN MetaLex. Open XML Interchange Format for Legal and 
Legislative 
Resources. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.metalex.eu. 
2016.04.02 
[4] R. van Doesburg et al., Towards a Method for a Formal 
Analysis of Law, Study Case Report ICT with Industry 
workshop 2015, NWO 2016. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.nwo.nl/over-nwo/organisatie/nwo-onderdelen/ew/ 
bijeenkomsten/ict+with+industry+workshop/proceedings 
2016.04.11 
[5] T. M. van Engers, A. Boer, “Public Agility and Change in a 
Network Environment”, in Judith Schossboeck, 
Noella 
Edelmann and Peter Parycek (Eds.,), JeDEM 3(1), pp. 99-117, 
2011. 
[6] T. M. van Engers and R. van Doesburg, “At your service, on 
the definition of services from sources of law”, in Proceedings 
of the 15th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
and 
Law 
- 
ICAIL 
'15, 
pp. 
221-225, 
2015, 
doi:10.1145/2746090.2746115. 
[7] T. M. van Engers and R. van Doesburg, “First steps towards a 
formal analysis of law”, In Proceedings of eKNOW 2015, 
IARIA XPS Press, pp. 36-42, 2015. 
[8] T. M. van Engers and S. Nijssen, “From legislation towards 
the provision of services”, in Electronic Government and the 
Information Systems Perspective Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, pp. 163-172, 2014, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-10178-
1_13. 
[9] L. Fiorito, “John R. Commons, Wesley N. Hohfeld, and the 
origins of transactional economics”, in History of Political 
Economy, 42(2), pp. 267-295, 2010, doi:10.1215/00182702-
2010-003. 
[10] W. N. Hohfeld and W. W. Cook, Fundamental Legal 
Conceptions as Applied in Judicial Reasoning: And Other 
Legal Essays, New Haven, 1919 CT: Yale University Press. 
[11] E. van Kampen, Introducing a Rule Based Approach for the 
Mapping and Determination of Legal Facts, Master Thesis, 
University of Amsterdam 2015. 
[12] E. de Maat and R. Winkels, “Suggesting model fragments for 
sentences in Dutch laws”, in Proceedings of Legal Ontologies 
and Artificial Intelligence Techniques, May 2010 pp. 19-28 
[Online]. Available from: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2013146 
[retrieved: 03, 2016]. 
[13] E. de Maat, Making Sense of Legal Texts, PhD-thesis, Sep. 
2012, ISBN 978 90 5335. 
[14] E. de Maat and T. M. van Engers. “Mission impossible?: 
Automated norm analysis of legal texts,” in D. Bourcier, 
editor, Jurix 2003: The Sixteenth Annual Conference, Legal 
Knowledge and Information Systems, Amsterdam, IOS Press, 
pp. 143-144, Dec. 2003, ISBN: 978-1586033989. 
[15] M. Sergot, F. Sadri, R. Kowalski, F. Kriwaczek, P. 
Hammond, and T. Cory, “The British Nationality Act as a 
Logic Program,” in Communications of the ACM, Vol. 29, 
No. 5, pp. 370–386, May 1986, doi: 10.1145/5689.5920. 
[16] M. Sergot, “Representing legislation as logic programs,” 
Machine intelligence 11, J. E. Hayes, D. Michie, and J. 
Richards (Eds.), Oxford University Press, Inc., New York, 
NY, pp. 209-260, 1988, ISBN: 0-19-853718-2. 
[17] G. Sileno, A. Boer, and T. M. van Engers, “Commitments, 
expectations, affordances and susceptibilities: Towards 
positional agent programming”, PRIMA 2015: Principles and 
Practice of Multi-Agent Systems Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, pp. 687-696, 2015, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-25524-
8_52. 
[18] R. J. Wieringa, and J.-J.Ch. Meyer, “Applications of Deontic 
Logic in Computer Science: A Concise Overview”, in John-
Jules Ch. Meyer and Roel J. Wieringa (Eds.), Deontic Logic 
in Computer Science: Normative System Specification. John 
Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK, pp. 17-40, 1993, ISBN 
9780471937432. 
 
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

