The Social Accumulator (SOAC)  
An explanation model for digital interaction among human actors 
 
Karsten Böhm 
FH Kufstein Tirol University of Applied Sciences 
WEBTA Institute 
Kufstein, Austria 
email: karsten.boehm@fh-kufstein.ac.at 
 
Abstract—This contribution is addressing current issues in the 
increasing intensity of digital supported interaction and the 
perception and experiences made by human actors. Special 
attention is being put on the more than two years of due to the 
precautions in relation to the pandemic caused by the 
COVID19-virus. As a result, the concept of the Social 
Accumulator (SOAC) is introduced in this paper for the first 
time. It builds on the experiences from the intensified digital 
interactions both in academia and business life and should serve 
as an explanation model for the effects of digital interaction, that 
is easy to understand and to apply. The SOAC should help to 
understand the processes of Knowledge Creation and 
Knowledge Sharing when being driven by digital tools, which 
becomes increasingly important in a world that transforms 
education and businesses towards a highly digitized world. 
Keywords: Digital Transformation; Social Interaction; 
Higher Education; Digital Interaction; Communication; Collabo-
ration; CSCW. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Digitization and the digital transformation of our economy 
and out society has been an important topic in the recent years. 
The last two years under the influence of the global COVID19 
pandemic acted like a catalyst for an almost instant digital 
transformation in many economies. In countries like Austria 
and Germany that period could be seen as the first large scale 
and real-life application of fully digital work experience, 
whereas other countries in Europe like Sweden, Denmark or 
Estonia already had substantial experience with the digital 
transformation at scale. 
From a knowledge management perspective this situation 
was unique and interesting, as the use of information 
technology was always considered an important part of 
developing knowledge intensive businesses and activities. 
Thus, it is interesting to reflect back on the experience from a 
Knowledge 
Management 
perspective 
considering 
the 
interaction among human users (mostly) using digital 
channels.  
In the beginning of the pandemic technical challenges and 
the improvement of the infrastructure, the availability of 
software systems and the building of the necessary skills were 
dominating the agendas in many organizations, in business 
and academia alike. However, much to everybody’s surprise 
those challenges that were considered major showstoppers for 
technology adoption in the Knowledge Management 
community were resolved rather quickly. The collaboration in 
the digital world became the new norm and soon felt like the 
“new normal”.  
As the duration the of the pandemic extended in the second 
year, it became much more obvious that the mode of digital 
interaction had its own properties, which lead to advantages 
and disadvantages at the same time. Connections between 
colleagues and peers could be established quickly and 
communication and collaboration between individuals and 
groups of all sizes was facilitated by a number of useful tools 
that developed quickly to fit to the demand. Geographic 
distance was no impediment anymore, travel times virtually 
did not exist anymore. The transition from paper to digital in 
office became a reality at last and implemented easier ways of 
knowledge sharing among the users. On the other side the 
differentiation between working time and free time became 
much more blurred, the amount and the duration of digital 
meetings increased for most users very significantly and the 
time slots for concentrated work shrunk. Despite the massive 
use of digital communication tools, the individual feeling of 
loneliness or being isolated increased and informal 
conversation or communication did not happen that easily. 
This hampered informal knowledge exchange and affected the 
human well-being in the long run.  
The long-term effects led to a kind of tiredness and 
exhaustion and became the label “Zoom fatigue” [1] and 
recent research validated the effect in a study carried out in 
Germany [2].  
The channel reduction theory (from German: „Kanal-
reduktionstheorie”) [3] assumes that remote communication 
generally has deficits. Newer studies identify a shift of the 
relation between the communication partners. At the same 
time, new phenomenon seems to take place: 1) Intimacy 
between communication partners can be even higher in an 
online setting, because the situation leads to a higher readiness 
of self-revelation (phenomenon: “Talking to a Stranger”) and 
2) digital setting often focus on the factual level. This is being 
perceived in a positive way as communication is more 
efficient and less status oriented and refers to the 
Disentrainment Hyperpersonal Model of computer mediated 
communication [4]. 
 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

The situation described above, “This rapid and large-scale 
switch from in-person to remote interactions”, had been 
described earlier as Remote Living or “Telelife” [5], which 
puts emphasis on the fact that we will collaborate more 
remotely. It seems to be the case, that the massive application 
of technology mediated communication and collaboration 
does not only have benefits and positive effects, but also 
drawback – which is a common observation in massive use of 
any technology. Therefore, the right balance between digital 
interaction and direct interaction of human actors seem to be 
important in the author's opinion.  
Since the perception that direct interaction between human 
and digital interaction in which technical means are used for 
the communication (e.g., a phone call, a chat or a video 
conference call) are perceived differently in terms of richness 
and cognitive load, as well as towards trust building and 
perceived interactivity. This might be due to the fact that the 
channels are less rich [6], [7], we will use both channels. In 
essence direct interactions are perceived as more attractive 
and easier than digital interactions by most users. This became 
especially 
obvious 
during 
COVID19-pandemic 
when 
everything switched to solely digital interaction for a rather 
long period of time. 
Here the question on when to use which channel and how 
to interleave those to channels arises.   
Within this contribution we will introduce the concept of 
the Social Accumulator (SOAC) as an explanation model for 
the digital interaction of human actors, that focuses on the 
beneficial and the negative effects of computer supported 
collaboration (CSCW). By emphasizing on the different 
factors in a simple conceptual model, the SOAC should 
support the interleaving of digital and personal channels 
during communication and collaboration activities.  
The paper is structures as follows: in section 2 the concept 
of SOAC is introduced which is followed by an illustration of 
positive and negative characteristics that effect the SOAC of 
human actors in section 3. After that in section 4 some 
application areas of the model and challenges in the 
application are described. the paper concludes in section 5 
with a summary and the outlook for future research. 
II. 
 THE CONCEPT OF THE SOCIAL ACCUMULATOR 
The main contribution of this paper is the concept of the 
SOAC, which should serve as an explanation model for the 
characteristics of (intensified) digital interaction. The author 
perceives a need for grasping the positive and negative effects 
of digital interaction in a simplified form in order to plan, to 
facilitate and to execute digital communication and other 
forms of direct communication in the most effective way 
without the need to be an expert in that research field. This 
might be also important in the discussion about the future 
workplace [8] and post pandemic education models [9]. 
SOAC builds on the analogy of an electric accumulator 
that stores electric energy, transformed to the aspect of 
interaction between human actors. Refueling activities are 
providing an energizing element and feel good for the humans 
interacting with each other. But there are also draining 
activities which are perceived by the human actors as taking 
energy from them.  Figure 1 illustrates our concept of an 
SOAC. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The concept of the Social Accumulator (SOAC) with some 
charging and discharging aspects as examples. 
The term Social Accumulator is currently not used, 
although it is briefly mentioned in [10], but in the different 
context of social status of the youth generation. Therefore, in 
the opinion of the author, the metaphor of an accumulator that 
charges or discharges the perception of a communication or 
collaboration activities might be intuitive. With the focus of 
digital interaction in mind, we can consider the general 
observation that a direct conversation between human actors 
(“face-to-face”) is generally being perceived as richer and 
more satisfying than a digital interaction. Thus, we consider 
those types of interactions as positive or charging activities 
with respect to the SOAC, while we consider extensive digital 
interactions generally as negative or discharging activities, 
following the concept of the zoom fatigue. 
Based on the observations the (mental) concept of a SOAC 
is being ‘charged’ in direct interactions of human users and 
‘discharged’ in digital interactions. When balanced correctly 
viable amount of ‘social energy’ is available for the human 
user and the interaction is perceived as sufficient. If the level 
drops below a certain level, this becomes a (perceived) 
problem and affects the well-being of the user, if the situation 
continues to last longer – that’s the observation from the 
longer COVID19 periods. If the level exceeds the average 
energy level substantially the interaction is perceived as an 
especially valuable interaction – users call this a good chat, 
that was inspirational, for example. If this situation occurs 
more often, the context of the interaction is perceived in a 
positive way, e.g. as an inspirational workplace or motivating 
group. Figure 2 illustrates the process on at a schematic level. 
It should be noted, however, that the digital and direct 
interaction do not have a negative effect (discharging) or 
positive effect per se, but that the right balance or 
orchestration of charging and discharging effects are 
important for a working communication relation between the 
participants.  
The level of Social Energy (SE) available to the human 
actors is having a strong influence on his or her ability to 
create and share knowledge and might also influence his or 
her level of creativeness and innovation [11]. The term social 
energy is often used in the connection of energy supply and 
use within a nation or society.  
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Another definition can be found in the context of a societal 
force that aims at the wellbeing of its members by “doing 
good”.  
The relation between SE and the context of communi-
cation is less well defined in research literature and more 
informally described, see [12]. In the context of this 
contribution the term social energy is being defined as an 
individual and subjectively perceived energy level of a human 
actor with respect to his or her capability or willingness to 
enter into or contribute to a physical or digital conversation. 
As an immediate result, SE has a strong impact on knowledge 
related activities like knowledge creation, knowledge sharing, 
knowledge use and knowledge transfer. SE is changing over 
time and even during a conversation. 
The awareness created by the SOAC model first of all 
serves as a way to reflect on one’s own communication and 
collaboration situation, which puts the actor in a position to 
act on it. 
Simply assessing the current situation might be a start and 
a result of the reflection could be a change of the communi-
cation mode (e.g. from digital interaction to direct interaction). 
As a next step a human actor could also track the SE over time 
to learn more about positive and negative aspects on digital 
interaction from his or her individual perspective.  
It should be noted, that the authors would like to focus with 
this model at the dichotomy of direct vs. digital communi-
cation. With this respect the focus is being put on the channel 
and its methods and properties. It is clear that the human 
interaction is also largely influenced by the topic of the 
communication and the opinions and general feelings of the 
human actors. Those aspects can also have positive and 
negative aspects and require actions like a conflict resolution. 
These aspects are, however, not topic of this contribution. 
III. 
CHARGING AND DISCHARGING THE SOAC 
The aspects and characteristics of the digital and the direct 
communication channel can be considered towards their 
charging effects (adding social energy to the SOAC) and the 
discharging effects (taking social energy from the SOAC) and 
will be a subject for detailed future research. In order to 
illustrate the effect, examples of both categories will be 
described in the following subsections. 
A. Positive aspects charging the SOAC 
To illustrate the aspects that are draining social energy 
some of those discharging aspects are being described in more 
detail below: 
1. A fruitful conversation: between two human actors 
that evolves interesting and sometimes unexpected 
results is a good example of a fueling activity. Very 
often it is not only the exchange of information but 
the overall situation, gestures and mutual empathy 
that makes a difference here. As an important side 
effect psychological safety is created in such situati-
ons.  
2. An informal talk: at a coffee corner or similar place 
is a form of latent communication that happens as a 
by-product of another activity (e.g. taking a coffee). 
This often leads to the exchange of interesting 
information, knowledge sharing and even the 
creation of new knowledge stimulated by the situ-
ation. The main characteristic is that it is unplanned, 
but not unlikely. Those events happen much less 
likely in digital interactions. One of the reasons 
might be the less frequent and less natively incurred 
interactions in digital settings.  
3. A team experience: almost always requires a pre-
sence setting to allow for the emergence of a team 
spirit while working on a common goal or being 
submerged in a joint activity, very often these 
Figure 2. Illustration of the changing SOAC charging stage influenced by direct interactions and digital interactions over time. 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

activities serve as trust building entities for new 
groups or are reassessing mutual trust level for 
existing team that fuels the SOACs of the partici-
pants. Such settings can create transparency within 
the group as an important side-effect that fuels the 
positive perception of the group-members.  
B. Negative aspects discharging the SOAC 
To illustrate the aspects that are draining social energy 
some of those discharging aspects are being described in more 
detail below: 
 
1. A high frequency and/or long duration of digital 
interactions: might be considered as tiring to the 
human actors. This fact had been reported in a 
number of studies and it is important to clarify that 
this could also occur in situations in which only one 
of the human actors is under such a high load of 
digital interactions leading to a communication 
setting which is perceived very different by the 
participants (e.g. a team lead that is connecting to its 
peers in 1:1 session). 
2. Few interactions during a digital interaction: are 
another impact factor that is adding cognitive load to 
the human user, especially if the video setting is 
static and thus requires additional effort for the 
human brain to remain focused. When presentation 
settings are transferred 1:1 from a presence setting, 
they are often perceived more demanding in the 
digital communication and take less time or include 
more interactions to retain the attention of the 
audience.  
3. The perception of constant availability: for human 
actors might add to the perceived stress level as well. 
The lowered barrier of getting in contact with the 
other participant in a synchronous interaction might 
inflict his or her current working process and a 
cultural assumption within the organization that 
everyone is expected to be available almost always 
and instantly can lead to less efficiency in the 
working tasks and a high level of engagement at the 
same time. 
IV. POTENTIAL APPLICATION AREAS OF SOAC 
In this section some application areas for the SOAC will 
be explained in detail and it’s interesting to note that the 
SOAC can serve for different purposes in different application 
areas. From a Knowledge Management perspective, the 
charging and discharging aspects of the SOAC could be 
helpful to identify barriers in the fields of those Knowledge 
(Co)-creation, Knowledge Sharing and Knowledge Use 
among the different actors in the application settings that are 
described below. 
A. The context of Higher Education (HEI) 
The effects of the COVID19 pandemic and the intensified 
use of distant teaching just changed the way how Higher 
Education of the future is seen by students and lecturers alike. 
Due to those experiences Higher Education Institutions (HEI) 
will have to reflect on how to modernize the education in post-
pandemic age with a mixture of presence and distant teaching 
activities. It is very likely, that even education programs that 
relied on presence teaching only will include some form of e-
learning elements into their curricula. Even hybrid settings in 
which presence teaching and distant teaching occur 
simultaneously might be a valid scenario for the future. It is 
obvious, that some topics are more suitable for distant 
teaching than others (e.g. labs and exercises) but on the other 
hand also some students will favor digital interactions while 
others prefer a more direct interaction. Balancing those two 
forms of interaction between lecturer and students in the right 
way (in terms of didactic requirements and individual 
preferences), will retain a competitive advantage for a HEI in 
a market that constantly becomes more competitive and 
globalized due to the extension into the digital domain by 
market participants (e.g. Coursera, Udacity). The SOAC will 
help lecturers and to derive a measurement system during 
planning and execution of their lecturers to find the right mix 
between direct and digital interaction while planning and 
during execution of their lectures. For students SOAC could 
work as a tool to reflect on the own learning preferences with 
respect to their preferred form of communication and they 
could adapt accordingly by becoming aware of the advantages 
and drawbacks of digital interaction.  
B. The context of professional trainings 
For the professional training in the workplace setting and 
as part of the lifelong learning the results of the COVID19 
pandemic showed to companies and trainers that digital 
training can be effective and efficient. The requirement of 
traveling to a training became less of a demand and the 
integration in the everyday work schedule was much easier for 
digital training, leading to a higher acceptance rate for training 
in general and budget saving aspects (no travel and 
accommodation costs). On the other side, the focus on the 
training itself in a presence training and the direct and valuable 
exchange between participants and towards the trainer had 
been assigned a new value due to the drawbacks of digital 
trainings. Overall, it can be expected, that the market for 
professional training's will be changed due to the results of the 
pandemic, yet it is still to be shown what the long-term effects 
will be.  
The SOAC can help trainers design the interaction with 
the participants in an effective way by mixing direct and 
digital interactions in such a way that participants benefit in 
an optimal way from the training. Being aware of the 
characteristics of the charging and discharging effects will 
help to establish a level of social interaction that is common 
in a presence training also in a digital setting. SOAC helps to 
incorporate education in the professional job setting to fit to 
the individual requirements and thus provide a framework for 
the trainer to derive and monitor the charging state of the 
participants in his or her training. The concepts of SOAC 
might be combined with more agile approaches in delivering 
the teaching practices, too.   
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

C. The context of virtual companies 
The third application area that the author would like to 
shed light on in terms of SOAC is the digitization process 
within companies, that had been accelerated by the pandemic, 
too. Here, the concept of “New Work” [13], [14] became a 
reality in the perception and evolving work models of many 
organizations that resisted such changes before. This 
significant and ongoing change on the organization of 
companies often leads to more distributed or virtualized 
companies, especially in the IT-domain. While being common 
pattern in northern European countries, this is relatively new 
in the DACH area. From a managerial point of view this 
change creates new challenges for managing teams and 
project due to the fact of (perceived) fewer social interactions. 
The SOAC will help managers and team leaders as a 
managerial concept to understand the needs of their 
colleagues and team mates better and to act according to their 
(individual) needs, since they are able to sense and classify the 
charging and discharging activities during the digital and 
direct interactions. For the employees the SOAC can act like 
a model that helps them to become aware and to voice their 
needs in terms of communication and interaction over the 
various channels. 
Monitoring the social energy of the members of a group 
always had been an important task for leaders. However, in a 
hybrid working environment with a large amount of digital 
interaction it will be more important to monitor the SE of the 
team members and to recharge their SOACs early enough to 
prevent “outages” that might affect team motivation and 
performance. The concept of SOAC could help to manage 
team-SE more actively. 
D. Challenges for the application of SOAC 
Applying the mental model of a SOAC will have its 
challenges, which are a subject to future research. Some of the 
foreseen challenges are briefly mentioned in this section in 
order to provide some hints for the application in the settings 
described above. 
 It will be important to keep the simplicity of the concept 
and to stick as close to the accumulator metaphor as possible 
in order to make application simple and intuitive for the 
human actors in the communication process.  
Likewise, it will be important and challenging to make the 
current SE visible for the individual and for the group in order 
to create awareness and the opportunity to act on critical states 
of the SOAC appropriately. A promising approach for teams 
could be the use of retrospectives as a method from the agile 
software development for groups [15]. An adapted and 
simplified version might even work for the individual as a 
form of self-retrospective that can be mapped to the 
communication events in the recent period to plot the SE-
levels over time. 
Finally, charging and discharging factors will overlay each 
other and communication setting (presence or digital) might 
not be directly related to the SE level or being conscious for 
the human users in every situation. Therefore, the identifica-
tion of relevant communication events and their contribution 
to the SE-level in a precise way is going to be another 
challenge. 
V. 
CONCLUSION & FUTURE RESEARCH 
The main contribution of the paper is the introduction of 
the SOAC as a mental concept that might serve as a simple 
explanation model for the social energy level of an individual 
or a group and the perceived differences of direct and digital 
interactions. This might help to understand the interplay 
between the different forms of interaction and thus support the 
improvement of the overall interaction between human users 
as both forms are and will be present in our daily professional 
life. Further, the paper contributes in terms of working out 
different individual aspects that have to be considered when 
planning and orchestrating the different forms of interaction. 
This is being exemplified using application examples from 
three different fields.  
Being currently on the conceptual level, this contribution 
is missing the empirical data, whose gathering is subject to 
further research in the different usage scenarios mentioned 
above. This next step will also be used to collect responses 
from the human stakeholders in the interaction process 
concerning the understanding and usefulness of the mental 
model of a SOAC. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author would like to thank the Tyrolean Science Fund 
(“Tiroler Wissenschaftsförderung”), which supported this 
research under grant number F.33280/6-2021 and the feed-
back provided by the reviewers of this contribution and 
colleagues which helped to improve it.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
G. Fauville, M. Luo, A. C. Muller Queiroz, J. N. Bailenson, 
and J. Hancock, ‘Zoom Exhaustion & Fatigue Scale’, Social 
Science Research Network, Rochester, NY, SSRN Scholarly 
Paper ID 3786329, Feb. 2021. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.3786329. 
[2] 
‘Zoom-Fatigue – Instituts for Employment and 
Employability’. https://www.ibe-
ludwigshafen.de/zoom_fatigue/ (accessed Mar. 27, 2022). 
[3] 
N. Döring, Social Psychology of the Internet. The 
importance of the Internet for communication processes, 
identities, social relations and groups., 2nd ed. Göttingen 
Bern: Hogrefe Verlag, 2003. 
[4] 
J. Walther, ‘The Effect of Feedback on Identity Shift’, 
Comput.-Mediat. Commun. Media Psychol., vol. Vol. 14, no. 
Issue 1, pp. 1–26, 2011. 
[5] 
J. Orlosky et al., ‘Telelife: The Future of Remote Living’, 
ArXiv210702965 Cs, Jul. 2021, Accessed: Jul. 10, 2021. 
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2107.02965 
[6] 
A. M. Johnson and A. L. Lederer, ‘The Effect of 
Communication Frequency and Channel Richness on the 
Convergence Between Chief Executive and Chief 
Information Officers’, J. Manag. Inf. Syst., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 
227–252, Nov. 2005, doi: 
10.1080/07421222.2005.11045842. 
[7] 
K. Ishii, M. M. Lyons, and S. A. Carr, ‘Revisiting media 
richness theory for today and future’, Hum. Behav. Emerg. 
Technol., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 124–131, 2019, doi: 
10.1002/hbe2.138. 
[8] 
D. Smite, N. B. Moe, J. Hildrum, J. G. Huerta, and D. 
Mendez, ‘Work-From-Home is Here to Stay: Call for 
Flexibility in Post-Pandemic Work Policies’, 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

ArXiv220311136 Cs, Mar. 2022, Accessed: Apr. 29, 2022. 
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2203.11136 
[9] 
L. Bayerlein, M. T. Hora, B. A. Dean, and S. Perkiss, 
‘Developing skills in higher education for post-pandemic 
work’, Labour Ind., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 418–429, Oct. 2021, 
doi: 10.1080/10301763.2021.1966292. 
[10] D. V. Lepeshev and A. N. Teslenko, ‘Social status of 
scientific activity in the minds of the youth of Kazakhstani’, 
Eur. Sci. J. ESJ, vol. 10, no. 17, Art. no. 17, Jun. 2014, doi: 
10.19044/esj.2014.v10n17p%p. 
[11] ‘7 Ways to Recharge When You’re Feeling Drained of 
Social Energy’, Andy Mort, Feb. 16, 2015. 
https://www.andymort.com/social-energy/ (accessed Apr. 
29, 2022). 
[12] ‘Understanding Social Energy & Communication Styles – 
Evergreen Planner’. 
https://www.evergreenplanner.com/2021/03/17/understandin
g-social-energy-communication-styles/ (accessed Apr. 29, 
2022). 
[13] R. C. Barnett, ‘A New Work-Life Model for the Twenty-
First Century’, Ann. Am. Acad. Pol. Soc. Sci., vol. 562, no. 1, 
pp. 143–158, Mar. 1999, doi: 
10.1177/000271629956200110. 
[14] M. Helmold, ‘Culture Change Towards New Work 
Concepts’, in New Work, Transformational and Virtual 
Leadership: Lessons from COVID-19 and Other Crises, M. 
Helmold, Ed. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 
2021, pp. 45–54. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-63315-8_4. 
[15] Y. Andriyani, R. Hoda, and R. Amor, ‘Reflection in Agile 
Retrospectives’, in Agile Processes in Software Engineering 
and Extreme Programming, Cham, 2017, pp. 3–19. doi: 
10.1007/978-3-319-57633-6_1. 
 
 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

