Compound Noun Polysemy and Sense Enumeration in WordNet
Abed Alhakim Freihat
Dept. of Information Engineering
and Computer Science
University of Trento,
Trento, Italy
Email: fraihat@disi.unitn.it
Biswanath Dutta
Documentation Research
and Training Centre
Indian Statistical Institute (ISI)
Bangalore, India
Email: bisu@drtc.isibang.ac.in
Fausto Giunchiglia
Dept. of Information Engineering
and Computer Science
University of Trento,
Trento, Italy
Email: fausto@disi.unitn.it
Abstract—Sense enumeration in WordNet is one of the main
reasons behind the problem of high polysemous nature of
WordNet. The sense enumeration refers to misconstruction that
results in wrong assigning of a synset to a term. In this paper,
we propose a novel approach to discover and solve the problem
of sense enumerations in compound noun polysemy in WordNet.
The proposed solution reduces the number of sense enumerations
in WordNet and thus its high polysemous nature without affecting
its efﬁciency as a lexical resource for natural language processing.
Keywords–Polysemy; wordNet; compound nouns; sense enumer-
ation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
WordNet or Princeton WordNet [1] is a machine readable
online lexical database for the English language. Based on
psycholinguistic principles, WordNet has been developed since
1985 by linguists and psycholinguists as a conceptual dictio-
nary rather than an alphabetic one [2].
Compound nouns are multi-words or collocations that
consist of modiﬁed nouns and noun modiﬁers. One such
example is the noun nerve center, where the center is the
modiﬁed noun and nerve is the noun modiﬁer. Compound
noun polysemy in WordNet refers to the cases where we
use the modiﬁed noun to refer to several different compound
nouns such as using the modiﬁed noun center to refer to
nerve center and shopping center [3]. The meanings
of a compound noun polysemous term may correspond to a
specialization polysemy [4] [5], metonymy [6] [7], or they
are just sense enumerations, i.e., a misconstruction that results
in wrong assignment of a synset to a term. Assigning the term
center to the following two synsets is an example of sense
enumerations:
#3
center, nerve center: a cluster of
nerve cells governing a specific bodily
process.
#15
plaza, mall, center, shopping
mall, shopping center: mercantile
establishment consisting of a carefully
landscaped complex of shops...
The problem of sense enumerations in compound nouns
is that they are a source of noise rather than a source of
knowledge when using WordNet as a source for natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) and knowledge-based applications, es-
pecially Information Retrievel (IR) [8] and semantic search [9].
Although speciﬁc instances of the compound noun polysemy
have been addressed when solving the problem of specializa-
tion polysemy [4] [5] [10] or metonymy [7] [11] [12] [13], no
or little research has been made towards solving the problem of
compound noun polysemy as a problem of sense enumeration
in WordNet.
In this paper, we discuss the problem of sense enumerations
in compound noun polysemy in general and propose a semi-
automatic method which allows us to discover and resolve
sense enumerations in compound noun polysemy. The pro-
posed solution is a cleaning process that reduces the number of
sense enumerations in WordNet and thus its high polysemous
nature without affecting its efﬁciency as a lexical resource.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we discuss
the compound noun polysemy and the relation between this
kind of polysemy and the high polysemous nature in WordNet.
In Section III, we brieﬂy discuss the state of the art. In Section
IV, we introduce the formal deﬁnitions that we used in our
approach. In Section V, we present a semi automatic method
for solving the problem of sense enumerations in WordNet
in the case of compound noun polysemy. In Section VI, we
discuss the results of the proposed method. In Section VII, we
conclude the paper.
II.
SENSE ENUMERATIONS IN COMPOUND NOUN
POLYSEMY
A term in wordNet can be a single word such as center
or a collocation such as nerve center. In the case of nouns,
collocations correspond to compound nouns. A compound
noun contains two parts.
1)
noun adjunct/modiﬁer: a noun that modiﬁes another
noun in a compound noun.
2)
noun head/modiﬁed noun: the modiﬁed noun in a
compound noun.
For example, the noun head is the noun adjunct and word
is the modiﬁed noun in the compound noun head word.
WordNet contains 104290 nouns. These nouns belong to 74314
synsets. The number of compound nouns is 58946 and the
number of the synsets that contain at least one compound noun
is 40560. That means, more than 56% of the nouns in WordNet
are compound nouns and more than 45.4% of the synsets
contain compound nouns. Compound noun polysemy refers to
the cases, where we use the modiﬁed noun to refer to several
different compound nouns. The number of the compound
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

polysemous nouns in WordNet is 3407. These nouns belong
to 4918 polysemous synsets. Compound noun polysemy in
WordNet belong to the following three groups:
1)
Metonymy: Corresponds to the metonymy polysemy
cases where the modiﬁed noun belongs to two
synsets, one of these synsets is base meaning and the
other is derived meaning. For example, the compound
noun polysemy between the following two synsets is
an instance of metonymy.
#2
cherry, cherry tree: any of
numerous trees and shrubs
producing a small fleshy round
fruit with a single hard stone.
#3
cherry: a red fruit with a single
hard stone.
2)
Specialization Polysemy: Corresponds to the spe-
cialization polysemy cases where the modiﬁed noun
belongs to two synsets, one of these synsets is a more
general meaning of the other or both synsets are more
speciﬁc meanings of a third synset. For example, the
compound noun polysemy between the following two
synsets is an instance of specialization polysemy.
#1
red laver, laver: edible red
seaweeds.
#2
sea lettuce, laver: seaweed with
edible translucent crinkly ...
3)
Sense enumeration: Sense enumeration means a mis-
construction that results in wrong assignment of a
synset to a term, i.e., assignment the noun modiﬁer
or the modiﬁed noun as a synonym of the compound
noun itself. For example, assigning the the term head
as a synonym to the compound nouns in the following
synsets is an instance of sense enumerations.
#8
fountainhead, headspring, head:
the source of water from which
a stream arise.
#9
head, head word: grammar the word
in a grammatical constituent
that plays the same grammatical
role as the whole constituent.
#13
principal, school principal, head
teacher, head: the educator
who has executive authority for a
school.
#16
promontory, headland, head,
foreland: a natural elevation
(especially a rocky one that juts
out into the sea).
#21
headway, head: forward movement.
#27
read/write head, head: a tiny
electromagnetic coil and metal
pole used to write and read
magnetic patterns on a disk.
#32
drumhead, head: a membrane that is
stretched taut over a drum.
In general, using the modiﬁed noun to refer to the com-
pound noun itself is usual in natural language. In such cases,
we use the context to understand and disambiguate the modi-
ﬁed noun. An important question here is the relation between
the lexicon and the ability to understand and disambiguate
the modiﬁed noun. The issue is whether compound nouns
and their corresponding modiﬁed nouns should be stored as
synonyms in the lexicon. In natural language processing, do
we need a lexical database that assigns each modiﬁed noun as
a synonym to its corresponding compound nouns to be able
to disambiguate the cases in which we use modiﬁed nouns to
refer to compound nouns?
If we need to explicitly store the synonymity between
each modiﬁed noun and its corresponding compound nouns,
then the polysemous nouns in WordNet should be at least
56% and the polysemous synsets at least 45% just to store
this information. For example WordNet contains 135 non
polysemous synsets in which the term head is a noun
modiﬁer or modiﬁed noun of a compound noun. That means,
the number of the senses of the term head in WordNet should
be 168 (head has 33 senses in WordNet). For example the
term head should be synonymous to the terms department
head, head of household, head of state, head
nurse, human head, nominal head, hammerhead,
axe head, spearhead, magnetic head,....
In this approach, we argue that using a noun adjunct/mod-
iﬁed noun to refer to its corresponding compound noun is
similar to the use of anaphoric pronouns
[14] (he, she ,
it, ...). This means that the disambiguation of polysemous
modiﬁed nouns depends on the context rather on the used
lexicon. In this sense, we may call a noun adjunct/modiﬁed
noun that refers to a compound noun an anaphoric term.
Anaphoric pronouns and anaphoric terms are similar in the
following aspects:
1)
Anaphoric pronouns and anaphoric terms are usually
used to avoid repetition of the same word.
2)
Anaphoric pronouns and anaphoric terms are usually
ambiguous.
3)
Using and understanding of anaphoric pronouns and
anaphoric terms depends on a term that precedes
them.
4)
Anaphoric pronouns and anaphoric terms usually
need a disambiguation process which allows to bind
them to their corresponding referred term in the
discourse.
In point 3, the discourse dependency of anaphoric terms
means that an anaphoric term is used to refer to another
(explicit or implicit) term in the context that enables disam-
biguating the reference term. That means, without (the explicit
or implicit) referred term, the anaphoric term has no meaning
or its meaning can not be disambiguated. We think that the
referred term is the nearest understood compound noun. Thus,
using and understanding the reference term is dependent on
a compound noun that can be understood from the discourse
and does not depend on storing the polysemy relation between
the referred term and the the reference term in the lexicon.
Similar to anaphoric pronouns in point 4, anaphoric terms
need to be disambiguated. Anaphoric pronoun disambiguation
is called anaphoric resolution which is a syntactic process that
binds the pronouns to their corresponding referred terms.
Our hypothesis in this approach is that reference term dis-
ambiguation is similar to pronoun disambiguation. That means,
removing the anaphoric terms from WordNet in all compound
noun polysemy cases reduces the sense enumerations without
affecting its efﬁciency as a lexical resource for NLP tools.
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

III.
RELATED WORK
In general, the polysemy approaches address the Com-
pound noun polysemy as a sub case of metonymy and special-
ization polysemy. These approaches did not address solving
the sub cases of compound noun polysemy that correspond
to sense enumerations. In the following, we summarize the
most prominent polysemy approaches for solving metonymy
and specialization polysemy.
CORELEX [11] is a database of systematic polysemy
classes (based on the generative lexicon theory [15]). These
classes are combinations of 39 basic types that reside at the
top level of WordNet hierarchy such as {animal, plant,
food, attribute, state, artifact, ...}. The idea is
that metonymy cases can be underspeciﬁed to one of these
classes. Systematic polysemous meanings are systematic and
predictable. The polysemy type of the term banana in the fol-
lowing example is systematic since the meaning food can be
predicted from the plant meaning and so these two meanings
of banana belong to the systematic class plant#food.
#1
banana, banana tree: any of several
tropical and subtropical treelike herbs
of the genus Musa having a terminal
crown of large entire....
#2
elongated crescent-shaped yellow fruit
with soft sweet flesh.
The semantic relations extraction approaches are regular
polysemy [16] approaches that attempt to extract implicit
semantic relations between the polysemous senses via regular
structural patterns. The basic idea in these approaches is
that the implicit relatedness between the polysemous terms
corresponds to variety of semantic relations. Extracting these
relations and making them explicitly should improve word-
Net [12]. These approaches reﬁne and extend CORELEX
patterns to extract the semantic relations. Beside the structural
regularity, these approaches exploit also the synset gloss [4]
and the cousin relationship [7] [12] in WordNet. For example,
the approach described in [4] exploits synset glosses to extract
auto-referent candidates. The approach described in [7]
uses several rules, such as ontological bridging [7] to
detect relations between the sense pairs.
In general, the extracted relations in the semantic relations
extraction approaches are similar. For example, we ﬁnd the
relations similar to or color of in the results of the
approach in [4]. The results in [7] contains relations such as
contained in, obtain from. Similarly, the result in [12]
contain relations such as fruit of, tree of.
Specialization polysemy approaches such as [3] [4] are
regular polysemy approaches that attempt to transform the
implicit hierarchical relation between the synsets from lexical
level to the semantic level. The approach described in [10] [5]
considers representing the hierarchical relation at lexical level
as a kind of sense enumeration that leads to high polysemy and
information lost. An example for transforming the hierarchical
relation from lexical level to the semantic level is shown in
Figure 1.
IV.
APPROACH DEFINITIONS
In this section, we present the deﬁnitions that we use in
our approach. We start with the basic deﬁnitions. We deﬁne
terms as follows.
Figure 1. Example of transforming the hierarchical relation from the lexical
level to the semantic level
Deﬁnition 1: (Term) A term T is a triple ⟨Lemma, Cat,
T-Rank⟩, where
a)
Lemma is the term lemma, i.e., the orthographic string
representation of the term;
b)
Cat ∈ {noun, verb, adjective, adverb} is the grammat-
ical category of the term;
c)
T-Rank is the term rank, i.e., a natural number >0.
T-Rank is used to reﬂect which is the preferred term of a
synset. For example, man and adult male in the following
synset correspond to the following term instances: ⟨Lemma:
”man”, Cat: noun, T-Rank: 1⟩ and ⟨Lemma: ”adult male”, Cat:
noun, T-Rank: 2⟩.
#1
man, adult male: an adult person who is
male (as opposed to a woman).
In the following, we deﬁne wordNet synsets.
Deﬁnition 2: (WordNet synset) A synset S is deﬁned as
⟨Cat, Terms, Label, Gloss⟩, where
a)
Cat ∈ {noun, verb, adjective, adverb } is the gram-
matical category of the synset ;
b)
Terms is an ordered list of synonymous terms that
have the same grammatical category as the synset
grammatical category;
c)
Label ∈ Terms is the preferred term of the synset, i.e.,
the term whose T-Rank = 1;
d)
Gloss is a natural language text that describes the
synset.
A term is polysemous if it is found in the terms of more
than one synset. We deﬁne polysemous term as follows.
Deﬁnition 3: (polysemous term) A term t = ⟨Lemma, Cat,
T-Rank⟩ is polysemous if there is a term t
′ and two synsets s
and s
′, s ̸= s
′ such that
a)
t ∈ s.Terms and t
′ ∈ s
′.Terms
b)
t.Lemma = t
′.Lemma
c)
t.Cat = t
′.Cat.
A synset is polysemous if it contains at least one polyse-
mous term. We deﬁne polysemous synsets as follows.
Deﬁnition 4: (polysemous synset) A synset s is polyse-
mous if one of its terms is a polysemous term.
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

It is possible for two polysemous synsets to share more
than one term. Two polysemous synsets and their shared terms
constitute a polysemy instance. In the following, we deﬁne
polysemy instances.
Deﬁnition 5: (polysemy instance) A polysemy instance is
a triple [{T}, s1, s2], where s1, s2 are two polysemous synsets
that have the terms {T} in common.
The second step is to formalize the case where we have a
polysemy instance of a compound noun.
Deﬁnition 6: (compound noun polysemous term) A term
t is compound noun polysemous term of a term t′ if t is the
noun adjunct or the modiﬁed noun of t′.
For example, the term center is a compound noun polyse-
mous term of the term nerve center. In the following, we
deﬁne a compound noun polysemous synset.
Deﬁnition 7: (compound
noun
polysemous
synset)
A
synset s is compound noun polysemous if it contains a
compound noun polysemous term.
For example, the following synset is a compound noun
polysemous synset.
#7
center, centre, nerve center, nerve
centre: a cluster of nerve cells
governing a specific bodily process
In the following, we deﬁne compound noun polysemy
instance.
Deﬁnition 8: (compound noun polysemy instance) A pol-
ysemy instance I = [{T}, s1, s2] is compound noun polysemy
instance if s1 or s2 is a compound noun polysemous synset.
For example, [{center, centre}, #7, #8] is a compound
noun polysemy instance because #7 is a compound noun
polysemous synset.
#7
center, centre, nerve center, nerve
centre: a cluster of nerve cells
governing a specific bodily process
#8
center: the middle of a military or
naval formation
The third step is to deﬁne the structural patterns which
allow us to identify specialization polysemy instances in com-
pound nouns.
Deﬁnition 9: (structural pattern) A structural pattern of a
polysemy instance I = [ {T}, s1, s2] is a triple P = ⟨r, p1, p2⟩,
where
a)
r is the least common subsumer of s1 and s2;
b)
p1 and p2 are children of r.
c)
p1 subsumes s1 and p2 subsumes s2
For example, ⟨mercantile
establishment, marketplace,
shop⟩ is the structural pattern of the polysemy instance
[ {bazaar; bazar}, s1, s2] as shown in Figure 2.
The following deﬁnition allows us to deﬁne the specializa-
tion polysemy instances in compound nouns.
Deﬁnition 10: (Specialization Polysemy instance) A com-
pound noun polysemy instance I = [ {T}, s1, s2] is a special-
ization polysemy instance if its structural pattern p=⟨r, p1, p2⟩
has one of the following forms ⟨r, s1, s2⟩, ⟨r, s1, p2⟩ or
⟨r, p1, s2⟩ as illustrated in Figure 3.
Figure 2. Example of a structural pattern
Figure 3. Specialization polysemy pattern
In the following, we deﬁne compound noun polysemy
instances that belongs to metonymy by using CORELEX
structural patterns.
Deﬁnition 11: (CORELEX structural pattern) CORELEX
structural pattern is a sequence of synset labels separated by #
where each synset label corresponds to a synset in WordNet.
For example, a CORELEX structural pattern is plant#fruit
In the following, we deﬁne CORELEX polysemy classes.
Deﬁnition 12: (CORELEX polysemy class) Let p=p1# p2
be a CORELEX pattern. The polysemy class of p is deﬁned
as the set of all polysemy instances {I = [{T}, s1, s2] | s1 is
subsumed by p1 and s2 is subsumed by p2}
For
example,
the
polysemy
instance
{I
=
[{peach}, #1, #3]
belongs
to
the
polysemy
class
of
CORELEX structural pattern
plant#fruit because the
synset #1 is subsumed by plant and #3 is subsumed by
fruit.
#1
peach, peach tree, Prunus persica:
cultivated in temperate regions.
#3
peach: downy juicy fruit with sweet
yellowish or whitish flesh.
In the following, we deﬁne the notion of metonymy in-
stance.
Deﬁnition 13: (Metonymy instance) A polysemy instance
I is a metonymy instance if it belongs to some CORELEX
polysemy class.
Finally, we deﬁne sense enumeration in compound noun
polysemy.
Deﬁnition 14: (Sense enumeration in compound noun pol-
ysemy) A compound noun polysemous term in a compound
noun polysemous synset s1 is considered to be a sense enu-
meration if the following hold:
a)
s1 is a compound noun polysemous synset;
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

b)
There is no polysemy instance I = [{T}, s1, s2] such
that I is a metonymy or a specialization polysemy
instance.
V.
DISCOVERY AND ELIMINATION OF SENSE
ENUMERATIONS IN COMPOUND NOUNS
In this section, we describe the discovery and elimination
of sense enumerations in compound nouns. This is performed
by a semi-automatic process that includes the following steps.
P1
Discovery of sense enumerations in Compound
Nouns: Sense enumerations discovery in compound
nouns is performed semi-automatically as follows.
1)
Sense enumeration candidates discovery:
This step is automatic and performed by
deploying an algorithm that returns sense
enumeration candidates in compound noun
polysemous nouns.
2)
Excluding of false positives: This step is
manual where we exclude the false positives
from the output of the algorithm in the pre-
vious step. For example, we exclude term
abbreviations.
P2
Elimination of sense enumerations: This step is
automatic and performed by deploying an algorithm
which allows us to eliminate sense enumerations in
the identiﬁed cases by removing the polysemous noun
modiﬁer and keeping the compound noun.
A. Discovery of sense Enumerations in Compound Nouns
In the following, we discuss the algorithm that we deployed
in the discovery of sense enumerations in compound nouns.
The algorithm returns a hash map of compound noun polyse-
mous terms and senses enumeration candidates according to
deﬁnition 14 and it works as follows:
1
It retrieves all compound noun polysemous terms in
WordNet.
2
It iterates over all retrieved compound nouns to iden-
tify sense enumeration candidates as follows. For each
retrieved compound noun term:
2.a
It computes a list of the term sysnets.
2.b
It computes a list of the polysemy instances of each
of the retrieved synsets.
2.c
It checks if any of the polysemy instances of the
synset is a specialization polysemy instance according
to deﬁnition 10 or a metonymy instance according to
deﬁnition 13.
2.d
if none of the polysemy instances of the synset is
specialization polysemy or metonymy, the synset is
considered as a sense enumeration according to deﬁ-
nition 14 and added to the sense enumeration list of
the term.
2.e
The compound noun polysemous term and its corre-
sponding sense enumerations are stored in a hash map.
3
The algorithm returns the hash map that correponds
to the compound noun polysemous terms and their
corresponding sense enumerations.
B. Excluding of False Positives
The input of this phase is the output of the algorithm
senseEnumerationsDiscovery. The task of this phase is
to exclude false positives. Experimentally, it turns out that the
false positives can be classiﬁed into the following two groups:
1)
Missing adjunct noun/modiﬁed noun synset: In
some cases, a synset of the adjunct noun or the
modiﬁed noun is missing. Such cases are excluded.
For example, none of the 6 synsets of the term party
can be considered as a general meaning of the term
political party in the following synset.
#
party, political party: an
organization to gain political
power.
2)
Term abbreviations: Since the algorithm in the pre-
vious step uses the string function to test compound
noun polysemy, the algorithm returns polysemy in-
stances that include term abbreviations as compound
noun polysemy instances. For example, the term
mil is abbreviation of the terms milliliter and
millilitre in the following synset.
#
milliliter, mil, ml, cubic
centimeter, cc: a metric unit
of volume equal....
C. Elimination of Sense Enumerations in Compound Nouns
In this step, we eliminate the sense enumerations by
removing the polysemous modiﬁed nouns. For example, the
result of applying the function on head and the synset #32 is
the synset #32’:
#32
drumhead, head: a membrane that is
stretched taut over a drum.
#32’
drumhead: a membrane that is stretched
taut over a drum.
VI.
RESULTS AND EVALUATION
In the following, we present the results of our approach.
Table I shows the results of the compound noun polysemy
discovery algorithm that returned 2270 possible compound
noun polysemous terms. These terms belong to 2952 synsets.
The total number of compound noun polysemous instances
is 11650 instance. Table II shows the results of the man-
TABLE I. RESULTS OF THE DISCOVERY ALGORITHM
#Compound noun polysemous terms
2270
#Compound noun polysemous synsets
2952
#Compound noun polysemous instances
11650
ual validation process, where the synsets of 1905 terms are
classiﬁed to be sense enumerations. These terms belong to
2547 synsets. These synsets belong to 11088 compound noun
polysemy instances. In Table III, we give an overview about
TABLE II. MANUAL VALIDATION RESULTS
#Compound noun polysemous terms
1905
#Compound noun polysemous synsets
2547
#Compound noun polysemous instances
11088
number of nouns, noun senses and noun synsets in resulting
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

WordNet after applying the disambiguation algorithm on the
nouns in the WordNet 2.1. The table shows the reduction of
TABLE III. DISAMBIGUATION ALGORITHM RESULTS
#Nouns
#Synsets
#Senses
Before Applying the Algorithm
104290
74314
130207
After Applying the Algorithm
104290
74314
127660
WordNet senses from 130207 to 127660. The average sense
per noun before applying our algorithm is 1.25. Applying our
algorithm reduces sense number per noun to 1.22.
A. Evaluation
To evaluate our approach, 200 synsets have been evaluated
by two evaluators. In Table IV, we report the statistics of the
evaluation, where we show the following:
a
Total agreement: Measures the number of polysemy
instances where both evaluators agrees with our ap-
proach (corresponds to second row in the table).
b
Partial agreement Measures the number of polysemy
instances where the at least one of the evaluators
agrees with our approach (corresponds to third and
fourth rows in the table).
c
Disagreement Measures disagreement between the ap-
proach and the evaluators (corresponds to last row in
the table).
In Table IV, a refers to our approach, e1, e2 refer to evaluator1
and evaluator 2 respectively.
TABLE IV. EVALUATION RESULTS
Evaluators Agreement
Result
a = e1 ∧ a = e2
161 (80.5%)
a = e1
172 (86%)
a = e2
177 (88.5%)
a ̸= e1 ∧ a ̸= e2
12 (6%)
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have introduced a new approach for
solving the problem of sense enumerations in compound noun
polysemy, where we have removed the sense enumerations
in compound nouns in WordNet and thus reduced the high
polysemy in compound nouns. The proposed solution is a
necessary step that should be included in any approach for
solving the polysemy problem in WordNet because the sense
enumerations in compound nouns is a source of noise rather
than a source of knowledge that affects the quality of WordNet
as a source for NLP and knowledge-based applications.
Although the manual treatment in the approach guarantees
the quality of the approach, we plan to run an indirect evalu-
ation to test the effects of our approach in terms of precision
and recall as a future work. As future work, we plan also to
examine the relation between sense enumeration and missing
terms in WordNet especially when a synset contains a modiﬁed
noun and the compound noun itself is missing in the synset.
For example, solving the sense enumeration problem in the
following two meanings of the term head, we add the missing
terms bony pelvis and head of muscle in the following
two synsets respectively.
#25
head:the rounded end of a bone that bits
into a rounded cavity in another bone to
form a joint.
#26
head: that part of a skeletal muscle
that is away from the bone that it
moves.
Acknowledgment. The research leading to these results
has received partially funding from the European Commu-
nity’s Seventh Framework Program under grant agreement n.
600854, Smart Society (http://www.smart-society-project.eu/).
REFERENCES
[1]
G. A. Miller, “Wordnet: A lexical database for english,” Commun.
ACM, vol. 38, no. 11, Nov. 1995, pp. 39–41. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/219717.219748
[2]
G. A. Miller, R. Beckwith, C. Fellbaum, D. Gross, and K. J. Miller,
“Introduction to WordNet: an on-line lexical database,” International
Journal of Lexicography, vol. 3, no. 4, 1990, pp. 235–244. [Online].
Available: http://wordnetcode.princeton.edu/5papers.pdf
[3]
A. A. Freihat, “An organizational approach to the polysemy problem in
wordnet,” PhD thesis, University of Trento, 2014.
[4]
L. Barque and F.-R. Chaumartin, “Regular polysemy in wordnet.”
JLCL,
vol.
24,
no.
2,
2009,
pp.
5–18.
[Online].
Available:
http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/journals/ldvf/ldvf24.html#BarqueC09
[5]
A. A. Freihat, F. Giunchiglia, and B. Dutta, “Solving specialization pol-
ysemy in wordnet,” International Journal of Computational Linguistics
and Applications, vol. 4, no. 1, jan-june 2013.
[6]
W. Peters and I. Peters, “Lexicalised systematic polysemy in wordnet.”
in LREC.
European Language Resources Association, 2000. [Online].
Available: http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/lrec/lrec2000.html#PetersP00
[7]
T. Veale, “A non-distributional approach to polysemy detection in
wordnet.” [Online]. Available: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/
viewdoc/download?rep=rep1&type=pdf&doi=10.1.1.146.5566
[8]
R.
Mandala,
T.
Tokunaga,
and
H.
Tanaka,
“Complementing
wordnet with roget’s and corpus-based thesauri for information
retrieval.”
in
EACL.
The
Association
for
Computer
Lin-
guistics,
1999,
pp.
94–101.
[Online].
Available:
http://dblp.uni-
trier.de/db/conf/eacl/eacl1999.html#MandalaTT99
[9]
F. Giunchiglia, U. Kharkevich, and I. Zaihrayeu, “Concept search:
Semantics enabled syntactic search,” in Proceedings of the Workshop
on Semantic Search (SemSearch 2008) at the 5th European Semantic
Web Conference (ESWC 2008) , June 2, 2008, Tenerife, Spain, ser.
CEUR Workshop Proceedings, S. Bloehdorn, M. Grobelnik, P. Mika,
and D. T. Tran, Eds., vol. 334.
CEUR-WS.org, 2008. [Online].
Available: http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-334/paper-10.pdf
[10]
A. A. Freihat, F. Giunchiglia, and B. Dutta, “Regular polysemy in word-
net and pattern based approach,” International Journal On Advances in
Intelligent Systems, no. 3&4, jan 2013.
[11]
P. Buitelaar, “Corelex: Systematic polysemy and underspeciﬁcation,”
PhD thesis,Brandeis University, Department of Computer Science,
1998.
[12]
P. W., “Detection and characterization of ﬁgurative language use in
wordnet,” PhD thesis, Natural Language Processing Group, Department
of Computer Science, University of Shefﬁeld, 2004.
[13]
S. N. Kim and T. Baldwin, “Word sense and semantic relations
in
noun
compounds,”
ACM
Trans.
Speech
Lang.
Process.,
vol.
10,
no.
3,
Jul.
2013,
pp.
9:1–9:17.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2483969.2483971
[14]
J. Zheng, W. W. Chapman, R. S. Crowley, and G. K. Savova,
“Coreference resolution: A review of general methodologies and
applications in the clinical domain,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics,
vol.
44,
no.
6,
2011,
pp.
1113
–
1122.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S153204641100133X
[15]
J. Pustejovsky, “The generative lexicon,” Computational Linguistics,
vol. 17, 1991.
[16]
A. J., “Regular polysemy,” Linguistics, 1974, pp. 5–32.
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

