Evolutionary Social Knowledge Graphs for Individual and Organizational Learning 
 
Christoph Greven, Hendrik Thüs, Mohamed Amine Chatti, Ulrik Schroeder 
Learning Technologies Research Group 
RWTH Aachen University 
Aachen, Germany 
email: {greven, thues, chatti, schroeder}@cs.rwth-aachen.de 
 
 
Abstract—Knowledge has been identified as one of the most 
important 
resources 
that 
grants 
organizations 
certain 
competitive advantages. Hence, while dealing with problems 
like the demographic change, organizations are trying to 
preserve the knowledge of their members. Its informal and 
network character, as well as its little half-life demand high 
standards to record, store and maintain the knowledge which 
needs to be consider for the development of an appropriate 
knowledge tool. This paper presents a novel knowledge 
management system which addresses the scattered, distributed, 
flexible and interrelated nature of knowledge. It therefore 
brings different important aspects together and utilizes the 
personal knowledge management of individuals in working 
processes together with social collaboration methods for a 
global organizational learning process. The three reflection 
layers promote a continuous feedback loop resulting in high 
quality knowledge maturing. The paper mainly concentrates 
on the essential underlying architecture and knowledge 
structure that only makes the learning process possible. 
Keywords-Knowledge 
Management 
System; 
Informal 
Knowledge; Network Knowledge; Knowledge Graph; Knowledge 
Evolution; Organizational Learning; Reflection. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Since time immemorial, society tries to impart new 
knowledge to their posterity and therefore finds appropriate 
ways to capture it. As, over time, the kind and form of 
knowledge changed, the methods and techniques to store it 
changed accordingly. Knowledge itself is a controversial 
topic and scientists have many different ideas and views on 
it. But when it comes to a concrete software tool to deal with 
it, knowledge needs to be stored somehow. That is where 
traditional knowledge management systems fail because they 
are not able to map the complex characteristics that 
knowledge nowadays has. They are not considering the 
multimodality, flexibility, interrelation, and short life. As a 
consequence, a lot of potential remains unused or even gets 
lost. 
The lost capacities are also sensed by the economy. 
While resource management in general has always been an 
important issue for the efficiency, companies start to realize 
that, beside traditional sources like money or workforce, 
expertise or knowledge is a new resource and good that 
drastically impacts their competitiveness. Having employees 
with a lot of expertise means an enormous advantage on the 
market. Hence, it is not astonishing that companies start to 
manage their knowledge like all other resources to keep, 
maintain, and expand their knowledge. 
There is a common consensus on the significance of 
knowledge for economic success. However, its extraction 
and collection is not as easy. Organizations as well as society 
have to face different recent problems: the running 
demographic change, an enormous information overflow, 
overspecialization in special fields instead of heaving general 
problem-solving competency, the high percentage of tacit 
knowledge which is not tangible from outside, little 
exchange of experience which is often related to missing 
communication possibilities, a lack of knowledge application 
after trainings or workshops, no feedback for the authors 
from the real practitioners, little reusability of knowledge 
due to the rigid old structures, very slow publication 
procedures of new knowledge, for example owed to only 
annually meeting committees, or very specialized and often 
mobile workplaces that require considerably different 
demands. 
Regarding the learning or knowledge management 
process, there are different challenging phases. First, the 
knowledge is in the employees’ minds. The largest share is 
not factual but tacit knowledge. Thus, it is difficult to make 
this knowledge explicit and verbalize or formalize it. Second, 
employees 
that 
have 
certain 
competency 
do 
not 
communicate and share it. The most valuable knowledge is 
useless if anyone can access it. Last, the knowledge needs to 
be kept up to date and be adapted regarding the latest 
changes. A quality assurance of the individual knowledge is 
mandatory to eliminate errors and misconceptions.  
All the present problems can be addressed by aspects of 
knowledge management systems. Therefore, this paper 
presents a novel learning management system that owns the 
potential to help out of misery. Thereby it presents the 
overall process of knowledge management but clearly 
focusses on the underlying unique architecture and structure 
which makes this kind of interactions possible. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: 
Section 2 gives a brief overview about recent knowledge 
management approaches. Section 3 introduces and explains 
the knowledge management process and hence the individual 
as well as organizational learning. The concrete underlying 
structure which defines how knowledge is finally represented 
and treated is depicted in Section 4. As this is the major part 
of this paper, different aspects like knowledge entities, 
relational behavior, versioning or access management are 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

described in more detail. Section 5 gives some information 
regarding evaluation efforts. Finally, Section 6 concludes the 
approach so far and gives an outlook of future procedures 
and possible extensions.  
II. 
KNOWLEDGE AND LEARNING 
Organizations had high hopes in knowledge management 
when it came up in the 90s. The topic knowledge 
management has been discussed a lot in literature and there 
are various different opinions on it. Earlier discussions are 
about whether to understand knowledge as a thing [1][2][3] 
that can be stored like in simple information management. 
Others see it as a standardized process that learners always 
pass through but which is not really flexible. One example is 
the well-known SECI model [4] which seems to be flexible 
at a first glance but which is not indeed. More recent 
approaches are concentrating on the knowledge worker 
himself and realize knowledge as well as learning as highly 
personal. Personal knowledge management puts the learner 
and his tacit, implicit knowledge in focus [5][6][7]. In 
contrast to earlier understanding of knowledge management, 
this is steered by the user and hence following a bottom-up 
instead of a traditional top-down approach. Still, the nature 
of today’s knowledge cannot be mapped. 
Today, organizational structures like companies invest 
enormous amounts of money in education and training. Still, 
those efforts cannot prevent regular incidents with e.g. 
breakdowns appearing in the public media every now and 
then. Many of those effects are owed to omissions of 
knowledge management and a corresponding quality 
assurance. Especially traditional organizations are only 
slowly adapting their management strategies and often count 
on outdated approaches such as simple learning content or 
asset management systems. Although, such systems got more 
interactive with the new possibilities of the Web 2.0 focusing 
on the worker a lot more, platforms like wikis are still 
struggling in the professional working environments. They 
cause additional expenses and the active involvement of 
people is hard. Personal learning environments try to address 
the individuality of the learners and their tacit knowledge, 
but in most cases they are only a set of enforced tools that do 
not fit in naturally. Further aspects like workplace mobility 
make knowledge management even more difficult while the 
new powerful mobile devices offer a lot of still unused 
potential. Systems for mobile distribution of digital 
documents [8] or question and answering systems [9] show 
that companies are trying to find a way out, but that the 
overall transfer and integration of new approaches is rather 
slow. And nevertheless, not all current problems like the 
short half-life, dispersion and fragmentation or interrelation 
of knowledge are addressed. 
The approach presented in this paper is based on the 
Learning as a Network theory [10] which unites the concepts 
of network learning, complexity theory, and double loop 
learning. It regards learning and working as one thing and 
addresses the challenges described. 
III. 
EVOLUTIONARY KNOWLEDGE PROGESSION 
The idea behind the whole concept is a 3-layered 
knowledge reflection process which promotes personal 
learning, naturally leading to organization learning as well. 
As depicted in Figure 1, the process concentrates on the 
single knowledge worker and his knowledge. As a certain 
knowledge maturity or quality has been reached in one 
phase, it can be raised to the next level. At the same time, 
experiences on higher levels always reproduce a knowledge 
flow backwards. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Three-layered knowledge reflection loop. 
The first phase starts with the personal knowledge 
management and learning process of each individual. The 
individual refers to official material like instruction rules, 
documentations, guidelines, or trainings in his everyday 
working process. While using it in his every day work, he 
gains experience and has the possibility to create his very 
own multimedia notes and aids. With the help of his newly 
gained knowledge, he can solve similar problem situations in 
future. By and by, he changes, enhances and corrects his 
thoughts in this feedback loop which results in high quality 
working aids. At any time, the individual can decide to 
exchange his knowledge with a selected group of peers 
allowing them to participate in his experience. 
In the second phase, knowledge is communicated 
amongst the personal knowledge networks of the individuals. 
Discussions come about and argue on certain approaches, 
understanding or best practices that have been experienced 
by the individuals. Besides the open dialog, users also have 
the possibility to rate all kinds of material available, from 
official guidelines to answers to comments. The new insights 
gained from the discourse influence the knowledge in the 
network as well as the personal opinions so that parts are 
revised resulting in a higher quality. 
In the third and last phase, the created knowledge should 
flow back to the original authors so that it can be didactically 
reworked and integrated in the official organizational 
knowledge. As new versions, it can be published for all the 
workforce again where it represents the basis for future 
working processes. The overall continuous feedback loop 
starts again. Intelligent methods help editors to find and 
discover problem areas or highly valuable knowledge in the 
system. 
In principle, the presented process is generic and can be 
applied in various kinds of scenarios. The related project – 
Professional 
Reflective 
Mobile 
Personal 
Learning 
Environments (PRiME) – in which this model has been 
developed, concentrates on mobile field services that profit 
the most [11]. An according architecture of mainly mobile 
clients of visualizers and manipulators communicate with a 
central knowledge repository through service interfaces. The 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

mobile 
application 
ecology 
thereby 
supports 
the 
personalization of each individual and can be flexibly 
adapted to the current needs of the worker [12][13]. 
The presented process appears to be unspectacular, but to 
really establish such a continuous feedback loop, many 
different aspects need to be considered. The next section 
explains the underlying complex knowledge structure step by 
step, for without no system would have been possible. 
IV. 
REALIZATION 
This section gives more details on the concrete 
realization and implementation which is the foundation for 
the before mentioned knowledge process. Therefore, the 
different knowledge entities are explained, relationships are 
introduced, the versioning is described, annotations and 
ratings are pointed out, and finally the authorization system 
is explained. The paper does not restrict to a fixed 
technological implementation as a selection of such heavily 
depends on the application scenario and environment. 
A. Entities 
In whichever way knowledge is generated or understood, 
when it comes to a concrete implementation it has to be 
stored in a data base somehow. The system supports the 
separation of concerns and concentrates on the content and 
its structure and not on its visual representation. The own 
knowledge structure is format-less and does not contain 
general style information. Figure 2 shows a very simplified 
class diagram of the elements and relations that are 
introduced in the following sections. There are two major 
entities which represent different aspects of the knowledge. 
 
Figure 2.  Simplified CD of knowledge structure. 
1) Snippets 
Snippets 
are 
multimedia-based 
atomic 
units 
of 
knowledge. A single snippet might cover a paragraph, an 
image, a short video, an engineering detail drawing, a 3D-
model, and so forth. It is self-contained and from a semantic 
point of view it would not make sense to split it up any 
further. Snippets are reduced to content and do not address 
possible visual presentation. Hence, they abdicate the most 
formatting and style information and are restricted to those 
that contribute to the actual content. That are, e.g., structural 
information like listings or tables or style information like 
bold or underline. Beside the content, snippets hold further 
meta information like an abstracting title, information about 
the author, etc. Summarizing, they represent a smallest 
semantic unit of concrete, directly applicable content. 
2) Bundles 
Bundles are logical, semantic units that are thought to 
group an order of knowledge entities such as snippets, or 
bundles themselves. That means it is a recursive data 
structure which allows to set up several layers of bundles and 
snippets. It can be understood as a tree where the inner nodes 
are bundles and the leaves are snippets whereas leaves are 
allowed on every level. Bundles do not contain content 
themselves but such as snippets they hold some additional 
meta information, e.g., a title. They can be compared to 
chapters or sections in a book, where text (snippets) may be 
placed on each level as, e.g., an introduction of the section, 
or inside a section. Bundles are logical groupings of content 
and form an enclosed object themselves regardless of the 
surrounding content and where they are to be found. 
Summarizing one could say that bundles mainly realize a 
named list of references to sub-elements. 
B. Relations 
The previous sections introduced snippets as content 
holders and bundles as semantic structures. Without any 
relational associations they were lose, incoherent pieces 
without any use. And as already mentioned, the most 
important aspect of today’s knowledge is still missing: 
interrelations. That is why the system offers different kinds 
of relationships between elements that all have a special 
semantic. Simplified, one can first think of bidirectional 
associations (see next section for more details). The first and 
most important relation has been implied before already. It is 
the parent-child relation of bundles (parent) and bundles or 
snippets (children). The recursive component allows a 
hierarchical representation of knowledge in a tree-like 
structure. Through the relation, bundles are able to somehow 
abstract and aggregate their subtree and make it usable as a 
whole. Official documents or training exercises are arranged 
the same way: there is a general topic which is split up in 
subtopics, and so forth. Although traditional documents have 
a tree structure (also see Section 4.H), once they are in the 
system they (or parts of them) can be reused in different 
contexts. That means they can be embedded via the parent-
child relation in other bundles resulting in potentially more 
than one parent for each bundle and hence many 
simultaneous interwoven trees. 
Oftentimes, knowledge refers to some other knowledge. 
As an example, specifications often contain phrases like "see 
chapter x" or "as in figure y". There is a corresponding 
relation – namely references – which allows snippets to 
cross-ling additional elements which do not even need to be 
in the same tree. As a result, the trees-structure becomes a 
real graph. Additionally, there are further relations which are 
of minor importance. For example, there is a "based on" 
association telling that this element or its version is based on 
content in some other snippet, bundle or comment (see 
Section 4.B for more details). In particular, this can be used 
to "thank" a user for his contribution. 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

C. Versioning and States 
For a knowledge management system that also offers 
official material like documentations, instruction rules, 
guidelines, etc. it is important to keep track of the changes 
that have been done in the system. That is, e.g., related to 
the responsibility of the authors. Hence, a complex 
versioning system has been created which covers the 
system’s entities and their relations. 
Elements, i.e., bundles and snippets, are uniquely 
defined by their id and their version number. Newly created 
elements get a novel id and start with version 0. As soon as 
new versions are created, new physical elements are 
injected, having the same id but an increased version 
number. This way, the history of one single element can be 
traced by showing all elements with the same id and all the 
different versions. Essentially, a new snippet version means 
a changed content (or meta information like its title). It is to 
be created when the knowledge atom needs to be updated, 
changed or enhanced. In contrast, a new bundle version 
means a changed structure (or its meta information). As a 
bundle only defines its children and hence the subtree in the 
hierarchy, adapting it means adding, ordering, or even 
removing a child element. 
The whole knowledge structure is based on the directive 
that the newest version of an element is understood to 
always be the best version of it. At least in relation to the 
current state of knowledge in the system. That has big 
implications on the whole process and structure. As stated 
before, knowledge is not represented redundantly. There are 
no copies of elements but multiple usage of an element is 
realized by multiple relations to one single element. 
Considering the “the newer the better” rule it would be 
comfortable if relations always addressed the newest 
versions of elements as all previous versions are thought to 
describe the same issue but in a less optimal way. That is 
how the system has been implemented. This implies, that as 
soon as an element is changed into a new version, all other 
elements which have relations to the changed element are 
now directly referring to the new version. As an example, 
one can think of an exploded view of a machinery which is 
used in a book’s chapter and in a workshop presentation. In 
case the image needs to be corrected, the new version is 
immediately included in the book and presentation as well. 
The versioning together with the referencing keeps the 
knowledge structure very flexible and adaptable. 
The authoring process of creating new versions 
commonly includes a phase, where elements are under 
construction but not yet finished to be accessible for 
everyone. That is not covert in the system so far. To satisfy 
this requirement, elements are extended via states. The idea 
behind states is to describe in which maturity phase an 
element is. When a new version is created due to changes of 
the current element, the version number is incremented. 
Furthermore, the element is working state then. All temporal 
independent changes of the element are directly applied and 
do not result into a new version until the author has finished 
his work. And yet it is no different if changes are done 
within a minute or over several weeks. The working state 
also has some other influences. For example, working 
versions of elements cannot be found by someone who does 
not own authoring rights. The element remains in working 
state until it is actively published by an author. That means 
the version number stays the same while the state is changed 
to published. At this point of time, the element reached an 
official character of quality and is accessible for the target 
group. From then on it is not possible to adapt the element, 
and changes result in new working versions with 
incremented version numbers respectively. Besides the 
working and published, there are other states, for example 
initial for automatically imported elements with additional 
restrictions. Figure 3 shows the different versions/states of an 
element and the possible transitions. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Knowledge versioning process. 
The versioning of the bidirectional relations and the 
different states do not mesh with each other very well. The 
structure of elements and relations is thought to have one 
best element for each knowledge issue. The concept of non-
published new versions leads to a violation as there is a 
coexistence of two elements describing the same things at a 
time. Of course, it would not make sense to show both of 
them in the tree or link the new version already as it has not 
been finalized yet. To address this challenge, it has been 
decided to slit the bidirectional relations up into two 
unidirectional relations, which are not synchronized at the 
same time but with a delay of the different state transitions.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Evolving Knowledge Graph. 
Left: published bundle (version 0) with two children and one parent bundle. 
Middle: one snippet is deleted in working version 1 of bundle. 
Right: updated bundle (version 1) is published. 
Figure 4 shows an example of one root bundle, 
containing one other bundle, containing two snippets itself. 
One can see that the return paths of the middle bundle’s 
relations (dashed) are only set the moment the element is 
published. When being in working state, it only adapts or 
rather creates the relation parts of which it is the owner 
(solid). The figure also shows how the child relation (green) 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

of the top bundle is altered on publish. Splitting up the 
bidirectional relations added some complexity as there two 
independent structures by the going and returning part of the 
relations. But since the modification process of the relations 
follows strict rules, it is a good tradeoff. 
D. Annotation System 
At the beginning of this section, the two main entities 
snippets and bundles have been introduced. Actually, there is 
one more element which has a deep impact on the utilization 
of the whole system. In contrast to snippets and bundles, 
which represent something official or thought trough in the 
system, annotations are personal notes of individual users. 
Just like snippets, they are multimedia objects. The creation 
of annotations via certain tools is very easy so that users can 
ad-hoc record audio, take a photo, create a video, list some 
issues, create a sketch, etc. Thus, it is easy to grab non-
formal 
situational 
knowledge. 
Furthermore, 
a 
short 
description can be added explaining the note in some detail. 
The real profit is earned when annotations are stuck at any 
other knowledge element in the system. I.e., with the help of 
annotations the user is able to create his own working aids 
and extend the global knowledge with his own experience. 
For the moment, his annotations are private and can be seen 
by himself only. Nevertheless, it seems as if they are part of 
the available knowledge graph. Whenever the user works 
with the available material, from now on he directly receives 
his embedded annotations as additional help. As soon as the 
aids are believed to be valuable enough, the user has the 
possibility to share them with a self-determined group of 
other users (see sections 4.F and 4.G). Annotations can even 
be used to comment on already available annotations of other 
users encouraging discourses and allowing the author of the 
knowledge element to receive useful feedback and insights. 
That means the system avails communication and exchange 
of knowledge where it was not possible before, e.g., due to a 
job profile like field services. On the one hand, helpful 
contributions can be used to improve the knowledge in future 
versions. 
On 
the 
other 
hand, 
the 
author 
realizes 
misconceptions he would not have known otherwise and has 
the chance to respond to them. From an architectural point of 
view, the annotation structure is infinitive, but due to 
usability the level of annotations is limited to 2 levels via the 
program logic. That way, answers to annotations on elements 
are still possible but discourses do not get too complex and 
unclear. As already mentioned, annotations are similar to 
snippets although they serve a different purpose. The 
likeness can be used in such a way that an element’s author 
can use annotations as templates for new elements or 
improved versions. That way he can easily embed, e.g., a 
photography of a mechanic taken of a machine. The 
mechanic himself gets involved in the process and can 
identify with the new material due to his input. 
E. Rating System 
Besides annotations, knowledge workers have another 
possibility to interact with the available knowledge. An extra 
rating system has been integrated into the structure which 
allows users to rate all kinds of elements, i.e., snippets, 
bundles and annotations. While ratings on annotations and 
snippets refer to the content or the remark, a rating of a 
bundle expresses the quality of the compilation. For 
example, that includes which subsections a chapter has, how 
subsections are ordered, whether the collection of elements is 
semantically complete, etc. Due to the rating system, it is 
very easy for users to communicate their thoughts without 
too much effort. Still, the input can be used to advice high 
quality knowledge and identify problem areas to contribute 
to an overall quality assurance. As users do not vote too 
much and if they do they do not tend to down-vote, the 
graphical user interface needs to assure a quick access of a 
simple rating mechanism like, e.g., positive stars. This is also 
very important for the authors and all users in the system. 
The awareness of activities in the system has a motivating 
effect on its participants and their willingness to contribute. 
F. Diverse Group System 
Annotations and other elements can be share with 
selected peers. To achieve this and to simplify the 
communication and distribution of material, a diverse group 
system has been created. Groups are collections of peers in 
the system and designed in a rather generic way. Via 
different characteristics, such as visibility or admission 
procedures, it is possible to easily create various different 
kinds of groups. It is feasible to have personal unidirectional 
friend lists which are only visible for the user himself, circles 
like in google+, groups which are used for commonalities 
such as working locations or occupational profiles, more 
formal groups that may represent a successfully passed 
training, groups that reproduce department structures, and so 
forth. Table 1 shows some possible types of groups 
regarding some of their features. They are used for 
communication purposes as well as access management of 
knowledge elements in the system as described next. 
TABLE I.  
GROUPS AND THEIR FEATURES 
Feature \ 
Group 
Personal 
Friends 
List 
Group of 
Colleagues 
Official 
Department 
Working 
Location 
Open 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Visible for 
all 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Applicable 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
Invitable 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
 
G. Access Rights Management 
Not only from an organizational point of view it makes 
sense to restrict the users’ access to selected content. This is 
reasonable if there is, e.g., security-related material for 
which’s use the worker is not educated. The presented group 
system is an optimal basis for the needed rights management. 
In the knowledge system, the creator is in full control of his 
knowledge and has the power to grand additional rights. As 
there is no one system-wide privileged author, it depends on 
the element and the current situation whether some user 
owns this authoring role or not. Access rights are related to 
single elements and hence for every snippet or bundle – at 
least in principle – it could be different. Of course, the user 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

interfaces simplify the process such that authors can adapt 
the access for a whole (tree) structure at once. Besides the 
special creator role which allows to retain full power over a 
created element, there are several other roles. There is a right 
to read and show elements, and a right to write and change 
an element. Access rights cannot only be assigned to a single 
user but also to groups. That way it is very easy to allow a 
certain group of people to use some material, e.g., the 
handouts of a workshop. As soon as more people pass the 
corresponding training, they only need to be invited to the 
group which is already authorized. Another manage right 
allows users to allocate rights to other users and pass the 
power. For example, his makes sense if there is committee 
that is responsible for some knowledge. One last special right 
is called REFERER. The owner of this right is able to only 
add read access to others. That becomes important if authors 
want to include elements of other authors into their bundles. 
Commonly, they would not have power about the rights 
allocation of the included elements. To still be able to offer 
reading rights to their audience, they can get the REFERER 
right which enables them to add readers to foreign material. 
Table 2 summarizes all different rights again. 
TABLE II.  
ACCESS RIGHTS 
Access Right 
Declaration 
CREATOR 
Implies all the access rights and 
cannot be revoked 
READ 
Find and read-out element 
WRITE 
Change element 
MANAGE 
Grant and revoke other rights 
REFERER 
grant READ rights 
 
H. Linkage of Traditional File Formats 
The cold-start problem is a negative effect which many 
new software systems suffer from. That occurs, when there is 
too little data in the system to really use it effectively. 
However, employees need their material and cannot trust in a 
system that only covers some aspects. The risk of falling 
back into old habits and not accepting the system as a whole 
is too high. Also, organizations already have an enormous 
mass of material in digital file formats of traditional tools 
like MS Word, MS PowerPoint, and others. Hence, it would 
be a tremendous help to transfer those into the new system 
structure. 
Different importers have been created that take, e.g., a 
MS Word’s docx file and convert it into the system’s internal 
structure of snippets, bundles, etc. The modules analyze the 
original document and utilize different kinds of information 
to build up the hierarchy. For example, the different levels of 
headlines can be used to recognize the different bundle 
levels, or paragraphs can be used to determine text units for 
snippets. This automation disburdens the human authors a 
lot. As it is not possible to create an automatism for all 
theoretically possible inputs, the modules only generate 
suggestions which are stored via a special initial state. 
Authors then have the chance to correct the material in 
regard to inaccurately detected elements. That means 
combining snippets that should have been recognized as one, 
splitting up material in further units, and so forth. After 
publishing the new structures, they are ready to be used like 
structures that have been created from scratch in the system. 
Elements in the system are neither restricted to their former 
visualization nor to their previous format. 
 
Summarizing, 
the 
presented 
knowledge 
structure 
represents a network of knowledge elements (snippets, 
bundles, annotations) and their interrelations. Version control 
realizes a constant graph evolution and still allows to 
reproduce the history of knowledge. Social aspects like 
annotations and rating together with the group system are the 
basis for lively exchange of knowledge between peers. Via 
the rights and roles management, it is very easy to grant 
access to different users. To overcome the start-up problems, 
import modules are able to automatically transform 
traditional documents into the new knowledge structure. 
V. 
EVALUATION 
The presented approach has been developed in 
connection with a project named Professional Reflective 
Mobile Personal Learning Environments (PRiME). It is a 
joint research project of the Learning Technologies Research 
Group from RWTH Aachen University and DB Training, 
Learning & Consulting from Deutsche Bahn AG. It is 
sponsored by the Federal Ministry of Education and 
Research via the German Aerospace Center. Although the 
system developed in PRiME is designed in a generic way to 
fit many different scenarios, the most benefitting job profiles 
are mobile field services. As proof of concept, we address a 
first group of mobile mechanics from the car inspection 
service of the long-distance passenger transport DB 
Fernverkehr AG, as well as related trainers, training 
developers and specialist author. The mostly qualitative 
evaluations in form of interviews and work tasks show broad 
acknowledgement and positive feedback from all involved 
roles. It also emerged, that in principal the current traditional 
processes are similar to the proposed ones but so far very 
uncomfortable and slow in comparison to the new 
possibilities in the PRiME system. Current employees make 
their own way to cope with the addressed problems and look 
for workarounds or their very own tricks anyway. Thus, the 
need for an organization-wide uniform solution is clearly 
there. 
Further quantitative evaluations with, e.g., questionnaires 
in combination with some broader field studies are running 
at the moment. First figures adumbrate that the implemented 
system and its underlying model can really embed in the 
everyday work life and naturally support the workers in their 
working process. The results will be published accordingly. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Knowledge has been identified as a very important 
resource that greatly impacts the competitiveness. Hence, 
there are endeavors to improve the collection, distribution 
and the enhancement of knowledge and manage it like any 
other good. 
In this paper, we introduced a promising approach that 
unites different – so far independent – aspects like 
complexity, network character, social aspects, and quality 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

assurance together into one process and model to naturally fit 
in and characterize the real knowledge process. The 
underlying structure has been explained in more detail and 
allows the distribution of official knowledge, the record of 
tacit knowledge, sharing it with peers, and improving it due 
to an annotation and rating system. The whole system results 
in a three-layered learning process starting with the personal 
individual, over his social network to the whole organization. 
This continuous process of knowledge evolution and 
maturation has some additional benefits: 
 
Knowledge does not leave the organization with 
its members and hence does not need to be 
reproduced again and again. 
 
The concept promotes a mentality to work 
together and benefit from one another instead of 
destructive competition. 
 
By their contribution, knowledge workers feel 
involved and can identify easily with the 
organization. 
 
The organization’s focus is more on its 
employees and their abilities. 
 
Due to their participations, users enjoy respect 
and appreciation. 
 
Users have the chance to communicate and 
experience social aspects that have not been 
possible before. 
 
Very high reusability of knowledge by virtue of 
the atomic elements and their linkage. 
 
Faster 
publication 
procedures 
of 
official 
knowledge as authorities can concentrate on 
point by point enhancements. 
 
Authors get to know about misconceptions and 
can reveal them. 
 
Authors can fall back on an enormous collective 
know-how and quality assurance a lot faster due 
to the high involvement. 
 
The presented knowledge system is already able to map 
the 
whole 
knowledge 
process 
from 
individual 
to 
organizational learning. Nevertheless, there are many aspects 
that can and should be enhanced. The introduced structure 
can cope with the spread and cross-linked character of the 
knowledge. Still, one idea is to add more semantic meaning 
to elements by, e.g., introducing categories or types of 
knowledge units to improve its discovery and offer it more 
selective. It has to be further researched if it is possible to 
deduce concepts or taxa from the structural content in 
different areas of application. Once formalized, ontologies 
can then abet improvements in, e.g., identifying situationally 
important knowledge. 
Content can be created from scratch or traditional file 
formats can be imported by specific modules, as described 
before. Even if the whole management and usage process is 
represented in the system, there are still situations where 
other formats outside of PRiME are needed. That could be a 
PowerPoint presentation in a workshop or a Word document 
for external companies that do not have access to the system. 
Analog to the import modules, export modules will be able 
to generate traditional documents back from the special 
systems own structure. 
The current employees are used to their present toolset 
which is in most companies the Microsoft Office Suite. 
Instead of forcing them to use yet another system, there are 
approaches to develop assistance systems that integrate 
PRiME into their common working environment. As an 
example, plugins for their text editors can help to stick with 
some guidelines to gain the maximum profit and less rework 
from the import modules. 
Learning Analytics is a powerful tool that allows better 
learning data analyses. On the one hand, it can improve the 
automated feedback for authors so that they see points of 
failure or misconceptions at a glance. On the other hand, it 
can optimize the user’s handling of material in his working 
process. Further collection of context data [14] like time, 
location, situation, etc. can help to offer the right knowledge 
which is required for the individual in his current unique 
situation. Ideally, it could dispense with former traditional 
searching. 
Aside the mentioned aspects, there are many more 
possible extensions or improvements which could also cover 
topics like assessment. It remains to be seen how the system 
will be accepted in long-term studies and if there are other 
aspects of higher priority such as the improvement of user 
motivation. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Hildreth and C. Kimble, “The duality of knowledge,” 
Information Research, Vol. 8 No. 1. 2002. 
[2] C. Kimble, Paul Hildreth and Peter Wright, “Communities of 
practice: going virtual,” in Y. Malhotra (Ed.), Knowledge 
Management and Business Model Innovation, Idea Group 
Publishing, Hershey (USA)/London (UK), pp. 220–234. 
2001. 
[3] Y. 
Malhotra, 
“Integrating 
knowledge 
management 
technologies in organizational business processes: Getting 
real time enterprises to deliver real business performance,” in 
Journal of Knowledge Management, Vol. 9 No. 1, 2005, pp. 
7–28. 
[4] I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi, “The Knowledge-Creating 
Company: How Japanese Companies Create the Dynamics of 
Innovation,” Oxford University, New York. 1995. 
[5] G. E. Gorman and D. J. Pauleen, “The Nature and Value of 
Personal Knowledge Management,” in D. J. Pauleen and G. 
E. Gorman (Eds.), Personal Knowledge Management: 
Individual, Organizational and Social Perspectives. Gower 
Publishing Limited, Farnham Surrey, England, pp. 1-16. 
2011. 
[6] L. Prusak and J. Cranefield, “Managing your own 
Knowledge: A Personal Perspective”, in D. J. Pauleen and G. 
E. Gorman (Eds.), Personal Knowledge Management: 
Individual, Organizational and Social Perspectives. Gower 
Publishing Limited, Farnham Surrey, England, pp. 99-114. 
2011. 
[7] D. Snowden and D. J. Pauleen, “Knowledge Management and 
the Individual: It’s Nothing Personal”, in D. J. Pauleen and G. 
E. Gorman (Eds.), Personal Knowledge Management: 
Individual, Organizational and Social Perspectives. Gower 
Publishing Limited, Farnham Surrey, England, pp. 115-128. 
2011. 
[8] “DB 
Regio 
und 
DB 
Training 
gewinnen 
Deutschen 
Bildungspreis 2013“, https://www.db-training.de/dbtraining-
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

de/start/news1/6012202/bildungspreis2013.html. 
reviewed: 
March, 2016. 
[9] J. Finken, D. Krannich, and B. Tannert, “Kodin-Kfz - A 
Collaborative Diagnosis Network,” in Proceedings of ICL 
15th International Conference on Interactive Collaborative 
Learning. Sept. 2012, Villach, Austria. IEEE Conference 
Publications. 2012, pp. 1–3. 
[10] M. A. Chatti, U. Schroeder, and M. Jarke, “LaaN: 
Convergence of Knowledge Management and Technology-
Enhanced Learning,” in Learning Technologies, Vol.5 No.2. 
2012, pp.177-189. 
[11] C. Greven, M. A. Chatti, H. Thüs, and U. Schroeder, 
“Context-Aware Mobile Professional Learning in PRiME,” in 
“Mobile as Mainstream - Towards Future Challenges in 
Mobile Learning : 13th World Conference on Mobile and 
Contextual Learning”. Springer. 2014, pp. 287-299. 
[12] C. Greven and U. Schroeder, “²SIMPLE: Symbiotic 
Interrelated Seamless Integrated Mobile Personalizable 
Learning Environments,”  in Proceedings of DeLFI 
Workshops 2015. 2015, pp 232-243 
[13] C. Greven et al., “Seamless Application Ecologies as Mobile 
Personal Learning Environments,” in “DeLFI 2015 – Die 13. 
E-Learning Fachtagung Informatik der Gesellschaft für 
Informatik e.V”. 2015, pp. 57-69. 
[14] Thüs et al., “Mobile learning in context,” in Int. J. 
Technology Enhanced Learning, Vol. 4, Nos. 5/6, 2012, pp. 
332-344. 
 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

