A New Explorative Model to Assess the Financial Credit Risk Assessment
Eric Mantelaers
Optimizing Knowledge-Intensive Business Processes
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences
Sittard, the Netherlands
eric.mantelaers@zuyd.nl
Martijn Zoet
Optimizing Knowledge-Intensive Business Processes
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences
Sittard, the Netherlands
martijn.zoet@zuyd.n
Abstract—In recent years, Financial Credit Risk Assessment
(FCRA) has become an increasingly important issue within the
financial industry. Therefore, the search for features that can
predict the credit risk of an organization has increased. Using
multiple statistical techniques, a variance of features has been
proposed. Applying a structured literature review, 238 papers
have been selected. From the selected papers, 700 features have
been identified. The features have been analyzed with respect
to the type of feature, the information sources needed and the
type of organization that applies the features. Based on the
results of the analysis, the features have been plotted in the
FCRA Model. The results show that most features focus on
hard information from a transactional source, based on official
information with a high latency. The main contribution of this
paper is the FCRA Model combined with the plotted results,
indicating multiple questions for further research.
Keywords-Financial
Credit
Risk
Assessment;
Business
Failure Prediction; Credit Risk Features; DMN Requirements
Diagrams (DRD).
I.
INTRODUCTION
Within the field of the Financial Credit Risk Assessment
(FCRA) there are two main areas of interest. Credit rating (or
scoring) is used to solve the problem to label companies as
bad/good credit or bankrupt/healthy. Credit rating is used not
only internally for screening borrowers, pricing loans and
managing credit risk thereafter, but also externally for
calibrating regulatory capital requirements [1]. Bankruptcy
(failure) prediction (or business failure prediction or going
concern assessment) is intended to predict the probability
that the company may belong to a high-risk group or may
become bankrupt during the following year(s). Both of them
are strongly related and solved in a similar way, namely as a
binary classification task. In this paper, both categories of
problems are collectively called Financial Credit Risk
Assessment, which is a business decision-making problem
that is relevant for creditors, auditors, senior management,
bankers and other stakeholders.
Financial Credit Risk Assessment is a domain which has
been studied for many decades. According to Balcaen and
Ooghe [2], there are four main areas with reference to
Financial Credit Risk Assessment: (1) Classical paradigm
(arbitrary definition of failure, non-stationarity and data
instability, sampling selectivity), (2) Neglect of the time
dimension of failure (use of one single observation, fixed
score
output/concept
of
resemblance/descriptive
nature,
failure not seen as a process), (3) Application focus (variable
selection,
selection
of
modelling
method),
(4)
Other
problems (use of a linear classification rule, use of annual
account information, neglect of multidimensional nature of
failure). The literature on Financial Credit Risk Assessment
and business failure dates back to the 1930’s [27]. Watson
and Everett [3] described five categories to define failure: 1)
ceasing to exist (discontinuance for any reason), 2) closing or
a change in ownership, 3) filing for bankruptcy, 4) closing to
limit losses and 5) failing to reach financial goals. When the
Financial Credit Risk Assessment is negative, it is called
business failure, which is a general term and, according to a
widespread definition, it is the situation that a firm cannot
pay lenders, preferred stock shareholders, suppliers, etc., or a
bill is overdrawn, or the firm is bankrupt according to the
law [4]. There is extensive literature in which this topic has
been researched from the perspective of auditors or bankers.
On the other hand, rare literature can be found about related
literature from an information and decision perspective. The
features (variables) which are relevant in the field of
Financial Credit Risk Assessment will be analyzed in this
paper. In this paper the focus will be on the auditor’s,
bankers and crediting rating firms, hence forward the term
financial industry will be used to describe all three. A
combination will be made between the financial industry and
an information and decision perspective.
Figure 1. DRD-level elements
To do so, the DRD model will be used. The reason DMN
is used is because it is currently the standard to model
decisions. In September 2015, the Object Management
Group (OMG) [5] released a new standard for modelling
decisions and underlying business logic, DMN (Decision
Model and Notation). The DMN standard is based on two
levels; the Decision Requirements Diagram (DRD) level and
the Decision Logic Level (DLL). The DRD level consists of
four concepts that are used to capture essential information
with regards to decisions: 1) the decision, 2) business
knowledge, which represents the collection of business logic
required to execute the decision, 3) input data, and 4) a
knowledge source, which enforces how the decision should
be taken by influencing the underlying business logic. The
contents of the DLL are represented by the business
knowledge container in the DRD level.
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II contains a description of relevant literature
regarding features and feature selection with reference to
Financial
Credit
Risk
Assessment,
from
a
combined
perspective of both the financial industry and information
and decision analysts, followed by the research method in
Section III. In Section IV, our data collection and analysis
will be reported. Subsequently, in Section V, a presentation
of the results derived from the applied data analysis
techniques will be given. The conclusion (Section VI) closes
the article.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Feature selection is a critical step in Financial Credit Risk
Assessment. Features (or variables or attributes) can be
irrelevant, redundant or useful. There are several alternative
methodologies for feature selection. Tsai [6] compares five
well-known feature selection methods used in bankruptcy
prediction, which are: 1) t-test, 2) correlation matrix, 3)
stepwise regression, 4) Principle Component Analysis (PCA)
and 5) factor analysis.
From a DMN perspective, a feature can either be a
decision or an input data element. The choice between which
element is used depends on one characteristic: derivation.
Must the features be derived from other features then it is
depicted as decision, for example expected market growth
and, honesty in negotiation of human resources motivation.
If the feature can be retrieved from a database or document,
it
is
an
input
data
element,
for
example
retained
earnings/total assets, or Total debt/total assets. Feature
selection refers to the process that reduces the feature space
and selects an optimum subset of relevant features. Three
possible methods can be distinguished: human, statistical and
hybrid. Statistically, there are two alternative approaches
available. The first assesses the attributes in terms of
measures independent of the learning algorithm that will be
used. This is called the ‘filter’ approach. The second
evaluates the subset according to the method that will
ultimately be used for learning. This approach is called
‘wrapper’ [7]. There are two broad categories of techniques
applied in Financial Credit Risk Assessment: statistical
techniques and the (state-of-the-art) intelligent techniques. In
the earliest research on Financial Credit Risk Assessment
(FitzPatrick [27] and the well-known Altman models [8])
they used quantitative (hard) financial data. Besides these
hard data, qualitative (soft) data are used [9]. The early
studies for Financial Credit Risk Assessment were univariate
(a specific statistical method applied) studies which had
important implications for future model development.
These laid the groundwork for multivariate studies. Ravi
Kumar and Ravi [10] identify statistical and intelligent
techniques to solve the bankruptcy prediction problem. For
each type of technique, they describe the way they work.
Chen, Ribeiro and Chen [11] summarize the traditional
statistical models and state-of-the-art intelligent methods. In
terms of performances, an accuracy rate between 81 and
90% reflects a realistic average performance based on the
results of the analyzed studies [7]. The top five bankruptcy
models with accuracy level of more than 80 per cent are
[9]:1) Altman [8], 2) Edmister [12], 3) Deakin [13], 4)
Springate [28] and 5) Fulmer [29].
III. RESEARCH METHOD
The goal of this research is to identify and classify
features that have been applied to determine Financial Credit
Risk Assessment. In addition to the goal of the research,
also, the maturity of the research field is a factor in
determining the appropriate research method and technique.
Based on the number of publications and identified features,
the maturity of the Financial Credit Risk Assessment
research field can be classified as mature. Mature research
fields should A) focus on further external validity and
generalizability of the phenomena studied or B) focus on a
different perspective on the constructs and relationships
between identified constructs [14].
Current studies have focused on selecting the best features
to predict bankruptcy, while other studies have focused on
comparing the efficiency and effectiveness of the different
features identified. However, the analysis is always from a
high-level and high latency perspective. Summarized, to
accomplish our research goal, a research approach is needed
in which the current features are explored, compared and
mapped to the Financial Credit Risk Assessment Model. To
accomplish this goal, a research approach is needed that can
1) identify features for Financial Credit Risk Assessment, 2)
identify similarities and dissimilarities between features for
Financial Credit Risk Assessment, and 3) map the features to
the Financial Credit Risk Assessment Model. The first two
goals are realized by applying a structured literature research
and grounded theory. The purpose of the structured literature
research is to collect the features. In addition, the purpose of
grounded theory is to “explain with the fewest possible
concepts, and with the greatest possible scope, as much
variation as possible in the behavior and problem under
study.”
Grounded
theory
identifies
differences
and
similarities by applying eighteen coding families. However,
in our specific situation, an a priori coding scheme has been
applied.
IV. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS
As stated in the previous section, the goal of this a
research is to 1) identify features for Financial Credit Risk
Assessment,
2)
identify
similarities
and
dissimilarities
between features for Financial Credit Risk Assessment, and
3) map the features to the Financial Credit Risk Assessment
Model.
Figure 2. Feature Selection
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

The selection of the papers has been conducted via the
link-tracing
methodology
[15],
more
specifically
via
snowball sampling. The snowballing was applied to take
advantage of the social networks of identified respondents to
provide a researcher with an ever-expanding set of potential
contacts [16]. Snowballing is an effective and efficient form
of contact tracing for use in diversity of research methods
and designs, and apparently well suited for a number of
research purposes [17] - [20]. In total, over 500 articles have
been selected after which each paper was inspected for the
inclusion of features. After this inspection, a total of 238
papers were included in the coding. For a study to be
selected for coding, the study must explicitly address
features for Financial Credit Risk Assessment (see Table I
for details). This resulted in the identification of 700
features. Each of the 700 features have been added to a
comparison table. After comparison, the features are coded.
The unit of analysis for coding is a single feature, implying
that one study can contribute multiple units of analysis.
Data analysis was conducted in one cycle of coding; the
reason for one cycle of coding instead of three is the use of a
priori coding scheme. The reason an a priori coding scheme
was applied is because the concepts that needed to be coded
were known upfront. To code the selected items the
following question are asked: 1) is the feature a hard or soft
feature? and 2) is the feature a relational or transactional
feature? This process required inductive deductive reasoning.
The inductive reasoning was applied to reason from concrete
features to abstract elements. For example, the feature “net
income/total assets” is a hard feature from a transactional
perspective. Another feature is “the quality of management”,
which is a soft feature from a relational perspective. The
coding was done by one researcher while the other
researcher acted as reliability coder.
V.
RESULTS
In this section, the results of the data collection are
presented. As described in the previous section, first features
from existing studies have been analyzed. Therefore, the
descriptive statistics with regards to the results of our coding
processes are presented. After that, the description of the
features from a DMN perspective are presented. The
extraction of the features resulted in the registration of 700
features from 283 papers. From this sample, the top ten
features were identified and selected; see Table I. Analyzing
the defined features showed three results: 1) from an existing
ranking perspective, 2) from a DMN perspective, and 3)
from an information availability perspective.
A. Results from an existing ranking perspective
As stated in the literature review section, research
indicates that the Altman model for bankruptcy prediction
[8] is the most applied one. From our analysis, it shows that
4 out of 10 features (indicated by an asterisk) are applied by
Altman and that the fifth feature by Altman (Market Value
of Equity/Total Liabilities) ranks thirteenth.
TABLE I. TOP TEN FEATURES
Feature 01: Net income/total assets
85 (papers)
Feature 02: current ratio
74
Feature 03: EBIT/total assets (*)
65
Feature 04: retained earnings/total assets (*) 62
Feature 05: working capital/total assets (*)
60
Feature 06: sales/total assets (*)
46
Feature 07: quick ratio
41
Feature 08: current assets/total assets
39
Feature 09: total debt/total assets
39
Feature 10: cash/total assets
32
B. Results from a DMN perspective
Analyzing the top ten features from a DMN perspective
show four results. The first result: decision versus data input
show that each feature is treated like a decision. The feature
is derived from one or more conditions. For example, the
first feature is derived out of two conditions: net income and
total assets to which a mathematical formula is applied, in
this specific case, net income divided by total assets. Each
feature in the 10 retrieves the applied conditions from one
data source, namely, the financial statements (the balance
sheet and/or the profit and loss account).
Figure 3. DRD-level elements
From the perspective of the financial statements, the
conditions applied, e.g. net income, actually are data input
since all are listed there. However, when analyzing one step
deeper, each data input on the balance sheet or the profit and
loss account is actually a decision. For example, total assets,
is calculated as current assets plus fixed assets; see Figure 3.
When analyzing all of the quantitative features selected, all
features are derived from the balance sheet and/or the profit
and
loss
account.
A
potential
explanation
of
this
phenomenon can be that the financial industry only looks at
formal documents and formal statements. However, this
raises the question if these combined features contain
specific sub-decisions or specific input data elements that
make
them
suitable
for
analysis.
According
to
the
researchers, this would be a subject to further investigate.
In addition, the features only apply information from the
current financial statements. Formally, the balance sheet and
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

the profit and loss account have to be created once a year.
Most companies create this information more times a year,
voluntarily or obligatory. Also, not comparing information
from early years, thereby indicating that the patterns have no
additional information value. By analyzing the deeper layers
underneath the features described previously, the hypothesis
is that a better and quicker Financial Credit Risk Assessment
can be performed.
C. Results from an information type perspective
As stated in this section, most features are based on data
from the financial statements. Financial statements are, in
most organizations, created once or twice a year. Therefore,
the data needed to calculate the features is available once or
twice a year. This causes an information opacity problem
thereby reducing the effectiveness of the features. Other
organizations that also assess the financial credit risk of an
organization are banks, credit assessors, etc. Both previously
also had to trust numbers that are published once a year.
Since this time period is too long for both parties they
searched for solutions to address this problem.
The bank addresses this problem by applying lending
technologies. A lending technology is “a set of screening
and underwriting policies and procedures, a loan contract
structure, and monitoring strategies and mechanisms” [21].
Examples of lending technologies they apply are: leasing,
commercial
real
estate
lending,
residential
real
estate
lending, motor vehicle lending, and equipment lending,
asset-based
lending,
financial
statement
lending, small
business credit scoring, relationship lending and judgment
lending. The same conclusion is realized by Ju and Sohn [22]
who proposed to update the credit scoring model based on
new features like management, technology, marketability,
and business and profitability. Kosmidis and Stavropoulos
[23] even got one step further in their conclusion, as they
state that factors such as economic cycle phase, cash flow
information
and
the
detection
of
fraudulent
financial
reporting can evidently enhance the predictive power of
existing models. Altman, Sabato and Wilson [24] reach the
same conclusion as they state: “that qualitative data relating
to such variables as legal action by creditors to recover
unpaid debts, company filing histories, comprehensive audit
report/opinion data and firm specific characters make a
significant contribution to increasing the default prediction
power of risk models built specifically for SMEs.” This leads
us to the first conclusion that the financial industry should
not only rely on hard features, which have a time delay, but
also on soft information to assess the financial credit risk; see
bottom left side in Figure 4.
To realize proper research in this area, the researchers
have to go beyond the already cumulative features and look
at the base data. E.g. no longer apply the cumulative feature:
current assets but instead build features on the base
information such as debtors information.
Figure 4. Financial Credit Risk Assessment Model
D. Results from an information source perspective
In addition to the type of information available, the data
source and its fluidity are also factors. In financial literature,
this phenomenon is called “the hardening of information”
[21]. The concept “the hardening of information” states that
because personal contact with the bank has decreased the
banks rely more and more on hard quantitative information.
However, if the model on which they base these conclusions
is further dissected, two axes can be distinguished: A) the
type of data and B) the manner in which the data is retrieved.
The first axe describes the type of data that organizations
retrieve to make a judgement about the financial credit risk.
In the papers of Berger [21][25], the same distinction is
made in an information type perspective: soft versus hard
data. The second axe described the manner in which this
information is retrieved. For example, two manners in which
information can be collected are: 1) through face to face
contact between a loan officers and the organization’s owner
and 2) through a form on a website or any other digital
manner.
Since
more
banks,
credit
organizations,
and
accountants rely on the second, the statement of “the
hardening of information” is that only quantitative data is
used. Thereby underlying the fact that the traditional features
are the most useful features to analyze going concern
assessment. The main reason they state to support their claim
is the adoption rate of technology.
However, a counter claim can be made that through the
adoption of technology soft information can be more easily
collected. For example, through firehose access to social
media websites. However, this will depend on the type of
soft or hard information one wants to retrieve because not all
soft information can be retrieved through social websites,
some still might need to be retrieved face to face. Therefore,
the bottom part of our model, see Figure 5, indicates the
manner in which the information is retrieved.
E. Results from an organization perspective
In FCRA literature, from a banking perspective, a
distinction is made between the manner in which small and
big banks assess the risk. Small banks apply more of a
relationship perspective to assess the risk while big banks
apply the analysis of transactions to determine the risk.
Although this specific distinction cannot be found in
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

accountancy and lending (firms) literature, the hypothesis is
that the same basic rules apply. Therefore, the right axe of
the Financial Credit Risk Assessment Model contains the
size of the firms assessing the risk; see Figure 4.
F. Overall Results
The overall analysis shows the following results. Most
features are positioned in quadrant B, see Figure 5. The
second most features are positioned in quadrant C. The other
results show that none of the features are positioned in
quadrant A and D, indicating a significant gap.
Figure 5. Overall Results with respect Financial Credit Risk Assessment
Model
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we aimed at finding an answer to the
following research question: “how to categorize financial
credit risk features such that an integrative relationship is
established
with
the
information
type
applied
and
information sources used?” To accomplish this goal, we
conducted a literature study to identify features that have
been designed and applied in previous research followed by
coding the features based on an a priori coding scheme. The
literature resulted in a total of 238 selected papers. From the
selected papers, a total of 700 features were selected. Based
on the a priori coding scheme, the features were mapped
according to the following dimensions: A) the type of
features applied, B) the information source applied and, C)
the type of organization that applies the features. The results
show that most features focus on hard information from a
transactional source from official information with a high
latency. In addition, the results show that most features still
relate to the traditional Altman-Z score.
All the results have been mapped on the Financial Credit
Risk Assessment Model, which is based on Wand and Weber
[26], see Figure 4. The insights derived from this study
provides a better understanding of the level on which the
features are applied and where they score in the Financial
Credit Risk Assessment Model. This will enable further
exploration and identification of features that have a low
latency but still have a proper predictive power. From a
practical perspective, our study provides an overview of
features that can currently be applied, and which further
exploration should be taken into account.
While we provide an integrative overview of features for
Financial Credit Risk Assessment, our study is not without
limitations. The first limitation concerns the sampling and
sample size. The sample group of features is drawn from the
identified paper without taking into account the effectiveness
of the features selected. The main reason for this choice is
the fact that not all papers report on the effectiveness of the
features applied. While we believe that for the purpose of
this study this causes no problems, further refinement of the
features selected is recommended. Additionally, our results
should be further validated in practice.
We believe that this work represents a further step in
research on classifying and creating new features for
Financial Credit Risk Assessment. While this work has
focused on classifying current features, future research
should explore subcategories, reducing the high latency for
hard information and to research more features from a
relational/soft
perspective
and
relational/transaction
perspective.
Further research should focus on reducing the high
latency for hard information and to research more features
from a relational/soft perspective and relational/transaction
perspective.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Cornee and A. Szafarz, “Vive la Difference: Social
Banks and Reciprocity in the Credit Market,” J. Bus.
Ethics, vol. 125, no. July, pp. 361–380, 2014.
[2]
S. Balcaen and H. Ooghe, “35 years of studies on business
failure:
An
overview
of
the
classic
statistical
methodologies
and
their
related
problems,”
British
Accounting Review, vol. 38, no. 1. pp. 63–93, 2006.
[3]
J. Watson and J. E. Everett, “Do Small Businesses Have
High Failure Rates?,” J. Small Bus. Manag., vol. 34, no.
4, pp. 45–62, 1996.
[4]
B. S. Ahn, S. S. Cho, and C. Y. Kim, “The integrated
methodology of rough set theory and artificial neural
network for business failure prediction,” Expert Syst.
Appl., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 65–74, 2000.
[5]
T. Derriks, “A Business Process & Rules Management
Maturity Model for the Dutch governmental sector,” no.
March, 2012.
[6]
C.-F. Tsai, “Feature selection in bankruptcy prediction,”
Knowledge-Based Syst., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 120–127, 2009.
[7]
E.
Kirkos,
“Assessing
methodologies
for
intelligent
bankruptcy prediction,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 43, no. 1,
pp. 83–123, 2012.
[8]
E. I. Altman, “The Prediction of Corporate Bankruptcy: A
Discriminant Analysis,” J. Finance, vol. 23, no. 1, pp.
193–194, 1968.
[9]
M. Aruldoss, M. L. Travis, and V. P. Venkatesan, “A
reference model for business intelligence to predict
bankruptcy,” J. Enterp. Inf. Manag., vol. 28, no. 2, pp.
186–217, 2015.
[10]
P. Ravi Kumar and V. Ravi, “Bankruptcy prediction in
banks and firms via statistical and intelligent techniques -
A review,” Eur. J. Oper. Res., vol. 180, no. 1, pp. 1–28,
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

2007.
[11]
N. Chen, B. Ribeiro, and A. Chen, “Financial credit risk
assessment: a recent review,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 45,
no. 1, pp. 1–23, 2016.
[12]
R. O. Edmister, “An empirical test of financial ratio
analysis for small business failure prediction,” J. Financ.
Quant. Anal., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1477–1493, 1972.
[13]
E. B. Deakin, “A Discriminant Analysis of Predictors of
Business Failure,” J. Account. Res., vol. 10, no. 1, pp.
167–179, 1972.
[14]
A. C. Edmondson and S. E. Mcmanus, “Methodological
fit in management field research,” Acad. Manag. Rev.,
vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 1155–1179, 2007.
[15]
M. Spreen, “Rare Populations, Hidden Populations, and
Link-Tracing
Designs:
What
and
Why?,”
Bull.
Méthodologie Sociol., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 34–58, 1992.
[16]
S. K. Thompson, “Adaptive sampling in behavioral
surveys,” NIDA Res.Monogr, vol. 167, no. 1046–9516
(Linking), pp. 296–319, 1997.
[17]
K. Hjelm, P. Nyberg, Å. Isacsson, and J. Apelqvist,
“Beliefs about health and illness essential for self-care
practice: A comparison of migrant Yugoslavian and
Swedish diabetic females,” J. Adv. Nurs., vol. 30, no. 5,
pp. 1147–1159, 1999.
[18]
M.
N.
Marshall,
“Qualitative
study
of
educational
interaction between general practitioners and specialists,”
BMJ, vol. 316, pp. 442–445, 1998.
[19]
T. R. Misener et al., “National Delphi study to determine
competencies for nursing leadership in public
health.,”
Image. J. Nurs. Sch., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 47–51, 1997.
[20]
J. H. Patrick, R. A. Pruchno, and M. S. Rose, “Recruiting
Research Participants: A Comparison of the Costs and
Effectiveness
of
Five
Recruitment
Strategies,”
Gerontologist, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 295–302, 1998.
[21]
A. N. Berger et al., “Small Business Lending by Banks:
Lending
Technologies
and
the
Effects
of
Banking
Industry Consolidation and Technological Change.”
[22]
Y. H. Ju and S. Y. Sohn, “Updating a credit-scoring
model based on new attributes without realization of
actual data,” Eur. J. Oper. Res., vol. 234, no. 1, pp. 119–
126, 2014.
[23]
K. Kosmidis and A. Stavropoulos, “Corporate failure
diagnosis in SMEs,” Int. J. Account. Inf. Manag., vol. 22,
no. 1, pp. 49–67, 2014.
[24]
E. I. Altman, G. Sabato, and N. Wilson, “The value of
non-financial information in small and medium-sized
enterprise risk management,” J. Credit Risk, vol. 6, no. 2,
pp. 1–30, 2010.
[25]
A. N. Berger and L. K. Black, “Bank size, lending
technologies, and small business finance,” J. Bank.
Financ., 2011.
[26]
Y. Wand and R. Weber, “An Ontological Model of an
Information System,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., vol. 16,
no. 11, 1990.
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

