Security of Information System in View of Business Continuity Management
Kiyoshi Nagata
Faculty of Business Administration
Daito Bunka University
Tokyo, Japan
Email: nagata@ic.daito.ac.jp
Dieter Hertweck
Electronic Business Institute
Heilbronn University
Heilbronn, Germany
Email: dieter.hertweck@hs-heilbronn.de
Abstract—In any type of company, the information system is
one of the core systems in order to accomplish their business
objectives. Exposure of its malfunction or defect sometimes
causes critical damages to the company in view of business
continuity, and the company should form a plan consist of
several measures to prevent, to reduce, to transfer, to avoid
risks and also to recover the system. Since the company’s
information system is closely related to their business type
and strategy, the plan should be laid considering them. In
this paper, we propose a methodology to ameliorate the
present state of the company’s information system in business
continuity perspective.
Keywords-IT system; business continuity; security controls;
business process management
I. INTRODUCTION
As a core system of a company, the information system
and its management system is critical, and their malfunction
directly affects the business performance. There are several
systems proposed for evaluation and management of the
information related system, and some companies acquired
a kind of certiﬁcates of the information security, such as
ISO/IEC27001 or BS7799-2. These certiﬁcates may give
companies a guarantee on their information management
system. However, the approaches of these certiﬁcation some-
times tend to formal and stereotype, and does not reﬂect the
companies characteristics. Especially in Small or Medium-
size company, the information system and its management
system should be evaluated based on their own assets, ac-
tivities, and strategy. Thus a self-directed, business oriented,
and assets based evaluation is recommended, and some
systems such as OCTAVE [2] [10], ENISA’s Information
Package for SMEs (Small or Medium-size Enterprise) [13],
and MEHARI [12] can be applied to SMEs.
Although the business oriented, self-directed evaluation
system matches the company’s characteristics and strategic
goal, it sometimes requires to compose a relatively small
team, called an analysis team, whose members are from
several important sections of the company. The analysis team
leads the evaluation process by acquiring information on
their system all over the company. So the top managements
should be in sympathy with the importance of information
security evaluation, then consensus of staff members are
necessary. SMEs neither have sufﬁcient human resources nor
have diligent intention to assign them to such a job, even
if they know the malfunction of their information system
causes serious problem on their business performance.
In this paper, we propose a methodology for information
security evaluation and management which reduces com-
pany’s workload by adopting evaluation process in ENISA’s
Information Package for SMEs, and by referencing their
security measures which are actually in OCTAVE. In order
to reﬂect company’s characteristic or business objectives, the
consensus with company staffs on the evaluation values are
made in several steps.
Since our methodology is business oriented, essentially
asset based, we need to ﬁnd out from 3 to 5 critical assets.
After the speciﬁcation, we propose to describe the internal
process related to each of asset using business process
management tool such as ADONIS. This type of system
has performance indicators, and we can see the bottle neck
in the total process related to the asset. Then comparing the
measures should be implemented with those of the output
from ENISA, we can suggest a risk mitigation plan.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows; we refer
to the ENISA’s Information Package for SMEs in the next
section, some methods to choose critical assets are de-
scribed, some references on ADONIS as a business process
management tool, then the total process of our proposed
methodology comes up.
II. ENISA’S INFORMATION PACKAGE FOR SMES
ENISA (European Network and Information Security
Agency) developed and delivered the Information Package
for SMEs. The method is highly structured and one can
obtain a set of several controls considered to be effective to
solve the organization’s information security problem or to
improve their current condition.
The system procedure includes four phases as follows:
Phase1. Select Risk Proﬁle
Output: Identiﬁed risk area, risk proﬁle table with
risk level labels, organizational risk proﬁle
Phase2. Identify Critical Assets
Output: Five most critical assets, security require-
ment selection table with rationales for selection
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Phase3. Select Control Cards
Output: Organizational controls, asset based con-
trols
Phase4. Implementation and Management
Output: Gaps between recommended controls and
current status, risk management plans
The risk proﬁle table in Phase1 includes only four risk
area which roughly correspond to the impact classiﬁcation
of OCTAVE, whose details are coming up in Section V. The
risk should be evaluated for each of these areas, however
the evaluation is very simple and automatically performed.
Here we notice that the evaluation of “legal and regulatory”
is dependent on the handling level of customers’ personal
information deﬁned in the EU Data Protection Law [4,
pp.104-105].
The personal data means any information relating to an
identiﬁed or identiﬁable narural person, and the details are
slightly different in countries. For example, according to the
German Federal Data Protection Act, the deﬁnition of the
sensitive personal data are as follows;
• Racial or ethnic,
• Political opinions,
• Religious or philosophical beliefs,
• Trade union membership,
• Health or sex life.
The assets are classiﬁed into four categories, System,
Network, People, and Applications. In this phase, the anal-
ysis team, a team of small number of personnel from
various sectors of organization also introduced in OCTAVE,
has to choose ﬁve critical assets from many of possible
assets. Evaluation is done by considering the impact to the
organization when “Disclosure” or “Modiﬁcation” or “Loss
and Destruction” or “Interrupted Access” occurs. These
scenarios are just the set of outcomes appears in OCTAVE’s
threat proﬁle worksheet.
Like as many other security evaluation systems recom-
mend, assets are evaluated in the usual three perspectives,
that is Conﬁdentiality, Integrity, and Availability (CIA). In
the process of choosing ﬁve critical assets, we need to
evaluate each assets from each perspective, then aggregate
the resulted values or establish a method for giving priorities
to each of the assets according to their values. We always
have this kind of problem when performing an asset-based
evaluation system, also in OCTAVE, and several methods
can be applied to solve this kind of problem. For instance,
AHP and FSM are very popular, where pair-wise compar-
isons of alternatives are performed and the priority value is
expressed as the weight of each alternative. By identifying
ﬁve critical assets with references of security requirement in
three perspectives, the security requirements selection table
is completed.
The control cards choosing phase, the Phase3, has two
processes. One is for the organizational control cards cor-
responding to the Strategic practice in OCTAVE, and the
selection of controls depends only on the risk levels of each
risk area described in Phase1. In TableI, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4,
SP5, and SP6 are sets of controls related to “Security Aware-
ness and Training”, “Security Strategy”, “Security Manage-
ment”, “Security Policies and Regulations”, “Collaborative
Security Management”, and “Contingency Planning/Disaster
Recovery”, respectively, [13].
The other is for the asset based control cards correspond-
ing to the Operational practice in OCTAVE, and possible
and effective controls are listed in the asset control card
whose selection depends on the level of total risk proﬁle,
the asset category, and the asset’s risk level. Once selecting
a card, one can ﬁnd out controls to be adopted according
to three perspectives and security requirements of “Phys-
ical security”, “System and network management”, “Sys-
tem authentication”, “Monitoring and auditing IT security”,
“Authentication and authorization”, “Vulnerability manage-
ment”, “Encryption”, “Security architecture and design”,
“Incident management”, and “General staff practices”.
Table I
ORGANIZATIONAL CONTROL CARDS
Risk Area
High
Medium
Low
Legal and Regulatory
(SP1)
(SP1)
SP1.1
(SP4)
(SP4)
Productivity
(SP3), (SP4)
(SP4)
SP4.1
(SP6), (SP5)
(SP6)
Financial Loss
(SP2), (SP1), (SP4)
(SP4)
SP4.1
Productivity
(SP1)
(SP4)
SP4.1
(SP5)
(SP1)
The last phase consists of Gap analysis and planning the
risk management. From the previous phase, recommended
controls are proposed and one can see the gap from currently
performed controls. Then make a plan in order to ﬁll in the
gap to compromise the present risk.
III. METHOD FOR FINDING CRITICAL ASSETS
In any decision making process, choosing one or a few
critical alternatives from a large set of them is an important
and difﬁcult task. There are many methods proposed from
theoretical point of view, and some are applied to practical
cases. Here we refer to pairwise comparison based meth-
ods, like as AHP(Analytic Hierarchy Process), FSM(Fuzzy
Structural Modeling). In AHP [8] or FSM [9], weights are
obtained by computing the principal eigenvector of a subor-
dination matrix with pairwise comparison values entries. The
Perron-Frobenuis theorem guarantees the principal eigenvec-
tor to be considered as the importance weight vector. In
order to apply the theorem to the matrix obtained by pairwise
comparison, the (j, i)-entry value should be set as the inverse
value of the corresponding (i, j)-entry in AHP, and the
reachability matrix should be computed in FSM. Instead of
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

computing the principal eigenvector of reachability matrix
in FSM, we have more simpliﬁed method by which the
weight of evaluation factors can be found on the basis
of the ratio calculation [1] [7]. The relationships between
evaluation factors are transitive regarding the contextual
relation “Importance degree”.
At ﬁrst, put all the alternatives in sequential oder, then
give values fi,i+1 (i = 1, 2, . . . , n − 1) as the importance
degree of i-th alternative compared with (i + 1)-st one,
where n is the number of all the alternatives. The corre-
sponding symmetrical value of fi,i+1, can be calculated by
fi+1,i = 1 − fi,i+1 (i = 1, 2, . . . , n − 1). These values are
carefully given on the basis of experience and knowledge of
the decision makers and/or specialists.
From these relative comparison values, we compute the
evaluation value Ei of i-th alternative so as to satisfy
following ratio equations:
Ek : Ek+1 = fk,k+1 : fk+1,k
(1 ≤ k ≤ n).
(1)
A set of answer values of the simultaneous ratio equations
is given by following formulae:
Ek =
k−1
Y
i=1
(1 − fi,i+1)
n−1
Y
i=k
fi,i+1
(1 ≤ k ≤ n),
(2)
where the empty product is set to be 1 for k = 1 or k = n.
If the values for each fi,i+1 are carefully chosen to satisfy
the transitivity, we actually do not need other comparison
value fi,j (i < j). We have only to evaluate each alternative
to the adjacent one, and the total number of essential values
is just n − 1.
In other words, we need to be careful that the set of values
{fi,i+1}i=1,...,n−1 should be transitive, which means that
the importance degree of i-th alternative to j-th one (i < j)
should be approximately equal to the value calculated from
{Ei} in a certain degree of error. However in some practical
applications, it is not so easy to guarantee that condition, and
we will propose some modiﬁed pragmatic methods.
A. Checking system to guarantee the transitivity
Supposing that {Ei} is the set of importance weights, the
relative important degree of i-the alternative to j-th alterna-
tive should satisﬁes a ratio equation Ei : Ej = fi,j : fj,i,
which is solved to have the following formula for i < j;
Ei
Ei + Ej
=
Qj−1
k=i fk,k+1
Qj−1
k=i fk,k+1 + Qj−1
k=i(1 − fk,k+1)
.
(3)
When this value seems to be considerably different from
the value evaluated directly, we need to reconsider initial
comparison values. If we notice that the directly given value
should be modiﬁed, it will be all right.
B. Averaging over All or Some of Sequences
Sometimes it may happen that values given by formulae
(2) widely vary depending on the way of setting alternatives
in order, and an adjustment seems to be difﬁcult. We can
take the average of the evaluation values corresponding
to each sequence given by a permutation of {1, . . . , n}.
When several principal sequences can be distinguished, the
average can be taken only over them. For a subset S of
the permutation group Sn, the formula for the normalized
averaged weight are given by the followings:
Ei
=
X
σ∈S
1
tσ−1 eσ(i)σ−1
=
n
X
j=1


X
σ−1∈S,σ(j)=i
1
tσ
ejσ

 ,
(4)
where ejσ
= Qj−1
l=1 fσ(l+1),σ(l)
Qn−1
l=j fσ(l),σ(l+1), tσ
=
Pn
j=1 ejσ, and S−1 = {σ : σ−1 ∈ S}.
C. Hierarchical Block-wise Computing
If it seems that there are small set of invisible attributes
behind alternatives, classify them according to these at-
tribute. Then compute weights of alternatives in each class
separately, and the weight of attribute class should be
calculated. The aggregation process is done by multiplying
the weight of super set to that of each attribute after
normalization.
The merit of this option is that we may have small number
of comparison candidates, and our weight computing method
will effectively work. If the number of ﬁrst blocks is large,
we will try to ﬁnd out some attribute factors which are
common to several blocks.
IV. BUSINESS PROCESS MANAGEMENT TOOL
In this paper, as we are concerned about risks related
to each of chosen critical assets, the management process
on which the asset related process are mapped should
be assessed carefully. Fortunately, there are some good
computerized application of business process management
tool. Here, we introduce ADONIS which is developed and
provided by BOC Group [11].
ADONIS is composed of several model type such as
“Company map”, “Business process diagram”, “Choreogra-
phy diagram”, “Conversation diagram”, “Business process
model”, “Document model”, “IT system model”, “Prod-
uct model”, “Working environment model”, “Risk model”,
“Control model”, and “Use case diagram”, and each model
includes some objects with own attributes. Among them,
here we refer to following models:
Business process model
This process model is essential model of this
system containing several type of objects such as
Activity, Subprocess, Decision, Performance Indi-
cator, etc. which are combined with each other.
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

This can also contain Risk and its Control objects
when an activity has a risk, and the risk and its
control are described in each corresponding model.
Figure 1 is a part of “Accept transfer model” in
Example ﬁles down loadable from BOC group
homepage, [11].
Figure 1.
ADONIS Business Process Model
IT system model
This model contains Application, Service, Infras-
tructure element, and Operation. The model de-
scribes physical and logical relationship between
objects by “has”, “uses”, “Is dependent on”, “has
note”, and “has cross-reference” indicators.
Document model
This model is composed of several documents
referred by personnel especially in case of emer-
gency or trouble. The document’s attribute has a
reference link to a Word, or Excel, or PowerPoint
ﬁle.
Working environment model
This model contains Organizational unit, Per-
former, Role, Position, etc. The position and pri-
mary roles of personnel, and their command struc-
ture is embedded in this model.
Risk model
The main object of this model is Risk whose
attribute has several risk types such as “operational
riks”, “strategic risk”, “market price and liquidity
risk”, “credit risk”, “quality risk”, and “other risk”.
Control model
The main object is Control, and the control process
is described as a business process model which is
referred in the attribute of this object.
V. PROPOSED SYSTEM
Before going on the detail of our proposed methodology,
we just refer to the business performance in general. In the
research area of evaluation of business performance, there
are several models or methodologies proposed by many
researchers or consultants. But most methodologies refer
to “ﬁnancial”, “customer”, “productive or internal process”,
and “learning and growth”, which are emphasized especially
in the Balanced Score Card (BSC) [3]. Of course, BSC
insists that these four perspectives should be balanced and
equally treated.
Although BSC and some other methodologies for busi-
ness performance are tailored not only for evaluating the
performance status but also for improve the future state of
business, it seems that they do not consider any collapse
caused in short span. Here we are interested in business
continuity when some disasters occur or serious attacks, e.g.
DDoS, are exposed. In most cases, problem seemed to be
serious to the business continuity occurs in productive or
internal process which causes big ﬁnancial impact. Thus we
explicitly focus on ﬁnancial and internal process perspective
among these perspectives.
Now we explain our proposed methodology for enforcing
company’s information system in view of business conti-
nuity. Figure 2 describes the total ﬂow of our systematic
methodology composed of four main phases.
Figure 2.
Flow of Total System
In the ﬁgure, the region on the left side is the company’s
region where workload by the company’s personnel is high.
The workload set in the right side region should be done by
researcher’s group.
The total work ﬂow proceeds in the following way. First
of all, ﬁnd out the most important and critical business seg-
ment from ﬁnancial perspective and the company’s strategy
referring the annual report. Next, apply ENISA system to
evaluate company’s information related property which lead
to strategic practices required for the company. We also need
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

to identify a small set of critical assets which would lead
a set of necessary operational practices. In the third phase,
business process modeling related to each of critical asset
is constructed using application software like as ADONIS.
Then try to ﬁnd out serious problems in the process by
performing recursive simulation, considering suggestive op-
erational and strategic practices. The ﬁnal phase is a phase
for making up a total risk control plan.
A. Critical Business Segment
If the company is very small and/or there is unique
business segment, the critical segment might be clear. Even
if the company has several segments, the critical business
segment might be trivial just from the company’s strategy. In
these cases, this phase is seemed be unnecessary. However,
we recommend to perform the total evaluation of segments
in ﬁnancial perspective in case that some disastrous incidents
cause serious impact on the business continuity.
From the pyramid of ﬁnancial ratios, ROCE(Return On
Capital Employed; =
“NetP rofit”
“Capital employed”) is the starting
point, then it is initially decomposed into the product of the
net proﬁt margin (= “NetP rofit”
“Sales”
) and the sales on capital
employed (=
“Sales”
“Capital employed”). The former index is on
proﬁtability, and the later one is again expressed as the
product of the turnover of total assets (=
“Sales”
“T otal assets”)
and the inverse value of the capital employed ratio(=
“T otal assets”
“Capital employed”).
Focusing on the net proﬁt margin derives other indices
such as the break-even point ration, EBIT, EBITDA and
their margins. The turnover of total assets is an index
on investment effectiveness, and the CCC (Cash Con-
version Cycle;= 365 × ( “Receivable”
“Sales”
+
“Inventory”
“Cost of sales” −
“Accounts payable”
“Cost of sales” ) is one of serious index for business
continuity. The capital employed ration is an index on
ﬁnancial leverage, which derives DE ratio (Debt Equity
ratio;= “Debt(with interest)”
“Equity”
), and ICR (Instance Coverage
Ratio; = “Operating profit” +“F inancial income”
“Interest expense”
) for exam-
ple.
Fortunately almost all the information necessary to cal-
culate them are on the company’s annual report, consisting
of PL, BS, Cash ﬂow statements. The annual report also
contains information on the “strategy” which helps us to
ﬁnd out not only the critical segment but also critical assets.
B. Applying ENISA
This phase includes main two process. First one is the
evaluation of company’s, or segment’s, proper condition by
the risk proﬁle evaluation table, then the process output a
set of strategic practices from the organizational(Strategic)
control cards. Second process is choosing a small set of
critical assets in the assigned segment. Then the asset
based(Operational) control card table is referred to have a set
of controls according to the evaluation value of each asset
from CIA points of view.
1) Risk Proﬁle Evaluation Table: ENISA’s risk proﬁle
evaluation table is very simple composed of four risk areas,
and the evaluation is fairy automatically done as follows.
Legal and Regulatory
“High” is marked if the company’s business han-
dles customer information of sensitive and personal
nature including medical records and critical per-
sonal data as deﬁned by the EU Data Protection
Law. “Medium” if the handled customer informa-
tion is not sensitive. “Low” if the business does
not handle customer information.
Productivity
“High” is marked if the business employs more
than 100 employees having a daily need to access
business applications and services. “Medium” if
the number of such employees is between 50 and
100. “Low” if the number is less than 50.
Financial Stability
“High” is marked if yearly revenues are of excess
of 25 million Euros or/and ﬁnancial transactions
with 3rd parties or customers are taking place as
part of the business as usual process. “Medium” if
the yearly revenue are between 5 million and 25
million Euros. “Low” if the revenue are less than
5 million Euros.
Reputation and Loss of Customer Conﬁdence
“High” is marked if unavailability or service qual-
ity directly impact business proﬁle or/and more
than 70% of customer base have online access to
business products and services. “Medium” if the
impact is indirect and/or less than 5% of customer
base have online access. “Low” if there are no
impact on business proﬁle or on loss of revenue.
According to the set of evaluation values, strategic con-
trols are determined from the Table I in Section II.
2) Critical Assets: Task of choosing a few, at most ﬁve,
critical assets is very important and difﬁcult. As we mention
in Section II, it is performed generally considering the case
of “Disclosure” or “Modiﬁcation” or “Loss and Destruction”
or “Interrupted Access” from view point of each of CIA.
When focusing on the business continuity, we should mainly
consider the “Loss and Destruction”, and the “Interruption
of Access” to assets.
First listing possible information related assets in the
business segment, then choose any two of them and compare
them as the important level with values in the open interval
(0, 1) from each of CIA point of view. If we apply the
ratio based method, the number of pairs to be evaluated is
just n − 1, but adjustment or modiﬁcation process might be
needed.
After calculating the set of three weight vectors, they are
aggregated according to the importance degree of perspec-
tives, CIA. Although the conﬁdentiality has high degree in
usual information evaluation activity because of nowadays
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

increasing concerns on personal data protection, the avail-
ability should be the highest from the business continuity
point of view.
Once a few critical assets are distinguished, the asset base
control card is assigned according to the asset category,
“Application”, or “System”, or “Network”, or “People”, and
the company’s risk level (“High”, “Medium”, or “Low”).
We also need to ﬁnd out components related to each of
critical asset and security requirement as conﬁdentiality,
and/or integrity, and/or availability.
C. Business Process Mapping
Before starting the business process mapping using an
application soft ware, list up possible impacts on each of
critical asset caused by any disaster or threats. Then map
all the components to the application’s model. For example,
the total process for management or recovery of the asset
related system is described by the Business Process Model
whose activity is dependent on IT system and HRM system.
If the company has own model for this process, map
it on the application and give the precise information on
processing time, possibilities of decision, working time
of each employee, and performance indicators should be
carefully constructed. Once the process model is completed,
several cases are simulated and results are stored for the next
phase.
D. Risk Control/Mitigation Plan
In the last phase, we make a plan for business continuity
considering the result comes out of the previous phase.
When the company has formalized plan and process against
critical asset affecting exposure of risk, we will set up the
total plan which reinforcing the process using the result from
the simulation and controls as the output of ENISA system.
In case of no current effective process, we need to
establish it considering the company’s IT and HR condition
which are already investigated in the previous phase.
The risk is usually treated in four types of way; retention,
reduction, transfer, and avoidance. It is very important to
investigate which activity has the key indicator mainly affect
the business continuity, then determine controls in one or
some of these types.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed a systematic methodology for
evaluation of current status of critical business factor and
for suggesting effective risk controls and mitigation plan.
Since our main concern is the business continuity, we have
considered the total business performance evaluation system,
and try to incorporate the ﬁnancial factor as the most critical
business segment. As we mainly concern about the reduction
of company’s workload, a simple and systematical method,
ENISA for SMEs, is adopted for the preliminary evaluation.
Although usual security evaluation is essentially based on
the asset based method, we also focus on the process
against the exposure of risks, and propose to use a kind of
business process management application whose simulation
functions help us to review or compose an effective risk
control/mitigation plan.
Instead of ENISA, we might use OCTAVE-S, a version
for relatively small enterprises, if some method for extracting
effective mitigation controls are established, see [5] [6]. We
will apply our methodology to some of real company and
see how it works.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Amagasa, Performance Measurement System for Value
Improvement of Services, Bulletin of The Australian Society
for Operations Research Inc., Vol.29, No.1, pp.35-52, 2010.
[2] C. Alberts and A. Dorofee, Management Information Security
Risks, Addison-Wesley, 2003.
[3] R. S. Kaplan, D. P. Norton,The Balanced Scorecard-Measures
that Drive Performance-, Harvard Business Review. Vol. 70,
No.1, pp.71-79. 1992.
[4] C. Kuner, European Data Protection Law, Oxford University
Press, 2nd ed. 2007.
[5] K. Nagata, Y. Kigawa, D. Cui, and M. Amagasa, Method to
Select Effective Risk Mitigation Controls Using Fuzzy Out-
ranking, Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
Intelligent Systems Design and Applications, pp. 479-484,
2009.
[6] K. Nagata, On Clustering of Risk Mitigation Controls, Pro-
ceedings of 2011 International Conference on Network-Based
Information Systems, pp. 148-155, 2011.
[7] K. Nagata, M. Amagasa, and H. Hirose, Multi-attribute Deci-
sion Making Based on Fuzzy Outranking,Proceedings of 13th
IEEE International Symposium on Computational Intelligence
and Informatics, pp.169-174, 2012.
[8] T. L. Saaty, Decision Making for Leaders; the Analytical Hier-
archy Process for Decisions in a Complex World, Wadsworth,
Belmont, Calif., 1982.
[9] E. Tazaki and M. Amagasa, Structural Modelling in a Class
of Systems Using Fuzzy Sets Theory, International Journal of
Fuzzy Sets and Systems, Vol.2, No.1, pp.87-103, 1979.
[10] C. Alberts, A. Dorofee, J. Stevens, and C. Woody,(2005).
OCTAVE-S Implementation Guide, Version 1.0, CMU/SEI-
2003-HB-003. Available from http://www.cert.org/octave/
octaves.html, 18.12.2012.
[11] ADONIS Community Edition: Taking BPMN 2.0 one step
further. Available from http://www.adonis-community.com/,
18.12.2012.
[12] MEHARI 2010: Fundamental concepts and functional speciﬁ-
cations. Available from http://www.clusif.asso.fr/fr/zz produc-
tion/ouvrages/type.asp?id=METHODES, 18.12.2012.
[13] Risk Management: Information Package for SMEs.
Available
from
http://www.enisa.europa.eu/act/rm/cr/risk–
management–inventory/downloads, 18.12.2012.
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

