 
 
Information and Communication Technology Infrastructure in E-maintenance 
 
 
Muhammad S. Al-Qahtani 
Saudi Aramco 
Dhahran, Saudi Arabia 
E-mail: qahtms1b@aramco.com 
 
Abstract – The major objective of this paper is to provide 
further insights into the Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) infrastructure for supporting e-maintenance 
processes in today’s manufacturing environments. To achieve 
this objective existing e-maintenance models were investigated 
and an appropriate model was selected based on (i) its 
currency, (ii) its relevance to the manufacturing industry, and 
(ii) an explicit role being played by the ICT for enabling 
various e-maintenance activities. The ICT component of the 
selected framework is then further expanded by identifying 
specific ICT component technologies that are currently 
available for supporting various e-maintenance activities 
within the framework. Therefore the major contribution of the 
current study includes (i) identification of an existing e-
maintenance framework with explicit focus on ICT, and (ii) to 
purposeful review of the current ICT literature in order to 
identify current ICT technology components that can be used 
in order to support various e-maintenance activities of the 
selected e-maintenance model.    
 
Keywords 
– 
manufacturing 
industry; 
maintenance; 
e-
maintenance; 
conceptual 
model; 
Information 
and 
Communication Technology (ICT) 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
As a multidisciplinary field, e-maintenance is related to 
a variety of research fields ranging from operation & 
maintenance 
engineering, 
to 
software 
engineering, 
information systems, and business management [1]. As a 
result of such inter-disciplinary nature of e-maintenance, a 
variety of theoretical and research perspectives can be 
adopted I order to investigate the phenomena. The 
perspective adopted in the current study is the Information 
and Communication Technology (ICT) perspective. 
E-maintenance addresses emerging requirements of 
today manufacturing industry and provides various benefits 
in form of increased availability, reduced lifecycle and set 
up cost, facilitated the integration of maintenance support 
technologies with existing material and personal resources, 
increased customer-value, continuous improvement of 
maintenance management, improved decision making 
process [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. 
The current study is presented in the form of a review 
paper, and as a result, its findings are synthesized from the 
existing literature on e-maintenance and ICT domains. One 
major motivation for conducting the current study has been 
a lack of sufficient insights into the existing ICT component 
technologies that can be used for both supporting as well as 
enabling various e-maintenance activities in today’s 
manufacturing environments. While practitioners have been 
busy with utilizing a variety of ICT technology components 
for supporting their e-maintenance activities, little academic 
research seem to have been conducted to provide a 
taxonomy-like knowledge representation of the current ICT 
technologies that can be used in today’s manufacturing 
sector. 
The current study extends existing work on e-
maintenance by providing an ICT classification scheme for 
e-maintenance activities by identifying specific ICT 
components from the current literature that provide required 
support. Findings of the study which is represented in an 
ICT classification scheme, can in turn serve as a supplement 
to the selected e-maintenance model, and collectively 
referred to as integrated e-maintenance architecture 
incorporating ICT components and e-maintenance activities. 
The ICT classification scheme is presented textually in the 
section titled “ICT Infrastructure for E-maintenance”.   
II. E-MAINTENANCE STRATEGIES/PROCESSES 
As a multi-disciplinary e-disciplinary research field, e-
maintenance is a combination of two e-domains: ‘e-
manufacturing’ and ‘e-business’ [6]. It is defined as 
“maintenance managed and performed by virtue of 
computing” [1], “it integrates ICT within the maintenance 
strategy to face the new challenges of supporting e-
manufacturing” [7], and “provision of maintenance support 
services remotely with the aid of ICT” [5]. In this section a 
review of literature is provided to further clarify the e-
maintenance side of the theoretical foundation of this study 
which 
primarily 
focuses 
on 
current 
e-maintenance 
strategies. The outcome of this review is identification of a 
recent ICT-oriented e-maintenance framework where ICT is 
given critical role of enabling and supporting various e-
maintenance activities. Such bias in reviewing the current 
literature has been deliberate and consistent with the overall 
aim of the study in one hand, and the enhanced role of ICT 
in e-maintenance activities, from having a ‘supporting’ role 
to having an ‘enabling’ role. Below is a summary of the 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

existing e-maintenance strategies adopted by today’s 
primarily knowledge-based manufacturing organizations:      
 
Remote maintenance: It is based on the notion of 
distance and transfers data from one site to another one 
remotely without the physical access to the item [8]. 
 
Predictive maintenance: It is concerned mainly with 
detecting hidden and potential failures and predicting the 
condition of the equipment [9]. 
 
Real-time maintenance: Maintenance operators can 
respond to any situation by the real-time remote monitoring 
of equipment status coupled with programmable alerts [10]. 
 
Cooperative maintenance: The work is divided to 
independent tasks, every actor assigned to a part of the 
resolution of the problem and the coordination is done 
during the assembly of partial results [10]. 
 
Collaborative maintenance: The work is synchronized 
and coordinated so as to build and to maintain a common 
vision of the problem [11]. 
 
Preventive maintenance: The objective of preventive 
maintenance is to decrease the probability of failure in the 
time period after maintenance has been applied [12]. 
 
Corrective maintenance: Corrective maintenance strives 
to reduce the severity of equipment failures once they occur 
[13]. 
 
On the other hand e-maintenance processes have been 
identified and classified by Kajko-Mattsson et al. [1] and 
Muller et al. [11] as (i) ‘diagnostics’, (ii) ‘prognostics’, (iii) 
‘planning and production control’, (iv) ‘documentation’ 
such as technical publications, (v) ‘electronic log books and 
technical records’, (vi) ‘repair order/work order’, and (vii) 
‘quality assurance and reliability analysis’.  
All above e-maintenance strategies and processes would 
require support from ICT in a variety of ways. For example, 
the ‘remote maintenance’ strategy would require ICT 
component technologies that maintain a ubiquitous 
environment for the maintenance workers whereas the 
‘predictive maintenance’ strategy would need strong ICT 
support in the areas of business intelligence and decision 
support systems and technologies. The current study 
provides a generic guide to the ICT component technologies 
without adhering to a specific strategy. This will facilitate 
identification of matching each of the proposed ICT 
component technologies with a particular strategy.    
III. E-MAINTENANCE FRAMEWORK 
A comprehensive architectural framework for e-
maintenance has been proposed by Han and Yang [6] and is 
widely used by researchers in the fields of management and 
ICT mainly because it assigns an explicit role for ICT as an 
enabling factor for supporting various maintenance 
activities. The current study adopts this framework and 
elaborates on the ICT component by exploring existing ICT 
component technologies that can be used in conjunction 
with the above conceptual framework.  
The 
framework 
mimics 
the 
traditional 
holistic 
maintenance shops in multi-division environments with a 
centralized 
maintenance 
centre 
and 
several 
local 
maintenance centers, and closely resembles the model that 
has been adopted by the Saudi Aramco where the author is 
employed.  
The maintenance center is a sharable platform that 
interconnects research groups, experts, repair shops, and 
manufacturing divisions via internet and communication 
techniques. The local maintenance centers provide routine 
services to their respective manufacturing sites that do not 
involve 
ad-hoc 
decision-making 
and/or 
fundamental 
changes to the existing local facilities. In the event when 
such needs arise the latter uses the shared facilities of the 
maintenance center both for problem-solving as well as for 
implementing change management and supporting relevant 
decisions. Maintaining an effective communication and 
coordination activities between the local and central 
maintenance centers is one major role of the ICT 
infrastructure that have been discussed in the next section. 
The lower part of Figure 1 represents the ICT 
infrastructure component of the architecture that supports 
activities within the e-maintenance framework, and is the 
focus of the current study. In the following section the latter 
part of the architecture is described in more detail through a 
review of the current literature. The identified ICT 
components have been selected from the literature on the 
basis of their relevance and appropriateness in relation to 
supporting various e-maintenance activities.  
 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
Figure 1 – Architecture of a hypothetical e-maintenance system; adopted from Han and Yang, 2006. 
IV. ICT INFRASTRUCTURE 
It is claimed that ICT infrastructure in e-maintenance 
must ensure that the level of service quality expected for the 
process execution is maintained for scalability and 
availability [14]. From the e-maintenance point of view the 
ICT infrastructure is composed of one or several networks 
with servers, workstations, applications, databases, smart 
sensors, PDA, and many more [14]. Furthermore, such role 
for ICT has also been characterized by its operating 
principles such as wireless infrastructure as well as 
deploying the right ICT related standards for presentation, 
storage, exchange, and process communication [15]. In the 
following section a summary of the most relevant categories 
of ICT technology components have been identified from 
the literature. Such categorization represents one major 
contribution of the current study.  
 New sensors such as smart sensors—MEMS (micro-sensor 
technology equipped with autonomous power, memory 
cells, analogue amplification, converter, etc. well adapted 
for vibration analysis, oil analysis), wireless sensors, and 
sensor networks. The sensors are the main factor for 
performing the basic e-maintenance activities which 
materialize the ‘‘Condition-Based Maintenance’’ concept 
(CBM). Therefore, these sensors support more than 
conventional capacities (such as CM, diagnosis, prognosis) 
[15], [14]. 
 RFID 
tag 
(passive 
and 
active; 
Radio 
Frequency 
Identification Device) is used for operator and component 
identification, storage of conventional data, and traceability 
of the past maintenance actions. In addition, for it can be 
used for geo-localization of the maintenance tools. 
 Global Positioning System (GPS) in a complementary 
technology to the RFID tags and is used for distinguishing 
location of an operator or the maintenance tools. 
 Wireless technologies lead to considerable savings in 
networking costs and provide high degree of flexibility that 
are not normally provided by wired systems. Wireless 
Personal Area Networks (WPAN) such as IEEE 802.11, 
802.15.4 ZigBee, 802.15.1 Bluetooth; Wireless Local Area 
Network (WLAN) such as WiFi, WiMax; GSM-UMTS 
(for long distance) are currently the main wireless 
technologies [15], [4], [17], [18]. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 Innovative communication equipment such as “virtual 
reality” 
for 
supporting 
man/machine 
or 
man/man 
exchanges for speaking, hearing, seeing, touch, and feel. 
 Tools for diagnostics and prognostics that support 
maintenance decision-making include E-CBM and remote 
sensing devices. These technologies are deployed for 
monitoring the condition and performance of physical 
assets [19], [20]. Furthermore, in an e-CBM-enabled 
environment data are transmitted through the Web to a 
secure site for analysis and decision making [20]. 
 PDA, SmartPhones, Graphic tablets, harden laptops, etc. 
(equipped with WiFi, Bluetooth, RFID Reader, Windows 
Mobile). 
 Specific standards for ensuring the integration between all 
the IT components and e-Maintenance solutions.  
 Web services (for monitoring, diagnosis, prognosis, 
scheduling) protocols and technical standards (Internet-
based technologies) used for exchanging data between 
applications within heterogeneous environments: SOAP 
(Simple Object Access Protocol) for message exchanging; 
WSDL (Web Service Description Language); UDDI for 
referencing the web services, etc. 
 Full Web-CMMS (e-CMMS) is a CMMS (Computerized 
Maintenance Management System) able to monitor and 
manage the preventive maintenance activities of the 
organization but by offering new functionalities such as 
ASP (Application Service Provider/Providing) over the 
Web; link with mobile technologies for retrieving data, 
loading maintenance action; workflow module, etc [19]. 
 
V. AN INTEGRATED FRAMEWORK 
According to the e-maintenance architectural framework 
of Figure 1 the ‘wireless’ component provides required ICT 
infrastructure for supporting various activities of the other 
architectural components. This study extends the model in 
Figure 1 by providing further insights into the ICT support 
of the e-maintenance. The argument raised in the study is 
that the identified ICT components when combined with the 
e-maintenance architectural framework of Figure 1 together 
provide an integrated framework for e-maintenance that can 
be 
used 
by 
today’s 
highly 
information-intensive 
manufacturing and service organizations for managing their 
e-maintenance processes.  
VI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 
This paper reviewed current literatures in the areas of 
ICT and Manufacturing/Maintenance in order to provide 
further insights into the specific ICT requirements of the e-
maintenance process. A recent e-maintenance framework, 
representing the latest effort in the field, was selected on the 
basis of its relevance to the manufacturing as well as its 
explicit notion of ICT support as an enabler of e-
maintenance activities. The study expanded the ICT 
component of the framework by investigating current ICT 
components technologies as a supplement to the existing 
model, hence the name ‘integrated framework’; a 
framework 
that 
integrates 
a 
recent 
e-maintenance 
framework with specific ICT component technologies.  
In future the author intends to extend the current study 
by providing taxonomy for ICT support of e-maintenance 
activities and apply the framework to manufacturing 
industries with the aim of evaluating its suitability to 
various industries as a step towards developing a generic 
integrated e-maintenance framework.  
    
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Kajko-Mattsson, M., Karim, R. and Mirijamdotter, A. "Fundamentals 
of the eMaintenance Concept". Proceedings of The 1st international 
workshop and congress on eMaintenance. 2010, Luleå, Sweden. 
[2] Fuchino, T., Shimada, Y., Miyazawa, M. and Naka, Y. "Business 
process model for knowledge management in plant maintenance". In: 
Bertrand, B. and Xavier, J. (eds.) Computer Aided Chemical 
Engineering. Elsevier. 2008, pp. 101-102. 
[3] Marquez, A. C., De Leon, P. M., Fernandez, J. F. G., Marquez, C. P. 
and Campos, M. L. "The maintenance management framework: A 
practical view to maintenance management". Journal of Quality in 
Maintenance Engineering,2009; 15(2), pp. 167-178. 
[4] Candell, O. Development of Information Support Solutions for Complex 
Technical Systems using eMaintenance. PhD, Luleå University of 
Technology, 2009. 
[5] Karim, R. and Soderholm, P. "Application of information and 
communication technology for maintenance support information 
services: Transferring experiences from an eHealth solution in 
Sweden". Journal of Quality in Maintenance Engineering, 2009; 
15(1), pp. 78-91. 
[6] Han, T. and Yang, B. S. "Development of an e-maintenance system 
integrating advanced techniques". Computers in Industry,2006; 57, 
pp. 569-580. 
[7] Sahoo, T. and Parida, A. "Improving Overall Equipment Effectiveness 
(OEE) of process plant equipments through e-Diagnostics". 
Proceedings of The 1st international workshop and congress on 
eMaintenance.2010,  Luleå, Sweden. 
[8] Rasoyska, I., Chebel-Morello, B. and Zerhouni, N. "Process of s-
maintenance: Decision support system for maintenance intervention". 
Proceedings of the 10th IEEE Conference on Emerging Technologies 
and Factory Automation, ETFA 2005, pp. 679-686. 
[9] Zhao, Z., Wang, F.-L., Jia, M.-X. and Wang, S. "Predictive 
maintenance policy based on process data". Chemometrics and 
Intelligent Laboratory Systems, 2010; 103(2), pp. 137-143. 
[10] Muller, A., Crespo Marquez, A. and Iung, B. "On the concept of e-
maintenance: Review and current research". Reliability Engineering 
& System Safety, 2008; 93(8), pp. 1165-1187. 
[11] Muller, A., Suhner, M.-C. and Iung, B. "Formalisation of a new 
prognosis 
model 
for 
supporting 
proactive 
maintenance 
implementation on industrial system". Reliability Engineering & 
System Safety, 2008; 93(2), 234-253. 
[12] Kenne, J. P. and Nkeungoue, L. J. "Simultaneous control of 
production, preventive and corrective maintenance rates of a failure-
prone manufacturing system". Applied Numerical Mathematics, 
2008; 58(2), pp. 180-194. 
[13] De Lucia, A., Pompella, E. and Stefanucci, S. 2005. "Assessing effort 
estimation models for corrective maintenance through empirical 
studies". Information and Software Technology, 2005; 47(1), pp. 3-
15. 
[14] Iung, B., Levrat, E., Marquez, A. C. and Erbe, H. "Conceptual 
framework for e-Maintenance: Illustration by e-Maintenance 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

technologies and platforms". Annual Reviews in Control, 2009; 33(2), 
220-229. 
[15] Emmanouilidis, C., Liyanage, J. P. and Jantunen, E." Mobile solutions 
for engineering asset and maintenance management". Journal of 
Quality in Maintenance Engineering, 2009; 15(1), pp. 92-105. 
[16] Zhang, Y., Gu, Y., Vlatkovic, V. and Wang, X. "Progress of smart 
sensor and smart sensor networks". Proceedings of the Fifth World 
Congress on Intelligent Control and Automation, WCICA 2004(4). 
pp. 3600-3606. 
[17] Voisin, A., Levrat, E., Cocheteux, P. and Iung, B. "Generic prognosis 
model for proactive maintenance decision support: Application to 
pre-industrial e-maintenance test bed". Journal of Intelligent 
Manufacturing, 2010; 21(2), pp. 177-193. 
[18] Campos, J., Jantunen, E. and Prakash, O. "A web and mobile device 
architecture for mobile e-maintenance". International Journal of 
Advanced Manufacturing Technology,2009;  45(1-2),pp.  71-80. 
[19] Tsang, A. H. C. "Strategic dimensions of maintenance management". 
Journal of Quality in Maintenance Engineering, 2002; 8(1), pp. 7-39. 
[20] Jardine, A. K. S., Lin, D. and Banjevic, D. "A review on machinery 
diagnostics 
and 
prognostics 
implementing 
condition-based 
maintenance". Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 2006; 
20(7), pp. 1483-1510. 
  
  
  
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

