Application of Business Process Quality Models in 
Agile Business Process Management
Michael Gebhart 
Gebhart Quality Analysis 
(QA) 82 GmbH 
Karlsruhe, Germany 
michael.gebhart@qa82.de  
 
Marco Mevius, Peter Wiedmann 
HTWG Konstanz 
Constance, Germany 
mmevius/pewiedma@htwg-konstanz.de
 
 
Abstract— The increasing complexity of business process 
management projects requires a methodology that supports 
the tight and efficient collaboration between customer and 
process analysts. For that purpose, the agile methodology that 
is well-known in software projects has been transferred to 
business process management. However, in these agile 
environments governance regarding the designed processes is 
necessary for ensuring their high quality. This article 
demonstrates how to apply quality models for business 
processes in agile business process management environments 
and its specific challenges. To illustrate the application, a 
business process in the context of offer management has been 
captured by means of this approach.  
Keywords-business 
process; 
design; 
quality; 
agile;  
ISO 25000. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
High business process flexibility is required for 
companies to counter current challenges. Fast and efficient 
adaptability to business processes becomes an increasingly 
important competitive factor [1]. Explicit knowledge about 
the structure and functionality of business processes is 
essential for the understanding of organizational sequences 
[2]. A targeted enhancement of Business Process 
Management (BPM) with the help of agile advantages 
generates new significant potential for the automation, 
modeling, 
interaction 
and 
optimization 
of 
business 
processes. Therefore, different (agile) approaches have been 
developed. The idea of agility is described as the ability to 
balance flexibility and structure [3] and to minimize risks 
for instance by conforming project changes rapidly [4].   
One of these approaches is called BPM(N)Easy1.2.  
With BPM(N)Easy1.2 an agile BPM method is introduced 
[5][6]. BPM(N)Easy1.2 describes a combination of Business 
Process Management and Business Process Model and 
Notation (BPMN) with the ambition of making BPM easier. 
The major intention of the method is to provide aspects of 
agile software engineering for BPM. The approach extents 
and supports the interaction between every participant with 
focus on more coherency without confronting them with 
unneeded complexity. Furthermore, it follows an empirical, 
incremental and iterative concept to increase predictability 
of the process quality and to reduce project risks [5]. Hereby 
the efficiency and effectiveness of BPM will be enhanced. 
However, within the prediction and control of the 
business process quality the participants have to know what 
constitutes a good process and how to evaluate processes 
[7]. But there are no general rules which define what a good 
process is. Aspects, such as the customer value, process 
standardization, and the employee well-being, can be a 
signal [8]. But this information is not sufficient to perform a 
systematic or even automatic quality analysis of business 
processes. 
Aggravating 
this 
situation, 
contradictory 
constraints and needs – for instance speed and quality – 
generate the need to focus on the delivering value [9].  
To enable a systematic quality assurance in agile BPM, 
this paper introduces the application of quality models and 
quality gates. Quality gates define a specific point within a 
project to evaluate determined maturity and sustainability 
[10]. These quality gates ensure the synchronization and 
acceptance of all participants. For instance, an automated 
business process has to correspond with all predefined 
requirements and expectations. The introduced quality gates 
are supposed to close the gap especially at the beginning 
and during the business process modeling step. In the area 
of BPM and business process quality measuring, different 
approaches already exist.  As quality model, these existing 
quality assurances are reused as well as evaluated and 
adapted [11] for applying and measuring them in BPM 
environments. Especially agile environments with short 
iterations and high interaction are suited for the continuous 
monitoring of the business process quality. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 analyses 
relevant literature regarding quality models for BPM and 
their application for agile BPM. In Section 3, the application 
of a certain business process quality model in agile business 
process management is illustrated by means of a scenario 
from offer management. Section 4 introduces the 
BPM(N)Easy1.2  method and demonstrates where quality 
models can be applied within an agile approach. In addition, 
a possible tool support is shown. The last section presents a 
conclusion and outlook. 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

II. 
RELATED WORK 
This section describes the fundamental terms and existing 
work in the context of measuring the quality of business 
processes. For that purpose, work that targets the quality 
from both a functional and a technical point of view is 
considered. Furthermore, this work is examined in detail 
regarding its applicability in agile BPM environments. 
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
and the International Electro technical Commission (IEC) 
have created standards regarding the quality of software 
products. Both ISO/IEC 9126 [13] and the successor 
ISO/IEC 25000 ff. [14] define relevant terms for software 
product 
quality. 
Furthermore, 
they 
describe 
quality 
characteristics, their subcharacteristics, and their final quality 
measure elements. They hereby provide a wide overview of 
measuring the quality of software products. In order to apply 
these standards on business processes, the term “business 
process” has to be distinguished from “business process 
model”. As the standards refer to software products, they can 
only be directly applied on business process models as 
software artifacts. Also, in this case, only a subset of 
described characteristics is applicable. Heinrich et al. [16], 
Sánchez-González et al. [17], and YeonSeok et al. [18] show 
the adaptation of these standards on business process models. 
However, according to the introduction, we focus on the 
quality of business processes and their content instead of the 
models as software artifacts and their syntactical correctness 
etc. For that reason, the standards cannot be applied directly. 
Nevertheless, they provide good hints about characteristics 
that might be important for business processes as well.  
Further standards regarding quality management focus on 
quality management systems. Examples are ISO 9000 ff. 
[15], or branch-specific manifestations, such as the European 
Norm (EN) 9100 for aerospace. There also exist standards 
for the quality management in projects, such as ISO 10006. 
Even though they consider the quality in business domains 
and in some cases also describe business processes, the 
quality of the business processes themselves is not explained 
in detail. This is also the case when choosing Capability 
Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) or IT Infrastructure 
Library (ITIL).  
In [8], Krogstie describes criteria for so-called good 
processes. He introduces dimensions of value that is valid for 
most customer groups. Furthermore, he summarizes 
heuristics for good business processes. Even though no 
metrics are provided, these heuristics can be good starting 
points to derive more concrete quality aspects that again 
enable a systematic and automatic evaluation of business 
processes. In addition, this work helps to understand the 
purpose of business processes and why it is important to 
have good processes. Thus, it forms the framework for a 
quality model as it focuses on the motivation and strategic 
goals of business processes.  
In order to enable a more systematic quality analysis of 
business processes, Kneuper created the quality model 
Gokyo Ri based on existing standards, such as ISO 9000, 
CMMI, and ITIL [19]. It refines the quality of business 
processes so that their quality can be determined. Even 
though this quality model focuses on business processes and 
their content, the quality model is still too abstract to be used 
in agile business process management environments. In agile 
projects the quality has to be determined in short intervals 
best automated based on modeled business processes. Thus, 
Gokyo Ri has to be further refined until at least a subset of 
the quality attributes can be determined automatically or with 
short user interaction intervals. 
Similarly, Lohrmann et al. introduce quality attributes for 
business processes [7]. Also, in this case the quality 
attributes are derived from business-related quality concerns 
and focus on the content of the business process and not the 
artifact. Lohrmann et al. distinguish between the efficacy and 
efficiency of business processes that can be either 
determined on basis of business process models and running 
instances. Former is called business process design and 
implement efficacy and efficiency. Latter is described as 
business process enactment efficacy and efficiency. Even 
though Lehrmann et al. do not describe an entire quality 
model, they introduce quality attributes that are relevant for 
the business process quality as considered in this article. 
Nevertheless, similar to the quality model introduced by 
Kneuper the quality attributes are still too abstract to be 
applied in an agile environment. They first have to be refined 
so that they can be determined either based on business 
process models or by answering simple questions by process 
analysts. 
Regarding a more technical point of view, Suarez et al. 
[20] describe best practices for modeling business processes 
using certain languages, such as the Business Process Model 
and Notation (BPMN). Even though this article also focuses 
on BPMN as modeling language, these best practices mostly 
consider syntactical correctness of created models or related 
issues. The content of the processes and their quality from a 
functional point of view is not considered. The described 
best practices are also not aligned with a holistic quality 
model. So, the impact of these best practices on abstract 
quality characteristics is not obvious. The best practices can 
increase the quality of modeled business processes. They are 
also applicable in agile business process management 
environments as they can be easily determined or can be 
even measured automatically by tools. Nevertheless, they do 
not target the kind of business process quality considered in 
this article. 
Thus, this overview shows that there exists work 
considering the quality of business processes from a 
functional point of view as required in this article. However, 
the introduced quality attributes are too abstract to be 
measured directly and especially too heavyweight to be 
determined in agile environments. Other work focuses on 
fine-grained quality aspects, such as syntactical correctness 
that can be easily determined, however does not provide 
value for the quality of business process from a functional 
point of view. This article shows how to fill this gap by 
reusing existing work as introduced by Lohrmann et al. [7] 
and breaking these quality attributes down into aspects that 
can be either directly measured on business process models 
or easily answered by process analysts.  
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

The methodology applied in this article has already been 
successfully applied for service-oriented architectures [12]. 
Also, in this case, existing abstract quality attributes were 
refined to enable a fully or partially automated quality 
assurance. As result, a solution was created to ensure the 
systematical creation of a flexible and maintainable 
architecture. 
III. 
SCENARIO 
A sample business process model has been selected to 
apply the quality model. The business process model 
originates from a real business process model repository of 
an industry partner. The model describes the business 
process of an “offer creation”. The activities consider the 
aspects from setting up a new offer until sending it out to a 
potential customer. The business process model is modeled 
with BPMNEasy1.2. BPMNEasy1.2 is a business process 
modeling language which uses BPMN 2.0 [21] but reduces 
the complexity of the first modeling step. In the second step, 
the model can be enriched and used, e.g., for business 
process automation. Fig. 1 shows the business process 
model. 
 
Figure 1. Offer creation business process. 
The business process requires three roles: Sales, Calculation 
and Accounting and follows two different paths. In case of a 
successful credit check the Sales can finalize the offer 
otherwise the business process will be aborted. During the 
scenario the first draft of the business process model has 
been designed. BPMNEasy1.2 provides three different activity 
types: manual (green form), semi-automated (blue form) and 
automated (red form). For instance, the “Enter Offering” 
activity is computer-aided and can be defined as a semi-
automated activity. In addition, the required user stories have 
been described according to an agile methodology. To verify 
the correctness, participants interacted with each other 
closely. To prove the quality of the business process model it 
was necessary to use a specified quality model. In the 
following section, the developed quality model will be 
applied to this business process. 
 
 
IV. 
APPLICATION OF BUSINESS PROCESS QUALITY 
MODELS IN AGILE BUSINESS PROCESS MANAGEMENT 
In order to apply a certain business process quality model 
in an agile business process management project, several 
questions have to be answered. These constitute the structure 
of this section.  
A. Agile BPM  
There are different approaches to agile BPM e.g. [5] [22] 
[23]. In the following section the agile approach 
BPM(N)Easy1.2 [5] is used to show when (time of application) 
during the methodology the quality model is expected to be 
applied. BPM(N)Easy1.2 enables highly sophisticated agile 
Business Process Management. It covers all aspects of 
Business Process Management – from process design and 
process execution to process controlling with focus on the 
integration of all process participants. The following Fig. 2 
provides an overview of the approach and the including 
quality gates. Latter are displayed as stars: 
 
Figure 2. Illustration of the BPM(N)Easy1.2 approach. 
The approach consists of two connected cycles. One 
cycle is used to capture new BPMNEasy1.2 models and short 
user stories. Both BPMNEasy1.2 models and short user stories 
formulate the requirements of the activities within a 
business process. The BPMNEasy1.2 models are used to 
design the flow in general and set up a first model very 
easily. 
The 
short 
user 
stories 
describe 
additional 
information, e.g., additional business rules. The formulated 
requirements are the basis for the modeling and 
implementation of an enriched BPMN 2.0 business process. 
For the enrichment a BPMNEasy1.2 model and a number of 
user stories are selected to work on. Furthermore, the 
business process is modeled on the business user’s point of 
view. In addition, in consultation with a business user, an IT 
expert is able to use the business process model to automate 
the process. Once the modeling and implementation stages 
are completed the resulting BPMN 2.0 models are 
transferred to a final control. Within this control all 
participants assure that the result e.g. an automated business 
process corresponds with the BPMNEasy1.2 models and 
formulated 
short 
user 
stories 
(synchronization 
and 
acceptance).  
Displaying
Abort
Closing
Offer
Check
Enter
Offering
Executing
Credit
Check
Start
Credit Check
Started
Calculation
Started
Credit-Worthiness ok?
no
yes
Entering
Result of
Calculation
Sales
Calculation
Accounting
Accounting
Sales
Analysis
Optimizing
BPMNEasy1.2-Models
Short User Stories
BPMN 2.0-Models
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Immediately after the acceptance, new requirements can 
be taken and transformed into a business process model or 
implementation. If defined key performance indicators show 
optimization potential (analysis and optimizing cycle), new 
BPMNEasy1.2 models or short user stories will be generated. 
The several iteration and high collaboration between every 
participant allows the continuous monitoring of the business 
process quality [5].  
However, in general there are still different weak points 
in agile methods. Mohammad [24] says short response times 
and high interaction during the agile development do not 
require the writing of documents which can lead to a 
reduced quality of documentation. Furthermore, Mohammad 
[24] mentions the increased collaboration time of the 
participants. But in fact in some circumstances there is not 
enough time for the required coordination or the participants 
are not at the same (physical) location [24]. In [25], agile 
methods are described as a risk of large or complex projects. 
The magnitude of uncertainty is increased. Therefore agile 
methods are mistrusted in most organizations. To counteract 
these disadvantages and related lack of quality it is required 
to introduce quality checks during the application of an agile 
approach. In [26], quality checks are suggested to be applied 
to different steps of agile approaches.  
According to [26] and with the assumption that software 
engineering has the same goals as Business Process 
Management, 
e.g., 
cost 
reduction, 
collaboration 
enhancement, the quality gates listed in Table I are 
suggested for agile BPM approaches: 
TABLE I. QUALITY GATES 
Quality Gate 
Time of Application 
Comment 
1 
Formulation of user 
stories 
Continuous feedback and 
collaboration between 
every participant  
2 
Modeling of business 
process 
 
3 
Automation of 
business process 
Test of process application 
4 
Acceptance testing 
 
 
Today, some of the quality gates have already been 
implemented to assure the determined quality. For instance, 
the quality gate 1 can be applied by a continuous feedback 
process between every participant or by means of standard 
assurance tests of the process application [27]. For quality 
gates 1, 3 and 4 methods already exists, which can be used 
to assess the quality e.g. real tests of a process applications. 
Therefore, in this article, the quality gate number 2 that 
is applied during the modeling of business process is 
considered to improve and guarantee the expected quality. 
B. Quality Model Choice and Adaptation 
In the previous section, quality gates during an agile 
methodology have been identified. One quality gate 
considers the quality of modeled business process. In order 
to support this quality assurance, an appropriate quality 
model has to be prepared. For that purpose, first the most 
appropriate existing quality model has to be identified. 
Afterwards, its direct applicability has to be verified. As 
described in Section II, appropriate quality models are those 
introduced by Lohrmann et al. [7] and Kneuper [19]. 
However, in both cases, the introduced quality attributes 
have to be adapted for requirements in agile environments: 
As mentioned before, the quality of business processes has to 
be determined in short intervals, which again requires a 
quality analysis to be easy and lightweight. This requirement 
cannot be fulfilled by these existing quality models and the 
contained quality attributes. They are not formalized using 
metrics which hampers their automatic determination based 
on business process models. Furthermore, the informal 
description requires interpretation effort that can result in 
misunderstandings and thus wrong measures. This is a 
typical issue when performing quality analyses and has 
already been identified for other domains, such as the quality 
analysis of service-oriented architectures by Gebhart et al. 
[28][29].  
Thus, after choosing a certain quality model, the quality 
attributes have to be refined if necessary until more fine-
grained and comprehensible quality attributes are identified 
so that no interpretation is necessary any longer. They are 
called quality indicators, formalized as metric, and return a 
measure. It is not necessary that a quality indicator can be 
fully automatically measured on process models. If this is not 
possible as they require further knowledge, such as domain 
knowledge, the only condition is that it is possible to 
formulate unambiguous questions that can be answered by 
experts and do not require interpretation. Summarized, for 
every function and variable used within a metric, the criteria 
listed in Table II have to be fulfilled. 
 
TABLE II. CRITERIA FOR FUNCTIONS AND VARIABLES IN METRICS 
Criterion 
Description 
Technology 
Representation 
for variables and 
functions 
A variable or function represents a certain aspect 
within the considered technologies, i.e., business 
process models in this case. This enables an 
automatic measurement.  
Comprehensible 
Question  
for variables and 
functions 
If Technology Reflection is not fulfilled, for 
example if expert knowledge is necessary, a 
comprehensible and unamabigious question can be 
formulated that can be answered by experts and 
does not require interpretation. 
Composition  
for functions 
If the previous criteria are not fulfilled, the 
considered function is composed of other 
functions using automatically measurable 
operators. 
 
In this article, the quality model and its attributes 
introduced by Lohrmann et al. [7] are chosen. The 
refinement and application in an agile environment is 
exemplified by means of two quality attributes and their 
correlating quality predicates.  
 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

1) Controlled resource consumption in activities: 
According to Lohrmann et al. a business process fulfills this 
predicate when activities within the process are designed to 
avoid materials waste and capacity waste. This information 
is too abstract to be comprehensible on a certain business 
process model as it is not explained how this waste is 
reflected in process design. For that reason, the predicate 
and its quality attribute have to be refined into quality 
indicators.  
For this purpose, best practices that could be identified 
in earlier projects are tested for their suitability to represent 
the considered predicate and its quality attribute. One best 
practice suitable in this case is that for every role at least 
two persons have to be available. This ensures that in case 
of a person being absent still another person can continue 
the work and other persons do not have to wait and to be 
idle, which represents a capacity waste. As the predicate 
refers to the business process as a whole, also the refinement 
has to be measured on the entire process. Thus, the indicator 
measures the degree to which the participating roles have 
more than one person assigned. This indicator can be 
formalized as metric (1) similar to the ones introduced by 
Gebhart et al. in [28]. Table III describes the used elements. 
 
         
|                    |
|       |
 (1) 
 
TABLE III. VARIABLES AND FUNCTIONS USED FOR PAR (1) 
Element 
Description 
PAR(bp) 
Person Availability of Roles: Degree to which roles in 
business process bp have more than one person assigned 
R(bp)  
 
Role of Business Process: roles used in business process 
bp 
F(e, v, c)  
 
Filter: filter the elements e by condition c that uses the 
variable v as iterator 
HSP(r) 
Role Has Several Persons: true if role r has more than 
one person 
 
TABLE IV. FULFILLED CRITERIA FOR PAR (1) 
Element 
Fulfilled Criteria 
bp 
Technology Representation: The considered business 
process is represented by the BPMN process file 
PAR(bp) 
Composition: This function is composed of other 
functions and all operations can be automated. 
R(bp) 
 
Technology Representation: The roles are represented by 
the pools and lanes within the BPMN business process 
model 
F(e, v, c) 
 
Composition: This function is requires other functions as 
input and the filter operation can be automatically 
performed.  
HSP(r) 
Comprehensible Question: This aspect is not measurable 
on standard BPMN 2.0 artifacts. Thus, it has to be 
answered by an expert, but the question is easily to 
understand, unambigious and comprehensible: “Are 
more than one person assigned to role r?” As input, a 
boolean value is expected. 
In order to prove the suitability of this quality indicator as 
quality indicator in an agile environment, in Table IV for 
every element used in the formalization the criteria 
introduced in Table II are checked. As mentioned before, we 
assume business process models using BPMN 2.0 [21]. 
For the sake of simplicity, we focus on this best practice 
as solely quality indicator for the considered predicate. If 
further best practices, standards, or guidelines can be 
identified as influencing quality indicators they can be added 
later and have to be weighted.  
Applied on the scenario introduced in Section III, the 
metric returns a value less than 1 as we assume that not every 
role is filled by at least two persons yet, i.e., HSP(r) is not 
true for all roles. Table V shows how to interpret this value. 
In order to fulfill the predicate of controlled resource 
consumption in activities, the metric is expected to return 1 
as desired value. Thus, the business analyst is made aware to 
ensure that some further persons have to be assigned to roles 
with only one person. Even though if this is not possible, the 
business analyst gets the information that this fact represents 
a critical point for the efficiency of the business process.  
TABLE V. INTERPRETATION OF VALUES FOR PAR (1) 
Value 
Interpretation 
0 
No role within the business process is filled with at least 
two persons 
Between 0 
and 1 
Some roles are filled with less than two persons 
1 
All roles within the business process are filled with at 
least two persons 
 
2) Controlled skill employment: A business process can 
only be efficiently performed when skill employment is 
controlled. According to Lohrmann et al. [7], this quality 
attribute or predicate is fulfilled when all activities are 
documented and trained. This refinement can be used as 
measurement. In BPMN, these activities are represented by 
manual tasks or tasks that are not further specified yet. 
 
         
             
 
 
(2) 
 
        
|                   |
|        |
 
(3) 
 
        
|                   |
|        |
 
(4) 
TABLE VI. VARIABLES AND FUNCTIONS USED FOR CSE (2, 3, 4) 
Element 
Description 
CSE(bp) 
Controlled Skill Employment: Degree to which skill 
employment is controlled in business process bp 
DT(bp)  
 
Documentation of Tasks: Degree to which manual tasks 
in business process bp are documented. 
D(t) 
Documentation: true if task t is documented 
TT(bp)  
 
Training of Tasks: Degree to which manual tasks in 
business process bp are trained. 
T(t) 
Training: true if task t is trained 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Also, in this case, all used functions and variables are 
described in Table VI. They fulfill the required criteria 
described in Table II. The manual tasks represent certain 
aspects within the technology and the other functions are 
either composed of others or comprehensible questions can 
be formulated as for D(t) and T(t).  
Applied on the scenario we assume that all tasks 
represent manual tasks as automation has not been specified 
yet. When the metric is calculated, the business analyst has 
to answer, whether all these tasks are documented and 
trained. We assume that the business analyst realizes now 
that this is not the case. Only some tasks are documented and 
trained. Thus, the metric returns a value less than 1. The 
interpretation of this value is shown in Table VII.  
TABLE VII. INTERPRETATION OF VALUES FOR CSE 
Value 
Interpretation 
0 
No manual task within the business process is 
documented or trained 
Between 0 
and 1 
Some manual tasks within the business process are 
documented and trained 
1 
All manual tasks within the busienss process are 
documented and trained. 
 
By applying the refined metrics, the business analyst is 
made aware that the documentation and training is important 
for the efficiency of the business process. If the metric 
returns a value less than 1 the analyst gets the information 
that further documentation and training effort is necessary.  
C. Tool Support 
In order to increase the efficiency of quality analyses 
especially in agile environments, an appropriate tool support 
is necessary. For that purpose the already existing QA82 
Analyzer [30] (Fig. 3) can be applied as it is suited for agile 
environments and hybrid quality indicators identified in the 
previous section.  
 
 
Figure 3. QA82 Analyzer to analyze business process. 
 First, it supports the integration of custom quality 
models and combines the measure of model elements with 
questions that can be answered by experts, i.e., process 
analysts in this case. Second, the QA82 Analyzer can be 
integrated in business process modeling tools, such as 
BPM(N)Easy1.2, using web services. This enables the display 
of quality analysis results directly in existing environments. 
Finally, the QA82 Analyzer allows the provisions of advices 
about how to improve the quality. As result, process analysts 
can model business processes using their modeling tool and 
directly get hints about how to design the process to improve 
their quality based on the custom quality model. 
For that purpose, the quality model based on the quality 
attributes of Lohrmann et al. and the derived quality 
indicators has to be formalized and integrated into the QA82 
Analyzer. This includes the mapping of functions to 
technology, i.e., to BPMN 2.0 artifacts, and the formulation 
of appropriate questions if necessary. As result, the QA82 
Analyzer can be used to apply the identified quality 
indicators on any BPMN 2.0 compliant business process.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
In this article we demonstrated the application of 
business process quality models to support agile business 
process management and to assure a high quality of created 
solutions. For that purpose, we exemplarily chose the quality 
model introduced by Lohrmann et al. [7]. We identified the 
essential challenges and showed how to address them. First, 
the application of business quality models was aligned with 
an agile methodology. As essential deficit the abstraction of 
available quality attributes was identified. To solve this 
issue, we demonstrated how these quality attributes can be 
refined to be applicable in agile environments. Finally, we 
illustrated necessary tool support to increase the efficiency of 
quality analyses. 
To illustrate our work, a scenario in the context of a real 
offer creation business process was chosen. The refined 
quality attributes enabled the systematic analysis of this 
process and the results helped the process analysts to revise 
the process and its environment in a quality-oriented manner. 
Even though the quality of a business process includes a lot 
of further aspects not covered in this article, the application 
of a fine-grained quality model increases the awareness of 
relevant aspects and supports the creation of high-quality 
business processes. 
Thus, our approach enables companies and their process 
analysts to increase the quality of created business processes 
whilst reducing at the same time effort and costs for quality 
assurance. Process analysts can create business process 
models using their preferred modeling tool, such as 
BPM(N)Easy1.2, and directly receive feedback about their 
quality. Finally, derived advices are shown and help them to 
improve the created business models with regard to quality 
attributes that influence business-related goals. 
Next, we will consider further quality attributes and 
derive appropriate quality indicators to enhance the created 
quality model. As described in this article, we will focus on 
reuse of existing quality attributes.  
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

We also plan to refine the tool support. In particular, the 
integration with existing modeling tools has to be enhanced. 
Finally, the approach is expected to be applied in further 
business process management projects to identify advantages 
and also weaknesses that have to be examined.  
REFERENCES 
[1] T.M. Bekele and Z. Weihua, “Towards collaborative business process 
management development current and future approaches”, in 
Communication Software and Networks (ICCSN), 2011 IEEE 3rd 
International Conference, 2011, pp.458-462. 
[2] J. Eder and H.Pichler, “Business Process Modeling and Workflow 
Design”, in D.W. Embley and B. Thalheim (eds), Handbook of 
Conceptual Modeling, Springer, 2011, pp. 259-286. 
[3] J. Highsmith, “Agile Software Development Ecosystems”, Pearson 
Education, 2002, pp. 26-34. 
[4] Agile Manifesto, http://agilemanifesto.org. [accessed: May 21, 2013] 
[5] M. Mevius, R. Stephan and P. Wiedmann, “Innovative Approach for 
Agile BPM”, in The Fifth International Conference on Information, 
Process, and Knowledge Management eKNOW 2013, ISBN 978-1-
61208-254-7.  
[6] M. Mevius and P. Wiedmann, „BPM(N)Easy1.2 –Gebrauchssprachliche 
Gestaltung IT-basierter Prozesse. BSOA 2013. 8. Workshop 
„Bewertungsaspekte service- und cloudbasierter Achitekturen“ der GI 
Fachgruppe „Software-Messung und -Bewertung“, Basel, 2013, pp. 
31-46. 
[7] M. Lohrmann and M. Reichert, “Understanding business process 
quality”, in Business Process Management - Theory and Applications, 
Springer, 2013, pp. 41-73. 
[8] J. 
Krogstie, 
“Model-Based 
Development 
and Evolution 
of 
Information Systems – A Quality Approach”, Springer-Verlag, 
London, 2012. 
[9] J. Highsmith, “Agile Project Management – Creating Innovative 
Products”, Addison-Wesley Professional, 2009, pp. 15-16. 
[10] F. Salger, M. Bennicke, G. Engels , and C. Lewerentz, 
“Comprehensive Architecture Evaluation and Management in Large 
Software-Systems“, in 4th International Conference on the Quality of 
Software Architectures, 2008, pp.205-219.  
[11] E. Mnkandla and B. Dwolatzky, “Defining Agile Software Quality 
Assurance”, International Conference on Software Engineering 
Advances, IEEE 0-7695-2703-5/06, 2006. 
[12] M. Gebhart, “Service identification and specification with SoaML”, 
in Migrating Legacy Applications: Challenges in Service Oriented 
Architecture and Cloud Computing Environments, Vol. I, A. D. 
Ionita, M. Litoiu, and G. Lewis, Eds. 2012. IGI Global.  
ISBN 978-1-46662488-7. 
[13] International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and International 
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), ISO/IEC Standard No. 9126: 
Software Engineering – Product Quality; Parts 1–4. 
[14] International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and International 
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), ISO/IEC Standard No. 25000: 
Software Engineering – Software Product Quality Requirements and 
Evaluation (SQuaRE) - Guide to SQuaRE. 
[15] International Organization for Standardization (ISO), ISO Standard 
No. 9000: Quality Management Systems – Fundamentals and 
Vocabulary.  
[16] R. Heinrich and B. Paech, “Defining the quality of business 
processes“, in Lecture Notes in Informatics Vol. P-161, 2010, pp. 
133-148. 
[17] L. Sánchez-González, F. Ruiz, F. García, and M. Piattini, “Improving 
quality of business process models”, in Evaluation of Novel 
Approaches to Software Engineering, 2013, pp. 130-144. 
[18] L. YeonSeok, B. JungHyun, and S. Seokkoo, “Development of 
quality evaluation metrics for BPM (business process management) 
system”, in Proceedings of the Fourth Annual ACIS International 
Conference on Computer and Information Science, 2005, pp. 424-
429. 
[19] R. Kneuper, „Gokyo ri: messung und bewertung der qualität von 
entwicklungsprozessen am beispiel des v-modell xt“, in O. Linssen, 
M. Kuhrmann (Eds.): Qualitätsmanagement und Vorgehensmodelle, 
Shaker, 2012, pp. 25-34. 
[20] G. N. Suarez, J. Freund, and M. Schrepfer, “Best practice guidelines 
for BPMN 2.0”, in BPMN 2.0 Handbook, 2011, pp. 153-165. 
[21] OMG, “Business process model and notation (BPMN)”, Version 2.0, 
2011. 
[22] R. Meziani and I. Saleh, “Towards a Collaborative Business Process 
Management Methodology”, International Conference on Multimedia 
Computing and Systems (ICMCS). 2011. 
[23]  F. Schnabel, Y. Gorronogoitia, M. Radzimski, F. Lecue, N. 
Mehandjiev, G. Ripa,, et al.“Empowering Business Users to Model 
and Execute Business Processes”, BPM 2010 Workshops, Springer, 
2011, pp. 433-448. 
[24] A. H. Mohammad, T. Alwada’n , and J. Adabneh, “Agile Software 
Methodologies: Strength and Weakness”, in International Journal of 
Engineering Science and Technology, 2013, ISSN : 0975-5462, 
pp.455-459. 
[25] J. Barlow, J. Giboney, M. Keith, D. Wilson, R. Schuetzler, P. Lowry, 
and A. Vance, “Overview and Guidance on Agile Development in 
Large Organization”, Communications of the Association for 
Information Systems, Vol. 29, No. 2, 2011, pp. 25-44. 
[26] M. Huo, J. Verner, L. Zhu , and M. Babar, “Software Quality and 
Agile Methods“, 28th Annual International Computer Software and 
Applications Conference, IEEE 0730-3157/04, 2004. 
[27] A. Janus, A. Schmietendorf, R. Dumke , and J. Jäger, “The 3C 
Approach for Agile Quality Assurance”, Emerging Trends in 
Software Metrics (WETSoM), 2012 3rd International Workshop, 
2012. 
[28] M. Gebhart and S. Abeck, “Metrics for evaluating service designs 
based on SoaML”, International Journal on Advances in Software, 
4(1&2), 2011, pp. 61-75. 
[29] M. Gebhart and S. Abeck, “Quality-oriented design of services”, 
International Journal on Advances in Software, 4(1&2), 2011, pp. 
144-157. 
[30] Gebhart Quality Analysis (QA) 82 GmbH, QA82 Analyzer, 
http://www.qa82.com.  [accessed: May 21, 2013] 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

