The Strategic Value of Interorganization Information Systems: A Resource 
Dependency Perspective 
 
 
Philippe Marchildon and Pierre Hadaya 
Department of Management and Technology 
ESG-UQAM 
Montréal, Canada 
e-mail: marchildon.philippe@courrier.uqam.ca 
hadaya.pierre@uqam.ca 
 
 
Abstract—Over the past three decades, numerous studies have 
shown that the adoption of interorganizational systems (IOS) 
has enabled organizations to obtain a competitive advantage. 
Yet, recent information systems (IS) resource-centered studies 
now question the strategic value of IOS, arguing that they have 
become easily imitable necessities. However, these studies are 
mainly efficiency oriented and do not assess the effectiveness 
impacts of IOS. Hence, the objective of this paper is to bring 
clarity on the strategic value of IOS by demonstrating that IOS 
can indeed be used to achieve organizational effectiveness. To 
do so, we anchor our work on the resource dependency theory 
(RDT), which explicitly posits effectiveness as the main driver 
of organizational performance. Accordingly, the literatures on 
business relationships, organizational performance, RDT and 
IOS are examined to propose a research model, its related 
hypotheses, and methodological aspects regarding its empirical 
validation. 
Finally, 
the 
proposed 
model’s 
anticipated 
contributions are discussed. 
Keywords-dyadic 
business 
relationship; 
dependence; 
effectiveness; resource dependency theory; interorganizational 
information systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
To stay competitive in today’s uncertain dynamic 
environment, organizations are increasingly relying on their 
partners to accomplish complex tasks that are impossible to 
achieve independently [1][2]. This new dynamic, where 
organizations are outsourcing their activities in which they 
are less competent [3], is modifying the links bounding a 
firm to its business counterparts [4] and creating a state of 
greater interdependence between social actors present in the 
environment [5]. This new dynamic is also translating in the 
emergence of new interorganizational forms such as virtual 
enterprises and integrated supply chains [6][7], to harness 
benefits from closer and stronger partnerships [8], which, in 
turn, have put to the forefront the use of interorganizational 
information systems (IOS). IOS are computer networks that 
support 
information 
exchange 
across 
organizational 
boundaries [9]. They have been extensively adopted and 
relied upon by organizations to obtain a competitive 
advantage over their competitors. Abnormal rents derived 
from such systems are assumed to stem from their ability to 
allow information to flow quickly and transparently across 
multiple interorganizational boundaries making it visible to 
all supply chain partners and in turn improving the 
performance of business relationships [10]. Despite these 
stated benefits, recent findings from information systems (IS) 
resource-centered studies now question the strategic value of 
IOS, arguing that they have become easily imitable 
necessities [11][12][13][14]. 
The proliferation of new interorganizational forms has 
also changed organizational practices in regards to 
performance 
assessment 
by 
shifting 
the 
locus 
of 
organizational performance from efficiency to effectiveness 
considerations. Indeed, organizations forced to transact with 
one another to complete their activities are no longer the sole 
master of their destiny and are thus subject to external 
influence and demands when making strategic decisions. 
Effectiveness, defined as the organization ability to satisfy 
the demands of those in its environment from whom it 
requires support for its continued existence [5], is thus 
becoming a critical measure of organizational performance. 
Furthermore, the shift from efficiency to effectiveness 
considerations has exacerbated the recent questioning of IOS 
strategic value. Indeed, findings from IS studies suggest that 
incentive to adopt an IOS are only efficiency bounded (i.e., 
reduction of transaction cost, increase productivity) [15][16]. 
Thereby, using such resources would be of little value in an 
effectiveness prized context and further validates the recent 
questioning of their strategic value.  
Despite these criticisms on the strategic value of IOS, we 
must emphasize that resource-centered studies in the IS field 
are for the most part efficiency oriented and do not assess the 
effectiveness impacts of IOS [17]. Such a state suggests that 
much is still to learn in this area and that discarding the 
strategic value of IOS based on an half complete picture 
would be mistaken. The present paper is in line with this 
consideration and aims to bring clarity on the strategic value 
of IOS by demonstrating that IOS can be used to achieve 
organizational effectiveness. To do so, we anchor our work 
on the resource dependency theory (RDT), which is the only 
resource-based theory (e.g., resource based view theory, 
relational view theory, knowledge based view theory) that 
explicitly takes into consideration the interdependencies 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

between social actors and posits effectiveness as the main 
driver of organizational performance and competitive 
advantage. More precisely, the underlying premise of this 
paper is that an organization may shift the nature (i.e., 
structure) of its business relationship with a trading partner 
from an arm’s length to an integrated stance [18][19][20][21] 
by using an IOS, which in turn will enable the organization 
to be effective (i.e., to satisfy the demands of its partner from 
whom it requires support for its continued existence). 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, in 
Section 2, we illustrate the key differences between 
efficiency and effectiveness measures of operational 
performance. Then, in Section 3, we rely on the tenets of 
RDT to identify how an organization may change the nature 
of its business relationship with a partner from an arm’s 
length to integrated stance to achieve organizational 
effectiveness. Next, based on these theoretical underpinnings 
we present our research model and its related hypothesis in 
Section 4. This is followed, in Section 5, by a discussion of 
the research methodology that will be used to validate our 
research model. Lastly, Section 6 concludes the paper by 
presenting 
the 
anticipated 
theoretical 
and 
practical 
contributions of the study as well as its limits and future 
research avenues. 
II. 
LITTERATURE REVIEW 
A. Organizational Performance: Efficiency vs. 
Effectiveness 
Efficiency and effectiveness are clear distinguishable 
domains of organizational performance [22]. Efficiency is an 
internal standard of organizational performance [5] that 
refers to an input-output ratio or comparison [22]. In turn, 
effectiveness is externally oriented [5] and refers to an 
absolute level of either input acquisition or outcome 
attainment [22]. Effectiveness measures of performance 
imply a valued evaluation, usually based on how well the 
organization is meeting the needs or satisfying the criteria of 
evaluators [5]. As such, in a context like today’s competitive 
environment, where interdependencies between social actors 
play a critical role, effectiveness measures are more suitable 
to assess organizational performance than efficiency 
measures due to their external focus. In the particular case of 
this study, evaluators consist of the external partners upon 
which an organization depends. 
B. Resource Dependency Theory 
Resource dependency theory posits that organizations are 
defined at the activity level, making activities under the 
control of an organization its core and purpose [5]. To 
complete their activities, organizations are assumed to rely 
on resources present in their environment. Resources can 
include anything perceived as valuable by an organization; 
from materials to access to markets [23]. The reliance on 
these resources poses the problem of their procurement, 
which is exacerbated by the fact that no organization is 
believed to be self-contained or to have the total control over 
it’s required operational components or resources [5]. 
Therefore, differences in firm resource endowments exist 
and persist over time and define the structure of an 
organization’s 
environment. 
In 
turn, 
environmental 
characteristics or patterns of resource endowments create 
interdependencies between organizations for resource 
procurement and forces them to transact with one another 
[23]. 
Exchanges between partners caused by the environmental 
structure are not all balanced. In fact, in dyadic settings, 
asymmetry due to the unequal importance of the exchange 
for each organization may be present [23]. Asymmetry in a 
relationship is determined by the respective dependence level 
of each party upon the other [24]. According to [5], three 
factors must be weighted to assess an organization’s level of 
dependence towards another. First, the importance of the 
resource exchanged for the organization (i.e., the extent to 
which the organization requires the resource for continued 
operations and survival). Second, the extent to which the 
organization from which the resource will be acquired has 
discretion over the resource allocation and usage. Third, the 
extent to which there are few alternatives or other 
organizations from which the resource can be obtained. 
Hence, an organization for which the resource exchanged is 
highly important, and that has limited discretion over the 
resource and few alternatives from which it can obtain the 
resource is considered to be dependent upon its exchange 
partner.  
In turn, asymmetry or different levels of dependence in 
an exchange will confer to the less needy partner a certain 
power over its more dependent counterpart exposing the later 
to the influence and the demands of the former [24]. Hence, 
an organization’s level of dependence upon a partner 
measures the potency of its partner. In other words, it 
measures how much the dependent organization must take 
into account its partner’s demands, and also how likely the 
dependent organization will consider its partner’s demands 
in its decision making process [5]. 
To deal with a partner’s demands and ensure its 
survival (i.e., to be effective), an organization can take three 
types of actions [5]. As noted by [25, p. 88], “The first 
alternative is to comply with such influence. The second 
response is to evade these demands. The last alternative is to 
alter external demands by modifying its relationships with 
external actors”. RDT focuses mainly on this last alternative. 
More precisely, RDT posits that an organization will aim to 
shift the nature (i.e., structure) of its relationship with a 
significant partner from an arm’s length to an integrated 
stance. In doing so, an organization will increase its external 
partner’s stakes in the relationship, which in turn will 
alleviate power asymmetries and secure access to critical 
resources. Two types of strategies can be used to achieve this 
aim [25]: (1) ownership alteration strategies such as vertical 
integration, horizontal integration and diversification that 
involve the acquisition of the needed external resource and, 
thus, eliminate interdependencies [5]; and (2) quasi-
hierarchical strategies that do not involve a change in 
ownership, but rather the creation of quasi hierarchical 
relations (e.g., joint ventures, interlocking boards of 
directors, associations, cartels and the formation of social 
norms) to more formally govern interfirm relationships [23]. 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

III. 
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
Based on the theoretical background presented above, the 
premise of this paper is that IOS usage may be used by an 
organization to implement a quasi-hierarchical strategy in its 
attempt to increase its partner’s stake in the relationship, 
alleviate power asymmetries and secure access to the critical 
resources it requires for its continued existence. This Section 
exposes the three hypotheses tied to our research model 
shown in Figure 1. 
A. Hypothesis #1 
According to the tenets of RDT, to be effective, a 
dependent 
organization 
should 
develop 
a 
close 
interorganizational relationship – a particular type of quasi-
hierarchical strategy – with its business counterpart in order 
to balance the asymmetrically dependent relationship and 
make it more symmetrical and interdependent [5]. Finding 
stemming from the field of marketing, which has a well 
established tradition of examining organizational dependence 
in business relationships, support this assertion. Indeed, 
several authors have demonstrated that the dependence of 
one party upon another entices the former to integrate its 
activities with the later [26][27][28]. For example, to ensure 
that it continues to have access to the resources provided by 
its less needy partner, a dependent organization is more 
likely to have a long-term orientation and significantly invest 
in its relationship with its partner [26][27][29]. Such 
investments often take the form of bounding behaviours, 
which include adding value to goods exchanged and 
developing specialized procedures in ordering, shipping and 
servicing [30]. Conceptually one can think of such 
investments involving people, products and procedures as 
creating exit barriers in the business relationship [27], which 
would create switching costs for the less needy organization 
if it decided to change trading partner.  
These bounding behaviors also include relationship-
specific IOS usage. For example, a dependent supplier may 
use an IOS to facilitate timely and accurate information 
sharing, which should add value to the exchange relationship 
by reducing redundant workload for their customer [31]. It is 
important to note that these offsetting investments in dyadic 
relationships are themselves transaction-specific assets since 
their value would be greatly diminished if one of the partners 
was to switch and decide to exchange with a source different 
than the original partner. Thus, IOS usage may be seen as a 
particular type of quasi-hierarchical strategy that balances 
asymmetrically dependent relationship. Based on the 
arguments mentioned above the following hypothesis is 
formulated: 
 
Hypothesis #1: The greater the organization’s level of 
dependence upon the trading partner, the 
greater its level of IOS usage with that 
trading partner. 
 
H1 (+)
Organization’s 
effectiveness
Organization's 
Level of 
integration with 
its partner
Organization’s 
level of IOS 
usage with with 
its partner
Organization's 
Level of 
dependence 
upon its partner
H2 (+)
H3 (+)
 
Figure 1.  Research Model. 
B. Hypothesis #2 
Various mechanisms facilitating the integration between 
trading partners have been identified in the organization 
theory literature [32]. As noted by [33, p. 171), these 
mechanisms include “standardizing work (i.e., common and 
clearly specified procedures and tasks), standardizing 
output (i.e., clearly specified results or output of work), 
standardizing skills and knowledge (i.e., standardized 
training 
and 
expertise), 
standardizing 
norms 
(i.e., 
establishment of common values, beliefs, and expectations), 
direct supervision (i.e., someone not directly doing the work, 
but being responsible for coordinating the activities), 
planning (i.e., establishment of schedules governing 
activities of different units), and mutual adjustment (i.e., 
people or units adapting to each other during their work 
processes)”. In turn, numerous studies in the IS field have 
demonstrated that IOS usage allow for the implementation 
and/or optimization of these mechanism facilitating 
integration between partners [34]. Indeed, IOS are 
recognized to enhance the formalization, the content and the 
amount of information exchanged between business 
partners [21]. More precisely, by requiring standard 
protocols for data communication, IOS usage introduces the 
need for the establishment of a formal agreement between 
the trading partners, which in turn fosters the standardization 
of work and certain outputs. Furthermore, by formalizing 
communication processes and procedures as well as by 
providing a superior capacity for data transmission, IOS 
usage also enhances the speed, the accuracy and 
completeness of interorganizational communication [35], 
which in turn optimizes several other mechanisms 
facilitating partner’s integration. For example, by allowing 
the information to flow effectively across organizational 
boundaries [36][37], IOS usage enables a manufacturer to 
promptly react to unexpected events caused by their 
suppliers/customers as well as to advise them of changes in 
planning, which fosters rapid mutual adjustment between 
partners [38][39][40]. Improvements in interorganizational 
communication derived from IOS usage also increase speed 
of feedback and error correction between supply chain 
partners [40] thereby facilitating the supervision of activities 
across organizational boundaries. In addition, sharing 
information through IOS gives integrated partner’s accurate 
and precise information on future material requirements [39], 
and thus improves their planning and scheduling [41][42]. 
Based on these previous arguments, the following hypothesis 
is formulated: 
 
Hypothesis #2: The greater the organization’s level of 
IOS usage with the trading partner, the 
greater its level of integration with that 
partner. 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

C. Hypothesis #3 
The positive relationship between an organization’s 
pursuit of a quasi-hierarchical strategy and its effectiveness 
has been demonstrated in several studies. For example, [43] 
demonstrated that, by integrating its activities with those of 
its trading partner, an organization can be more innovative 
and be more prone to develop new business opportunities. In 
addition, [44] also revealed that, by integrating its activities 
with those of its trading partner, an organization can be more 
effective. Based on these previous arguments, the following 
hypothesis is formulated: 
 
Hypothesis #3: The greater the organization’s level of 
integration with the trading partner, the 
greater its effectiveness. 
 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
As our research is still in progress, this Section explains 
the methodological framework we have devised, but not yet 
used, to test our research model. More precisely, we present 
our intended research setting, data collection procedures, 
survey instrument and data analyses procedures. 
A. Research Settting 
An important part of the research design was to identify 
an industry where: (1) new interorganizational forms 
established to harness the benefits of closer and stronger 
partnerships exist, (2) effectiveness is a valued measure of 
organizational performance, and (3) the level of IOS 
adoption is high. One example of such industry came to our 
attention: the aerospace industry. Indeed, recent studies have 
shown that organizations from this industry are increasingly 
developing integrated supply chains and strong business 
partnerships to fulfill market demands [45]. As such, 
effectiveness is highly valued in this industry [45]. Lastly, 
recent studies have also shown that the adoption level of IOS 
by firms in this industry is amongst the highest [46]. 
Accordingly, the unit of analysis of this study is the business 
relationship between a manufacturer pertaining to the 
aerospace industry and one of its customers. 
B. Data Collection 
Data will be collected by means of a field survey. 
Conceptually, a researcher can decide to study a business 
relationship through the perspective of the supplier, the 
customer or both parties [47]. In the present research, the 
perspective of the manufacturer (i.e., the supplier) will be 
adopted. We will follow the key informant approach and 
collect data from one sales professional at each supplier 
because specialists in this boundary role are most likely to be 
knowledgeable about study constructs [48]. These sales 
professional 
will 
be 
identified 
from 
a 
Canadian 
governmental database, which lists all the manufacturers 
pertaining to the Canadian aerospace industry. They will be 
asked to focus on a specific customer relationship for the sale 
of a specific component/resource when answering the 
survey. Lastly, to ensure the anonymity of our respondents 
all collected data will be anonymized. 
C. Survey Instrument 
The survey instrument will include measures specifically 
developed for the purpose of this study as well as measures 
drawn and/or adapted from the literature. Existing scales for 
the manufacturer’s level of dependence upon its customer 
were deemed inappropriate as they do not account for the 
three dimensions identified by [5]. Also, measures of 
organizational effectiveness are non existent. Thus, we will 
develop appropriate scales for each of these constructs by 
following the three-stage approach proposed by [49]. 
Scales for the remaining constructs (those related to the 
manufacturer’s level of IOS usage with its customer, and the 
manufacturer’s level of integration with its customer) will 
adapted 
from 
the 
literature. 
More 
precisely, 
the 
manufacturer’s level of IOS usage with its customer will 
comprise three dimensions, namely volume, diversity and 
depth and will be measured with scales adapted from [50]. 
The manufacturer’s level of integration with its customer 
will include four dimensions, namely joint actions, 
assistances, monitoring and information exchange [51] and 
will be measured using scales adapted from [52] (joint 
actions), [53] (assistance), [54] (monitoring), and [55] 
(information exchange). 
D. Data Analyses 
Structural equation modeling (SEM) will be used to 
analyze this study’s data. One important particularity of this 
approach is that it allows for the simultaneous evaluation of 
both the quality of the measurement and the construct 
interrelationships [34]. In addition, the use of SEM will 
allow us to test both the direct and indirect effects of 
dependent constructs on organizational effectiveness as well 
as to assess if the process of IT value creation is sequential as 
implied by our model.  
A two-phase analytical procedure will be employed. In 
the first phase, a confirmatory factor model (i.e., the 
measurement model) will be used to measure the fit between 
the theorized model and observed variables, whereas in the 
second phase, results of the measurement model will be used 
to create a path-analytic model to investigate the 
relationships hypothesized in this study [56].  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The objective of this project is to bring clarity on the 
strategic value of IOS by demonstrating that IOS can be used 
to achieve organizational effectiveness. To do so, a research 
model anchored on RDT is proposed. Results tied to the 
empirical testing of this model should prompt important 
theoretical and practical contributions as well as future 
research avenues despite certain limits. 
A. Theoretical Contribution 
First, by measuring organizational effectiveness rather 
than organizational efficiency, the present study will broaden 
our understanding IOS impacts and consequently our 
understanding of their strategic value. Second, this study will 
complement previous IS resource-centered research by 
providing insights on how to use a particular IS strategic 
resources, namely IOS. Traditionally, IS resource-centered 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

research have been concerned with identifying strategic 
resources rather than explaining how they should be used. 
Such predisposition and lack of guidelines to turn valuable 
IS resources into competitive advantages may lie on the 
extensive reliance on the resource-based-view perspective, 
which doesn’t cover this critical aspect. As such, the present 
study, anchored on RDT, significantly departs from previous 
research endeavors by being one of the few to both identify 
and define how a particular IS strategic resource, the IOS, 
can be used to alleviate dependence asymmetries in business 
relationships. 
B. Practical Contributions  
From a practical stance, anticipated findings should help 
organizations 
to 
better 
manage 
their 
portfolio 
of 
interorganizational relationships by identifying: (1) key 
organizational partners, (2) how to alleviate the influence of 
these partners through interorganizational integration and 
(3) the critical role of IOS in this integrating process. As 
such, managers will be able to effectively cope with partner 
demands, and hence ensure the survival of their organization. 
C. Limits and Future Research Avenues 
The theoretical and methodological contents presented 
above suggest a few limits and related future research 
avenues. First, our study sample is specific to manufacturers 
involved in a customer relationship for the sale of an 
important component/resource. To address this limit, future 
research should be undertaken in order to replicate our 
research efforts in different settings with different types of 
resources. For example, it could be interesting to replicate 
our research efforts within the context of manufacturer-
supplier relationships where the manufacturer aims to 
acquire an IT resource in exchange of a monetary 
compensation. Second, the present study does not take into 
consideration the different types of IOS used to support the 
manufacture-customer 
relationship 
(e.g., 
dyadic, 
multilateral). Future research initiatives could thus be 
undertaken to extend the present work by investigating 
whether or not the use of different types of IOS may lead to 
different findings. For example, it would be interesting to see 
if the dependence between two business partners can 
influence the choice of a particular type of IOS. Third, our 
research considers only the perspective of the manufacturer. 
To address this limit, we recommend that future research on 
dyadic relationships should investigate the viewpoint of both 
partners in the business relationship. Such an endeavor 
would generate more accurate findings by, amongst other 
things, assessing interdependence between the partners, 
which better reflects the reality of business relationships than 
only capturing the level of dependence of a single partner 
towards the other. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. H. Dyer and H. Singh, “The Relational View: Cooperative 
Strategy and Sources of  Interorganizational Competitive 
Advantage,” Academy of Management Review, vol. 23, no. 4, 
1994, pp. 660-679. 
[2] W. W. Powell, “Neither Market nor Hierarchy: Network form 
of Organization,” Research in Organization Behavior, vol. 12, 
1990, pp. 295-336. 
[3] M. Sobrero and E. B. Roberts, “Strategic Management of 
Supplier-Manufacturers 
Relations 
in 
New 
Product 
Development,” Research Policy, vol. 31, 2002, pp. 159-182. 
[4] M. Bensaou, “Interorganizational Cooperation: The role of 
Information Technology an Empirical Comparison of U.S. 
and Japanese Supplier Relations,” Information Systems 
Research, vol. 8, no. 2, 1997, pp. 107-124. 
[5] J. Pfeffer and G. R. Salancik, The External Control of 
Organizations: A Resource Dependence Perspective, New 
York, NY: Harper & Row, 1978. 
[6] L. A. Lefebvre and É. Lefebvre, “E-commerce and Virtual 
Enterprises: 
Issues 
and 
Challenges 
for 
Transition 
Economies,” Technovation, vol. 22, no. 5, 2002, pp. 313-323. 
[7] P.-M. Léger, L. Cassivi, P. Hadaya, and O. Caya, 
“Safeguarding Mechanisms in a Supply Chain Network,” 
Industrial Management and Data Systems, vol. 106, no. 6, 
2006, pp. 759-777. 
[8] B. A. Weitz and S. D. Jap, “Relationship Marketing and 
Distribution Channels,” Journal of Academy of Marketing 
Science, vol. 23, no. 4, 1995, pp. 305-320. 
[9] V. Choudhury, “Strategic Choices in the Development of 
Interorganizational 
Information 
Systems,” 
Information 
Systems Research, vol. 8, no. 1, 1997, pp. 1-24. 
[10] P. Hadaya and L. Cassivi, “The Role of Joint Collaboration 
Planning Actions in a Demand-Driven Supply-Chain,” 
Industrial Management & Data Systems, vol. 107, no. 7, 
2007, pp. 954-978. 
[11] N. G. Carr, “IT doesn’t matter,” Harvard Business Review, 
vol. 81, no. 5, 2003, pp. 41–49. 
[12] E. K. Clemons and M. C. Row, “Sustaining IT Advantage: 
The Role of Structural Differences,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 15, 
no. 3, 1991, pp. 275-292. 
[13] F. J. Mata, W. L. Fuerst, and J. B. Barney, “Information 
Technology and Sustained Competitive Advantage: A 
Resource-Based Analysis,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 19, no. 4, 
1995, pp. 487–505. 
[14] A. Paulraj, A. A. Lado, and I. J. Chen, “Inter-Organizational 
Communication as a Relational Competency: Antecedents 
and Performance Outcomes in Collaborative Buyer–Supplier 
Relationships,” Journal of Operation Management, vol. 26, 
no. 1, 2008, pp. 45-64. 
[15] S. Barrett and B. Konsynski, “Inter-Organization Information 
Sharing Systems,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 6, 1982, pp. 93-105. 
[16] T. W. Malone, J. Yates, and R. I Benjamin, “Electronic 
Markets and Electronic Hierarchies,” Communications of the 
ACM, vol. 30, no. 6, 1987, pp. 484-497. 
[17] W. Oh and A. Pinsonneault, “On the Assessment of the 
Strategic Value of Information Technologies: Conceptual and 
Analytical Approaches,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 31, no. 2, 2007, 
pp 239–265. 
[18] J. Y. Bakos and E. Brynjyoolfsson, E. “From Vendors to 
Partners: Information Technology and Incomplete Contracts 
in Buyer-Supplier Relationships,” Journal of Organizational 
Computing, vol. 3, no. 3, 1993, pp. 301-329. 
[19] V. Grover, J. Teng, and K. Fiedler, “Investigating the Role of 
Information 
Technology 
in 
Building 
Buyer-Supplier 
Relationships,” Journal of the Association for Information 
Systems, vol. 3, no. 1, 2002, pp. 217–245. 
[20] R. L. Stump and V. Sriram, “Employing Information 
Technology in Purchasing: Buyer-Supplier Relationships and 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Size 
of 
the 
Supplier 
Base,” 
Industrial 
Marketing 
Management, vol. 26, no. 2, 1997, pp. 127–136. 
[21] L. R. Vijayasarathy and D. Robey, “The Effect of EDI on 
Market Channel Relationship in Retailing,” Information & 
Management, vol. 33,no. 2, 1997, pp. 73-86. 
[22] C. Ostroff and N. Schmitt, “Configurations of Organizational 
Effectiveness 
and 
Efficiency 
Source,” 
Academy 
of 
Management Journal, vol. 36, no. 6, 1993, pp. 1345-1361. 
[23] J. Tillquist, J. L. King, and C. Woo, “A Representational 
Scheme 
for 
Analyzing 
Information 
Technology 
and 
Organizational Dependency,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 26, no. 2, 
2002, pp. 91-118. 
[24] T. Casciaro and M. J. Piskorski, “Power Imbalance, Mutual 
Dependence, and Constraint Absorption: A Closer Look at 
Resource Dependence Theory,” Administrative Science 
Quarterly, vol. 50, no. 2, 2005, pp. 167-199. 
[25] C. L. Iacovou, “Interorganizational Systems as an Uncertainty 
Reduction Strategy: A Resource Dependence Perspective,” 
The fiftteen conferecne of the Administrative Science 
Association of Canada (ASAC), 1994, pp. 45-51. 
[26] R. F. Lusch and S. W. Brown,“Interdependency, Contracting, 
and Relational Behavior in Marketing Channel,” Journal of 
Marketing, vol. 69, no. 4, 1996, pp. 19-38. 
[27] S. Ganesan, “Determinants of Long-Term Orientation in 
Buyer-Seller Relationships,” Journal of Marketing, vol. 58, 
no. 2, 1994, pp. 1-19. 
[28] J. B. Heide and G. John, “The Role of Dependence Balancing 
in Safeguarding Transaction-Specific Assets in Conventional 
Channels,” Journal of Marketing, vol. 52, no. 1, 1988, pp. 20-
35. 
[29] L. Buchanan, “Vertical Trade Relationship: The Role of 
Dependence and Symmetry in Ataining Organizational 
Goals,” Journal of Marketing Research, vol. 29, no. 1, 1992, 
pp. 65-75. 
[30] R. M. Emerson, “Power-Dependence Relations,” American 
Sociological Review, vol. 27, no. 1, 1962, pp. 31-41. 
[31] C. C. Hsu, V. R. Kannan, K. C. Tan, and G. K. Leong, 
“Information Sharing, Buyer-Supplier Relationships, and 
Firm Performance,” International Journal of Physical 
Distribution & Logistics Management, vol. 38, no. 4, 2008, 
pp. 296–310. 
[32] S. Glouberman and H. Mintzberg, “Managing the Care of 
Health and the Cure of disease—Part II: Integration,” Health 
Care Management Review, vol. 26, no. 1, 2001, pp. 70–84. 
[33] H. Barki and A. Pinsonneault, “Toward a Construct of 
Organizational Integration,” Organization Science, vol. 16, 
no. 2, 2005, pp. 165-179. 
[34] M. Subramani, “How Do Supplier Benefit From Information 
Technology Use in Supply Chain Relationships?,” MIS 
Quarterly, vol. 28, no. 1, 2004, pp. 45-73. 
[35] L. W. Stern and P. J. Kaufmann, “Electronic Data Interchange 
in 
Selected 
Consumer 
Goods 
Industries: 
An 
Inter-
Organizational Perspective,” In R.D. Buzzel (Ed.), Marketing 
in an Electronic Age, Boston, MA: Harvard Business School 
Press, 1985. 
[36] J. I. Cash and B. R. Konsynski, “IS Redraws Competitive 
Boundaries,” Harvard Business Review, vol. 63, no. 2, 1985, 
pp. 134-142. 
[37] S. Kekre and T. Mukhopadhyay, “Impacts of Electronic Data 
Interchange 
on 
Quality 
Improvement 
and 
Inventory 
Reduction Programs: A Field Study,” International Journal of 
Production Economics, vol. 28, no. 3, 1992, pp. 265–282. 
[38] R. O'Callaghan, R. Kaufmann, P. J. Konsynski, and R. Benn, 
“Adoption Correlates and Share Effects of Electronic Data 
Interchange Systems,” Journal of Marketing, vol. 56, no. 2, 
1992, pp. 45-55. 
[39] K. Srinivasan, S. Kekre and, T. Mukhopadhyay, “Impact of 
Electronic Data Interchange Technology on JIT Shipments,” 
Management Science, vol. 40, no. 10, 1994, pp. 1291–1304. 
[40] E. T. G. Wang, J. C. F. Tai, and H. L. Wei, “A Virtual 
Integration Theory of Improved Supply-Chain Performance,” 
Journal of Management Information Systems, vol. 23, no. 2, 
2006, pp. 41-64. 
[41] C. A. Hill, C. P. Zhang, and G. D. Scudder, “An Empirical 
Investigation of EDI Usage and Performance Improvement in 
Food Supply Chains,” IEEE Transactions on Engineering 
Management, vol. 56, no. 1, 2009, pp. 1-15. 
[42] Z. Shi, “Exploring the Roles of Transaction Costs Reduction 
and Explicit Coordination in Mediating the Impacts of IOS 
Use on Buyer Benefits,” Journal of Information Technology 
Management, vol. 18, no. 2, 2007, pp. 1-17. 
[43] N. R. Sanders, “IT Alignment in Supply Chain Relationships: 
A Study of Supplier Benefits,” Journal of Supply Chain 
Management, vol. 41, no. 2, 2005, pp. 4-13. 
[44] A. Gunasekaran, C. Patel, and E. Tirtiroglu, “Performance 
Measures and Metrics in a Supply Chain Environment,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Operations 
& 
Production 
Management, vol. 21, no. 1, 2001, pp. 71-87. 
[45] R. R. Bales, R. S. Maul, and Z. Radnor, “The Development of 
Supply 
Chain 
Management 
within 
the 
Aerospace 
Manufacturing Sector”, Supply Chain Management: An 
International Journal, vol. 9, no. 3, 2004, pp. 250-255. 
[46] Forrester Research, “Canadian Online B2B Trade Poised to 
Reach C$272 Billion in 2005”, Press releases, 2001. 
[47] J. C. Anderson and J. A. Narus, “A Model of Distributor Firm 
and Manufacturer Firm Working Partnerships,” Journal of 
Marketing, vol. 54, no. 1, 1990, pp. 42-58. 
[48] L. W. Phillips and R. P. Bagozzi, “On Measuring the 
Organizational 
Properties 
of 
Distribution 
Channels: 
Methodological Issues in the Use of Key Informants,” 
Research in Marketing, vol. 8, 1986, pp. 313–369. 
[49] G. C. Moore and I. Benbasat, “Development of an Instrument 
to Measure the Perception of Adopting an Information 
Technology Innovation,” Information Systems Research, vol. 
2, no. 3, 1991, pp. 192-222. 
[50] B. Massetti and W. R. Zmud, “Measuring the Extent of EDI 
Usage in Complex Organizations: Strategies and Illustrative 
Examples,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 30, no. 3, 1996, pp. 331-345. 
[51] R. A. Robicheaux and J. E. Coleman, “The Structure of 
Marketing Channel Relationships,” Journal of the Academy 
of Marketing Science, vol. 22, no. 1, 1994, pp. 38-51. 
[52] R. Gulati and M. Stych, “Dependence Asymmetry and Joint 
Dependence in Interorganizational Relationships: Effects of 
Embeddedness 
on 
a 
Manufacturer’s 
Performance 
in 
Procurement 
Relationships,” 
Administrative 
Science 
Quarterly, vol. 52, no. 1, 2007, pp. 32-69. 
[53] T. G. Noordewier, G. John, and J. R. Nevin, “Performance 
Outcomes of Purchasing Arrangements in Industrial Buyer-
Vendor Relationships,” Journal of Marketing, vol. 54, no. 4, 
1990, pp. 80-93. 
[54] R. L. Stump and J. B. Heide, “Controlling Supplier 
Opportunism 
in 
Industrial 
Relationships,” 
Journal 
of 
Marketing Research, vol. 33, no. 4, 1996, pp. 431-441. 
[55] J. B. Heide and A. S. Miner, “The Shadow of the Future: 
Effects of Anticipated Interaction and Frequency of Contact 
on Buyer-Seller Cooperation,” Academy of Management 
Journal, vol. 35, no. 2, 1992, pp. 265-291. 
[56] G. S. Kearns and A. L. Lederer, “A Resource-Based View of 
Strategic IT Alignment: How Knowledge Sharing Creates 
Competitive Advantage,” Decision Sciences, vol. 34, no. 1 , 
2003, 2003, pp. 1-29. 
 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

