The Digital Diamond Framework:  
An Enterprise Architecture Framework for the Digital Age 
Roy Oberhauser 
Computer Science Dept. 
Aalen University 
Aalen, Germany 
email: roy.oberhauser@hs-aalen.de 
 
 
Abstract—Enterprise architecture (EA) frameworks of the past 
have attempted to support the cohesive and comprehensive 
modeling and documentation of the enterprise, often with a 
focus on business and information technology (IT). However, 
the digitalization of enterprises and the complexity of IT have 
outgrown these matrix box-like frameworks. This paper 
proposes a digital, holistic, and sustainable EA framework, 
called the Digital Diamond Framework, to support digitized 
enterprises in aligning the real EA state with the desired state. 
Keywords- enterprise architecture frameworks; enterprise 
architecture; 
enterprise 
modeling; 
business 
architecture; 
digitalization. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Enterprise 
Architecture 
(EA) 
is 
concerned 
with 
comprehensively modeling and documenting the structure and 
behavior of the business and IT infrastructure of an enterprise 
in a cohesive way as a set of artifacts in order to communicate, 
implement change, and develop insights in support of strategic 
business planning and management science. Historically, EA 
emerged from a necessity to document information systems 
for management stakeholders. One of the most well-known 
EA Frameworks (EAF) is the Zachman Framework, first 
publicized in 1987 [1]. While one might think that after 30 
years the EA area must be mature, Gartner's 2017 Hype Cycle 
for Enterprise Architecture [2] shows EA and EA Tools within 
the slope of Enlightenment - not yet in the Plateau of 
Productivity, and EAFs are in the Trough of Disillusionment. 
Currently, enterprises face multiple contemporaneous 
challenges:  1) A major digital transformation [3] of their 
industry. While the digitalization rate (digital score) may vary 
across industries and economies, it is nevertheless impacting 
business strategies and necessarily EA. As big data, data 
analytics, business intelligence, and machine learning make 
inroads 
into 
enterprises, 
improved 
decision-making 
capabilities at all levels and across organizational entities 
empowers employees with new insights and assistance and 
additional automation. 2) Agility is restructuring internal 
people-centric enterprise management, processes, and 
projects to continuously flexible and responsive business 
forms, accelerating product and service delivery and 
improving efficiency (e.g., Scrum, DevOps, BizDevOps). 3) 
Service-networked and mobile software: the IT landscape is 
rapidly changing from large, siloed, hierarchical, and static 
deployments to cloud-centric, networked, and containerized 
micro functionality deployments. Software/data functionality 
becomes easily reusable and accessible via standard protocols 
and formats independent of programming language or 
platform. Its scale can be seen in various “death star”-like 
microservice network landscape visualizations (see Figure 1) 
 
 
Figure 1.  Visualization of microservices at Amazon [4]. 
In lieu of these major trends, the reality that EA is 
attempting to comprehensively model, document, and change 
has become much more complex than in previous decades. 
The era of siloed functional teams and applications is fading, 
and a highly networked and integrated digitized era has begun. 
This challenges currently available EAFs, which were mostly 
developed before these trends swept into enterprises and 
typically rely on a simplified box-and-matrix paradigm.  
In 2007, Ivar Jacobson reckoned 90% of the EA initiatives 
he was aware of had not resulted in anything useful, giving 
big gaps vs. seamless relationships as a primary reason [5]. A 
2008 study showed two-thirds of EA projects failing to 
improve IT and business alignment [6], with the most frequent 
explanation being that connecting EA to business elements 
was difficult in practice. Hence, the EA frameworks of the 
past with their associated paradigms and their models cannot 
continuously reflect the dynamic enterprise realities, thus they 
are illusionary, ineffective, inefficient, and no longer viable. 
To enable more responsive and agile enterprises with 
better alignment of business plans and initiatives with the 
actual enterprise state while addressing the EA needs of 
digitized enterprises for structure, order, modeling, and 
documentation, this paper contributes a digitized, holistic, 
hyper-model EA conceptual framework called the Digital 
Diamond Enterprise Framework (D2F), providing a 
sustainable EA framework for a digital EA future.  
Section 2 discusses background material on EA. Section 3 
describes the D2F, which is followed by a conclusion in 
Section 4.  
 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

II. 
ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE BACKGROUND 
EA comprises the structural and behavioral aspects needed 
for the enterprise to function and their adaptation to align with 
a vision. It thus covers business (including people), 
information (data), and technology (IT, hardware and 
software). EA has been compared to city planning [7], 
designing in the face of many unknowns.  
A. EA Frameworks (EAFs) 
EAFs offer structure, associated terminology, and at times 
processes for EA-related work. Zachman’s EAF [1] utilizes a 
matrix paradigm and has changed over the years, using rows 
(layers) to address highest level business, then logical to the 
most detailed technical levels, and columns for the 5W’s and 
H (who, what, where, when, why, how). Many of these EAFs 
have common ancestors and historical influences. The Open 
Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF) [8] was first 
publicized in 1995 and provides a methodology for EA and a 
boxed architecture. The National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST) EA Model is a five-layered reference 
model stemming from the 1980s and formed the basis for the 
Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework (FEAF) [9]. The 
Generic Enterprise Reference Architecture and Method 
(GERAM) [10] is a generalized EAF from the 1990s and 
focuses on enterprise integration and business process 
engineering. Most EAFs use a 2D box or 3D cube paradigm 
in attempting to deal with the inherent complexity.  
B. Enterprise Modeling 
Modeling abstracts and simplifies an area of interest while 
maintaining certain its essential characteristics. So, reality is 
more complex than our models. We model in order to reason 
or understand within our cognitive limitations and to convey 
insights to others. Different domains and enterprises have 
different weightings and expectations as to what and how 
much, if any, modeling and its associated overhead should 
occur. The modeling spectrum can span from nothing for 
small organizations to modeling everything, but usually it is 
in the area between (see Figure 2). Something is inherently 
absent and models are imperfect, and manual adjustments may 
be necessary if the reality changes. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Modeling spectrum. 
An international standard for enterprise modelling (EM) 
and enterprise integration is ISO 19439:2006, which based on 
GERAM and Computer Integrated Manufacturing Open 
System Architecture (CIMOSA). It uses a cube paradigm with 
model phase, model view, and genericity on each axis. As to 
business modeling, Meertens et al. [11] argue that there is 
hardly any agreement or standardization in the area as yet. 
The reality is enterprise models for dynamic enterprises 
can become extremely complex and perhaps difficult to 
maintain, as illustrated in Figure 3 with a CHOOSE semantic 
meta-model [12] for an SME (small-to-medium enterprise). 
 
 
Figure 3.  A example CHOOSE enterprise model for an SME, from [12]. 
C. Related Standards 
Related standards in the EA area are ISO/IEC 38500:2008, 
which deals with corporate governance of information 
technology. ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010 Systems and software 
engineering — Architecture description deals with describing 
system and software architectures. ISACA’s COBIT (Control 
Objectives for Information and Related Technologies) is a 
good-practice framework for IT management and governance. 
D. Summary 
John Zachman admitted in 2004 [13] "if you ask who is 
successfully implementing the whole framework, the answer 
is nobody that we know of yet." Gartner’s 2011 global EA 
survey showed more than 60 EA frameworks in use, with the 
most popular being blended followed by homemade [14]. This 
indicates that none of the current EAFs suffice for enterprise 
needs, and many were not designed for the new digital 
enterprise era and lack the ability to leverage its capabilities. 
The EAFs and methods mentioned above typically use 
some layer-and-column matrix and most aspects related to 
models and views land in a box. This the clean-box paradigm 
(or syndrome depending on your view). Everything appears 
nicely modeled, complete, consistent, traceable, and 
semantically precise. But this apparent harmony is an illusion, 
the grey areas that cross boundaries or are cross-cutting 
concerns are not explicitly dealt with. The above EAFs 
currently lack an integrated digitalized and data-centric 
concept. They fail to provide real-time dynamic updates and 
thus reflect stale or inaccurate data. They also require 
additional manual labor to maintain independent artifact 
consistency with changing reality or to monitor and detect 
inconsistencies when they occur since they have independent 
data sources that are not automatically synchronized. 
A new sustainable “out-of-the-box” paradigm for a new 
era that can deal with digitalization, ambiguity, further IT 
complexity, and additional automation is needed. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

III. 
THE DIGITAL DIAMOND EA FRAMEWORK 
In the following, the key areas, activities, principles, 
integrative facets (potentially applicable when applying D2F),  
maturity levels, and roadmap to D2F are portrayed. 
A. D2F Key Areas 
Key Areas cluster related facets (concepts or elements) and 
provide a focus for human thought. In contrast to boxes/levels, 
here boundaries are intentionally absent, reflecting the lack of 
boundaries in the digital world, wherein facets can relate to 
multiple areas. Mind maps can be seen as a useful analogy. 
Figure 4 shows key areas involved in D2F, with cross-cutting 
areas shown angled on the left and right:  
 
Figure 4.  Key areas D2F. 
1) Enterprise Environments: comprises all actual human, 
business, infrastructural, and IT operational objects.  
2) (Meta-)Data Repositories: includes all (meta-)data 
concept repositories in the enterprise from a logical 
standpoint, reflecting Enterprise Environments in a data-
centric way in support of higher level data-centric analyses. 
While such repositories also reside in an Enterprise 
Environment, the focus is support for data acquisition, data 
processing, and other data-centric higher-level activities. 
3) Data Acquisition: involves collecting data and meta-
data into Data Repositories and making these accessible. 
4) Data Processing: includes characterizing, filtering, 
preparing (e.g., deriving), transforming (e.g., between 
formats, sorting), and cleansing data, the outputs of which are 
also stored in Data Repositories and hence available to other 
areas (e.g., automation, synthesis, analysis). 
5) Data Synthesis: involves aggregating, clustering, and 
correlating related or unrelated enterprise data, e.g., for 
digital key performance indicators (KPIs), dashboards, model 
conformance, etc. While this area overlaps the previous one, 
its focus is on determining and structuring aggregates. 
6) Data Visualization/Data Analysis: provides data-
centric analysis and visualization of data, models, and other 
EA artefacts for understanding, exploration, and insights. 
7) Adaptation/Evolution: 
includes 
taking 
action, 
responding 
to 
issues 
or 
concerns, 
stimulating 
or 
commissioning adaptive changes to fix or optimize the 
enterprise, and creating new initiatives and capabilities that 
let the enterprise evolve to a new state.  
8) Stakeholders/Agents: stakeholders can be viewed as 
anyone with an interest in the enterprise, and they may have 
conflicting and overlapping interests and (informational) 
needs. Agents (human or software) are able to directly effect 
changes within the enterprise. 
9) Automation 
and 
Intelligence: 
automation 
will 
increasingly support digital enterprise processes and will 
leverage data to improve efficiency and effectiveness and is 
thus explicitly considered. Beyond automation, intelligence 
utilizes data analysis and machines learning capabilities to 
assist humans in forming decisions or, via intelligent 
software agents, directly supporting autonomic decisions in 
given areas. For instance, automatic real-time adjustment of 
business product prices based on market movements or IT 
forecasting of required cloud infrastructure capacities. 
10) Management and Governance: involves managing 
and directing enterprise resources to reach enterprise goals as 
well as the enterprise governance including controlling, 
compliance, and assessments at various enterprise levels . 
Note that Key Areas can overlap (a data or meta-data 
repository will likely reside in an enterprise environment) and 
thus may appear redundant or inconsistent, yet this is not 
problematic and one strength of the D2F paradigm. Key Areas 
may be tailored for a specific enterprise. A prerequisite to a 
complete implementation of D2F presumes digitalization of 
EA-relevant areas for any given enterprise. As to scaling, the 
concept of a connected D2F Chain (Diamond Necklace) can 
be considered for applying D2F within various entities (e.g., 
divisions) but tied into a larger enterprise organization. 
B. D2F Key Principles and Qualities 
Key principles and resulting qualities of D2F include: 
1) Digitized (digital and networked): data and artifacts 
are acquired or transformed into a digital and network-
accessible form, open and transparent within the enterprise 
(to the degree feasible from a security standpoint), and 
preferably retained in some version-controlled repository 
(database or configuration-management database (CMDB) 
such as git). Internet-of-Everything and concepts such as 
digital twins can be used for physical entities to mimic real 
properties. Standards for data formats and interface access are 
considered for the enterprise. 
2) Meta (self-describing): all (data) elements including 
artefacts, entities, services, etc. should, as far as feasible, 
provide (its own) metadata (properties and semantic 
meaning) that can be integrated in metadata repositories (e.g., 
federated CMDBs) or searched via metadata networks (e.g., 
LinkedData), and which can be utilized by data processing 
and data synthesis. Various technologies such as semantic 
data graphs, RESTful services, JSON-LD, etc. can be used. 
3) Linked: Related networked data and meta-data are 
(semantically) linked in such a way that related data to some 
element or concept can be discovered and accessed. 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

4) Dynamicity: In an adapting and evolving digital 
enterprise, all artefacts and enterprise elements (or the digital 
twins thereof) as well as their relationships are assumed to be 
dynamic, and configurations are used to “snapshot” a set of 
element states that can be used in some analysis or 
communication. Models can be based on functions that 
transition from simulated to real data rather than static 
structures detached from external values. 
5) Holistic: bottom-up and top-down deep integration of 
applicable enterprise facets, such that various concepts (e.g., 
business models, business strategies, policies, architectures) 
can be tied to various related artefacts, models, operational 
data, and actual enterprise entities and thus be holistically 
analyzed across various factors. 
6) Hyper-models: embraces many coexistent and co-
evolving intertwined models (domain, business, process, 
software, IT architectures, context), perspectives, viewpoints, 
and views (not necessarily consistent) supported by data 
processing. Manual modeling is waning, and automation will 
also affect modeling, thus we must adapt our tooling and 
methods towards sustainable integrative modeling. Humans 
desire simplicity and computers can better deal with 
complexity and massive data volume, thus a symbiotic 
relationship should be pursued. 
7) Actuality processing (real/continuous/resilient/fuzzy): 
ongoing data acquisition and processing should be able to 
continuously access and adjust the data picture to the real live 
enterprise truth. To have resilient processing (vs. expecting 
consistency or exact values), data processing should embrace 
data ranges and the inconsistencies that will occur between 
data, models (inter- and intra-), reality, etc., and develop 
(automated) strategies and methods for detecting and 
working with exceptions, ranges, and thresholds and 
escalating more serious issues. That may include automated 
discrepancy monitoring and analysis and criticality 
weightings based on thresholds, risks, and potential impacts. 
While data cleansing can remove some of the dirt, rather 
expect issues to occur and have measures and thresholds in 
place to detect and govern these and processing that can work 
with ambiguity such as semantic imprecision. 
8) Analytics: data forms the basis for EA decisions. Data-
centric processing and analysis capabilities are available for 
the present, past, and planned enterprise states to determine 
alignment to expectations. Digital KPIs, dashboards, reports, 
and visual data analytics enable investigation and exploration 
of EA-related views, perspectives, viewpoints, and any other 
factor of interest (X-Factors) to contribute to understanding 
and insights on various EA factors.  
9) Actionable: data is leveraged to support decisions and 
governance, enabling responsive and predictive adaptation 
and evolution of the enterprise to a better state.  
10) Automation/Intelligence: Data is leveraged for 
automation to reduce sources of error and improve 
effectiveness and efficiency. For example, business process 
management systems and business and IT rules can be 
utilized. Intelligence via data-centric machine learning is 
integrated where possible to improve, support, or automate 
(human and software agent) decision making.  
11) Traceability and Logging: mistakes will happen, and 
people and enterprises can learn from mistakes. To embrace 
this fact, changes to data, elements, artefacts, and all actions 
with their associated agents are tracked (and versioned if 
appropriate), logged, and traced in order to be able to 
investigate and resolve potential issues that might arise. 
C. D2F Key Activities 
Various (ongoing) human and IT activities are involved to 
apply and maintain D2F. We use the term activities instead of 
processes, as processes have a clearly-defined goal and 
workflow and can be documented with specified artifacts, 
whereas activities can be agile and integrated where and when 
needed in whatever agile method is currently being used and 
done in any order deemed appropriate. They can be recurring 
and continuous to maintain D2F capabilities. As shown in 
Figure 5, key D2F activities include:  
1) Data Acquisition: ensures necessary and desired 
(meta-)data is collected, characterized, and accessible.  
2) Data Processing: ensures data is cleansed, filtered, 
prepared, and transformed into expected (standard) formats. 
3) Data Synthesis: aggregates and correlates data from 
various repositories for a specific purpose, such as providing 
data needed for a certain viewpoint or dashboard.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Digital Diamond Framework (D2F) activities. 
4) Data Analysis, Visualization,  & Exploration: involves 
agents (human or software) exploring, forming questions or 
hypotheses, utilizing various data and visualization analysis 
techniques from certain perspectives and viewpoints to 
address the concerns of various stakeholders, developing 
solutions, detecting opportunities and develop insights.  
5) Adapting & Evolving: directing and commissioning 
change, usually involving the previous activity (4), be it 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

adjustments to align or to evolve the enterprise, its EA, or its 
supporting infrastructure. It may utilize effectors available in 
the enterprise environments and/or human efforts via 
initiating projects or enacting processes. 
6) Modeling & Configuring: involves creating and 
maintaining (hyper) business, operational, architectural, 
product and other models (which can be logical in nature) and 
provide some simplification of some structure of interest and 
associated properties. These can be for a pre-development, 
development, or operational stage. While maintaining models 
is burdensome, incorrect models are worse, thus the basis for 
models should be tied into current enterprise data. 
Configuring involves (re)arranging enterprise elements in 
various ways to optimize certain desired properties. 
7) Testing & Simulating: involves testing and/or 
simulating hypotheses and models with potential real or 
generated data on virtual or real staged or production 
elements. The goal is to develop an improved basis for 
decisions affecting elements of the EA, and might include 
concepts such as a delivery pipeline. These activities become 
more important as the systems increase in complexity. 
Without the data from these activities, decision making at the 
higher levels can be hampered. 
8) Management & Governance: includes setting the 
vision and goals for the enterprise, perceiving and acting on 
opportunities and risk, planning, organizing, directing, and 
managing 
enterprise 
resources, 
making 
decisions, 
performing assessments, determining compliance with 
policies and alignment with expectations, supporting the 
development and application of strategies, best practices, 
policies, and guidelines, and making this information 
available to the enterprise. It is both top-down and bottom-up 
in its approach. It includes a feedback loop for continuous 
improvement or adjustment, enabling the enterprise to learn 
from mistakes and to optimize its future state. It ensures that 
logging and traceability of the data used for decisions, the 
decisions made, and the resulting actions are accessible. 
9) Intelligence & Automation: involves developing, 
maintaining, and optimizing automation processes in the 
enterprise, including EA analysis activity. Activity to support 
intelligence builds on automation and includes decision 
assistance for humans and software agents. 
D. D2F Enterprise Facets 
Any enterprise concept or element can be a facet. To 
provide further detail on which enterprise facets might be of 
interest for an enterprise when using D2F, Figure 6 clusters 
facets near Key Areas. Its intent is not to portray every 
possible facet, or by neglect thereof or apparent inconsistency 
to negate the entire approach. Rather, it shows that grey or 
inconsistent areas with which matrix approaches struggle are 
not as problematic with D2F, since it embraces these types of 
relations. A short explanation of selected facets follows:  
Enterprise Environments can involve a Business in a 
Market with Customers, involving Projects, Processes 
(business, development, agile, IT Infrastructure Library), 
Products, and Services (business, IT) together with Actors 
organized in Teams utilizing Infrastructure, IT (cloud, 
microservices, mobile), Resources, Tools, and Technologies. 
Entities can be organizational units or any other enterprise 
element not already covered by other facets. Sensors permit 
data about changes in the enterprise state to be acquired, while 
Effectors permit desired changes to be applied. IT Rules and 
Biz (Business) Rules support automation or escalation.  
 
Figure 6.  Illustrative enterprise facets when applying D2F. 
 (Meta-)Data Repositories includes data and metadata 
about Projects, Processes, Products, and Services as well as 
Planning Data and Ops (Operational) Data. CMDBs provide 
data and metadata about the IT landscape, X-Assets are 
repositories for data and metadata about other enterprise assets 
(e.g., program code). Knowledge repositories may be used. 
Archives provide historical data. Digital Twins provide a 
digital representation of real enterprise elements not covered 
by the above. X-Architectures stands for any (enterprise, 
business, software, IT) architecture, describing the goals and 
representation of some structure and its properties and 
involving principles, rules, abstractions, and views. Models 
(conceptual, mathematical, business, data, etc.) are a partial 
representation of some reality. 
Data Synthesis, Data Visualization, and Data Analysis can 
be used to develop Insights and can include digiKPIs (digital 
KPIs), Dashboards, and Reports. Perspectives address a 
particular quality property and have an implicit goal or 
intention. Views (partially) address some concern. Viewpoints 
are a class of views to address associated concerns.  X-Factors 
can be qualities, capabilities, properties, aspects, etc. 
otherwise not addressed by the above. 
Adaptation/Evolution includes Decisions and Actions to 
respond to disruptions, support change such as enterprise 
element lifecycle adjustments (acquire, prepare, operate, 
maintain, retire) as well as discovering and utilizing 
Innovations and instigating digital transformation initiatives. 
Stakeholders/Agents are driven by some Motivation, have 
Knowledge, Values (what they hold to be good), and Beliefs 
(what they hold to be true), develop Ideas, and have future-
oriented Goals and present-oriented Intentions with 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Expectations and Concerns they would like addressed, 
including a (common) Vision (future desired state) for the 
enterprise and some Mission (purpose) it intends to fulfill. 
Automation involves Processes. In an intelligent 
enterprise, Autonomically-Capable Processes (ACPs) [15] 
will increasingly be desired and expected. These ACPs can be 
completely autonomic, involve human interaction, or assist 
human operators in some fashion. These intelligent ACPs are 
much more complex than normal business processes.  
 
Figure 7.  Colored graph showing possible linked facet instantiations. 
The random colored node graph superimposed in Figure 7 
conceptually illustrates how facet instantiations (data) across 
various areas could be linked via graph relations to provide 
various insights addressing stakeholder concerns. 
E. D2F Maturity Levels 
Because D2F is a digital EAF, to achieve and apply all D2F 
principles across all levels of any existing large enterprise will 
require a transformation and enterprises will be in different 
states of transformation. The following Maturity Levels 
shown in Table I can be helpful to guide and ensure that 
requisite capabilities are addressed before focusing on higher 
level capabilities. Each level subsumes the one below.  
TABLE I.  
D2F MATURITY LEVELS 
Level 
Label 
D2F Qualities 
Data Perspective 
0 
Arbitrary 
- 
- 
1 
Digitized 
Digitized 
Meta 
Data Acquisition 
2 
Linked 
Dynamicity 
Linked 
Data Processing 
3 
Analytical 
Hyper-models 
Analytics 
Actuality processing 
Data Synthesis 
Data Analysis 
Data Visualization 
4 
Adaptive 
Holistic 
Actionable 
Traceability/Logging 
Effectors 
5 
Autonomic 
/Intelligent 
Automation  
Intelligence 
Automation 
Intelligence 
F. D2F Roadmap 
Each enterprise and its IT infrastructure are unique. The 
digital nature of D2F requires access to (semantically 
annotated) data repositories and software functionality. 
Various methods and best practices related to enterprise 
application integration (EAI), EA and other IT tools, protocol 
standards and formats (JSON/REST), and data visualization 
techniques can be leveraged to realize D2F in an enterprise.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
A sustainable EAF is needed that can embrace the 
digitized enterprise era. This paper described the Digital 
Diamond Framework (D2F) to support digitized enterprises 
with the structure, order, modeling, documentation, and 
analysis needs to enable more responsive and agile enterprises 
with better alignment of business plans and initiatives with the 
actual enterprise state. Key areas, principles, activities, facets, 
and maturity levels were elucidated. 
While D2F can be applied at a high-level, as the framework 
is digital-centric, any concrete application in an enterprise 
requires concrete and integrated EA tooling utilizing the 
standards and formats available to that enterprise. Future work 
includes applying D2F in case studies in various organizations. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Zachman, "A framework for information systems 
architecture." IBM Systems Journal, 26(3), pp. 276-292, 1987. 
[2] M. Blosch and B. Burton, “Hype Cycle for Enterprise 
Architecture, 2017,” Gartner, 2017. 
[3] M. Muro, S. Liu, J. Whiton, and S. Kulkarni, Digitalization and 
the American Workforce. Brookings Institution Metropolitan 
Policy 
Program, 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2017/11/mpp_2017nov15_digitalization_full
_report.pdf 2018.01.27 
[4] C. Munns, I Love APIs 2015: Microservices at Amazon. 
[Online]. Available from: https://www.slideshare.net/apigee/i-
love-apis-2015-microservices-at-amazon-54487258 
2018.01.27 
[5] I. Jacobson, EA Failed Big Way! [Online]. Available from: 
http://blog.ivarjacobson.com/ 2018.01.27 
[6] S. Roeleven, Why Two Thirds of Enterprise Architecture 
Projects Fail. ARIS, 2011. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.computerworld.com.au/whitepaper/370709/why-
two-thirds-of-enterprise-architecture-projects-fail/ 2018.01.27 
[7] R. Nolan and D. Mulryan, “Undertaking an Architecture 
Program,” Stage by Stage, 7(2), pp.63- 64, 1987. 
[8] The Open Group, “TOGAF Version 9.1,” Van Haren 
Publishing, 2011. 
[9] Chief Information Officers Council: Federal Enterprise 
Architecture Framework Version 1.1. 
[10] IFAC-IFIP Task Force, “GERAM - Generalized enterprise 
reference architecture and methodology, version 1.6.3,” 1999.  
[11] L. Meertens, M. Iacob, and L. Nieuwenhuis, “Developing the    
business modelling method,” In: First Int’l Symp. Bus. Model. 
& Softw. Design, BMSD 2011, SciTePress, pp. 88-95, 2011. 
[12] M. Bernaert, G. Poels, M. Snoeck, and M. De Backer, 
“CHOOSE: Towards a metamodel for enterprise architecture 
in small and medium-sized enterprises,” Information systems 
frontiers, 18(4), pp. 781-818, 2016. 
[13] D. Ruby, Erecting the Framework, Part III. 2004-03-18 
Interview with John Zachman. [Online]. Available from 
http://archive.visualstudiomagazine.com/ea/magazine/spring/
online/druby3/default_pf.aspx 2018.01.27 
[14] Gartner, “Gartner’s 2011 Global Enterprise Architecture 
Survey: EA Frameworks Are Still Homemade and Hybrid,” 
Gartner, 2012. 
[15] R. Oberhauser and G. Grambow, “Towards Autonomically-
Capable Processes: A Vision and Potentially Supportive 
Methods.” In Adv. in Intell. Process-Aware Information 
Systems: Concepts, Methods, and Technologies. Springer, 
2017, pp. 79-125.
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

