Automatic Diagrammatic Multiple Choice Question Generation from Knowledge 
Bases 
 
 
Khalil Bouzekri, Liu Qiang, Husam N. Yasin, Benjamin Chu Min Xian, Dickson Lukose 
Artificial Intelligence Department, MIMOS Berhad, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
khalil.ben@mimos.my, qiang.liu@mimos.my, husam.yasin@mimos.my, mx.chu@mimos.my, dickson.lukose@mimos.my  
 
Abstract—In this paper, we present a methodology to generate 
diagrammatical multiple choice questions from a knowledge 
base. When considering a knowledge base, the main strategies 
discussed in the literature are class-based, property-based and 
terminology-based, 
and 
the 
generated 
multiple 
choice 
questions are typical with all the choices (correct answer and 
distractors) being of atomic types such as plain text. In this 
paper, we introduce graph-based strategies, enabling the 
generation of choices (correct answer and distractors) in the 
form of complex structures such as diagrams, and discuss 
different approaches to take into account difficulty levels when 
generating the questions. 
 
Keywords-Question Generation; MCQ; Diagram; Graph; 
Question Difficulty; Knowledge Base; Ontology; Islamic 
Finance. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
A Multiple Choice Question (MCQ) comprises of a short 
text describing the question, and a number of alternative 
choices as answer, where usually one of the choices is the 
correct answer and the others are wrong alternative choices 
called distractors. MCQs are popular in e-learning systems 
due to several characteristics: simplicity of generation 
(header and choices), ease for scalability (systems can 
generate a large number of different MCQs), and 
automation and objectivity of the assessments. 
The use of the semantic web to generate questions has 
been studied at length [1][2][3][8][9]. Indeed, domain 
ontologies can be considered a proper formalism as the basis 
for automatic generation of MCQs. Ontology contains 
domain knowledge in the form of concepts, instances and 
relationships between concepts and/or instances. Moreover, 
the concepts and relationships are structured in a 
hierarchical manner based on their semantics. Papasalouros 
et al. proposed an ontology-based approach to automatically 
generate MCQs [1]. They used Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) techniques to generate the question 
header, and a series of strategies based on the structure of 
the ontology (class-based, property-based and terminology-
based) to generate the correct answer and the distractors. 
Their strategies were further enriched and implemented as a 
plugin in Protégé [2]. Cubric and Tosic extended the work 
by considering new elements such as annotations, and 
leveraging on question templates instead of NLP to generate 
the question header [3]. 
However, all the research has been focusing on the 
generation of “simple” MCQs, which means MCQs 
containing a question header and choices (correct answer 
and distractors) in an atomic format (e.g., plain text, 
numbers). To the best of our knowledge, more complex 
structures as choices (e.g., diagrams) have not been studied 
when automatically generating MCQs. Therefore, the main 
novelty of our research work resides in two elements: 
firstly, we propose a more complex type of MCQ that we 
call “Diagrammatic MCQ”, in which the correct answer is a 
graph composed of labelled nodes and arcs (e.g., a graph 
representing a diagram) generated from a knowledge base, 
and the distractors are generated by combining existing 
strategies from the literature and new strategies relying on 
the structure of the graph itself; secondly, we discuss the 
difficulty levels of the different question generation 
strategies. 
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 recalls basic 
notions utilized throughout the paper. In Section 3, we 
introduce the diagrammatic MCQs and discuss the utilized 
strategies. Section 4 discusses the difficulty of generated 
questions. Finally, the prospects of this work are outlined in 
Section 5. 
II. 
BASIC NOTIONS 
In this paper, we use the Islamic Finance Knowledge 
Base (IFKB) from [4], which comprises a total of 2281 RDF 
triples [7]. An RDF triple consists of three components: 
subject, predicate and object. The predicate expresses a 
relationship between the subject and the object. For example, 
the relationship between “Deposit” and “CashInvestment” 
can be represented using the following triple: “Deposit 
subClassOf CashInvestment” where “Deposit” is the subject, 
subClassOf is the predicate and CashInvestment is the object 
(this triple can be read as “Deposit is a specialization/kind of 
CashInvestment”). Islamic Finance concepts are organized in 
a hierarchy, as shown in Figure 1: the concept “Bank” is a 
subclass of “Party” (also read as “Bank” is a child of 
“Party”, “Party” is a parent of “Bank”), and the siblings of 
“Bank” are “Bank Client”, “Partner” and “Supplier”. 
 
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 1. Excerpt of IFKB Concept Hierarchy 
 
IFKB also contains 45 Islamic Finance contract models 
represented as sets of RDF triples. An Islamic Finance 
contract model shows the parties involved in the contract, 
the financial instruments utilized, as well as the process 
flow. Figure 2 illustrates the Salam contract model in IFKB 
(rendered using Gruff tool [6]):  
 
Figure 2. Salam Contract Model in IFKB 
 
There are four processes, where Process1 is followed by 
Process2, then Process3 and subsequently Process 4. In this 
application model, the Bank plays the role of a 
buyer/purchaser as well as seller. The financial instruments 
used are “Cash”, “Deferred Price” and “Good”, and the 
involved parties are “Bank Client”, “Bank” and “Supplier. 
They are all concepts from IFKB. As an example, a triple is 
“Process1 HasContractInitiator Bank”. Figure 3 shows the 
Salam contract model in a diagrammatical form, which is the 
visualization used to display the DMCQs to the user. 
 
 
 Figure 3. Salam Contract Model in Diagrammatical Form 
 
Salam contract model (lit: forward payment) is the sale of 
a deferred item in exchange for an immediate (forward) 
price [5]. 
 
III. 
DIAGRAMMATIC MULTIPLE CHOICE 
QUESTION GENERATION 
Diagrams are useful mechanisms for information 
summarization 
and 
displaying 
relationships 
between 
objects. They are used to explain concepts and amplify 
understanding. In this section, we present four types of 
diagrammatic multiple choice question (DMCQ), and 
discuss the strategies involved to generate these DMCQs 
such as choosing a question header, choosing a correct 
answer by extracting a group of concepts and relationships 
representing a contract model from a knowledge base, and 
forming the distractors. In the following, we use the Islamic 
contracts of IFKB to build DMCQs. 
A. Diagrammatic Multiple Choice Question 
A DMCQ consists of a question header, a correct answer 
and distractors (wrong answers). In the following, each 
DMCQ will have one correct answer and three distractors. 
In DMCQ Type 1, the correct answer is a set of nodes or 
arcs from the diagram. DMCQ Type 2 is based on 
conventional fill-in-the-blank questions, where one or more 
labels, nodes or arcs will be removed from the correct 
diagram and the user needs to select the correct answer from 
the given choices to fill in the blank. The correct answer of 
the DMCQ Type 3 is the original diagram from the domain 
knowledge base. Finally, the correct answer of DMCQ Type 
4 is a partial diagram which is extracted from the original 
diagram. For each DMCQ type, the distractors are derived 
from the correct answer using various strategies. The 
distractors generation strategies and difficulty levels are 
discussed in Section III. D. 
 
 
Figure 4. DMCQ Type 1 Sample 
 
Figure 4 shows a sample of DMCQ Type 1, where the 
question header is “Select the group items that belong to 
Salam contract process”, and the possible answers are sets 
of parties. Choice “A” is the correct answer and choices 
“B”, “C” and “D” are distractors. 
 
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 5. DMCQ Type 2 Sample 
 
A sample of DMCQ Type 2 is shown in Figure 5. The 
party label “Bank” has been removed from the diagram 
representing the Salam contract model. In this sample, the 
modified diagram is part of the question header. Question 
choice “C” is the correct answer, and “B”, “C” and “D” are 
distractors.  
 
 
Figure 6. DMCQ Type 3 Sample 
 
Figure 6 shows a sample of DMCQ Type 3, where the 
correct answer is the diagram of the Salam contract model 
(choice “A”), and “B”, “C” and “D” are the distractors. 
 
 
Figure 7. DMCQ Type 4 Sample 
 
DMCQ Type 4 question sample is shown in Figure 7. The 
correct answer is a subset of the full diagram of Salam 
contract model (choice “A”), and choices “B”, “C” and “D” 
are distractors. 
 
B. Question Header Generation 
As discussed in Section 1, using predefined question 
header templates allow the multiplication of generated 
questions. We use the same method, as shown in Table 1. 
An example of question header template is “Select the group 
items that belong to <Concept X>”, where <Concept X> is 
called the missing concept, and is instantiated during the 
question header generation by selecting a contract model 
concept from IFKB. The selected concept is called the 
target concept, and it will be used to retrieve/create the 
correct answer and the distractors in the next steps. 
For example in Figure 4, the chosen question header 
template is “Select the group items that belong to <Concept 
X>”, and the target concept is “Salam Contract Model”. 
 
TABLE I. EXCERPT OF QUESTION TEMPLATES  
Types 
Question Templates 
DMCQ 
Type 1 
 
Which of the following group items belong to 
<Concept X>? 
 
For the below choices, which one can be considered as 
part of < Concept X>? 
 
Select the group items that belong to <Concept X> 
DMCQ 
Type 2 
 
Fill in the blank for below diagram representing 
<Concept X>. 
 
For the diagram below representing <Concept X>, 
please fill in the blank.  
 
Fill in the blank with the correct answer for the 
diagram below representing <Concept X>. 
DMCQ 
Type 3 
 
Select the diagram that represents <Concept X>. 
 
Which of the following diagrams represent <Concept 
X>? 
 
Please select the diagram that represents <Concept 
X>. 
DMCQ 
Type 4 
 
Which of the below process is part of <Concept X> 
process? 
 
Select the diagram which is part of<Concept X> 
process 
 
Please select the diagram which is part of<Concept X> 
process. 
 
For DMCQ Type 2, the question header also contains a 
modified diagram (see Figure 5), where parts of the original 
diagram have been randomly removed. 
C. Correct Answer Generation 
The correct answer of DMCQ Type 1 is generated by 
randomly choosing a subset of nodes/arcs from the original 
diagram. For DMCQ Types 2 and 3, the correct answer is 
straightforward, respectively the removed labels/nodes/arcs 
and the complete diagram. Finally, the correct answer of 
DMCQ Type 4 is a randomly chosen subset of the original 
diagram. 
D. Distractors Generation 
When generating the distractors, we have to consider 
two modifier strategies: labelling and structural strategies. 
They respectively concern the labels of the nodes and arcs, 
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

and the structure of the contract model chosen as target 
concept. The labelling strategy is similar to existing class-
based, property-based and terminology-based strategies [1], 
and consists in modifying the labels of nodes and/or arcs. 
The structural strategy modifies the correct contract model 
to create a distractor by adding new nodes and/or arcs, 
modifying direction of arcs, modifying the positioning of 
nodes, as well as removing nodes and/or arcs. By 
considering labelling as well as structural strategies, the 
number of possible generated distractors is growing 
immensely. The utilized strategies are summarized as 
follows:   
 
Strategy 1: Replacing a node label (resp. an arc 
label). 
 
Strategy 2: Inserting new nodes and/or arcs that do 
not belong to the correct contract model. 
 
Strategy 3: Modifying the direction and/or 
numbering of arcs. 
 
Strategy 4: Modifying the positioning of nodes by 
swapping nodes 
 
Strategy 5: deleting nodes and/or arcs belonging to 
the correct contract model. 
 
Strategy 6: Selecting a wrong contract model. 
E. Difficulty of Distractors for each Strategy 
In this research, we consider the generated distractors to 
be the core criterion for determining the question difficulty. 
The results of our preliminary investigation are as follows: 
 
In Strategy 1, the replacement label makes the 
question more difficult if its meaning is close to the 
replaced label, which is if it comes from a sibling 
or a direct parent in the hierarchy.   
 
In Strategy 2 (resp. 5), inserting (resp. deleting) n 
nodes/arcs makes the question easier as n grows 
bigger, since it totally alters the original diagram. 
 
Strategy 3 (resp. 4) introduces difficulty, as the 
diagram must be well understood in order to 
remember the direction as well as the numbering of 
the arcs (resp. the positioning of the nodes). 
 
Finally, Strategy 6 makes the question more 
difficult if the selected contract model is close in 
structure to the correct contract model. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we presented a methodology to 
automatically generate DMCQ from a knowledge base, and 
discussed our preliminary investigations on the difficulty of 
the generated questions. We introduced four types of 
DMCQs, and new generation strategies based on the 
structure of Islamic finance contract models in the form of 
diagrams.  
In our future work, we plan to evaluate and extend our 
current prototype in several prospective directions: (1) 
evaluate the quality of the generated questions with regard 
to several criteria such as pedagogy; (2) pursue the 
investigation on question difficulty; (3) enrich the question 
templates; (3) extend the types of generated questions to 
free-hand drawing, and automatically assess the drawings. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Papasalouros, K. Kanaris, and K. Kotis, “Automatic 
Generation Of Multiple Choice Questions From Domain 
Ontologies,” presented at the IADIS e-Learning conference, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2008, pp.427-434. 
[2] M. Tosic and M. Cubric, “SeMCQ – Protégé Plugin for 
Automatic Ontology-Driven Multiple Choice Question Tests 
Generation”, presented at the 11th International Protégé 
Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2009.  
[3] M. Cubric and M. Tosic, “Towards automatic generation of e-
assessment using semantic web technologies”. In Proceedings 
of the 2010 International Computer Assisted Assessment 
Conference, University of Southampton, July, 2010. 
[4] A. Mamadolimova, N. Ambiah, and D. Lukose, “Modeling 
Islamic finance knowledge for contract compliance in Islamic 
banking”, Proc. 15th international conference on Knowledge-
based and intelligent information and engineering systems, 
Springer-Verlag, Volume Part III, 2011, pp. 346-355. 
[5] W. 
Al-Zuhayli, 
“Financial 
Transactions 
in 
Islamic 
Jurisprudence” (originally alFiqhu al-Islāmī wa adillatūhu). 
Translated into English by Mahmoud Amin El-Gamal. Syria: 
Dār al-Fikr, 2003. 
[6] Gruff: 
A 
Grapher-Based 
Triple-Store 
Browser 
for 
AllegroGraph. 
retrieved 
January, 
2015, 
from: 
http://franz.com/agraph/gruff/.  
[7] Concepts and Abstract Syntax, retrieved January, 2015, from: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-concepts/. 
[8] M. Al-Yahya, “Ontology-Based Multiple Choice Question 
Generation”, The Scientific World Journal, 2014. 
[9] M. Teitsma, J. Sandberg, M. Maris, and B. Wielinga, “Using 
an Ontology to Automatically Generate Questions for the 
Determination of Situations”, 22nd International Conference, 
DEXA, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

