ERP Implementation in a Developing World Context: a Case Study of the Waha Oil 
Company, Libya 
Hosian Akeel 
Department of Computing 
Azzaytuna University 
Libya 
Husage_81@hotmail.com 
Martin Wynn 
School of Computing and Technology 
University of Gloucestershire 
Cheltenham, UK 
MWynn@glos.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract – This article examines the implementation and 
functioning of a major Enterprise Resource Planning software 
package in a Libyan oil company. The study uses a process 
mapping and systems profiling approach to establish the 
current status of a 10 year project - which the company 
embarked upon in 2007 - to implement the new company-wide 
software. It examines the project from the point of view of 
progress in new technology, new people skills and process 
change, and concludes that a balanced approach to these three 
change elements has underpinned successful project outcomes.  
Keywords – Enterprise Resource Planning; Libyan oil 
companies; 
information systems; 
ERP; process 
change; 
information systems strategy. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
It has been over 25 years since Enterprise Resource 
Planning (ERP) packages first came to the market. The 
emergence of the UNIX operating system in the late 1980s 
as a standard for minicomputers running the Intel chipset 
significantly increased demand for integrated packaged 
software. SAP and Oracle were two of the first software 
vendors to offer packages that combined software modules, 
providing integrated solutions for order capture and 
processing, invoicing, ledgers, materials requirements 
planning, inventory management, payroll, and human 
resource management. The functionality and integration of 
this software was enhanced in the 1990s, sometimes through 
the acquisition and incorporation of rival vendors’ software. 
By the end of the decade, ERP offered the prospect of one 
integrated package for all company operations. As Koch 
noted, “ERP attempts to integrate all departments and 
functions across a company on to a single computer system 
that can serve all those departments’ particular needs” [1].  
ERP packages were initially used in some of the major 
international organizations of the Western world. In the UK, 
for example, GlaxoSmithKline, Kraft, Nestle, Kellogg’s and 
Diageo all became early users of the SAP ERP package. The 
number of ERP vendors increased as small to medium sized 
enterprises started to acquire and deploy cheaper ERP 
packages, specifically geared to smaller scale operations. In 
the developing world, the uptake of these new systems was 
slower, for a number of reasons, including budgetary 
constraints of the user organization, and the non-availability 
of sales and support operations for many of these vendors in 
developing world countries.  Since the turn of the new 
millennium, the use of ERP in developing world countries 
has accelerated, but the current literature suggests that there 
have been both significant failures [2], as well as successes 
[3]. Although many authors [4] [5] now question the 
concept of the “digital divide” between developed and 
developing worlds, there remain divergences of opinion 
regarding the suitability of systems developed in the western 
world for a developing world context. When discussing IS 
in the developing world, Gomez and Pather [6] observe that 
there is lack of literature and evaluation studies, and the 
World Bank view that “analysts and decision makers are 
still struggling to make sense of the mixed experience of 
information technologies in developing countries” is 
highlighted by other authors [7]. This article attempts to 
contribute to addressing this imbalance and focuses on the 
implementation of SAP – a mainstream ERP package - in 
the Waha Oil Company (WOC) in Libya, identifying the 
key issues that underpinned project outcomes. 
This introductory section is followed by a discussion of 
the theoretical framework for this paper in Section 2. In 
Section 3, the case study methodology used in this research 
is briefly discussed, and Section 4 then focusses on the 
primary research findings from the core study of the ERP 
implementation in WOC. In Section 5, the benefits that have 
ensued from the company’s information systems (IS) 
strategy are outlined, highlighting the importance of making 
sure that change in process, people and technology is kept in 
balance, as large IS projects such as this are progressed.    
II. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
The Design - Actuality Gap model developed by Heeks 
[8] identifies four main elements of change that are key to 
transitioning an organisation from local actuality - where the 
organisation is now – to its future state or design (see Figure 
1).  While Heeks’ model can be applied to various business 
change environments, in this paper it is used to support the 
analysis of the implementation of an ERP package. Other 
authors [9] have adopted a similar approach in looking at 
structures that are embedded in both packages and 
organisations, in trying to assess the reasons for 
misalignments 
between 
an 
ERP 
package 
and 
the 
organisation.  According to Heeks, the transition to such a 
major new system can be considered from four interrelated 
dimensions of change – people, structure, technology and 
processes. Here, however, we will focus on what have been 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

termed the “three pillars” in other literature [10] for 
successful systems implementation – people, processes and 
technology.  This is justified because the structure of the 
company under study changed little over the period of ERP 
implementation, although processes within the company 
were affected. As regards process change, Harmon [11] has 
argued that process redesign should not only look at the top 
level process functions, but should also examine how the 
lower level activities are managed day-to-day, looking at 
how activities are planned, communicated, organised, 
monitored, and controlled.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Design - Actuality Gap Model 
Source: Adapted from Heeks [8] 
 
The process mapping technique can help the researcher 
assess systems deployment at process level. It generates a 
sequence of maps that are used in identifying the information 
systems that are used in defined business areas. While 
process mapping is used as a framework to identify the 
business processes, it can also be used as a point of reference 
for assessing the functionality of the information systems 
themselves at process level. This “systems profiling” 
encompasses a review and assessment of functionality, 
reporting capabilities, user interface and soundness of the 
underlying technology [12].  
Within this context, and in accordance with the research 
aims and objectives given above, this research addresses the 
following questions: 
1. 
How has the SAP ERP package been implemented 
at WOC and what is the underlying IS strategy? 
2. 
How successful has the implementation been in 
supporting the growth of the company? 
3. 
How can the ERP implementation at WOC be 
assessed using the three pillars of people skills 
enhancement, 
technology 
capability 
improvement, and process change? 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
A case study approach is adopted in this research. “A 
case study is a research strategy that focuses on 
understanding the dynamics present within single settings” 
[13]. The case study is a widely used research method within 
business research, and can focus on one single case or a 
single organization [14]. Bryman and Bell [15] argue that the 
case study is particularly appropriate to be used in 
combination with a qualitative research approach, allowing 
detailed and intensive research activity. In a qualitative case 
study, an inductive approach is usually adopted, and a case 
study is also appropriate for the combination of qualitative 
methods. This is particularly relevant to this study of 
information systems in one large oil company, which 
combines 
mapping 
and 
profiling 
techniques 
with 
questionnaire and interview material.  Saunders, Lewis and 
Thornhill [16] argue that case studies are mostly used in 
explanatory and exploratory research, and affirm that the 
case study is a good choice when the researcher requires a 
deep understanding of one specific organisation.  
Case studies are often used to provide insights into a 
significant managerial issue, providing an analysis of the 
context and processes that illuminate the theoretical issues 
being studied [17]. The need for a case study arises from the 
quest to understand, analyze, and highlight a complex 
phenomenon and it is explicitly applicable for doing research 
on strategic developments or processes [18]. The primary 
purpose for undertaking a case study is to explore the 
particularity, the uniqueness, of the single case. The goal for 
the researcher is to design a good case study and to collect, 
present and analyze data “fairly” [19].  
The central tendency among all types of case study is that 
it tries to illuminate a decision or set of decisions: why they 
were taken, how they were implemented and with what 
result. Because phenomenon and context are not always 
distinguishable in real-life situations, other technical 
characteristics, including data collection and data analysis 
strategies, have to be recognized as a secondary technical 
dimension of case studies. In this context, case studies are 
not limited to being a data collection tactic alone or even a 
design feature alone. Like other research methods, it is a way 
of investigating an empirical topic, by following a set of 
specific procedures to gain appropriate valuable information 
and ideas [18].  
In this research, the case study under investigation is the 
SAP implementation at WOC, the largest domestic oil 
company in Libya. It was founded in 1955, and its 
headquarters are in Tripoli, the Libyan capital city. It is 59% 
publicly owned (by Libyan state entities) and 41% privately 
owned. It employs 3,200 staff, has over 1000 oil wells and 
an annual turnover of 690 million Libyan dinars (LDs) in 
2013 (1 Libyan dinar = $0.8US). Since 2007, the company 
has spent over 1.5 million LDs on hardware and 4 million 
LDs on software. The main investment in software has been 
on SAP licence acquisition and annual maintenance charges.  
 Data collection was pursued through a combination of 
questionnaires, interviews, observations and documentary 
evidence. Yin [18] suggests that the utilisation of multiple 
sources of evidence is one way of increasing the construct 
validity of case studies. A detailed structured questionnaire 
was filled in by two respondents – the IT manager and the 
Finance Director, and this was followed up by face to face 
interviews to build up a picture of IS strategy and systems 
deployment in recent years. There were several iterations of 
follow-up emails and phone calls to clarify points made in 
the questionnaire responses, and this resulted in further 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

conversations with other staff members. The topics included 
in the questionnaire can be categorised as follows: 
a) Company information:  To confirm basic company 
data, company profile, size, turnover, operations and 
other general information.  
b) Company processes: To explore the company’s main 
business processes and to determine secondary 
processes (sub-processes).  
c) Information systems: To establish the deployment of 
information systems and to assess the underpinning 
technical architecture.   
d) Current systems status: To confirm the functionality 
of the main information systems and general 
satisfaction levels in different departments that use 
them.   
e) Problems and challenges: To determine if there were 
any key problems or issues, both from a technical 
perspective and also from the point of view of the end 
user. Integration and interfacing of systems, report 
quality, systems performance and access were some 
of the issues covered.  
Follow-up interviews encompassed sessions with IT staff 
in which there were wider-ranging discussions of IS 
strategy, the management structure in the company, and 
decision-making regarding IS investment.  Interviews were 
conducted in English, although certain sections of the 
questionnaire were translated into Arabic. The initial 
interviews took approximately two hours, excluding follow-
up phone calls and emails.  
IV. 
CASE STUDY FINDINGS 
This section applies process mapping and systems 
profiling to the current systems portfolio at WOC. The 
business activities of WOC can be grouped into six top-level 
business processes, each of which has a number of sub-
processes.  These processes are briefly outlined below, along 
with the information systems that currently support these 
process activities.  This is depicted in Figure 2. 
1. 
Exploration: The company carries out seismic 
mapping by exploding dynamite and measuring the way in 
which the resulting seismic waves travel through the 
underground formations to detect crude oil, which when 
found, is subsequently drilled for, and pumped to the surface 
via oil wells into storage tanks. The exploration process in 
the company is divided into two sub-processes: Planning, 
and Oil Production. The Oil Production sub-process is 
automated with an in-house information system developed in 
COBOL This records and manages all data associated with 
exploration of crude oil from setting up oil rigs to pumping 
the oil into the reservoirs, including the volume, grade, and 
chemical/sulphur content of the extracted crude oil. The 
Planning sub-process, however, is still manual in part, with 
some use of the Excel spreadsheet package for the recording 
and management of data related to seismic mapping of 
prospective exploration areas, and other related information.  
2. 
Forecasting: This process has three sub-processes, 
all of which are partially automated with a specially designed 
Microsoft Access and Excel package. The three sub-
processes are Sales Forecasting, Price Modelling and 
Demand Planning. The Sales Forecasting sub-process takes 
current crude oil market data input into the system, and uses 
the current supply and demand of crude oil between WOC 
and its customers to determine some variables and constants, 
to produce managerial reports that are used in forecasting 
sales, modelling prices and managing the known and 
envisaged demand. The Price Modelling function manages 
data on different chemical compositions of the crude oil, and 
generates reports on the optimal price for different grades of 
WOC crude oil in their reservoirs. The Demand Planning 
function aims to improve the accuracy of revenue forecasts, 
align inventory levels with peaks and troughs in demand, and 
enhance profitability for a given channel or product. The 
system uses data from customer standing orders and planned 
sales orders, among other statistics, to generate income 
forecasts and align inventory levels with forecast demand. 
This system does not completely automate these sub-
processes; there are still some supporting manual activities to 
obtain and enter data into the system. 
3. 
Financial Management: The process can be 
subdivided 
into 
two 
main 
sub-processes: 
Financial 
Accounting, which manages the balance sheet as well as 
profit and loss account, different journals used, and other 
financial reports; and Management Accounting, which 
handles the financial costing activities, and generates 
appropriate prices for sales of crude oil. Both these sub-
processes are automated using the Financials and Controlling 
(FICO) module of SAP. Real-time and reliable managerial 
reports are available from the system, and any new format of  
financial reporting needed can be customised and generated 
from the system. 
4. 
Logistics and Distribution: The Transportation 
Management sub-process is partly undertaken by third party 
logistics companies transporting crude oil to the customer, 
and supporting activities in-house are mainly manual. 
However, Inventory Management is automated via an in-
house system developed in COBOL, and the Vehicle 
Management sub-process is supported by a bespoke system 
developed in Excel to manage the fleets of vehicles owned 
by WOC. 
5. 
Crude Oil Trading: Both sub-processes of Sales 
Management and Marketing Management use the Sales and 
Distribution (SD) module of SAP. Sales Management 
involves raising  pro forma orders and invoices,  and tracking 
them through the sales order processing cycle. The 
Marketing Management sub-process encompasses customer 
relationship management, prospecting for new customers and 
recording management details of all marketing activities.  
The system contains up-to-date records of customers and 
their business activities with the company. The records are 
used to respond to all customer queries. 
6. 
Human Resource Management: This is centrally 
managed and automated using the SAP HR module. There 
are two main sub-processes: Personnel Management and 
Payroll Management. SAP handles the creation and 
management of new employee records on the system, and all 
their professional relationships with the company, including 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

leave management, bonuses, and allowances. It handles the 
periodic assessment of staff activity and manages the 
payment of salaries and wages to regular and casual staff. 
 
 
 
 
 
The information system strategy adopted at WOC is a 
proportionate blend of an in-house/bespoke approach using 
COBOL and Microsoft Excel and Access, combined with a 
phased implementation of SAP. The choice of SAP in 
2006/7 was largely pragmatic. The company’s senior 
management had elected to move in phases to a mainstream 
integrated software package, and SAP were the first such 
company to set up a sales and support office in Libya. There 
were no realistic alternatives at that time, although Oracle, 
another major ERP vendor, have since opened a sales office 
in Tripoli also.  
     The top managerial reports are centrally available via the 
SAP system and the in-house systems developed in COBOL. 
Senior management rely on the reports from these different 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information systems to derive a complete overview of 
business activities at any one point in time. This illustrates 
the issues that still prevail regarding systems integration. The 
Financial Management, the Crude Oil Trading, and Human 
Resource Management processes are efficiently integrated 
around SAP R/3 technology. These SAP modules are not 
well integrated with the in-house bespoked systems. 
However, information from the Access/Excel systems that 
support the Forecasting process and Logistics and 
Distribution processes is exported in comma delimited files 
(.csv format) and imported into the SAP R/3 system via data 
ports. 
Figure 2. Main Business Processes and IS profiling at Waha Oil Company 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
 
In similar vein, data is exported in a .csv format from SAP 
R/3 and imported for use in the Access/Excel and COBOL 
systems. These comma delimited files are used with human 
intervention to bridge the integration gap that exists between 
these three different groups of systems based on different 
technologies (see Figure 3). 
V. 
ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION 
The current information system strategy at WOC was 
adopted in 2007 to support the company’s business strategy 
of expansion and increase in bottom-line profits. The 
development of this strategy was largely a top-down process 
undertaken by senior management, which envisaged a stage 
by stage implementation of the SAP ERP system, and a 
gradual phasing out and replacement of existing in-house 
developed systems. The initial focus was to be on the core 
sales order processing cycle and back-end financial systems, 
where problems of inconsistent data were paramount, and 
which were affecting customer service levels. In that year, an 
IS strategy committee was set-up by the senior management 
of the company, comprising members chosen from across all 
company departments. The committee focused on aligning 
the company’s business processes with the newly adopted IS 
strategy. Since then, over the past seven years, there has been 
a gradual phasing-out of the in-house systems and their 
replacement with appropriate SAP modules. The in-house 
systems that remain continue to meet the basic needs of the 
sub-processes that they are supporting. Benefits of this 
hybrid strategy can be generally grouped as follows: 
 
1. Improved turn-around time in business activities. A 
typical example given by a respondent was the 
elimination of comparative checks of reports 
between the ones generated by the Financial 
Management process and Crude Oil Trading 
process. The fact that both processes are managed 
by a single information system (SAP R/3) has 
eliminated the need for comparison of reports 
generated by the two processes. 
2. Improved availability of key business information. 
Once the information from other systems is 
exported and imported into SAP, management 
reports become available on a real-time basis: for 
example, analysis of forecast sales vs. actual sales 
for a specific period. Senior executives now use 
systems 
outputs 
to 
support 
key 
business 
management decisions. Reports on the weekly oil 
production and weekly oil dispatched to customers 
are used as a guide on how to take decisions on 
maintenance and the management of the oil storage 
infrastructure of the company.   
3. There is an increased centralisation of data 
maintenance in the company, which has reduced the 
human error that results from double or triple entry 
of data into different systems, and the importing 
and exporting of information across different 
systems. This has increased the reliability of 
corporate information and reporting, both within 
and outside of the company. For example, the 
confirmed orders, sales made, invoices generated, 
amounts involved, tax deducted, discount given, 
and all the financial stages in the Crude Oil Trading 
process can be accessed by authorised users in the 
Financial 
Management 
department, 
because 
business transactions in both the Crude Oil Trading 
and Financial Management processes are executed 
within the SAP system. This reduces time wastage 
that comes with reconciliation of financial 
activities, when data is maintained in more than one 
system. Questionnaire respondents confirmed a 
significant reduction in data error rate from in 
excess of 10% prior to the adoption of SAP, to 
current levels of around 2%. 
 The current plan is to complete the replacement of all 
legacy systems by 2017, whilst at the same time increasing 
the e-business capabilities of the company, exploiting the 
web capabilities of the SAP modules. The progress made to 
date in this 10-year implementation plan for SAP can be 
viewed in terms of the three dimensions of people, process 
and technology noted above in Section 2. In terms of the 
advance in people skills and capabilities, there has been a 
continuous expansion in the number of users of the SAP 
modules in the organisation, and the general users’ 
acceptance of the system appears to have contributed 
significantly to its successful implementation. This was 
engendered by a clear commitment by senior management to 
provide staff training, allied to their all-inclusive approach to 
systems implementation, whereby staff at all levels of the 
company were included in the process. The one area where 
there are arguably some significant staff issues is in the IT 
department, where the work-load of the current support staff 
is very high. There are only two staff responsible for 
supporting all the information systems of the company, 
including the legacy COBOL and Access/Excel systems. 
Figure 3. Systems Interfaces at Waha Oil Company 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

This issue should be resolved to a degree once these legacy 
systems are phased out. 
The new SAP technology is a strategically sound 
product. The centralisation of data and information provided 
by the SAP R/3 suite is a major benefit and its ease of use, 
enhancement capability, and enterprise-wide functionality 
has made it highly relevant to the day-to-day running of the 
company’s business activities. Its future strategic position 
among the information systems in the company is 
guaranteed, because of the company’s dependence on it, and 
upgrade plans for it: it is the central element of the 
company’s IS strategy. Nevertheless, the phasing-out of the 
key COBOL systems may require some configuration of new 
SAP replacement modules. These legacy systems are used 
for managing oil production and management of inventory, 
which are crucial to the smooth running of the company’s 
supply chain, so their replacement will need to be carefully 
planned and managed. They currently support business 
activities to an acceptable level, but their lack of flexibility 
and associated upgrade problems justify their replacement. 
The replacement of the Excel-based vehicle management 
system and the Access/Excel forecasting systems are less 
problematic, but will also require appropriate testing and 
configuration of additional SAP modules.   
The implementation of the new SAP modules has been 
co-ordinated with change management with regard to 
improvement of people capabilities, knowledge and training. 
A key to success at the company is that there has been a 
steady improvement in processes rather than any radical 
change, and change has been centred on the sales order 
processing and production backbone of the company. The 
change in the three areas of people, technology and process 
improvement has been balanced and focussed. This was 
underpinned by a staged implementation of new SAP 
modules, that has already spanned seven years, and should 
complete in a further three years. This has allowed careful 
management and firm cost control of the phased migration to 
the SAP product suite. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C.  Koch, “The ABCs of ERP”, CIO Magazine, Dec 22nd, 
1999.  
[2] A. Hawari and R. Heeks, “Explaining ERP failure in a 
developing country: a Jordanian case study,” Journal of 
Enterprise Information Management, vol. 23, no. 2, 2010, pp. 
135-160. 
[3] M. Moohebat, M. Jazi, and A. Aseni,  “Evaluation of ERP 
implementation 
at 
the 
Esfahan 
Steele 
Company,” 
International Journal of Business and Management, vol. 6, no. 
5, 2011, pp. 236-250. 
[4] P. J. DiMaggio and E. Hargittai “From the Digital Divide to 
Digital Inequality”, Working Paper 19, 2001, Centre for Arts 
and Cultural Policy Studies, Woodrow Wilson School, 
Princeton University.  
[5] M. Warschauer, “Dissecting the Digital Divide: a case study 
in Egypt,” The Information Society, vol. 19, 2003, pp. 297-
304. 
[6] R. Gomez and  S. Pather, “ICT evaluation: are we asking the 
right questions?”, Electronic Journal of Information Systems 
in Developing Countries (EJISDC), vol. 50, no. 5, 2012, pp. 
1-14. 
[7] S. Batchelor, S. Evangelista, S. Hearn, M. Pierce, S. Sugden, 
and M. Webb, ICT for development: contributing to the 
millenium development goals – lessons learnt from seventeen 
infoDev projects, Wasington DC: World Bank, 2003.  
[8] R. Heeks, "Information systems and developing countries: 
failure, success, and local improvisations", Journal of 
Information Society, vol. 18, no. 2, 2002, pp. 101-112. 
[9] C. Soh and S Kien Sia, “An institutional perspective on 
sources of ERP package-otrganisation misalignments”, 
Journal of Strategic Information Systems, vol. 13, 2004, pp. 
375-397. 
[10] Department of Trade and Industry, Business in the 
information age: the international benchmarking study, 2004, 
London: Booz Allen Hamilton.  
[11] P. Harmon, Process Maturity Models, BP Trends, 2009. 
available: 
<http://www.bptrends.com/bpt/wp-
content/publicationfiles/spotlight_051909.pdf>.  [Retrieved 
20 March 2014].  
[12] M. Wynn and O. Olubanjo, “Demand-supply chain 
management: systems implications in an SME packaging 
business in the UK”, International Journal of Manufacturing 
Research, vol. 7, no. 2, 2012, pp. 198-212.   
[13] K. M. Eisenhardt, “Making fast strategic decisions in high-
velocity environments”, Academy of Management Journal, 
vol. 32, no. 3, 1989, pp. 543-576. 
[14] M. Easterby-Smith, R. Thorpe and P. Jackson, Management 
Research, 2012, Sage Publications. 
[15] A. Bryman, A. and E. Bell, Business Research Methods, 3rd 
edition, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011. 
[16] M. Saunders, P. Lewis and A. Thornhill, Research methods 
for business students, 5th edn., 2009, England: Pearson 
Education Limited. 
[17] J. Hartley, “Case studies in organisational research”, in C. 
Cassell and G. Symon (eds), Essential guide to qualitative 
methods in organizational research,  2004, London: Sage. pp 
323-333.  
[18] R. K. Yin,  Applications of Case Study Research. 3rd edn., 
2012, London: SAGE Publications, Inc  
[19] H. Simonds, Case Study Research in Practice, Sage 
Publications, 2009. 
 
 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

