eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.
ISBN: 978-1-61208-620-0
56
A Knowledge-based Approach to Enhance the Workforce Skills and Competences
within the Industry 4.0
Enrico G. Caldarola∗, Gianfranco E. Modoni∗ and Marco Sacco†
∗Institute of Industrial Technologies and Automation
National Research Council, Bari, Italy
Email: {enrico.caldarola, gianfranco.modoni}@itia.cnr.it
†Institute of Industrial Technologies and Automation
National Research Council, Milan, Italy
Email: marco.sacco@itia.cnr.it
Abstract—One of the signiﬁcant challenges of Industry 4.0 is
the realization of a more sustainable manufacturing along the
whole factory life-cycle, which has an impact on three differ-
ent dimensions: economical, social and environmental. Whereas
the economic and environmental dimensions have been widely
discussed in many works and progressively integrated in pro-
duction processes, there is still a shortage of studies aiming
at incorporating the social dimension. Consequently, economic
planning and policies lack the full acknowledgment of human
rights, education, health and gender diversity. With this study, we
aim at aligning the technological panorama of Industry 4.0 with
the social dimension of sustainable manufacturing, by proposing
a semantic model based framework as a reference architecture
to enhance social sustainability in manufacturing. Finally, a case
study is presented, in which factory environments try to meet
workers capabilities and desiderata, by augmenting the quality
of life and ensuring people health, at work or in their community
during their entire life, while ensuring productivity.
Keywords–Social Sustainable Manufacturing; Industry 4.0;
Teaching Factory; Knowledge-Intensive Systems; Cyber-Physical
Systems; Semantic Web.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, new trends in manufacturing and au-
tomation have embraced circular economy models, which
emphasize the design and implementation of a new sustain-
able industry changing at different dimensions: economical,
societal and environmental. The concrete realization of this
changing tune has been made possible by the adoption of
new technological solutions and paradigms coming with the
fourth industrial revolution, also known as Industry 4.0 [1][2].
This latter promotes the computerization of manufacturing
grounding on some design principles, such as interconnection,
information transparency, decentralized decisions and technical
assistance; while the key enabling technologies underpinning
it are Internet-of-Things (IoT), Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS)
and Smart Factories [3]. One of the main strengths of In-
dustry 4.0 is the creation of intelligent cross-linked modules,
holding a great opportunity for realizing sustainable industrial
mechanisms on all three dimensions previously mentioned:
economic, social and environmental. The value creation in
Industry 4.0 can be proﬁtably realized through the adoption of
human-centered technologies, which put the human operator
(or the knowledge worker) at the center of the innovation
process. This vision is in line with the European Commission
strategy as reported in [4], where, it is pointed out that, in
order for European industry to be competitive and ﬂourishing,
it is needed to ensure workforce with the right skills. Indeed,
one of the key priorities for the Factories of the Future (FoF)
18-19-20 Work Program [5] is focused on the human factor,
addressing in particular the development of competences of
the workers in synergy with technological progress. Some
of the technological enablers addressing this objective, which
have also acknowledged in this work, are: (i) models for in-
dividual and collective sense-making, learning and knowledge
accumulation; (ii) workers interconnection with machines and
processes and developing context-oriented services towards
safety practices and decision making. In particular, the work
introduced in this paper follows three inspiring paradigms
described as follows. Firstly, the Teaching Factory concept,
which aims to align manufacturing teaching and training to
the needs of modern industrial practice. According to this new
paradigm, future engineers and knowledge workers (i.e., work-
ers whose main capital is knowledge) “need to be educated
with new curricula in order to cope with the increasing indus-
trial requirements of the factories of the future” [6]. Secondly,
it exploits the Visual Approach concept to manufacturing [7].
In this regard, the efﬁciency of workers can be enhanced
by Augmented Reality/Virtual Reality (AR/VR) systems, such
as headmounted displays together with Learnstruments [8] or
by using new Information and Communication Technologies
(ICTs) for implementing gamiﬁcation in order to support
decentralized decision-making. Finally, we have the adoption
of Knowledge-based systems, which use proper formalisms
(semantic-based languages or ontologies) [9] in order to rep-
resent the knowledge hidden in the product or production
process. All the above paradigms contribute to realize the
envisioned concept of Smart Factory, as a thorough Cyber-
Physical System allowing safety, wellness and continuous
training inside the factory (Figure 1).
Acknowledging the great interest for the human factor in
modern factory, this work proposes a multi-layered framework
as a leading architecture satisfying the requirements of social
sustainability. The framework will be applied to a concrete case
study, which demonstrates the use of advanced technologies
from the Industry 4.0 panorama in order to create a user-
centred factory environment.
The reminder of the paper is structured as follows: Section
2 collects some previous works in deﬁning a conceptual model
in Industry 4.0 both from academics and industrial research
groups. Section 3 describes the framework highlighting the
leading principle that have inspired it. Section 4 presents a

eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.
ISBN: 978-1-61208-620-0
57
Figure 1. The Smart Factory as a Cyber-Physical system
case study aiming at demonstrating the applicability of the
conceptual framework introduced in this work. Finally, the last
section summarizes the main ﬁndings outlining future research
investigations.
II.
RELATED WORKS
With the advent of Industry 4.0 and even before, new
spreading paradigms, such as lean manufacturing and ad-
vanced computer-based manufacturing, conceptual models or
frameworks have been thought in order to clearly highlight
the concepts and relationships resulting from the new per-
spective proposed by the paradigm. Lee et. al. [1] proposes
a “5C architecture” for Cyber-Physical Systems in Industry
4.0 manufacturing systems. It is intended to provide a step-
by-step guideline for developing and deploying a CPS for
manufacturing application. The architecture is layers-based and
includes the following levels:
•
Smart connection. It acquires accurate and reliable
data from machines and their components. Data might
be directly measured by sensors or obtained from
controller or enterprise manufacturing systems such as
Enterprise Resources Planning (ERP), Manufacturing
Execution Systems (MES), Software Conﬁguration
Management (SCM) and Coordinate Measuring Ma-
chine (CMM);
•
Data-to-information conversion. It performs some
computational task like multidimensional data correla-
tion, degradation and performance prediction in order
to infer information from the data;
•
Cyber. It acts as central information hub in this
architecture by collecting data from all the machines
and performing analytics tasks to extract additional
information that provide better insight also by taking
into consideration historical data coming from ma-
chines;
•
Cognition. It properly presents the acquired knowl-
edge to expert users supporting the correct decision to
be taken;
•
Conﬁguration. It represents the feedback from cyber
space to physical space and acts as supervisory control
to make machines self-conﬁgure and self-adaptive.
Another valuable architectural model is the “Reference
Architectural Model Industrie” (RAMI) 4.0 [10]. This model
combines the fundamental elements of Industry 4.0 in a three-
dimensional layer model including the “Hierarchy Levels”
axis, the “Life Cycle & Value Stream” axis and ﬁnally the
orthogonal vertical axis. The ﬁrst axis ranges over the different
functionalities within factories or facilities and retraces what
is provided by the International Electrotechnical Commission
(IEC) 62264 document [11]. Such functionalities intersect with
the second axis, which represents the life cycle of facilities and
products and is based on IEC 62890 [12]. Finally, the vertical
axis includes the decomposition of a machine into its properties
structured layer by layer: asset, integration, communication,
information, functional and business. Within these three axes,
all crucial aspects of Industry 4.0 can be mapped, allowing
objects such as machines to be classiﬁed according to the
model, thus providing a common understanding of Industry
4.0 technologies.
The Open Platform Communications Uniﬁed Architecture
(OPC UA) [13] is the new standard of the OPC Foundation
providing interoperability in process automation. It provides
a Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) for industrial applica-
tions from factory ﬂoor devices to enterprise applications by
specifying an abstract set of services mapped to a concrete
technology. A communication stack is used on client- and
server-side to encode and decode message requests and re-
sponses. Also, this architectural model includes a bottom level
of data acquisition from heterogeneous data sources, which
provide the server implementation with data requested by the
client. OPC Ua does not provide Application Program Inter-
faces (APIs) implementation for client-server communication
but a Web service-based implementation that allow heteroge-
neous clients to communicate with different implementations
of server (exploiting Microsoft, Java or C-based technologies).
Among the commercial solutions, which take advantage of
a semantic-based approach, it is worth mentioning the Global
Real Time Information Processing Solution (GRIPS) [14]
developed by Star Group, a software framework that enables
intelligent processing capabilities by linking information ob-
jects. Speciﬁcally, by allowing a geographically distributed and
multi-lingual authoring of structured and linked information
units, GRIPS supports the creation of product knowledge while
enabling semantically linked knowledge management on all
business-critical objects. The GRIPS authoring and informa-
tion processing model distinguishes three layers of information
processing: semantic content base layer, publication/document
types and structures layer, publishing channels layer. By ex-
ploiting the semantic-based enabling technologies, it beneﬁts
not only product communication, but also marketing, sales,
after sales and the end customer. Moreover, the framework
allows enhanced re-use of software components, standardiza-
tion, cost reduction, quality, sustainability and protection of
investments, seamless integration, and so forth.
In [15], the authors proposed a system approach to sup-
port sustainability of manufacturing from three perspectives:
energy, material, technology. Finally, the use of knowledge-
based models for enabling context-awareness in the context

eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.
ISBN: 978-1-61208-620-0
58
Figure 2. Conceptual framework for the Social User-centered Manufacturing
in Industry 4.0
of Smart Home, which can be borrowed in the Smart Factory
scenario too, has already been explored and experimented by
the authors in [16].
III.
THE CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
Figure 2 depicts the layers-based conceptual framework
proposed in this work. The leading principles at the base of
the framework are: (i) highlight the cutting edge technologies
and paradigms belonging to Industry 4.0 in order to meet the
social sustainable manufacturing requirements involved in our
case study; (ii) separate technologies and solutions according
to different layers having in mind the production processes,
from the design phase to its realization; (iii) emphasize the
digital synchronization between the real and digital factory
acknowledging the continuous exchange of data and feedback
between the factory and its mirror image in the cyberspace.
Starting from the bottom, the Real Factory layer represents
a unique level of acquisition for data coming from inside or
outside the factory. To this level belong data collected from the
shop-ﬂoor acquired for example through a distributed sensors
network (wireless sensors networks) such as in-line inspection
and monitoring data, wearable devices, proximity sensors like
eBeacon. This layer is also called to operate a preliminary
adaptation and integration of data acquired from heterogeneous
sources, also just at a syntactical level such as data cleansing
and syntactic alignment in order to let them be interoperable
and usable by the software tools at the upper levels of the
framework [17] [18].
The IoT Hub is conceived as the layer in which the in-
depth knowledge of product-process and production systems
is elicited from raw data collected at the bottom level. Once
elicited, the product-process knowledge can be represented
through standard or de facto standard languages and tech-
nologies so that it can be shared and understood by human
and automated agents. The adoption of such formalisms in
modelling the information about products, processes and pro-
duction systems opens several perspectives in managing the
complexity of data models used in modern manufacturing
scenarios. Furthermore, with the rise of Big Data and Big Data
Analytics technologies [19][20], we are witnessing the trend of
moving data, applications, or other business components from
an organization’s on-premises infrastructure to the cloud, or
moving them from one cloud service to another. This trend has
lead to a new manufacturing paradigm, the Cloud Manufactru-
ing, developed from existing advanced manufacturing models
and enterprise information technologies under the support of
cloud computing, Internet of Things, virtualization and service-
oriented technologies, and advanced computing technologies
[21].
The Semantic Middleware layer at the centre of the frame-
work represents a sort of gateway responsible for a sys-
tematic integration of data, eventually semantically annotated
data [22][23], coming from the enterprise data sources (local
databases or legacy database) and from outside (distributed
storage or Web of Data). This layer is responsible for: im-
plementing the proper approach to transparently access data
from multiple clients, by taking into consideration security,
reliability, redundancy and trustability issues, providing reli-
able mechanisms to publish new data from the upper level
applications or by the bottom line and make them available
to all interested agents in a real-time or near real-time fashion
with respect to changes in critical data. A publisher-subscriber
mechanism or an Event Condition Action (ECA) architecture
can be used in order to implement such functionality [24]. To
this level belong one of the key component used in the scenario
described in the next section, i.e., the Digital Factory Model
(DFM), which can be conceived as an omniscient module able
to understand the representation models underlying the whole
product life’ cycle, the production process and system and the
Virtual Individual Model of workers engaged in the production
process and their skills.
The Application layer embraces different tools used in
computerized manufacturing. There exist many Digital Tools
that support engineers and designers in different phases of
product life-cycle. For example, Computer Aided Design
(CAD) software help users in creation, modiﬁcation, analysis
or optimization of a design and are used to increase the
productivity of the designer, improve the quality of design, and,
importantly, improve communications through documentation.
To this level also belong the Virtual Tools, i.e., Augmented
Reality Systems (like AR headset and visors), which im-
plement the Visual Approach to production process already
described in the introductory section, being one of the solution
adopted in the demonstration scenario. Finally, the Smart Tools
include all Business Intelligent tools and Analytics [20] used
to analyze data and get insight from them to support expert
user in the decision making process (e.g., Opinion Mining
tools or Information Visualization tools). Proper info-graphics
or information visualization tools are necessary to completely
transfer acquired knowledge to the users [19] [25].
The highest level of the framework is the Digital Twin level.
It resembles the Cognition level of the 5C architecture [1], i.e.,
at this stage proper presentation of the acquired knowledge
throughout the lower levels must be provided. Additionally, in
this level takes place the digital synchronization: there must
be a constant synchronization between the real factory and its
replica in the digital world. Such synchronization requires that
produced data or acquired by physical sensors spread at the
shoop-ﬂoor level must be passed to the digital tools, which in
turn elaborate them via sophisticate analytics or simulations
in order to provide feedback and reactions that impact real-
time over the real factory. The Digital Twin is underpinned by
representational models about the whole factory. In particular,
the demonstration scenario described in the next section rely

eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.
ISBN: 978-1-61208-620-0
59
above three representational models, which formally describe
the digital replica of the factory: the Digital Factory Model,
the Virtual Individual Model, and the Skills Virtual Model.
IV.
USER-CENTRED WORKPLACES: A CASE
STUDY
The case study presented here is focused on the production
process of wooden furniture, such as sofas, dispensers, chairs
and so on. This case study is signiﬁcant because, on the one
hand, the adoption of innovative technologies can improve the
whole production process making it more competitive and lean,
while, on the other hand, the need for a hand-made production
as the most important added value for customers, signiﬁcantly
reduces the freedom of action in terms of processes automation
and innovation deployment. Thus, most of the process innova-
tion is user-centred, i.e., it needs to be addressed towards the
direct support of human operators activities rather than towards
sophisticated machinery.
Typically, human operators involved in this scenario have
to deal with two different kinds of issues, which will be
further discussed as follows. At ﬁrst, the operators are not
interchangeable in the assembly line, since she/he is formed
for (and is in charge of) accomplishing a speciﬁc task (e.g.,
drilling, assembly of parts, cutting, etc.); therefore, job rotation
is not applicable, and thus, the company has great difﬁculty in
distributing the workload, for example, when it must deal with
peaks of requests for a certain product (requiring speciﬁc work-
ings) or in the case of unavailability of some resources. More-
over, the lack of a proper job rotation may result frustrating for
worker who is forced to perform the same operations all the
time. Secondly, the high variety of wooden products along with
the mass customization may require an extra effort for workers
in order to deal with the rapidly change of work instructions,
without the help of technologies. For example, the use of
traditional hard copy manuals, instead of technologies based
on a Visual Approach, will force the operator to continuously
check out the instruction sheets (due to the strong difference
among assembling sequences of different products models),
and this can lead to a waste of time, which can signiﬁcantly
grow depending on worker experience and on the frequency
of production of different models. Conversely, the proper
adoption of a Visual Approach supported by technologies,
will provide just-in-time information delivering, following the
principle of transferring the right information at the right
person at the right time.
What we expect from the implementation of user-centred
workplaces is: reducing non-value adding activities; reducing
mistakes from employees and suppliers; reducing time for
employee orientation and training; reducing search time in
navigating the facility and locating tools, parts and supplies; re-
ducing unnecessary human motion and transportation of goods;
increasing productivity supporting sustainability, mainly from
a social perspective. Workers will no longer perform their
tasks routinely; instead, they will have to undertake varied
and mostly unstructured tasks, depending on the needs of the
dynamically changing production process. Teams should/will
include ﬂexible and remote ways of working and interacting
with the systems as well as with other workers.
As shown in Figure 3, the case study involves different
actors and components: the operators, an AR equipment, the
Digital Factory Manager (DFM) and the virtual models. It
also involves different technological solutions which support
such components: an Augmented Reality System, with annex
headset or visors like the Oculus Rift, a distributed sensor
network, which is spread throughout all machinery and oper-
ators, intelligent software robots like chatbot able to assist the
human operators in accomplishing their tasks, in a high level
of abstraction, and ﬁnally, representational languages such as
ontologies [26], belonging to the Semantic Web technologies
panorama [27]. The latter are used for formally representing
the knowledge about the whole factory and the involved actors
through three virtual models:
•
Digital Factory Model, which represents the entire
production system including the production process
and the ﬁnal product with its parts. It borrows some
concepts and idea from the Virtual Factory Data
Model introduced in [28];
•
Virtual Individual Model, which is a formal conceptu-
alization of the operator proﬁle. It includes biographic
info (gender, age, language and so on), capabilities
and eventually disabilities or impairments, work as-
pirations and attitudes, training activities and courses
the worker has already taken part. This model is based
on the Virtual Individual Model provided within the
Pegaso project [29] and provides a formally multi-
faceted description of the operator within the factory;
•
Skills Virtual Model, which provides a formal repre-
sentation of the skills the operator need in order to
perform each single phase of the production process
and is informed by the knowledge of product and its
parts, processes, competencies and operator capabili-
ties.
These formal models need to be properly integrated in
order to be used by the DFM, exploiting well-known tech-
niques for ontology integration existing in the literature [22].
Furthermore, related to each model there is an extensional
part (the model instance) that need to be persisted through
storage technologies such as RDF Stores or TripleStore [24];
One of the key components of the entire case study is the
DFM, which can be conceived as an omniscient module able
to understand the representation models underlying the whole
product life’ cycle, the production process and system and the
Virtual Individual Model of workers engaged in the production
process and their skills. With all these information at hand,
the DFM is able to infer the right allocation of people to
production process phases by ensuring that individuals with
proper skills and capabilities (or maybe attitude or desiderata)
are engaged in activities that best ﬁt the worker characteristics,
this way, realizing the transfer of the right information at
the right person at the right time. The synergistic use of
these technologies allows the implementation of a close-loop
between the real factory and the its digital replica.
With the support of the technologies mentioned above,
framed in each layer depicted in Figure 2, it is possible
to imagine a demonstration scenario as follows. Once the
operator is ready to start her/his work, she/he approaches the
workstation and is immediately recognized through proximity
sensors like eBeacon. By accessing her/his proﬁle, represented
in the VIM (Virtual Individual Model), the system is able to
verify if the operator properly ﬁts to do a certain job over
a certain machine. Both the Digital Factory Model and the

eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.
ISBN: 978-1-61208-620-0
60
Figure 3. Case study conceptual overview
Skill Virtual Model allow the system to know which skills
are needed to use a particular machine, and which machine
has to be used in carrying out a speciﬁc task for producing a
particular item or component of a ﬁnal product. The operator
proﬁle also contains a report of operator performances in
accomplishing speciﬁc tasks and her/his preferred tasks. The
personal record also contains info like impairments, such as,
for example, visual or audio deﬁcit, which can be used by
the system in order to adjust, for example, the work surface
lighting. The operator faces a work plane with all the parts
of which the piece is made, but does not know how the
different parts should be mounted (or because the operator
is not trained or because the piece is new). The operator is
guided step-by-step to accomplishing the work by the use of
AR equipment, which are constantly connected to a DFM, via
wireless networks. The latter constantly informs the operator
about the procedures to be followed when accomplishing a
certain task. A distributed network of sensor is pervasively
used in order to monitor the worker positions with respect to
machines and the advancement of her/his work.
In this study, we modeled the skills of the various operators
and mapped with the operations to be performed. This way,
the AR system is able to display the full piece of work,
superimposed on what has so far built by the operator, to
provide a clear idea of how to continue the work that is
being done. The AR system also displays a preview of the
ﬁnished piece on the basis of the piece produced so far
and on the basis of the drawings in 3D as designed by
the CAD. 3D drawings are displayed as a virtual silhouette
of the part still to be worked on. The AR display is also
provided with a chatbot interface, which allows the user, via
a speech recognition system or via a wireless keyboard, to
interact with intelligent software robots able to answer the
operator questions in a high level of abstraction. The chatbot
also acts as an info request router being capable to forward
a request to a human operator recognized able to respond
according to her/his proﬁle and experiences, as modeled in
the Virtual Individual Model. Any updates in the production
process or in hardware and software components of machinery
can arise the need for a professional upgrade of the operator
that is promptly reported by the system, this way ensuring a
continuous learning within the factory. The synergistic use of
different technological solutions makes the workplace smart,
i.e., a sustainable work environment which is attractive for
workers, tailored to their speciﬁc needs and able to ensure well-
being, continuous training and education, by also augmenting
overall productivity.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
In this work, a conceptual framework for social manu-
facturing sustainability in the rise of Industry 4.0 has been
proposed. The idea of the framework is to put in evidence how
the cutting edge technologies under the Industry 4.0 umbrella
can support the fundamental principles of social sustainability.
In order to demonstrate this, intelligent cross-linked value
creation networks have been realized by turning the traditional
factory in a Cyber-Physical System, which implements the
concept of Teaching Factory and uses knowledge-based sys-
tems and a Visual approach to production process. A case study
has been presented in order to verge the layered framework
introduced on a real case study aligning the needs encountered
with the technological solutions belonging to each layer. The
paper demonstrates how the framed technologies can help in
implementing the user-centred environment within the factory.
This is conceived as a smart workplace, which is attractive for
workers, tailored to their speciﬁc needs and able to ensure well-
being, continuous training and education, and sustainability
without lessening productivity. Future lines of researches will
investigate the adoption of more sophisticated and complete
knowledge models of the production process also by applying
the proposed framework to other industrial scenario.

eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.
ISBN: 978-1-61208-620-0
61
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Lee, B. Bagheri, and H.-A. Kao, “A cyber-physical systems archi-
tecture for industry 4.0-based manufacturing systems,” Manufacturing
Letters, vol. 3, 2015, pp. 18–23.
[2]
H. Lasi, P. Fettke, H.-G. Kemper, T. Feld, and M. Hoffmann, “Industry
4.0,” Business & Information Systems Engineering, vol. 6, no. 4, 2014,
pp. 239–242.
[3]
M. Hermann, T. Pentek, and B. Otto, “Design principles for industrie 4.0
scenarios,” in System Sciences (HICSS), 2016 49th Hawaii International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 3928–3937.
[4]
EC, “Skills for Key Enabling Technologies in Europe,” European
Commission, Tech. Rep., 0 2016.
[5]
EFFRA, “Factories 4.0 and Beyond - Recommendations for the work
programme 18-19-20 of the FoF PPP under Horizon 2020,” EFFRA.
European Factories of the Future Research Association, Tech. Rep., 09
2016.
[6]
G. Chryssolouris, D. Mavrikios, and L. Rentzos, “The teaching factory:
A manufacturing education paradigm,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 57, 2016,
pp. 44–48.
[7]
H. Hirano, 5 pillars of the visual workplace.
CRC Press, 1995.
[8]
R. McFarland, C. Reise, A. Postawa, and G. Seliger, “18.9 learnstru-
ments in value creation and learning centered work place design,” in
Proceedings of the 11th Global Conference on Sustainable Manufactur-
ing - Innovative Solutions, 2013, pp. 624–629.
[9]
H. Lin and J. A. Harding, “A manufacturing system engineering
ontology model on the semantic web for inter-enterprise collaboration,”
Computers in Industry, vol. 58, no. 5, 2007, pp. 428–437.
[10]
M. Hankel and B. Rexroth, “The reference architectural model industrie
4.0 (rami 4.0),” ZVEI, 2015.
[11]
IEC, “Iec 62264-1 enterprise-control system integration–part 1: Models
and terminology,” Tech. Rep., 2003.
[12]
——, “Iec 62890 life-cycle management for systems and products used
in industrial-process measurement, control and automation,” Tech. Rep.,
2006.
[13]
S.-H. Leitner and W. Mahnke, “Opc ua–service-oriented architecture
for industrial applications,” ABB Corporate Research Center, 2006.
[14]
M. Gutknecht, “Introduction to GRIPS,” STAR AG, Tech. Rep., 07
2014.
[15]
C. Yuan, Q. Zhai, and D. Dornfeld, “A three dimensional system ap-
proach for environmentally sustainable manufacturing,” CIRP Annals-
Manufacturing Technology, vol. 61, no. 1, 2012, pp. 39–42.
[16]
M. Sacco, E. G. Caldarola, G. Modoni, and W. Terkaj, “Supporting the
design of aal through a sw integration framework: the d4all project,”
in International Conference on Universal Access in Human-Computer
Interaction.
Springer, 2014, pp. 75–84.
[17]
V. Kuts, G. E. Modoni, W. Terkaj, T. T¨ahemaa, M. Sacco, and T. Otto,
“Exploiting factory telemetry to support virtual reality simulation in
robotics cell,” in International Conference on Augmented Reality,
Virtual Reality and Computer Graphics.
Springer, 2017, pp. 212–221.
[18]
G. E. Modoni, M. Sacco, and W. Terkaj, “A telemetry-driven approach
to simulate data-intensive manufacturing processes,” Procedia CIRP,
vol. 57, 2016, pp. 281–285.
[19]
E. G. Caldarola and A. M. Rinaldi, “Big data visualization tools: A
survey - the new paradigms, methodologies and tools for large data
sets visualization,” in - KomIS,, INSTICC.
SciTePress, 2017.
[20]
——, “Big data: A survey - the new paradigms, methodologies and
tools,” in Proceedings of 4th International Conference on Data Man-
agement Technologies and Applications - Volume 1: KomIS, (DATA
2015), INSTICC.
SciTePress, 2015, pp. 362–370.
[21]
G. Modoni, M. Doukas, W. Terkaj, M. Sacco, and D. Mourtzis,
“Enhancing factory data integration through the development of an
ontology: from the reference models reuse to the semantic conversion
of the legacy models,” International Journal of Computer Integrated
Manufacturing, vol. 30, no. 10, 2017, pp. 1043–1059.
[22]
E. G. Caldarola and A. M. Rinaldi, “A multi-strategy approach for
ontology reuse through matching and integration techniques,” in Quality
Software Through Reuse and Integration.
Springer, 2016, pp. 63–90.
[23]
G. Modoni, E. G. Caldarola, W. Terkaj, and M. Sacco, “The knowledge
reuse in an industrial scenario: A case study,” in eKNOW 2015,
The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and
Knowledge Management, 2015, pp. 66–71.
[24]
G. E. Modoni, M. Veniero, A. Trombetta, M. Sacco, and S. Clemente,
“Semantic based events signaling for aal systems,” Journal of Ambient
Intelligence and Humanized Computing, 2017, pp. 1–15.
[25]
E. G. Caldarola and A. M. Rinaldi, “Improving the visualization of
wordnet large lexical database through semantic tag clouds,” in Big
Data (BigData Congress), 2016 IEEE International Congress on. IEEE,
2016, pp. 34–41.
[26]
T. R. Gruber, “A translation approach to portable ontology speciﬁca-
tions,” Knowledge acquisition, vol. 5, no. 2, 1993, pp. 199–220.
[27]
T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, O. Lassila et al., “The semantic web,”
Scientiﬁc american, vol. 284, no. 5, 2001, pp. 28–37.
[28]
B. K´ad´ar, W. Terkaj, and M. Sacco, “Semantic virtual factory supporting
interoperable modelling and evaluation of production systems,” CIRP
Annals-Manufacturing Technology, vol. 62, no. 1, 2013, pp. 443–446.
[29]
A. Sojic, W. Terkaj, G. Contini, and M. Sacco, “Towards a teenager
tailored ontology,” Ontologies and Data in Life Sciences (odls 2014),
2014, p. 1.

