Game Reﬁnement Theory and Multiplayer Games: Case Study Using UNO
Alﬁan Ramadhan and Nur Ulfa Maulidevi
School of Electrical Engineering and Informatics
Bandung Institute of Technology
Bandung, Indonesia
email: masphei@gmail.com, ulfa@stei.itb.ac.id
Hiroyuki Iida
School of Information Science
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
Nomi, Japan
Email: iida@jaist.ac.jp
Abstract—Game reﬁnement theory has started to provide
some interesting tools to measure sophistication of board games,
sport games, and video games. In this paper, we apply game
reﬁnement theory to UNO
R
⃝ card game, from which we identify
valuable aspects regarding multiplayer and incomplete informa-
tion game. Speciﬁcally, we analyze game reﬁnement value zone
of UNO and reveal recommended number of players to play.
Furthermore, we compare the measure of enjoyment between the
players. Experiments have been conducted by developing various
computer player types and simulating about 1.4 million UNO
games. Results show that critical states of the game and number
of card played are the important factors and conﬁrm that UNO
is best to play with 4, 5, or 6 players. Furthermore, another
result shows that the second last and the last player get the most
enjoyment out of the game.
Keywords—UNO card game; game reﬁnement theory; multi-
player game; incomplete information game.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Game reﬁnement theory has been proposed earlier by Iida
et al. [1] to determine level of sophistication of games. Some
applications have already been done, such as in domain of
board games [1], for Mah Jong [2], and sports games [3].
Although there are still many types of games to cover, this
theory has already performed well, and generalized funda-
mental concept. By using sophistication measurement, many
facts have been revealed regarding changes of attractiveness
of games in decades. In fact, there are still some challenging
research questions, especially in applying game reﬁnement
theory to multi-player and incomplete information game.
Multi-player game is one of important research themes in
game domains. Many works in multi-player game regarding
incomplete information aspects have been published, such as
multi-player algorithms and approaches [4], comparison of
algorithms [5], multi-player Go [6], decision algorithms [7],
computing equilibria [8], and lower bounds [9]. Moreover, ev-
ery kind of games is changing historically by years or decades,
even multi-player game. For instance, game reﬁnement theory
in multi-person and incomplete information of Mah Jong has
been proposed [2]. In fact, recent studies in game reﬁnement
theory still focused on several types of games. Hence, multi-
player and incomplete information game research in broader
types of games are still considered as challenging topics to
explore using game reﬁnement theory.
In this paper, we extend game reﬁnement theory with the
case study of UNO (UNO R
⃝, is a registered trademark of
Mattel Corporation) which has been widely recognized as a
popular card games. UNO is commonly known as fascinat-
ing games and many variants have been developed in many
countries. By analyzing game reﬁnement theory, we discover
reﬁnement value and sophistication value zone in UNO that
are appropriated, as has been found for other reﬁned games
such as chess [1], Mah Jong [2], and soccer [3]. Contribution
of this paper indicates a promising concept of game reﬁnement
theory to be applied in any games generally.
Basically, there are some interesting aspects of UNO,
because it is categorized as multi-player game, regarding
impact or feelings of each player during the game. Exploring
recommended number of players to play UNO is challenging.
Basically, there is a promising idea, proposed in sports games
[3], of using game progress to measure difference of impact
for each of player. Furthermore, determining players who
enjoy the game the most seems essential to us. Later, we
propose some measurement, called enjoyment measurement,
to analyze the impact of the game on each player. Thus, we
pack our main works on this different problems which are
exploring reﬁnement value and sophistication measurement
zone in UNO, investigating recommended number of players
to play, analyzing enjoyment measure which leads to ﬁnd who
are the players enjoying the most the game.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces
game reﬁnement theory. Then, Section III discusses UNO
card game, its various versions, our UNO program, and our
analysis in applying game reﬁnement theory. In Section IV
and Section V, we present our experiments and discussions of
our explorations and discoveries. Finally, Section VI concludes
and describes some future works.
II.
GAME-REFINEMENT THEORY
In this section, we ﬁrst show a basic idea of game-
reﬁnement theory, which has been cultivated in the domain
of board games. Then, we present the idea to bridge the gap
between the board games and sports games based on a model
of game progress and game information progress. Moreover,
we consider the game progress model of UNO game.
A. Basic idea of game-reﬁnement theory
We give a short sketch of the basic idea of game reﬁnement
theory [3]. This section describes the idea based on Sutiono
et al. [3] and additional knowledge from authors. The “game
progress” is twofold. One is game speed or scoring rate, while
another one is game information progress with focus on the
game outcome. In sports games such as soccer and basketball,
the scoring rate is calculated by two factors: (1) goal, i.e., total
score and (2) time or steps to achieve the goal. Thus, the game
speed is given by average number of successful shoots divided
by average number of shoot attempts. For other score-limited
sports games, such as Volleyball and Tennis in which the goal
(i.e., score to win) is set in advance, the average number of
total points per game may correspond to the steps to achieve
the goal [10].
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Figure 1. Illustration of one level of game tree.
Game information progress presents how certain is the
result of the game in a certain time or steps. Let G and T
be the average number of successful shoots and the average
number of shoots per game, respectively. If one knows the
game information progress, for example after the game, the
game progress x(t) will be given as a linear function of time
t with 0 ≤ t ≤ T and 0 ≤ x(t) ≤ G, as shown in (1).
x(t) = G
T t
(1)
However, the game information progress given by (1) is
usually unknown during the in-game period. Hence, the game
information progress is reasonably assumed to be exponential.
This is because the game outcome is uncertain until the very
end of game in many games. Hence, a realistic model of game
information progress is given by (2).
x(t) = G( t
T )n
(2)
Here, Sutiono et al. [3] described that n stands for a constant
parameter which is given based on the perspective of an
observer in the game considered. Then, acceleration of game
information progress is obtained by deriving (2) twice. Solving
it at t = T, the equation becomes
x′′(T) = Gn(n − 1)
T n
tn−2 = G
T 2 n(n − 1)
It is assumed in the current model that the game informa-
tion progress in any type of games is happening in our minds.
We do not know yet about the physics in our minds, but it is
likely that the acceleration of information progress is related
to the force in mind. Hence, it is reasonably expected that the
larger the value
G
T 2 is, the more the game becomes exciting
due to the uncertainty of game outcome. Thus, we use its
root square,
√
G
T , as a game reﬁnement measure for the game
considered.
B. Board games and sports games
Here, we show the idea to bridge the gap between board
games and sports games by deriving a formula to calculate
the game information progress of board games [3]. Let B and
D be average branching factor (number of possible options)
and game length (depth of whole game tree), respectively. One
round in board games can be illustrated as decision tree. At
each depth of the game tree, one will choose a move and the
game will progress. One level of game tree is illustrated in
Fig. 1. The distance d, which has been shown in Fig. 1, can
be found by using simple Pythagoras theorem, thus resulting
in d =
√
∆l2 + 1.
Assuming that the approximate value of horizontal differ-
ence between nodes is
B
2 , then we can make a substitution
and get d =
q
( B
2 )2 + 1. The game progress for one game
is the total level of game tree times d. For the meantime, we
do not consider ∆t2 because the value (∆t2 = 1) is assumed
to be much smaller compared to B. The game length will
be normalized by the average game length D, then the game
progress x(t) is given by x(t) =
t
D · d =
t
D
q
( B
2 )2 =
Bt
2D.
Then, in general we have, x(t) = c B
Dt, where c is a different
constant which depends on the game considered. However,
we manage to explain how to obtain the game information
progress value itself. The game progress in the domain of
board games forms a linear graph with the maximum value
x(t) of B. Assuming c = 1, then we have a realistic game
progress model for board games, which is given by
x(t) = B( t
D)n.
(3)
Equation (3) shows that the game progress in board games
corresponds to that of sports games as shown in (2).
To support the effectiveness of proposed game reﬁnement
measures, some data of games such as Chess and Go [1] from
board games and two sports games [3] are compared. We show,
in Table I, a comparison of game reﬁnement measures for
various type of games. From Table I, we see that sophisticated
games have a common factor (i.e., same degree of acceleration
value) to feel engagement or excitement regardless of different
type of games.
TABLE I. MEASURES OF GAME REFINEMENT FOR BOARD GAMES AND
SPORTS GAMES.
Game
B or G
D or T
√
B
D
or
√
G
T
Chess
35
80
0.074
Go
250
208
0.076
Basketball
36.38
82.01
0.073
Soccer
2.64
22
0.073
III.
UNO CARD GAME
UNO is one of the well known card games in the world
and characterized as a multi-player, imperfect-information, and
uncooperative combinatorial game [11]. In addition, a poll
found on the website BoardGameGeek, a website specialised
on board games and card games, shows that UNO is recom-
mended to play with 2 to 10 players and best to play with 4,
5, or 6 players [12].
Research of UNO card game has attracted many people
globally. Recent works have been performed from the view-
point of a combinatorial algorithmic game theory [11], also in
playful probing [13], and intelligent system [14]. Thus, UNO
has been recognized not only in entertainment, but also in
academic domain.
There are many variants of UNO with different rules,
number of cards, or number of players which can be found in
various countries in the world. Pagat [15] is a website which
collects information of UNO variants including Hold’em UNO,
Magic UNO, Speed UNO, Solitaire UNO, and so forth.
There is also a modiﬁed version of UNO rules which is
played slightly different. The only one difference is that the
game ends until there is only one player left who still holds
cards in hand. This type of game is similar with DaiFuGo [16]
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

card game from Japan. Moreover, the modiﬁed rules of UNO
are used in our experiments to measure enjoyment value of
each player.
A. Basic rules
UNO ofﬁcial rules can be found at ofﬁcial site [17] or [18].
There are 108 cards in total which are organized as follows: 19
Blue cards, 19 Green cards, 19 Red cards, 19 Yellow cards, 8
Draw Two, 8 Reverse, 8 Skip, 4 Wild, and 4 Wild Draw Four.
Accordingly, Draw Two, Reverse, Skip, Wild, and Wild Draw
Four cards are deﬁned as Action cards which have effects as
they are played in the game. Object of the game is to be the
ﬁrst player in games to get score 500 points. Speciﬁcally, only
the winner gets score from a game by getting rid of all the
cards in hands before other players, and this score is calculated
from all of opponents’ cards left.
Basically, UNO is easy to play. First of all, the game begins
by deciding who among participants is to play ﬁrst. In this part,
every player picks a card and the ﬁrst player is determined by
the one who gets the highest number of numbered cards. Then,
each player when beginning his turn ﬁrstly has to determine
whether he wants to draw a card, or play a card in his hand.
He can choose to play a card in his hand, otherwise he draws
a card from deck and can play the drawn card if the card is
possible to play. In ofﬁcial rules, the game ends until there is
one player which has no cards left in his hands. However, we
add some modiﬁcations in this study that the game ends until
there is only one player holding cards in his hands. By doing
so, there will be ranking from ﬁrst player as the winner until
the last player as the ﬁnal loser.
There are several action cards which have to be understood
before playing such as Draw Two, Skip, Reverse, Wild, and
Wild Draw Four. Draw Two card forces the next player to draw
two cards and skip his turn. Skip card means that next player
misses his turn. Reverse card is used to invert turn direction.
Wild card can be used to change color to play. Then, Wild
Draw Four card is used to force next player to draw four cards,
skip next player’s turn, and change color in the game. These
cards have their own effect and affect game play. Thus, these
basic rules and action cards lead analysis of UNO in next
sections.
B. Game reﬁnement theory and game progress in UNO
The idea that had been the basis of previous works on
sports games [3] is to ﬁnd some critical enjoyment points in
the game, and only measure those, assuming that they are key
point and are the only point that we need to study. For example,
in soccer, this critical action are the shoots. A game of soccer is
actually more than a succession of shoot, but we can restrict
our study to only those for two reasons: the ﬁrst is all the
other actions during the game take place only to decide which
side will be able to try a shoot, and how probably it will be
a success, and the second is that shoots are the moment the
spectator can enjoy the most, because it is the most intense
action.
In game reﬁnement theory, branching factors and game
length are the main factors to determine game information
outcome [1]. Iida et al. proposed average number of possi-
bilities and turns to apply game-reﬁnement theory in board
games [2]. Furthermore, Sutiono et al. proposed some rela-
tionships between game-reﬁnement theory and game progress
concluding that number of goals and shoots are factors to
measure sophistication of games, as well as game information
outcome [3]. Thus, each game may have its own measurement
to be identiﬁed as game reﬁnement value regarding game
characteristics.
UNO card game is different from sports and board games.
Although there are some similarities between board games
and card games such as turns and type of actions, different
rules or characteristics of games can result contrast impact
to players in terms of game reﬁnement theory. For instance,
different versions of Mah Jong game in history affect its
attractiveness [2]. Furthermore, broad and deep analysis of
UNO are required since it is characterized as a multi-player,
imperfect-information, and uncooperative combinatorial game
[11]. Thus, there are some different considerations to identify
main factors of game reﬁnement theory in UNO.
In this study, we highlight multi-player and imperfect-
information characteristics as main aspects. First of all, multi-
player games characteristic is simply identiﬁed by the number
of players. Basically, each player is supposed to perform any
actions which affect the game in any conditions. For instance,
a player may play any action cards to attack other players
or skip his turn to give other player’s chance. Consequently,
each player has contributions to increase or decrease attrac-
tiveness or ﬂow of the game. Meanwhile, treating imperfect-
information game is more challenging than perfect-information
game because of hidden information. However, there is global
information which is visible to all of players in game and
simply measured as global variables which is state of the game
such as number of cards or number of remained cards in deck.
Because of the imperfect information nature, it is much
harder to measure the progression of the game. The end of
the game may not be expected by every player. We will only
look at information that are shared by every player for our
measurement, and because the game ends when a player had
no more cards in his hand, game progress can be measured
by looking at the number of remaining cards in hand for each
player.
The solution we propose here is to consider the times a
player say “UNO”, when he has only one card left in hand,
which we name critical state of the game. This is a viable
option because it is emphasised by the game itself as a big
point of interest of the progression of a player toward victory.
When a player says “UNO”, he is more likely to become
the target of every punishing card or strategy from other
players (for example playing yellow if it is known that he
had no yellow card in hand). Also, when considering the ratio
of “UNO” over the total number of card played, the value
obtained is in relation with the balance of the game. The most
card you need to play in average before having only one card
left is a measure of how slow the game is.
In experiment, we use both values in average of each
player because UNO is a multi-player game. Thus, determining
sophistication of the game is simpliﬁed by using average
number of UNO times and average number of played cards
for each per player.
x(t) = U( t
P )n
(4)
According to (3), let U to replace B as average number of
saying UNO, and P to replace D as average number of played
cards for each player independently. By using our analysis
and referring to game reﬁnement theory, game information
outcome of UNO is deﬁned in (4). Then, acceleration of game
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

information outcome value in UNO is shown in (5). Finally,
the sophistication measurement can be obtained using
√
U
P .
x′′(t) = Un(n − 1)
P n
tn−2
(5)
When t = P, the equation becomes
x′′(P) = U
P 2 n(n − 1)
On the other hand, there is another analysis regarding ex-
citement for each player which argues that the ﬁrst player, the
winner, does not feel more excitement than other late player.
Likewise, there is some different feeling when comparing
multi-player game with two-player game due to the number
of players. Although the ﬁrst player is lured by prize and high
score, as he enjoys his win, but it stops his play. But players
still in the game can continue to enjoy it. Our model does
not include feeling about winning, and only focus on enjoying
the content of the game, not the side effects like winning or
losing. Our analysis argues that the second and the last player
in the game are the player who enjoy the most and feel the
most excitement in the game.
Basically, measuring enjoyment feeling is more likely to
outlook the game in overall. This can be done by using overall
number of critical states of the game and contributions of
the game as well as generalizing our analysis in measuring
sophistication value of UNO. In other words, overall critical
state of the game is reﬂected by total number of UNO times
in the game. Moreover, instead of having overall number
of played cards, we can change it by number of rounds in
the game. Thus, according to the sophistication measurement
formula, the enjoyment measure can be similarly deﬁned using
√
U
P
with U as overall UNO times and P as number of rounds,
in order to speciﬁcally investigate the excitement of each
player.
C. UNO program
We have created a program which is developed in Java to
run our simulation of UNO. The program works as automatic
simulation playing UNO and records each player’s activity.
Information of player’s activities is collected during the game
including the number of turns, played cards, UNO times, and
so forth. Furthermore, the program has been published as an
open source which can be found on Github [19].
Process of each player who is having a turn is illustrated
in Fig. 2. Square and diamond shape stands for process and
decision, respectively. From the beginning until the end of
turn, a player is given some several processes and decisions
including decision of drawing a card, process of picking a
card, and so forth. In general, there are several basic actions
called Module Actions which require an action of each player
regarding their strategy and mind. These actions are drawing
a card, playing drawn card, playing a card, yelling UNO, and
choosing a color. Consequently, by having well deﬁned and
separated actions, the program becomes well structured and
modularized, especially in building computer players.
Basically, our simulation is played fully by computer
players which are inspired from multi-player algorithms and
approaches [4]. However, our implementation has been per-
formed in simpler ways. We have created four different pro-
ﬁles as computer players: Amateur, Offensive, Defensive, and
Figure 2. Flowchart of Player Turn Process.
Observer. These types of players are identiﬁed because they
are most reasonable strategies and easy to understand.
First of all, Amateur is the easiest player to imagine.
Amateur is more likely to be analogous to weak human players
who still lack of experiences. In general, Amateur does not
have good strategy to play, so that he does not consider any
actions or situations. Speciﬁcally, Amateur plays all of Module
Actions randomly and recklessly. Thus, action of Amateur is
not speciﬁed as an important algorithm.
Algorithm III.1: OFFENSIVE(possible cards)
procedure OFFENSIVE ACTION(P)
C ← {} // candidate stack
C ← TOP(P) // P possible cards as stack
for each p ∈ P
do





if (stronger (p, TOP(C)))
then
( // p is stronger
// push p to top of stack C
PUSH(C p)
return (C) // return cards in offensive order
Figure 3. Offensive step.
Secondly, Offensive roles as an active player and is more
likely to be analogous to ambitious players. In general, Of-
fensive always plays offensively, so that he takes the most
strongest and offensive actions, especially to attack other
players as shown in Fig. 3. Ranking of card’s strength from
the strongest to the weakest is given as follows, Draw Four,
Draw Two, Skip, Reverse, and Wild card.
Meanwhile, Defensive player acts as a passive player. In
contrast, Defensive is more likely to be the opposite of Of-
fensive because he always plays defensively, so that he mainly
chooses harmless actions as shown in Fig. 4. Ranking of cards
is prioritized in inverted order with Offensive algorithm.
Finally, Observer player chooses his strategy by consider-
ing opponent actions. Basically, he plays cards which other
players do not have the color or number by remembering
others’ missing cards from recent turns, especially when they
draw a card as shown in Fig. 5.
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Algorithm III.2: DEFENSIVE(possible cards)
procedure DEFENSIVE ACTION(P)
C ← {} // candidate stack
C ← TOP(P) // P possible cards as stack
for each p ∈ P
do





if (weaker (p, TOP(C)))
then
( // p is weaker
// push p to top of stack C
PUSH(C, p)
return (C) // return cards in defensive order
Figure 4. Defensive step.
Algorithm III.3: OBSERVER(possible, forbidden)
procedure OBSERVER ACTION(P, F)
C ← [ ] // list of candidates
// copy P into C
for each p ∈ P
do {INSERT (C, p)
for each f ∈ F
do



for each p ∈ P
do

if match (f, p)
then {V OTE DOWN(C, p)
SORT(C) // sort candidates in vote order
return (C) // return cards in vote order
Figure 5. Observer step.
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND RESULT
In this paper, we conduct experiments by simulating our
UNO computer program to obtain reﬁnement value and sophis-
tication measurement. Then, we quickly compare a particular
result with the real UNO games played with human players.
Another experiment is done by modifying rule of the game to
identify enjoyment value using UNO computer program.
A. Game Reﬁnement Experiment
First of all, we collected data from 1,432,089 game sim-
ulations run by several type of players described previously.
Composition of player types in each of the game is randomly
organized. Measures of game reﬁnement in simulations of
UNO is illustrated in Table II. The measures are applied for
10 different number of players playing in the game from 3
to 12 players. Each number of players gives a different value
of three variables which are average UNO times per player
U, average played cards per player P, and division between
square root of U and P as game information outcome.
According to Table II, U, P, and
√
U
P
are decreasing from
3 to 12 players. That is, chance to have UNO is decreasing
when the number of players is increasing. In addition, each
player also has less number of played cards in the game with
more players. Furthermore, third variable called sophistication
Figure 6. Graph of Game Reﬁnement Measurement UNO Simulation.
measurement is scored 0.0682 as minimum value and 0.0758
as maximum value. Speciﬁcally, sophistication measurement
reaches below 0.07 in 11 and 12 players. Understandable vi-
sualization can be seen from Fig. 6, which shows visualization
of Table II.
TABLE II. MEASURES OF GAME REFINEMENT IN SIMULATION OF UNO
CARD GAME.
Player
U
P
√
U
P
3
1.260
14.802
0.0758
4
0.976
12.684
0.0779
5
0.813
11.679
0.0772
6
0.702
10.994
0.0762
7
0.617
10.511
0.0747
8
0.554
10.129
0.0735
9
0.506
9.856
0.0722
10
0.460
9.594
0.0707
11
0.427
9.404
0.0695
12
0.398
9.246
0.0682
On the other hand, although our experiments using simu-
lation show fascinating results, statistical data which was ob-
tained from real games shows slight difference. By conducting
19 real UNO games in four human players, we have U at
1.118 and P at 10.947, so that the
√
U
P
becomes 0.095. This
phenomenon is interesting to be explained in discussion section
later on.
B. Enjoyment Value Experiment
We conduct another experiment by using UNO modiﬁed
rules, so that the game continues until only one player had
cards in hand. The results shown in Table III and Table IV
illustrate measures of game reﬁnement in simulation of UNO
with modiﬁed rules. The measurement is performed for 10
different number of players from 3 to 12 players. Ranking are
grouped by number of players in the game, and the enjoyment
value is expressed in function of the rank of the player.
According to Table III and Table IV, score of each player
is decreasing from ﬁrst rank until last rank in the game, so
that the ﬁrst rank gets the highest score and the last rank gets
the second lowest score. Speciﬁcally, the lowest and highest
score in each different player of the game is from about 0.074
to 0.076 and 0.11 to 0.22, respectively. Basically, only the
second and last player from all of different number of players
perform score from about 0.071 to 0.076.
There are some essential information extracted from statis-
tics regarding different type of computer players. Other statis-
tics from our simulation of UNO with modiﬁed rules in overall
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

TABLE III. ENJOYMENT MEASURE OF UNO SIMULATION WITH
MODIFIED RULES 3-7 PLAYERS.
Rank
3P
4P
5P
6P
7P
1
0.110
0.135
0.152
0.166
0.177
2
0.071
0.106
0.130
0.148
0.164
3
0.074
0.072
0.103
0.126
0.144
4
0.074
0.072
0.102
0.123
5
0.074
0.073
0.101
6
0.075
0.074
7
0.075
TABLE IV. ENJOYMENT MEASURE OF UNO SIMULATION WITH
MODIFIED RULES 8-12 PLAYERS.
Rank
8P
9P
10P
11P
12P
1
0.188
0.197
0.205
0.213
0.220
2
0.178
0.191
0.202
0.212
0.222
3
0.160
0.174
0.187
0.199
0.210
4
0.141
0.156
0.170
0.183
0.195
5
0.121
0.138
0.153
0.167
0.180
6
0.100
0.119
0.135
0.150
0.164
7
0.074
0.098
0.117
0.134
0.148
8
0.075
0.074
0.098
0.116
0.132
9
0.075
0.074
0.097
0.115
10
0.076
0.075
0.097
11
0.076
0.075
12
0.076
is collected in Table V. Statistics are given as a percentage and
score from all of different type of players, which are Amateur,
Defensive, Offensive and Observer. Furthermore, according to
Table V, the lowest and highest percentage of winning rate
are performed by Amateur at 10.04% and Defensive at 30.5%.
In addition, Amateur and Defensive also perform the lowest
score at 0.0862 and the highest score at 0.1337 of enjoyment
measure, respectively. On the other hand, Amateur reaches the
highest percentage of being second last player at 38.42% and
being last player at 57.82%.
TABLE V. STATISTICS OF UNO.
Level
Amateur
Defensive
Offensive
Observer
Winning rate
10.04%
30.50%
29.62%
29.84%
Being second last player
38.42%
21.55%
21.21%
18.82%
Being last player
57.82%
13.35%
13.84%
14.99%
enjoyment measure
0.0862
0.1337
0.1323
0.1246
Enjoyment measure of 8-Player UNO is represented in
Fig. 7 ordered by ranking. First rank player gets the highest
score at 0.188, but the second last player gets the lowest score
at 0.074. In general, the point is decreasing from the ﬁrst rank
until the second last player. Meanwhile, the second and the
last player perform score 0.074 and 0.075, respectively.
V.
DISCUSSION
In this section, there are discussions regarding reﬁnement
value of UNO and enjoyment measurement in the game ac-
cording to the experimental results. First investigation focuses
on the difference of reﬁnement value between UNO computer
program and the real game with human players. Then, the
second issue points the enjoyment value of the game which is
speciﬁcally related with the second and the last player in the
game.
First of all, by observing comparison of game reﬁnement
measurement between computer simulation and human UNO
games, there is difference about 0.02. The difference is shown
by 4-Player human game and 4-Player UNO game simulation
Figure 7. Enjoyment Measure of 8-Player UNO.
in Fig. 6. There are several possible issues to be drawn
regarding this difference such as computer player quality,
playing against human in reality, and method of gathering data.
Basically, our implementation of UNO players, which are
Amateur, Offensive, Defensive, and Observer may not fully
represent real human players’ abilities. They are only very
simple models, and could be improved to be closer to human
real strategies. Real human players’ abilities may vary broader
and deeper in terms of skill compared to our implementation.
Moreover, playing UNO against human players is more likely
to be uncontrollable, so that the game can be various depending
on various human skills. For example, human social nature
may cause players to not be equally considered by each
other. Besides that, another problem may be drawn by error
in recording data in human game. For instance, gathering
data in real human game may be less accurate because of
various game ﬂow speed. There are many factors affecting
the game ﬂow such as luck, number of turns, strategies and
so forth. However, our implementation has reﬂected only a
few of the various player types in the world. Although the
difference appears, our implementation is fair enough since
the difference is not signiﬁcant. Furthermore, the number of
data obtained from human real games is less than 20, which
is very small compared to our computer simulation with only
slight difference of result. Thus, the statistics gathered from
computer simulation is still acceptable to be analyzed.
By accepting data of our simulation, we can analyze from
Fig. 6 that UNO shows reﬁnement value from 0.0682 to 0.0758
for different number of players. In fact, there is an interesting
fact that the value reaches lower than 0.07 for 11 or 12 players.
By referring to game reﬁnement theory in board games [2]
and sports games [3], we can say that UNO is sophisticated
enough to play from 3 to 10 players since the reﬁnement
value ranges in between 0.07 and 0.08, which are identiﬁed
as the reasonable values. Moreover, although our experiment
did not cover 2-player game, we have successfully conﬁrmed
that recommended number to play UNO ranges between 2 and
10 players, which is what people voted on BoardGameGeek.
Our measures shows that UNO is a sophisticated game to play,
like chess, Mah Jong and soccer. Furthermore, we suggest that
the most sophisticated game to play UNO is not more than 10
players.
In addition, according to Fig. 6, there is a peak area which
is considered as the three highest reﬁnement value in UNO,
which are performed by 4, 5 and 6 players. By referring to
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

game reﬁnement value, this can be inferred that these three
cases are special numbers of players which is recommended
to enjoy the most the game of UNO, because it has the best
sophistication for these values. This ﬁnding is relevant to
the BoardGameGeek site, where people have voted optimal
numbers to play UNO, as well as the same result in our
experiment.
Moreover, according to our last experiment in Fig. 7, there
is an another important result showing about enjoyment value
in the game. Although the last player performs higher score
than the second last player, their values are in the range of
0.07 to 0.08. According to related works, by using board and
sports game’s sophistication value which lies between 0.07 and
0.08, our enjoyment measure shows that late players feel more
excitement comparing to players who left the game earlier,
especially the ﬁrst player. Hence, we have conﬁrmed that the
second and the last player enjoy the most in the game. Finally,
these results endorse ideas to support the concept of game
reﬁnement theory to be applied generally.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Game reﬁnement theory has been applied to measure
sophistication of games in board games, video games, and
sports. In this paper, we have extended this theory to card
games and presented that UNO can be analyzed using this
measurement. Speciﬁcally, we can prove the recommended
number of players to play UNO and show some enjoyment
measure to determine which player enjoy the most in the game.
In UNO card game, individual critical situation and indi-
vidual contributions are the most considered values to be used
in sophistication measurement in game reﬁnement theory. In
addition, the theory considers UNO card game as a sophisti-
cated game which is consistent with the popularity of the game.
Furthermore, recommended number of players to play UNO
has been proven from 3 to 10 players and the best number to
play lies from 4 to 6 players as mentioned on BoardGameGeek.
Thus, game reﬁnement theory is well applied in UNO card
game using the individual critical situation and contribution.
Determining which player who feels the most engaging
game is a challenging question to be ﬁgured out, especially
in multi-player games. Directly, enjoyment measure can be
simpliﬁed using critical states of the game and game length
in modiﬁed UNO card game. Speciﬁcally, this variables show
some facts that the second last and the last player enjoy playing
the most in the game. Consequently, the critical state of the
game and length of the game perform the most important role
in identifying the enjoyment measure of player in the game.
Thus, a good deal of efforts have been done to analyze
UNO card game using game reﬁnement theory approach. This
paper has successfully proposed attributes which can be used
as sophistication and enjoyment measure in UNO which are
individual critical situation, contributions, overall critical states
of the game, and game length. In general, critical state of
the game is reasonably a main factor in game reﬁnement
theory, especially in multi-player games in order to discover
sophistication or enjoyment evaluation of games.
This research can be continued better by exploring ex-
ternal validation to discover fundamental formulas in game
reﬁnement theory. Besides, it is possible to capture whole
picture of game in general by inspecting carefully all of the
applied concepts so far and identifying global concept of game.
Moreover, further works may consider other interesting aspects
such as cooperation and non-cooperation in multi-player and
incomplete information games using game reﬁnement theory.
In addition, improving computer player UNO in terms of
quantity and quality may also be interesting, especially in
developing a framework of more or less sophisticated multi-
player game. Moreover, there are other challenging aspects to
apply game reﬁnement theory in multi-player and incomplete
information games such as player modelling, social behavior,
economy, and game sustainability.
REFERENCES
[1]
H. Iida, N. Takeshita, and J. Yoshimura, “A metric for entertainment of
boardgames: Its implication for evolution of chess variants,” Entertain-
ment Computing Technologies and Applications, pp. 65–72, 2003.
[2]
H. Iida, H. Takahara, J. Nagashima, Y. Kajihara, and Y. Hashimoto, “An
application of game-reﬁnement theory to mah jong,” in International
Conference on Entertainment Computing (ICEC), pp. 333–338, 2004.
[3]
A. P. Sutiono, A. Purwarianti, and H. Iida, “A mathematical theory of
game reﬁnement,” 6th International Conference on Intelligent Technolo-
gies for Interactive Entertainment (INTETAIN 2014), 2014.
[4]
N. R. Sturtevant, Multi-Player Games: Algorithms and Approaches.
PhD Thesis, University of California, Los Angeles, 2003.
[5]
N. R. Sturtevant, “A comparison of algorithms for multi-player games,”
in Third International Conference on Computers and Games, pp. 108–
122, 2002.
[6]
T. Cazenave, “Multiplayer go,” in LNCS 5131, pp. 50–59, 2008.
[7]
G. Peterson, J. Reif, and S. Azhar, “Decision algorithms for multiplayer
non-cooperative games of incomplete information,” Journal of Comput-
ers and Mathematics with Applications, vol. 43, pp. 179–206, 2002.
[8]
S. Ganzfried and T. Sandholm, “Computing equilibria in multiplayer
stochastic games of imperfect information,” in IJCAI’09 Proceedings of
the 21st international jont conference on Artiﬁcal intelligence, pp. 140–
146, 2009.
[9]
G. Peterson, J. Reif, and S. Azhar, “Lower bounds for multiplayer non-
cooperative games of incomplete information,” Journal of Computers
and Mathematics with Applications, vol. 41, pp. 957–992, 2001.
[10]
R. Takeuchi, R. Ramadan, and H. Iida, “Game-reﬁnement theory and
its application to volleyball,” IPSJ SIG Technical Report, 2014-GI-31,
3, pp. 1–6, 2014.
[11]
E. D. Demaine, M. L. Demaine, R. Uehara, T. Uno, and Y. Uno, “Uno
is hard, even for a single player,” in FUN’10 Proceedings of the 5th
international conference on Fun with algorithms, pp. 133–144, 2010.
[12]
S.
Alden
and
D.
Solko,
“Boardgamegeek.”
url:
http://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/2223/uno.
Accessed:
15-
02-2014.
[13]
R. Bernhaupt, A. Weiss, M. Obrist, and M. Tscheligi, “Playful probing:
Making probing more fun,” in INTERACT’07 Proceedings of the 11th
IFIP TC 13 international conference on Human-computer interaction,
pp. 606–619, 2007.
[14]
L. Antanas, I. Thon, M. van Otterlo, N. Landwehr, and L. De Raedt,
“Probabilistic logical sequence learning for video,” in Proceedings of
the 19th International Conference on Inductive Logic Programming,
2007.
[15]
J.
McLeod,
“Card
game
rules.”
url:
http://www.pagat.com/invented/uno vars.html.
Accessed:
15-02-
2014.
[16]
J. McLeod, “Rules of card games: Dai fugo / dai hinmin.” url:
http://www.pagat.com/climbing/daifugo.html. Accessed: 22-01-2015.
[17]
UNOtips.org, “Uno card game ofﬁcial rules from unotips.org.” url:
http://unotips.org/pdf/ofﬁcial rules.pdf. Accessed: 15-02-2014.
[18]
E. D. Demaine, M. L. Demaine, N. J. A. Harvey, R. Uehara, T. Uno,
and Y. Uno, “The complexity of uno,” arXiv:1003.2851, 2010.
[19]
A.
Ramadhan,
“Uno
card
games
simulation
using
java.”
url:
https://github.com/masphei/unosuka. Accessed: 22-01-2015.
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

