Solving Problems by Implementing a Business Rules Management System 
A case study towards identifying design problems in Business Rules Management Systems 
Sam Leewis 
Digital Smart Services 
HU University of Applied Sciences Utrecht 
Utrecht, The Netherlands 
sam.leewis@hu.nl 
 
Martijn Zoet 
Optimizing Knowledge-Intensive Business Processes 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, The Netherlands 
martijn.zoet@zuyd.nl 
Koen Smit 
Digital Smart Services 
HU University of Applied Sciences Utrecht 
Utrecht, The Netherlands 
koen.smit@hu.nl 
 
Matthijs Berkhout 
Digital Smart Services 
HU University of Applied Sciences Utrecht 
Utrecht, The Netherlands 
matthijs.berkhout@hu.nl 
 
Abstract— During the timespan of the implementation of a 
system, the why and what against the actual state of the system 
can change. This difference is referred to as the design problem. 
Currently, no design problems are identified in Business Rules 
Management (BRM) and Business Rules Management System 
(BRMS) literature. To solve problems with a BRMS 
implementation it is important that the problems solved by this 
implementation are known, which is not the case. A case study 
approach is utilized containing two phases of data collection. 
Phase one consisted of multiple expert interviews focused on 
creating a set of design problems utilizing existing literature on 
BRMS design problems. Then, in phase two, the set of design 
problems were proposed to a selection of thirteen organizations, 
which indicated if the design problems occurred in a BRMS 
implementation. This resulted in a set of 24 design problems. The 
identification of design problems contributes to future research 
in evaluating BRMS’s. Furthermore, the identification of design 
problems is a contribution towards situational artifact 
construction in the field of BRM. 
Keywords-Business Rules; Business Rules Management; 
Business Rules Management System; Design Problems. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Organizations aim for a shorter time to market and 
lowering the cost of developing and maintaining any 
information systems to support their operations. Business 
Rules Management (BRM) technologies play an important 
role in organizations daily operations [1]–[3]. BRM is defined 
as: “a systematic, and controlled approach to get a grip on 
business decisions and business logic to support the 
Elicitation, Design, Specification, Verification, Validation, 
Deployment, Execution, Governance, and Monitoring of both 
business decisions and business logic.”[4]. Organizations 
have or could implement a system to support BRM. This is 
known as a Business Rules Management System (BRMS),  
which is defined as: “a set of software components for the 
Elicitation, Design, Specification, Verification, Validation, 
Deployment, Execution, Monitoring, and Governance of 
business rules”[5].  
An increasing amount of BRMS implementations are 
executed nowadays, of which many are characterized by 
complications. The fundamental principle of creating and 
implementing an artifact is that having an understanding of a 
design problem and its solution (the capabilities of a BRMS 
[5]) are acquired in the building and application of an artifact 
(the BRMS) [6]. Therefore, the problem arises that no design 
problems are identified in the BRM research field. Compared 
to neighboring research fields, for example, Business Process 
Management [7], Software Product Management [8] and 
Enterprise Architecture [9], were the design problems are 
identified in detail. To explore the design problems related to 
BRM, an answer is required on the following research 
question: Which design problems can be identified regarding 
the implementation of a Business Rules Management System?  
The goal of this study is to identify design problems which 
can be solved by implementing a BRMS. The identification 
of design problems creates a possibility for organizations to 
better clarify what problems they have and thereby what 
solution (e.g., a BRMS) is needed to solve these problems. 
The identification of design problems can be utilized for 
situational artifact construction. This technique requires the 
identification of design problems and uses these design 
problems to create BRMS instantiations for organizations 
with different specifics [10][11], for example, government 
agencies or insurance companies. 
The structure of the paper is as follows: First, the context 
of this study, i.e., business rules, BRM, BRMS, and design 
problems are addressed. Second, the research method used to 
identify design problems which are solved by implementing 
a BRMS are discussed. Next, the data collection and analysis 
of this research regarding case study research is explained. 
Subsequently, the results which led to the set of design 
problems are elaborated. Finally, the conclusions that can be 
drawn from the results of this research, together with a critical 
view on the limitations of this research and possible future 
research possibilities are discussed. 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

II. 
RELATED WORK 
Business rules describe the state of affairs of what the 
business demands [3] and the use in business and technology 
models [12]. A business rule is defined as: “a statement that 
defines or constrains some aspect of the business intending to 
assert business structure or to control the behavior of the 
business” [3]. For organizations to be in control of their 
business rules, an approach is utilized, which is known as 
BRM. BRM is an approach which contributes to the improved 
productivity 
or 
effectiveness 
of 
a 
Business 
Rules 
Management System. Each capability of the BRMS has its 
own goals and aims to increase the effectiveness and 
productivity of the BRM activities. The benefits of 
implementing a BRMS can be translated into design 
problems. For example, a BRMS is implemented to solve 
Elicitation productivity problems). In current BRM literature, 
benefits and advantages of using a BRMS are described in the 
work of [1]–[3], [13]–[16]. 
Design problems occurring in organizations are generally 
defined as “the differences between a goal state and the 
current state of a system” [6]. 
 In the context of this study, this would mean that the 
current state is not having a BRMS implemented, and the goal 
state, an implemented BRMS. A specific configuration of the 
capabilities of a BRMS solve specific problems, the design 
problems, as demonstrated in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. Design Problem Context 
 
Research field maturity can be classified as nascent, 
intermediate and mature [17]. At the moment, the state of the 
BRM research field is nascent [16]. Therefore, research from 
neighboring fields on the identification of design problems is 
taken into consideration [7]–[9]. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
The goal of this research is to identify design problems 
which occur when organizations implement a BRMS. To 
reach this goal, design problems which are encountered when 
implementing a BRMS should be identified. Therefore, a 
qualitative research approach is the most appropriate research 
methodology. Case study research is selected so the 
researchers could gather design problems in a specific 
context. This all leads towards the explorative nature of the 
case studies. The organizations included in the case study are 
distributed over the financial and public sector in the 
Netherlands. The researchers believe that the organizations 
from the public and financial sector are representative 
towards 
recognizing 
design 
problems 
in 
BRMS 
implementations because of their extensive experience with 
rules, laws, regulations, and compliance. This research 
includes a holistic case study approach [18], consisting of 
several reasons of why an organization should implement a 
BRMS (context), thirteen organizations which implemented a 
BRMS within the context (cases), and the BRMS design 
problems (unit of analysis). The data collection consisted of 
two phases. Phase one is characterized by a combination of 
first degree and third-degree data collection techniques [19]. 
The third-degree data collection focused on gathering existing 
literature 
on 
design 
problems 
which 
occur 
when 
organizations implement a BRMS. The literature is mainly 
used to show the existence of benefits and advantages of using 
a BRMS. The first-degree data collection focused on experts 
validating the completeness of the set of design problems 
through expert interviews. Phase two is characterized as a 
first-degree data collection technique using expert interviews 
to state which design problem occurred during their BRMS 
implementation [19]. 
IV. 
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS 
Phase one data collection was completed in November 
2016. The literature study was focused on identifying the 
existence of benefits and advantages of implementing a 
BRMS. The studied literature was used as an indication of the 
existence of advantages and benefits of which occur when 
utilizing a BRMS (as shown in Figure 2).  
 
 
Figure 2. Collection Of Design Problems 
 
These were translated into a set of 24 design problems. The 
24 design problems were validated through expert interviews. 
These expert interviews focused on validating the existence 
of the design problems and the completeness of the set of 
design problems derived from literature. Four expert 
interviews were conducted with an average duration of one 
hour. Each design problem was proposed to experts and input 
was asked about whether these were relevant in practice and 
if the design problem was complete enough to describe the 
spectrum of design problems that can be solved by 
implementing a BRMS. The four experts had the following 
backgrounds: expert 1: a professor with eight years of 
practical and research experience in the field of BRM and 
BRMS; expert 2: a lecturer and PhD-candidate with five years 
of practical and research experience in the field of BRM and 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

BRMS; expert 3: a Master student with four years of practical 
and research experience on BRMS capabilities, and expert 4: 
a BRM and BRMS practitioner with 21 years of experience 
on multiple BRM and BRMS implementations. 
Phase two data collection is completed during a period of 
four months, between January 2017 and April 2017, through 
a case study at 13 organizations. The organizations requested 
that their data is handled anonymously. Therefore, ID’s are 
added ranging from 1 to 13. Participants of this research are 
selected based on their knowledge towards the studied 
phenomenon, which are: the group of individuals, 
organizations, information technology, or community [20]. 
Translated to this research, the studied phenomenon is 
represented by organizations and individuals within these 
specific organizations which deal or that dealt with the 
implementation of a BRMS. Therefore, are knowledgeable on 
why and how a BRMS is implemented. The organizations 
included in this case study are distributed over the Dutch 
financial and public sector. These two sectors are selected due 
to the fact that these organizations have many products and 
services that are (semi) digitally handled in combination with 
high numbers of applications. This ensures that large parts of 
their products and services use business rules. To characterize 
the 13 organizations, certain situational factors are identified 
at each organization to create an overview as shown in Table 
I. The 24 design problems (from phase 1) were proposed, 
separately, to the participants, thereby creating a list of the 
occurrences of the known 24 design problems at the thirteen 
organizations. 
 
TABLE I. CASE STUDY ORGANIZATIONS 
Case 
ID: 
Sector: 
Employees: Implementation focus: 
1 
Public 
2001 - 5000 Organization-wide 
2 
Public 
2001 - 5000 Organization-wide 
3 
Public 
>5000 
Application focused 
4 
Public 
2001 - 5000 Organization-wide 
5 
Financial 2001 - 5000 Application focused 
6 
Financial 2001 - 5000 Line of business focused 
7 
Financial 501 - 1000 
Line of business focused 
8 
Financial 251 - 500 
Line of business focused 
9 
Financial >5000 
Organization-wide 
10 
Public 
251 - 500 
Application focused 
11 
Public 
>5000 
Line of business focused 
12 
Financial 501 - 1000 
Organization-wide 
13 
Public 
2001 - 5000 Organization-wide 
 
The employee range of the organizations is identified as a 
situational factor. These employee ranges could influence 
different implementation setups. For example, Organization 
1, with 2001 - 5000 employees possibly need a different 
configuration 
of 
BRMS 
capabilities 
compared 
to 
Organization 10 with 251 - 500 employees. The employee 
ranges are adopted from previously conducted research where 
design problems are also a topic of research [10][11]. Three 
main implementation scopes can be identified, which are: 
Application focused, Line of Business focused and 
Organization-wide. The work of Nelson et al., [21] 
demonstrated the scoping from narrow (single application 
focused) and expanded to Line of Business focused and 
eventually to Organization-wide. The implementation focus 
intends to characterize the aim of each separate type of 
implementation.  
V. 
RESULTS 
Phase one and phase two of the data collection resulted in 
a set of 24 design problems and are validated (on occurrence) 
by thirteen organizations. The organizations were asked if 
they recognized one of the design problems as a design 
problem in their BRMS implementations. The 24 design 
problems are listed in Table II. 
 
TABLE II. DESIGN PROBLEMS 
Design 
problem 
#: 
Design problem name: 
1 
Increase Elicitation productivity 
2 
Increase Elicitation effectiveness 
3 
Construct library of decisions 
4 
Ensure artifact relationship insight 
5 
Reduce Design effort 
6 
Shortening the Design phase  
7 
Increase Design productivity 
8 
Increase Design effectiveness 
9 
Support experts mobilization 
10 
Mapping of business rules 
11 
Improve Validation and Verification quality 
12 
Ensure automated Verification 
13 
Reduce Verification effort 
14 
Increase Verification productivity 
15 
Increase Verification effectiveness 
16 
Ensure automated test cases generation 
17 
Ensure automated Validation testing 
18 
Perform impact analysis 
19 
Create validated and accessible business rules 
20 
Reduce testing for implementation 
independent and dependent models 
21 
Reduce Validation effort 
22 
Ensure working with implementation 
independent business rules to export models 
23 
Simplify models into code 
24 
Separate 'know' and 'flow' 
 
The occurrence of the 24 design problems (DP#) during the 
BRMS implementations at the 13 organizations is questioned, 
and this resulted in an occurrence percentage for each design 
problem together with a description, as shown down below. 
Most of the design problems affect a BRM capability 
(Elicitation, Design, Specification, Verification, Validation, 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Deployment, Execution, Monitoring, and Governance). 
These BRM capabilities are explained, in detail, in the work 
of Smit and Zoet [5]. 
 
Design problem 1: Increase Elicitation productivity 
DP1 requires a specific configuration of a BRMS to 
increase the productivity of the Elicitation capability. For 
example, an implemented BRMS facilitates employees 
working on Elicitation with the possibility of supporting the 
comparison of different elicitation sources. 46.15% of the 
organizations identified this as a known design problem. 
 
 
Design problem 2: Increase Elicitation effectiveness 
DP2 requires a BRMS configuration to increase the 
effectiveness of the Elicitation capability. For example, an 
implemented BRMS facilitates the stakeholders of Elicitation 
with the possibility of automatizing annotations of sources. 
76.92% of the organizations identified this as a design 
problem in their context. 
 
Design problem 3: Construct library of decisions  
DP3 requires a BRMS configuration to solve the problem 
of constructing a library of decisions. For example, an 
implemented BRMS supports the creation of a library of 
decisions on one central location. 61.54% of the organizations 
identified this as a design problem in their context. 
 
Design problem 4: Ensure artifact relationship insight 
DP4 requires a BRMS configuration to give insight into 
relationships between artifacts. For example, an implemented 
BRMS provides the stakeholders with an estimation of the 
impact of a to be made term change. 76.92% of the 
organizations identified this as a design problem in their 
context. 
 
Design problem 5: Reduce Design effort  
DP5 requires a BRMS configuration to reduce the effort 
needed in the Design capability, specific for the requirements 
and specifications. For example, an implemented BRMS 
creates the possibility for the stakeholders of Design to 
support them by selecting the right rule base automatically. 
69.23% of the organizations identified this as a design 
problem in their context. 
 
Design problem 6: Shortening the Design phase  
DP6 requires a BRMS configuration to shorten the Design 
phase of BRM. For example, an implemented BRMS enables 
the reuse of decision structures or decisions. 69.23% of the 
organizations identified this as a design problem in their 
context. 
 
Design problem 7: Increase Design productivity 
DP7 requires a BRMS configuration to increase the 
productivity of the Design capability. For example, an 
implemented BRMS reuses patterns by filtering the rule base 
elements on features, such as type, status, version, and 
validity. 76.92% of the organizations identified this as a 
design problem in their context. 
 
Design problem 8: Increase Design effectiveness  
DP8 requires a BRMS configuration increase the 
effectiveness of the Design capability. For example, an 
implemented BRMS facilitates the stakeholders of Design 
with the possibility of automatizing the creation of diagrams. 
92.31% of the organizations identified this as a design 
problem in their context. 
 
 
Design problem 9: Support experts mobilization  
DP9 requires a BRMS configuration to support the 
mobilization of experts involved in the BRM process. For 
example, an implemented BRMS supports printing reports in 
a specific format to be used by the involved experts. 69.23% 
of the organizations identified this as a design problem in their 
context. 
 
Design problem 10: Mapping of business rules  
DP10 requires a BRMS configuration to facilitate the 
mapping of business rules. For example, an implemented 
BRMS creates the possibility to link decisions by modeling 
them together visually. 76.92% of the organizations identified 
this as a design problem in their context. 
 
Design problem 11: Ensure Validation and Verification 
quality 
DP11 requires a BRMS configuration to ensure the quality 
assurance of the Validation and Verification capabilities. For 
example, an implemented BRMS ensures the securing of the 
quality of Validation and Verification by generating a report. 
84.62% of the organizations identified this as a design 
problem in their context. 
 
Design problem 12: Ensure automated Verification  
DP12 requires a BRMS configuration to ensure the 
automated Verification of business rules. For example, an 
implemented BRMS ensures automated Verification of 
redundancy and lexical errors. 61.54% of the organizations 
identified this as a design problem in their context. 
 
Design problem 13: Reduce Verification effort 
DP13 requires a BRMS configuration to reduce the effort 
needed in the Verification capability. For example, an 
implemented BRMS creates the possibility for the 
stakeholders of Verification to suggest repair options. 46.15% 
of the organizations identified this as a design problem in their 
context. 
 
Design problem 14: Increase Verification productivity 
DP14 requires a BRMS configuration to increase the 
productivity of the Verification capability. For example, an 
implemented 
BRMS 
facilitates 
the 
stakeholders 
of 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Verification by filtering and sorting reports to execute a 
specific check. 53.85% of the organizations identified this as 
a design problem in their context. 
 
Design problem 15: Increase Verification effectiveness 
DP15 requires a BRMS configuration to increase the 
effectiveness of the Verification capability. For example, an 
implemented 
BRMS 
facilitates 
the 
stakeholders 
of 
Verification by displaying the conclusions of other colleagues 
to check for inconsistencies. 61.54% of the organizations 
identified this as a design problem in their context. 
 
Design problem 16: Ensure automated test cases 
generation 
DP16 requires a BRMS configuration to create the 
possibility for the generation of automated test cases in the 
Validation capability. For example, based on fact types and 
fact values within the context of scenarios, a number of 
combinations are tested. 46.15% of the organizations 
identified this as a design problem in their context. 
 
Design problem 17: Ensure automated Validation testing 
DP17 requires a BRMS configuration to perform 
automated testing in the Validation capability. For example, 
an implemented BRMS supports the creation of generated test 
cases to be used for the automated Validation testing. 46.15% 
of the organizations identified this as a design problem in their 
context. 
 
Design problem 18: Perform impact analysis 
DP18 requires a BRMS configuration to give insight which 
artifacts are hit when a change is performed. For example, an 
implemented BRMS gives an overview of the impact of a law 
change which affects related terms. 69.23% of the 
organizations identified this as a design problem in their 
context. 
 
Design problem 19: Create validated and accessible 
business rules  
DP19 requires a BRMS configuration to provide validated 
and accessible business rules. For example, an implemented 
BRMS implementation generates a validation report. 84.62% 
of the organizations identified this as a design problem in their 
context. 
 
Design problem 20: Reduce testing for implementation 
independent and dependent models  
DP 20 requires a BRMS configuration to reduce the testing 
of implementation independent models (models not specified 
to a specific context) and implementation-dependent models 
(models specified to a specific context). 30.77% of the 
organizations identified this as a design problem in their 
context. 
 
 
 
Design problem 21: Reduce Validation effort 
DP21 requires a BRMS configuration to reduce the effort 
needed in the Validation capability. For example, an 
implemented BRMS automatically determines the input and 
output variables when testing. 53.85% of the organizations 
identified this as a design problem in their context. 
 
Design problem 22: Ensure working with implementation 
independent business rules to export models  
DP22 requires a BRMS configuration to ensures for 
implementation independent business rules to export models. 
For example, an implemented BRMS ensures implementation 
independent business rules to export models (e.g., Decision 
Modeling Notation (DMN)). 38.46% of the organizations 
identified this as a design problem in their context. 
 
Design problem 23: Simplify models into code  
DP23 requires a BRMS implementation to simplify 
converting from models to code. For example, DMN into java 
code. 61.54% of the organizations identified this as a design 
problem in their context. 
 
Design problem 24: Separate 'know' and 'flow' 
DP24 requires a BRMS configuration to separate the 
implementation of the ‘know’ and the ‘flow’. For example, an 
implemented BRMS separates the business logic, business 
rules, concepts and relations from the business process. 
69.23% of the organizations identified this as a design 
problem in their context. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
The goal of this research is to identify BRMS design 
problems. To achieve this, the following research question is 
answered: ‘’Which design problems can be identified 
regarding the implementation of a Business Rules 
Management System?’’ In order to identify BRMS design 
problems, the researchers utilized a case study approach and 
conducted two phases of data collection. Phase one, aimed at 
existing literature on advantages and benefits of a BRMS and 
experts validating the completeness and relatability of the 
gathered design problems. Phase two focused on validating 
the set of design problems at thirteen organizations with 
BRMS implementations. From a research perspective, this 
research provides a basis upon which future identification of 
design problems in the field of BRM of related fields can be 
built. Furthermore, the identification of design problems is a 
key element for conducting situational artifact construction, 
due to the fact that situational artifacts are created to solve 
specific problems, design problems [10]. Therefore, this 
research contributes towards future situational artifact 
construction in the BRM domain. From a practical point of 
view, organizations could benefit from the identified design 
problems because it provides them with explicit design 
problems which can be solved by implementing a BRMS. 
Additionally, organizations can compare problems by using 
the set of design problems as a reference to their own design 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

problems. Furthermore, the results of this study are used to 
create a substantiated business case. 
Several limitations may affect the results of this research. 
The first limitation is the sampling technique. The case only 
existed of organizations drawn from the public and financial 
sector. We believe that the organizations from the public and 
financial sector are representative towards recognizing design 
problems in BRMS implementations. Further increasing the 
sample including industries other than public and financial 
organizations is required. The second limitation is that of the 
lack of any nominal comparison. Additional nominal 
comparison could be conducted to indicate the importance of 
identified elements, which design problem affects the 
implementation of a BRMS [22]. Being that a design problem 
is a problem (1) or not a problem (0), compared to that of 
situational factors [16] where there the organizations cannot 
select their situational factors. 
Following these limitations, we believe that future 
research should incorporate organizations from other 
industries, to compare occurrences of design problems 
between sectors. Furthermore, the next recommended step 
would be using this set of design problems in the context of 
situational artifact construction in the BRM domain. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
I. Graham, Business rules management and service 
oriented architecture a pattern language, 1st ed. 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2007. 
[2] 
J. Boyer and H. Mili, Agile business rule development. 
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2011. 
[3] 
T. Morgan, Business Rules and Information Systems : 
Aligning IT with Business Goals. Boston, MA: 
Addison-Wesley, 2002. 
[4] 
K. Smit, M. Zoet, and M. Berkhout, “Functional 
Requirements for Business Rules Management 
Systems,” Twenty-third Am. Conf. Inf. Syst., pp. 1–10, 
2017. 
[5] 
K. Smit and M. Zoet, “Management control system for 
business rules management,” Int. J. Adv. Syst. Meas., 
vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 210–219, 2016. 
[6] 
A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, 
“Design Science in Information Systems Research,” 
MIS Q., vol. 1, no. 28, pp. 75–105, 2004. 
[7] 
T. Bucher and R. Winter, “Taxonomy of business 
process management approaches,” in Handbook on 
Business Process Management, New York, NY: 
Springer, 2010, pp. 93–114. 
[8] 
W. Bekkers, I. van de Weerd, S. Brinkkemper, and A. 
Mahieu, “The Influence of Situational Factors in 
Software Product Management: An Empirical Study,” 
in 2008 Second International Workshop on Software 
Product Management, 2008, no. 21, pp. 43–50. 
[9] 
S. Aier, C. Riege, and R. Winter, “Classification of 
enterprise architecture scenarios – an exploratory 
analysis,” Enterp. Model. Inf. Syst. Archit., vol. 3, no. 
1, pp. 14–23, 2008. 
[10] 
R. Winter, “Problem analysis for situational artefact 
construction in information systems,” in Emerging 
themes in information systems and organization 
studies, Berlin: Springer, 2011, pp. 97–113. 
[11] 
R. Winter, “Design Solution Analysis for the 
Construction of Situational Design Methods,” in 
Engineering Methods in the Service-Oriented Context, 
Berlin: Springer, 2011, pp. 19–33. 
[12] 
Business Rules Group, “The Business Rules 
Manifesto,” 2003. 
[13] 
C. J. Date, What not how: The business rules approach 
to application development, 1st ed. Boston, MA: 
Addison-Wesley, 2000. 
[14] 
R. G. Ross, Principles of the business rule approach, 
1st ed. Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley Professional, 
2003. 
[15] 
B. Von Halle, Business Rules Applied — Business 
Better Systems Using the Business Rules Approach. 
New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 2002. 
[16] 
M. Zoet, Methods and Concepts for Business Rules 
Management. Utrecht: Hogeschool Utrecht, 2014. 
[17] 
A. 
C. 
Edmondson 
and 
S. 
E. 
Mcmanus, 
“Methodological Fit in Management Field Research,” 
Acad. Manag. Rev., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 1155–1179, 
2007. 
[18] 
R. K. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 
5th edition, 5th ed. London: SAGE Publications Ltd., 
2013. 
[19] 
P. Runeson and M. Höst, “Guidelines for conducting 
and reporting case study research in software 
engineering,” Empir. Softw. Eng., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 
131–164, 2009. 
[20] 
A. Strauss and J. Corbin, Basics of Qualitative 
Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing 
Grounded Theory, 3rd ed., vol. 3. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
SAGE Publications Ltd., 2015. 
[21] 
M. L. Nelson, J. Peterson, R. L. Rariden, and R. Sen, 
“Transitioning to a business rule management service 
model: Case studies from the property and casualty 
insurance industry,” Inf. Manag., vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 
30–41, 2010. 
[22] 
J. Mahoney, “Nominal, Ordinal, and Narrative 
Appraisal in Macrocausal Analysis,” Am. J. Sociol., 
vol. 104, no. 4, pp. 1154–1196, 1999. 
 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

