Turnover and ICT Contribution in Organizational Knowledge Management  
The case of employee turnover in portuguese real estate. 
Filipe Fidalgo 
School of Technology 
Polytechnic Institute of Castelo Branco 
Castelo Branco, Portugal 
ffidalgo@ipcb.pt 
Luis Borges Gouveia 
Faculty of Science and Technology 
University Fernando Pessoa 
Oporto, Portugal 
lmbg@ufp.edu.pt
 
 
Abstract— 
Organizations 
face 
a 
number 
of 
major 
transformations; one of the most important is that all have 
been suffering from growing employee turnover. This 
phenomenon makes organization loses not only potential but 
also customer relationships, image, routines, and other more 
subtle issues. In some cases, the most significant lost is clients 
trust with may have a direct impact on sales and profit and, 
also, perceived quality of service. For organizations where the 
business processes are less depending from machinery and 
heavily rely on human relationships, this problem is even more 
relevant, being real estate business one such good example. 
Additionally, if we consider the increase time needed to sell 
real estate propriety after recent subprime worldwide crisis, 
sometimes the broker who initiates the process is not the one 
who finalizes it. It is easy to retain in the organization 
information about activities we performed (the “what” and 
“when”; that we may collectively consider as explicit 
knowledge). However, we cannot say the same about the way 
those activities are performed (the “how”; that can consider 
more of tacit knowledge).  To solve this situation, organizations 
must promote ways to retain tacit knowledge, in a way that it 
can be stored and disseminated through the organization.  This 
paper discusses such issues taking into consideration real 
estate professionals, forms of action against this phenomenon. 
Assess the contribution of Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICT), formulating a conceptual model for the 
capture and knowledge transfer, using Grounded Theory to 
inform the model. 
Keywords-Knowledge 
Management; 
Tacit 
Knowledge; 
Explicit Knowledge; ICT; Turnover; Real Estate. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Knowledge has always being a hot topic in organizations, 
but nowadays assumes a critical role, because of constant 
changes, fast decision cycles and a knowledge oriented 
economy. Drucker [1] already pointed this in 1988, based it 
on the following three points: the basis of employment 
changes from the office and manual workers to knowledge 
workers, who resist the model inherited command of military 
organizations; an economy that requires organizations to be 
innovative and entrepreneurial; and, finally (and according to 
the author the most important), an heavy use of information 
technology. Also, we can say that human capital is the most 
remunerative resource of any organization in the long run. 
Current changes are more common and faster, with less 
time to react and even less to predict them. In the 
organizational perspective, “everything has an increasingly 
tight lifetime”. Transactions change from local scale to 
regional scale, and from regional to international and global 
scale, becoming increasingly intense and less predictable, 
promoting additional levels of competition [2]. We live in a 
time that “less is more and the time is now” – creating a urge 
to act on moment. This reality is not exclusively in products 
but across the entire organization, processes, technology, and 
even people.  
Considering human resources, we can observe a growing 
phenomenon: employee turnover. A few decades ago 
employment was considered as a relationship for life, both 
for 
employees 
and 
organizations. 
Nowadays, 
this 
relationship in most cases is very small in its time span. To 
analyze the workers flows in the Portuguese economy we use 
an administrative statistical source – Quadro Pessoal (QP) 
collected by the Ministry of Employment (MTSS). As we 
can see in Table I, more than half the working population is 
linked to an organization, less than 4 years. 
TABLE I.  
WORKERS SENIORITY (IN YEARS) IN PORTUGUESE 
ORGANIZATIONS 
Year 
Total 
Workers 
Less 
than 1 
year 
1 to 4 
years 
5 to 9  
Years 
10 to 
14 
years 
15 to 
19 
years 
More 
than 
20 
years 
2007 
2967559 
713897 
883286 
633051 
272900 
221758 
242667 
 
24% 
30% 
21% 
9% 
7% 
8% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2008 
3016571 
696045 
954170 
606046 
294669 
213196 
252445 
 
23% 
32% 
20% 
10% 
7% 
8% 
Source: [3], [4]. 
 
As a result of employee turnover, in many cases, 
organizations face a hiring process that is always time 
consuming and costly. Moreover, it is the loss of intellectual 
capital that those assets can represent. Furthermore, it is also 
needed to consider the time required for a new employee to 
be effectively productive. If in the hiring process 
organization has few to innovate, in the loss of intellectual 
capital organizations must create mechanisms to minimize it. 
Knowledge management can support the creation of such 
mechanisms. Organizations shall promote the capture and 
transfer of knowledge, so the impact of employee turnover 
does not represent the loss of organizational memory or, at 
least, minimize it. These issues assume particularly 
importance in organizations where the activities are not 
mostly made by machines, but by direct human contact. Real 
Estate is a good example of this kind of organizations, where 
the relationship between real estate agent (broker) and the 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

client (buyer or seller), depends most directly from the 
quality of the relationship between them. If we focus our 
attention analyzing seniority organizations data, considering 
the special case of real estate, we see that the values are even 
more significant (Table II). 
TABLE II.  
REAL ESTATE WORKERS SENIORITY (IN YEARS) IN 
PORTUGUESE ORGANIZATIONS 
Year 
Total 
Workers 
Less 
than 1 
year 
1 to 4 
years 
5 to 9  
Years 
10 to 
14 
years 
15 to 
19 
years 
More 
than 
20 
years 
2007 
21905 
6135 
8675 
4223 
1286 
772 
814 
 
28% 
40% 
19% 
6% 
4% 
4% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2008 
22539 
5646 
9496 
4366 
1485 
704 
842 
 
25% 
42% 
19% 
7% 
3% 
4% 
Source: [3], [4]. 
 
While the overall picture, up to 4 years of seniority in the 
company, had general values of around 55%, considering 
real estate in Portugal case these values are around 70%. The 
question is what organizations should (and can…) do to 
minimize the loss of organizational memory caused by this 
level of turnover. By organizational memory we mean the 
extension and amplification of knowledge as the key asset of 
a knowledge organization by capturing, organizing, 
disseminating, and reusing the knowledge created by its 
employees [5]. Dalkir also refers to the impact that of losing 
organization employees, by giving the example of NASA 
where “60% of aerospace workers were slated to reach 
retirement age all within a few years of each other”, and by 
this, threatened the loss of valuable knowledge of the 
Apollo-era missions [5], in what can be called as employee 
generation problem turnover.  
Not losing the traditional techniques like coaching and 
shadowing, the aim of this paper is to assess the contribution 
that information and communication technology (ICT) can 
add to this problem. This study reports the efforts that are 
conducted in the context of the first author doctoral program. 
As a result, the paper presents the problem and proposes a 
knowledge management approach to retain tacit knowledge 
in order to cope with employee turnover. 
II. 
SET THE CONTEXT: A BRIEF LITERATURE 
REVIEW 
A. Knowledge Management 
As defended by several authors, the value of knowledge 
is from all the organizational assets, the most decisive in the 
production [1], [6], [7], [8]. Organizational changes were 
very deep and with high impact in recent years. On one hand, 
the opening of markets resulting from globalization produces 
many challenges and puts pressure on both times to react and 
adapt to evolving markets. On the other hand, the emergence 
of a knowledge-based society turns knowledge into more 
central organizational assets and ones that needed to be 
further understand and preserved.  
Organizations are made of people and many are feeling 
that the knowledge of its human resources is its most 
valuable asset [9]. To succeed, a knowledge management 
initiative must have a robust theoretical foundation [5]. 
According to Dalkir, these models providing the widest 
possible perspective on KM Choo (1998), Weick (2001), 
Nonaka and Takeuchi (1995), Wiig (1993), Von Krogh and 
Roos (1995), Boisot (1998), Beer (1984), and Bennet and 
Bennet (2004). [5].  
The Nonaka and Takeuchi Knowledge Creation Model 
have the major contribute to this project, so it will be present 
in more detail. The Nonaka and Takeuchi theory of 
organizational knowledge management (Fig. 1 illustrates the 
four modes of knowledge conversion that are the core of the 
overall knowledge-creation process) argues that knowledge 
creation is an ongoing process of socialization, explicit, 
combination and internalization [10]: 
• 
Socialization: sharing individual tacit knowledge; 
• 
Externalization: from tacit knowledge to explicit 
knowledge (codification of tacit knowledge in 
metaphors, analogies, figures and stories to create 
new concepts and then justify them before the 
corporate imperatives); 
• 
Combination: in which the prototypes of new 
concepts are developed and incorporated into the 
organization; 
• 
Internalization: this knowledge through learning 
by doing and experimenting, making tacit 
knowledge to be generated again. 
 
 
Figure 1.  SECI Model [10]. 
The SECI or spiral model provides a good reference on 
how an organization deal with knowledge management 
issues and how a group of people are involved in the 
knowledge creation process. Knowledge creation always 
begins with the individual [5]. Making personal knowledge 
available to others in an organization is at the core of the 
Nonaka and Takeuchi Knowledge Spiral Model: this type of 
knowledge creation process takes place continuously and 
occurs at all levels of the organization – many times it occurs 
in an unexpected or unplanned way. Central to the SECI 
model proposal is the sharing of Tacit Knowledge that 
Davenport and Prusak define as complex knowledge 
developed and internalized by the professionals, over a long 
period of time which incorporates so much accrued and 
embedded learning that its rules may be impossible to 
separate from how an individual acts [8]. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

B. The Role of Information and Communication 
Technology 
Traditionally, 
information 
and 
communication 
technology systems are used in organizations to support 
processes. One of current challenges is to make them support 
the professional competencies of individuals and to turn its 
adoption work in a broader collective context.  
The use of computers and networks cannot stay only 
within the frame of operational tasks; they should add value 
to new forms of communication, conversation and learning 
on-the-job, support communities of practice, and provide the 
structure and access to ideas and experiences needed to excel 
in day-to-day organizational life. As stated by Davenport and 
Prusak, “The computer’s ability has little relevance to 
knowledge work, but the resources for communication and 
storage of networked computers make them enablers of 
knowledge” [8] – this reinforces the role that human 
resources may have in knowledge organizations as the most 
value asset.  
Without knowledge acquisition, knowledge transfer is 
meaningless. While knowledge transfer may be technology-
enabled, knowledge acquisition is human-driven, so systems 
must be develop people-centered, not technology-centered 
[11]. Information and communication technology continues 
to be a powerful force in the ways in which people and 
organizations operate. ICT advances have become a 
permanent force bringing continuous and sometimes 
unpredictable changes to organizational structures and 
processes, 
including 
services 
delivered, 
management 
practices and governance [12].  
Technological evolution allows tremendous freedom for 
creative thinking and a massive expansion of relationships, it 
also as a multiplier effect in promotion collaborative 
processes [13]. The use of computers, networks and digital 
information can open new opportunities in knowledge 
management and play important roles in meeting the 
prevailing challenges related to sharing, exchanging and 
disseminating knowledge.  
As we know a large part of knowledge is not explicit but 
tacit, and this will a trend as human nature prevails as one of 
the most important sources for creativity. This is also true for 
knowledge in real estate business where a lot of good 
practices are transferred without being well documented in 
books, papers or any other documents. We must also notice 
that real estate business is largely based on face-to-face 
contacts and puts a real stress on human relationship. We 
defend that the use of ICT is needed to manage the 
knowledge properly. 
C. Employee Turnover 
A few years ago when we refer to employment, its 
general understanding that it was a lifetime relationship 
between the organization and the employee. Today this 
concept is passing by a radical transformation and must be 
redefined. A discussion about employment and its social role 
is presented by [14].  
High turnover takes extreme importance, since human 
resource 
turnover 
represent 
costs 
to 
organizations. 
Chiavenato [2] proposes a cost list that are divided into 
primary, secondary and tertiary groups. The first group is 
quantitative, the second and third are qualitative estimates. 
Table 3 lists the Chiavenato costs for staff turnover [2]. 
TABLE III.  
COSTS OF STAFF TURNOVER 
Primary 
Recruitment and selection costs; 
Registration and documentation costs; 
Integration costs; 
Separation costs. 
Secondary 
Production effects; 
Staff attitude effects; 
Extra labor cost; 
Extra operating cost. 
Tertiary 
Extra investment costs; 
Losses in business. 
Source: [2] 
 
We may think, “Some employee turnover is unavoidable, 
even desirable”. Some turnover is necessary, to replace some 
employees with more productive ones and to bring in people 
with new ideas and expertise. However, high turnover costs 
are both avoidable and unnecessary.  
As new team members are added and others leave, it is 
critical to prevent the loss of information, even during such 
periods of major structural change [15]. Organizations can 
face a “Brain Drain” phenomenon if a turnover occurs and 
loses competent personnel at a higher rate than the 
organization can recruit and train new personnel. Some of 
costs involved to the organization or business could have 
easily been prevented in the first place if we experienced a 
way to retain employees´ knowledge. It is important to 
develop a strategy for retaining knowledge.  
The knowledge lost from a departing employee is not a 
short-term problem; it is a long-term problem that breeds 
other problems and reduces an organization's effectiveness 
[11]. This is both a challenge and a problem that deserves to 
be dealt with. 
D. Real Estate Bussiness 
The real estate business has been in the last decades, one 
of the most important engines in western development 
economies. In first hand, if we live in modern cities, it is 
easy to observe the phenomena of empty places where 
nothing existed, but the real estate business changed them 
radically.  
More recently, in 2008, the subprime crisis turns real 
state a more dangerous activity but still central for our 
economy. Nowadays we can expect to have a more 
challenging environment to buy and sells properties. In the 
context of Portugal, current sector statistics shows the 
importance of presenting smaller selling times, although 
there is a trend of the opposite. 
1) Time to make real estate business 
In the real estate business one key concept is selling time. 
Selling time can be defined as the amount of time needed for 
a certain property to be sold. It can be displayed in various 
units, usually days or months. For the independent 
Portuguese 
Real 
Estate 
Confidential 
(Confidencial 
Imobiliário) –  which operates in two complementary areas 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

of business, editorial and production indicators of market 
analysis, the absorption time is the number of months that 
mediate between the first placed on offer and completion of 
the sale, understood as and the conclusion of the promissory 
contract of sale [16]. As for the ERA real estate network, 
presents itself under the name Average Days on Market [17].  
Whatever the case, the reality is that this time has 
increased in recent years. According to data from 
Confidencial Imobiliário, in the last three years the increase 
was more moderate in the center of the country, more 
pronounced in the north of the country, while in the Algarve 
that time has nearly tripled [18]. The provided data by ERA 
real estate network in its most recent survey available, 
pointing in the same direction, although in this case the 
information is presented only in aggregate form, the values 
are global to the country and not by zone, as in the previous 
case. Indicating an average of 240 days on the market for 
270 days for 2007 and 2008 [17].  
Real estate organizations require real-time access to 
knowledge on a variety of subjects, including information on 
the core business and conditions affecting it, the business 
units' current objectives and corresponding real estate 
requirements, and the latest thinking in approaches to real 
estate [15].  
Properties sales, like any complicated transaction, benefit 
from the attention and continuity of the real estate broker, 
and when that isn’t possible, deal is delayed and can take 
more time to close because of staff turnover. New employees 
need time to establish relations with costumers, understand 
them, and then conclude the deal. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
We cannot look only consistency and validity in 
structured data, quantitative arrangements. At a time when 
the paradigm highlights the importance of the person as a 
guarantee of success – Knowledge Society – is increasing, 
the need for text analysis, interviews, speeches, among 
others, that is, pursue a qualitative analysis.  
The qualitative methodological approach used in this 
research is the Grounded Theory. According to Fortin this 
“aims to generate a theory from data collected in the field 
and among those who have relevant experience” [19]. This 
theory began with Glaser and Strauss in 1967 and continued 
more expressive, with Corbin and Strauss in 1990.  
Interview was used to collect data. This is indicated in 
cases where little knowledge exists about a particular 
phenomenon, and the researcher intends to obtain data on the 
research questions. In this particular case, partially structured 
interview were made. We interact through interviews with 
real estate professionals who hold a large experience, which 
gives them a deep knowledge of the subject under review.  
Was defined a non-probabilistic sample selection rational, 
determined by the purpose of the study and theoretical 
relevance, and its potential for the development of the 
theory. 
The 
theoretical 
sampling 
aims 
not 
the 
representativeness of the sample, but the “representation of 
the concepts” [20].  
Individuals are selected according to their level (expected), 
for generate new ideas for the elaboration of the theory [21]. 
The profile of respondents will be based on two different 
assumptions. On one hand professional experience in an 
area of more than 10 years, and on the other, organization 
seniority of at least 5 years. The first, it will ensure a 
thorough understanding of the study area, as well as all the 
elements needed for success in business. The second one 
gives us the double vision of the deep knowledge of the 
organization and the importance of the impact of turnover in 
the loss of skills. We contacted real estate agencies by email 
and when needed later by phone. Most of the interviews 
were conducted at the broker’s agencies. In the interviews 
the researcher presents his study and the interviewed signed 
the informed consent – a document to authorize the data 
usage, as previously approved by the university ethics 
committee. This process took about 30 minutes per 
interview. A voice recorder device was used in the 
interviews so they later could be transcribed for analysis. 
In the data analysis phase Strauss and Corbin proposed a 
method of comparative orientation composed of three types 
of coding [20]: 
 1) Open coding: are identified and coded, all statements, 
which the investigator deems significant, near or far the 
phenomenon under study; 
 2) Axial coding: preliminary codes will be compared and 
grouped according to their properties and dimensions and 
will allow the construction of conceptual categories; 
 3) Selective coding: categories intended to regroup for 
the construction of several major categories. These main 
categories will become central concepts and integrators to 
form the grounded theory to formulate. 
In short, the researcher makes connections between all of 
the facts obtained, to construct a theory. To implement this 
methodology, first we select the “initial case”, one 
significant case, associating with direct observation, in the 
environment or following the professional on the job and 
some relevant literature and we are in conditions make first 
analyses and to achieve the theoretical base (Fig. 2).   
 
Figure 2.  Grounded Theory Method – Theoretical Base. 
After this first theoretical base formulation, followed an 
iterative phase where new cases are added (eg. other 
interviews) more observations and readings to make a new 
analyses (Fig. 3). If new findings appear, the theoretical base 
is reformulated and a new iteration begins; otherwise the 
theoretical saturation is achieved (when nothing new is found 
and the theory no longer suffers changes). Now the 
researcher formulates the theory.  
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 3.  Grounded Theory Method – Theoretical Sturation. 
In order to validate the theory an alignment must be made 
with the theoretical reference. 
IV. 
RESULTS ANALYSIS 
Although the main focus of this paper was to build a 
conceptual model linking Information and Communications 
Technologies, 
Employee 
Turnover 
to 
Knowledge 
Management, our results also provide an opportunity for 
some substantial comments on the Portugal Real Estate 
Business. Many efforts are made regard the use ICT, 
however, there appears to be a lag with respect to the 
advanced use of technologies such as video conferencing, 
intranets, etc. As we can see from one of the interviews: 
“…I can tell you that after two days I was about to leave 
because I did not realize anything about computers, and still 
don’t, but ... now I perform a task in 10 minutes that at the 
beginning took me one day, two days and ended my 
patience”.  
Another one refers: 
“… I don’t say them aren’t good, I don’t know I to 
manage them”.  
Other says: 
“…I'm old school; I'm more of the paper and pen time”. 
However is common opinion that ICT are a fundamental 
resource on their jobs:   
“It's very, very important. Without Internet we can’t do 
anything. When there is no system, we act like crazy”. 
Employee turnover, and its effects in the organizations it’s 
also a very concern issue: 
“…when a person leaves an organization, always exists a 
loss, because contact with the client was that person. And 
then when the next contact is another person, the client 
whether he will or will not retreat …”. 
“…not only loss of knowledge/information, but also affect 
in a negative way by the loss of an asset created by the 
company. …”. 
Organizations also waste a lot of time settling down their 
new employees and make them productive: 
“…there were people, who learned quickly, and there 
were people that cost a bit more, it depends from one person 
to another. In some cases after two, three years had not yet 
heard a complete document or needed assistance to do it 
others after one month or two already knew how to do it …”. 
An indicator of this is that, for specialist positions 
responsible for KM, not a single position (i.e.: department, 
section) was found.  
Results also suggest that many decision-makers still think 
that KM begins and ends with building sophisticated 
information technology systems and that no further 
organizational change is required.  
Many others opinions were collected, but also point in 
the same way.  In order to represent and show relations 
among these findings, a conceptual map was created. The 
theory about the concept map was developed in the 70s by 
Joseph Novak, he defines it as an administrative tool for 
organizing and representing knowledge [22].  
There was made some relations between the phases from 
ground theory and the concepts representation in the concept 
map. Tree rings and a central concept are the present 
elements, as we can see in figure 4.   
 
Figure 4.  Conceptual Map. 
The external ring, is divided in two parts, both represent 
concepts that we consider as atomic ones. A division exists 
between them. The light green (more exterior) is compose by 
elements from tacit dimension (eg. experiences, talk,…) and 
the dark green by elements from explicit dimension (eg. 
photography’s, email,…). We can establish a relation 
between this ring and the open code from grounded theory. 
The second ring represents more aggregated concepts, 
generated by the first ones and his relationships, and in a 
similar way a relation with grounded theory axial code. In 
the last ring we found the principal concepts, as in grounded 
theory selective code, these main categories will become 
central concepts and integrators to formulate the theory. Real 
estate business has three major activities: 
 
House recruiting: real estate agent connect to the 
seller of a real estate property in order to represent 
him to the potential buyers; 
 
Visit: real estate agent show, showing the real estate 
property to the potential buyers; 
 
Sale: help the buyer and the seller of the real estate 
property making the transaction. 
All this activities generate information that must be stored 
and disseminated throw organization. The information 
dissemination must be done using some communications 
channels. In fact what we are doing by performing these 
activities; stored the generate information and use 
communications channels to disseminated it, is achieve the 
main objective – knowledge transfer.  
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

V. 
PROPOSED MODEL 
In the former part, we have analyzed the results. In this 
section we propose a conceptual model (Fig. 5) in order to 
transfer tacit knowledge based in the concepts mentioned 
before. 
 
Figure 5.  TATEK – Tacit to Explicit Knowledge. 
   A geometric figure was used – triangular prism to represent 
the model. The “input’s” and “output’s” arrows represents 
the model interaction with environment, what to receive and 
to provide.  
   Each lateral face of the prism represents the main 
categories mentioned in the conceptual map – Activities, 
Information and Communication. In all cases the colors 
nearby the inferior base are darkness and in the opposite 
side, nearby the top base are light. This difference represents 
the fact that either in Activities, Information and 
Communications we can found elements from two different 
dimensions of knowledge – explicit (dark ones) and tacit 
(light ones). Nearby the inferior base, the dark stands for the 
elements from explicit dimension. The inferior base 
represents the operational dimension, which give operational 
support to real estate business. In this dimension we can 
already found systems to support the explicit components 
from activities, information and communication. For 
example, when we schedule a meeting with a potential seller 
in order to recruit a new real estate property to represent we 
use ICT that give support to schedule the meeting, to store 
the result information and to communicate it to the 
organization.  
   But what if we think about the competences we needed? In 
all 
three 
dimensions 
Activities, 
Information 
and 
Communications, we use intangible elements. How can ICT 
give support in these cases? That’s what the top base of the 
prism represent, an existing reality without support from 
ICT. We need to focus not only in creating systems that 
support operational task, but also systems to support 
competencies. Also create channels to disseminate them to 
the organization and make them available to operational 
systems. We can also make an alignment from the proposed 
model: TATEK, with the Knowledge Model from Nonaka & 
Takeuchi (Fig. 6). In the top base, previously identified as 
competencies dimension, we can find a correspondence with 
two elements of the knowledge conversion model from 
Nonaka & Takeuchi – Socialization and Externalization. In 
the TATEK model we assume that booth them can be 
supported by ICT. Nowadays, more people use ICT to 
socialize the Facebook platform is a good example. 
Emerging virtual worlds enable new ways to support 
knowledge and knowing processes because these virtual 
environments consider social aspects that are necessary for 
knowledge creating and knowledge sharing processes [23].     
   With the appropriate ICT tools workers can do the same in 
professional environment, creating reports of their success in 
the job tasks, additionally associating his reports with 
images, sounds, and video; and made it available to others in 
theirs organizations.  
 
Figure 6.  TATEK – Tacit to Explicit Knowledge - SECI. 
   Organizations play important roles creating conditions to 
make possible (and desirable) what we define as digital 
socialization 
and 
externalization, 
creating 
retribution 
programs to the knowledge providers is critical in this case.     
   These roles are also important to promote the combination 
of new knowledge’s with the ones they already had. A 
successful KM implementation depends on a harmonious 
amalgamation of infrastructure and process capabilities, 
including technology, culture and organizational structure 
[24]. And, finally, evaluate the knowledge internalization, 
identified new activities, new information to provide and to 
receive to clients or to organizations and also new ways to 
communicate, otherwise in all three cases new approaches to 
the existing ones. This new knowledge represents the start 
point to a new cycle in the knowledge spiral.  
Based on the TATEK model we can develop systems to 
share real estate stories (SHREX – Sharing Real Estate 
eXperiencies) – following a storytelling approach. This 
approach can take into consideration some clues to support 
its effectiveness like raking: scales showing the importance 
of each individual contribution and its organizational 
compensation 
(measures 
for 
Socialization 
and 
Extenalization); ratios: evaluating professional performance 
comparing who have and who have not access to the system 
(measures for Combination); process modeling: make a 
process model AS-IS comparing the before and after states 
and establish timeline making a new instance of the process 
model, allowing to identify innovations (in products, 
processes, 
activities, 
information, 
communication 
– 
measures for Internalization) . 
VI. 
FINAL REMARKS 
This research investigates the impact of employee 
turnover in organizational knowledge and influences of 
information and communication technology (ICT) in 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

knowledge management in the context of the Portuguese real 
estate organizations.  
We use grounded theory methodology to collect data, 
associating direct observation, literature review and 
interviews to real estate agents in order to formulate a theory. 
Then, it was developed a conceptual model linking ICT to 
Knowledge Management.  
Through our conceptual model, our researched, we are 
contributing to a better understanding of the principles and 
practices involved in building the foundations for 
Knowledge Management practice. Our findings about the 
relationships between ICT, Knowledge Management and 
Real Estate Business are relatively general. However, they 
prove to be particularly relevant for the Real Estate situation. 
On one hand Real Estate is a business depends particularly 
from relations between people, and consequently from the 
knowledge created by those contacts. On the other hand, the 
employee turnover has always been a phenomenon with 
which organizations have to confront. The point is that 
today, time to market pressure (which made it increasingly 
reduced) makes the increase turnover employee in Real 
Estate business a more operational and challenging problem.  
As the time of a property stays in the market is rising, 
contributing to the central issue placed by our research, in 
many cases the real estate individual agent changes during 
the business. As a result, there is a need to create 
mechanisms to retain knowledge and allow continuity even 
with high rates of employee turnover.  
The success and the competitive advantages of 
organizations came from the individual knowledge, so the 
ability to capture and disseminate it within the organization 
is a key factor for sustainable success. The abilities of an 
individual valued knowledge resulting from its activity 
(when speaking of human resources) should be retained in 
the organization so that their separation is not only an 
advantage to the host organization.  
It is not enough to attempt to improve only one element, 
ICT, in its relationship with Knowledge Management, but it 
fails if not recognize Knowledge Management as essential 
for proper targeting Real Estate objectives. Progress depends 
on both technical and organizational change, and ICT 
professionals need to work closely with the others 
organizational players, in the deployment of Knowledge 
Management strategies.  
The 
association 
of 
knowledge 
management 
and 
information and communication technology can leverage 
provide better systems that can support organizational 
success and cope with employee turnover. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Peter F. Druker, O Advento da Nova Organização – Gestão do 
Conhecimento 13ª Ed. Harvard Business Review. Rio de Janeiro: 
Editora Campus, 1998. 
[2] Idalberto Chiavenato, Administración de Recursos Humanos 5ªed. 
Santa Fé de Bogotá: Editora MC Graw Hill, 2001. 
[3] MSST. (2007) Web Site do Ministério do Trabalho e da 
Solidariedade 
Social. 
<retrieved:Set,2010> 
http://www.gep.mtss.gov.pt/estatistica/gerais/qp2007pub.pdf 
[4] MSST. (2008) Web Site do Ministério do Trabalho e da 
Solidariedade 
Social. 
<retrieved:Set,2010> 
http://www.gep.mtss.gov.pt/estatistica/gerais/qp2008pub.pdf 
[5] Kimiz Dalkir, Knowledge Management in Theory and Practice.: 
Elsevier. Butterworth Heinrmann., 2005. 
[6] Thomas A Stewart, Capital Intelectual – A nova riqueza das 
Organizações.: Editora Silabo, 1999. 
[7] Karl Erik Sveiby, A Nova Riqueza das Organizações. Rio de 
Janeiro: Editora Campus, 1998. 
[8] Thomas H. Davenport and Laurence Prusak, Conhecimento 
Empresarial – Como as organizações gerenciam o seu capital 
intelectual, 8th ed.: Editora Campus, 1998. 
[9] A. Serrano and C. Fialho, Gestão do Conhecimento - O novo 
paradigma organizacional.: Editora FCA, 2003. 
[10] Nonaka Ikuhiro and Takeuchi Hirotaka, Criação de Conhecimento 
na Empresa – Como as empresas Japonesas geram a dinâmica da 
inovação, 20th ed.: Editora Campus, 1997. 
[11] Hamilton Beazley, Jeremiah Boenisch, and David Harden, 
Continuity Management: Preserving Corporate Knowledge and 
Productivity When Employees Leave.: Ed. John Wiley & Sons., 
2002. 
[12] Jaro Berce, Sam Lanfranco, and Vasja Vehovar, eGovernance: 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technology, 
Knowledge 
Management and Learning Organisation Culture. Eslovenia: 
Informatica an International Journal of Computing and Informatics., 
2008. 
[13] Sérgio Lins, Transferindo Conhecimento Tácito – Uma abordagem 
construtivista.. Brasil: E-papers Serviços Editoriais, 2003. 
[14] Anthony Giddens, Sociologia. 6ª Edição. Lisboa: Fundação 
Calouste Gulbenkian, 2008. 
[15] J. Samuells, Putting knowledge management to work for real estate 
organizations.: Real Estate Issues, 26(1):35–38, 2001. 
[16] CI. 
(2006) 
Confidencial 
Imobiliário 
– 
Metodologia 
SIR. 
<retrieved:Nov,2010> 
http://www.confidencialimobiliario.com/sites/default/files/Metodolo
gia_SIR.pdf 
[17] ERA. 
(2009) 
ERA 
Europe 
Market 
Survey 
2008/2009. 
<retrieved:Nov,2010> 
http://www.eraeurope.com/assets/pdf/ERAEuropeMarketSurvey_08
09.pdf 
[18] CI. Confidencial Imobiliário – Press Release. <retrieved:Nov,2010> 
http://ci-iberica.com/?q=content/press-release-tempo-de-absorcao-
da-habitacao-no-algarve-triplica-em-3-anos 
[19] Marie-Fabienne Fortin, O Processo de investigação – da concepção 
à realização, 5th ed.: Editora Lusociência., 2009. 
[20] A. Corbin, J. Strauss, Basics of qualitaty research.: Sage 
Publications, 1990. 
[21] Uwe Flick, Métodos Qualititvos na Investigação Cientifica.: Editora 
Monitor, 2005. 
[22] J.D. Novak, Concept Mapping: A Strategy for Organizing 
Knowledge. Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1995. 
[23] J Mueller, K Hutter, J Fueller, and K Matzler, "Virtual worlds as 
knowledge management platform - a practice-perspective.," 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS JOURNAL, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 479-501, 
November 2011. 
[24] Maria R. Lee and Yi-Chen Lan, "Toward a unified knowledge 
management model for SMEs," Expert Systems with Applications, 
vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 729-735, January 2011. 
 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

