S-Grouper 
A Semantic Based System to Semi-Automatic Encode Hospital Activities  
 
Roberta Cuel and Andrea Francesconi 
Department of Economics and management 
University of Trento 
Trento, Italy 
{roberta.cuel; andrea.francesconi}@unitn.it 
Filippo Nardelli  
Expert System  
Trento, Italy 
fnarderlli@expertsystem.it
Giampaolo Armellin 
Centro Ricerche GPI 
Trento, Italy 
Giampaolo.armellin@gpi.it 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents a pilot implementation of a 
semantic based system which enables physicians to semi-
automatic encode hospital cases. This system, called S-
Grouper, is the result of a project carried out by the University 
of Trento and two Italian companies: GPI S.p.A and 
ExpertSystem.  S-Grouper is aimed to improve the codification 
process of the so called Diagnosis-related group by (i) 
implementing semantic content analysis of healthcare records,  
(ii) providing useful hints and coherent categories that 
physicians may select, (iii) comparing the codification provided 
by professionals with the one automatically extracted from the 
patients’ health care records, and (iv) improving management 
of knowledge. 
Keywords- Diagnosis-related group; coding processes; 
semantic analysis; information systems; healthcare quality. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In Italy, as in many other countries, hospital acute 
activities are classified, measured and financed according a 
standard classification system called Diagnosis-related group 
(DRG) [1]. DRG is identified manually or semi-
automatically by physicians when the treatment on a patient 
is finished and the discharge letter is written. This activity is 
often supported by a 3M tool called Grouper that identify the 
DRG code analyzing the list of ICD-IX-CM codes which 
represent both diagnosis and clinical procedures adopted in 
the treatments.  
We have analyzed various practices in different hospitals 
in Italy, and in all cases physicians have to analyze the 
patients’ clinical records, manually codify diagnosis and 
clinical procedures, identifying the related ICD-IX-CM 
codes. Then the Grouper tool identifies the corresponding 
DRG code.  
As in a socio-technical system [3], the process of 
codification (ICD-9-CM and DRG) is interrelated with the 
individuals’ roles in the organization, knowledge they share, 
and their motivations. It is not hard to imagine, physicians do 
care more on medical procedures than on administrative  
 
 
duties, they consider the processes of code identification as 
irrelevant and oppressive, they may not pay attention on the 
correctness of the codes, and provide results prone of 
mistakes [2]. 
Analyzing the working environment, procedures, inner 
interests of physicians, and the technology they use, we 
identified some recommendation to improve the DRG 
codification process [4, 5, 6].  
II. 
OUR METHODOLOGY  
Our approach encourages the interdependencies between 
social and technical sub-systems and the relations among 
users, tasks they carry on, technology they use and the social 
structure they belong to [3]. Our focus does not reflect a 
disregard for the technical aspects of software engineering, 
but is meant to underline features of the process that are 
oftentimes neglected by software developers, but are 
essential for the success of any socio-technical based 
application. Ideally the process of design and development 
starts with a field analysis aimed at identifying the 
motivations of individuals and the groups’ practices which 
they belong to. Direct observations, interviews and 
questionnaires are very effective techniques that can be used 
to unveil and better define behaviors and motivations. In the 
second phase, the raw knowledge is then analyzed and 
requirements identified. The third phase is the creation of the 
software prototype which should be the simplest possible 
solution that can effectively support the users. In the fourth 
phase, the resulting prototype is tested, initially in a 
controlled environment with selected testers, then with real 
users, tasks (daily activities that actors usually carry on), and 
situations (the field and the social structure which actors 
belong to). The software changes in response to these 
findings, and the process is repeated until the desired 
outcome is achieved. 
III. 
A SEMANTIC BASED TOOL  
After a first analysis of clinicians practices we defined 
the requirements for a new tool aimed at improve the ICD-
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

IX-CM and DRG codification processes. The resulting tool 
called S/Grouper had the following high level architecture 
(Figure 1).  
 
 
Figure 1.  The system architecture of S-Grouper  
S-Grouper is an expert system that:  
- 
integrates semantic linguistic analysis in the Grouper 
software 
- 
analyzes medical records and any other relevant 
document the physicians may need,  
- 
and suggests some ICD-IX-CM categories. 
 
These are used by physicians to:  
- 
encode the medical treatments, reducing the time 
they spend dealing with bureaucratic procedures, 
- 
suggest alternative codifications enabling clinicians 
to improve their abilities,  
- 
check the coherence between the treatments 
described in the healthcare records and the 
codification chosen by doctors. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The interface of S-Grouper  
As shown in the Figure 2, S-Grouper allows physicians 
to:  
- 
connect in a "transparent" mode to the clinical 
documentations already digitalized (box at the right) 
- 
analyze the document and extract entities from 
unstructured 
sources 
of 
information 
(see 
the 
underlined text at the right) such as the patients’ health 
care records, the resignation letters, the nursing and 
surgical registers, etc.  
- 
identify various ICD-IX-CM codes and propose them 
to the physicians (box at the left) 
- 
select, organize and change the ICD-IX-DM codes 
(box at the left) 
- 
recognize the most appropriate DRG code and close 
the patient discharge letter.   
 
From the back office side, the system provides useful 
knowledge that enable administrative officers to:  
- 
compare the resulting codes provided by the semantic 
engine with the ones manually listed by doctors in the 
hospital discharge form  
- 
identify some lacks in physicians abilities  
- 
measure the performances of physicians and identify 
some opportunistic behaviors  
- 
report on potential errors or omissions, and provide 
some alerts  
- 
measure the benefits generated by a more accurate 
reporting and ICD-IX-CM identification 
- 
reduce time in dealing with bureaucratic procedures. 
 
Finally, the public administration or the local government 
may take advantage of this tool. With S-Grouper they can 
automatically compare the DRG codes identified by 
physicians with the ones automatically identified through the 
semantic analysis of the patient’s health care records, 
identifying opportunistic behaviors in DRG reporting..  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Barr, Charles E., et al. "Conceptual Modeling for the Unified 
Medical 
Language System." Proceedings/the... 
Annual 
Symposium on Computer Application [sic] in Medical Care. 
American Medical Informatics Association, 1988. 
[2] Bowker, Geoffrey C. & Susan Leigh Star. Sorting Things 
Out: Classification and Its Consequences. Cambridge, MA: 
The MIT Press, 1999. 
[3] Bostrom, Robert, Saurabh Gupta, and Dominic Thomas. A 
Meta-Theory for Understanding Information Systems Within 
Sociotechnical Systems. J. Manage. Inf. Syst. 26, 1 (July 
2009), 17-48. 
[4] Hoelzer, Simon, Ralf K. Schweiger, and Joachim Dudeck. 
"Transparent ICD and DRG coding using information 
technology: Linking and associating information sources with 
the extensible markup language." Journal of the American 
Medical Informatics Association 10.5 (2003), 463-469. 
[5] Pelzer, M., et al. "Electronic documentation of injuries of the 
hand with a semantic network: effective and efficient methods 
for the documentation of clinical and administrative 
processes." Der Unfallchirurg 110.3 (2007): 213-218. 
[6] Straub, Hans Rudolf, and Michael Lehmann. "A semantic 
clinical data repository-how the work on DRGs can serve 
clinical medicine too." Swiss Medical Informatics 27.71 
(2011), 34-36. 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

