 
 
An Experiment in Managing Language Diversity Across Cultures 
 
Amarsanaa Ganbold 
School of Information Technology 
National University of Mongolia 
Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia 
amarsanaag@disi.unitn.it 
Feroz Farazi  
DISI 
University of Trento  
Trento, Italy 
farazi@disi.unitn.it  
Fausto Giunchiglia  
DISI  
University of Trento  
Trento, Italy 
fausto@disi.unitn.it  
 
 
Abstract—Developing ontologies from scratch appears to be 
very expensive in terms of cost and time required and often 
such efforts remain unfinished for decades. Ontology 
localization through translation seems to be a promising 
approach towards addressing this issue as it enables the 
greater reuse of the ontological (backbone) structure. 
However, during ontology localization, managing language 
diversity across cultures remains as a challenge that has to be 
taken into account and dealt with the right level of attention 
and expertise. In this paper, we report the result of our 
experiment, performed on approximately 1000 concepts taken 
from the space ontology originally developed in English, 
consisted in providing their translation into Mongolian. 
Keywords: Ontology localization, space ontology, space 
domain, ontology, Semantic Web 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Building a true, flourishing and successful Semantic Web 
[1] should involve the participation from all cultures and 
languages across the world. In the development of the 
traditional Web, this participation was spontaneous and has 
been made possible as the necessary tools and resources 
were available. With the Semantic Web one of the crucial 
lacks is the capacity to assign precise meaning to words that 
requires Natural Language Processing (NLP) tools that use 
Knowledge Base (KB). Still for many languages such 
resources are not developed at all and for some others what 
is out there cannot be used effectively as they could not 
achieve critical mass. However, for English much progress 
has been made and the WordNet (http://www.princeton.edu) 
developed at Princeton is one of the well-known and widely 
used resources in the field. Yet its coverage is often 
unsatisfactory while dealing with domain specific tasks [2]. 
Towards solving the issue of the lack of coverage and to 
gain a critical mass of concepts, some domain ontologies 
have already been developed. A prominent example is the 
space ontology [3] developed in English with comparatively 
very large coverage of geo-spatial features and entities 
around the globe. Domain ontologies can also deal with the 
specificity of an area of knowledge, for example, by 
providing relations and attributes specific to the domain. By 
reducing polysemy (the amount of words with same 
meaning), they can enable better semantic interoperability. 
Ontologies that are developed to perform NLP tasks in one 
language can hardly be used with their full potential for 
another. Representing an existing ontology in a new 
language, taking into account cultural and linguistic 
diversities, is defined as ontology localization. 
In this paper, we describe the development of the space 
ontology in Mongolian starting from its English counterpart 
from the Universal Knowledge Core (UKC). Building an 
ontology without human-level accuracy is a potential 
obstacle in developing applications (e.g., word sense 
disambiguation and document classification). Synset base 
resources (linguistic representation of ontologies) such as 
WordNet and FinnWordNet [4] are built manually to obtain 
better quality. Being concerned about the quality and giving 
utmost importance to it, we followed a manual approach. 
The contributions of our paper include: 
i) 
The development of an ontology localization 
methodology that is domain and language 
independent and seems to achieve very high  
quality 
ii) The development of a methodology for dealing 
with diversity (e.g., lexical gaps) across cultures 
and languages 
iii) Lessons learned from the execution of the whole 
process in the generation of the space ontology in 
Mongolian 
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we 
provide detailed description of the UKC. Section 3 gives an 
overview of the space ontology. In Section 4, we describe the 
macro-steps of the translation process. In Section 5, we 
describe the diversity across English and Mongolian cultures 
in terms of space related features. Section 6 reports the 
experimental results, Section 7 discusses the lessons learned 
and Section 8 describes the related work. In Section 9, we 
provide the concluding remarks. 
II. 
THE UNIVERSAL KNOWLEDGE CORE 
The UKC[3] is a large-scale ontology, under development 
at the University of Trento which includes hundreds of 
thousands of concepts (e.g., lake, mountain chain) of the real 
world entities (e.g., Lake Garda, Alps). It consists of three 
main components: domain core, concept core and natural 
language core (See Fig. 1). 
As described in [3], the domain core consists of various 
domains, where each of them represents an area of 
knowledge or field of study that we are interested in or that 
we are communicating about [5]. In other words, a domain 
can be a conventional subject of study (e.g., mathematics, 
physics), 
an 
application 
of 
pure 
disciplines 
(e.g., 
engineering, mining), the aggregation of such fields (e.g., 
physical science, social science) or a daily life topic  (also 
called Internet domains, e.g., sport, music). Each domain is  
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Knowledge Organization in the UKC
organized in facets, where a facet can be defined as a 
hierarchy of homogeneous concepts describing the different 
aspects of meaning [6]. According to our methodology [7], 
called DERA, where D stands for Domain, facets are 
classified into three categories: Entity class (E), Relation (R) 
and Attribute (A). For example, in the space ontology, 
country and continent are entity classes. Relations describe 
relations between entities; examples of spatial relations are 
near, above, far etc. An attribute is a property of an entity, 
e.g., depth of a lake. 
The concept core consists of concepts and semantic 
relations between them. The concepts in the concept core 
form a directed acyclic graph, which provides the terms and 
the structure from which facets are defined. Entity class, 
relations and attributes are all codified as concepts. A 
concept is a language independent representation of a set of 
words (synset) which are synonym of a given word in natural 
language. For example, country, city, etc. The concept city 
can be represented as city in English, città (chit’a) in Italian, 
хот (khot) in Mongolian. 
The natural language core is built with the complete 
integration of hierarchically organized synset bases, for 
instance WordNet and the Italian part of MultiWordNet 
(http://multiwordnet.fbk.eu). This component consists of 
words, senses, synsets and exceptional forms. A word is the 
basic lexical unit of the natural language core represented as 
a lemma. It can be multiword, phrase, collocation, etc. The 
words in the natural language core provide, for any given 
language, the translation of the concepts stored in the 
concept core. 
Word senses are organized into four part-of-speeches -- 
noun, verb, adjective and adverb, one word may have more 
than one part-of-speech, and synonym word senses with the 
same part-of-speech are grouped into synset. A sense is the 
meaning of a word. A word can have one or more senses 
each having a part-of-speech tag. Each sense belongs to only 
one synset. All senses of a given word are ranked according 
to most preferred usage. A synset is a set of words which 
share the same meaning. In fact, words in a synset have 
semantically equivalent relations. Each synset might be 
accompanied by a gloss consisting of a definition and 
optionally example sentences. 
III. 
THE SPACE DOMAIN 
The space domain [3], [5] is a large-scale geospatial 
ontology built using the faceted approach. It was developed 
as the result of the complete integration of GeoNames 
(http://www.geonames.org) and WordNet. It is also known 
as space ontology and in this paper, we refer to it with any of 
these names. It currently consists of nearly 17 facets, around 
980 concepts and 8.5 million entities. The ontology 
(excluding entities) is integrated into the UKC. Some 
 
 
part-of 
  
part-of 
  
instance-of 
  
instance-of 
  
instance-of 
  
is-a 
  
is-a 
  
is-a 
  
is-a 
  
is-a 
  
populated place 
 
body of water 
city 
Italy 
country 
A 
b 
d 
lake 
Trento 
river  
B 
C 
e 
f 
g 
 
location 
Garda Lake 
is-a 
  
c 
depth  
value-of  
  
value-of  
  
depth  
shallow  
deep 
h 
 
i 
is-a 
  
is-a 
  
north  
south 
k 
m 
direction  
l 
 
l 
 
antonym 
(adj) shallow -- 
lacking physical depth; 
(adj) deep -- having 
great spatial extension… 
(adj) profondo -- alto che 
presenta una notevole 
distanza tra il limite 
superiore e il fondo; 
antonym 
(adj) гүйхэн (guikhen), 
гүехэн (guekhen) -- 
гүйхэн устай гол; 
 
(adj) гүнзгий (gunzgii) 
-- гүн; оломгүй гүнзгий ус; 
DOMAIN CORE 
  
CONCEPT CORE 
  
NATURAL LANGUAGE CORE 
  
   it-IT 
  
en-US 
  
mn-MN 
  
  
 
Entity class  
Instance 
 
Attribute name  
  
Attribute value  
LEGENDS 
 
Relation name  
Relations of the 
knowledge level 
Synset 
Lexical relation 
Relations of the formal 
language level 
 
Relations between 
knowledge and language 
level 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
examples of facet are land formation (e.g., mountain, hill), 
body of water (e.g., sea, lake), administration division (e.g., 
state, province) and facility (e.g., university, industry). 
In Fig. 2, we provide a partial bird’s eye view of the whole 
set of facets. Note that facets are not connected to each other 
and they do not have concept overlap across or within them. 
Fig. 3 shows a small portion of the facet geological 
formation in which the second level represents natural 
elevation, natural depression and the level below the natural 
elevation is organized into oceanic and continental elevation, 
and so forth. 
 
Figure 2. A subset of the facets of the Space domain 
Note that within a facet with double circled node we 
distinguish the root concept from the rest of the concepts that 
are represented with single circle. 
 
Figure 3. An entity class (E) category facet (partial view) 
In the Space domain, the relation category contains around 
10 facets such as spatial relation and primary outflow. A 
partial representation of the spatial relation facet is shown in 
Fig. 4.  
The spatial relation is the spatial property between 
geological physical objects or the way in which something is 
located. Leaf nodes of this facet represent relations between 
entities. For instance, Mongolia is south of Russia and north 
of China. The relation primary outflow connects two bodies 
of water. 
 
Figure 4. A relation (R) facet (partial view) 
Within the domain the attribute category consists of 
around 20 facets such as rain and temperature. 
 
 
As shown in Fig. 5 the facet rain includes among others 
rainstorm, downpour, drizzle and shower. With rain we 
mean falling of water in drops from vapor condensed in the 
atmosphere. The temperature indicates the degree of hotness 
or coldness of an object or environment. 
IV. 
TRANSLATION APPROACH 
The main idea of the translation process is to take the 
objects of the domain of interest from a source language, in 
this case English, and to produce the corresponding 
representation in a target language, e.g., Mongolian in order 
to update the UKC with translations. The process includes 
the translation of the synset words and glosses. A direct 
translation of them is provided whenever possible. However, 
the world is full of diversity and people of a particular 
culture might not be aware of some concepts. For instance, 
Mongolia is a landlocked country, thus some terms (e.g., dry 
dock, quay, pier, etc.) related to seaport are not known to the 
community or are rarely used. 
In order to provide the most suitable translation for a 
synset, we follow the macro-steps described below and 
represented in Fig. 6. 
1. A language translator takes a synset provided in 
the source language and gets a clear understanding 
of its meaning. In case of difficulty, he/she finds the 
corresponding images or videos of the synset 
word(s) on the Web to perceive the concept through 
visualization. 
rain 
downpour 
shower 
is-a 
is-a 
part-of 
is-a 
rain drop 
rain storm 
line storm 
thundershower 
is-a 
is-a 
drizzle 
is-a 
spatial relation 
direction 
internal spatial 
relation 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
relative level 
external 
spatial 
relation 
orentation 
east 
west 
south 
north 
vertical 
horizontal 
above 
below 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
geological formation 
natural  elevation 
natural depression 
oceanic elevation 
continental elevation 
hill 
mountain 
volcano 
mountain peak 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
part-of 
antonym 
geological 
formation 
body of  
water 
administrative 
division 
facility 
agricultural 
land 
land 
relation 
populated  
place 
attribute 
Figure 5. An attribute (A) facet (partial view) 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
2. The language translator provides a suitable 
translation of the word(s) in the target language. 
With suitable we mean word, multiword, co-
occurrence and phrasal representation as we do not 
allow a free combination of words as translation of a 
word. In case of unavailability of the word(s) for the 
given meaning, the translator can mark it as a lexical 
gap. However, the translator always provides the 
translation of the gloss. 
 
Figure 6. Translation phases of UKC 
3. A language validator evaluates the translation of 
the word(s) and the gloss of the synset. In case the 
concept is marked as a gap, the validator either 
confirms the gap or suggests a translation for the 
word(s).  
4. Upon receiving feedback on the synset, the 
language translator goes through the comments 
and updates the translation when necessary. In case 
of disagreement, the language translator provides 
comments including mostly the rationale about the 
disagreement. 
5. The language validator reevaluates the updated 
translation. In case of disagreement, the validator 
generates further feedback and sends it back to the 
language translator (step 4). Even if after a few 
iterations a disagreement is not resolved, a second 
language validator is consulted. If agreed upon, the 
validation for the given synset is over. 
6. A UKC language validator takes the validated 
translation to evaluate its correctness from both the 
language and UKC perspectives. The validator 
corrects the mistakes and resolve the issues (if any) 
communicating with the language validator (if 
necessary), possibly in a few iterations. Finally, 
he/she asks a UKC validator for importing the 
translation to the UKC. 
7. The UKC validator runs an automatic validation 
tool to evaluate if the provided input is compliant 
with the UKC. In case of errors are found, they are 
corrected with the help of the UKC language 
validator (if needed) possibly iterating a few times. 
Once all the issues are resolved, the UKC validator 
imports the translation to the UKC. 
Following these steps we translated the space ontology 
into Mongolian end-to-end, evaluated and finally imported 
the translations to the UKC. To achieve optimal quality 
while executing the whole process depicted in Fig. 6, we set 
the criteria that translators and various validators must 
possess the competences necessary for the task. The 
language translator should be a native speaker from the 
country of origin of the target language with a good 
command of the source language. The language validator 
should be a linguist possessing the necessary language 
competences. The UKC language validator is a native 
speaker of the target language with knowledge of the UKC. 
The UKC validator is an expert on the UKC with no specific 
competence on the language. 
From a geographical point of view we expect that, in most 
cases, the language core will be developed in the countries 
where that language is spoken, while the UKC is and will be 
developed centrally. The UKC language validator, whenever 
possible, should operate centrally where the UKC validator 
is. This spatial distribution of operations and operators has 
been designed as an attempt to preserve local diversity and, 
at the same time, to deal with the need for central 
coordination required because of existence of a unique, 
single UKC. The underlying model is that there is a single 
world, represented by the UKC, and many different views of 
the world, each represented by a different natural language. 
The diversity of the world is therefore captured, as it will be 
described in detail in the next section, in the mapping from 
the informal natural languages and the unique UKC formal 
concept language. 
V. 
TYPES OF DIVERSITY 
The translation or localization is the adaptation of a piece 
of knowledge to a particular language and culture [8]. This is 
nontrivial and linguistic experts might help in this task. 
Moreover, the localization should be based on the perception 
of the concepts and entities in the real world within the local 
communities and not on the literal translation. 
A. Concepts 
We assume concepts to be universal. However, their 
representation in natural languages varies. Within the same 
language a concept might be referred with multiple terms 
(known as synonymy) and multiple concepts might be 
referred with the same term (known as polysemy). 
The concepts valley, dale and hollow are represented 
with the same term in Mongolian. 
valley – (a long depression in the surface of the land 
that usually contains a river) 
dale – (an open river valley (in a hilly area)) 
hollow – (a small valley between mountains; "he built 
himself a cabin in a hollow high up in the 
Appalachians") 
Moreover, in the UKC dale and hollow are subordinate 
concepts of valley. In this case, translating them into the 
Language  
Translator 
Language  
Validator 
 
 
Translations 
resolve conflicts; 
provide feedbacks 
validate; 
give feedbacks 
produce 
Language dependent level 
Knowledge representation level 
UKC  
Language  
Validator 
 
request importing  
UKC  
Validator 
import translation 
resolve conflicts 
UKC 
 
Domain  
Core 
 
 
Concept 
Core 
Natural  
Language  
Core 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
target language increases polysemy. However, we translate 
them because within the Mongolian culture people can 
classify their (real world) entities under the specific concept. 
Lexical gaps are those concepts that do not have a 
succinct representation in a given language. However, they 
can be expressed as a free combination of words [9]. For 
example, the concept parish - (the local subdivision of a 
diocese committed to one pastor) is a lexical gap in 
Mongolian. The variation in the concept lexicalization from 
the source language (S) to the target language (T) is 
depicted in Fig. 7(a). 
As the lexical gap is a feature of the languages, it does 
happen with all of them. There can be a gap also from the 
target to source language. For instance, the Mongolian 
words бууц (buuts) and буйр (buir) are gaps in English. 
The word buuts can be represented in English as an area of 
dried and accumulated manure where a nomadic family was 
living and the word buir can be represented in English as a 
round shaped spot where a nomadic yurt was built. Note 
that these words lack a succinct representation in English. 
Therefore we consider them as gaps. This phenomenon is 
drawn in Fig. 7(b). 
The nomadic lifestyle of Mongolians is the source of 
these concepts that are not used in the English speaking 
cultures across the globe. 
 
Figure 7. Variations of concept localization 
Words pointing to lexical-gap concepts might appear also 
in the glosses. For instance, the term piers appearing in the 
gloss of Romanesque architecture is a lexical gap in 
Mongolian. In such cases, the translation is produced with a 
free combination of words. 
Romanesque architecture – (...characterized by round 
arches and vaults and by the substitution of piers for 
columns and profuse ornament and arcades) 
B. Senses 
In the space ontology, some words have multiple senses 
that have subtle difference in meaning. For instance, the 
word fissure has two senses: 
[S1]:  crack, cleft, crevice, fissure, scissure – (a long 
narrow opening) 
[S2]:  fissure – (a crack associated with volcanism) 
The two concepts associated with the given word are 
hyponyms of continental depression and they can be 
represented with the same word(s) in the target language. 
This phenomenon is shown in Fig. 8(a). 
Polysemous words in the source language might correspond 
to lexical gaps for a subset of senses. For instance, gorge 
has two senses within Space ontology and one of them is a 
gap as depicted in Fig. 8(b), where ‘mn’ and ‘en’ denote 
Mongolian and English, accordingly. 
 
Figure 8. Word sense diversity 
C. Synsets 
Words in a synset can be directly translated into the target 
language. However, for some of them there might be a lack 
of translation. For example, the synset mountain peak (the 
top point of a mountain or hill) has 6 words of which 3 of 
them lack translation into Mongolian as shown below. 
1 peak 
→ оргил (ogril) 
2 crown 
 
3 crest 
 
4 top 
→ орой (oroi) 
5 tip 
 
6 summit → дээд оргил (deed orgil) 
In gloss paraphrasing, some parts of the glosses 
sometimes are obtained using words with a very close or 
similar meaning instead of exact translation. Though our 
first preference is to provide the exact translation, in many 
cases this could not be achieved. The following example 
shows a paraphrased translation where the phrase “near a 
shore” is eliminated from Mongolian version. In this 
situation, there is no difference between bank and shore in 
Mongolian language. 
[in English] oceanic sandbank – a submerged bank of 
sand near a shore, can be exposed at low tide 
[in Mongolian] далайн элсэн эрэг (gl. oceanic bank of 
sand) – шунгаж орсон далайн элсэн эрэг, далайн 
давалгааны намхан хаялганд үзэгддэг (gl. a 
submerged sea bank of sand, visible at low tide) 
Example sentences in glosses were also paraphrased or 
added newly in order to provide a better explanation. For 
example, well-known place names are often substituted in 
the target language because famous names within a culture 
might give better understanding about a concept being 
translated. The highest mountain peak of the Alps ridge is 
Mont Blanc that is substituted with Everest as it is known to 
the most of the people in the East Asian region. Moreover, 
symbols are kept in their original forms, e.g., measurement 
unit symbol, pH. 
Date and time format, measurement unit and currency 
were converted into the ones used regionally. For example, 
5 inches is converted into 12.7 centimeters because of the 
pervasive use of MKS system in Mongolia. Note that these 
types of words appear only in glosses. However, using these 
types of word might not be suitable as fractions are less 
intuitive than whole numbers. For example, 3 feet is 
converted into 0.9144 meters. Such fractions cannot be 
a) 
b) 
[en] fissure 
S1 
S2 
[en] gorge 
S1 
S2 
[mn] эгц хавцал 
(egts khavtsal) 
[mn] GAP 
[mn] ан цав 
(an tsav) 
S 
T 
a) Gap in the Target language 
S 
T 
b) Gap in the source language 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
TABLE I. LOCALIZATION RESULT OF THE SPACE DOMAIN 
Facets 
Concepts 
Translated 
Disagreed 
words 
Disagreed 
glosses 
Translator 
Identified 
Gaps 
Finally 
accepted 
Gaps 
Finally 
Localized 
Concepts 
administrative division 
18 
18 
2 
4 
0 
0 
18 
agricultural land 
19 
19 
2 
1 
0 
0 
19 
attribute 
85 
73 
1 
23 
12 
10 
75 
barren land 
7 
7 
1 
0 
0 
0 
7 
facility 
357 
357 
54 
64 
0 
2 
355 
forest 
5 
5 
5 
4 
0 
0 
5 
geological formation 
200 
150 
73 
87 
50 
52 
148 
land 
15 
15 
2 
3 
0 
2 
13 
plain 
12 
12 
0 
0 
0 
3 
9 
rangeland 
8 
8 
1 
4 
0 
0 
8 
region 
46 
44 
6 
0 
2 
2 
44 
relation 
54 
54 
8 
32 
0 
0 
54 
wetland 
8 
8 
3 
1 
0 
0 
8 
abandoned facility 
16 
15 
4 
1 
1 
1 
15 
body of water 
116 
106 
24 
17 
10 
3 
113 
populated place 
13 
10 
2 
1 
3 
2 
11 
seat of government  
6 
4 
0 
1 
2 
2 
4 
Total number of objects 
985 
905 
188 
243 
80 
79 
906 
 
mapped easily to the real world entities and most often 
become tedious to remember. 
VI. 
RESULTS 
In this Section, we report the results of our experiment. 
We could translate 91.88% of the concepts of the space 
ontology into Mongolian and the remaining 8.12% were 
identified as lexical gaps. In Table I, we report the detailed 
statistics of the translation task and the obtained results. 
In Table I, the number of concepts per facet is shown 
separately, e.g., administrative division has 18 concepts, 
agricultural land has 19 concepts and so on. Note that for 
the sake of space, we group the statistics of all attribute 
facets as attribute and relational ones under relation. 
Language Translators provided Mongolian translation for 
905 concepts Language Validators provided feedback on 
each of the produced synset words and glosses separately 
that help us achieving better quality. The validation 
procedure identified 188 disagreed words and 243 disagreed 
glosses. Cases such as disagreements and modifications for 
improvement were solved in iterations (as many as needed) 
between the translators and validators until they reached to 
an agreement. The highest number of iterations was 
recorded as 4. 
Language Validators’ evaluation of the lexical gaps 
revealed that the translators proposed 10 false positives out 
of 80. We also identified that the translators produced 9 
false positive translations of the concepts whereas they are 
gaps. In the end, we found that there are in total 79 gaps and 
906 concept translations being accepted. The UKC 
Language validator and UKC validator reported a few 
(around 5) conflicts which were then solved with little 
effort. It is worth mentioning that Language Translators 
proposed to add 7 new concepts to the space ontology. This 
is only initial work and we expect that a few more concepts 
will be added with the evolution of the space ontology. 
VII. LESSONS LEARNED 
Assigning word sense rank appears as a difficult task to 
accomplish since the Language Translators contribute the 
results separately. In the translation work, they were aware 
of the fact that concepts translated by others might have the 
same word label. But it remained obscure until the whole 
translation task was finished. This ranking could be defined 
once all the concepts are translated. This is a non-trivial task 
to accomplish because deciding acceptable ranks might 
require local community agreement or the consultation of 
high quality linguistic resources that are often insufficient 
for domain specific tasks in many languages. 
Synonymous words within the synsets were often 
increased after translations were evaluated by the Language 
Validators. This was the case since Language Translators 
concentrate in providing the target language correspondence 
representation of the knowledge objects taken from the 
source language within a reasonable amount of time. This 
often results in the postponement of the addition of synsets. 
In the cases where an example sentence in a gloss 
contains a number that has to be converted according to 
some suitable measurement, we should freely change values 
and corresponding units since the numbers always give 
some extra information to provide glosses. For instance, 
6000 meters can be changed to 6 km (while value remains 
same) and 3 kilograms to 3 pounds (while value modifies). 
Nevertheless, in case of sensitive information found in a 
gloss, we should exactly convert the number to relevant 
measurement unit in order to preserve the meaning of the 
gloss. For example, for understandable measuring unit of 
the target users 500 feet can be converted into 152.4 meters. 
Parts of the glosses that follow the same syntactic pattern 
in the source language can be translated with little effort. 
For instance, the gloss part a facility for [verb]+ing [object] 
appeared in around one tenth of the concepts. We repeated 
the same translation for the part that matched completely. 
Moreover, we used the translation memory technique which 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
provides a translation with recurrent structure in the same 
way as previous translations. 
In order to introduce foreign cultures to the community, 
we can translate lexical gaps as free combination of words. 
However, this should not always be the case. A first reason 
is computational:  the explicit marking of the lexical gaps 
could support the KB-based applications in reducing 
computation time by avoiding the management of 
(multi)words which will be very rarely or never used. A 
second, more important reason, is related to the actual 
existence of a free combination of words capable of 
capturing, in the mind of a native speaker with no 
knowledge of the original concept (as it exists in the foreign 
culture) what the concept actually means, in the real world. 
VIII. RELATED WORK 
MultiWordNet [9] consists of several European language 
WordNets. It was developed under a model that reuses 
semantic relations from WordNet as follows:  when there 
are two synsets and a relation holding between them, the 
same relation is assumed to hold between corresponding 
synsets in the new language. There is no literal translation in 
the case of developing Italian version of MultiWordNet of 
the synsets, words and exceptional forms but the 
contributors have produced the best possible Italian 
equivalents according to their skills and experiences in 
knowledge organization and linguistics. However, a limited 
number of glosses has been provided, e.g., around 2k in 
Italian over 33k. 
The ontology localization activity described in [10] is an 
attempt to address the localization and diversity issues. They 
proposed guidelines and methodologies for enriching 
ontology with multilingual information. However, we differ 
from them with respect to the target language and the 
development approach. 
Universal Multilingual Knowledge Base also known as 
UWN [11] was developed leveraging on the Wikipedia data 
and linking multilingual terms that are connected to the 
same page. However, automatically built KB resources 
often suffer from quality issues, e.g., around 10% of the 
terms in UWN are attached to the wrong senses, whereas we 
achieved human-level accuracy. 
FinnWordNet [4] was produced from WordNet with the 
help of professional translators and the output is monitored 
by bulk validation. While producing the whole WordNet in 
Finish in 100 days, they traded off the quality for reducing 
the amount of translation time. Diversity in the languages 
such as lexical gaps is overlooked in this task. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we proposed an approach for generating 
ontologies through translation from one language into 
another. This approach was developed to be applied 
independently of domain and language and to deal with the 
diversity across the languages. While translating the 
ontologies, we manage diversity with the identification of 
diversity features and their presence in a given target 
language by working together with the linguistic experts 
and/or native speakers living in the country where it is 
spoken. We evaluated the effectiveness of the methodology 
by performing a case study for translating the space 
ontology into Mongolian. Thanks to the reuse of the 
ontological backbone structure, we achieved a space 
ontology in Mongolian that is as high quality as the original 
one in English. Though manual approach is usually known 
to be time consuming, adopting this methodology in a 
crowdsourcing setting can help increase throughput and 
make this suitable for dealing with large ontologies. Our 
future plan includes the exploitation of this valuable 
resource to improve the accuracy of NLP tasks (see [12]) 
and Concept Search (see [13]) in space domain. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research leading to these results has received funding 
(partially) from the European Community's Seventh 
Framework 
Program 
(FP7/2007-2013) 
under 
grant 
agreement n. 600854 Smart Society: hybrid and diversity-
aware collective adaptive systems: where people meet 
machines to build smarter societies http://www.smart-
society-project.eu/. We are thankful to Vincenzo Maltese for 
his valuable feedback. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, and O. Lassila, “The Semantic Web,” 
Scientific American, vol. 284, no. 5, 2001, pp. 34–43. 
[2] 
F. Giunchiglia, V. Maltese, F. Farazi, and D. Biswanath, 
“GeoWordNet: a resource for geo-spatial applications,” in ESWC’10, 
Volume Part I, 2010, no. December 2009, pp. 121–136. 
[3] 
F. Giunchiglia, V. Maltese, and D. Biswanath, “Domains and context: 
first steps towards managing diversity in knowledge,” Web 
Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web, 
vol. 12–13, 2012, pp. 53–63. 
[4] 
K. Lindén and L. Carlson, “FinnWordNet – Finnish WordNet by 
Translation,” LexicoNordica – Nordic Journal of Lexicography, vol. 
17, 2010, pp. 119–140. 
[5] 
F. Giunchiglia, B. Dutta, V. Maltese, and F. Farazi, “A facet-based 
methodology for the construction of a large-scale geospatial 
ontology,” Journal on Data Semantics, vol. 1, no. 1, 2012, pp. 57–73. 
[6] 
F. Giunchiglia, B. Dutta, and V. Maltese, “Faceted Lightweight 
Ontologies,” 
in 
in 
Conceptual 
Modeling 
Foundations 
and 
Applications, vol. 5600, 2009, pp. 36–51. 
[7] 
F. Giunchiglia, B. Dutta, and V. Maltese, “From Knowledge 
Organization to Knowledge Representation,” in 
ISKO UK 
Conference, 2013, no. June. 
[8] 
M. C. Suárez-Figueroa and A. Gómez-Pérez, “First Attempt towards 
a Standard Glossary of Ontology Engineering Terminology,” in 
TKE08, 2008, pp. 1–15. 
[9] 
L. Bentivogli and E. Pianta, “Looking for lexical gaps,” in 
EURALEX International Congress, 2000, pp. 663-669. 
[10] M. Espinoza, E. Montiel-Ponsoda, and A. Gómez-Pérez, “Ontology 
localization,” in K-CAP  ’09, 2009, pp. 33-40. 
[11] G. De Melo and G. Weikum, “Towards Universal Multilingual 
Knowledge Bases,” in Principles, construction, and applications of 
multilingual wordnets : proceedings of the Fifth Global WordNet 
Conference, 2010, pp. 149–156. 
[12] I. Zaihrayeu, L. Sun, F. Giunchiglia, W. Pan, Q. Ju, M. Chi, and X. 
Huang, “From Web Directories to Ontologies : Natural Language 
Processing Challenges,” in ISWC’07/ASWC'07, 2007, no. 60673038, 
pp. 623–636. 
[13] F. Giunchiglia, U. Kharkevich, and I. Zaihrayeu, “Concept search,” 
The Semantic Web Research and Applications, vol. 5554/2009, 2009, 
pp. 429–444.  
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

