 
A Comprehensive Study on the Reality of Knowledge Management and Lessons 
Learned in the Projects  
A Case Study in Iran Oil and Gas projects 
Ahad Nazari 
Assistant Professor, Faculty of Architecture and Urban 
Planning, Shahid Beheshti University 
Tehran, Iran 
Nazari_ahad@yahoo.com 
Mohammad Mehdi Mortaheb 
Assistant Professor, Civil Engineering Department,    
Sharif University of Technology 
Tehran, Iran 
mmmortaheb@yahoo.com 
Zahra Aghalou 
Engineering Department, Ministry of Petroleum, Expert on Project Management 
Tehran, Iran 
aghaluz@yahoo.com
  
Abstract—The concept of Lessons Learned (LL) in projects 
refers to the knowledge and experiences have been gained 
during the execution of the projects. These can be very vital 
in improvement of management style of current and future 
projects, to prevent the potential problems such as cost and 
time overruns. However, despite the importance of LL, it is 
usually ignored or not considered properly in the projects. 
The aim of this research is to study the current status of the 
LL practices in “Iran Oil and Gas Projects” (IOGP). First, a 
comprehensive literature review on the concept and 
approaches used to include LL in project management is 
conducted. Then, the major barriers for implementation of 
LL management in IOGP are identified, using interview 
method and investigation of the current states of LL 
processes in IOGP. Finally, in order to suggest solutions, in-
depth analysis of the problems is carried out, using project 
management tools and techniques. According to the findings 
of this research, there is not a formal and systematic process 
for LL management in IOGP. Moreover, the main barriers 
for KM and LL Process consist of strategic and management 
barriers, organizational barriers, communication barriers 
and staff barriers. The proposed solution to improve the LL 
documentation consists of organizational issues, open 
communication culture, training & learning environment 
and formal LL process. 
 
Keywords-Project 
management; 
Lessons 
learned; 
Knowledge Management; Oil and Gas Projects  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Completed projects are terrific sources of information 
[3], which bring some new experiences on the table. Such 
information can help to prevent similar problems in future 
and make considerable time and cost savings on the 
projects. The concept of Lessons learned (LL) in projects 
refers to the knowledge gained from the process of 
performing the project. It can be documented at any time 
of project life cycle, particularly during the execution of 
the projects, in order to catalogue significant information 
that has evolved as a result of the implementation of the 
projects. The gathered information is used to build up a 
knowledge base of an organization and to establish a 
database of the best and worst experiences in project 
implementation [1]. LL has a significant role in knowledge 
development and improvement, particularly in uncertain 
problems. It provides the possibility of recording the 
knowledge gained by professional bodies who have 
worked thousands of hours in the projects. So even if they 
leave the organization, it can be documented and reported 
as the LL knowledge base, which is a database of 
historical information, gained experiences and issues 
related to the outcomes of previous projects [2].   
Despite the importance of KM & LL, they are usually 
ignored or not considered properly. This deficiency is 
common not only in many of the projects in the world but 
also in the “Iran Oil and Gas Projects” (IOGP). So, the aim 
of this paper is to study the current status of LL 
documentation in IOGP with concentration on its barriers. 
According to this aim, through a comprehensive literature 
survey on the concept of LL and KM, the processes, tools 
and requirements for developing a successful LL process 
is introduced. Then the barriers for KM and LL process are 
identified. 
Finally, 
through 
some 
interviews 
and 
documents analysis, the status and the barriers for 
implementation of LL process in IOGP is investigated and 
some solutions are proposed. 
 
II. 
LITERATURE  REVIEW 
A.  KM and LL Reality in the Projects 
 Lessons learned are the experiences gained from the 
process of performing the projects. It is an ongoing 
process with great knowledge creation. It may be 
considered as a project record, which is classified as a 
lessons learned knowledge data base [2]. The project team 
may learn lessons which can be useful in similar future 
projects, while no one documents them in a systematic 
way at the end of the projects [11]. Using knowledge 
gained from implementation, failures or even successes of 
the projects is vital for the long-term sustainability and 
competitiveness of businesses [5]. It can be helpful in; 
reduction of the cost and time needed for problem solving 
and improvement of the quality of the solutions suggesetd 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
during the construction phase of the projects. Morover, it 
can reduce the probability of repetition of the same 
problems in projects [12]. So, most of the projects do not 
need to start from scratching as much as they can utilize 
existing processes and learn from the experiences acquired 
from previous projects [5].  
According to "integration management" part of 
PMBOK [2], project close out refers to the process related 
to the closing of the projects including LL documentation. 
This document includes "Historical Information" which is 
transferred to the LL knowledge base for use by future 
projects. It can be concluded that LL activities is a major 
part of the knowledge management in the projects. This 
information is used to update "Organizational Process 
Assets".  
Knowledge Management (KM) is the process of 
creating value from an organization’s intangible assets. It 
refers to sharing and leveraging knowledge within an 
organization 
and 
outward 
toward 
customers 
and 
stakeholders [5]. KM has such strategic value that 
organizations should include it as one of the pillars of their 
human capital strategy. KM can help to capture, share and 
leverage knowledge before it leaves the organization [5]. 
KM improves the efficiency of the organizations; it 
facilitates the access to the knowledge of the employees. 
The organizations make better decisions, improve their 
procedures, reduce reworks, increase innovation and reach 
to high level of integration and cooperation [6]. 
B.   KM and LL Processes and Tools 
 Several KM cycles are suggested in different 
references, while the simplest one that meets the purpose 
of this paper consists of four major steps, Knowledge is 
identified and captured, shared with others, applied in 
combination with existing pertinent knowledge, and then 
created in the form of new knowledge, which is then 
captured and continues [5].  
According to Chin, (2004) [13] There are three parts to 
the basic LL process. First, develop an environment that 
supports continual learning. Then, capture key lessons 
learned and finally, archive, organize, and make these 
learnings accessible to current and future project teams. 
So, archiving, organizing, and communicating LL will be 
a foundation for long-term success of the organizations. 
Considering the aim of this approach, it is possible to 
create major three steps for LL process including; LL 
capturing approaches which refers to the activities of 
capturing key lessons learned, LL documenting which 
refers to the activities of archiving and organizing and LL 
communicating which refers to the activities of making 
LL accessible to current and future projects. Comparing 
the KM cycle as explained previously with the above 
suggested steps for the LL process, It can be concluded 
that the concept of the steps is similar but as it mentioned 
the fourth step of the KM cycle is use of knowledge by 
people and then it may result in creating the form of new 
knowledge which is then captured and continues, 
therefore for completion the cycle of the LL process 
another step should be added as "LL Feedbacks & 
Development". So it implies that LL process should 
include four major steps: Capturing Phase, Documenting 
Phase, communicating Phase, Feedbacks & Development 
Phase:   
C.   Capturing Phase 
 The purpose of "LL capturing" is to find out key 
experiences, deviations and any LL regarding the ongoing 
projects. Key information about achieved experiences 
including deviations, problems, opportunities, wrong or 
right actions/ solutions and root causes of any deviations 
and problems are captured from key projects’ team 
members and Stakeholders. It should be noticed that there 
are some approaches for capturing of LL, experiences and 
root causes analysis, as below. It means that LL 
approaches should not be just a diary report of what 
happened in the project. Below, different approaches for 
"LL capturing" are presented [13]. 
1) Learning Organization Establishment: A learning 
organization is one in which managers do everything 
possible to maximize the ability of individuals and groups 
to think and behave creatively and thus maximize the 
potential for organizational learning to take place. In order 
to establish such environment, a learning organization 
should be built up. The five principles for creating a 
learning organization are  to develop  personal mastery, 
build complex, challenging mental models, promote team 
learning, build shared vision and  encourage system 
thinking 
[10]. 
Organizational 
Learning 
(OL) 
is 
complementary to KM. An early view of OL was 
"Encoding inferences from history into routines that guide 
behaviour"(Levitt and March 1988). So OL has to do with 
embedding what has been learned into the fabric of the 
organization [9]. 
2) Meeting Approaches: There are different techniques 
to manage LL meetings such as brain storming [13], open 
discussion [14] and even E-meeting [4], in which all 
participants can discuss from their point of view in turn. 
The facilitators of the meetings should try to keep 
discussions on the road and un-biased. Well documenting 
and recording of the meetings’ results is important [13]. 
The input data for these meetings include Project 
Schedule, Bug Reports, Review Reports, and Integrated 
Project Plan [15]. 
Generally LL meetings should be held bi-weekly, 
monthly or at major milestones with participation of the 
project team and stakeholders, as an information sharing 
tool of how obstacles were overcome and what could be 
done better on the next phase or next project. The 
advantage of  regular meetings  during the project progress 
(not just at project completion) is that people can give 
more accurate information and have better discussion, 
before forgetting the details of experiences or even leaving  
the project or organization.  
• 
Brainstorming Technique:  In this technique, the 
facilitator asks the participants to write their 
answers/ideas to questions such as: “what are the 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
main LL / experiences in the project”, "what could be 
improved?" and "what went well?"  In order to avoid 
people influence on each other point of views and 
cause biases on the results, it is recommended to 
develop the ideas in silence. Then the facilitator leads 
the discussion to record and publish the results of LL 
[13].  
• 
Open Discussion: In this approach all participants can 
present issues including experiances, problems and 
their solutions. The LL meetings can be held in three 
levels, including project team members, relevant 
department managers and senior managers. So, team 
members feel free for open dialogue. The idea is to 
transfer the results of lower level meetings to the 
upper ones [16]. 
   3) Capturing Tools  
• 
IT Tools -Telecommunications & Media Tools: This 
approach to LL Capturing can be used especially 
when project members and stakeholders are not in the 
same place and can not have regular face to face LL 
meetings. Using IT facilities and media devices, such 
as e-mail, SharePoint, video conference and other 
tools, project managers are contacted in a specific 
time periods to find out if they have encountered 
similar problems and have knowledge of the 
solutions.   
• 
Risk 
Management: 
According 
to 
the 
risk 
management part of PMBOK standard, it can have a 
significant role in LL capturing [2]. The results of 
risk management processes produce information that 
can be used in future projects and should be captured 
in the organizational process assets [2]. One of the 
organizational process assets that referred here which 
may be updated is lessons learned from project risk 
management activities. These documents are updated, 
during the implementation of the project and the 
project 
closure. 
Risk 
management 
plan, 
risk 
breakdown structure and the final version of the risk 
register, all include some issues related to LL 
documents [2].  
• 
Project Auditing: Project auditing can be 
addressed as a capturing tool for the projects’ LL. Its 
report includes LL information. The formal report 
should contain Information pertinent to other 
projects, which means, what LL from the project 
being audited can be applied to other projects being 
undertaken by the organization [17]. 
D.    Documenting Phase 
 As it is mentioned before, all efforts to capture LL 
data through each of the aforementioned methods would 
have no value if they are not documented in a well-
organized knowledge base format. The following 
approaches are suggested for documenting the LL.    
1) LL Report: LL data should be distinguished and 
extracted from resources such as LL meetings, risk 
management process and project auditing. The context of 
the LL report includes [1]: description of the LL, sources 
of LL data, any reference related to the LL, description of 
root causes of the problems, impacts of the problems on 
the project, recommended solutions, description of the 
application of the LL, searchable key words related to the 
LL documents, list of the necessary data for creation and 
reporting and approving the LL. 
2) Approving and Encoding the LL Documents: 
Considering the main attributes of the LL report, the 
outcomes of LL reports need to be reviewed and 
categorized in a final report format, which is an 
appropriate reposition for the knowledge of informally 
developed procedures that helps to ease the tasks of 
execution of the project. Once reported, they can be tested, 
approved and finally added to the parent organization 
project management procedures and roles, if generally 
useful [17].  
All generated LL documents should be approved by an 
entitled person of the organization that should be clarified 
in the LL procedure in advance. The Project Manager 
should assign some individuals at the early stages of the 
project for the task of generating these documents. 
Moreover, it is very important to enable the LL documents 
by using some searchable functions such as key words, 
their application areas, the level of their importance and 
chronology. So they should have label of encoding which 
shows these characteristics.  
E.    Communicating Phase 
According to the philosophy of the LL documentation, 
information should be communicated with the relevant 
people in the organization in a timely manner and 
distributed to them. So, the communication process of the 
organization has a key role to ensure that LL is available to 
all relevant people, in a timely manner. According to the 
PMBOK standard [2], communication management 
process can facilitate LL process in term of gathering and 
distributing of LL from and to the relevant people. Both 
LL process and communication process increase the 
efficiency of each other and their functionality.  There are 
many tools for communication improvement such as team 
working, communication media and so on. 
There are some factors to be considered including 
Communication network, Communication climate and 
Trust Building [8]. Moreover, media is the way that 
information is communicated. Using a combination of 
some of the media such as Electronic database 
(information systems), Web Pages, Broadcasting Job 
Knowledge, email, Inter LL meetings, Journal and 
newsletters can help to communicate LL of the projects in 
an organization. 
F.   Feedbacks and Development Phase 
Application of the LL is the main purpose of doing LL 
process in projects but it is not independent from other 
steps. LL application in other projects and similar 
situations, getting feedback and improving LL process are 
the most important part of a LL process. Feedbacks can be 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
reflected in order to update LL database. The mechanism 
of reflecting feedbacks can be considered as below: 
• 
Risk Monitoring & Control: According to the Risk 
Management process, risk monitoring & control has a 
key role in updating the organization LL document. 
Risk management feedbacks are reflected to update 
LL data.  
• 
Organization Procedures and Standard Adjustments: 
Normally, LL outputs could recommend some 
improvments on the technical and managerial assets 
of the organization. The recommended revisions will 
be investigated and will be added to the organization 
procedures and standards. This approach guarantees 
useful application of the LL findings which means 
LL data are communicated and applied in its relevant 
areas.  
• 
Project Management Office (PMO) Establishment: 
Establishment of the Project Management Office 
(PMO) in organizations can be a guarantee to 
develop a successful LL process. PMO is an office to 
deal with multiple projects and charged with 
improving the project management maturity and 
expertise of the organization, as well as increasing 
the success rate of projects. PMOs commonly 
perform many tasks such as initiating and launching 
new projects, establishment and enforcing project 
management processes. Most of its functions cover 
different activities required to perform the four major 
steps of the LL process in an organization [17]. 
III. 
LL AND KM BARRIERS 
According to the aim of this paper, in this section the 
general berries of KM and LL activities is reviewed. 
Considering the relevant literature, the main barriers of 
KM can be classified as below [7]. These barriers are valid 
in LL process and can affect its process as well.  
A.   Strategic and Management Barriers 
• 
Strategy Alignment: The problem will occur due to 
the lack of alignment between the KM strategy and 
the business strategy of the organization. 
• 
Management Support: Without the active and visible 
support from top managers in organization, KM will 
not get the support of employees. So, where leaders 
clearly communicate and enforce the value of sharing 
knowledge, the KM will have better results. One of 
the main management barriers is that managers do 
not use positional and social power to facilitate open 
communication channels in an informal way. 
• 
Resource 
Allocation: 
The 
cost 
of 
capturing, 
processing and transferring knowledge can be a 
barrier to KM. When companies fail to allocate 
sufficient resource to the KM activities in most 
instances they will fail in their KM venture [18] [19].  
B.   Organizational Barriers 
• 
Organizational Structure: Informal connections keep 
communication channels open and nobody needs to 
wait for next official meeting to initiate information. 
So, organizational hierarchy could have a direct 
impact on the KM success. In some organizations 
hierarchical structure negates any KM activities, 
which means organizations should be aware of that.  
• 
Organizational Culture: The Company's culture can 
influence the perceived usefulness, importance and 
validity of KM. It influences the process of creation 
and adoption of new knowledge, determines the 
knowledge belongs to organization or individuals and 
creates a content of social interaction which 
influences the organizational maturity on KM. 
Factors such as creating a supportive and open 
communication climate, fair rewarding and building 
trust in an organization can encourage people to state 
their beliefs and focus on opinions and problem 
solving rather than negative evaluations or criticizing 
others [8].  Where the organizational culture is not 
aligned with the drive for knowledge it will act as a 
barrier toward KM [7]. 
C.  Communicational Barriers 
• 
Communication and Information Systems: If the 
organization's information system is a kind of 
overloaded system (including useful and useless 
information) people will be confused [20]. People 
simply like to directly access to the required 
knowledge in an appropriate time scale with less 
confusion about the accuracy of the system. One of 
the major barriers to LL utilization is inefficient 
access 
to 
the 
relevant 
information. 
The 
communication process of the organization has a key 
role to ensure that LL is available to all relevant 
people.  
• 
Rewarding and Recognition System: when the 
organization doesn’t have a rewarding system to 
recognize the valuable knowledge shared by the 
employee, people do not encourage sharing valuable 
knowledge.  
D.   Staff Barriers 
• 
Trust: Tacit knowledge is the type of knowledge that 
lies with the experience of employees, so in order to 
share this type of knowledge employees should trust 
the organization. Otherwise they will feel that they 
lose their own knowledge and its value, so they avoid 
making it available to others. 
• 
Competition: If the competition internally in an 
organization or externally between divisions is not 
healthy, people will not want to share knowledge. 
• 
Knowledge Value: The value and benefit of existing 
knowledge is often not realized by the owners, so 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
they don’t try to capture and store it in an appropriate 
format. 
• 
Language: 
Due 
to 
communication 
barriers, 
knowledge may not be transferred to the relevant 
people. This problem particularly can occur in multi-
national projects which are implemented by many 
people from different countries [21].  
• 
Staff Turnover:  As discussed before, it is difficult to 
capture and manage tacit knowledge. This type of 
knowledge is also lost when employees leave the 
organization.  
IV. 
LL CONCEPTUAL MODEL  
Considering the above discussion about the LL 
elements and their relation with KM, a conceptual model 
is developed. The Model shows the barriers to KM and LL 
process in the organizations. Moreover, it presents the 
relationships between KM and LL process and their 
interactions with the projects (Figure 1). According to this 
model, the LL process is conducted during the 
implementation of the projects. The adopted data from LL 
are transferred to the knowledge base of the organization 
in an appropriate format, which can be used to support 
new projects. The model shows two main parts of LL and 
KM process in an organization and their relation with 
projects. 
In the first stage, the LL is captured and documented 
that can be considered as captured knowledge in KM 
system. The next stage is LL communicating that is 
equivalent to the knowledge sharing stage of the KM 
process. Therefore any communication procedures of LL 
process can be transferred for utilization in the knowledge 
sharing step as well. The last stage of LL process is 
application of LL in other projects and similar situations 
and their feedbacks which help to improve and update the 
LL database. This stage corresponds with knowledge 
application. Finally knowledge creation stage of KM 
process enhances knowledge capturing stage. During this 
process many problems and challenges could happen, 
which are classified as LL and KM barriers 
V. 
INVESTIGATION OF THE LL BARRIERS IN IRAN OIL & 
GAS PROJECTS 
In order to find the current status and the main barriers 
to documentation and utilization of the lessons learned, in 
Iran Oil & Gas projects, the actual application of LL in 
Iranian oil & gas projects is investigated. This case study 
has been done by conducting several in- depth interviews 
and document reviews. In this regard eight interviews with 
the relevant experts and managers of different projects 
have been done and some organizational documents have 
been reviewed.  
 
Figure 1: Conceptual Model of LL process and its barriers in 
project based organizations 
In order to study the current status of the LL activities 
in projects, several questions related to the application of 
the LL in the organizations, their approaches toward LL as 
well as the reasons for negative attitude toward the LL 
were asked. These questions were: If the organization has 
any LL process. If the organization has any systematic 
approach for LL process. In case of negative answers, 
what is the reason? What are the problems and barriers to 
implementation of LL practices in the organization? The 
reasons are classified in categories of barriers to KM. 
Details of the findings are as below. 
A.    Strategic and Management Barriers 
• 
Top Management Support- No Formal LL 
process: In most organizations, LL activities are 
ignored because they are not defined in the 
organizations’ procedures and there is not a 
formal management support.  
• 
Allocation of Resources for LL Processes: A 
quick look at the four steps of LL process 
presented 
in 
section 
2.2 
shows 
that 
implementation of LL process needs enormous 
effort including time and cost, which requires 
additional cost and expenses from the parent 
organizations. 
B.   Organizational Barriers 
• 
Organizational Culture- Lack of Supportive 
Climate and Open Communication: As it is 
explained, supportive climate and managers’ 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
power could create warm culture, trust, open 
communication system and fair rewarding 
system. These are important factors to implement 
a successful LL process. In the observed 
organizations these factors are not considered so 
much and leaders do not support and encourage 
people for collecting, sharing, and using lessons 
learned. Moreover, in this type of organizations, 
due 
to 
the 
political, 
accountability 
and 
organizational reasons, People may not like to 
participate in LL meetings.  
C.   Communicational Barriers 
• 
Poor 
Knowledge 
Management 
& 
Communication Infrastructure: In most of the 
organizations there are no sign of integrated 
knowledge management information systems. In 
the exceptional cases, organizations have their 
isolated data, without any communications and 
exchanges of information between them. These 
deficiencies would be significant barriers to 
implement LL process. 
D.   Staff Barriers 
• 
Knowledge Value- Perceived importance of LL. 
Most of the senior and project managers do not 
know about potential benefits and real value of 
the systematic approach for LL. According the 
research findings, there are some traditional 
approaches 
in 
the 
LL 
activities, 
applied 
personally by some of the project managers, 
using the experiences of pervious projects. 
However. They do not know how much a 
systematic LL process can help to improve 
different aspects of their project and the parent 
organization's performance. 
• 
Poor Attitude toward the Application of the LL: 
The common problem of the organizations is that 
there is not any hope and guarantees for 
application of the LL in other projects.  
• 
Trust: From job security point of view, people 
prefer not to share their knowledge, they are 
afraid to lose their competitive advantages and 
their situation in the organization. Moreover, 
some managers believe that they are too busy to 
spend time looking back.  
VI. 
 PROPOSED SOLUTIONS 
A.   Organizational Issues 
 According to the case study findings, the most 
important problems in our organizations are related to 
cultural issues. Below, there are solutions linked to 
different cultural factors. 
• 
Open Communication Culture: Supportive climate 
and open communication can encourage people to 
share their knowledge and participate in LL activities 
[8]. A long period plan is needed to break the existing 
culture. The leaders have key roles to create trust 
(paired with staff barriers-trust) by a fair rewarding 
system and considering team building points as a 
major part of this strategy. 
• 
Training 
& 
Learning 
Environment: 
Continual 
learning environment is the first principle for the LL 
process [13], this environment encourages people to 
share their knowledge and be active and creative in 
LL meetings [10]. Training is the first step to create 
learning environment. Lack of knowledge about 
Project Management and LL value (paired with staff 
barriers) can be solved by training. Theses programs 
also can help to remove the belief that LL process is 
costly or waste of time. When an organization 
decides to establish a formal LL process, some 
specific training courses can be helpful for better 
understanding of their tasks and implementing the 
process. 
• 
Formal LL Process: With respect to the case study's 
findings, there is not any organizational obligation 
for LL activities, so establishing a formal LL process 
can be helpful. The process should be unified and 
consistence with all organizational sections. It should 
include codification and standardization activities, 
clarified tasks and responsibilities and considering 
incentive and feedbacks [22].  
B.   Project Management Issues 
 According to the case study's findings, below, there 
are the solutions linked to the project management 
techniques. 
• 
Project 
Management 
Information 
System 
(PMIS): Developing an Integrated Project 
Management Information System (PMIS) has a 
significant role in development of LL & KM. In 
this regard, there are some recommended 
features in development of PMIS, from LL point 
of view, such as being user friendly and easy to 
use, having root cause analysis and searchable 
key word related to the LL data base. 
Additionally, having  possibility for  knowledge 
sharing and  broadcasting  of job knowledge 
which means producing a common language of 
unified data for dealing with problems from 
multiple locations and having a communication 
capability that automatically places information 
directly into the hands of the persons throughout 
the network of organizations. 
• 
Risk Management Process: There are important 
interactions between three processes of Lessons 
learned, risk management, and communication 
management.  Sharing knowledge in a systematic 
format, documenting LL, and ensuring frequent 
communication will maximize project success 
factors [4]. Risk management process can have a 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
significant 
role 
in 
the 
capturing 
and 
communicating project problems and pitfalls 
from LL point of view. Risk management helps 
to capture LL data as well as communicating 
them. On the other hand information related to 
the LL is used to risk identification and improve 
communication process. In addition project 
communication facilitates risk monitoring and 
control, 
and 
more 
communications 
about 
problems and risk factors would occur at LL 
meetings. 
Thus 
implementing 
these 
three 
processes can enhance each other during the 
project life cycle.   
• Project 
Management 
Office 
(PMO): 
For 
development of the LL activities in the IOGP, 
there are some solutions, which are classified in 
organizational and managerial groups. These can 
be implemented by establishing of PMOs in the 
organizations. 
Establishing 
PMOs 
in 
organizations is a comprehensive solution that 
can include aforementioned solutions because the 
functionality of the PMOs can cover most of the 
requirements of the above solutions.  
VII. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, the main barriers of KM and LL in 
projects were investigated. Based on the research findings 
these can be classified in four major groups including 
strategic and managerial barriers, organizational barriers, 
communicational barriers and staff–related barriers. 
Investigation of the maturity and application of the LL in 
Iran Oil & Gas projects show that there is not a formal and 
systematic process for LL management. Moreover, there 
are many problems related to these barriers such as lack of 
supportive climate and open communication infrastructure, 
poor knowledge management & communication, poor 
attitude toward the application of the LL and perceived 
value of LL and trust. The proposed solution to improve 
the LL documentation consists of 1) organizational issues 
including creating open communication culture, training & 
learning environment and defining formal LL process  2) 
project management issues including developing project 
management 
information 
system 
(PMIS), 
risk 
management process and project management office 
(PMO). 
 
REFERENCES  
[1]    C. Pritchard, Project Management Communication Toolkit, 
1st ed., Artech House, Boston-London, 2004.  
[2] 
PMI, 
Project 
Management 
Body 
of 
Knowledge      
(PMBOK), 4th ed., Project Management Institute, USA 
2008. 
[3] 
R. Wysocki and R. Mc Gary, Effective Project 
Management, 3rd ed., Wiley, New York, 2003. 
[4] 
S. Seningen, “Learn the value of Lessons Learned” 
<http://www.projectperfect.com> 11.2011 
[5]     P. E. d. Love, P. S.W.Fang, and  Z. Irani, Management of 
Knowledge in Project Environment, 1st ed., Elsevier 
Butterworth-Heineman, Oxford, 2005. 
[6]   B. P. Bergeron, Essentials of Knowledge Management, 
Wiley, Hobboken, Newjersey, 2003. 
[7] 
R. Rynhardt, Barriers and Facilitators to Knowledge 
Management in Multi-National Companies: The Case of 
Nissan, University of Pretoria, 2008. 
[8] 
D. Levi, Group Dynamic for Teams, 1st ed., Sage 
Publications, California, 2001.  
[9]    W. R. King, Knowledge Management and Organizational 
Learning (Annals of Information System), Dordecht 
Heidelberg, London, 2009. 
[10] J. George and G. Jones, Contemporary Management, 4th     
ed., Mc Graw- Hill, New York, 2005.  
 [11] G. Probst, S. Rraub, and K. Romhardt, Managing 
Knowledge: Building Blocks for Success, Wiley, New 
York, 2000 
[12] C. Lin Yu and K. Lin Lee, Critical Success Factors for 
Knowledge Management Studies in Construction,  
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
Department of Civil Engineering, National Taipei University of 
Technology, 2006 
 [13] G. Chin, Agile Project Management: How to Succeed In 
The Face of Changing Project Requirements, 1st ed., 
AMACOM, New York, 2004.  
[14]C. Bobbe, “A New Process for Harnessing Past 
Experience.” <http://www.chiefprojectofficer.com/article> 
10.2006  
[15] Ohio state University, “Wrap-up meeting.” <http:// 
www.osu.edu/articles > 10.2006 
[16]  Trainers 
Direct, 
“LL 
Meeting 
Procedures.”  
<http://www.trainersdirect.com/resources> 11.2011 
[17]  J. Meredith and JR. Mantel, Project a managerial 
Approach, 5th ed., Wiley, New York, 2003.  
[18] A. Wiewiora, B. Trigunarsyah, G. Murphy, G. Gable, and 
Ch. Liang ”The Impact of Unique Characteristics of 
Projects and Project-Based Organisations on Knowledge 
Transfer”, Australian government’s cooperative research 
centre program, 2009 
[19] Th. H. Davenport, D. W. De long, and M. C. Beers, 
“Successful knowledge management projects”, Sloan 
Management Review, pp. 43-57, winter 1998 
 [20] W. F. Boh, “Mechanisms for sharing knowledge in 
project-based 
organizations”, 
Information 
and 
Organization, vol. 17, pp. 27–58, 2007 
 
[21]  J.J.J. Kasvi, M. Vartiainen, and M. Hailikari, “Managing 
knowledge and knowledge competences in projects and 
project organizations”, International Journal of Project 
Management, vol. 21, pp. 571–582, 2003 
 [22]   N. Meshkati, “Cultural Influence on the Implementation 
of Lessons Learned.”<http://www.allbusiness.com/human-
resources> 10.2006 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

