Developing Students’ Vocabulary Knowledge in Content Subjects:  
A Computational Linguistic Approach
Kirk Dowswell  
College of Technological Innovation  
Zayed University  
Dubai, United Arab Emirates 
 
 
email: kirk.dowswell@zu.ac.ae  
  
 
Abstract— Undergraduate students are exposed to discipline-
specific lexis and concepts, particularly when studying in a 
second language. Current research suggests that most students 
find it difficult to fully comprehend academic reading material 
because they lack the requisite vocabulary, i.e., 5,000 to 8,000 
word families for achieving 95% to 98% comprehension, 
respectively. It has also been suggested that teaching vocabulary 
explicitly is not an efficient use of classroom time. Thus, in order 
to enhance vocabulary acquisition and, ultimately, improve the 
reading comprehension skills of second language learners, this 
pilot study evaluated the use of a modified version of the 
Vocabulary Self-Selection Strategy (VSS+) as a self-directed 
learning tool. The study was conducted in an Arab higher 
education institution where undergraduate students studied 
Information Technology (IT) in English. It was anticipated that 
this unique intervention would improve vocabulary acquisition 
with minimal use of classroom teaching time. Results indicated 
that students were actively engaged with the wiki as a learning 
tool and there was a noticeable improvement in their vocabulary 
knowledge. Overall, the study has implications for teachers, as 
well as learners  
Keywords: data-driven learning; vocabulary self-collection 
strategy; vocabulary learning; involvement load hypothesis; 
teaching with wikis. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The ability to read academic texts in English is one of the 
most challenging issues facing second language students 
studying at English-medium institutions (EMI). Many Emirati 
students who have studied in Arabic-medium schools are not 
equipped with these skills and thus find it difficult to obtain 
direct entry into these institutions. Consequently, many 
federal EMI’s in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) require 
students who have not achieved an International English 
Language Testing System (IELTS) score of 5.0 attend pre-
baccalaureate programs that focus on English academic 
literacy and language skills. Students can spend up to two 
years in these programs and can only progress by achieving 
the requisite IELTS score (5.0) and a pass in their final 
examination. IELTS broadly defines a Band 5 student as a 
modest user (IELTS, 2016). 
Reading proficiency is assessed throughout these 
academic English courses and students are expected to have 
achieved a satisfactory level of academic literacy skills that 
will allow them to cope with the English language textbooks 
and content specific material encountered in their 
baccalaureate studies. At first glance, it would seem that most 
students do cope and have the language and academic literacy 
skills to meet subject requirements. However, feedback from 
content faculty and recent pre-graduation data in the 
institution where the study described in this paper took place, 
has revealed that over 60% of students who graduated in 2015, 
exited the institution with an IELTS level less than Band 6 on 
Reading. This indicates no or minimal improvement has been 
achieved by these students despite four years of subject 
specific study in the English language (Internal Dean’s 
Council Report, December 21st, 2015).  
IELTS broadly defines a Band 6 student as a competent 
user (IELTS, 2016) and Band 6.5 as the entry level demanded 
by many universities in the UK; this is largely considered the 
minimum level that a student should possess to cope with the 
rigors of academic study. Based on these definitions of 
language competence, many of the English as a Second 
Language (ESL) students studying at the institution where this 
study took place are struggling to cope with academic texts 
and are graduating at a level of less than ‘competent’. 
Furthermore, the majority of these students are struggling with 
academic and technical language, once they have ceased to 
receive academic language support. 
This situation stimulated several discussions at the 
institutional level about reading and the level of attainment, 
(as measured by the IELTS examination), that students need 
in order to function effectively and prompted the following 
questions:  
1. Do ESL students studying at an EMI have sufficient 
academic literacy skills to be able to cope with their 
subject-specific reading material?  
2. If not, what strategies can be employed to improve 
ESL students’ academic literacy skills in content 
courses? 
The present study addressed these questions by first 
conducting a short survey with the IT content teaching faculty, 
asking how they taught academic reading and content specific 
vocabulary in the classroom and what problems the lack of 
technical vocabulary knowledge caused their students. The 
majority of faculty indicated that a significant number of 
students did, indeed, face difficulties, however, a number of 
faculty felt it was not their place to rectify them (Internal 
College of Technological Innovation’s Language Task Force 
Survey, January 2014). This inability of many content faculty 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

members to consider the difficulties faced by their students in 
their subjects and the students’ inadequate academic literacy 
skills led to the development of the next phase of this research 
project, described in this paper.  
It was anticipated that by using contemporary text mining 
techniques to develop the students’ academic vocabulary and 
by rethinking our approach to the development of academic 
literacy skills, particularly in the area of vocabulary 
acquisition, we should be able to reduce the difficulties faced 
by ESL students when studying content and allow them to 
utilize the higher order thinking skills needed to function in 
today’s multi-literate society, as identified in Bloom’s 
Revised Taxonomy [1]. By employing these techniques, 
coupled with the implementation of “Language Across the 
Curriculum” strategies, the aim would be to develop the 
students’ Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency skills 
(CALP), [2] along with, what Volmer [3] calls, students’ 
‘Conceptual Literacy’ and ‘Discourse Competence’ skills.   
In Section 2 of this paper, the literature review will address 
the issue of developing vocabulary knowledge. Section 3 will 
discuss the methodology used to develop the vocabulary and 
finally Section 4 of the paper will conclude with a discussion 
of the results and future implications for this pilot project. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Academic research, [4]. highlights the difficulties long-
term (7 or more years of language instruction) second 
language learners have in reading academic texts. Difficulties 
they highlighted include those identified by Cummins [2] 
where students find it problematic to distinguish between 
spoken and academic language. The studies also provide some 
guidance on how these academic literacy skills, particularly 
vocabulary instruction, can be taught in content courses and 
thereby improve reading comprehension.  
Research has demonstrated that there is a clear link 
between word knowledge and the ability to comprehend texts. 
This relationship was recently examined by Laufer and 
Ravenhorst-Kalovski [5] who not only suggested that 
increased vocabulary knowledge 
could lead to an 
improvement in reading comprehension, but also proposed 
two thresholds for text coverage and comprehension. This 
showed that for a student to understand 98% of a text, a 
knowledge of 8,000 word families is required and a 
knowledge of 4,000 to 5,000 word families for 95% coverage. 
This reinforces an earlier study by Hu and Nation [6] who 
proposed that for unknown vocabulary not to be a major 
hindrance to text comprehension, knowledge of roughly 98% 
of the lexis is required.  
This awareness of the importance of academic discourse 
and, in particular, academic vocabulary is thus deemed 
necessary for students’ success in university study. 
Consequently, it is paramount that content faculty be made 
aware of interventions that could enhance students’ 
comprehension of academic texts. However, as the faculty 
survey revealed, many content teachers do not have the time 
or inclination to engage in strategies to improve their students’ 
text comprehension. Therefore, many faculty rely on basic 
glossaries available in the course textbooks and assume that 
students will make use of these. To rectify this situation, the 
present study incorporated data driven techniques to develop 
subject-specific keyword vocabulary lists and then created an 
intervention based on an extended version of the Vocabulary 
Self-Collection Strategy Plus (VSS+) [7], the Involvement 
Load Hypothesis (ILH) [8] and a class wiki. 
The VSS+ and wiki, when combined with the ILH formed 
an important part of the vocabulary retention strategy. The 
Involvement Load Hypothesis (ILH), [8] an idea that 
postulates that words processed with greater learner 
involvement are retained longer than those processed with a 
lower involvement load. The construct, labeled ‘task-induced 
involvement’, incorporates the cognitive components of 
‘Search’ and ‘Evaluation’ and the motivational component of 
‘Need’. For example, the act of selecting a target word and 
finding its meaning demonstrates ‘Need’. When followed by 
the action of searching for the definition and translating it into 
Arabic, the ‘Search’ process is fulfilled. Finally, the 
evaluation of the ‘word sense’ or context meets the 
‘Evaluation’ criteria. Such activities warrant a high level of 
engagement from the student on the Involvement Index scale 
(i.e., Presence of factors: No factor=0, Moderate=1, and 
Strong=2). This study evaluated the level of vocabulary 
knowledge development between two groups of students: a 
control group following the same course with no intervention 
and a group engaging in the wiki tasks which, ranked high on 
the Involvement Index scale.  
III. 
 METHODOLOGY 
The aim of this research was to develop and apply a 
pedagogical framework for the teaching and learning of IT 
content-specific 
vocabulary. 
It 
employed 
a 
quasi-
experimental research design to test the impact of the VSS+ 
framework and it explored the following research questions: 
1. Is there a significant difference between the VSS+ 
wiki intervention group and the control group that 
received traditional instruction? 
2. What do the participants in the VSS+ wiki group 
think about the VSS+ wiki framework as a means of 
learning vocabulary? 
A. Participants  
A total of 8 male and 21 female university students 
majoring in Information Technology at an EMI university in 
the UAE participated in the study. The students, all ESL 
learners with Arabic as their first language, ranged in age from 
20-30 years old. A control group of 11 female students were 
taught by a separate instructor and followed the traditional 
course of instruction. The intervention group consisted of two 
intact groups: one female class of 10 students and one male 
class of 8 students who were taught using the VSS+ by myself. 
Of the students participating in the intervention group, 17 
completed a pre- and post-vocabulary knowledge (VKS) test 
as well as a questionnaire. From the control group, only 5 
students completed the pre- and post-VKS test.  
B. The Intervention - Selecting Appropriate Lexeis for the 
Content Course 
Studies cited by Cobb [9] suggest that the first 2,000 most 
frequent words, coupled with the 570 word families in the 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Academic Word List (AWL), can bring the coverage of an 
academic text up to approximately 90%. To increase 
comprehension to the minimum coverage of 95% the students 
will need to develop a word knowledge of 4,000 to 5,000 word 
families, [5].  
The current debate on the benefits of rich vocabulary 
instruction, [10] as opposed to “genuine academic reading for 
the readers’ own purposes, [11] has prompted educators to 
explore what intervention would be more successful with ESL 
students. However, evidence provided, [12] showed that Arab 
learners find vocabulary acquisition extremely challenging 
primarily because a limited number of words in English are 
borrowed from Arabic and also because the Arab teaching 
pedagogy is traditionally based on rote learning and minimal 
engagement in extensive reading activities. Based on this 
evidence, the present study employed ‘rich’ vocabulary 
instruction strategies in the style of the VSS+ intervention as 
these would be deemed useful for Arab ESL students. 
Having decided on the method of intervention, it was 
necessary to compile academic words specific to the pilot 
content course, i.e., IT in Global and Local Cultures. There 
are numerous definitions of academic vocabulary but, [13] 
state that academic words can be categorized into two 
distinctive areas: general and discipline-specific words. 
General words are used across disciplines whereas discipline-
specific words tend to be used in specific disciplines. As 
learning discipline-specific words does not always guarantee 
full comprehension of discipline-specific texts, it also 
advisable to incorporate scaffolding techniques to make the 
text more meaningful, [10]. Thus, a corpus of key academic 
words (general and discipline specific) was created using the 
SketchEngine application, [14]. 
The use of corpora in language teaching and learning, 
sometimes referred to as ‘data-driven learning’ a model 
created by Johns (1990), as cited in, [15] has greatly simplified 
the process of analyzing language and enabled the creation of 
frequency lists based on the course textbook. Once the lists 
were created and analyzed, keywords were chosen based on 
the following criteria: relevance to subject, academic word list 
and, finally, frequency level as per the Vocab Profiler, [16].  
 
C. Vocabulary Self-Collection Strategy 
The Vocabulary Self-Collection Strategy (VSS) is an 
approach that can be used for “general, basal reading or 
content area development”, [17]. In this study, the focus was 
on content vocabulary development, with the main purpose 
being to develop students’ understanding of subject-specific 
words and concepts. The instructional strategies used to 
achieve this involved specific instruction of the reading 
followed by the students selecting key terms that have been 
identified in the corpus analysis of the reading. The process, 
however, was slightly adapted to incorporate technology and 
use techniques similar to those adopted by, [7] with their 
VSS+ framework. After reading the text and discussing the 
major concepts in class, the students used a wiki to develop a 
subject glossary based on the vocabulary they selected. This 
allowed them to explore the words in much greater depth, as 
the template with hyperlinks enabled them to study the words 
in detail. (see Fig. 1) 
 
 
 
Figure I. Wiki Template Sample 
 
The rationale for the use of the wiki was twofold. Firstly, 
it was expected that the students would be involved in specific 
activities that required reading the text, creating an easily 
available glossary and engaging in word focused tasks that 
encourage deep learning. Secondly, the word tasks were 
collaborative and loosely followed, [18] the six steps of 
vocabulary instruction. It is also generally recognized that 
what learners do with words is an important part of vocabulary 
retention and it is necessary for learning tasks to involve the 
components of “need, search and evaluation”, [8] It was, 
therefore, postulated that the adaptation of the VSS+ /ILH 
intervention using the wiki framework discussed above would 
enhance content vocabulary acquisition.  
As discussed above, the Vocabulary Self-Collection 
Strategy (VSS+) and Involvement Load Hypothesis (ILH) 
approaches, were used in conjunction with the class wiki tool. 
The intervention took place over a period of twelve weeks or 
six teaching units. The students in the intervention group were 
instructed on the use of the wiki as an autonomous learning 
tool. A vocabulary template was developed for the students to 
investigate the meaning of their selected lexeis (see Fig. 1). 
For each new topic covered in the course, students selected 
unknown vocabulary from the list of Key Words In Context 
(KWIC) words highlighted in the corpus or words they 
selected on their own from class readings. After reading the 
text and discussing the major concepts in class, the students 
used the wiki to develop a subject glossary based on the 
vocabulary they selected. Students in the class had the 
opportunity to edit the wiki entries as they saw fit. As an 
incentive, a small percentage of the final course grade was 
awarded for participation based on the number of wiki entries. 
 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

D. Data Collection Instruments & Proceedures 
The following two vocabulary tests were administered as 
pre- and post-tests to both the intervention and the control 
groups:  
• 
X-Lex: an online test of vocabulary breadth that 
assesses how many words a student knows. The 
students in the current study were presented with a 
set of words from five different frequency levels (1k 
to 5k) one at a time, in a context-free environment. 
They simply decided whether they knew the 
meaning of each word. Based on their responses X-
Lex developed a profile of vocabulary knowledge for 
each frequency band and then suggested which level 
each should be placed in, [19]. The test was 
completed by 13 students from the intervention 
group and 11 students from the control group. 
• 
Vocabulary Knowledge Scale, (VKS), [20] a test of 
students’ 
knowledge 
of 
discipline 
specific 
vocabulary. This was adapted to test 130 prominent 
keywords extracted from the discipline specific 
corpus. The students in this study indicated their 
level of recognition of the words by selecting one of 
the options: a) I have never seen this word before; b) 
I have seen or heard of this word before; c) I think I 
can define this word; d) I am confident I can define 
this word. The test was completed by 18 students 
from the intervention group and 11 students from the 
control group. 
The aim of the tests was to establish a vocabulary level for 
all students and to establish which of the 130 corpus keywords 
were known by both groups of students.  
Additionally, at the end of the study, a questionnaire was 
used with the intervention group to assess the students’ 
perceptions on the use of the wiki as an autonomous learning 
tool. The questionnaire consisted of 8 statements and asked 
participants in the intervention group to rate each statement on 
a 5-point Likert scale (Agree, Strongly agree, Neither Agree 
nor 
Disagree, 
Disagree, 
Strongly 
Disagree). 
The 
questionnaire was administered at the end of the 12-week 
intervention and it was completed by 17 students.  
 
IV. 
RESULTS & DISCUSSION 
A. Pre- and Post-Test Comparisons 
The first research question sought to investigate the effect 
of vocabulary instruction using the VSS+ with the 
intervention group and to compare the results with a control 
group who had received traditional vocabulary instruction.  
The results were analyzed using a t-test and produced 
some interesting findings within the groups, but unfortunately 
limited information was obtained in the between-groups 
comparisons. This could be a result of the small amount of 
data available for the control group, many of whom failed to 
complete the post-test. It is planned to repeat the study with a 
much larger cohort of students and greater control over the 
testing proceedures. 
The pre- and post-test scores were calculated with both the 
raw scores and the percentage scores. No significant 
difference was found between pre- and post-VKS, between 
the control and intervention groups. However, the t-test results  
showed that the intervention group performed significantly 
better with regards to their knowledge of vocabulary (see 
Table 1), which, suggests that the use of the VSS+ strategy 
and the wiki improved their vocabulary knowledge. Although 
the pilot study did not provide conclusive results, it is evident 
TABLE I.  
T-TEST RESULTS FOR INTERVENTION GROUP 
 
 
 
 
Pre-Test (% of 
students) 
Post Test (% of 
students) 
Pre-Test (% of 
students) 
Post-Test (% of 
students) 
 
 
VKS 
 
% Word 
recognition 
% Word recognition 
Mean 
Mean 
t-test score 
p value 
VKS 1(I have never 
seen this word before) 
17% 
10% 
21.28 
12.94 
4.652 
.000 
VKS 2 (I have seen or 
heard of this word 
before) 
9% 
8% 
11.89 
10.67 
.466 
.647 
 
VKS 3 (I think I can 
define this word) 
12% 
7% 
15.00 
9.00 
2.848 
.011 
 
VKS 4 (I am confident 
I can define this word) 
62% 
74% 
77.78 
93.28 
-9.520 
.000 
 
 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

that using this method has the potential to enhance students’ 
vocabulary and ability to comprehend academic texts.  
 
Overall, the results of the VKS support the view that the 
wiki was a useful tool for teaching vocabulary, when using the 
VSS+ and ILH strategy because the students were actively 
engaged in the process. Not only did the students research the 
meaning and ‘sense’ of the vocabulary items they selected, but 
they also translated each word into Arabic and added a 
pictorial representation, where possible. Additional test 
results also revealed that there were no significant statistical 
differences between the male and female students. Finally, 
they were also engaged in the glossary review process, which, 
promoted collaborative learning and a sense of community 
within the class. All of the above would seem to support the 
conclusion that “What learners do with the word may be more 
important than how many times they encounter it.”, [21]. 
B. Questionnaire 
The second research question sought to discover what the 
intervention group thought about the class wiki and the VSS+ 
strategy, as a means of learning vocabulary. A questionnaire 
was used asking participants in the intervention group to rate 
a total of 8 statements on a 5-point Likert scale. The results of 
the questionnaire are shown in Table 2.  
 
The feedback gathered from the questionnaire suggested 
that: 
• 
Two thirds of the students in the intervention 
group found that a wiki is a useful vocabulary 
learning tool. 
• 
11 out of 17 students liked using the wiki as 
a way of exposing themselves to and learning 
new vocabulary.  
TABLE II. QUESTIONNAIRE RESULTS (N=17). 
 
Statement 
SD 
D 
N 
A 
SA 
1. The class wiki is a useful tool 
to practice new course 
vocabulary. 
4 
2 
0 
7 
4 
2. The class wiki has given me 
more exposure to new 
vocabulary. 
4 
0 
2 
5 
6 
3. I feel competent to peer 
review my classmates’ wiki 
entries. 
4 
0 
3 
6 
4 
4. Peer review of the wiki 
entries has been useful for 
vocabulary learning. 
4 
0 
3 
7 
3 
5. I felt insecure to make 
corrections to other student’s 
wiki entries. 
3 
6 
7 
1 
0 
6. I think my motivation to the 
subject has now increased. 
3 
2 
3 
3 
6 
7. The wiki has improved the 
sense of community in the class. 
3 
1 
2 
6 
5 
8. I would like to employ the 
wiki in all my courses. 
4 
3 
4 
2 
4 
 
Note: SD = Strongly Disagree; D= Disagree; N=Neutral; A= 
Agree; SA = Strongly Agree 
• 
A further 10 students felt competent in peer 
reviewing their classmates’ entries and felt that it 
was a useful learning exercise. 
• 
Only one student felt insecure with editing other 
students’ work. 
• 
More than half of the students felt that their 
motivation increased and that it improved their 
sense of community in class. 
• 
Just over one third of students would like to use 
a vocabulary wiki in all their classes.  
By and large, the wiki proved to be functional as a teaching 
tool and was used throughout the semester for a variety of 
activities. It was particularly useful for collaborative 
activities, once the students had become used to the many 
features available. However, in the future, it would be 
advisable to employ the wiki solely as an online glossary that 
can be easily accessed and utilized, as a result of the finding 
that some initial difficulties were encountered when it was 
being used for other purposes. 
The use of the wiki as the main technological interface 
appears to have been well received, with 11 out of 17 students 
indicating that is was a useful tool to learn vocabulary. 
However, the interface design was not as easy to manipulate 
as had been anticipated and valuable time was spent training 
students on the process for creating and editing the wiki 
glossary. The word template, although easy to use, required 
quite a few ‘clicks’ to achieve the end result and, thus proved 
to be frustrating for some students. As the activities were 
associated to the Involvement Load Hypothesis, [8] the 
students were required to click on a variety of links, to seek 
out the required information and then enter the results into the 
template, thus making the whole process quite time 
consuming.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
The main purpose of this pilot study was to determine the 
effectiveness of the VSS + and ILH strategy, when used in 
conjunction with a wiki, as a means of enhancing the 
acquisition of content specific vocabulary by undergraduate 
Arab students studying at an EMI in the UAE. Each of the 
research questions sought to determine the level of 
effectiveness of this intervention. While the results from the 
first research question were not conclusive owing to the 
limited number of students in the control group completing 
the tests, the results for the intervention group indicated an 
improvement in vocabulary knowledge when the VSS+, wiki 
ILH intervention were used. The second research question 
addressed the students’ attitudes to the VSS+, wiki and ILH 
as a means of developing their vocabulary. The questionnaire 
results indicated that the majority of students found the 
strategy and tools to be a useful method by which to learn new 
IT content specific vocabulary. 
The present study has implications for both teachers and 
learners. The VSS+/Wiki/ILH framework could be easily 
adapted by content-specific teachers as a method for 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

developing their students’ vocabulary knowledge and 
concepts in their specialized courses. Although this a pilot 
study, these results indicate that this method of autonomous 
learning could have long term future implications that could 
be beneficial to many fields of study, wherein extensive 
knowledge and retention of vocabulary is required. The 
potential to share the framework and build it into course 
templates is also a possibility, as many universities now use 
learning management systems such as BlackBoard or Moodle 
that incorporate wikis in their course tools.  With the help of 
free and readily available tools, the framework described in 
this paper, can help learners work collaboratively and further 
enhance their vocabulary knowledge.  
At this point, it is useful to identify some of the factors that 
should be taken into consideration for the follow-up study. 
The development of the corpus in this study, although 
straightforward with the Sketch Engine application, could be 
created just as easily with the AntConc application that is 
freely available for all to use and has training videos readily 
available on YouTube. It would also be advisable to contact 
textbook publishers, well in advance, for a .txt version of the 
course textbook being used to create the corpus, as the option 
of scanning the whole textbook and creating the .txt file for 
use in the concordance is very time consuming, even when 
using specialized software. Finally, future studies should also 
analyze the long-term retention of the vocabulary, as it is 
subject specific and, unlike general vocabulary, it will not be 
recycled on a regular basis throughout the other subjects.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] D.R. Krathwohl, “A revision of bloom's taxonomy: An 
overview,” Theory into Practice, vol. 41 no.4, pp. 212-218, 
2002. 
[2] J. Cummins, “Cognitive/academic language proficiency, 
linguistic interdependence, the optimum age question and 
some other matters,” Working Papers on Bilingualism,  no. 19, 
pp. 121-129, 1979.  
[3] H.J. Vollmer, “Language Across the Curriculum,” Strasbourg: 
Council 
of 
Europe. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://www.coe.int/t/dg4/linguistic/Source/Vollmer_LAC_E
N.doc  2006. 2015.11.21. 
[4] Y. Freeman, and D. Freeman, “Academic language for English 
language learners and struggling readers: How to help students 
succeed across content areas.” Portsmouth, NH: 2009. 
[5] B. Laufer, and  G. C. Ravenhorst-Kalovski, “Lexical  threshold  
revisited: Lexical   text   coverage,   learners;   vocabulary   size   
and   reading comprehension.”  Reading in a Foreign Language, 
vol. 22, no. 1,  pp. 15-30,  2010.   
[6] M. Hu, and I.S.P. Nation, “Vocabulary density and reading 
comprehension.” Reading in a Foreign Language, vol. 13 no. 
1, pp. 403–430, 2000.  
[7] T.D. Wolsey, L. Smetana, and D.L. Grisham, “Vocabulary Plus 
Technology.” The Reading Teacher, vol 68, no. 6, pp. 449–
458, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://www.learntechlib.org/p/15916, 2015.03.15 
[8] J. H. Hulstijn, and B. Laufer, “Some empirical evidence for the 
involvement load hypothesis in vocabulary acquisition.” 
Language Learning, vol.51 no. 3, pp. 539–558, 2001,  
doi:10.1111/0023-8333.00164.  
[9] T. Cobb,  “Range for texts v.3” Vocab Research Resources. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://www.lextutor.ca/cgi-
bin/range/texts/index.pl, 2015.11.14. 
[10] W. Nagy,  and D. Townsend, “Words as Tools: Learning 
Academic Vocabulary as Language Acquisition.” Reading 
Research Quarterly, vol 47, no. 1, pp. 91-108, January, 
February, March 2012.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/RRQ.011 
[11] S. Krashen, W. Nagy, and D. Townsend,  “Letters to the 
editors.” Read Research Quarterly, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 233–234, 
2012, doi:10.1002/rrq.018. 
[12] B. Smith, “Arabic speakers.” In M. Swan & B. Smith (Eds.), 
Learner English: A teacher's guide to interference and other 
problems. 2nd Ed. pp. 195-213. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 2001 
[13] E.H. Hiebert, and S. Lubliner, “The nature, learning, and 
instruction of general academic vocabulary.” In A. E. Farstrup 
& S. J. Samuels (Eds.), “What research has to say about 
vocabulary 
instruction” 
pp.106-129. 
Newark, 
DE: 
International Reading Association. 2008. 
[14] A. Kilgarriff, P. Rychly, P. Smrz, and David Tugwell. The 
Sketch Engine. Proc EURALEX 2004, Lorient, France; pp. 
105–116, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
http://www.sketchengine.co.uk , 2015.3.05. 
[15] A. O'Keeffe, and M. McCarthy, “The Routledge handbook of 
corpus linguistics.” London: Routledge. 2010.  
[16] T. Cobb, “VocabProfile Home” Vocab Research Resources. at 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.lextutor.ca/vp/   
2015.11.08. 
[17] M.R. Haggard, “The vocabulary self-selection strategy: An 
active approach to word learning.” Journal of Reading, vol. 26, 
pp. 203–207, 1982. 
[18] R.J. Marzano, “Teaching basic and advanced vocabulary: A 
framework for direct instruction.” Boston: Heinle. 2010. 
[19] P.M. Meara, and J.L. Milton. “X_Lex. The Swansea 
Vocabulary Levels Test.” Newbury: Express. 2003. 
[20] T.S. Paribakht, and M. Wesche, “Vocabulary enhancement 
activities and reading for meaning in second language 
vocabulary development.” In J. Coady & T. Huckin (Eds.), 
Second language vocabulary acquisition: A rationale for 
pedagogy, pp. 174-200, Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 1997. 
[21] B. Laufer, and B. Rozovski-Roitblat, “Retention of new words: 
Quantity of encounters, quality of task, and degree of 
knowledge,” 
Language 
Teaching 
Research, 
2014  
1362168814559797. 
 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

