 
 
Service-Oriented Development of 
 Content and Knowledge Provision Tool  
Sonja D. Radenkovic, Jelena Jovanovic, Vladan Devedzic 
FON - School of Business Administration,  
University of Belgrade 
Belgrade, Serbia 
emails: {sonjafon, jeljov, devedzic}@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract— 
This 
paper 
presents 
the 
service-oriented 
development of Content and Knowledge Provision tool, one of 
the core services developed within IntelLEO, an FP7 project in 
the area of technology-enhanced learning. The project aims at 
enhancing cross-organizational Learning and Knowledge 
Building practices at the workplace. Content and Knowledge 
Provision tool enables employees to upload different kinds of 
learning resources into a knowledge repository, annotate them, 
and (re-)discover relevant learning resources by performing 
semantic search over the knowledge repository. Hence, this 
service effectively serves as a content management system and 
semantic search engine within the IntelLEO. 
Keywords-Service-Oriented Architecture, Semantic Web, 
knowledge management, workplace learning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Semantic Web technologies offer a new approach for 
information and knowledge management that is largely 
based on the creation and use of semantics-rich metadata. 
The main idea of Semantic Web is to create a layer of 
machine processable data on top of the existing Web in 
order to enable advanced, automated processing and use of 
Web content [1]. The primary motivation for applying these 
novel technologies in existing software systems is to 
facilitate semantic interoperability and/or integration of 
software products made by different vendors with existing 
systems. Thus, Semantic Web technologies complement and 
further 
improve 
the 
capacity 
of 
Service 
Oriented 
Architecture (SOA) to enable flexible linking of resources 
related to traditional architectures and, , encourage 
reusability of these resources. In particular, Semantic Web 
technologies facilitate the implementation of the SOA 
concept by enabling semantics-driven identification and 
integration of required services, and sharing of data between 
them [3]. 
One system that implements the SOA concept through 
the use of Semantic Web technologies has been developed 
within the Intelligent Learning Extended Organization 
(IntelLEO) project [4]. This project investigated the 
IntelLEO paradigm – a learning community emerging as a 
temporal integration of two or more different business and 
educational 
communities 
characterized 
by 
different 
organizational 
cultures 
(industrial, 
research, 
and 
educational) [5]. In fact, an IntelLEO is a kind of extended 
organization focused on cross-organizational learning and 
knowledge building. Accordingly, the main goal of the 
project was to enhance Learning and Knowledge Building 
(LKB) practices in an IntelLEO. The software framework 
developed in the scope of the IntelLEO project encourages 
LKB activities, and makes it easier for learners to initiate 
and/or take part in these activities within an IntelLEO. The 
framework is composed of a set of services that interoperate 
through the common ontology framework. One of these 
services is the Content and Knowledge Provision (CKP) 
tool  that makes use of Semantic Web technologies and the 
SOA concept to enable employees to upload different kinds 
of learning resources into a knowledge repository, annotate 
them, and (re-)discover relevant learning resources by 
performing semantic search over the knowledge repository. 
CKP tool enables employees to allocate learning activities 
in the form of unstructured documents and knowledge 
sources in order to acquire some new knowledge required 
for performing their workplace activities. On the other hand, 
this tool helps in efficient and effective communication and 
exchange of information within an extended organization, 
enabling the management and exchange of learning 
resources between employees during their learning and 
work-related practices. 
This paper presents the SOA-development of the CKP 
tool and shows how it allows employees to effectively use 
knowledge and content from the extended organization's 
knowledge/content repositories as well as from all over the 
Web, without wandering and wasting their time on 
irrelevant resources. The rest of the paper is organized as 
follows: the next section presents the IntelLEO framework 
as a SOA-based system. Section 3 describes the CKP tool 
layered architecture, whereas Section 4 shows the CKP tool 
evaluation. Section 5 presents related work, whereas the last 
section gives the conclusions and indicates directions for 
future work. 
II. 
INTELLEO AS A SOA-BASED FRAMEWORK 
The IntelLEO framework (Fig. 1) comprises several core 
services that can be thought of as abstractions for grouping 
the framework’s principle functionalities – each core service 
consists of a number of functionality-specific services. The 
framework also integrates a set of interlinked ontologies – 
the IntelLEO ontologies – that allows for unified knowledge 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
representation within an extended organization (i.e., an 
IntelLEO) and semantic interoperability of services. 
The data layer of the IntelLEO framework (the bottom 
most layer on Fig. 1) consists of one or more data 
repositories (typically, one repository for each organization 
that participates in an IntelLEO) storing data relevant for the 
IntelLEO services in a format compliant with the IntelLEO 
ontologies[23]. 
The 
use 
of 
ontologies 
allows 
for 
representing and storing data together with their semantics, 
so the meaning of each piece of data is unambiguously 
defined, and therefore, data can be more easily shared and 
(re-)used by different services. 
RDF (Triple) STORE
Ontology-
related 
Services
Org_1 Triple 
store
Org_2 Triple 
store
 
Learning Path Creator
(LPC)
Content/Knowledge Provision
(CKP)
Collaborative Learning Services
(HRD, WGC, UM)
Organizational Policy
(OP)
 
 
Figure 1. IntelLEO Framework 
The core services of the IntelLEO framework can be 
divided into two main groups. The first group – Learning 
and Knowledge Building Services – is composed of the 
following services: 1) Services for Collaborative Learning 
(green boxes in Fig. 1), in particular Human Resource 
Discovery (HRD), Working Group Composition (WGC) 
and User Monitoring (UM); and 2) Content/Knowledge 
Provision (CKP). The second group –  Harmonization 
Services (orange boxes  in Fig. 1) – includes: 1) Learning 
Path Creator (LPC); and 2) Organizational Policy (OP) 
Service. These services are often orchestrated from 
applications to interact and interoperate with each other. In 
this paper we focus on the Content and Knowledgde 
Provision functionality of the IntelLEO framework 
implemented in the CKP tool. Description of all other 
components of the IntelLEO framework can be found in the 
project deliverables, specifically [2] and [6], available at the 
project's Website 
  
III. 
CKP TOOL LAYERED ARCHITECTURE 
Like the overall IntelLEO framework, the CKP tool is 
also organized in a SOA manner, with its own specific 
services forming a layered architecture shown on Figure 2.  
A. Persistence Layer 
The CKP tool uses the persistence layer of the overall 
IntelLEO framework (Fig. 1). In fact, this layer is used by 
all the IntelLEO core services. It provides generic services 
for storage and retrieval of data originating from LKB 
activities in an extended organization, as well as data about 
various kinds of knowledge and learning resources that were 
used in or resulted from those activities. The data are 
represented and stored as Resource Definition Framework 
(RDF) triples compliant with the IntelLEO ontologies. In 
other words, the IntelLEO ontologies serve as models for 
storing data in the RDF [24] repositories of the Persistence 
Layer. This means that data are stored with explicitly 
defined meaning, and, also, that semantics of connections 
among data items are made explicit (through ontologies). 
This further implies that the semantics of the data are 
directly available for processing by any software component 
accessing those data through the services of the Persistence 
Layer.  
The services of this Layer hide all the specificities of 
working 
with 
ontologies, 
RDF, 
and 
other 
related 
technologies of the Semantic Web stack. So, when needing 
to access or store data in the repository, the CKP tool (or 
any other software component) simply works with ‘regular‘ 
Java classes and interfaces and all the tasks related to the 
storage, retrieval and update of ontology instance data are 
handled by the services of the Persistence Layer. 
In the following section, we present how the CKP tool, 
in particular, its Service Layer, makes use of the semantics-
rich data of the Persistence Layer to provide users with 
advanced content/knowledge management and sharing 
functionalities. 
B. Service Layer 
Services 
of 
this 
layer 
allow 
for 
personalized 
content/knowledge retrieval. This means that these services 
provide users with learning/knowledge resources compliant 
with the particularities of their learning context (e.g., their 
present learning goals and competences). These services 
include: Semantic Annotation service, Tagging service, 
Service for computing relevance of a learning resource, and 
Retrieval service. 
Semantic annotation service (Fig. 2) provides automatic 
semantic annotation of learning resources by making use of 
the annotation services of the KIM platform [8]. 
The main challenge for using KIM platform in the CKP 
tool was the extending of PROTON [25] ontology, an 
upper-level ontology within KIM, with the concepts and the 
relationships from the , domain ontology - an ontology that 
formally specifies a specific subject domain, used in the 
CKP tool. Semantic annotations obtained from this process 
were clearly specified, easy to understand, and served as a 
basis 
for 
useful 
applications 
in 
the 
CKP 
tool.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
Figure 2. Layered Architecture of the CKP tool 
In other words,  the main task of the Semantic 
Annotation service was to retrieve semantic annotations 
gathered by the KIM platform, to add these annotations to 
the specific learning resource as well as to transfer them 
to the user interface of the CKP tool. Tagging service 
(Fig. 2) helps to add additional information to a specific 
learning resource in the form of tags or keywords. The 
process of adding tags is important both for users who 
perform the tagging (reflection on the content in order to 
find the terms that best describe it), and members of the 
extended organization who might want to use specific 
learning resources in the future (easier search and 
discovery).  
Service for computing relevance of a learning 
resource (Fig. 2) computes semantic similarity between 
the given learning resource and a specific learning goal.. 
In particular, the relevance is computed as semantic 
similarity between a resource and a specific learning goal.  
Semantic similarity is computed using information 
retrieval techniques, namely TF-IDF [26] and Cosine 
Similarity [27]. This further means that semantic 
similarity between a learning resource and a learning goal 
is calculated by measuring similarity between the term 
vector found in the learning resource and the term vector  
of the considered learning goal. Term vector is used to 
represent both learning resource and learning goal as a 
vector of identifiers [9].The concepts used for creating 
these vectors are obtained through semantic annotation of 
both the learning resource and the learning goal. Each 
concept forming a vector of the learning resource is 
associated with its frequency (i.e., number of occurrences) 
in that learning resource. On the other hand, a learning 
goal is composed of competences, and these competences 
can be complex, i.e., composed of sub-competences. Let 
us explain this through an example. Suppose we have 
learning goal LG1 that is composed of competences C1 
(annotated with concepts T1 and T2) and C2 (annotated 
with concepts T3 and T4). Competence C1 is composed 
of sub-competences C1.1 (annotated with the concept T5) 
and C1.2 (annotated with concepts T6 and T7), while the 
competence C1.1 is composed of sub-competences C1.1.1 
(annotated with concept T8) and C1.1.2 (annotated with 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
concept T9). Presented in the form of a tree, the LG1 
learning goal and the associated competences look as 
follows:  
LG1 
 
C1(T1, T2) 
o 
C1.1 (T5) 
 
C1.1.1(T8) 
 
C1.1.2(T9) 
o 
C1.2 (T6, T7) 
 
C2 (T3, T4) 
 
Values associated with concepts T1 – T9 are 
calculated having in mind the distance between the 
competence a concept is associated with and the learning 
goal. In particular, the following simple formula is used: 
VTn = 1/k, where Tn represents the concept (Tn=1,9), VTn 
is the value for that concept, and k is the distance between 
the competence the concept Tn is assigned to and the 
learning goal (LG1). Accordingly, the values for concepts 
T1 – T9 are as follows: 
 
 
V(T1) = 1 
 
V(T2) = 1 
 
V(T3) = 1 
 
V(T4) = 1 
 
V(T5) = 0,5 
 
V(T6) = 0,5 
 
V(T7) = 0,5 
 
V(T8) = 0,33 
 
V(T9) = 0,33 
 
Finally, the semantic similarity between the learning 
resource d1 and the specific learning goal d2 is calculated 
by multiplying the vector of concepts of learning resource 
v(d1)  and the vector of concepts of specific learning goal 
v(d2) as follows:  
 
             sim (d1, d2) = v(d1)*v(d2) 
                (1) 
 
The output is a number between 0 and 1 and it 
presents the relevance of learning resource for specific 
learning goal. In addition, this relevance is presented in 
the form of star-scale in user interface (Figure 6A) 
indicating if the learning resource is relevant for a specific 
learning goal. 
Retrieval service (Fig. 2) enables seamless retrieval 
of stored learning resources based on the input that can be 
a domain-specific concept or tag(s). This service queries 
the repository of learning resources looking for learning 
resources that are annotated with domain concept(s) or 
tag(s) given in the user’s request. The result is a list of the 
ranked search results. If none of the available resources 
directly matches the user’s request, this service identifies 
semantically related domain concepts or tags, finds 
resources annotated with them and suggests those as 
potentially useful resources. In order to find similar 
domain concepts, the service looks for concepts that are 
more general or more specific to those given in the user’s 
request. In particular, it makes use of skos:narrower and 
skos:broader relations for structuring the domain concepts 
in concept hierarchies. These relations are defined by the 
SKOS 
(Simple 
Knowledge 
Organization 
System) 
ontology [10]. It defines classes and properties for 
modelling specific subject domains in the form of 
thesauri, taxonomy, or classification scheme. 
To rank the retrieved learning resources, this service 
makes use of semantic similarity between each of the 
retrieved learning resources and the user's profile. 
Semantic similarity is calculated as Cosine similarity 
between the vector of a specific resource and user’s 
profile vector. The vector of a resource comprises all tags 
and the semantic annotations (concepts from the domain-
specific ontology for the learning resources. The user’s 
profile vector comprises all domain concepts and tags 
related to the user, his personal learning goals, his 
competences and learning paths he is following. In 
addition, it contains concepts and tags that reflect the 
user’s personal priorities, including general interests, 
learning history, and acquired competences. Each 
personal priority contains a weighting factor that affects 
the value of domain concepts and tags associated with 
that priority. If the search was done upon request of some 
other service (e.g., some of the IntelLEO services), 
similarity is computed between the retrieved resources 
and some other kind of learning asset (e.g., competence, 
learning activity, learning path), as requested by the 
service on whose behalf the search was performed.. 
C. Application Layer 
Application layer is the connection to the “external 
world” and comprehends Web interface and application 
logic that uses the functionality of the Service Layer (Fig. 
2). This layer implements three types of functionalities 
gathered from the application cases involved in the 
IntelLEO project: annotation of learning resources, 
management of learning resources, and semantic search of 
a repository of learning resources (Fig. 2). These 
functionalities are offered through a Web-based interface 
(see the next section). 
D. Implementation 
Regarding the actual implementation, the CKP Tool, 
as well as whole IntelLEO solution is implemented in the 
Java programming language, to be independent from the 
underlying platform, and is based upon a number of open 
source frameworks. Specifically, the Service Component 
Architecture (SCA) framework Apache Tuscany [15] was 
used to facilitate the implementation of loosely coupled 
Core Services. In terms of user interfaces, to achieve 
cross-browser compatibility, Apache Wicket [16], a Java-
based web framework, was used in combination with 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
Javascript framework JQuery [17]. This approach allows 
for the IntelLEO platform to be installed and run on 
different target platforms, and enables users to access the 
IntelLEO platform from different operating systems and 
with the majority of common web browsers, as was 
proved during the evaluation phase. 
IV. 
EVALUATION 
 
The CKP tool was evaluated in an empirical study that 
lasted two months and included three application cases of 
the IntelLEO project. The first case (AC1) was about an 
IntelLEO comprising a big multinational corporation in 
the automotive sector, a research institute and a 
university. The second application case (AC2) involved 
an IntelLEO formed by an SME providing IT services in 
the e-Engineering and e-Manufacturing sectors, and a 
university-based research group. The third Application 
Case (AC3) was about an IntelLEO focused on teacher 
training; the participating organisations were a Teacher 
Association and a university. The objective of the 
evaluation study was to collect feedback from end-users, 
in the three application cases, concerning the usability and 
usefulness of the overall IntelLEO framework and its 
individual components as well as to test to IntelLEO 
hypotheses, 
which 
suggested 
that 
a 
synergy 
of 
collaboration and harmonisation services increases the 
individual motivation for LKB activities, a pre-requisite 
of organizational responsiveness [7].. The evaluation 
details are presented in [11]. In the text bellow we present 
a short overview related to evaluation procedure of  the 
CKP tool, compliance with the scope of this paper. 
The study was organized through a series of tasks, set 
in a specific learning scenario, that the participants had to 
complete. The tasks were the same in all three application 
cases to allow for comparison of the results obtained in 
heterogeneous settings. The study was conducted with 
participants from AC1, AC2, and AC3. Most of them had 
university degree (83.3%). In terms of occupations, 31% 
of participants are teachers, 8% are researchers, 23% are 
students, 15% are technical employees, 17% are engineers 
and 6% are categorized as “others”. 
They interacted with the services of the IntelLEO 
framework in five tasks. The forth task was related to the 
CKP tool; hence, we present the part of the study 
procedure and the results only for that task. At the 
beginning of the study session, the participants were 
familiarized with the learning scenario that was adapted to 
the particularities of each application case. The fourth 
task in the learning scenario 
was to share a 
learning/knowledge resource by making use of the 
bookmarking/annotation features of the CKP tool. To 
complete this task, the participants were asked to navigate 
to the given URL, initiate the CKP tool, and 
bookmark/annotate the corresponding Web page (e.g., by 
adding some tags and/or selecting some of the 
automatically generated tags, and/or choosing related 
learning goal(s)). After completing the task, the 
participants were asked to fill in the corresponding 
questionnaire. For each feature of the CKP tool, the 
questionnaire 
presented 
the 
participants 
with 
the 
corresponding screenshot and a question statement, 
asking them about the perceived usefulness of the tool’s 
presented at that screenshot. Answers were provided in 
the form of a 5-point Likert scale (5 – strongly agree; 1 – 
strongly disagree).). An example for a statement would be 
“When I want to plan my personal learning goals, it is 
useful to tag an online resource with my personal learning 
goal.” The objective of this investigation was to find out 
how useful and relevant are the developed services and 
functionalities for end-users in the three ACs, and also to 
examine how useful and relevant the CKP tool and its 
functionalities are in performing this task, especially w.r.t 
the motivational and pedagogical challenges of learning 
in the workplace. 
Evaluation of the CKP tool has shown the importance 
of CKP tool functionalities for learning and knowledge 
building (LKB) activities. The users have identified 
several benefits of the CKP tool for workplace learning. 
Respondents 
highlighted 
the 
fact 
that 
colleagues 
collaboratively create one repository of learning content, 
which is annotated and updated bottom-up, but accessible 
and useable by the whole organization. The requirement 
to structure and document one’s work-relevant knowledge 
has been highlighted by users of all three ACs, too. This 
documentation serves 1) to have one’s own knowledge 
available at a later stage, and 2) to profit from the 
reciprocal knowledge exchange between colleagues to 
split up the burden of documenting important lessons 
learned among several colleagues. They indicated that the 
links between knowledge and content must be fully 
exploited by using a shared repository of learning 
resources. 
V. 
RELATED WORK 
To support the learning and evolving the knowledge 
of employees at the workplace, the CKP tool focuses on 
providing distributed services for the semantic annotation, 
managing and semantic search of learning resources in 
extended 
organizations. 
Many 
tools/services 
have 
supported knowledge management at the workplace and 
they were used as a basis for content and knowledge 
provision within extended organizations.  
The objective of K-NET project [28] is to support 
knowledge sharing and reuse within an organisation. 
Unlike the CKP tool, as well as the whole IntelLEO 
project, this project does not consider the specificities of 
learning in an extended organisation.  
The European Integrating Project MATURE [29]  is 
focused on providing technology that would allow an 
enterprise to make a significant shift in its organisational 
(learning) culture and move towards enterprise 2.0, which 
is characterized by enhanced collaboration and a culture 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
of employee participation [20]. Unlike the CKP tool, this 
project does not provide means for achieving the goals of 
harmonization of personal and organisational goals, 
neither supports learning and knowledge building 
activities in an extended organizations.The latest trends in 
knowledge management are about using social software 
for conversations and collaboration, for knowledge 
elicitation, creation and sharing, for identifying experts 
and getting access to expert opinions worldwide. 
However, despite their numerous positive sides, social 
software tools also have one major drawback: the 
knowledge (i.e. knowledge objects) they capture is not 
accessible for machine processing. Therefore, there is a 
need for enriching these tools with formal semantics that 
can be leveraged by machines for supporting learning and 
knowledge building activities. Specifically, there is a need 
for annotating semantically knowledge objects created 
using social software tools. 
There are a lot semantic annotation platforms, such as  
Action [21], AnnoTex [22], Self-teaching SVM struct 
[14], ASCUM [13] based on the domain ontologies. On 
the other hand, there are very popular bookmarking tools 
such as Delicious [18],  Diigo [19]  etc. The CKP tool 
implemented features for collaborative tagging in a form 
of an Internet browser plug-in (Firefox) are similar to 
other bookmarking systems at a glance. However, the key 
difference is that CKP can compute the relevance of the 
tagged resource with the learning goals and competences, 
and recommend learners to tag learning resources with 
them as well. This tool also differs from the other 
retrieval and content management services in a few ways. 
First, by using the CKP tool within the IntelLEO software 
solution, employees can store, annotate and (re-)discover 
heterogeneous resources (e.g., documents, discussions, 
blog posts, and wikis). The annotation is done 
automatically by using the concepts of appropriate 
domain-specific 
ontologies. 
Secondly, 
it 
allows 
employees to find job-specific experiences and “know-
how” (in the form of, e.g., annotated wiki pages, blog 
posts, discussions) that are not freely available on the 
Web. These can originate from a member of the extended 
organization, a colleague from the same organization, or 
can be a documented self experience. Annotations of 
these resources with the concepts from specific domain 
ontologies facilitate their discovery and retrieval. The 
IntelLEO CKP tool also aims at addressing well known 
drawbacks of traditional search paradigms related to 
difficulties in finding relevant information [12] by 
improving existing search interfaces with semantic search 
capabilities, thus allowing the search to be based on 
domain topics and not only keywords. Finally, the CKP 
tool offers a measuring the semantic similarity between 
learning resource and the specific learning goal which is a 
novel approach. It is a very important in determining the 
relevance of knowledge asset related to learning 
goal/competency that has to be achieved 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented the development process of the 
Content and Knowledge Provision tool by using the SOA 
concept. The tool is designed as a core service of  
IntelLEO, a new workplace learning paradigm being 
developed within an FP7 research project in the area of 
technology-enchanced learning. The concept of CKP tool 
requires technologies to support sharing, harmonization, 
building, and extension of content/knowledge among 
individuals, industries and universities, and effective 
combination of content and organizational knowledge 
systems (at both universities and workplaces in 
organizations). 
The 
management 
of 
content 
and 
knowledge has a key role for both collaborative LKB and 
harmonization of individual and organizational objectives.  
This interface of the CKP tool includes all the 
advantages of the bookmarklets features. However, this 
service is much more than a simple bookmarking system 
or a mere Learning Management system; it combines all 
features 
in 
one 
single 
solution, 
thus 
improving 
exponentially the way those facilities can support 
workplace learning. The objective was to formally 
represent the semantics of the knowledge captured 
through social software tools, so that it can be leveraged 
by machines for supporting LKB activities in extended 
organizations.  
In the future, we plan to implement the integration of 
the CKP tool with the Delicious bookmarking tool so that 
users can automatically save a bookmark to both 
Delicious and the CKP tool Additionally, this integration 
should 
provide 
users 
with 
the 
ability 
to 
have 
recommended concepts and most frequently used tags, as 
well as the ability to search through colleagues’ 
bookmarks (both on Delicious and CKP). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This publication was partially supported/co-funded by 
the European Community/European Union/EU under the 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) 
theme of the 7th Framework Program for R&D (FP7). 
This document does not represent the opinion of the 
European Community, and the European Community is 
not responsible for any use that might be made of its 
content.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Berners-Lee, T., "Weaving the Web", Orion Business 
Books, 1999.  
[2] IntelLEO D4.1 Full Prototype, Prototype of Services and 
Report, 
2013, 
Online: 
http://intelleo.eu/uploads/tx_abdownloads/files/IntelLEO_
D4.1_FullPrototype_v1.0.pdf. [retrieved: Oct,  2014]. 
[3] Skopik, F., Schall, D., and Schahram, D., "Trusted 
Information Sharing using SOA-based Social Overlay 
Network", International Journal of Computer Science and 
Applications Technomathematics Research Foundation vol. 
9 
no. 
1, 
2012, 
pp. 
116-151, 
Online: 
http://danielschall.at/v9i16.pdf [retrieved: Oct,  2014]. 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
[4] IntelLEO - Intelligent Learning Extended Organization, 
2014, Online: http://www.intelleo.eu/ [retrieved: Oct,  
2014]. 
[5] Stokić, D. Pata, K., and Devedžić, V., "Intelligent Learning 
Extended Organizations", In: Proceedings of TELearn2008, 
Hanoi, Vietnam. CD Edition. 
[6] [IntelLEO D6.1, 13] IntelLEO D6.1 Demonstrators, 2013, 
Online: 
http://intelleo.eu/uploads/tx_abdownloads/files/IntelLEO_
D6.1_Demonstrators_v1.0.pdf [retrieved: Oct,  2014]. 
[7] IntelLEO 
D5.2 
Empirical 
Evaluation 
of 
IntelLEO 
Hypotesis using Full-rptotype measurement, 2013 Online: 
http://intelleo.eu/uploads/tx_abdownloads/files/D5_2_Intel
LEO_Evaluation_V2.0.pdf [retrieved: Oct,  2014]. 
[8] Popov, B., Kiryakov, A., Kirilov, A. Manov, D., 
Ognyanoff, D., and Goranov, M., "KIM - A Semantic 
Annotation Platform", The Semantic Web - ISWC 2003 
Lecture 
Notes 
in 
Computer 
Science volume 
2870, 2003, pp. 834-849. 
[9] Wong, S. K. M., Ziarko, W., Raghavan, V. V., and Wong, 
P. C. N., On Modeling of Information Retrieval Concepts 
in Vector Spaces, ACM Transactions of Database Systems, 
vol. 12, no. 2, June 1987, pp. 299-321, Online: 
http://lincweb.cacs.louisiana.edu/cmps561/2.pdf, [retrieved: 
Oct,  2014]. 
[10] SKOS 
Simple 
Knowledge 
Organization 
System  
Reference, W3C Recommendation 18 August 2009, 
Online: http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/REC-skos-reference-
20090818/, [retrieved: Oct,  2014]. 
[11] Radenkovic, S.D., Devedzic, V., Jovanovic, J., and 
Jeremic, Z., Content and knowledge provision service - a 
way to build intellectual capital in learning organizations,  
Knowledge Management Research & Practice (2014) 12, 
pp. 297-309, doi: 10.1057/kmrp.2013.55. 
[12] Uren, V., Cimiano, P., Iria, J., Handschuh, S.,Vargas-Vera, 
M., Motta, E., and Ciravegna, F., (2006). Semantic 
annotation for knowledge management: Requirements and 
a survey of the state of the art. Web Semantics: Science, 
Services and Agents on the World Wide Web, vol. 4, no. 1, 
pp. 14-28. 
[13] Liao, W. and Veeramachaneni, S., (2009), "A Simple 
Semi-supervised 
Algorithm 
For 
Named 
Entity 
Recognition", In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 
Workshop on Semi-supervised Learning for Natural 
Language Processing, pp. 58-65. 
[14] Kauppinen, T., Kuittinen, H., Tuominen, J., Seppälä, K., 
and Hyvönen, E., (2009), "Extending an Ontology by 
Analyzing Annotation Co-occurrences in a Semantic 
Cultural Heritage Portal", In Proceedings of the ASWC 
2008 Workshop on Collective Intelligence (ASWC-CI 
2008) organized as a part of the 3rd Asian Semantic Web 
Conference (ASWC 2008). Bangkok, Thailand. 
[15] Appache Tuscany, 2014, Online: http://tuscany.apache.org/, 
[retrieved: Oct,  2014]. 
[16] Appache Wicket, 2014, Online: http://wicket.apache.org/, 
[retrieved: Oct,  2014]. 
[17] jQuery, 2014, Online: http://jquery.com/, [retrieved: Oct,  
2014]. 
[18] Delicious, 2014: Online: www.delicious.com, [retrieved: 
Oct,  2014]. 
[19] diigo, 2014, Online: https://www.diigo.com, [retrieved: 
Oct,  2014]. 
[20] Maier, R., Retzer, S., and Thaimann, S. "Collaborative 
Tagging of Knowledge and Learning Resources" in Mills, 
Annette and Huff, Sid (eds.) In: Proceedings of the 19th 
Australasian Conference of Information Systems (ASIS 
2008), Christchurch, New Zealand, 3-5 December 2008, 
pp. 607-616. 
[21] Malik, S.K., Prakash, N., and Rizvi, S., (2010), "Semantic 
Annotation 
Framework 
For 
Intelligent 
Information 
Retrieval Using KIM Architecture", International Journal 
of Web & Semantic Technology (IJWest), 1 (4): pp. 12-26. 
[22] Yan, Y., Matsuo, Y., Ishizuka, M., and Yokoi, T., (2008), 
Relation Classification for Semantic Structure Annotation 
of Text", In: Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE/WIC/ACM 
International 
Conference 
on 
Web 
Intelligence 
and 
Intelligent Agent Technology, pp. 377-380. 
[23] Ontology 
Framework, 
Online: 
http://intelleo.eu/index.php?id=183, [retrieved: Oct,  2014] 
[24] W3C - Latest "RDF Concepts and Abstract Syntax" 
versions, 
Online: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-concepts/, 
[retrieved: Oct,  2014]. 
[25] PROTON, Online: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PROTON, 
[retrieved: Oct,  2014]. 
[26] tf-idf, 
Online: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tf%E2%80%93idf, [retrieved: 
Oct,  2014]. 
[27] Cosine 
similarity, 
Online: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosine_similarity, [retrieved: 
Oct,  2014]. 
[28] K-Net 
Project, 
Online: 
http://www.knetproject.com/, 
[retrieved: Oct,  2014]. 
[29] MATURE Project, Online: http://mature-ip.eu/, [retrieved: 
Oct,  2014]. 
 
 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

