Towards A Blockchain-based Decentralised
Educational Landscape
Niaz Chowdhury, Manoharan Ramachandran, Allan Third,
Alexander Mikroyannidis, Michelle Bachler and John Domingue
Knowledge Media Institute, The Open University
Milton Keynes, United Kingdom
email:{niaz.chowdhury, manoharan.ramachandran, allan.third,
alexander.mikroyannidis, michelle.bachler, john.domingue}@open.ac.uk
Abstract—Institutions in the current educational landscape oper-
ate independently. They exhibit reluctance in sharing their teach-
ing and qualiﬁcations with others due to the fear of damaging
individuality. This practice, however, is counterproductive for the
students as they suffer from various difﬁculties and get deprived
of certain beneﬁts. In this paper, we explore the possibility of
ﬁnding a solution to this deadlock. We argue that Blockchain-
based decentralisation can offer a passageway where educational
institutions get to keep their individuality but participate in
collaborations to help overcome the problems students face. Our
principal contribution in this paper is a conceptual educational
landscape to show how institutions could potentially manage
record-keeping, credential veriﬁcations, and continued career
support in a decentralised environment.
Keywords–blockchain; decentralisation; veriﬁcation; education.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The primary role of educational institutions is to offer
governance, teaching, qualiﬁcations and support towards a suc-
cessful career of their graduates in the post-study period. In this
practice, they exhibit a standalone, scattered and remote model.
They do not show interest in sharing their teaching methods
or qualiﬁcations with others due to the fear of damaging their
goodwills and reputation. The roles of the institutions can also
vary broadly. Some provide both tuition and degrees while
others only teach and the degree comes from issuing authorities
who do not offer teachings. The practice of universities issuing
qualiﬁcations for other institutions having no right to confer
the degree on their own is not rare either. In addition to
maintaining their individuality, the complex nature of types
and roles heavily contributed against decoupling educational
institutions from their standalone model, making the education
system inherently isolated.
This current model is inadequate, backdated and sometimes
damaging. It cannot see the full academic history of a student;
hence, institutions fail to act appropriately. This model is also
unsupportive towards lifelong learners and students receiving
micro-credentials. Amongst many shortcomings, the follow-
ing are three prominent problems that students frequently
encounter. First, students need to verify their qualiﬁcations
every time they join a new job or a new course, which is time-
consuming and expensive. Second, the centralised governance
puts students records in danger as such practice increases
the chances of corruption, manipulation and privacy violation.
Third, and ﬁnally, institutions fail to give adequate career
support, particularly for a more extended period when students
achieve multiple qualiﬁcations from more than one institution.
While a universal institution is not a practical concept,
students’ miseries are genuine intricacies that need solving. In
this paper, we show that employing Blockchain technology can
help decentralising qualiﬁcation veriﬁcation, data governance
and career support. We demonstrate how existing technologies
and methods can be put together to offer a reasonable solution
to these problems.
The remaining paper is organised into six sections. Section
II presents the current educational landscape and identiﬁes the
problems, Section III reviews the technologies to be used in the
proposal and Section IV describes potential decentralisation
models. Finally, Section V presents the proposed Blockchain-
based decentralised educational landscape before concluding
the paper in Section VI.
II.
CURRENT EDUCATIONAL LANDSCAPE
Historically, education is an isolated system centred around
teachers or teaching schools [1]. Before the establishment of
formal institutions, pupils used to go to teachers’ homes to
receive an education. This practice gradually evolved, and both
pupils and teachers started to gather at common locations,
often at renowned places. This move began to establish the
concept of school, although still not as a formal institution [2].
Raphael’s celebrated fresco the School of Athens on the wall
of Apostolic Palace in Vatican City is an excellent depiction of
how the school used to look like in the ancient period (shown
in Figure 1). Ancient Greece, Ancient Rome, Ancient India
and Ancient China have well-documented histories of such
schools [3]. By the time the University of Bologna opened
its door to students in Europe roughly a millennium ago, the
need for institutional education had echoed at different places
across the continent and the universities of Paris, Oxford and
Cambridge were established.
In this journey of evolution from teachers’ home to formal
institutions, one element remains common – the standalone
and remote nature of the institutions. There are many lobby
groups and collaborations between institutions for promoting
their names and values, such as Ivy league (US), Russell Group
(UK), U15 (Canada), G8 (Australia), Coimbra Group (Europe)
and so on, but not many initiatives in giving joint teaching and
degrees. Educational institutions have always been protective
to safeguard their reputation as they fear sharing teaching
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Figure 1. Raphael’s celebrated fresco the School of Athens on the wall of
Apostolic Palace in Vatican City.
practice and qualiﬁcations with others might put their goodwill
in danger. Even institutions of the same status can have severe
reluctance in joining such a union [4]. For instance, Imperial
College London and University College London, two world-
renowned universities from England, initiated a merger in a
bid to form a large university capable of attracting twice
the research fund universities such as Oxford or Cambridge
can allure [5]. Although the alliance could help them achieve
many beneﬁts, it did not come through due to opposition from
management and students of both universities [6].
In the present days, educational institutions play a broad
role. Some provide governance, teaching, qualiﬁcations and
career support. In contrast, others may provide a subset of these
duties, such as awarding bodies confer qualiﬁcations while
institutions without the right of giving their own degree con-
tribute in teaching and governance. With the rise of the World
Wide Web, online-based education and micro-credentials have
recently become popular. Most of these qualiﬁcations come
from distance learning and online institutions. The size and
functional scope of these institutions are limited, making them
provide slow veriﬁcation assistance and almost no career
support in the post-study period.
The current educational landscape shows us the practice
has three broad problems. These are as follows:
A. Problem P1
It is a common practice that all educational institutions
maintain individual databases of their own to store and hold
students’ records including their personal information. In most
cases, students have no or limited control over their data and
often remain oblivious to what exactly their institutions keep
on their behalf. This centralised approach, in general, has been
a subject of mounting concern as social awareness surrounding
how users control their data continues to grow. Such an
approach can cause alteration of data for numerous reasons
including updates by mistakes, corruption and most impor-
tantly deliberate manipulation by the controlling administrators
leading to tempering or removal of data without the owner’s
consent or knowledge. Privacy could be another solicitude as
data can be viewed, shared or sold by the possessors.
B. Problem P2
Educational institutions maintain an old tradition of carry-
ing trust through badges, diplomas and certiﬁcates. It used to
work when there were fewer institutions, and people recog-
nised the certiﬁcate issued by a speciﬁc university or school.
However, as time passed by, people started to lose faith in
paper certiﬁcates due to the availability of handy technology
that can produce fraudulent documents. Instead, it became a
new trend for the bearers of certiﬁcates, transcripts and other
educational records to establish the authenticity of their papers.
Sometimes they need to send documents to another school
or an employer using ofﬁcial email of the providers, while
some test scores, such as the International English Language
Testing System (IELTS) or Graduate Record Examinations
(GRE) need to come directly from the issuers by post. What
seems to be the biggest irony in the education sector is that
even the educational institutions that once proudly developed
the convention of issuing certiﬁed documents now do not trust
them and ask for veriﬁcation at the time of admitting new
students.
C. Problem P3
The existing education system is mainly scattered, where
educational institutions operate standalone failing to provide
continued career support for their students. There indeed exists
a practice of helping current students and alumni to obtain
jobs through arranging networking sessions in universities and
colleges. Still, the impact of such events is limited, and the
process lasts for a few years in the post-graduation period.
Furthermore, institutions generally have access to records and
degree information of the qualiﬁcation they provide only and
cannot access or verify their students’ skills and diplomas
obtained from other institutions. This limitation prevents them
from adequately assessing one’s potentials and helping them
to apply for the right job and guide them to their career paths.
III.
TECHNOLOGY REVIEW
While forming alliances amongst the universities sharing
their student records, teaching, and qualiﬁcation does not seem
practical under the current landscape, the problems P1, P2 and
P3 desperately need solving. We, therefore, argue that it is
time to look for a resolution elsewhere and propose a solution
in this paper using existing technologies, such as Blockchain,
distributed storage and linked data. Before we present the
explanation of how these technologies offer the answers to
the problems, we introduce them brieﬂy below.
A. Blockchain Technology
A Blockchain is an immutable distributed ledger secured by
cryptographic techniques, as shown in Figure 2, and managed
by a decentralised community over a peer-to-peer network
through incentivisation [7]. Each member of the community
is commonly known as node who distributedly maintains the
storage of the Blockchain. No node has the authority to make
changes unless agreed by the majority of the network. The
process of this agreement is called consensus [8].
The transactions of a Blockchain are called immutable
because once inserted, they become permanent and cannot be
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

0
1
2
3
Data
Timestamp
Hash of Previous Block
Data
Timestamp
Hardcoded Hash
Hash
Data
Timestamp
Hash of Previous Block
Data
Timestamp
Hash of Previous Block
Hash
Hash
Figure 2. Each block in a Blockchain is chained to one another using
cryptographic hashes creating the ultimate bond to develop the chain.
modiﬁed retroactively, not even by the authors, without the
alteration of all subsequent transactions. The ﬁrst block of the
chain is called genesis block with subsequent blocks added
through consensus between nodes. Various consensus methods,
such as proof of work, proof of stake, proof of authority etc.
are used in different protocols that allow nodes to compete for
a pole position enabling them to insert the new block. The
design of a Blockchain ensures that, once entered, contents of
the blocks cannot be changed as long as no entities control
more than 50% of the nodes. This property of Blockchain
makes it trustworthy.
The progress in the development of Blockchain has taken
the technology beyond the storage of records and includes
distributed computing in the form of smart contracts. These
are blocks of executable source code stored on a Blockchain
with a published interface describing the methods and their
parameters. The code gets executed when the corresponding
transaction is added on the distributed ledger. Because the code
fulﬁls the same requirements of the immutability of Blockchain
data, smart contracts form trustworthy distributed computation
[9].
B. Linked Data
Linked Data is a form of structured data interlinked with
other data to become useful through semantic queries of
associative and contextual nature. It extends the capability
of Web data originally meant for only human readers to
share information in a way that can be read automatically by
machines [10]. Linked Data plays a vital role in integrating
data in the presence of multiple data sources, making them
interoperable.
Sir Berners-Lee, the founder of the World Wide Web, ﬁrst
coined the term in his note Linked Data. He also outlined four
principles known as four rules for Linked Data. These rules
state that Lined Data, i) Uses Uniform Resource Identiﬁers
(URIs) as names of things, ii) Uses HTTP URIs to look up
those names, iii) At the time of looking up a URI, provides
useful information using the standards, such as Resource
Description Framework (RDF) and SPARQL [11], and iv)
Includes links to other URIs to discover more things [12].
C. Distributed Storage
Distributed Storage is a decentralised approach of storing
data in one or multiple servers. HyperText Transfer Protocol,
or more commonly known as HTTP, is considered the biggest
distributed database where peers can access particular data
from anywhere in the world. HTTP became outdated due to
its centralised nature. Peer to Peer (P2P) ﬁle system, such as
BitTorrent, took its place. Although BitTorrent comes with a lot
of advantages, several drawbacks, such as unstable download-
ing, unveriﬁed publisher and a lack of incentive mechanism
restricted its use [13].
After the arrival of Blockchain, a combination of the
distributed ﬁle system and Blockchain becomes a promising
solution where the former provides the storage facilities while
the latter ensures the integrity of the data and provides a way
to achieve incentives. Interplanetary Filesystem (IPFS) [14],
Swarm [15], and FileCoin [16] are some of these modern
distributed storages.
D. Solid: SOcial LInked Data
Sir Berners-Lee originally viewed the World Wide Web
as a decentralised network. It was close to a peer-to-peer
network assuming each user of the Web would be an active
editor and contributor, creating and linking content to form
an interconnected web of links [17]. The Internet, however,
gradually turns out to be the opposite - an ideal example of
the centralised paradigm. Sir Berners-Lee’s response to this
evolution of the World Wide Web is Solid. Solid, derived from
SOcial LInked Data, is a set of rules and tools for developing
decentralised social applications based on Linked Data. It uses
as much as possible the existing W3C standards and protocols
[18].
Solid aims to modifying the centralised client-server
paradigm, improving peer-to-peer networking in a manner that
adds more control and performance features than its traditional
concept, such as BitTorrent. Its central focus is to enable the
discovery and sharing of information in a way that preserves
privacy. It allows users to store personal data in Pods (Personal
online data stores) hosted at the location of users’ desire. They
also have the ﬂexibility to distribute data among several pods;
allowing them to organise various types of data (personal,
contact, health, ﬁnancial) in multiple pods with varying degree
of access control. In a nutshell, Solid allows users to retain
complete ownership of their data, including where to store the
data and who has permission to access it [19].
IV.
DECENTRALISED MODELS
Disintegrating educational institutions from their isolation
does not necessarily have to come through sharing teaching
or credentials. Decentralising their governance can potentially
make them open to the authorised parties who can access in-
formation without any formal union. This approach establishes
a trade-off where institutions get to keep their individuality
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

but participate in collaborations to help overcome the existing
problems.
Decentralisation means the transfer of authority from one
or more central controlling body to local representatives –
in the context of web technology, these representatives are
generally users. In an educational landscape, the institutions
act as the central controlling bodies while students are users.
Decentralisation gives students the authority over their data.
They get to decide the storage location of their data and can
grant access to speciﬁc entities while disallowing such access
to others. There are several ways to achieve decentralisation.
The following describes three models that can be used to
decentralise the educational landscape.
A. Model M1: Pure Blockchain-based Decentralisation
Blockchain is decentralised by nature and a distributed
ledger that can be used as data storage; hence, it acts as a useful
tool for decentralisation. By design, data on a Blockchain are
immutable; therefore, no further actions are required to ensure
data integrity. There are different ways available to store data
on Blockchain. The most efﬁcient way of storing data on a
Blockchain requires a smart contract. This model provides a
fully distributed storage with a ﬁrm guarantee of data integrity.
The tradeoff is, however, the cost as it requires payment for
every contract deployment. The cost varies based on the size
of the smart contract; the longer the contract, higher the fees
required to deploy it. Amongst other shortcomings, lack of
privacy is one that hinders its useability signiﬁcantly. Besides,
there exists various types of Blockchain, and depending on
their kinds, advantages and disadvantages may differ. The
following describes three major Blockchains, public, private
and consortium, and their suitability.
1) Public Blockchain (M1-A): A public Blockchain has
absolutely no access restrictions. Anyone with an Internet con-
nection can act as a participating node or send transactions. For
a public Blockchain to keep operating, the platform provides
some form of economic incentive or reward, often in the way
of giving away some native currency, but it can be fees too.
A public Blockchain is more trustworthy due to being
managed by a large community where no one has particular
superiority over others in its governance and decision making.
Nevertheless, it is not privacy-friendly due to being always
open. This feature allows anyone to read its contents unless
encrypted. Public Blockchains are expensive and storing and
accessing data on this type of Blockchain can incur huge fees.
In general, Blockchains do not come with built-in searching
mechanisms, rather applications require developers to imple-
ment their own search functionalities. This inefﬁcacy meets
with another problem in public Blockchains. Their contents
grow very fast, making the search even more difﬁcult.
2) Private Blockchain (M1-B): A private Blockchain is
one that a single entity controls. Participating nodes require
permission to join a private Blockchain and may have limited
privileges. Because of access restrictions, private Blockchains
offer some degrees of privacy and they do not grow as
fast as public Blockchains. A big advantage of using private
Blockchains is that they do not require real money to store
and access data. However, they are not entirely trustworthy.
The entity that controls their governance and operations may
retain a superior power for tempering data.
3) Consortium
Blockchain
(M1-C):
A
consortium
Blockchain can have the best of both public and private
Blockchains. It is sometimes referred to as a shared ledger or
federated ledger because of multiple approved parties using
it within a federated environment. These Blockchains are
private Blockchains operated by a group or consortium and
usually require permission. However, instead of a single body
controlling it, various organisations can share governance.
The administrators of a consortium Blockchain may restrict
users’ reading rights and allow a limited set of trusted nodes
to execute the consensus protocol.
The main advantage of consortium Blockchains is they
can bring the best of both public and private Blockchains.
Because of having access restrictions (as only invited, and
approved entities can join the Blockchain), they are more
privacy-friendly than a public Blockchain. Besides, unlike a
private Blockchain, a single entity may not hold control of
the consortium Blockchains, making them more trustworthy.
However, consortium Blockchains can still be vulnerable.
Their number of controlling authority is likely to be limited,
making it possible to group and a launch 51% attack quickly
[8].
B. Model M2: Distributed Storage-based Decentralisation
Potential decentralisation strategies using distributed stor-
age include two possible routes. The ﬁrst is solely based on
distributed storage, while the second option uses a combination
of distributed storage and Blockchain.
1) Distributed Storage Only (M2-A): Data can be dis-
tributed across multiple servers by duplication with anyone
wishing to use the desired copy must know its precise location.
This approach, however, fails to ensure the integrity of the
data as there remains no straightforward way to identify if
the data is altered. An improved method could be making the
distributed storage to act as a ﬁlesystem for storing data with
clients keeping copies of hashes of all ﬁles locally. Clients
can then run the queries with these hashes to retrieve the data
(e.g., IPFS). This technique helps to verify the integrity of
the data because if the stored data gets altered, there will be
a mismatch between the locally stored hash and the hash of
the data, tearing apart the connection. In such cases, clients’
query does not return the altered data, and in the event of no
results, we can assume that either the data got tempered or
went missing [20].
2) Distributed Storage and Blockchain (M2-B): Instead
of using distributed storage alone, another approach is to
incorporate a Blockchain in the management of the data [21].
This use of a distributed storage with Blockchain can help
to reduce the cost encountered while using pure Blockchain-
based decentralisation. This model makes the decentralisation
cost-effective but incorporates guaranteed data integrity. It also
enables clients to avoid the need for maintaining the hashes
locally; instead, data goes to a distributed storage while hashes
and their associated timestamps stay as a trustworthy record
on the distributed ledger [23].
C. Model M3: Solid-based Decentralisation
Solid can offer a third rote to decentralisation. Solid pods
are decentralised and give users full control of their data. They
also ensure privacy as only approved entities can read and
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

access the data. There are two possible ways Solid can be
used, standalone or in combination with a Blockchain.
1) Solid-only Decentralisation (M3-A): The use of Solid
is sufﬁcient to introduce decentralisation. The ability of users
while using Solid to store various types of data, such as
personal, ﬁnancial, educational, health, and so on, in different
Solid pods makes way for creating customised privacy control.
Users may give certain entities access to their personal and
educational data but restrict access to ﬁnancial and health data
while using Solid. A signiﬁcant shortcoming of Solid-only
decentralisation is trust. Because of users having full control
over their data, they can modify them anytime. Third parties
having to rely on user data can ﬁnd this model less prudent.
2) Solid and Blockchain (M3-B): The use of a Blockchain
with Solid pods is a type of decentralisation where Solid holds
the data while a hash of it goes to the Blockchain, ensuring
the integrity and trust of the user-controlled stored data. This
strategy brings all the beneﬁts that a Solid-only model can
offer and solves the trust issues. Because a hash of the data
goes to the Blockchain, third parties can quickly check the
integrity by hashing the data stored on the pods and matching
it with its Blockchain counterpart [22].
V.
PROPOSED EDUCATIONAL LANDSCAPE
In decentralising the educational landscape, we propose a
four-layer architecture where Blockchain forms the ﬁrst layer
from the bottom. The design embraces three other layers on
top of the Blockchain layer, namely data layer, veriﬁcation
layer and support layer – Figure 3, shows the architecture and
the arrangement of the layers in the design.
Three problems, P1, P2 and P3, that we identiﬁed in Sec-
tion 2 represent three broad areas of the educational landscape
and form the top three layers in our design. P1 represents data
management and governance and creates the data layer, P2
focuses on the credential veriﬁcations and forms veriﬁcation
layer, and ﬁnally, P3 states the continued career support for
the students and produces the support layer.
A. Blockchain Layer
The Blockchain layer forms the foundation of our proposed
architecture. We recommend using a consortium Blockchain
due to its ability to mimic the best of both private and public
ledgers. In our architecture, participating institutions will join
and govern this consortium Blockchain. The remaining three
layers will operate over the Blockchain and will have the
ability to access it directly or through other layers.
B. Data Layer
The second layer in our architecture is the data layer
responsible for data governance. It manages students data in
a decentralised style. Institutions generally maintain a cen-
tral database to hold all kinds of data, including students
records and information. Data layer disintegrate this database
and distribute its contents to various stakeholders, such as
students, teachers and administrators. Amongst the suitable
decentralised models, M1-C, M2-B and M3-B from Section
IV look useful for developing this layer. However, due to
lack of privacy, M1-C does not ﬁt for sensitive data like
personal information, students record and results; therefore, we
prefer M2-B and M3-B, which means storing data on either
IPFS or Solid with their hashes on the Blockchain. Between
Institution 1
Institution 2
Institution 3
Institution n
Solid Pods
IPFS
Credential-veriﬁcation modules
Career-support modules
Support
Layer
Veriﬁcation
Layer
Data 
Layer
Blockchain
Layer
Figure 3. The layered architecture of the Blockchain-based proposed
decentralised educational landscape
these two models, Solid offers added beneﬁts in the form of
advanced access control; hence, we use Solid while describing
the remaining architecture.
The data layer consists of Solid pods managed by students,
teachers and administrators. Students will have their personal
information on their pod that they grant access to only their
institutions. Administrators of the institutions can have some
student data on their pods too, such as results and qualiﬁca-
tions. In this case, they grant at least read access to students
so that they can be aware of what data institutions hold on
their behalf. This access may be time-dependent; for instance,
results data will be made visible to students only when the
results are announced. Teachers can have their pods to store
and share students marks and initial results. They may only
grant access to this data to administrators before the results
are ﬁnalised. Institutions should have speciﬁc policies tailored
to their practice concerning when to share data and how.
In a decentralised architecture, multiple sources can hold
the data making it difﬁcult to run queries using traditional
methods. Linked Data and federated query can help to solve
this problem. It works as follows: Each and every entity in
a Solid pod are represented in the form of URIs. If the data
stored in the Solid pods are expressed in RDF format, it can
be queried using SPARQL, which is a query language for
accessing linked data [11]. SPARQL can also be used to query
data from multiple Solid pods as long as the query engine is
granted access to the Solid pods [20].
The data layer solves P1. It gives students control over their
data and allows them to see what their educational institution
holds on their behalf. By employing Blockchain, data layer
also ensures the integrity of the information contained by
students and administrators.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

C. Veriﬁcation Layer
The veriﬁcation layer is responsible for verifying creden-
tials. This layer helps students and lifelong learners to get
their qualiﬁcations checked for potential employers and other
educational institutions. All institutions that confer degrees or
award micro-credentials must give students a badge or similar
object that students keep in their Solid pods. Later at the
time of applying for courses in other institutions or jobs in
companies, they show the badge as a representative of their
qualiﬁcation certiﬁcate.
Badges are digital objects that students can temper. There-
fore, to ensure the integrity of the data, issuing authorities
insert hash of the issued badge to the consortium Blockchain.
They also keep a record of the credentials to their Solid pods
with students having access to it. An entity wishing to verify
a particular credential does not have to go to the issuing
authority. Again, Linked Data and federated query help us
achieve this. The veriﬁer can be a web application which seeks
access to a Solid pod stored qualiﬁcation badge, which then
hashed by the web application. The badge hash is compared
with the hash stored on the Blockchain which was previously
uploaded by the badge issuer. If it matches, then the employer
knows that the student badge is valid [24].
The veriﬁcation layer solves P2. By making veriﬁcation
automated, it allows students to get their credentials veriﬁed
at the expense of a few mouse clicks. It reduces time and
saves money for both students and parties who check their
credentials.
D. Support Layer
The support layer paves the path for both educational and
non-educational institutions to participate in providing career
support to students and lifelong learners. These supports can
come in various ways, including suggesting jobs, courses and
preparing automated CVs.
Our architecture already showed how data are made ac-
cessible for approved entities through Linked Data and fed-
erated query engines. Educational institutions can run feder-
ated searches on the available job and qualiﬁcations of their
graduates to pinpoint suitable employment for them. Potential
employers can also beneﬁt from this decentralised architecture
as they can shortlist potential candidates on their own through
veriﬁed qualiﬁcation matching. Educational institutions can
further suggest courses to students based on the qualiﬁcations
they do not have but would help them land their preferred jobs.
Institutions and commercial companies providing HR support
can also use the data to offer students smart resumes where
veriﬁed credentials and job information will be appended
automatically.
The support layer solves P3 by opening data to approved
parties. In a centralised and isolated system, educational insti-
tutions cannot see what qualiﬁcation students have in addition
to theirs. In this proposed architecture, institutions do so; hence
can come up with job and course suggestions more precisely.
VI.
CONCLUSION
Educational institutions behave like islands – isolated and
remote. Their reluctance in sharing teaching and credentials
create sufferings for the students. In this paper, we try to ﬁnd
a trade-off proposing a decentralised educational landscape
where institutions do not have to lose their individuality but can
still participate in collaborations. Using existing technologies,
we showed how record-keeping, credential veriﬁcations and
continued career support could be provided in a decentralised
atmosphere.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Chiappetta,
“Historiography and Roman Education”, History of
Education Journal 4, no. 4, pp. 149-156.
[2]
A. J. Coulson,
“Market Education: The Unknown History”, ed. 1,
Transaction Publishers, 1999.
[3]
F. Cordasco, “A Brief History of Education: Handbook of Information on
Greek, Roman, Medieval, Renaissance and Modern Educational Practice”,
Revised ed., Rowman & Littleﬁeld Publishers, 1976.
[4]
Opinion, “Looking after number one”, Nature, Volume 419, Issue 6909,
October 2002.
[5]
S. Cassidy, “Imperial College and UCL in merger talks to create ‘the
world’s number one university”’, The Independent, 15 October, 2002.
[6]
D. MacLeod, “Opposition ends Imperial and UCL merger dream”, The
Guardian, 18 November, 2002.
[7]
S. Nakamoto,
“Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System”,
Bitcoin.org, Last Access 29 February 2020.
[8]
P. Franco, “Understanding Bitcoin”, ed 1, Wiley, 2015
[9]
N. Chowdhury, “Inside Blockchain, Bitcoin, and Cryptocurrencies”, ed
1, Taylor and Francis, 2019
[10]
D. Wood, M. Zaidman, L. Ruth, and M. Hausenblas, “Linked Data”,
Manning Publications, ed. 1, 2014.
[11]
M. Schmidt, M. Meier and G. Lausen “Foundations of SPARQL query
optimization”, in Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on
Database Theory, pp. 4–33, Lausanne, Switzerland, March 2010.
[12]
T. Berners-Lee,
“Linked Data: Design Issues”, w3.org, 2006, URL:
www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html, Last Access 29 February
2020
[13]
H. Huang, J. Lin, B. Zheng, Z. Zheng, and J. Bian, “When Blockchain
Meets Distributed File Systems: An Overview, Challenges, and Open
Issues”, IEEE Access, 2020
[14]
J. Benet, “IPFS - Content Addressed, Versioned, P2P File System”,
arXiv.org, Last Access 29 February 2020.
[15]
J. H. Hartman, I. Murdock and T. Spalink, “The Swarm scalable storage
system”, in proceedings of the 19th IEEE International Conference on
Distributed Computing Systems, Austin, TX, USA, June 1999.
[16]
J. Benet and N. Greco, “Filecoin: A decentralized storage network”,
Technical Report, Protoc. Labs, 2018.
[17]
T. Berners-Lee, “Weaving the Web: The Past, Present and Future of
the World Wide Web by its Inventor”, HarperCollins, 1999.
[18]
A. Sambra et al. “Solid: A Platform for Decentralized Social Appli-
cations Based on Linked Data”, Technical Report, MIT CSAIL & Qatar
Computing Research Institute
[19]
E. Mansour et al. “A Demonstration of the Solid Platform for Social
Web Applications”, in proceedings of the 25th International Conference
Companion on World Wide Web, pp. 223–226, Montreal, Canada, April
2016.
[20]
A. Third and J. Domingue,
“LinkChains: Exploring the space of
decentralised trustworthy Linked Data”, in proceedings of Decentralising
the Semantic Web, Vienna, Austria, July 2017.
[21]
A. Third and J. Domingue,
“Linked Data Indexing of Distributed
Ledgers. in proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Linked Data
and Distributed Ledgers”, Perth, Australia, April 2017.
[22]
Third, A. and Domingue, J., LinkChains: Trusted Personal Linked Data,
in proceedings of BlockSW, Auckland, New Zealand, October 2019.
[23]
J. Domingue, A. Third, and M. Ramachandran, “The FAIR TRADE
Framework for Assessing Decentralised Data Solutions”, in proceedings
of World Wide Web Conference, pp. 866—882, San Francisco, USA, May
2019.
[24]
A. Mikroyannidis, A. Third, and J. Domingue, “Decentralising online
education using blockchain technology”, in proceedings of the Online,
Open and Flexible Higher Education Conference, Madrid, October 2019
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

