Exploring Aspects of a Faculty Digital Learning Channel:
The Case of Eclips
Ilke Franquet, Christine Lippens
Kelly Martens and Herwig Mannaert
Faculty of Business and Economics
University of Antwerp
Email: {ilke.franquet,herwig.mannaert}@uantwerp.be
Abstract—In recent years, video tutorials have become an impor-
tant tool to enhance active student learning. They are considered
to be an effective and efﬁcient instrument to enhance the
progression of students. In 2016, the Faculty of Business and
Economics of the University of Antwerp formulated a vision
on technology-enhanced learning, with a strong focus on the
creation and the use of both course speciﬁc and integrative video
tutorials. To make the tutorials available to students throughout
their entire study career, the faculty started in 2017 with the
development of a faculty-wide learning channel, called Eclips.
The platform offers students the opportunity to prepare for a
lecture, revise learning content and ﬁll knowledge gaps across the
curriculum. Besides enhancing the pedagogical project by means
of the student channel, (sub)channels were deﬁned in 2018 for
two additional target groups: the pre-students and the alumni.
This enables the channel to support two other aspects of the
academic mission of a faculty: the dissemination of knowledge
and the interaction with the broader environment.
Keywords–Technology Enhanced Learning; Blended learning;
Digital learning channels.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The importance of digital learning material has grown in
recent years. The university and in particular the faculties
Faculty of Business Economics (FBE) and Faculty of Medicine
and Health Sciences (FMHS) focused on video tutorials used in
education to address the heterogeneous incoming and ongoing
students and to improve knowledge across the curriculum. The
existing video tutorials were selected by the lecturers to make
sure that the quality and the level were aligned with the ﬁnal
objectives of the programmes. These videos were used during
the course or served to clarify certain topics of the course.
Lecturers could also create their own videos in the recording
rooms that have been available on the different campuses of
the university.
However, there was no platform available to collect, group,
and structure all this information. Therefore, the business
and economics faculty decided to create a digital learning
channel in order to provide the students and lecturers with a
clear structure, where they can easily navigate through all the
content that the students have learnt during their bachelor and
master years. By creating the Eclips Learning Channel, the
faculty wants to give the students the possibility to revise at
their own pace and to consult educational video material (also
used in previous study years) when they feel it is necessary
to do so. It also gives lecturers a complete view on the study
material that students are supposed to know.
In this paper, we use a case-based approach, based on
the Eclips learning channel, to explore several key aspects
of designing and organizing such a faculty digital learning
channel. In Section 2, we give a brief literature overview of the
possible power of video as a teaching medium, and present the
way that the faculty decided to leverage this technology. The
actual structure, content, and design of the Eclips Learning
Channel is detailed Section 2. Section 4 gives an overview
of the main realizations thus far, and presents the current and
future efforts to broaden the reach of the learning channel.
Finally, we present some conclusions in Section 5.
II.
ACADEMIC VIDEO TUTORIALS
A. The Case for Video Tutorials
Apart from the great advantage of ﬂexibility, video can be
a very powerful teaching medium, as stated by Thomson et
al.[1]. Video tutorials, often presented as screencasts, are short
videos adopted by lecturers to stimulate active learning during
the course. In the form of shorter mini-lectures, explanations
of assignments or exam solutions, they can be used as supple-
mentary resources when teaching a module [2]. Research, for
instance by Morris and Chikwa [3], has conﬁrmed that students
prefer short screencasts that summarise lectures or delve in-
depth into complex concepts. Lloyd and Robertson demon-
strated positive learning gains in an undergraduate statistics
course for students using a supplemental video tutorial [4].
Apart from being part of the lecturer’s own module, video
tutorials can also be used to cope with the heterogeneity of a
student group by offering students the opportunity to refresh
knowledge or to ﬁll up knowledge gaps. Research by Pinder-
Grover et al. showed that screencasts lead to demonstrable
improvements in course performance, especially for those who
enter with the least amount of exposure to the subject matter
[5]. These hiatus frequently occur at the beginning of a study
career, because of lack of background in a certain topic due to
limited prior knowledge when entering university. Moreover,
it is also manifest that students continuously need to refresh
speciﬁc topics during their studies because of the inevitable
process of knowledge evaporation.
B. Faculty Vision on Video Learning
At the Faculty of Business and Economics of the University
of Antwerp, video tutorials tended to be part of a certain
module, incorporated in the related Blackboard course only. To
make video tutorials available for students during their entire
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

study career, the faculty set up a digital learning channel with
permanent and mobile access. Students can watch the tutorials
during their studies whenever they need to. Lecturers can refer
to this channel in a cross-curriculum way.
The faculty has organised its courses based on so-called
Learning Tracks, and leverages this structure to deal with
various aspects or cross-cutting concerns of academic courses,
such as internationalisation and examination forms [6]. There-
fore, the digital Learning Channel ECLIPS, is being or-
ganised around these learning tracks: Business Economics,
Economics, Quantitative Methods, Engineering, Information
Systems, Business Communication, Research Methods and
Broadening Subjects. The faculty also decided to adopt an
hybrid model for its video tutorials, using both in-house
produced tutorials and existing clips from external providers.
The channel was implemented at the start of the academic year
2017-2018, and launched for ﬁrst-year undergraduate students,
i.e., ﬁrst bachelor year. The main emphasis was on providing
resources for this group of students. In 2018-2019, the focus
moved towards the second bachelor year.
In order to support and encourage in-house made video
tutorials, the faculty set up its own ECLIPS recording studio.
When developing a video tutorial, different video production
styles are offered to lecturers by the production team, such as
screencasts and recording with glassboard or green screen. It
is important to provide a variety in video production styles as
standardisation of video production faces many limitations, as
stated for instance by Hansch et al.: It is important to match
the video style to the instructor. There is not a one-size-ﬁts-all
approach [7]. For the sourcing of the videos from elsewhere,
the faculty relies upon their faculty staff to assess the quality
and consistency of the selected videos. A quality checklist and
a list of guidelines were developed to evaluate both in-house
made and external videos.
III.
THE ECLIPS LEARNING CHANNEL
In this section, we detail the actual development of the
learning channel, including three main aspects: structure, con-
tent and design. But ﬁrst, we discuss the approach to set up
the concept, and gather people around it.
A. Approach
First of all, lecturers who showed interest in Digital and
Blended Learning and Teaching (DBLT) before, were con-
tacted to ask for input on the content of the learning channel.
In order to ensure that the entire faculty was represented,
these lecturers were spread across the various departments.
Moreover, the content of the learning channel was discussed
on the various department meetings. All this information was
collected in order to get a good overview on the information
that lecturers believed to be necessary for their own course.
Since the students are the main target group, a workshop was
organized in which a group of 21 students were asked to
give their opinion on the structure, content and design of this
learning channel. This feedback was taken into account during
the further development of Eclips.
As with other pedagogical aspects or so-called cross-
cutting concerns, the structure is based on the eight learning
tracks within the faculty [6]. The project was initially deﬁned
for a three year period, during which the faculty envisioned
to add content gradually. During the creation of the learning
channel, extra attention was given to the visual or graphical
aspect of Eclips. To make adoption of the learning channel
a success, the two target groups — students and lecturers —
needed to be reached, informed and actively stimulated. As
stated before, the focus during the ﬁrst academic year was
on the courses of the ﬁrst year bachelor. Therefore, the main
target group initially consisted of the ﬁrst year’s students who
were informed in the information sessions at the beginning of
the academic year. In their welcome package, they received
for instance a pen with the Eclips logo. For the adoption by
other students (Bachelor 2, Bachelor 3, Masters) the faculty is
counting on the second target group to spread the word. This
second group, the lecturers, was informed during the yearly
meeting in the beginning of the academic year. They were
also invited to take a look at the recording room containing
the necessary supporting equipment to record video tutorials.
B. Structure
The learning channel is embedded in Blackboard and has a
clear structure to navigate, both for students and lecturers. The
Eclips Learning Channel presents video tutorials and digital
modules according to the structure of the eight learning tracks
within the curriculum. Each learning track decides on and
deﬁnes their own substructure by mutual agreement within the
learning track. Mindmaps are used to guide the students and
lecturers throughout this structure.
The technology behind the channel structure is quite
elementary and consists of two basic building blocks: the
electronic learning platform Blackboard and a PowerPoint
presentation to represent the mindmap structure, which is
converted into a HTML5-package within Blackboard. The
Eclips Learning Channel is made available in the list of courses
within Blackboard, which is accessible to all students and
lecturers of the faculty. Opposed to other courses, the learning
channel will be visible during the entire academic life of
both the student and lecturer. When the student or lecturer
clicks on Eclips in Blackboard, he is presented with the main
HTML5-mindmap of Figure 1. When navigating to a video
Figure 1. Main structure of the mindmap.
in the mindmap, an information sheet shows details about
the author, the production date and duration of the video,
the used platform or source, and a short description of the
video content. Each information sheet has a unique identiﬁer
that refers to the video tutorial or digital module. The video
starts by clicking on the play button in the right corner of
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

this information sheet, as represented in Figure 2. Hyperlinks
Figure 2. Example information sheet.
behind the icons in the mindmap ensure that the user can
navigate through the different learning tracks to ﬁnd the video
tutorial or digital module he or she wants to consult. The
technology used to create the HTML5-package ensures that
users are able to navigate through the mindmaps and watch the
videos on their mobile devices, a concern that was expressed
during a workshop organized with the students.
In case a student has a suggestion to upload a video tutorial
in the learning channel, or there is an error in the video tutorial,
the student can contact the Eclips team through an interactive
forum. Thanks to the unique identiﬁer in the information sheet,
the student can easily refer to the video tutorial.
C. Content
In the ﬁrst academic year of the project, 2017-2018, the
faculty focused on courses for the ﬁrst year bachelor students.
More speciﬁcally, the focus was on the courses with a low
pass rate and the courses taken by a high number of students,
i.e., Accountancy, Economics, Mathematics and Statistics. The
lecturers of these subjects received technical support from
the Eclips team members to create the video tutorials, which
beneﬁts the content in general and especially the pace at which
the content of the learning channel is created. Even though
these four subjects receive priority, other subjects are also
invited to create video tutorials. In the second academic year,
2018-2019, the focus shifted to the courses of the second
year bachelor, in order to ﬁnish the project in 2019-2020 with
a focus on the third year bachelor. This time path ensures
that the content of the learning channel gradually grows in a
synchronous way with the students who started their academic
life at the same time the learning channel was launched. The
students can consult the learning channel during their entire
academic career at the University of Antwerp.
The content of Eclips consists of both existing videos
and in-house made videos. The existing videos are carefully
selected by the lecturers, keeping the quality of the video
tutorials in mind. These are video tutorials from websites
like Khan Academy and PatrickJMT. The faculty provides a
recording studio where lecturers can record video tutorials with
the assistance of an Eclips team member. Various types of
recordings are possible in order to realize a variety of content
in the learning channel. Examples of these types are video
tutorials making use of a glassboard, handwritten video tuto-
rials, PowerPoint presentations, and green screen recordings.
The type of the recording depends on the preference of the
lecturer and the topic of the video tutorial. The current number
of available video tutorials for each learning track is shown in
Table 1, and will be discussed in the next section.
D. Design
The visual aspect certainly plays a crucial role in encour-
aging students and lecturers to make systematic use of this
video platform. Together with the graphical design team of the
University of Antwerp, a logo, a set of icons, and a house style
were designed. The icons are used in the mindmap in which
the students navigate through the structure. The logo makes
it possible to brand the in-house made video tutorials and the
learning channel. Even though Blackboard is the platform that
is used for the learning channel, the mindmap, logos and icons
give it a refreshing and contemporary look.
Figure 3. Example introduction screen.
In order to be sure that the in-house made videos by
the lecturers exhibit a uniform look and feel, the in-house
made video tutorials start with the Eclips introduction screen,
represented in Figure 3. To provide maximum support, a tem-
plate for PowerPoint and Camtasia (a video editing program)
were created. The main colour used in the templates is green,
since this is the colour that represents the faculty. The various
learning tracks have different unique colours.
IV.
REALIZATIONS AND FUTURE PLANS
A. Content and Usage
A ﬁrst realization is of course the mere fact that the faculty
developed a dedicated, visually attractive learning channel,
offering both in-house and external video tutorials and digital
modules, and providing a clear structure in which the students
can easily navigate. However, the actual realizations need to
be expressed in terms of created content and student use of the
video tutorials. Table I shows the number of video tutorials and
TABLE I. NUMBER OF VIDEO TUTORIALS OR DIGITAL MODULES IN
ECLIPS.
Learning track
In-house
External
Total
Business communication
7
6
13
Research methods and tool
11
10
21
Quantitative methods
43
108
151
Business economics
58
0
58
Economics
15
0
15
Total
134
124
258
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

digital modules, that were available for each learning track
in may 2018, less than one year after the launch of Eclips.
Only the learning tracks that contain content are mentioned
in Table I. In Figure 4 the growth in the different phases of
the project are summarized. This ﬁgure shows that especially
Figure 4. Eclips Content growth.
after the launch of the learning channel, the content in general
and the production of in-house made video tutorials started
booming. The highest growth rate can be found in the learning
track quantitative methods. This is both logical and desirable,
since the content of quantitative methods covers the core
competences that are needed in other learning tracks.
Through the Mediasite of the university, the video platform
in which the in-house made videos are uploaded, the lecturers
can consult statistics on the views of their video tutorials. It
gives an overview of how many students have watched the
videos, which parts of the video have been watched the most,
etcetera. In other words, it offers the lecturer a clear insight
in the topics that students ﬁnd more relevant and consult
accordingly. These results are, up to may 2018 or less than
a year after the launch of Eclips, summarized in Table II.
TABLE II. NUMBER OF VIEWS FOR THE VARIOUS VIDEO TUTORIALS.
Learning track
Number clips
Total views
Average views
Business communication
7
269
38
Research methods and tool
11
1232
112
Quantitative methods
43
8140
189
Business economics
58
59327
1023
Economics
15
2639
176
Total
134
71607
534
B. Synergies with Other Faculties
Since the launch of Eclips in 2017, two other faculties
of the University of Antwerp started with the implementation
of their own tailor-made ECLIPS Learning Channel. These
additional faculty channels share the Eclips brand, including
the concept and the design, but consist of videos which are
speciﬁc to the domains offered in the degree programmes
of these faculties. This interfaculty cooperation clearly offers
multiple opportunities for the future. Such opportunities range
from simple economies of scale for recording equipment, to
the exchange and co-creation of videos and/or scripts.
The growth of Eclips into multiple subchannels also im-
plies an increase in efforts to manage the Eclips channel(s).
For instance, the regulations concerning copyrights should
be taken into account. Using video excerpts or short videos
as educational resources without adding changes in a pro-
tected learning environment is allowed by Belgian legislation.
However, referring or linking to the existing tutorials on the
external channels should be done very carefully. Moreover,
a growing learning channel consisting of three subchannels,
needs permanent maintenance and monitoring. Due to the
interaction with different parties delivering videos, this may
become quite challenging.
C. Reaching Multiple Target Groups
It is part of a university mission to connect and interact
with the outside world. In 2018, the faculty included the pre-
students as second target group for the in-house produced
tutorials. Three public subchannels were launched for pupils of
secondary school and their teachers, in the domains of mathe-
matics, statistics and accountancy. The tutorials are offered to
provide this new target group with a tool to bridge possible
knowledge gaps between secondary school and university
before entering university. As such, these tutorials will help
pre-students to assess their readiness, and function as a support
instrument in their study orientation process.
As lifelong learning becomes and remains a crucial issue
in our society, the faculty recently decided to address alumni
as a third target group of the ECLIPS Learning Channel.
Specialized expert knowledge, based on research being done
by academics, will be transformed into video tutorials as
well, serving both graduate students and alumni. Unlike the
more accessible knowledge offered in the subchannel for
pre-students, more advanced niche knowledge is targeted for
the alumni subchannel. This channel is yet to be launched
formally, but initial preparations have already begun.
Figure 5 presents a schematic overview of the vari-
ous Eclips (sub)channels, based on the corresponding target
groups, i.e., pre-students, students, and alumni. For every target
group, the technological hosting platform and the type of
content are included in the summary. As an illustration, the QR
codes referencing the pre-student channels are also included.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
The development of the Eclips Learning Channel proofs
that a faculty can indeed build an efﬁcient digital learn-
ing channel with limited human, i.e., three part time team
members, and technological resources, i.e., Blackboard and
PowerPoint. As the channel has only been launched a little
more than one year ago, it would be premature to draw
any hard conclusions about its added value and efﬁcacy. An
enquiry with both students and lecturers about the structure,
the content and the design of the video tutorials is currently
being organized.
However, based on the registrated viewing statistics, we
can already cautiously say that the learning channel is gaining
momentum. Moreover, we are able to conclude that students
consult the video tutorials more often when the lecturer ex-
plicitly refers to them. As the learning channel offers a better
overview across various topics of the different courses, we
expect that the learning channel will have a positive impact on
the study process of the students, and the productive interaction
between students and lecturers.
A clear indication of the (perceived) added value is that the
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, decided to replicate
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Figure 5. Schematic representation of Eclips (sub)channels and various target groups.
the entire concept of the Eclips learning channel, and adapted
the mindmaps to make a logical structure for their own faculty.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Thomson, R. Bridgstock, and C. Willems, “‘Teachers ﬂipping out’
beyond the online lecture: maximising the educational potential of
video.” Journal of Learning Design, vol. 7, no. 3, 2014, pp. 67–78.
[2]
M. Lee, S. Pradhan, and B. Dangarno, “The effectiveness of screencasts
and cognitive tools as scaffolding for novice object-oriented program-
mers.” Journal of Information Technology Education, vol. 7, 2008, pp.
61–80.
[3]
C. Morris and C. Gladson, “Screencasts: How effective are they and
how do students engage with them? Active learning in higher education,”
Teaching of Psychology, vol. 15, no. 1, 2012, pp. 25–37.
[4]
S. Lloyd and C. L. Robertson, “Screencast Tutorials Enhance Student
Learning of Statistics,” Teaching of Psychology, vol. 39, no. 1, 2012, pp.
67–71.
[5]
K. Green, T. Pinder-Grover, and J. Millunchick, “Impact of Screencast
Technology: Connecting the Perception of Usefulnes and the Reality of
Performance.” Journal of Engineering Education, vol. 4, 2012, pp. 717–
737.
[6]
G. Oorts, H. Mannaert, P. De Bruyn, and I. Franquet, On the evolvable
and traceable design of (under)graduate education programs.
Springer
International Publishing, 2016, vol. 252, pp. 86–100.
[7]
H. Hansch, L. Hillers, K. McConachie, C. Newman, P. Schmidt, and
T. Schildhauer, “The Role of Video in Online Learning: Findings From
the Field and Critical Reﬂections.” p. 32, 2015.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

