 
 
Teaching Arabic with Technology Project-Based Learning 
A non-traditional approach to summative assessment 
Odeese Mariam Ghassa-Khalil 
Department of Instructional Technology and Leadership, School of Education 
Duquesne University 
Pittsburgh, PA, United States 
e-mail: GhassaKhalilo@duq.edu 
 
Abstract— This paper seeks to demonstrate how Technology 
Project-Based Learning can be applied in the classroom to 
make 
learning 
more 
enjoyable, 
interdisciplinary, 
and 
applicable to real life. Being experienced in teaching Arabic in 
the traditional, hybrid, synchronous, and asynchronous online 
environment, 
the 
author 
shares 
her 
perspective 
on 
implementing a technology-infused, teacher-facilitated, and 
student-driven, 
project-based assessment 
challenge. She 
explains how this challenge allows for a higher level of 
creativity and can be applied to other subject areas. She 
defines Technology Project-Based Learning as a methodology 
that enriches the learning environment and complements 
academic instruction and curricular design. The author then 
summarizes how the Technology in Technology Project-Based 
Learning allows for a higher level of creativity in the 
classroom, in which students’ perspectives expand as they 
prepare to navigate an ever-changing technological world. 
Keywords- Arabic; Learner-Driven, Collaboration; Student-
Centered; Technology; Project-Based Learning; Instructor-
Designed; Student-Driven 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
While many schools in K-12 and higher education realize 
the importance of teaching foreign languages to prepare 
students to contribute to a better tomorrow, many obstacles 
present themselves limiting the teaching of foreign language 
in the United States and around the world. These obstacles 
include, but are not limited to, pedagogical, teacher-related, 
learner-related, and financial challenges, among many others 
[1].   
The foreign language classroom, just like any other 
subject, has suffered from being teacher-centered and has 
struggled to find a balanced learning environment and to 
transition from being dominated by the teacher to being 
student-centered [2]. On page 88 of reference [3], the author 
cites Odom et al. stating that in today’s classroom, students’ 
attitude towards any subject is “positively associated with 
student-centered teaching practices and negatively associated 
with traditional (teacher-centered) teaching practices.” 
Student-centeredness, however, requires, a shift-in-the-minds 
of both educators and students [4]. 
How do we promote this shift-in-the-thinking as 
educators? Available technological tools seem to make a 
difference in creating a healthy language learning 
environment that is also sustainable and affordable. The 
foreign language classroom is seeing more use of 
multimedia, moving toward student-centeredness, leaving 
behind the aging mentality of lecture-based instructions and 
teacher-dominated, 
teacher-centered 
classroom. 
This 
resolution to create a classroom atmosphere that puts the 
students in the center of their learning promotes a healthy 
relationship between the teacher and the learner, fosters 
critical thinking and shows the relevance of academic 
content to real life [5].  
To highlight her efforts to overcome the roadblocks to a 
student-centered classroom, the author shares a success story 
of adopting a student-centered pedagogical approach to 
teaching Arabic. She encourages students to use existing 
tools to design their learning and think beyond the classroom 
walls by infusing technology into Project-Based Learning 
(PBL). In this paper, the author focuses on sharing her 
experience in implementing Technology Project-Based 
Learning in Introduction to Arabic I.  
Elementary Arabic I is the beginner level course in 
Arabic language and culture. It is a course which covers and 
emphasizes the development of the basic skills of the Arabic 
language, including basic pronunciation, comprehension, 
communication, and grammar. Students in this course also 
become acquainted with the culture of the Arabic world [6]. 
This course may be offered in the traditional face-to-face, 
hybrid, synchronous, or asynchronous online environments. 
In a culminating, end-of-semester, instructor-designed 
assignment, students are required to create individual, 
digitally-recorded 
autobiographies. 
Clips 
of 
these 
autobiographies are to be included in a collaborative project, 
“Arabic 101 Class Documentary,” in which the whole class 
contributes.  
The following sections provide information on how 
Technology Project-Based Learning methodology is used to 
complete two teacher-designed projects in a beginning 
Arabic course. Additionally, future implications for the 
language and other classrooms are discussed:  
• 
Section II offers background information on 
Project-Based Learning.  
• 
Section III presents the design brief, including 
two hands-on, individual and whole class 
activities: “My Cultural Autobiography” and 
“Arabic 101 Class Documentary.”  
• 
Section IV shows how the two (individual and 
class 
semester 
projects) 
exemplify 
the 
characteristics of Technology Project-Based 
Learning (TPBL): using technology, taking 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
ownership, collaboration, and incorporating of 
the entire curriculum 
• 
Section V introduces work samples of students’ 
and a perspective on the benefit of TPBL in the 
Arabic classroom 
• 
Section V is the conclusion. It contains a 
reflection and future implications for the 
language and other classes.  
II. 
BACKGROUND ON PROJECT-BASED LEARNING  
Project-based learning (PBL) is “an innovative approach 
to learning that teaches a multitude of strategies critical for 
success in the twenty-first century” [7]. It is known to help 
students take ownership of their learning and take pride in 
their accomplishments in an environment that invites 
creative thinking. Students practice collaboration, planning, 
problem-solving, communication, among other skills. They 
create projects, utilizing resources available to them, 
including technology, books, personal experiences, talents, 
and the Internet. Project-Based Learning incorporates the 
entire curriculum and encourages the exploration of multiple 
subjects while requiring a broad knowledge to complete 
tasks.  John Savery defines PBL in reference [9] as “an 
instructional approach that has been used successfully for 
over 30 years and continues to gain acceptance in multiple 
disciplines”.  
 
III. 
THE DESIGN BRIEF: TWO  HANDS-ON LEARNING 
PROJECTS INTO ONE 
Although they are due during the last week of class, the 
instructor shares “Arabic 101 Class Documentary,” along 
with “My Cultural Autobiography,” design brief several 
weeks before the conclusion of the course. At the time of 
introducing the two projects, students have learned the entire 
Arabic alphabet and can connect the letters to make words, 
spell (dictate) words, and pronounce words using correct 
grammar, special characters, and short and long vowels. 
Students have accumulated a substantial amount of 
vocabulary to cover different topics such as greetings, self-
introduction, jobs, places of residence, family members, 
other people in their lives, and their likes and dislikes. They 
have learned to construct simple sentences, have taken 
several quizzes, and have completed a midterm exam. 
Students are encouraged to begin working on their individual 
and class projects early in the semester since they must finish 
their autobiographies in time to have their work included in 
the whole class documentary.  
A. “My Cultural Autobiography”- An Individual Project 
For this project, each student in Elementary Arabic I is 
expected to write and record his/her autobiography in 
Modern Standard Arabic. Students are expected to include 
the following information in their projects: 
• 
A proper greeting 
• 
Name and place(s) of residency 
• 
Their field(s) of study 
• 
The number of brothers and sisters they have, if 
any 
• 
Favorites (Pets, food, colors, movies, drinks, 
etc.) 
• 
Names of and information about other people in 
their 
lives 
(siblings, 
teachers, 
doctors, 
neighbors, etc.)  
Each student is required to submit his/her English and 
Arabic versions of the written autobiography. They also 
create video recordings of the individual autobiography 
and upload them to the class online learning management 
system to present them to class. Students are graded as 
follows for this individual project: 
• 
Five points for 
the 
submission of the 
Autobiography in English  
• 
Five points for the Autobiography in Arabic 
• 
Ten points for correct grammar 
• 
Twenty points for correct pronunciation of 
individual words in Arabic and clarity of 
student’s recorded voice  
• 
Twenty points for using new vocabulary from 
each unit (7 words minimum)  
• 
Ten points for helping at least one classmate 
peer-review his/her autobiography. Assessment 
of this task is accomplished through each 
student completing and submitting a form called 
“My Cultural Autobiography Evaluation Form.”  
B. “Arabic 101 Class Documentary” – The Whole  Class 
Project 
For 30 additional points, students collaborate to create a 
whole class documentary. In one video presentation, each 
student is asked to state her/his name, major of study, origin, 
citizenship, current home location, and the reason they are 
taking Arabic. The students’ clips are edited and used as part 
of the final collaborative project. Each student is also 
required to complete an “Arabic 101 Class Documentary 
Survey” to share feedback with the instructor regarding 
difficulties experienced, students who were helpful or not, 
and their contributions in completing the class project.  
IV. 
THE ARABIC SEMESTER PROJECTS - AN APPLICATION 
OF TECHNOLOGY PROJECT-BASED LEARNING 
How does such a design brief in the Arabic classroom 
represent Technology Project-Based Learning? The above-
presented design brief requires the use of technology while 
encouraging students to take ownership of their learning and 
work in collaboration with others.   
A. Using Technology 
To complete both their individual projects and the whole 
class documentary, students use technology across many 
stages of their work while communicating, collaborating, and 
presenting their products. They learn to use digital 
presentations, video production software and applications, 
and online collaboration and communication tools. They 
employ project planning, project management, production, 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
and design tools such as video editing, storyboarding, and 
clip sequencing.  
B. Taking Ownership 
Another Technology Project-Based Learning (TPBL) is 
satisfied while implementing the mentioned summative 
assessment activity. To complete their work, students must 
take ownership of their learning. They carefully plan, 
manage, design, and execute the steps to present their stories. 
They express pride in their work, apply what they learned to 
their lives, and use their creations in real-life situations.  
C. Collaboration  
As a part of the requirements, students are asked to 
collaborate with classmates while working on their 
individual and whole class projects design. They use an 
evaluation form and a survey to self-evaluate their work and 
their classmates’ contribution to the whole-class project. 
They evaluate how they and other classmates: 
• 
Help one another in peer review 
• 
Work together to accomplish project planning, 
project management, and task completion  
• 
Work together to design the whole class video 
presentation 
Another characteristic of Technology Project-Based 
Learning, i.e., collaboration, is satisfied by the requirement 
of cooperation and group-based learning among students. 
Everyone in the class uses his/her talent(s) to complete the 
final culminating project.  
D. Incorporation of the Entire Curriculum 
Designing activities that incorporate other academic 
subjects that focus on the whole student make learning an 
enjoyable experience and applicable to real life. Completing 
their individual autobiographies and the class documentary, 
students enjoy cross-disciplinary exploration.  Students:  
• 
Practice self-study and reflection 
• 
Conduct writing critiques 
• 
Explore the geography and climate of unfamiliar 
areas 
• 
Recognize the names of other professions and 
fields of study in Arabic 
• 
Learn about hobbies outside of their areas of 
interest 
• 
Become familiar with diverse family structures 
and relationship styles 
• 
Use multimedia and digital tools to design 
digital environments 
• 
Participate in problem-solving, project planning, 
management, and communication  
This design brief proves to incorporate many content 
areas such as critical thinking and writing, geography, social 
studies, family structure, multimedia, and project planning, 
management and communication. 
 
V. 
REFLECTION AND STUDENTS WORK EXAMPLES 
Following are two students’ work samples of the Arabic 
autobiographies: Figure 1 and Figure 2. All identifying 
students’ information (names, names of family members, 
school, origin, etc.) are removed from both work examples. 
In addition to the Arabic text, students also submit an 
English version of the autobiography to clarify any possible 
ambiguity in the Arabic language, if needed. The students 
also create a digital form of the autobiography that shows 
their pronunciation and fluency skills in Arabic.  
 
      
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 1.  A Sample Female Student Written Autobiography in 
Elementary Arabic I: (a) Arabic Version and (b) English Version 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 2.  A Sample Male Student Written Autobiography in Elementary 
Arabic I: (a) Arabic Version and (b) English Version 
Students in the above two examples share much about 
their lives, goals, and social circles. The information they 
provide includes a proper greeting to classmates, self and 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
family introductions, hobbies, likes, and dislikes. It is 
remarkable to see how they put the language to use.   
Wu [8] states that “Students write meaningful papers 
when they are allowed to explore various connections in 
writing” and that “writer-centered” project resulted in a 
“student-centered” writing classroom environment. After 
receiving the instructions for the final projects, the students 
begin to make connections between the academic content to 
their daily lives. They draft their autobiographies earlier in 
the semester and ask questions to clarify any possible unclear 
use of the language as they progress in their work. They 
become active learners, take control of achieving the project 
goals, use new vocabulary in context, and incorporating new 
vocabulary to add to their stories about themselves. Students 
are only allowed a limited number of non-course related 
vocabulary; therefore, during the writing process, students 
use force themselves to express what they want using the 
vocabulary they learned in the course. This approach is 
helpful since “contextualized vocabulary learning is more 
effective than learning words in lists” [9]. Putting the 
language to use empowers the learner, makes acquiring new 
vocabulary less tedious, and relates the knowledge gained in 
the classroom to real life. Moreover, students show 
excitement about being able to use that they produced in this 
final design brief in real life, especially in an interview 
where the Arabic language is preferred foreign language, 
with which to be familiar.  
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
Project-Based Learning has been a popular instructional 
approach to designing instructions for decades.  It is the 
Technology part that is becoming a must-incorporate in 
every classroom. Technology removes obstacles and 
roadblocks, 
shortens 
distances, 
and 
promotes 
communications 
among 
scholars 
and 
the 
education 
community. Technology, when used correctly, equalizes the 
education field, spreads opportunities beyond the classroom 
and institutions walls, and removes obstacles in the way of 
preparing today’s student to become a leader of better 
tomorrow.  
To 
represent 
Technology 
Project-Based 
Learning 
(TPBL), an activity must use technology in a learner-
centered, collaborative, innovative, and interdisciplinary 
environment [10].  
As teacher-facilitated, student-driven approaches to 
learning, the end-of-semester culminating activities in 
Elementary Arabic I demonstrate Technology Project-Based 
Learning (TPBL) characteristics. In the foreign language 
classroom, TPBL is one of many pedagogical solutions to 
moving away from the unsuccessful concept of the teacher-
centered classroom. It opens full doors for active learning 
and designing working solutions to real-world problems, but 
it is not the only approach. Many technology-infused 
pedagogies and instructional methodologies are also worth 
considering if they focus on the whole student and give 
him/her the center of the classroom.  
An approach such as TPBL can be applied in many 
academic subjects to help educators and students reach 
diverse course objectives. [11]. Educators must provide 
opportunities for students to design, build, and create with 
their knowledge and the classroom becomes a heaven for fun 
while learning. 
In 1916, John Dewey said, “Give the pupils something to 
do, not something to learn; and the doing is of such a nature 
as to demand thinking; learning naturally results” [3]. 
Technology Project-Based Learning requires students to use 
technology and their content knowledge to create solutions to 
real-world challenges. It enriches the learning environment 
and complements academic instruction and curricular design. 
It prepares 21st-century students to be innovative problem 
solvers in an ever-changing, technological world.  
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Elyas, and W. H. Al Grigri, “Obstacles to Teaching 
English in Saudi Arabia Public Schools: Teachers’ and 
Supervisors’ Perceptions,” International Journal of Language 
Teaching, vol. 2, Sept. 2014. pp. 74-89. 
[2] B. S. P. Teoh and T. K. Neo, “ Interactive Multimedia 
Learning: Students' Attitudes and Learning Impact in an 
Animation Course,” TOJET: The Turkish Online Journal of 
Educational Technology, vol. 6, Oct. 2007, pp. 28-37.  
[3] A. L. Odom and C. V. Bell, “Associations of Middle School 
Student Science Achievement and Attitudes About Science 
with Student-Reported Frequency of Teacher Lecture 
Demonstrations 
and 
Student-Centered 
Learning,” 
International Journal Of Environmental And Science 
Education, 
vol. 
10, 
2015, 
pp. 
87-97, 
doi:10.12973/ijese.2015.232a. 
[4] J. F. Strayer, “How Learning in an Inverted Classroom 
Influences Cooperation, Innovation, and Task Orientation,” 
Learning Environments Research, vol. 15, 2012, pp. 171-193,  
doi:10.1007/s10984-012-9108-4. 
[5] J. McTighe and G. Wiggins, Understanding by Design 
Professional 
Development 
Workbook. 
Association 
for 
Supervision and Curriculum Development (ASCD), 1703 
North Beauregard Street, Alexandria, VA 22311. 
[6] ARA 101 - Elementary Arabic 1. (n.d.). Retrieved Feb. 2019, 
from https://catalog.ccac.edu   
[7] S. Bell, “Project-Based Learning for the 21st Century: Skills 
for the Future,” The Clearing House, vol. 83, 2010, pp. 39-43, 
doi:10.1080/00098650903505415. 
[8] R. Wu, “ESL Students Writing Autobiographies: Are there 
Any Connections?” Proc. Annual Meeting of the Rhetoric 
Society of America, Louisville, KY, May 1994, Retrieved 
Feb. 
2019 
 
from 
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED373325.pdf  
[9] B. Nielsen, “A Review of Research into Vocabulary Learning 
and 
Acquisition,” 
2003, 
Retrieved 
Feb. 
2019 
from 
https://www.kushiro-ct.ac.jp/library/kiyo/kiyo36/Brian.pdf  
[10] J. Savery, “Overview of Problem-Based Learning: Definitions 
and Distinctions,” The Interdisciplinary Journal of Problem-
Based Learning, vol. 1. May 2006, pp. 8-20. 
[11] E. De Graaf, and A. Kolmos, “Characteristics of Problem-
Based Learning,” International Journal of Engineering 
Education, 2003,  pp. 657-662.  
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

