Mobile Application for University Courses of Journalism and Research
Claudia A. Lerma-Noriega
Media and Digital Culture
Tecnologico de Monterrey
Monterrey, México
e-mail: clerma@tec.mx
Maria Leticia Flores-Palacios
Media and Digital Culture
Tecnologico de Monterrey
Monterrey, México
e-mail: lflores@tec.mx
Genaro Rebolledo-Mendez
Writing Lab, TecLabs
Tecnologico de Monterrey
Monterrey, México
e-mail: g.rebolledo@tec.mx
Abstract—One of the most common activities of university
students in the areas of journalism and communication is to
write news or research articles for their classes. To do this,
students apply the concepts they studied in their courses to do
fieldwork, conduct research, and to write the news. To
facilitate this academic activity, we developed the InContext
mobile application (app), which contains preloaded templates
to guide the student through the process of news writing and
research reporting. This application allows a student to add
audio, video files, photos and link this to the information. The
first stage of our research was for diagnostic purposes. It
consisted of a review of the reports and textual articles
prepared by students to identify the necessary characteristics
that should be considered for the templates we were designing.
The second stage consisted
of
the
development
of
the
application and its testing to get feedback and make necessary
adjustments to the app. The results so far indicate that, with
the teacher's guidance, students follow the required structure
of the template, but elements of formatting that could be
predicted with the use of the app escape them. Ideally, the app
will allow the student to focus on the quality of the content.
The future evolution of the app envisages redesigning it to
include activities that promote the development of cognitive
skills through the use of the app.
Keywords - higher education; educational research; mobile
applications; journalism; educational innovation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Educational institutions are responsible for providing
their students with the tools and skills that give them the
competencies they need to be future professionals in
journalism and communication [1]. The students have to be
able to work with state-of-art technology, inform society,
and know how to request and obtain information. Similarly,
professionals in creative industries must be able to respond
to media outlet demands. Changes in how information is
received and disseminated have created a new need:
universities must update the courses offered to students in
curricula where communication is an integral part of their
studies. The variations in training are a result of different
trends in how people read and consume information.
Nowadays, the use of portable devices such as tablets,
mobile phones, and laptops allows access to online journals
and magazines. In Mexico, there are 79.1 million Internet
users, and 89% of the connections are through mobile
phones [2]. The use of social media is very high (89%), and
there is a high percentage of users (82%) searching for
information online [2]. This is why the technology provided
by the cell phone can be incorporated into teaching, as
young Mexican students use it daily. To bring about
change, teachers, when doing course design, must focus
their attention on learning experiences in which technology
can be integrated into them [3].
This paper presents the results of our study. The work is
structured as follows. In section II, we present the
theoretical background. Section III provides a description
of the methodology employed. Section IV presents the
research results, and Section V presents the conclusion of
this work.
II.
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Heutagogy is self-determined learning, focused on the
development of capabilities and capacity of the student.
Heutagogy is appropriate to the needs of learners in this
century [4].
The
theoretical-conceptual
perspective
of
heutagogy
recognizes the need to be flexible in learning, in the use of
resources, and in the facilitation or guidance that a teacher
provides to students. Heutagogy is defined by the idea that
the student can design and negotiate his/her own learning.
The
student
determines
what
is
most
essential
and
subsequently
arranges
his/her
reading
and
evaluation
assignments [4].
As an example, the journalism schools of the Auckland
University of Technology (AUT) in New Zealand use
heutagogy as a teaching method in their social media
courses in journalism. This method prepares students
through a new style of educating that incorporates dealing
with the vast amount of information available on the
Internet. In this case, a heutagogic framework provides the
flexibility for students to perform their course work using
existing technological tools familiar to them [5].
Along these lines, this work proposes the hypothesis that
the use of mobile applications is useful in academics to
enhance critical thinking [6]. There is evidence in this
regard: Reen and Ramnarayan's research with medical
students at Manipal University, India, is an example [7]. The
authors asked medical students to use social media to work
on their projects. They concluded that the heutagogic
method allowed their students to generate learning products
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

and develop critical thinking, so the union of this learning
methodology with technology can be considered a key to
learning for 21st-century youth [7].
According to Crittenden et al. [8], it is crucial that
university students know how to use digital technology such
as artificial intelligence, augmented reality, drones, the
Internet of Things, robots, virtual reality, and 3D printing,
among others. Technology applied in the classroom to
theory
helps
students
develop
critical
thinking
and
creativity, so they can generate value in the professional
arena. The authors add that one of the criticisms of
technology has been that it can be distracting; however,
distraction is also present in traditional teaching [8].
Today’s world is characterized by an abundance of data,
shortened
decision
times,
and
the
elimination
of
geographical boundaries brought about by information
technologies [9]. Foreseeably, communication technologies
will remain a permanent part of the continuous connectivity
in people’s work. [10][11]. For these reasons, educators
must guide the creators of future content toward the skills
of communication and precision. To that end, we
developed a mobile application called InContext, which
specifically targets those competencies. With InContext,
students have many features now like standard templates,
guides, focus group formats, and the key questions and
components
needed
to
write
journalistic
articles
or
editorials, among others.
Educators have the advantage of being able to leverage
student engagement in the classroom through the use of
technology. Making the students co-responsible for learning
the topics in class leads to their greater involvement. In our
research, we see that this involvement occurs when the
student, as a user of our app, can add photographs, audio,
and video files to content with a smartphone or tablet at
the time of the event. These tools, like Google Drive,
facilitate the collection of information.
The objective of this study was to design this mobile app
with interactive formats that assist the beginning of the
writing
process
or
the
beginning
of
social
research.
InContext lets the student use one of the pre-loaded,
interactive multimedia templates that correspond to the
different journalistic genres and research designs to generate
content suitable for journalism or social research. The target
users were students of journalism and communication at
Tecnologico de Monterrey, Mexico, during the winter 2018
and spring 2019 semesters.
III.
METHODOLOGY
A.
Participants
The students who participated in the first two stages
were men and women between 18 and 25 years old, with 21
being the average age. They were enrolled in various
curricula such as Journalism, Communication, International
Relations, Advertising, Political Science, and Psychology.
All were taking the courses in research and journalism
between the second and fifth semesters of their professional
curricula on the Monterrey campus of Tecnologico de
Monterrey. The risks associated with this experiment were
minimal because no personal or sensitive information was
requested from them during the study.
In the first stage, developed in the winter 2018 semester,
161 written articles prepared by 305 students enrolled in five
courses were taken as a reference for analysis. The classes
were Quantitative Methods for Social Research, Research
Journalism,
Digital
Journalism,
Qualitative
Methods
Research, Advertising and Comprehensive Marketing. The
second stage, in the spring 2019 semester, entailed the
design of the application and its use by some of the students
(n=141).
The InContext mobile application has 4 templates for
research courses and 16 templates for journalism courses. It
allows the students to enter and format their report
information, including surveys, interviews, content analyses,
and various things relating to news reports, like chronicles,
stories, semblances, etc.
B.
Procedure
Three stages were established for this investigation. The
first was developed during September to December 2018
and aimed to identify the essential characteristics that an
investigative report or a journalistic article should have. To
do this, we reviewed works written by the students before
using the technology. The second stage occurred from
February to May 2019, in which different students tested the
application and made adjustments, and the results of this
stage are reported in this paper. The third stage will use
control and experimental groups to check whether the use of
the tool by the students promotes autonomous learning and
develops the critical thinking in students to focus on the
content of the reports and not just their forms or structures.
C.
Tools
InContext is an application of specialized software
containing custom-made templates for the primary genres of
journalism
and
the
elemental
procedures
of
research
methodology. The app guides the student to supply the
relevant information for each of the points of the templates.
The student adds the required multimedia material and sends
the content via email or uploads it to the cloud. The use of
the app directs the student to the bare minimum inputs
necessary to start writing creative or informative text, and it
allows the student to explore new ways to deliver content.
Also, the app facilitates flexible learning because users can
go at their own pace as they practice journalistic writing and
conduct academic research.
Although InContext is a mobile-device application made
explicitly for university students, future versions could be
integrated as a suite in the Tec de Monterrey moodle-based
learning platform.
This application is based on Laravel, bootstrap, html5,
and progressive application techniques. It can be viewed on
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Android, Apple, and Windows mobile devices. The app
allows
the
student
to
access
the
summary
of
their
contribution (frontend). The teacher can easily design
templates, automatic reviews, assessments, and grading
scales (backend).
Students
access
the
app
at
app.incontext.mx/login,
register, and then select the preloaded formats. Journalism
students find specified templates (various formats for news,
report, chronicle, review, semblance, conference, press
conference, etc.). Research students find other templates
(surveys, interviews, etc.).
Students follow the template, inserting title, author, date,
sources, questions and answers, photographs, etc. Upon
completion of the template, students generate a PDF file that
can be downloaded.
Students enrolled in one of these courses have access to
the tool and they select the format needed from 20 options.
Figure 1 shows the InContext screen to illustrate how
students access the app. Figure 2 shows the dashboard
where the students can select the specific template to use,
and Figure 3 shows the screens with the survey form as an
example. In that form, they find the elements that must be
written, such as title and objective, theoretical background,
and bibliography, etc. The student can attach photos, videos,
audios, and links to the text documents they are preparing,
and they can proceed at their own pace. InContext allows
them to generate a PDF report that can be delivered in print
or electronic form to the teacher or anyone.
IV.
RESULTS
This initial review carried out was qualitative. We
compared the research reports and the news stories that
students prepared before using the application with the work
they did after using it and considered some possible
improvements in the tasks. In the case of research reports,
better results were observed in two specific respects (Table
I), namely, the manifest presence of the research objective
and the demographic data of the study participants.
Figure 1. Access screen to the app.
Figure 2. Student access to the dashboard and selection of forms.
In the same way, when reviewing the work of the
journalism courses, it was possible to identify improvements
with the use of the app (Table II), specifically in the
presence of information sources, the news writer credits, and
the inclusion of photographs. The application displays the
items to be completed in the format, and, therefore, it is
difficult to forget or omit their inclusion.
Table I shows the results of the exploratory study using a
convenience sample. Please note the low number of students
using the app was due to reduced attendance during the days
of the study.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
In the first two stages, the need to design the templates
carefully was evident, as well as the usability of the
application on both cell phones and computers. However, the
most important thing was to identify whether the use of this
technology not only facilitates the learning of formats, but
also leads to reflection and analysis of the written content.
These aspects will be reviewed in the future stage of this
investigation.
Figure 3. Example of a template that starts the work.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

TABLE I.
HITS FOUND IN THE RESEARCH WORK WITHOUT
APPLICATION AND USING IT
Research work
Without app
Using app
States the research objective
20/54
5/6
Specifies the demographics of the
sample data
26/54
6/6
Total work reviewed:
54
6
TABLE II.
HITS FOUND IN THE JOURNALISM EXERCISES WITHOUT
APPLICATION AND USING IT
Journalism exercises
Without app
Using app
States the news sources
34/41
37/40
Includes photographs
34/41
36/40
Indicates the writer credit
32/41
40/40
Total work reviewed:
41
40
The results presented in this paper seem to align with
those shown by Reen & Ramnarayan [7]; InContext
facilitates
student
work
by
offering
them
a
flexible
environment where they can learn better. The results
presented in this paper also supports the idea presented by
Crittenden et al. [8] that technology is not always a
distractor and can be used, instead, as a tool to increase
concentration [8]. The results of this paper are encouraging.
The research indicates that technology can help students
focus; in this project, it offers them the elements to guide the
development of writing and communicating using templates.
Future work will allow us to test, in an experimental setting,
how much these elements facilitate students’ work and
achievements.
Ideally, with the continuous repetition of exercises,
students will incorporate into their knowledge the details of
the formats and, on their own, will identify the usefulness of
this application. It is hoped that teachers using the app can
spend more time reviewing the relevance and the content of
student work rather than worrying about the details of form.
The use of this type of technology highlights the
importance of continuously updating the education for future
managers. The universities have to offer new educational
strategies so that students participate more while they
increase their self-efficacy [4]. The future communicators are
today’s students; therefore, universities have to offer the
instructional strategies that are relevant to their future needs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial and
technical support of Writing Lab, TecLabs, Tecnologico de
Monterrey, Mexico, in the production of this work.
REFERENCES
[1]
Clasesdeperiodismo.com.
“Jeff
Jarvis:
The
journalism
recognizes
that
the
public
knows
more,”
Clases
de
periodismo, 2017, July 16.
[2]
Asociación de Internet. “14 Study about habits of Internet
users in Mexico 2018,” Asociación de Internet, Mexico City,
2018.
[3]
C. Marcelo, C. Yot, and C. Mayor, "University teaching with
digital technologies,” Comunicar, vol. XXIII, no. 45, pp. 117-
124, 2015.
[4]
S. Hase and C. Kenyon, "From andragogy to heutagogy,"
National Library of Australia, 2004. [Online]. Available
from:https://webarchive.nla.gov.au/awa/20040812230501/http
://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/10088/20010816/ultibase.rmit.edu.a
u/Articles/dec00/hase2.htm
[5]
D. Mulrennan, "Mobile social media and the news: where
heutagogy enables journalism education," Journalism and
Mass Communication Educator, vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 322-333,
2018.
[6]
M. Deuze, "About the media and the entrepreneur as a way of
being in the world,” in Global education of journalism in the
XXI century. Challenges and innovations. Austin, Knight
Center for Journalism in the Americas, 2018, pp. 310-327.
[7]
R. Reen and K. Ramnarayan, "Heutagogic approach to
developing capable learners," Medical Teacher, vol. 39, no. 3,
pp. 295-299., 2017.
[8]
W.
Crittenden,
I.
Biel,
and
W.
Lovely,
"Embracing
digitalization: student learning and new technologies," Journal
of Marketing Education, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 5-14, 2019.
[9]
L. Lugo-Ortiz, “The academy, the media, and the ideal
professional:
a
generalist-multimedia
journalist,”
Comunicación y Sociedad, vol 29, no. 4, pp.271-287, 2016.
[10] X. López-García, A-I. Rodríguez-Vázquez and X. Pereira-
Fariña. “Technological skills and new professional profiles:
present challenges for journalism,” Comunicar, vol. 25, no. 5,
pp. 81-90, 2017. doi:10.3916/c53-2017-08.
[11] X. López-García, A. Silva-Rodríguez, Á-A. Vizoso-García, O.
Westlund, and J. Canavilhas, “Mobile journalism: systematic
literature review,” Comunicar, vol. 27, no. 59, pp. 9-18, 2019.
doi:10.3916/c59-2019-01.
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

