Smartphones as a Support for the Language of Images in Continuing Professional 
Development
Laura Rayón 
Faculty of Education
Alcalá University
Alcalá de Henares. Spain
e-mail: laura.rayon@uah.es
Ana María de las Heras
Pedagogy Department
UDIMA
Madrid. Spain
e-mail: anamaria.delasheras@udima.es 
Yolanda Muñoz
Faculty of Education
Alcala University
Alcalá de Henares. Spain
e-mail: yolanda.munozm@uah.es
Antonio Bautista
Faculty of Education
Complutense University
Madrid. Spain
e-mail: bautista@edu.ucm.es
Abstract- In this paper, we advance some of the results of a 
study aimed at identifying the contributions of smartphones 
as a support for multiple systems of representation in 
continuing teacher training. The participants are three 
teachers of primary school. The still-image tools on 
smartphones enable the representation and communication 
of situations experienced in classrooms using photography. 
Taking photos of classroom situations that are considered 
difficult by these teachers, and later viewing these photos to 
help them reflect on what occurred in the classroom using 
photo-elicitation processes, enables us to evaluate the 
possibilities that smartphones offer to represent and 
communicate meanings, beliefs and ideas on problematic 
situations using images, while weighing up diverse 
alternatives for professional action. They further enable 
analysis of trends concerning the type of image captured and 
the meanings associated to them. 
Keywords-teacher education; photography; smartphones; 
photo-elicitation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
We need to analyse two basic concepts to understand 
the functionality of smartphones to represent and 
communicate the situations experienced in classrooms 
through the language of images: smartphones as a means 
of communication based on audiovisual messages, and 
reflection on teaching practice mediated through photo-
elicitation processes.
A. Smartphones 
as 
a 
means 
of 
facilitating 
communication based on audiovisual messages
The 
functions 
that 
smartphones 
offer 
us 
simultaneously allow producing audiovisual messages, 
editing, publishing, and dissemination on the virtual 
spaces. New forms of communication and social 
interaction in collective virtual spaces appear in people’s 
lives daily. With this, image comes to the foreground to 
reveal people’s subjective experience. In the same way as 
a text give us ideas, images give us information about 
events, people and things. But in particular, they are 
capable of generating meanings, personal interpretations 
associated with such representations. In this sense, a 
picture does not show us the world but different ways of 
seeing the world. This subjective dimension of images is 
important for Barthes [1] since it highlights the emotional 
dimension that photography promotes. He focuses his 
reflections on the sensations and emotions a photo 
produces. One’s interest in the photo from such a 
perspective does not reside so much in its aesthetic beauty 
due to the composition of the elements it shows us, nor in 
the analogous reality it represents, but in its value in 
creating, communicating and transmitting the meanings 
that the photo contains. 
The smartphones´ uses and systems of representation 
promote the visibility of our experiences and our personal 
perspectives. These devices enable us to share images 
and, with them, experiences and messages in real time 
through the different social networks and to reach any part 
of the world quickly, reliably and efficiently. The 
anonymous voice of the individual gains in prominence 
and, in our study, so do teachers’ voices when faced with 
the dilemmas and problems of professional practice.
B. Reflection on teaching practice through photo-
elicitation processes.
Teachers have a mediating role in teaching processes. 
This is why helping them understand the determinants of 
professional practice, 
helping them represent the 
situations they experience and allowing them to define the 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

problems themselves, enables them to weigh up different 
choices of action and improve their teaching processes. 
This reflection on practice is key for developing any 
strategy for innovating and improving teaching. The 
modelling and transformational role of teachers, and 
consequently the need for autonomous development of 
their professional thought, justifies the need for teachers 
to carry out processes of reflection on their professional 
practice [2]. Many educators emphasize the critical role of 
learning through reflective practice in developing 
teaching capabilities [3] [4] [5]. 
The novelty in our study is placing a smartphone into 
teachers’ hands so they can record and analyse the 
difficulties and dilemmas emerging in classrooms and 
educational centres, previously capturing there significant 
instants and moments in photos.
In this way, teachers can analyse, question, discuss 
and reflect on what happened in photo-elicitation 
sessions. This procedure consists of using photos to 
communicate people’s life experiences [6]. It is a means 
of narration supported by images through which the 
thoughts, interpretations and meanings people place on 
the actions, objects or events represented in the photos are 
retrieved. The idea is to capture an image of reality to 
“see through others’ eyes” (in this case, the teachers’) 
aspects of this reality and their particular interpretations 
of the image captured [7].
In our case, given that during classroom activities it is 
difficult to reflect on professional problems and 
dilemmas, it is only later through photo-elicitation that the 
teachers become aware of their beliefs, theories, attitudes 
and values. This is because, based on the photos they take, 
they are asked about what the images represent and they 
provide a narration on what they are doing in class, what 
they could do and what would be advisable to do. This 
process forces them to analyse and make their problems 
and concerns explicit. When the teacher reflects on her 
practice, she constructs meanings over the realities within 
which she is working. She becomes involved with a 
process of observation, interpretation and construction of 
meanings. Essential processes in the “realization of their 
activity to the extent that the teacher inevitably makes 
many decisions, working with objectives and realities that 
can be interpreted, within complex, fluid settings: 
something that may not be so decisive in other 
professions” [8]. From this approach teachers are defined 
as a professionals who undertake their role in a personal 
way who give the profession a creative component.
What does a smartphone provide to help teachers 
record and reflect on these situations? What value does 
the language of images have in these analytical, 
questioning and discussion processes on what took place 
in classrooms and educational centres? What is the nature 
of the images that teachers take and what discourses do 
they articulate? We propose that the teachers take photos 
of situations and moments. This means we focus on the 
group of tools for taking still images that these devices 
have.
II.
THE AIMS AND RESEARCH METHOD
The aims proposed to reveal how the language of 
images contributes to reflection on teaching practice are:
•
Understanding 
how 
teachers 
use 
their 
smartphones to communicate using the language 
of images.
•
Describing and make connections between the 
photos´ content and the teacher´s reflections that 
arise in the photo-elicitation sessions.
To meet these aims, we developed three types of 
procedures:
Photo-elicitation sessions. These sessions were 
conducted once every two weeks during three years. 
Before the sessions teachers take photos of events, tasks, 
dilemmas, conflicts, behaviours and so on that they 
consider most relevant and interesting in the life of their 
classroom and other spaces in the centre. The photos that 
each teacher takes are shown and participants comment 
on the reasons that prompted them to take each photo. 
After this, the members of the research group formulate 
questions or doubts on the content of images and the 
reasons given by the teacher. In this way, images “can 
offer researchers new and valuable routes to other 
people´s experiences, knowledge and values” [9].
Audio-reflection sessions. An audio recording is made 
of the photo-elicitation sessions with two research goals. 
Firstly, to analyse each teacher’s narrations, and secondly, 
to codify the information provided to place it in context 
by analysing each photo’s content.
Content analysis. To describe how the images and the 
meanings associated to these photos are used by teachers, 
according this method [10] [11], we grouped the photos 
according to their relationship between the internal 
narrative – what actually appears in the photos and the 
type of shot or composition – and their external narrative 
– what the image aims to communicate, the information 
recorded in the audio-reflection sessions [12]. To codify 
and sort both information types, we use NVivo 10 
software, a programme that provides a flexible, multi-
purpose work space, which allows us to create categories 
for analysis and to access information combining different 
types of records: text-based and still image, in our case. 
We understand that the most direct way of knowing these 
human experiences is to narrate them, rather than to 
quantify them. Our research strategy is based on the idea 
that each situation of photo-elicitation is equivalent to an 
open interview, which does not need a questionnaire, 
because the questions are oriented from the spontaneous 
manifestations of the teachers about images of moments 
in their classrooms.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

III. CONCLUSION
Three fundamental aspects have stood out during our 
research:
Firstly, we verified how the language of images 
enables teachers to take photos easily to represent their 
ideas, concerns and problems in classrooms and 
educational centres. When an unexpected event occurs 
that activates their thought and a personal interpretation of 
that event, quick access to the camera app on smartphones 
makes it possible to record that moment, which is 
important to them, in a more efficient way than using a 
classic camera. 
It may seem like an obvious question, but in the 
educational field, Smartphones, which have a great 
presence in our daily lives, are not as widely used in 
schools as video and photo cameras. The study is relevant 
because of the few existing experiences in which 
smartphones take center stage in the processes of 
reflection on the teaching practice. This allows them to be 
aware of their particular professional and ethical attitudes 
in response to specific problems. The important role that 
smartphones play in ongoing training and in improving 
professional practice of these three teachers is clear. For 
them, smartphones have gone from being a resource 
whose use was exclusively devoted to leisure, to 
becoming an important tool for professional development. 
In contrast to a typical camera, we carry our smartphones 
on us at all times, and that omnipresence is what helps 
when recording images. Since they are multi-functional, 
teachers also have other ways of recording ideas such as 
taking text and audio notes to record the reasons why they 
took the photos. Furthermore, in the images the teachers 
took, we confirmed that the spaces for reflection were not 
only in the educational centre or classroom; rather, having 
a device on them to record images allowed teachers to 
extend their reflective spaces beyond the school 
environment. Thus, they showed us photos taken in their 
personal space, such as photos taken at home and in 
leisure spaces. It is in these spaces that they can also 
retrieve the photos taken previously and calmly continue 
to build meanings and ideas. But in addition, smartphones 
allow to capture the immediacy. It also allows to capture 
the significant moment of an event or anecdote for the 
teachers, in a more effective way than if they used a 
camera of photos. The practical thinking of teachers is a 
difficult question to materialize. The events that are 
happening in the classroom do not allow the teacher to 
become aware of the ideas and theory that they use to 
respond to the problems that arise. The tactile functions of 
smartphones facilitate this task to make explicit that 
practical knowledge.
With regard to the second aim, we have seen that 
close-up photos – showing objects and things – are a type 
of record that predominates in their representations. We 
observed that the teachers constructed highly personal, 
intimate and, therefore, elaborate meanings, and they 
recognised that it would be difficult to express these 
without the support of the photos. The language of images 
appears to be a language for expressing ideas and 
thoughts that would be more difficult to communicate 
through written language. The meanings associated with 
the photos also reveal their ideological position. The use 
of images reveals a negotiation process regarding their 
identities as creative teachers who transform their 
professional practices and conditions, as opposed to a 
more uncritical and technical role in the teaching 
profession. In the processes of photo-elicitation the 
teachers discuss with the researchers alternative actions. 
These alternative actions are aimed at improving the 
problems detected. For example, one of the participating 
teachers is becoming aware of the problems of 
coexistence in her classroom during the process of photo-
elicitation. Competitiveness among students emerges as 
their form of interaction. This process leads the teacher to 
implement a behavior modification project in her 
classroom.
A future line of work could be the inclusion of image 
and the processes of photo-elicitation such as a 
pedagogical strategy in initial teachers' curriculum. If the 
students use a multimodal language, they will improve 
their skills to observe and analyze critically their contexts 
and any educational situation. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
A project subsidised by the Ministry of Economy and 
Competitiveness of the Spanish Government, within the 
R&D&i State Plan, reference EDU2014-57103-R.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Barthes, Camera lucida: reflections of photography.
Barcelona: Paidós, 1990. 
[2] M. Cochran-Smith. “Studying Teacher Education. What we 
know and need to know”. Journal of Teacher Education, 
(56) 4, pp. 301-306, 2016.  
[3] F. A. J. Korthagen and J. P. A. M.  Kessels. “Linking theory 
and practice: changing the pedagogy of teacher education”. 
Educational Researcher, 28 (4), pp. 4-17, 1999.
[4] J.J. Loughran. “Effective reflective practice: in search of 
meaning in learning about teaching”. Journal of Teacher 
Education, 53 (1), pp. 33-43, 2002.
[5] A. E. Richert. “Inquiring about practice: using web-based 
materials to develop teacher inquiry”. Teaching Education, 
16 (4), pp. 297-310, 2005.
[6] D. Harper, “Talking about pictures: a case for photo 
elicitation”. Visual Studies, 17 (1), pp.13-26, 2002.
[7] I. Kaplan and A. Howes, “Seeing with difference eyes: 
exploring the value of participative research using images 
in schools”. Cambridge Journal of Education, 34 (2), pp. 
143-155, 2004.
[8] J. Gimeno, El curriculum: una reflexión sobre la práctica, 
[The curriculum: a reflection on practice]. Madrid: Morata, 
1988.
[9] S. Pink, Doing sensory ethnography, London: Sage, 2009.
[10] T. Van Leeuven and C. Jewitt, Handbook of Visual 
Analysis, London: Sage, 2001.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[11] J. Prosser, “Visual Methodology: Towards a More Seeing 
Research,” in Handbook of Qualitative Research, N. 
Denzin and Y. Lincoln, Eds. London: Sage, 2011.
[12] M. Banks, Using Visual Data in Qualitative Research, 
London: Sage, 2008.
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

