Recommendation Acceptance in a Simple Adaptive Learning System 
Matthias Holthaus, Tansu Pancar, Per Bergamin 
UNESCO chair on personalized and adaptive distance education 
Swiss Distance University of Applied Sciences (FFHS) 
Brig, Switzerland 
 
Email: matthias.holthaus@ffhs.ch, tansu.pancar@ffhs.ch, per.bergamin@ffhs.ch
 
 
 
Abstract - In the following article we report the current 
status of our research on integrating a simple, useful adaptive 
learning system into a university's standard learning 
management system. In this context, a corresponding 
instructional design was implemented for a basic mathematics 
course with the aim of supporting students in their self-study. 
A rule-based tool was developed for this purpose. The 
theoretical basis of the design was the Cognitive Load Theory. 
Based on the principles of this theory, the load on the working 
memory of the students during learning was to be optimized by 
appropriate task difficulties. It was expected that the learning 
performance would be improved. The first results from one of 
our preliminary studies focusing on learning progress, activity 
and previous knowledge of different groups of students showed 
that students who actively worked with adaptive tasks 
benefited from the system and achieved a greater learning 
progress than the comparison groups. In the follow-up to this 
finding, new research questions have arisen for us on the basis 
of certain limits of the previous study. All of these questions 
aim to determine whether the positive learning effects can be 
attributed to the increase in learning activities alone or to 
following the recommendations or to the interaction of both. In 
this paper, we present the next research steps in the sense of a 
framework in order to find the corresponding answers. 
Keywords - technology-based learning; adaptive learning; 
recommendation system; cognitive load; learning management 
system; log files. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Many areas of our society and social life are increasingly 
subject to digitalization. This also applies to the area of 
education and learning. Accordingly, new forms of learning 
are emerging and gaining importance, such as distance or 
blended learning concepts or also pure technology-based 
learning offers. These 
forms of learning 
can be 
distinguished from traditional ones by their flexible 
characteristics [2]. For example, they enable certain forms 
of freedom and autonomy, they help to overcome space-
time barriers, they open up new opportunities for lifelong 
learning, or they allow students to complete academic 
studies even while in full or part-time employment or 
parenthood. In addition, this flexibility also opens up the 
opportunity 
of 
individualizing 
or, 
even 
more, 
of 
personalizing learning on the basis of the heterogeneous 
characteristics or needs of learners by adapting teaching 
concepts, curricula, learning contents or tasks to the specific 
needs of the individuals. In many current training programs, 
specifically in higher education, it is generally expected that 
all learners develop the same competences, despite different 
prerequisites, such as pre-knowledge, learning skills, 
interests, motivation, social status, life situation, and so on. 
In addition, the learners in traditional learning offers are 
given the same or almost no different learning paths or 
learning support. In contrast to the corresponding traditional 
"one-size-fits-all" concept, one effective method of 
achieving learning success is to continuously adapt learning 
arrangements to the individual needs of students. The 
importance of adapting learning processes to the individual 
needs of learners is demonstrated, for example, by a 
phenomenon known in research on cognitive instruction 
design as the Expertise Reversal Effect [7][9]. It is shown 
that, among other things, instructions or specific assistance, 
which are important for beginners, lose their effect for 
experts or can even hinder them in their learning. From a 
technological point of view, adaptive learning environments 
or adaptive arrangements can be provided within a learning 
environment by a more or less complex Learning 
Management System (LMS). 
Today, studies on adaptive learning concepts are 
becoming 
increasingly 
common, 
but 
practical 
implementations are still scarce [6][16]. Price et al. [14] 
argue that there is a gap between research and practice that 
appears to be systemic in nature and requires change at 
several levels, including institutional change. FitzGerald et 
al. [3] in contrast assume that individualization in 
technology-based learning can be seen as positive and 
promising, but that its implementation is difficult to realize. 
While some, such as Murray and Pérez [13], assume that the 
cause is more to be found in technology-based learning 
environments, they look to the educational sciences and less 
to the technological side to drive forward a corresponding 
transformation. However, in order to bridge the gap between 
research and practice, we need an interdisciplinary approach 
with broad-based field studies in appropriate contexts and 
the further development of sound didactic concepts [15]. In 
one of our own studies [5] we show, for instance, that a 
viable adaptive concept for a basic mathematics course 
(university level) can be realized in a simple way via a 
standard learning management system (Moodle) using a 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

blended learning scenario during a whole semester. In 
particular, novices with low pre-knowledge and high 
learning activity benefit from this concept regarding their 
learning progress. 
On the basis of these results, the present study aims to 
answer a further question, which has not yet been assessed: 
whether the positive learning effects found in the 
preliminary study are attributable to the increase in learning 
activities or rather to recommendations of the learning 
system. In the following, the adaptive learning system 
developed by us is described and the results of the 
preliminary study are summarized. We then discuss the 
further research questions and methodological approaches 
(data collection and evaluation) arising from the limitations 
of the preliminary study. 
II. 
IMPLEMENTATION AND FIRST EXPLORATORY 
FINDINGS 
A. Implementation of the Adaptive Learning System and 
Instruction Design based on the Cognitive Load Theory 
The above-mentioned adaptive learning concept was 
developed and implemented as part of a degree program for 
business engineers. For this purpose, we implemented 84 
adaptive online tasks and made them available to the 
students for the autumn semester 2017/18 through the 
learning platform. The blended learning scenario consisted of 
20% learning time as a face-to-face sessions and 80% as self-
study. This included literature study on the one hand and the 
possibility to acquire required skills by intensive practicing 
with interactive tasks (in this case in adaptive form) on the 
other hand. The adaptive tasks themselves covered all 
learning objectives of the course. 
Various authors (e.g. [11]) propose a learner model on a 
theoretical basis for the development of adaptive learning 
environments. In this context, we focused more on a basic 
theory of information processing the Cognitive Load Theory 
[17] as a framework. In this theoretical approach, it is 
assumed that the working memory has only a limited 
capacity. Three types of cognitive loads influence its 
information processing processes. The intrinsic cognitive 
load (1) arises from the actual learning content respectively 
from the number of information connections of a learning 
task. The extraneous cognitive load (2) results from demands 
outside a learning task and is caused, for example, by the 
presentation of the learning material or by the teachers 
themselves. This form of load is increased by unfavorable 
instructional methods, e.g., by distracting information or 
unnecessary complexity of a task. The germane cognitive 
load (3) results from the development of new or the 
extension of existing cognitive schemata which are stored in 
the long-term memory. It is regarded as desirable, since new 
information is built up or the basis for new skills is laid in 
this context. 
Generally, the theory of cognitive load can be applied to 
any learning context (e.g., offline or online). To improve 
learning, it is assumed that the intrinsic load should be 
optimized, supporting measures to promote introduction of 
germane load and/or minimize extraneous load. 
In the present study, we focused especially on the 
individually adapted improvement of the learning situation 
with regard to the intrinsic load and the associated extrinsic 
load [8][10]. Therefore, the difficulty and design of tasks in 
learning processes were to be planned and regulated in such 
a way that many resources in the working memory could be 
kept free for the germane cognitive load and therefore for 
information processing. Utilizing these assumptions, we 
designed an adaptive learning process in which learners with 
low pre-knowledge or low learning performance received 
much support and guidance when solving mathematical 
learning tasks so that they were not overburdened by the 
complexity of the new learning content and information. In 
contrast, learners with a high level of pre-knowledge or high 
learning performance received little help and guidance, as 
superfluous support would disturb them and possibly even 
impede learning (see the Expertise Reversal Effect [7, 9]). 
Consequently, mathematical tasks were developed using 
these learning designs. Each task contained the same 
mathematical problem and learning goals, but differed in the 
quantity and type of solution steps and provided different 
levels of detail or assistance in the case of insufficient 
performance. 
Based on a model by Zimmermann et al. [18], we used 
three resources to implement the adaptation. These served to 
continuously measure the characteristics of the learners and 
the current learning behavior (in the present context learning 
performance), to compare the measurements with the desired 
target values, and then, in case of discrepancies, to initiate 
teaching reactions with the assistance mentioned above. As a 
first source, results of pre-knowledge tests with which 
students started their online course activities were used. 
Depending on the result, the students automatically received 
feedback on their current knowledge and their classification 
in our system as "high" performer or "low" performer. 
Accordingly, they received either detailed tasks with many 
intermediate steps and much support when classified as low 
performer or non-detailed tasks with little support for the 
high performers (see also Figure 1). The second source of 
adaptation was the solution behavior of the students. The 
tasks were divided into individual steps or questions 
depending on performance. When the student answered a 
question, he immediately received corresponding feedback. 
In the event of incorrect answers, the student received up to 
three different types of assistance. The immediate feedback 
and the corresponding solutions were meant to rapidly close 
and/or avoid knowledge gaps. The third source of adaptation 
could be found between the tasks. After each standard task, a 
transfer task was recommended to the students in order to 
work on the respective learning objective again. This 
horizontal learning transfer was supposed to help to test and 
to stabilize the knowledge. Transfer tasks were similar to 
standard tasks. They dealt with a similar or slightly different 
problems than the standard tasks and could be solved with 
mathematical methods already learned. Depending on their 
performance, low performers were recommended to perform 
the detailed standard task again or a non-detailed transfer 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

task, while high performers were suggested to perform either 
the detailed standard task or a non-detailed transfer task. 
Under certain circumstances, high performers may also have 
received a suggestion to proceed to a new task set. In the 
other cases, however, this only happened with good 
performance in the transfer tasks. The various adaptive 
learning paths are shown in an overview in Figure 1. For a 
more detailed description of the learning system see [5]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Task Set for a Learning Goal 
The 
entire 
adaptive 
system 
was 
based 
on 
recommendations. Students could follow them or decide not 
to. Thus, the intention was that the students have to make 
their own learning decisions, which in turn helped to assess 
their own learning. The recommendations were guided by a 
pre-defined set of rules. Defined threshold values for the 
number of points achieved defined which task was 
recommended next (see also Figure 1 and for more details 
[5]). 
The entire adaptive learning system was based on a 
standard Learning Management System (Moodle) without 
additional plugin. It worked with the conditions/restrictions 
that were available in the core of Moodle (from version 3.3+ 
on). A specific advantage of this variant without plugin was 
a guaranteed stability. Using plugins often lead to problems 
and revisions due to possible compatibility problems 
between core and plugin when updating. 
B. Current Findings and new Research Questions 
In a first explorative analysis [5] of the adaptive concept 
for a basic mathematics course, we focused on possible 
performance improvements of students by investigating the 
relationship between three variables: pre-knowledge (in other 
words low performer and high performer), online activity 
(log files), and learning progress. It turned out that students 
working actively online in the adaptive course achieved 
significantly better learning progress than the students who 
did not. The learning progress was defined as the difference 
between the results of the prior knowledge test, standardized 
to 100, and the results of the final examination, also 
standardized to 100. The average learning progress of the 
"inactive" students was 8.4, that of the "active" ones 32.4 
(the difference is significant, verified by a t-test, p < 0.05). 
In addition, the analysis showed that the active low 
performers in an adaptive version of the course showed 
significantly higher learning progress compared to all low 
performers in a non-adaptive variant of the same course 
(mean value of active low performer in the adaptive course: 
49.2, mean value of all low performer non-adaptive course: 
19.0; tested by a one-sided ANOVA with Tamhane post hoc 
test, p = 0.01).  
A comparable result with a significant difference was 
also found when comparing active high performer of the 
adaptive course with all high performer of the non-adaptive 
version (mean value of active high performer in the adaptive 
course: 22.2, mean value of all high performer in the non-
adaptive course: -12.1, tested with a one-sided ANOVA with 
Tamhane post hoc test, p = .01, see also [5]). 
On the basis of these results, it could be assumed that the 
adaptive teaching design, implemented in the learning 
platform, facilitated the learning progress of active online 
students compared to a non-adaptive design. However, the 
analysis was limited in that it was not clear whether the 
improved learning progress was only due to the increased 
activity or to the enhancement of learning processes through 
the optimization of cognitive load (assumption in our design) 
by following the recommendations of the adaptive system. 
In order to clarify this question and to continue the work, 
we therefore formulated the following four research 
questions for further investigation. 
 
a. 
How do the students follow the recommendations? 
b. Which parameters best predict the following 
subsequences (Logs) of the recommendations? 
c. 
Which groups follow the recommendations more? 
d. How does following the recommendations affect 
the learning behavior? 
 
In order to be able to answer these questions, we need a 
complete tracking of the online activities of the students as 
well as information on the self-monitoring of the students of 
their own learning activities. With the current work, we also 
want to check which recommendations are more likely to be 
accepted by students and which are not, and in this way 
modify and improve the recommendation system if 
necessary. 
III. 
WORK IN PROGRESS 
A. Collecting Data 
For further investigation and to answer the research 
questions, we use self-declaration by the students by 
evaluating their own mathematical knowledge (by asking 
short questions at the beginning of the course and storing the 
answers in the database of the learning platform) and also by 
individual log files or entire sequences of log files with time 
stamp. Each online action of a user is tracked and registered 
in a database in the following form: Time stamp of the 
action, personal identification of the user and event name. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

This creates sequences of log files that can indicate what the 
user has done in what time. This also means that it is 
possible to track which tasks (steps) were processed at which 
time in which action sequence, trial amount and also results 
(e.g., right/wrong). It is also possible to check on the basis of 
the log file sequences whether the tasks were processed 
according to the rule based recommendations (see Figure 1) 
or whether the users performed other online actions in 
between. In addition, it is also possible to estimate how much 
time elapsed between the recommendations and the 
subsequent actions. 
With the above data, we will test and validate three 
methodological assessment procedures to obtain an indicator 
of "how students follow the recommendations": 
1. 
In the first procedure, we consider only the next 
entry 
in 
the 
database 
that 
follows 
the 
recommendation. So, we check whether students go 
directly to the next recommended task without 
doing another online activity first. We assume that 
the students who directly execute the system's 
recommendations are less self-monitoring in their 
own learning. The index is calculated as the 
percentage of recommendations followed. 
2. 
The second method is to look at a sequence of log 
files 
after 
the 
student 
has 
received 
a 
recommendation. This involves observing when 
students follow recommendations and how much 
online activity they perform before they follow a 
recommendation [1][4][12]. We assume that these 
students monitor their own learning behavior more 
closely and accept a recommendation accordingly 
or do not follow it after consideration. For this 
purpose, we want to measure the average number of 
logs until the student starts the recommended online 
activity. 
3. 
In the third procedure, as an alternative to the two 
previous methods, we will use, for students who 
followed a recommendation, the average time until 
the student starts a corresponding online activity 
after a recommendation as an index. 
B. Data evaluation 
For the first two procedures, we will test the predictive 
validity and for the third method, we will check whether 
integration of "time" as an additional parameter results in a 
better predictive power.  
With a focus on all above mentioned research questions, 
we intend to combine the data resulting from the above-
mentioned methods with different groups of students. One 
criterion for the differentiation of students is their self-
evaluated mathematical knowledge at the beginning of their 
studies. It is then analyzed whether different evaluations 
have an influence on the acceptance of the system's 
recommendations. A further goal is to determine how 
different prior knowledge (measured by the standard 
mathematical test of the adaptive system) influences the 
following of recommendations. The same relationships are 
also explored for the frequency and type (self-monitoring) of 
online activities (recorded by logs) and learning performance 
(progress and performance in the final test). 
The results of the study should be available by the end of 
2019 and published subsequently. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Abbott, “Sequence Analysis: New Methods for old Ideas,” 
Annual Review of Sociology, 21(1), pp. 93-113, 1995. 
 https://doi: 10.1146/annurev.so.21.080195.000521 
[2] P. Bergamin, E. Werlen, E. Siegenthaler, and S. Ziska, "The 
Relationship between Flexible and Self-Regulated Learning in 
Open and Distance Universities," International Review of 
Research in Open and Distance Learning, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 
101–123, 2012. 
[3] E. FitzGerald et al., "Dimensions of Personalisation in 
Technologyenhanced 
Learning: 
A 
Framework 
and 
Implications for Design," British Journal of Educational 
Technology, 2017. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12534 
[4] A. Gabadinho, G. Ritschard, N. S. Mueller, and M. Studer, 
"Analyzing and Visualizing State Sequences in R with 
TraMineR," Journal of Statistical Software, 40(4), pp. 1-37, 
2011. 
[5] M. Holthaus, F. Hirt, and P. Bergamin, "Simple and Effective: 
An 
Adaptive 
Instructional 
Design 
for 
Mathematics 
Implemented in a Standard Learning Management System," 
CHIRA 2018 - 2nd International Conference on Computer-
Human Interaction Research and Applications - Proceedings, 
pp. 116 - 126, 2018. 
[6] L. Johnson et al., "NMC Horizon Report: 2016 Higher 
Education Edition." Austin, Texas: The New Media 
Consortium, 2016. 
[7] S. Kalyuga, "Expertise Reversal Effect and Its Implications 
for Learner-Tailored Instruction," Educational Psychology 
Review, 19(4), pp.509–539, 2007. 
[8] S. Kalyuga, "Cognitive Load Theory: How Many Types of 
Load Does It Really Need," Educational Psychology Review, 
23(1), pp. 1-19, 2011. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-010-9150-7 
[9] S. Kalyuga, P. Ayres, P. Chandler, and J. Sweller, "The 
Expertise Reversal Effect," Educational Psychologist, 38(1), 
pp.23–3, 2003. 
[10] S. Kalyuga and A.-M. Singh, "Rethinking the Boundaries of 
Cognitive Load Theory in Complex Learning," Educational 
Psychology Review, 28(4), pp. 831-852, 2016. 
[11] C. Limongelli, F. Sciarrone, M. Temperini, and G. Vaste, 
“Adaptive Learning with the LS-PLAN System: a Field 
Evaluation,” IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 
2(3), pp. 203-215, 2009. 
[12] Z. Liu, H. Dev, M. Dontcheva, and M. Hoffman, "Mining, 
Pruning and Visualizing Frequent Patterns for Temporal 
Event Sequence Analysis," Proceedings of the IEEE VIS 
2016 Workshop on Temporal & Sequential Event Analysis, 
2016. 
http://eventevent.github.io 
[13] M. C. Murray and J. Pérez, "Informing and Performing: A 
Study 
Comparing 
Adaptive 
Learning 
to 
Traditional 
Learning," Informing Science, 18(1), pp.111–125, 2015. 
[14] L. Price, D. Casanova, and S. Orwell, "Modeling an 
Institutional Approach to Developing Technology Enabled 
Learning: Closing the Gap between Research and Practice," 
INTED2017 Proceedings, pp.5009–5018, 2017. 
[15] E. Scanlon, T. O’Shea, and P. McAndrew, "Technology-
Enhanced Learning : Evidence-based Improvement," L@S 
’15 Proceedings of the Second (2015) ACM Conference on 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Learning @ Scale." Vancouver, BC, Canada: ACM New 
York, NY, USA, pp. 229–232, 2015. 
[16] S. Somyürek, "The New Trends in Adaptive Educational 
Hypermedia Systems," International Review of Research in 
Open and Distributed Learning, 16(1), pp.221–241, 2015. 
[17] J. Sweller, “Cognitive Load During Problem Solving: Effects 
on Learning, “Cognitive Science, 12(2), pp. 257-285, 1988. 
[18] A. Zimmermann, M. Specht, and A. Lorenz, “Personalization 
and Context Management,” User Modeling and User-Adapted 
Interaction, 15(3), pp. 275-302, 2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

