Mobile Computing Program Curriculum —Design and Implementation 
Khaled Ben Hamed 
Department of Computer Science,   
Faculty of Information Technology, University of Tripoli,  
Tripoli, Libya 
k.benhamed@it.uot.edu.ly 
 
 
Abstract—Mobile computing is revolutionizing the way 
computers are used. By looking at all of the entities in mobile 
computing (mobile users, mobile contents, and mobile devices), 
it forces us to consider a new curriculum design and teaching 
strategy to teach computing courses to students.  Our unique 
mobile computing curriculum design focuses on given students 
an in-depth knowledge of comprehensive mobile computing 
development techniques. This is achieved by not only 
integrating mobile concepts into a few specific undergraduate 
traditional computing courses but across the curriculum [13]. 
This paper presents a new curriculum design that reflects 
nowadays existing mobile computing technologies. Some of the 
courses are lab intensive where students experiment with 
various mobile devices to develop and deploy applications. 
Also, the paper reports the teaching strategies, feedback, and 
challenges. 
Keywords- 
Mobile 
Computing 
Curriculum; 
Computer 
Science; Teaching Mobile Computing; Portable Devices; Mobile 
Development; 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Internationally, mobile computing is on the cutting edge 
of business software. Accessing information ”anywhere” 
and ”anytime” has been a driving force for the increasing 
growth in web and internet technologies, wireless 
communications, and mobile computing devices. According 
to 
Brahima 
Sanou, 
Director 
of 
the 
ITU4’s 
Telecommunication Development Bureau, Near-ubiquitous 
mobile penetration makes mobile computing devices the 
ideal platform for service delivery in developing countries 
[1]. This is due to the widespread use of mobile computing 
devices. Many universities in the world started offering a 
few mobile computing courses [3][21]. This enables 
computing schools’ graduates to be familiar with mobile 
computing concepts that are essential within the rapidly 
changing environment of mobile computing, so that students 
can pursue a related career or further relevant academic 
study [13]. 
Mobile computing is interdisciplinary in nature and the 
name originated from two words mobile and computing [4] 
[7][8]. The word mobile refers to mobility of users, 
contents, and devices, while the word computing is any 
goal-oriented activities demanding algorithmic processes. 
Moreover, the area of mobile computing is the merger of 
computing and communication with the aim of providing 
seamless and ubiquitous computing environment for mobile 
users. This “mobile shift” in computing poses fundamental 
challenges for virtually every curriculum designer, and calls 
into question most established assumptions about how to 
implement a curriculum to provide a broad based 
educational experience of mobile computing to students that 
reflects todays existing computing technologies rather than 
improving traditional computing courses in the fields of 
computer science and computer engineering [5][6]. This 
paper is the author’s attempt to design a new curriculum and 
teaching strategies of mobile computing program with new 
mindset that reflects newly emerged theories, techniques 
and paradigms relevant to mobile computing.  
Therefore, the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
gives an overview of the current state of the art and 
summarizes the paper. Section 3 present previously 
published papers on mobile computing curriculum and 
survey of selected universities offering some courses on 
mobile computing. Section 4 introduces the program 
framework that contains our goal and philosophy of the 
program and descriptions of the courses and topics covered. 
Section 5 presents the teaching strategy for the new 
curriculum. Section 6 describes several challenges in 
designing the curriculum and teaching strategy of our 
program. Section 7 presents the results and feedback. 
Section 8 concludes the paper and gives possible future 
work. 
II. STATE OF THE ART 
Recent years have shown that computing is moving 
towards an increasingly mobile computing environment 
with wireless laptops, smart phones, handheld computers 
and even wireless printers and digital cameras. All of these 
devices need to be programmed to interact correctly, 
increasing the demand for these programming and design 
skills. This demand prompted many universities in the 
world to introduce mobile computing courses to their 
undergraduate computer science and computer engineering 
students. By scanning the literature, we can see that mobile 
computing courses are only taught as introductory CS and 
CE courses. For example, 
 
In computer science curricula, the courses 
introduce 
the 
student 
to 
mobile 
software 
development. The courses focus on building 
mobile native and web applications [2]. 
 
In computer engineering curricula, the courses 
focus on introduction of mobile and wireless 
networks.  
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

However, increasing number of universities has started 
new mobile computing undergraduate programs leading to 
bachelor degrees in computer science and engineering with 
specialization in mobile computing. 
 
In computer science curricula, the programs 
emphasize on topics which require specialized 
knowledge from only one particular aspect of 
mobile software development. For example, 
interface design issues, multimedia, or graphics 
design for mobile devices [20].  
 
In computer engineering curricula, the programs 
focus on mobile communications systems or 
embedded systems within the context of mobile 
devices.  
In the above universities, the approaches of mobile 
computing courses taught in the CS and CE curricula are 
either introductory or intensively focused on one particular 
area of mobile computing.  Our approach differs from 
existing mobile computing curricula by avoiding too much 
specialized knowledge from one particular area of mobile 
computing. The goal of our suggested mobile computing 
curriculum is to provide students with various courses of 
computing such as software development, cloud computing,  
security, multimedia, wireless communication, database, 
virtual communities, operating systems, human-computer 
interaction, and game graphics design within the context of 
heterogeneous mobile devices.  
III.  BACKGROUND 
The 
ACM/IEEE 
Computer 
Science 
Curriculum 
2013[17] lists Mobile Computing as an elective course 
under the “Platform-Based Development (PBD)” Body of 
Knowledge and as an core 1 tier 2 topic under several”   
Knowledge Areas such as “Human-Computer Interaction 
(HCI)”, “Networking and Communication (NC)”, and 
“Social Issues and Professional Practice (SP)”.  Also, the 
ACM/IEEE Computer Engineering Curriculum 2004[18] 
lists Embedded Systems as a Body of Knowledge and also 
lists Wireless and Mobile Computing under “Computer 
Networks” 
Body 
of 
Knowledge. 
The 
ACM/IEEE 
Curriculum concluded that it is important for both computer 
engineering and computer science undergraduate students to 
be familiar to the concepts of Mobile Computing. 
Recently, many papers have been published related to 
teaching and curriculum of mobile computing. Those papers 
are as follows: 
 
Instructors sharing their own teaching strategy of 
mobile computing class [11][13][14]. 
 
 Instructors 
sharing 
their 
mobile 
computing 
concepts into the course’s topics [12][15][16][20]. 
 
A study conducted on selected universities offering a 
study of mobile computing course(s). From the survey, it 
can be seen that universities are using five models to 
integrate mobile computing into their computer science and 
engineering curricula [19]: 
1. Offering 
undergraduate 
courses 
on 
mobile 
computing. 
2. Offering graduate courses on mobile computing. 
3. Integrating mobile computing concepts into their 
traditional courses. 
4. Combining model 1, 2, and 3. 
5. Offering mobile computing as an area of research to 
their graduate students. 
Model 1 is used by several universities such as Stanford 
University, 
University 
of 
Maryland, 
and 
Zhejiang 
University. The majority of universities that have graduate 
programs are using model 2. Some universities are using 
Model 3 and integrating mobile computing concepts as 
topics in their existing courses, as seen by the University of 
Guelph. The University of Bridgeport, Carnegie Melon 
University, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology are 
employing Model 5.  Furthermore, an increasingly number 
of universities such as Middlesex University, Carleton 
University, Oxford Brooks University, Webster University, 
and Newcastle University started using a more aggressive 
approach by offer mobile computing program leading to 
BSc degree specializing in mobile computing.   
In a relevant issue, mobile devices have become 
attractive learning devices for education. Almost every 
university student uses a mobile device for both personal 
and academic reasons [22].  
Mobile 
learning 
(m-learning) 
is 
more 
flexible, 
interactive, involving more contact, communication, and 
collaboration with people than e-learning. Given this 
environment, we believe that the value of using mobile 
technologies to support teaching and learning lies in 
integrating mobile technologies with the current e-learning 
environments in which the university has made major 
investments. A project is started to capitalize on these 
enormous 
array 
of 
mobile 
devices 
to 
promote 
communication, collaboration and learning. This project is 
aimed to investigate the development of the Mobile 
Assistant and Registrar System (MARS) using Cloud 
Services for the Faculty of Information Technology at the 
University of Tripoli. The MARS project started with an 
idea crossed the mind of the author. MARS attempts to 
alleviate the hassles that students face when registering 
courses using the existing simple on-line registration 
system. MARS provides several assistance and course 
registration services to students, staff, and faculty members 
through mobile devices.  
The project development phases are divided into several 
smaller projects.  A Student task is to choose a MARS 
project and implemented on a semester or a year long 
project as part of his/her Mini Project or Senior Project.  
This collaboration with students and faculty members can 
help the Faculty of Information Technology enhance 
classroom activities and learning, as well as administrative 
functions by integrating mobile technologies with its e-
learning environments.  
  
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

IV. PROGRAM FRAMEWORK 
Our suggested mobile computing program curriculum 
focuses on building an in-depth knowledge of advanced 
mobile computing and development techniques. Because 
basic mainstream computing skills and knowledge are still 
required by academia and industry, our curriculum is 
divided into two components. The two components are 
defined as follows: 
 
TABLE I. SHOWS COURSES OF THE CC. 
Introduction 
of 
Computing 
Introduction 
to 
Programming 
Operating 
System 
Foundati
ons of 
Databas
e 
Data 
Structure & 
Algorithms 
Computer 
Organization 
Computer 
Networks 
Problem 
Solving 
Techniq
ues  
Basics of 
Information 
Security 
Software 
Engineering 
Internet 
Development 
Discrete 
Mathem
atics 
Object 
Oriented 
Programming 
System 
Analysis 
 
 
 
Computing Component (CC). It contains courses 
drawn from computing-related disciplines such as 
mathematics, statistics, physics, and computing. In 
the area of computing, students are required to take 
some traditional courses in area of computer 
science and computer engineering. The CC courses 
are listed in TABLE I. 
 
Mobile Computing Component (MCC). All 
mobile computing-related courses are placed in this 
component. The MCC courses are listed in TABLE 
II and TABLE III. 
With both CC and MCC are defined. Why is it necessary 
to split the curriculum into two components, namely, CC 
and MCC? The answer to that is in the very real differences 
between the two. MCC is, to an extent, CC, but CC is not 
necessarily MCC. What this means is CC is not just a single 
discipline but it is a family of disciplines and therefore 
meets the definition of CC. In addition, CC may or may not 
incorporate mobile devices in its educational content and as 
such may or may not meet the definition of MCC. In many 
ways, CC acts as a pillar to MCC. The courses in MCC have 
one or more prerequisite courses from CC designed to 
ensure adequate preparation for courses in a sequence. This 
strategy allow students to gain broad knowledge of 
computing-related disciplines covered in CC, and then gain 
advance knowledge of mobile computing-related discipline 
covered in MCC. For example, foundation of database 
course in CC is a prerequisite to mobile database course in 
MCC, and operating system course in CC is a prerequisite 
to mobile operating system course in MCC, and so on.  
 
TABLE II. THIRD YEAR COURSES IN MCC. 
 Course Content
 Course Name
 Course 
Number
 
C#, Objective-C, and Java 
Mobile Applications 
programming foundation. 
 Mobile 
Applications 
ITMC 311 
P 
L 
Concepts, Architecture, Design, 
Performance Evaluation, 
Protocols, and Applications. 
Personal 
Area 
Networks 
ITMC 312 
P 
L 
Using Architectures of 
(Android, iOS, Windows). 
 Mobile 
Operating 
Systems   
ITMC 313 
P 
L 
User Behavior, Interacting with 
Information, and Theoretical 
Models of Movement and 
Perception. 
 Mobile 
Interaction 
Design 
ITMC 321 
P 
L 
Extensively discusses Multi-
Database Systems (MDBS) and 
Mobile Data Access Systems 
(MDAS)
 
Heterogeneous 
and Mobile 
Databases  
ITMC 322 
P 
L 
Introduction to Mobile and 
Wireless Networks.  
 Principle of 
Wireless and 
Mobile 
Networks 
ITMC 323 
P 
L 
J2ME using the following 
Models: Web Applications 
using Mobile Client 
Frameworks, and Native 
Applications using appropriate 
SDKs. 
 Application 
Development 
with Java ME 
ITMC 324 
P 
L 
The advantages of our suggested mobile computing 
program curriculum can be summarized as follows. 
 
Allows students to gain fundamental knowledge 
and skills of computing-related disciplines by 
taking courses in CC. Then, students enhance and 
apply their transferable knowledge and skills in 
courses taken in MCC.  
 
Varieties of text books available that teach the 
fundamentals of computing such as programming, 
database, networking, and computer architectures. 
This variety of text books might not be available in 
the area of mobile computing, while those acquired 
knowledge will be useful in leaning the courses in 
the MCC. 
 
It simplifies teaching.   
In this curriculum, MCC contains elective courses in 
which students can select five courses. These courses may 
emphasize on topics relevant to mobile computing area. 
Examples of elective courses are the following courses: 
 
ARM Microprocessor 
 
Programming Paradigms 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
Mobile Commerce 
 
Topics in Compilers Construction 
 
Mobile 3D Graphics 
 
Parallel and Distributed Computing 
 
Mobile Game Developments 
 
Topics in Mobile Computing  
 
Faculty Free  Elective 
As an interdisciplinary curriculum, 
non-technical 
schools and institutions across the university can contribute 
to the curriculum by creating specialized elective 
components (SECs). For example, the School of Arts and 
Media may integrate a SEC (Media Design) in this 
curriculum by choosing five specialized electives courses 
from its school. As a result, students will have a unique 
opportunity to take selected classes from other programs as 
part of their degree. 
V. TEACHING STRATEGY 
The teaching strategy for the new curriculum is enable 
student to gain theoretical and practical skills of the entities 
in 
mobile 
computing 
(mobile 
contents, 
mobile 
communications, and mobile devices), and not only how to 
design, develop, and then test mobile applications on 
various mobile devices. As shown in TABLE II and TABLE 
III, some courses are tagged with two letters “L” or/and “P”. 
The letter “L” indicates that the course requires supervised 
lab. While, the Letter “P” indicates that the course require 
mini project. The project can be a group project. Except for 
ITMC 324 course, programming languages and mobile 
platforms used in this curriculum is not glued into a 
particular language or device.  This will give student an 
opportunity to learn application development running 
various environments such as Android, Windows, and iOS. 
To elaborate further on course content and teaching strategy, 
some selected courses in MCC are discussed below: 
 
ITMC 311 Mobile Applications: 
Prerequisite courses: Object oriented programming course, 
problem solving course, and data structure and algorithms 
course. Since a student entering this course has a basic 
knowledge of programming in a particular language, object-
oriented concepts, and problem solving skills, this course 
covers the principles of mobile analysis, design, and 
development concepts using various languages such as C#, 
Java, and Objective-C running on iOS, Android, and 
Windows. This way a student is focused on mobile 
application development at the same time exposed to 
various languages and platforms. At the end of this course, 
student has experienced mobile developments using 
different tools, languages, and platforms.  
 
ITMC 324 Application Development with Java ME 
Prerequisite courses: Mobile applications course. This 
course covers advance mobile applications development 
using J2ME mobile application programming for mobile  
TABLE III. FORTH YEAR COURSES IN MCC. 
 Course Content
 Course Name
 Course 
Number
 
Mobile computing. security and 
privacy from the prospective  of 
(mobile interaction, mobile 
application, wireless 
communication) 
 Security in 
Mobile 
Computing 
ITMC 411 
P 
 
L 
 
Architectural Principles for 
Heterogeneous Social 
Networking Platforms, Social 
Concepts, Agent-Based 
Computing, and Information 
Exchanged between 
Community Members. 
  Social 
Networking 
ITMC 413 
P 
L 
The visions of Ubiquitous 
Computing and some of its 
applications, such as  Location, 
and Context Awareness in 
Ubiquitous Computing. 
 Fundamentals 
Ubiquitous 
Computing 
ITMC 421 
P 
 
Cloud Computing Services and 
Infrastructures (Virtualization, 
plus Developments of Mobile 
Apps that interacts with the 
Cloud. 
 Cloud 
Computing 
and Mobile 
Applications 
ITMC 422 
P 
L 
The Creation, Delivery and 
Analysis of Multimedia Content 
in Systems with Mobile Devices 
 Mobile 
Multimedia 
ITMC 423 
P 
L 
platforms using the following models: Web applications 
using mobile client frameworks, and native applications 
using appropriate SDKs.  
 
ITMC 411 Security in Mobile Computing 
Prerequisite courses: Mobile applications course, principle 
of wireless and mobile networks course, and mobile 
interaction design course. Topics covered are select from 
multidisciplinary: 
Mobile 
interaction 
(Principles 
of 
usability, 
security, 
and 
privacy; 
Methodologies 
for 
evaluating usable security; security and usability analysis 
Phishing and Risk; Knowledge-based authentication; 
Biometric and alternative authentication; Security and 
privacy; Usable security software design principles; Human- 
in-the-loop design framework; Security indicators and 
warnings; Usable security for security administrators). 
Mobile application (Mobile Platforms, mobile services). 
mobile communication systems (Mobile cellular telephony. 
Wireless internet; Mobile ad hoc; Sensor networks).  
 
ITMC 422 Cloud Computing and Mobile Applications 
Prerequisite courses: Heterogeneous and mobile databases 
course, and social networking course. Topics covered: 
Cloud computing services and infrastructures; development 
tools; 
fundamental 
tradeoffs 
and 
algorithms 
and 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

applications. iOS, Windows, and Android programming to 
develop mobile applications with backend storage, and 
computing components running on the cloud; Accessing 
cloud services with mobile devices;  Extending mobile 
applications with cloud processing and resources; Extending 
cloud services with the collective power of mobile devices; 
Partitioning of service functions between mobile devices 
and clouds; Data management for mobile cloud.   
Next, a discussion of assignments, exams, labs, mini 
projects, and senior projects is presented. 
 
Assignments 
Due diverse areas of MCC courses, the assignment 
deadlines should be flexible. The instructor needs to 
remember that some of the students will have to learn some 
extra material on their own in order to do the assignment. 
 
Exams 
Initially, students are expected to do two midterm exams 
plus final exams. Due to emphasize of hands-on experience, 
instructor can have one midterm exam instead of two. 
Marks are split evenly between exams and assignments on 
one hand and projects and labs on the other hand. 
 
Labs 
A 
mobile 
computing 
education 
requires 
hands-on 
experience because you can’t give in-depth explanations of 
many abstract mobile development concepts without 
practical hardware and software demonstrations. We use 
two types of labs (supervised and unsupervised) to enhance 
students’ learning. As it stands today, all faculty members 
owns at least one laptop and mobile devices are now 
necessary tools in students’ daily life. These mobile devices 
create mobile lab since a classroom can be easily converted 
into a lab. Also, students are encouraged to use their mobile 
phones. 
 
Mini Projects 
In addition to the assignments, students are required to be 
organized into teams, of at most two students, to work on 
semester long projects.  Based on the particular course, 
projects are either hands-on intensive programming or/and 
survey type projects. The objective is that the students 
should choose a topic relevant to the course, study it on their 
own, (with help from the instructors) and will learn about in 
much more depth that they don’t get from the class lectures. 
Students are required to provide periodic reports of their 
progress in addition to their final reports and presentations 
at the end of a semester. Furthermore, some of the term 
project topics can be chosen by students as their senior 
projects. 
 
Senior projects 
Senior-project students will soon be entering the workforce.  
Hence, it is important that graduates have full grasp of 
various aspects of mobile computing, as well as the ability 
to design and implement mobile systems and services. 
Senior-projects are a semester long and can be extended to 
second semester. The senior project must encompass the 
process of concept creation and development, testing, and 
debugging of the mobile application. Students will be 
applying collaborative skills to synthesize ideas and 
technical skills to create the “app” and conclude the senior 
project with a presentation of final application design and 
implementation. As mentioned earlier, senior project can be 
a continuation of mini project. A maximum of two students 
can work as team on senior project. 
VI. CHALLENGES 
The challenges can be view from the following 
perspectives: 
 
Books perspective: Although, there are several books 
available that covering various aspects of 
mobile 
computing.  For instance, textbook for mobile application 
developments focus only on one particular language and 
device.  In our curriculum, the course “ITMC 311 Mobile 
Applications” covers the principles of mobile analysis, 
design and development using various languages such as 
C#, Java, and Objective-C running on iOS, Android, and 
Windows. Asking students to buy several books for one 
course in the MCC is a daunting task.  Also, we could not 
find suitable text book that cover one aspect such as mobile 
operating system, mobile database, and mobile security that 
is not a collection of papers published in journals and 
conference proceedings. 
 
Topics 
perspective: 
Mobile 
computing 
is 
a 
multidisciplinary topic and students are expected to be 
exposed to various areas. Hence, it becomes important to 
avoid dealing with topics or emphasizing on topics which 
requires too much specialized knowledge from one 
particular area. In our curriculum the course “ITMC 411 
Security in Mobile Computing” covers the principles of 
mobile computing security from three angles, namely, 
mobile 
interaction, 
mobile 
application, 
and 
mobile 
communication systems. Also, new mobile technologies 
will continue to emerge, as a result, MCC’s courses must 
adapt to changes and innovations occurred in its area. 
 
Instructors perspective: The instructor should take into 
account the constant innovation nature of mobile computing 
for a particular course and adapt the course material and 
topics accordingly.  This implies that the instructor should 
be ready to add and/or delete some of the initially planned 
course topics during the semester.  This requires the 
instructor to integrate any emerging trends of mobile 
computing technology into corresponding course. 
 
VII. RESULTS FEEDBACK 
The 
university 
curriculum 
committee 
originally 
approved the mobile computing program in the Spring of 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

2013/2014. 
The 
new 
course 
“ITMC 
311 
Mobile 
Applications” was offered for the first time in fall of 
2014/2015 in the software engineering program and internet 
technology program. The mobile computing program 
commences to start in Spring 2014/2015 academic year. 
Yearly, the faculty hosts the Technology Days event. 
This event gives staff, faculty, and students an opportunity 
to learn about technologies on campus and participate in 
discussions of the current state and future innovations in the 
Faculty of Information Technology. The mobile computing 
curriculum was presented and a student questionnaire was 
conducted in the last day of the event.  The students’ 
responses we received were positive. Many students 
expressed enthusiasm to a great extent to enroll in the new 
program. Majority of the students stated the importance of 
gaining practical skills and broad knowledge in mobile 
computing area in their future career and academic 
endeavors. 
At the end of the new course “ITMC 311 Mobile 
Applications”, we asked students to complete evaluation 
surveys. Ninety percent of the students completed the 
survey. The following statements represent selected 
statements of the likert scale survey. 
 
Statement. 1   The instructor presented content in an 
organized manner. 
 
 
Figure 1. Students Results. 
 
Statement. 2   The instructor presented content in an 
organized manner. 
Statement. 3   The instructor helped me identify 
resources I needed to carry out the project. 
Statement. 4   The course was appropriate for the 
stated level of the class. 
Statement. 5   Course was difficult than what I 
thought. 
Statement. 6   Mobile 
development 
was 
more 
educational than desktop development. 
Statement. 7   I recommend my fellow students to 
take the course. 
Statement. 8   The course encouraged me to develop 
mobile app in my senior project. 
Statement. 9    I prefer to take more courses in mobile 
application development. 
 
The overall response from students was positive. Figure 
1 presents the students’ response to the likert scale survey.  
In the open-ended questions students’ responses were 
positive on how would you rate the overall effectiveness of 
the instructor’s teaching? On the question of what did you 
like best about this course, most students expressed 
development of mobile apps on their smart phones. On the 
question of what did you dislike about this course?  The 
response was marks should be better distributed to reflect 
the time spent to develop mobile applications. They 
suggested marks for labs should be higher than written 
exams. On the question of what was   the most challenging 
aspect in this course, most expressed lack of previous 
practical programming skills. 
 
VIII. 
 CONCLUSION 
We have presented our experience in designing and 
teaching strategy of an undergraduate level program leading 
to bachelor of information technology in mobile computing. 
Our unique mobile computing program covers various 
aspects of mobility in the area of computing.  The curriculum 
is divided into CC and MCC. In the CC, students required to 
take courses in diverse set of areas such as mathematics, 
statistics, physics, and computing. In the MCC, students are 
required to take several courses in mobile computing area. 
The constant innovation effecting mobile computing area 
makes the curriculum in the MCC dynamic.  This allows 
adaptation of innovation occurring in the mobile computing 
area to be easily adapted into our curriculum. 
For future work, we will continue to integrate more area 
of mobile concepts across our program’s curriculum as new 
technology in mobile computing emerges and changes in 
mobile paradigm arise.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The US Fulbright Program (# 68130706) partially supported 
the paper. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

REFERENCES 
[1] The World in 2013: ICT Facts and Figures – ITU. [Online]. 
Available 
from:http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/ 
Documents/facts/ICTFactsFigures2013-e.pdf, Accessed on 
September 30, 2014. 
[2] P. Dickson, “Teaching mobile computing using Cabana,” 
Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges, USA, vol.27 n.6, 
June 2012, pp.128-134. 
[3] K. Sung and S. Arjmand, "Mobile application development 
classes for the mobile era." Proceedings of the 2014 
conference on Innovation & technology in computer science 
education, 
ACM, 
2014, 
pp. 
141-146, 
doi:10.1145/2591708.2591710. 
[4] Q. Mahmoud, T. Ngo, R. Niazi, P. Popowicz, R. Sydoryshyn, 
M. Wilks, and D. Dietz, "An Academic Kit for Integrating 
Mobile Devices into the CS Curriculum," in (ITiCSE)14th 
annual ACM SIGCSE conference on Innovation and 
technology in computer science education, ACM, New York, 
USA, 2009, pp 40-44, [doi:10.1145/1562877.1562896]. 
[5] J. Fenwick, B. Kurtz, and J. Hollingsworth, "Teaching Mobile 
Computing and Developing Software to Support Computer 
Science Education," in SIGCSE, Dallas, Texas, pp. 589-594,  
ACM, 
New 
York, 
USA, 
2011  
[doi:10.1145/1953163.1953327]. 
[6] Q. Mahmoud, "Integrating mobile devices into the computer 
science curriculum." In Frontiers in Education Conference, 
2008. FIE 2008. 38th Annual, pp. S3E-17. IEEE, 2008. 
[7] Q. Mahmoud, "Best practices in teaching mobile application 
development." In Proceedings of the 16th annual joint 
conference on Innovation and technology in computer science 
education, ACM, New York, USA, 2011, pp. 333-333, 
[doi:10.1145/1999747.1999844]. 
[8] M. Dabney, B. Dean, T. Rogers, “No sensor left behind: 
enriching computing education with mobile devices,” 
Proceeding of the 44th ACM technical symposium on 
Computer science education, 2013, Denver, Colorado, USA, 
pp. 627-632,  [doi: 10.1145/2445196.2445378]. 
[9] J. Fenwick, B. Kurtz, and J. Hollingsworth, “Teaching mobile 
computing and developing software to support computer 
science education,” Proceedings of the 42nd ACM technical 
symposium on Computer science education, 2011, Dallas, 
TX, USA, pp. 589-594,  [doi: 10.1145/1953163.1953327]. 
[10] A. Allevato and S. Edwards, “RoboLIFT: engaging CS2 
students with testable, automatically evaluated android 
applications,” Proceedings of the 43rd ACM technical 
symposium on Computer Science Education, February 29-
March 03, 2012, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA, pp. 547-552 
[doi: 10.1145/2157136.2157293] 
[11] J. Bayzick, B. Askins, S. Kalafut, and M. Spear, “Reading 
Mobile Games Throughout the Curriculum”, in Proceedings 
of the 44th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science 
Education (SIGCSE 2013), Denver, CO,March 2013. 
SIGCSE '13 Proceeding of the 44th ACM technical 
symposium on Computer science education, ACM New York, 
USA, 2013, pp. 209-214. [doi:10.1145/2445196.2445264]. 
[12] D. Riley, “Using mobile phone programming to teach Java 
and 
advanced 
programming 
to 
computer 
scientists,” 
Proceedings of the 43rd ACM technical symposium on 
Computer Science Education, 2012, Raleigh, North Carolina, 
USA,  pp. 541-546, [doi:10.1145/2157136.2157292]. 
[13] A. Gordon, “Concepts for mobile programming,” Proceedings 
of the 18th ACM conference on Innovation and technology in 
computer science education,  2013, Canterbury, England, UK, 
pp. 58-63,   [doi: 10.1145/2462476.2462483] 
[14] F. Hu and A Teredesai, "A Pervasive Computing Curriculum 
for Engineering and Science Students," IEEE Pervasive 
Computing, vol.6, no. 1, January-March 2007, pp. 88-91, 
[doi:10.1109/MPRV.2007.3]. 
[15] Q. Mahmoud , S. Zanin , and T. Ngo, “Integrating mobile 
storage into database systems courses,” Proceedings of the 
13th annual conference on Information technology education,  
2012, Calgary, Alberta, Canada, pp. 165-170,  [doi: 
10.1145/2380552.2380602]. 
[16] M. Sahami, S. Roach, E. Cuadros-Vargas, and R. LeBlanc. 
"ACM/IEEE-CS 
computer 
science 
curriculum 
2013: 
reviewing the Ironman report." In Proceeding of the 44th 
ACM technical symposium on Computer science education, 
2013, pp. 13-14. ACM,. 
[17] R. Shackelford, J. Cross, G. Davies, J. Impagliazzo, R. 
Kamali, R. LeBlanc, B. Lunt, A. McGettrick, R. Sloan, and H. 
Topi, 
“CE 
2004: 
Computer 
engineering: 
curriculum 
guidelines for undergraduate degree programmes in computer 
engineering 
IEEE.” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
www.acm.org/education/education/curricvols/CE-Final-
Report.pdf, Accessed on September 30, 2014. 
[18] A. Minaie, P. Sanati-Mehrizy, A. Sanati-Mehrizy, R. Sanati-
Mehrizy, “Integration of mobile devices into computer 
science and engineering curriculum”, American Society for 
Engineering Education, AC 2011-2161. [Online]. Available 
from: 
 
www.asee.org/public/conferences/1/papers/2161/ 
download , Accessed on September 30, 2014. 
[19] K. Sung, and A. Samuel, "Mobile application development 
classes for the mobile era." Proc. conference on Innovation & 
technology in computer science education (ITiCSE '14), 
ACM, 2014,  pp. 141-146, [doi:10.1145/2591708.2591710]. 
[20]  R. Halstead-Nussloch and H. Reichgelt,” Leveraging HCI in 
teaching mobile, "anytime and everywhere" IT,” Proceedings 
of the 14th annual ACM SIGITE conference on Information 
technology 
education, 
ACM, 
USA, 
pp. 
13-18, 
[doi:10.1145/2512276.2512295]. 
[21] S. Jackson , S. Kurkovsky , E. Mustafaraj , and L. Postner, 
“Panel: mobile application development in computing 
curricula,“ Proceeding of the 44th ACM technical symposium 
on Computer science education, March 06-09, 2013, Denver, 
Colorado, 
USA, 
pp. 
107-
108,  [doi:10.1145/2445196.2445230]. 
[22] B. Fetaji and M. Fetaji, “Analyses and review of M-learning 
feasibility, trends, advantages and drawbacks in the past 
decade (2000-2010)”, Proceedings of the 5th European 
conference on European computing conference, World 
Scientific and Engineering Academy and Society (WSEAS) 
Stevens Point, Wisconsin, USA, 2011, pp. 474-479. 
 
 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

