Impact of Introducing E-learning in Secondary Education During Pandemic 
Case study of a tutoring school in Northeast Greece - Teachers’ perspective 
Kosmas Iatridis 
Department of Informatics 
Linnaeus University 
Växjö/Kalmar, Sweden 
email: kosiatridis@gmail.com 
Sarfraz Iqbal 
Department of Informatics 
Linnaeus University 
Växjö/Kalmar, Sweden 
email: Sarfraz.iqbal@lnu.se
 
 
Abstract — Covid-19 pandemic affected educational 
organizations to adopt new educational delivery models. The 
use of digital tools has been common in universities and in 
adult education. However, the adoption of e-learning in 
secondary 
education 
for 
minors 
has 
been 
a 
new 
phenomenon. This article intends to elicit information about 
the challenges that students, teachers and organizations 
faced during the pandemic, when e-learning was introduced 
as the only means to teaching minors. The challenges were 
investigated by performing an exploratory case study at a 
European School. The findings were classified into three 
categories: students’ challenges, teachers’ challenges, and 
organizational challenges. Furthermore, the positive and the 
negative effects of the introduction of e-learning were 
investigated.  
Keywords 
- 
E-learning; 
Secondary 
Education; 
Organizational learning 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
Information Technology is influencing every aspect of 
modern life and the way organizations operate and interact 
with their stakeholders. Due to the Covid-19 pandemic 
there was a significant increase in the demand for e-
learning tools to facilitate the teaching procedures during 
the school closures [1]. During the pandemic 90% of the 
education ministries globally implemented some form of 
e-learning, involving the internet and in some cases the 
television and the radio. Approximately, 1.2 billion 
children in 186 countries were affected by school closures 
between 2020 and 2021 [2].  
This research explores the challenges and the impact of 
e-learning introduced in secondary education during the 
pandemic. The study is based on the experiences of e-
learning from the perspective of teachers. The study is 
conducted at a tutoring school named "Orosimo 2001" in 
northeastern Greece. The courses offered are Mathematics, 
Physics, Chemistry, Economics, Informatics, Business 
Administration, History, Ancient Greek language, Modern 
Greek language, and Latin language. The organization also 
offers vocational guidance and psychological support 
services to students. During the academic year 2020-2021, 
which is the time period under investigation, there were 23 
teachers and 250 students. 
Following research questions are explored in this 
study: 1) What were the challenges faced by students, 
teachers, and the organization in introducing e-learning 
during the pandemic, according to teachers' opinion? 2) 
What was the impact of the introduction of e-learning after 
the return to face-to-face teaching? 
The rest of the article is arranged as follows: Section 2 
presents 
literature 
review, 
Section 
3 
portrays 
methodology, Section 4 describes findings, Section 5 
discusses the results and concludes the article with further 
research suggestions. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
A literature review was conducted using Scopus and 
IEEE Xplore. The keywords were “e-learning” AND 
“impact” OR “challenges” OR “obstacles” OR “barriers”. 
The articles were limited to those published between 2015 
and 2022, while the first 5 pages of each database were 
examined, containing 10 articles each. Inclusion criteria 
were based on selecting articles about the impact and the 
challenges faced when introducing e-learning during the 
pandemic. Findings were evaluated by title and abstract 
relevance. E-learning challenges were categorized into 
those related to students, those related to teachers and 
those related to educational organizations (Table 1). 
TABLE 1: SUMMARIZED LITERATURE REVIEW FINDINGS 
Students’ challenges 
Teachers’ 
challenges 
Organizational 
challenges 
Poor internet 
coverage 
Lack of training in 
ICT technologies 
Culture reluctant to 
changes 
Poor internet speed 
Reluctance to 
change 
Lack of financial 
sources 
Limited internet data 
packages 
Lack of online time 
management skills 
Electricity 
shortages 
Lack of electronic 
devices 
Low motivation 
Issues with the 
internet connection 
coverage and speed 
Lack of ICT 
knowledge 
Feeling of loneliness 
Inadequate 
coordination 
Variation of different 
educational platforms 
Maintain the 
balance between the 
working and the 
personal life 
Lack of digital 
skills by the staff 
Lack of technical 
support 
Maintain students’ 
attention and 
engagement 
Resolve members’ 
technical issues 
Lack of sense of 
learning community 
Conducting online 
assessments 
Distribute 
information about 
e-learning to staff 
Absence of physical 
presence of the 
Observing the 
students 
Choosing software 
application 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

teacher 
Low motivation and 
ineffective 
communication  
Higher workload 
 
Anxiety and 
depression caused by 
the pandemic 
Development of 
course content & 
learning activities 
 
Time waste due to 
technical issues 
Adopt online 
pedagogical 
approaches to 
students’ demands 
 
 
A. Students’ challenges 
Major issues for students when using e-learning 
environments are those related to technical infrastructure 
and internet connectivity [3]-[5]. In many cases, students 
do not possess the essential devices in order to have access 
to the internet [3]-[5]. Other barriers are related to the lack 
of ICT knowledge and the variation of the different online 
platforms that students have to use, as they find it 
confusing to adapt to different electronic environments [3]. 
Many students do not have essential technical support, due 
to lack of resources [6]-[8]. In addition, the time that 
students devote to technical issues limits the learning 
processes [9]. Other challenges are related to English 
language skills, which in some cases are essential in order 
to operate e-learning applications [10]. Students who are 
not familiar with e-learning applications are unlikely to 
engage in activities and can easily drop out [11].  
Lack of sense of the learning community is an emotion 
that makes it difficult for students to participate in e-
learning, while the absence of physical presence of the 
teacher is another barrier [8][12]. Low motivation and 
ineffective communication with other students and the 
management staff are some more obstacles [7][12]. Other 
challenges are related to the anxiety and the depression 
caused by the sudden change and the uncertainty during 
the pandemic [13]. Especially, children whose family 
income and living standards are dropped due to Covid-19 
are found likely to suffer from anxiety and stress, which in 
turn affects dropout rates [13]. 
B. Teachers’ challenges 
Moving on to teachers, a main challenge is the lack of 
proper training in ICT, as the instructors’ teaching skills 
are usually limited to face-to-face classroom experiences. 
Moreover, they may feel that e-learning environments are 
psychologically unsafe [14]. Many times, they have a 
strong will to stay in the comfort zone, while factors, such 
as the age, might enhance the reluctance to change [15] 
Lack of online time management skills is another barrier, 
while low motivation and the feeling of loneliness are 
common among the instructors [4][12]. Another crucial 
factor is the difficulty to maintain the balance between 
working and personal life [4].  
Teachers find it challenging to maintain students’ 
attention and engagement during the lesson [4][12]. More 
instructional time is needed in order to effectively teach 
the students, explain their questions, and guide them 
through their assignments. Conducting online assessments 
might be a challenging task for instructors, particularly on 
how to avoid plagiarism during the exams [12]. The 
workload is much higher, as teachers have to build new e-
learning teaching material [12]. Moreover, there are issues 
regarding the arrangement of online classes and the 
selection of the online platform [16]. Challenges related to 
the development of course content and learning activities 
are common among the instructors. Course design 
challenges consist of issues concerning online curriculum, 
subject 
content, 
teaching 
and 
learning 
activities, 
localization of the content, pedagogical model and 
flexibility 
[15]. 
Instructors 
may 
fail 
to 
provide 
differentiated 
e-learning 
environments, 
adapt 
their 
pedagogical approaches to students’ demands, localize the 
content to local cultures and explore new teaching 
methods for their courses [11]. 
C. Institutions’ challenges 
Implementation of e-learning initiatives is related to 
organizational challenges and the relationship between 
teachers, students, and educational organizations [11]. 
Challenges faced by educational organizations have a 
significant impact on users’ interaction with technology 
and their struggle to adapt with new electronic 
environments [11]. Stakeholders without essential digital 
skills might doubt the benefits of e-learning which causes 
unwillingness to use electronic tools [17]. Furthermore, 
organizations may lack the financial resources in order to 
upgrade 
the 
technical 
infrastructure, 
the 
internet 
connection, and to upskill their staff [6]. Organizations 
might face electricity shortages and issues with the 
internet connection coverage and speed [10]. A major 
obstacle to implementing e-learning initiatives is the 
inadequate coordination between organizations, students, 
and 
teachers 
[10]. 
Unclear 
plan 
of 
e-learning 
implementation negatively affects educational services 
[17]. Furthermore, the administration should support 
instructors to overcome technological problems [10]. 
However, the support should not be centered only on 
technical aspects of e-learning, but it should also consider 
course design issues and information distribution [11].  
Existing culture and educational policy are key 
challenges [18]. The cultural aspects influencing e-
learning environments can be measured by the attitudes, 
beliefs, and roles of organization’s members [18]. Many 
attempts to adopt e-learning solutions could fail because 
learning and teaching settings are not contextualized [11]. 
Choosing a software application with the appropriate 
learning system and interface design is another issue for 
educational organizations [15]. E-learning applications 
should guarantee the privacy and the security of the 
participants, while access should be given only to 
authorized users [19]. 
D. Theoritical Framework 
Additionally, a theoretical framework was developed 
to assess organizational learning. Argyris and Schon [21] 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

made a distinction between two different types of 
learning: a) the single-loop learning, which relates to 
changing theories of action by refining them, and b) the 
double-loop learning, which relates to changing theories 
of action by questioning the shared beliefs, norms, and 
assumptions to reach a new set of theories-in-use. Single-
loop learning is the way of learning that it is adopted 
when following specific instructions faithfully, without 
further examining the procedures and the causes of 
problems [21]. These processes are repetitive routine 
behaviours and involve adapting to the circumstances, 
without worrying about long-term solutions. They solve 
the 
problems 
without 
altering 
the 
organization’s 
fundamental processes and nature [21]. Double-loop 
learning is the procedure of comparing the norm with the 
situation, questioning the appropriation of the norm, and 
justifying whether the selected method is the best way of 
doing things [21]. New set of norms are established to 
adapt to the environment, which means that an 
organization might change its policies and its objectives 
[21]. Figure 1 depicts the usage of Single-Loop and 
Double-Loop Learning in this article. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Applying Single-Loop and Double-Loop Learning 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
Following qualitative research methodology, Semi-
structured interviews were selected, as they provide a 
wealth of information, while the data can be compared 
more easily [22]. The interviews were conducted in the 
organization, while the snowball sampling was selected. In 
total, 9 teachers participated in the interviews. Each 
interview lasted for approximately 30 minutes. Interviews 
were recorded in Greek and later transcribed to English. 
Teachers were asked about their experience in e-learning 
during the academic year 2020-2021. Two of these 
teachers were also the administrators of the organization, 
so the input was valuable in order to investigate the 
organizational challenges from a broader scope.  
Thematic analysis was utilized to analyze the collected 
data [22]. Thematic analysis consists of the systematic 
identification, organization and understanding of repetitive 
patterns within data. In the first step the researcher 
becomes familiar with the data, identifies, and collects 
excerpts corresponding to each research question. The next 
stage is the interpretation of the data, which is called 
coding. Then, the transition from codes to themes takes 
place. Themes are more abstract and conceptual 
constructions generated from codes, and finally the 
findings are presented [22]. 
IV. 
FINDINGS 
The following are the themes that emerged through 
the thematic analysis of the interviews: 
 
The adaptation procedures to e-learning 
 
 
Students’ challenges in e-learning according to 
teachers’ perspective 
 
Teachers’ challenges in e-learning 
 
Organizational 
challenges 
in 
e-learning 
according to teachers’ perspective 
 
Impacts of e-learning 
The findings are summarized in table 2.  
TABLE II: SUMMARIZED INTERVIEW FINDINGS ABOUT E-
LEARNINGS CHALLENGES 
Students’ 
challenges 
Teachers’ 
challenges 
Organizational 
challenges 
Poor internet 
connection 
Poor internet 
connection 
Technological 
upgrade 
Lack of electronic 
devices 
Lack of electronic 
devices 
Additional financial 
cost 
Lack of sociability 
Lack of sociability 
Solve students’ and 
teachers’ 
technological issues 
E-learning did not 
give them any 
pleasure 
Need to adopt new 
educational 
approaches 
Coordinating the 
educational 
processes 
Difficulty to 
understand the 
content of the course 
Motivating the 
students 
The reluctance to 
adopt e-learning by 
a portion of the 
members of the 
organization 
Sense of 
indifference 
Supervising children 
The pricing of e-
learning services 
 
Physical fatigue 
 
 
A. The adaptation procedures to e-learning 
The first theme describes the adaptation procedures to e-
learning. To facilitate adaptation to e-learning during the 
pandemic τhe Greek Ministry of Education and the 
organization provided the children with tablets and 
laptops in order to participate in electronic lessons. 
Although the curriculum remained the same, the teachers 
had to digitize the teaching material and to adapt their 
teaching in order to be able to distribute it electronically 
to their students. 
B. Students’ challenges in e-learning according to 
teachers’ perspective 
The second theme consists of students’ challenges in 
e-learning. Students faced several technical, emotional, 
and cognitive challenges. The pandemic reduced the 
social relations among the children. Students could not 
meet their friends and participate in their hobbies. E-
learning classes did not provide them with the opportunity 
to socialize, a fact that enhanced the feeling of loneliness. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Attending face-to-face lessons was more enjoyable, as it 
was a chance to meet their friends and contact with the 
teachers. Furthermore, it was difficult for the students to 
understand the content of the course in e-learning 
environments, a fact that reduced their performance. 
Moreover, they felt indifferent about their homework 
obligations, and referred to technological issues to avoid 
participating in e-classes. 
C. Teachers’ challenges in e-learning 
The third theme is related to teachers’ challenges in e-
learning. The teachers faced challenges similar to the 
students. The teachers needed to find new educational 
approaches in order to teach into electronic environments. 
They had to obtain new skills in order to motivate the 
students to participate, keep their interest and explain the 
course content. Moreover, supervising students was a 
challenge for the teachers, as it was difficult to know what 
the children had written and felt insecure about what 
children had really learnt. Furthermore, the teachers felt 
physical fatigue when working long hours on computer. 
D. Organizational challenges in e-learning according to 
teachers’ perspective 
The fourth theme is about organizational challenges. 
These challenges were related to the technological 
upgrade, the financial costs, the coordination of the 
educational procedures and the reluctance to adopt the e-
learning tools by some members of the organization.   
E. Impact of e-learning 
The fifth theme is related to the impacts of e-learning 
introduction. The interviewees found that e-learning had 
some positive impacts on the educational processes. The 
organization reached new customers and its members 
became more adaptable. The financial procedures were 
digitized and children with special needs benefited from 
e-learning applications. However, there were some 
negative aspects of the e-learning introduction during the 
pandemic. E-learning had a negative impact on students’ 
social skills and on their interest to learning processes.  
V. 
DISCUSSION AND FURTHER RESEARCH 
The research questions are answered in this section to 
discuss the results of the study. 
A. The challenges faced by students, teachers and the 
organization in introducing e-learning during the 
pandemic, according to teachers' opinion 
Regarding the students, technical issues were major 
challenges for them. Many children had poor internet 
connection at home, and they lacked the essential 
electronic devices in order to participate in lessons. 
Especially families with many children did not have 
enough devices for every child to participate in the 
learning processes. According to the interviewees, the 
pandemic reduced the social relations among the students. 
Students could not meet their friends and participate in 
their hobbies. E-learning classes did not provide the 
students with the opportunity to socialize, a fact that 
enhanced the feeling of “loneliness”. Attending face-to-
face lessons was more enjoyable for children, as it was a 
chance to meet their friends and contact with the teachers. 
A new challenge that emerged from the interviews and 
was not mentioned in the literature review was the 
difficulty for the students to understand the content of the 
course in e-learning environments, which reduced their 
performance. Moreover, the students felt indifferent about 
their homework obligations, and referred to technological 
issues to avoid participating in e-classes. 
Regarding the teachers, they faced difficulties in using 
the new electronic tools and applications to deliver the 
lessons. Moreover, the poor internet connection and the 
lack of the essential electronic devices to deliver the 
lessons were some technical challenges they faced 
initially. The teachers needed to find new educational 
approaches to teach in new electronic environments. They 
had to obtain new skills in order to motivate the students to 
participate, keep their interest and explain the course 
content. Moreover, supervising students was a challenge, 
as teachers could not know what the children had written 
and felt insecure about what children had really learnt. 
Additionally, the interviews showed that the feeling of 
“loneliness” and “the lack of sociability” during the 
lockdowns 
had 
a 
negative 
impact 
on 
teachers’ 
psychological mood.  A new challenge that emerged from 
the interviews was the “physical fatigue” that teachers felt 
when working long hours on computer. 
Moving on to the educational organization, there was a 
need to buy new technological devices due to the growing 
demand for laptops and tablets, as many teachers used 
organization’s 
classrooms 
to 
deliver 
the 
lessons. 
Furthermore, the organization had to upgrade the internet 
connection. These needs brought additional financial costs 
to the tutoring school. A major challenge for organization 
was the coordination of the learning processes. The 
secretariat had to organize e-classes in Skype, handle 
information about students’ absences and grades, 
scheduling the exams and receive payment of the tuition 
fees. Furthermore, the secretariat had to give instructions 
to students and teachers about how to overcome the 
technological issues that they faced.  
Another challenge for the organization was that a 
portion of the teachers was reluctant to adopt e-learning 
during the pandemic. However, the young teachers and the 
board were supportive in adopting e-learning tools. There 
was a new challenge that emerged during the interviews 
The School had to decide whether it should continue to 
charge the parents the same amount for e-learning 
services. The parents might have not realized the value of 
e-learning and the effort made by the organization and the 
teachers. However, the organization chose to keep the 
amount at the same level, as it continued to pay the 
teachers regularly. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

B. The impact of the introduction of e-learning after the 
return to face-to-face teaching, according to teachers’ 
opinion 
According to the interview findings, teachers and 
students became more adaptable to the environmental 
changes gradually. While many instructors transformed 
the way they delivered their lessons. The organization 
continues to use electronic tools that have brought some 
benefits in the delivery of educational services even after 
the return to face-to-face teaching. With the use of 
electronic tools children do not miss lessons, even if for 
some reason they cannot attend face-to-face classes. The 
learning experience is enhanced even more, as the lessons 
can be recorded and watched whenever and wherever the 
students want to. In e-learning, the lessons are delivered 
regardless time and place. Hence, students and parents 
can save time and money from the trip to educational 
facilities, while the organization can save money from 
operational costs. Many interviewees mentioned that they 
continue to use PowerPoint and projectors to present 
teaching materials in a more interactive way. Videos, 
interactive maps, and digitally enriched material are used 
to make the lessons more student-centered. Furthermore, 
during the pandemic the teaching staff digitized the 
educational material, while the organization and the 
parents digitized the payment transactions. After the 
return to face-to-face teaching, the students continued to 
use online messaging tools to keep in touch with the 
teaching staff and solve questions about the lessons. 
Finally, there were some positive impacts and 
opportunities in e-learning regarding secondary education 
which were not mentioned in the literature review. 
Students with special needs are benefited as e-learning 
environments provide their users with audio media 
interactive systems and visual stimuli. Furthermore, by 
using e-learning tools the educational organizations can 
approach new clients, as students from different places 
can attend online courses. In addition, an important 
element that emerged from the interviews is that e-
learning is just as effective as face-to-face teaching if the 
students are willing to participate. 
On the other hand, some teachers did not continue to 
use electronic tools after the return to face-to-face 
teaching, remaining unaffected by the changes brought by 
e-learning during the pandemic. Moreover, the adoption 
of e-learning tools had a negative impact on some aspects 
of educational processes. E-learning had a negative 
impact on students’ social skills, as the children lost 
significant time from their adolescence. The students did 
not come in real life contact with their friends, teachers, 
did not participate in social activities, sports, hobbies, 
which is devastating for the behavior and social life. In 
addition, during the pandemic, many students felt 
indifferent to e-learning, and this attitude continues into 
the current academic year. The children are less 
committed to their lessons, they participate less, their 
effort is reduced, and they consider the learning processes 
as something not important. In addition, the use of e-
learning as the main tool for teaching delivery has created 
many learning gaps, which is an obstacle in dealing with 
new educational material. Finally, children who had 
significant problems with e-learning felt disadvantaged, 
an emotion that negatively affects them. 
C. Using the theory of organizational learning to assess 
the impact of e-learning on the educational 
organization 
According to the interviews, the organization was 
ready to adopt electronic tools, as from the third day of the 
national lockdown. The school provided e-learning 
services to the students. The electronic rooms that included 
the students from each class were already organized before 
the school closures, while the organization provided 
additional electronic devices to teachers and students, who 
were in need. The internet connection was also upgraded 
as many of the organization's teachers continued to use the 
school classrooms to deliver their lessons. Tuition 
payments were digitized, a fact that facilitates financial 
transactions even today. The organization also adopted 
electronic tools, such as video calls for students to attend 
the lesson, in case for some reason they could not attend 
face-to-face teaching.  
The organization provided complete freedom in the 
choice of teaching methods and tools to teachers. Thus, the 
teachers had the opportunity to choose whether to continue 
using e-learning tools after the return to face-to-face 
teaching. The teachers that teach mathematics, physics and 
chemistry adopted e-learning tools during the pandemic, 
while after the school closures did not continue to use 
them. During the present academic year these teachers 
continue to teach in the way they did before the school 
closures. They use just some social media platforms to 
communicate with children and inform them about the 
schedule and solve potential questions about the lessons. 
According to organizational learning theory, these teachers 
adopted specific tools, without worrying for long-term 
solutions. They did not perceive the pandemic as an 
opportunity to reflect and transform their educational 
methods, by using the electronic tools for the enrichment 
of their teaching. As Argyris and Schon [22] mentioned, 
the adopted activities solved the problems without altering 
the fundamental processes. Therefore, these teachers fall 
into the category of Single-loop learning. 
On the other hand, the philologists who teach Ancient 
Greek, Latin, Modern Greek Language, History and 
Literature adopted the use of electronic tools even after 
returning to face-to-face teaching. These teachers continue 
to use chat applications to communicate with students, but 
they also use electronic tools, such as PowerPoint, video, 
and other multimedia, to make their lessons more 
interactive and student-centered. The pandemic crisis was 
seen by philologists as an opportunity to adopt electronic 
tools and enrich their teaching. The members understood 
the problem, changed their attitude, and chose the 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

appropriate strategy for long-term solutions. Therefore, 
these teachers fall into the category of Double-loop 
learning.  
The research aimed to investigate the challenges faced 
by students, teachers, and organizations in introducing e-
learning in secondary education during the pandemic, an 
area of concern that lacked sufficient prior studies. The 
findings were classified into three categories: students’ 
challenges, teachers’ challenges, and organizational 
challenges. In addition, the positive and negative effects of 
the introduction of e-learning were investigated. In this 
study organizational learning theory was utilized in order 
to examine whether the introduction of e-learning during 
the pandemic was the occasion for the teachers of 
“Orosimo 2001” to transform their educational practices. 
This research work contributes to the existing literature by 
describing the challenges and impact of e-learning in 
secondary education during the pandemic, a topic that has 
not been sufficiently investigated. The findings of the 
research can be used as a tool for educational 
organizations in order to mitigate the negative impact of e-
learning. Furthermore, the data of this study can be used in 
order to define the training needs of the teaching staff and 
structure training programs.  
As a suggestion for future research, it would be useful 
to explore the views of students and other members of 
educational organizations about the challenges they faced 
during the pandemic. This could help identify differences 
and discrepancies with teachers' views.  
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Edelhauser and L. Lupu-Dima, “One year of online 
education in COVID-19 age, a challenge for the Romanian 
education system,” Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health, vol. 
18, no. 15, p. 8129, 2021.  
[2] J. M. Donohue and E. Miller, “COVID-19 and school 
closures,” JAMA, vol. 324, no. 9, pp. 845–847, 2020.  
[3] Al-Balas, M., Al-Balas, H.I., Jaber, H.M., Obeidat, K., Al-
Balas, H., Aborajooh, E.A., Al-Taher, R. and Al-Balas, B., 
2020. Distance learning in clinical medical education amid 
COVID-19 
pandemic 
in 
Jordan: 
current 
situation, 
challenges, and perspectives. BMC medical education, 
20(1), pp.1-7. 
[4] F. Farooq, F. A. Rathore, and S. N. Mansoor, “Challenges 
of online medical education in Pakistan during COVID-19 
pandemic,” J. Coll. Physicians Surg. Pak., vol. 30, no. 6, 
pp. 67–69, 2020. 
[5] W. Hassan, “COVID-19 pandemic: Langkawi vocational 
college student challenge in using Google classroom for 
teaching and learning (T&L),” Int. j. adv. trends comput. 
sci. eng., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 3299–3307, 2020.  
[6] M. A. Almaiah, A. Al-Khasawneh, and A. Althunibat, 
“Exploring the critical challenges and factors influencing 
the E-learning system usage during COVID-19 pandemic,” 
Educ. Inf. Technol., vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 5261–5280, 2020.  
[7] P. Sahu, “Closure of universities due to Coronavirus 
disease 2019 (COVID-19): Impact on education and mental 
health of students and academic staff,” Cureus, vol. 12, no. 
4, p. e7541, 2020.  
[8] N. A. M. Zulkefli, H. Hashim, and S. Syahrin, “Evaluating 
e-learning google classroom tools for computer science 
subjects during covid-19 pandemic,” International Journal 
of Advanced Trends in Computer Science and Engineering, 
pp. 6251–6258, 2020.  
[9] S. Windiarti, N. Fadilah, E. Dhermawati, and B. W. 
Pratolo, “Teachers’ perception toward the obstacles of E-
learning classes,” Ethical Ling. J. Lang. Teach. Lit., vol. 6, 
no. 2, pp. 117–128, 2019.  
[10] Naveed, 
Q.N., 
Qureshi, 
M.R.N., 
Alsayed, 
A.O., 
Muhammad, A., Sanober, S. and Shah, A., 2017, 
November. Prioritizing barriers of E-Learning for effective 
teaching-learning using fuzzy analytic hierarchy process 
(FAHP). In 2017 4th IEEE international conference on 
engineering technologies and applied sciences (ICETAS) 
(pp. 1-8). IEEE.  
[11] H. Aldowah, H. Al-Samarraie, and S. Ghazal, “How 
course, contextual, and technological challenges are 
associated with instructors’ individual challenges to 
successfully implement E-learning: A developing country 
perspective,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 48792–48806, 2019.  
[12] M. Rannastu-Avalos and L. A. Siiman, “Challenges for 
distance learning and online collaboration in the time of 
COVID-19: 
Interviews 
with 
science 
teachers,” 
in 
Collaboration Technologies and Social Computing, Cham: 
Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 128–142. . 
[13] Cao, W., Fang, Z., Hou, G., Han, M., Xu, X., Dong, J. and 
Zheng, J., 2020. The psychological impact of the COVID-
19 epidemic on college students in China. Psychiatry 
research, 287, p.112934. 
[14] A. Tooq, Z. Cadiente, D. Ligawen, and S. Mendaje, 
“Readiness, Challenges, and Satisfaction in the New 
Paradigm of Teaching and Learning: An E-Learning 
Evaluation,” in 2020 Sixth International Conference on e-
learning (econf), IEEE, 2020, pp. 6–11.  
[15] Hamdan, M., Jaidin, J.H., Fithriyah, M. and Anshari, M., 
2020, December. E-learning in time of COVID-19 
pandemic: Challenges & experiences. In 2020 sixth 
international conference on e-learning (econf) (pp. 12-16). 
IEEE. 
[16] P.-S. Goh and J. Sandars, “Rethinking scholarship in 
medical education during the era of the COVID-19 
pandemic,” MedEdPublish, vol. 9, no. 1, p. 97, 2020.  
[17] Sabr, D.S. and Neamah, A.F., 2017, September. Notice of 
Violation of IEEE Publication Principles: Challenges and 
Opportunities of E-Learning in Iraq. In 2017 International 
Conference on Computer and Applications (ICCA) (pp. 
259-265). IEEE. 
[18] L. Shahmoradi, V. Changizi, E. Mehraeen, A. Bashiri, B. 
Jannat, and M. Hosseini, “The challenges of E-learning 
system: Higher educational institutions perspective,” J. 
Educ. Health Promot., vol. 7, p. 116, 2018.  
[19] S. Shivshankar and S. Paul, “E-Learning Environment-The 
Security and Privacy Challenges Focusing on the Counter 
Measures,” 
in 
2015 
International 
Conference 
on 
Developments of E-Systems Engineering (DeSE), IEEE, 
2015, pp. 176–179.  
[20] A. Al-Azawei, P. Parslow, and K. Lundqvist, Barriers and 
opportunities of e-learning implementation in Iraq: A case 
of public universities. The International Review of 
Research in Open and Distributed Learning. 2016.  
[21] C. Argyris and D. A. Schön, “Organizational learning: A 
theory of action perspective,” Reis, pp. 345–348, 1997.  
[22] M. Denscombe, EBOOK: The Good Research Guide: For 
Small-Scale Social Research Projects. UK: McGraw-Hill 
Education, 2017. 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

