Collaborative Music Composition Using Cloud Tools
Marco Morandi
Indire
Istituto Nazionale di Documentazione, Innovazione e Ricerca Educativa
Florence, Italy
Email: m.morandi@indire.it
Abstract—This paper illustrates an ongoing study to design
and create a collaborative digital learning environment using new
technologies, within the active-learning methodological approach.
The aim of the research is to propose a new methodology for
the development of composition and musical practice for upper
secondary school students, based on Cloud computing, within a
learning context characterized by the acquisition of skills in an
informal manner.
Index Terms—Music Composition; Cloud computing; Music
practice; ICT Music education.
I. INTRODUCTION
Digital technology has changed the world of music. Not
only music that is “listened” but also, and especially, music
that is played. The acoustic instrument has remained (almost)
the same, but the approach towards every type of musical
product has changed: the personal computer has become an
almost complete “home studio” with costs considerably lower
than a “real” professional recording studio. Digital technology
has also made a big impact on the teaching of music at
school, especially in recent years, with the widespread use of
mobile devices (smartphones and tablets) that offer a variety of
applications for music education, already used by many music
teachers for their students [1].
By exploiting new technologies (software cross-devices, 2.0
applications), it is possible to offer students a digital environ-
ment that can bolster the informal type of school activities
accompanying formal education subjects, to generate an “ap-
petite” for musical practice, with the awareness that music “is
essentially culture, knowledge that is reticular and interdisci-
plinary, that can shed light on other kinds of knowledge from
which it continuously receives light in turn [2]”.
The construction of an appropriate learning environment al-
lows experiments with methodological solutions that give stu-
dents the opportunity to enjoy musical experiences in contexts
without external constraints, allowing them to temporarily
abandon educational/formal practice and delight in the free-
dom of exploration during their music education.
Starting from a general outline of the educational basics that
led to the writing of this paper, Section 2 will show the
relationship between the construction of learning environments
and 2.0 digital technologies. Section 3 will then show the
technological context of music production and its development
in the Cloud which, thanks to the constant increase in perfor-
mance of web communication infrastructures, represents the
main novelty for collaborative musical production activities
not previously possible, when the characteristics of bandwidth
and storage were insufﬁcient to allow a quality/price ratio
accessible to schools or individual students.
Section 4 looks at the details of constructing a learning
environment: tools, facilities, objectives, technical feats, and
examples of tasks. Section 5 identiﬁes the expected results
from the on-ﬁeld study, both in general terms and from the
standpoint of individual students learning. New developments
and conclusions (Section 6) wrap up the paper.
II. LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS BETWEEN
CONSTRUCTIVISM AND DIDACTICS
The learning environment is the key element of the didactics
of Constructivism, which bases its principles on the following
conditions: “collaboration, personal autonomy, generativity,
reﬂectivity, active involvement, personal relevance and plu-
ralism. [3]”
Constructivism is an approach to teaching that puts the learner
at the centre of the learning process as an alternative to an
educational approach based on the centrality of the teacher.
In these environments, knowledge is the product of an active
construction on the part of the learner, is connected to the
concrete situation where the learning is taking place, and arises
from social collaboration and interpersonal communication.
In these environments, so-called “signiﬁcant learning” [4] is
also born from social collaboration and interpersonal commu-
nication, integrating seven fundamental aspects: active, collab-
orative, conversational, reﬂexive, contextualized, intentional,
and constructive. It follows that knowledge is a “making of
meaning”, a creative interpretation by learners in the process
of understanding the reality that surrounds them [5], and as
the product of an active construction by the learner, coupled
with the concrete situation where the learning is taking place.
The goal is not the learning of speciﬁc content, but the ability
to internalize a methodology that makes learners independent
within their own cognitive journeys: not knowledge that is
already coded, but methods for personal growth, learning how
to learn.
In 1990, Lavas and Wenfer [6] proposed the Situated Learning
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

theory: that knowledge is not a set of learned theoretical
concepts, but the result of a dynamic process, i.e., the active
participation of a learner within a context, given by interaction
with other members and the surrounding situation.
Constructivism has not developed a one-off teaching model.
For Jonassen, “there are no predeﬁned models for construc-
tivist learning environments, and for many, they could never
even exist, since the processes of constructing knowledge
are always inserted into speciﬁc contexts. Thus, with every
probability, the types of support for programmed learning in
each context will never be transferred to another. [4]” Jonassen
provides some basic suggestions for any learning environment
and identiﬁes the construction of knowledge as the main
objective, while in the attention to the context and the use of
internal communication tools, negotiation and problem-solving
are the key aspects.
The teacher guides and supports the group, and a space is
deﬁned (physical or virtual) where the work tools are located.
The current technological level inside the World Wide Web,
especially with the deep shared use of social tools and Cloud
services and the progressive growth in performance of web
communication infrastructures, offers the possibility of prepar-
ing a digital learning environment in line with the assumptions
of Constructivist teaching, abounding in stimuli for working
groups and small communities. Teachers assume the role of
facilitators of learning processes, and this represents a stimulus
that creates conditions for positive collaboration, stimulating
research and internal sharing, by focusing on the personaliza-
tion of teaching strategies within the group/community.
III. THE TECHNOLOGICAL CONTEXT OF MUSIC
PRODUCTION AND THE INNOVATION OF CLOUD SERVICES
Since 1877, the year when Thomas Edison invented the
phonograph, which made it possible to record and reproduce
sound waves, the technology to record the human voice,
singing, instrumental music, environmental effects, etc., has
evolved through the recording and reproduction of sound using
electrical and optical recording systems (photocells), vinyl,
magnetic tape and cinema ﬁlm.
In the beginning, all audio recording systems were based on
the acquisition of analogue signals in the form of waves, which
were physically recorded on supports (phonographic, vinyl or
magnetic) with the aim of replicating the waveform, and then
reversing the process and converting the tracks recorded on
the various media into audio pulses and by using an ampliﬁer,
restoring the original waveform.
The large-scale introduction of digital recording has com-
pletely changed the technology of acquiring sounds, coupling
the evolution of audio capture technology with the evolution
of information technology.
Digital recording uses a tool that measures changes in sound
pressure and converts and stores these on a support as a
sequence of bits, thus creating an abstract model of the sound
that varies in time.
The component that measures the sound pressure is the
analogue-to-digital converter (ADC) which through an input
device (e.g., a microphone) acquires a signal that is then
converted by sampling, continuously measuring the level of
the analogue sound wave and storing the binary number for
each measurement on a support that can be: magnetic, a hard
disk, an optical drive, or more recently, a solid state memory.
The sampling frequency indicates the number of times per
second that an analogue signal is measured and stored on the
support in digital form, and thus measures the quality/accuracy
of the digital signal obtained; for example, the standard for
telephone communication is 8,000 per second, while for music
it is 44,100 memorizations per second. For playback, the
sequence of numbers is sent to a digital-to-analogue converter
(DAC), which reconstructs the waveform, by interpolation,
which is then ampliﬁed and sent to the speakers for listening.
Despite an awareness of the physiological decrease in quality
of the reproduced signal, digital recording presents numerous
advantages, the main one being the versatility with which
information can be stored/managed through computer media
which are more efﬁcient, compact, and inexpensive systems
for analogue acquisition/copying.
The development of digital electronics and computers has
without a doubt inﬂuenced the preference for digital sampling,
leading to a vast public, something which, in the era of
analogue acquisition, was the prerogative of a restricted reality:
in fact, nowadays, ADC and DAC converters are to be found in
every smartphone, computer, tablet, and digital music player,
and allow the owners of such devices to record/playback their
own voice, an instrument, the sounds of the environment, etc..
The gradual improvement in the performance of web com-
munication infrastructures has allowed the transmission of
large amounts of data in a very short space of time, and
today operations are possible that were unthinkable until a
few years ago, such as the digitization of musical performance
and the ability to send it in real time to a remote server
capable of processing the input data and structuring them
inside multitrack music software.
IV. CONSTRUCTION OF A LEARNING ENVIRONMENT FOR
COLLABORATIVE MUSICAL COMPOSITION
The learning environment that is the subject of this research
(developed by the INDIRE project “Disciplinary Didactics and
ICT”), is dedicated to the practice of music, music composi-
tion, and the planning and active participation of members in
educational activities of an informal nature.
Participants can record their performances inside virtual spaces
set up inside the environment, recording and over-dubbing
music tracks, and adding their own recordings to those of other
participants asynchronously, to realize/arrange a full track with
all instruments as indicated/guided by the teacher.
The presence of a tool based on Cloud computing that can
handle incoming data (i.e., the performance of a musician
on his own instrument) solely by means of the browser,
delegating the power of calculation to the “Cloud” server, is a
technological aspect not previously available in the multimedia
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

landscape. This is a key factor for the potential access of all
students with any device and an internet connection: the type
of hardware/software owned is no longer relevant, but it is
sufﬁcient to have any device and a stable connection to the
web to work ﬂuidly.
The construction of such an environment requires two main
methodological approaches: the active and collaborative learn-
ing, and its main point of reference is musical practice and
composition plus the acquisition of skills in an informal way.
If on the one hand the active learning is a methodology
that enhances the experimental approach to problem-solving
by promoting its educational potential (ﬁelding activities in
which students are not mere executors of operations led by the
teacher, but work reﬂecting on the ways the experiment can be
carried out, and analysing the results [1]), cooperative learning
is a method that involves students in group work to achieve a
common goal, placing the emphasis on certain key features
such as positive interdependence, individual responsibility,
interaction, the appropriate use of skills in collaboration, and
assessment of the work carried out [7].
In the process of creating a learning environment that fosters
musical practice, the experiences and special features of the
informal acquisition of skills have been considered, particu-
larly within the framework of music.
John A. Sloboda [8] maintains that human beings can acquire
implicit knowledge with regard to the structural characteristics
of music in their own culture within the ﬁrst ten years of life,
by means of activities, rhythm games, songs, dance, etc..
Subsequently, this musical knowledge is fostered and main-
tained by means of exposure to the media (TV, radio, etc.);
thus, all this happens informally. These skills are then pos-
sessed by many people without any explicit musical training
or formal education.
Even earlier, James L. Collier conducted a study on Louis
Armstrong, and on the informal acquisition of active musical
skills without any allied formal education [9]. In the analysis of
the contexts that led Armstrong to become such a brilliant mu-
sician in his musical genre and within the history of twentieth-
century music (early exposure to a musical environment,
freedom of exploration and expression, lack of distinction
between practice and performance, etc.) Collier demonstrated
that people can become experts even without speciﬁc formal
education: “Musical involvement has the character of a vis-
ceral emotion, in total antithesis with situations of external
constraint; i.e., that such experiences take place in almost all
cases in the company of friends and family or alone, rarely
with the presence of a teacher.” [10]
Moreover, the construction of a digital learning environment
for music cannot ignore the “electro-acoustic paradigm” [11],
i.e., the effect that the introduction of digital equipment for the
production and reproduction of music has had on individuals,
and the change that the advent of digital technology has
brought to everyday life, which can then become an all-out
part of music education.
Prior to the introduction of recording/playback systems, there
were two major means of creating and transmitting music:
the oral tradition and writing. Electro-acoustic music has
seen the appearance of music played through speakers and
(subsequently) made in the studio by means of computers,
samplers, and other digital systems.
Therefore, if “current musical pedagogy is linked to the
musical attitude that preceded the advent of reproduction
technologies, and within that attitude, more than a century
old,” [12] then what we need is a sort of “informalization” of
music education, accepting that “formal education has been
undermined and contaminated by the informal kind” [12].
The approach to teaching music in the environment that is
the subject of this paper intends to use a workshop procedure,
moving the centre of learning from information to training,
promoting a more proactive attitude among students towards
knowledge; in addition, it intends to rely on an equal in-
terchange of work and collaboration between students and
teachers, combining the skills of both, becoming a virtual
lab to redeﬁne teaching times by applying organizational
and methodological innovation, facilitating hands-on teaching
rather than lecture-style lessons. A space in which to enjoy
experiences with others, using materials and methods that
produce learning processes and “build” knowledge.
In this way, learning becomes the result of a continuous
interaction of community members who, by interacting with
each other, “build” knowledge through the elements typical of
a workshop.
Within these learning communities, the teacher then becomes a
“facilitator” whose task is to create the conditions for positive
cooperation, to stimulate research and internal sharing, and to
provide credible models for learning.
A. Objectives and spaces
The purpose of the learning environment is to allow the
design, composition and production of music following in-
structions and guidance from the teacher.
The characteristics of the learning environment must allow
students to tackle music using multimedia tools that can
increase their awareness during their studies.
The a-synchronicity of the method facilitates the study of
music: recording and listening back to what you have just
produced is one of the main methods of acquiring musical
awareness.
It is also possible to consider the digital recording approach
as an “apprenticeship” towards the working world of music;
a world in which musicians ﬁnd themselves in the presence
of very similar systems every time they offer their services in
musical production situations.
The environment will be entirely online, and will use cross-
device web interfaces, handling all incoming data through
Cloud services.
B. Tools and features.
The tools that make up the learning environment are devel-
oped and/or integrated within a web platform, subject to login
procedures, where the teachers can manage several groups of
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Fig. 1. Content type management: multimedia ﬁles, instant messaging,
Video conferencing software, on line DAW
students (Fig. 1).
Each student can participate in the activities of several groups,
and tools have been developed for peer evaluation of the
results of each group, triggering a virtuous interaction between
students who can also be in different classes/schools.
Online Digital Audio Workstation (DAW).
This is a software that allows the recording of analogue
and digital music using computerised tools, by overdubbing
multiple recordings/different instruments and allowing a ﬁnal
mix-down and export of an audio ﬁle readable by any device
(Fig. 2).
The use of a Cloud-based online DAW, that allows access and
recording directly from a browser window via a web interface,
brings great beneﬁts compared to desktop solutions, i.e., using
a PC:
• Independence from the operating system and browser
(Windows, Mac, Linux, Android, iOS). In fact, it is
sufﬁcient to have an internet connection and an access
device;
• Independence from a device to access the Web (PC,
Tablet, Smartphone, etc.);
• The software data and technical performance are man-
aged server side, allowing access by almost any device
user, regardless of the quality of the hardware owned;
• All participants can access the software at any time to
record their performances, ﬁnding the work done by all
the others previously;
Repository of multimedia materials. An area in which
participants can share ﬁles of any type to plan a work,
supporting the ideas with multimedia contributions (songs,
audio-video bites, scores, etc.).
Instant
Messaging. Instant messaging system present
within all areas of the environment, to comment on the
materials shared or as music design forums. The messages
are saved and organized chronologically for correct navigation
over time.
Video-conferencing software. Organized in circumscribed
“rooms” accessible only to the working group in which
the participants, moderated by the teacher, can organize the
performance, editing and design of the work. Internal tools for
Fig. 2. Generic DAW session view
screen sharing and the upload of materials for instant sharing
are the most efﬁcient for the proposed use.
Devices to access the platform, manage the content, and
record musical performances. The environment is accessible
from all computing devices, to make it particularly suitable
for the reference target: the use of cross-device programming
languages (HTML5, JavaScript) makes the virtual space ac-
cessible and usable (as well as from any PC) also by common
smartphones, widespread among the students of reference.
These devices are accompanied by high quality microphones,
suitable for converting the analogue signal of an instrument
into a digital signal that can be saved and stored inside the
online DAW.
C. Technical Realization.
A prototype of the environment has already been created
by INDIRE as part of the projects to take a closer look
at the relationship between disciplinary didactics and new
technologies (Fig. 3).
An analysis was made of the technical aspects of the project,
the communication aspects of the software produced, and the
delicate issue of managing students privacy.
The following technical choices were then made:
• Programming languages: to maintain cross-device com-
patibility, the programming languages used for the areas
to share materials, for instant messaging and bulletin
boards, to create groups and manage teachers content and
CMS, are HTML5, JavaScript (Angular), and CSS3, with
Ionic Framework.
• Two third-party software packages have been used for
the management of synchronous meetings and the DAW.
Many commercial products are available on the market
that can satisfy these needs, but instead those that provide
Web-Services interfaces were chosen.
These enable a transparent link to the user and a manage-
ment of personal data that complies with the regulations
in force on privacy. Using API and federated identity
systems (OAuth) it is perfectly possible (if the third-
party software supports and develops these services) to
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Fig. 3. Prototype of the environment
authenticate a user by providing an alphanumeric code
only, keeping the link to the actual personal data inside
the source information systems.
In this way, users are authenticated directly and transpar-
ently using third-party products without any of their data
being shared elsewhere.
D. Description of an activity within the learning environment.
To illustrate the features of the application in more detail,
and how these can be integrated from the active-learning point
of view, we can show one possible activity within the learning
environment in which the teacher establishes the start-up mode
and supervision with the intent of supporting/moderating the
students’ work.
1) The instructor divides the class into groups of 4-5
people and assigns each group a corresponding online
environment, by ﬁxing as an objective the composition
of a pop song in a speciﬁc style (Italian / English pop,
Hip Hop, Rock, etc.).
2) The teacher provides an essential discography that
students must listen to (and expand to their liking)
to evaluate the compositional aspects and the ar-
rangements: the objective in this step will be to de-
cide and establish the structure of the song (AABA,
intro/verse/bridge/chorus/variation/ﬁnale/outro/etc.) and
discuss the main aspects of the arrangement (instrumen-
tation, melody lines, harmony, any modulations).
3) This activity will be carried out using instant-messaging
tools and by sharing multimedia materials, and the
teacher will moderate any discussions. Each student will
be able to record and share audio ﬁles with their own
compositional ideas or can share them synchronously
using video-conferencing.
This delicate and deeper phase ends with an indication
by the group of the main parameters of the song:
a) Metronomic tempo
b) Bars
c) Key
d) Structure
e) Electronic instrumentation needed (asking the
teacher for help)
4) The teacher supports students in the realization of the
structure of the piece inside the online DAW, building
a template within which students can record their per-
formances, and providing help with inserting electronic
samples, rhythm loops or ambience effects.
5) Each student enters the DAW to record his or her per-
formance, overdubbing their recordings until the desired
result is achieved. No limits are placed on the number
of overdubs nor the access times.
6) The teacher monitors the work and suggests changes to
performances considered below par. When the recording
work is ﬁnished, the teacher helps the groups in the
mixing and mastering steps, to explain how a piece of
music is produced.
7) Part of the sharing of materials is a speciﬁc evaluation
of ﬁnished products among peers: tracks are shared in a
particular form, and other groups of students are asked to
evaluate them, anonymously, by responding to a preset
questionnaire based on musical criteria, in order to offer
their own opinion.
8) At the end, students write a report on the key points of
the work carried out.
V. EXPECTED RESULTS
A. Expected results in the learning of individual students
Knowledge
• Learning of new languages and digital music codes using
a Digital Audio Workstation (DAW) to record musical
performances.
• Access to tools of collaborative learning online to exploit
different points of view and approaches in a musical
project.
• Knowing the importance of developing creative abilities
• Understanding interaction in the sharing of knowledge
within social networking environments.
Skills
• Strengthening and valorization of musical practice.
• Mastering the use of the network by means of indepen-
dent tools and collaborative environments, to search for
useful material, and to share and discuss musical roads
in the realization of a collaborative musical project.
• Ability to use tools for music creation through Cloud
software and DAWs, in general. Developing a capacity
to operate in technologically advanced environments and
as part of a work team.
Competence
• Competently using dedicated software and technological
applications and understanding the management mecha-
nisms.
• Recording music using systems commonly employed in
recording studios, precociously bridging the technological
gap between a personal “acoustic” performance and the
technological procedures to record this performance.
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

• Recording using a metronome, and overdubbing backing
tracks/performance by other musicians, listening to the
nuances and dynamics and trying out different approaches
to better match the performances of their band mates.
• Musical performance skills aimed at recording.
• Working, studying and planning as a group, being respon-
sible for the completion of a project and adapting personal
behaviour to the circumstances in resolving problems.
B. Expected results in general terms
• Shared leadership. Making music “together” lets students
grow, also and especially technically, and allows them to
express a considered sensitive leadership and to develop
skills of “mediation” in a group, sharing and making the
most of the emotional elements of a musical experience in
a working group (a band) to achieve an effective artistic
product.
• Feedback and evaluation. Each student is an integral part
of a group within an environment of communication-
participation-collaboration, and is therefore placed in a
direct relationship with all the other students, to realize
a product in the most effective, fun and interesting way
possible, using musical language. The interventions of
revision and control of the activities carried out, and the
assessment of the work of the group represent a constant
within the environment, which manifests itself through
synchronous and asynchronous tools of content sharing,
to correct/improve the musical project.
• Simulation, through an educational and training project,
of the concrete manner of operating in a musical pro-
duction when it comes to organization, environment,
compiling of reports and work tools.
• Assessment. It is not only the assessment of the “ﬁnal”
product that matters within a group of collaborative learn-
ing: elements such as the improvement of self-esteem,
communication skills, and problem-solving abilities are
of great efﬁcacy in a workshop approach.
• Social skills. The quality of the work and the results are
directly proportional to the communication and problem-
solving ability of the participants, who are mutually
supportive.
• Responsibility.
The
environment
favours
the
self-
realization and personal growth of each participant in
the group, inside which is triggered a sense of mutual
responsibility that promotes learning.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND POTENTIAL NEW DEVELOPMENTS
This paper has illustrated a digital learning environment to
develop musical practice and collaborative composition within
small groups of students moderated by a teacher, and are
considered the didactic outcome of the activities proposed
therein.
The learning environment uses Cloud services for its operation
and the necessary hardware for access is cross-device, allowing
any web-connected device to exploit the potential offered
and to deepen the students’ knowledge, skills and abilities in
connection with musical practice and composition.
As to future developments, the following guidelines have been
considered:
• Testing of informal training in the composition, perfor-
mance and remote sharing of musical tracks/projects with
technological tools based on Cloud computing, within a
virtual studio community, assembled under the supervi-
sion of teachers.
• Testing the efﬁcacy of an informal learning model in
a creative key as part of Italian school curricula, as
indicated in the Italian “National Guidelines for Lower-
Secondary-School Music Education’ (p. 59).
• Testing ways of offering assistance and support to all
students in the processes of learning within a virtual
environment, not only in the planning of a project/song,
but also in the management of teamwork communication.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Brown, Music Technology and Education: Amplifying Musicality.
Routledge, 2015.
[2] G. L. F. Bianconi, “The musical journey of education: closed streets
and highways. ”music education and teaching,” in Music education and
teaching.
Franco Angeli, 2008.
[3] D. Lebow, “Constructivist values for systems design: ﬁve principles
toward a new mindset,” Educational Technology Research and Devel-
opment, no. 41, pp. 4–16, 1993.
[4] Thinking Technology, Toward a Constructivistic Design Model, vol. 34,
1994, number 4.
[5] J. Bruner, After Dewey: The process of learning in the two cultures.
Armando, 1966.
[6] J. Lave and E. Wenger, Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Par-
ticipation (Learning in Doing: Social, Cognitive and Computational
Perspectives).
Cambridge University Press, 1991.
[7] M. Comoglio and M. A. Cardoso, Teaching and learning in groups.
LAS, 1996.
[8] J. A. Sloboda, “Music structure and emotional response: Some empirical
ﬁndings,” Psychology of music, pp. 110–120, 1991.
[9] C. J. Lincoln, Louis Armstrong: an american genius. Oxford University
Press, 1983.
[10] G. L. F. Bianconi and F. Frabboni, Music education and teaching.
FrancoAngeli, 2008, vol. Music education and teaching.
[11] D. Franc¸ois, Le son des musiques.
Paris: Buchet-Castel, 2001.
[12] R. Maragliano, New media and new sounds.
FrancoAngeli,, 2008, vol.
Music education and teaching.
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

