Educator-Oriented Tools for Managing the Attention-Aware Intelligent Classroom 
Evropi Stefanidi, Maria Korozi, Asterios Leonidis, Maria Doulgeraki, and Margherita Antona 
Institute of Computer Science 
Foundation for Research and Technology – Hellas (FORTH) 
Heraklion, Crete, Greece 
email: {evropi, korozi, leonidis, mdoulger, antona}@ics.forth.gr 
 
Abstract—The emergence of Intelligent Classrooms and in 
particular classrooms that are equipped with appropriate 
infrastructure for identifying the students’ attention levels, has 
raised the need for appropriate educator-friendly tools that 
facilitate monitoring and management of these educational 
environments. This paper presents two such systems: 
LECTORviewer and NotifEye. LECTORviewer is deployed on 
the educator’s personal workstation and offers an overview of 
the students’ attention levels. Additionally, through its intuitive 
user interface, educators can provide their input regarding 
ambiguous behaviors or scheduled interventions that aim to 
reengage distracted, tired or unmotivated students to the 
educational process. NotifEye is a smart watch application for 
educators that aims to communicate, in a mobile fashion, 
important events occurring during a lesson (e.g., 60% of 
students are tired). This work presents the functionality of these 
tools and the usability findings of a heuristic evaluation 
experiment conducted with UX experts for LECTORviewer. 
Keywords-Classroom management; intelligent classroom; 
monitoring student attention. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The introduction of technology in the school environment 
has been associated with enhancing the students’ performance 
and has encouraged several technology-driven curriculum 
renewal projects [1]. The rate of technological development is 
ever increasing, a fact that influenced the emergence of 
innovative approaches towards incorporation of Information 
and Communication Technologies (ICTs) in the classroom 
environment. Whereas once the overhead projector was 
considered a cutting-edge tool in the classroom [2], today the 
concept of the smart classroom is a reality [3].  
According to researchers, technology can be used 
effectively as a cognitive tool as well as instructional media, 
and can be helpful in classroom settings by promoting inquiry, 
helping communication, constructing teaching products, and 
assisting students’ self-expression [4]. Research in [2] shows 
that by combining Ambient Intelligence (AmI) technologies 
[5] with social and behavioral analysis inside a smart 
classroom, an active analysis of the effectiveness of the lecture 
can be conducted. Moreover, ICT can monitor learners’ 
behavior during learning activities to improve the educational 
process, such as identifying whether a learner is paying 
attention to the lecture or not [6]. Student attention monitoring 
has been proven to lead to better student achievements [7] and 
a more pleasant and effective learning process. 
Research has shown that live monitoring of a class is 
possible and beneficial, not only in the more obvious case of 
distant learning [6][8], where monitoring is deemed 
necessary, as the educator cannot rely on physical observation 
to perceive the status of the participants, but also in a physical 
classroom [8], as the large number of students hinders the 
educator’s ability to quickly draw conclusions. The kind and 
extent of monitoring in each case naturally varies, but 
students’ management is necessary in both cases, since the 
educator has to adjust and adapt the lesson according to the 
students’ needs at any given moment. Nevertheless, this is a 
cumbersome task for the educator to perform while pursuing 
specific educational goals in the short time frame of a lesson 
period. Technology can automate trivial monitoring and 
managing tasks, and present appropriate information to the 
educator either during classroom downtime (e.g., quiz, 
problem-solving, essay writing), or after class as a reflection 
on the overall process. Moreover, it has the ability to collect 
information from multiple visible and invisible sources, that 
can not only reveal problematic behaviors that the educator 
missed to detect (e.g., mind wandering), but most importantly 
provide indications about the reasons of inattention; the latter 
is especially important in classrooms with a large number of 
students, where the educator cannot focus on every student. 
In such settings, educator-friendly tools, which aim to help 
educators in managing and monitoring the attention-aware 
smart classrooms effectively, are necessary. This paper 
presents LECTORviewer and NotifEye, which equip 
educators with intuitive interfaces for performing the 
necessary managing tasks. Their functionalities include 
monitoring student attention levels and applying targeted 
interventions to distracted, tired or unmotivated students in 
order to reengage them in the educational process. 
Regarding the structure of this paper, in Section 2, related 
work is discussed, while Section 3 presents the requirements 
that guided the design and development process. Section 4 
describes the features of the in-vitro Intelligent Classroom that 
currently hosts these systems, while Sections 4 and 5 focus on 
LECTORviewer and NotifEye respectively. Finally, the 
findings of a preliminary heuristic evaluation are analyzed in 
Section 6, while conclusions and plans for further 
improvements are described in Section 7. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The ability to handle disruptive student behaviors in a 
classroom is a critical factor in any educational setting and 
greatly affects the overall learning process [9]. Effective and 
efficient classroom management and active monitoring of 
student progress and attention have been long since identified 
as key instructional factors, with significant relationships to 
positive student achievement outcomes [7]. Equipping 
educators with context-aware visualization tools [8]  allows to 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

quickly  detect problems stemming from inattentive behaviors 
and identify their causes. 
Towards addressing inattention, class monitoring is 
augmented with attention-aware artifacts embedded in the 
physical environment that observe relevant parameters and 
report their findings [10]. Upon inattention detection, targeted 
interventions are delivered to the inattentive students [11]. 
Such instructional interventions have been proven to both re-
engage students in the learning process and promote self-
monitoring and self-regulation [12]. Specifically, in 
educational contexts, interventions positively influence the 
students’ performance, independent of their educational 
background or their learning abilities [13]. 
Various Graphical User Interface (GUI) applications have 
been developed which simplify classroom management 
activities, such as teacher-student communication [14], 
management of learning assets [15][16], distant learning [17], 
real-time activity monitoring [18], and on-the-fly creation of 
educational software [19]. These applications utilize the data 
resulting from monitoring and management of the classroom 
in order to produce appropriate visualizations that the educator 
can explore so as to reflect and improve lecturing. 
Classroom monitoring has been the focus of multiple 
research attempts. Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) [20] 
monitor and assess learners’ affective and cognitive state. 
Their potential to influence learning is greatly enhanced by the 
tutor’s ability to accurately assess the student’s state in real-
time and then use this state as a basis to provide timely 
feedback or alter the instructional content. Thus, tailored and 
personalized educational experiences can be provided through 
monitoring student interactions in real-time and adapting 
learning events to the individual. In [21], the emotional state 
of the user is monitored via sensors that measure physiological 
signals (i.e., Electrocardiogram (ECG) and Galvanic skin 
response (GSR)) and appropriate interventions are provided 
when necessary. 
In [22], a monitoring instrument to assess students’ 
perceptions of their learning environments was developed and 
validated. The purpose was to assist teachers, teacher 
educators and researchers to monitor and guide changes 
towards outcome-based classroom learning environments. 
Biofeedback methodology is used in [23], to investigate 
interactions among learners’ affective states, metacognitive 
processes, and learning outcomes during multimedia learning. 
The developed model emphasizes cognitive processes and 
metacognitive monitoring and control.  
It is therefore obvious that the advancement of technology 
has allowed various monitoring techniques to be developed. 
Although quite a lot of research has been conducted on 
monitoring the classroom with respect to student interactions, 
physiological variables, and physiological signals in real-time 
[24], there is a lack of research and development of tools for 
educators that can monitor attention and take appropriate 
actions in the classroom setting. 
III. 
REQUIREMENTS 
This Section presents the requirements for both 
LECTORviewer and NotifEye, which have been collected 
through an extensive literature review and an iterative 
elicitation process based on multiple collection methods, 
including brainstorming, focus groups, observation and 
scenario building. 
R1. Real-time Classroom Monitoring: The system should 
permit real-time behavior monitoring of individual students 
and the entire classroom.  
R2. Intervention Management: When interventions are 
about to start, educators should be able to cancel, postpone or 
easily configure them. 
R3. Educator’s Control over the System: The educator 
should always have full control of the system and be able to 
turn on or off the monitoring and intervention mechanisms 
(either for the entire classroom of for specific individuals). 
R4. Educator’s Input: The educator should be able to (i) 
disapprove system decisions regarding identified behaviors, 
(ii) disambiguate behaviors (e.g., thinking vs. mind 
wandering), and (iii) override system suggestions in case they 
do not serve the students’ needs. 
R5. System 
Analytics 
regarding 
Intervention- and 
Attention- related Data: Statistics and data about the overall 
operation should be visible, such as attention and inattention 
percentage, total times that an intervention was initiated, and 
success rates of interventions. 
R6. Full Overview of System’s Decisions: The educator 
should have access to the detailed log of events that occurred 
during the lesson time. 
R7. Reduce Educator’s cognitive Load: The UI should be 
educator-friendly so that the teaching activities are not 
burdened by cumbersome interfaces. Furthermore, there 
should be alternative representations of the same information 
to serve different situations. 
R8. Do not hinder the lecture: The acquired information 
should be presented in a subtle, yet effective, manner. 
All these requirements are realized by LECTORviewer 
and NotifEye, which aim to support educators in their daily 
activities within the attention aware intelligent classroom. 
IV. 
THE INTELLIGENT CLASSROOM 
The systems presented in this paper are employed in-vitro 
inside a technologically augmented classroom, where 
educational activities are enhanced with the use of pervasive 
and 
mobile 
computing, 
sensor 
networks, 
artificial 
intelligence, multimedia computing, middleware and agent-
based software [25]-[27].  In more detail, the hardware 
infrastructure includes both commercial and custom-made 
artifacts, which   are   embedded   in   traditional   classroom 
equipment and furniture. In particular, the classroom contains: 
(i) a commercial touch sensitive interactive whiteboard, (ii) 
technologically augmented student desks [27] that integrate 
various 
sensors 
(e.g., 
Kinect, 
eye-tracker, 
camera, 
microphone.), (iii) a personal workstation and a smart watch 
for the educator, as well as (iv) various ambient facilities 
appropriate for monitoring the overall environment and the 
learners' actions (e.g., microphones, user-tracking devices). 
The Intelligent Classroom relies on the AmI-Solertis 
middleware infrastructure [28] that facilitates: (i) the 
deployment, execution and monitoring of the various artifacts 
in the classroom, (ii) their encapsulation in an interoperable 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

ubiquitous ecosystem and (iii) the collection, analysis and 
storage of environment-related data. 
A sophisticated framework, named LECTOR [29], is 
responsible for identifying inattentive behaviors and 
intervening to re-engage distracted, tired or unmotivated 
students to the educational process. Specifically, LECTOR 
observes the students’ actions (SENSE), identifies the 
individuals who show signs of inattention (THINK) and 
consequently undertakes the necessary actions to restore their 
engagement by applying appropriate interventions (ACT). 
Actually, interventions are applications running on private 
(e.g., student’s desk, teacher’s watch) or public (e.g., 
classroom board) hosts, instantiated at a key point in time 
with appropriate content. Currently, LECTOR features two 
types of interventions, namely quizzes and multimedia 
presentations that aim to ensure active student participation 
in the main course. Furthermore, taking into consideration the 
fact that most students thrive in encouraging environments, 
their private artifacts are equipped with a messaging 
mechanism able to provide encouraging messages when 
deemed necessary. The same mechanism is employed on the 
teacher’s smart watch in order to display subtle messages 
suggesting changes in the lecture format (e.g. recapitulation 
of the lecture topics, initiation of a discussion relevant to the 
current course, repetition of specific material, etc.).  
However, LECTOR would be ineffective without 
exploiting the expertise of educators. To this end, two 
interconnected tools are introduced, namely LECTORviewer 
[6] and NotifEye; the former provides an overview of the 
students’ attention levels and asks the educator’s opinion 
regarding ambiguous behaviors or scheduled interventions, 
while the latter provides notifications regarding important 
events occurring during the lesson time and can serve as an 
input to the former. The architecture of the intelligent 
classroom is depicted in Figure 1. 
V. 
LECTORVIEWER 
LECTORviewer is a web-based tool for managing the 
attention-aware intelligent classroom. It is deployed on the 
educator’s personal workstation and allows the observation 
and customization of LECTOR’s decisions regarding either 
individual students or the classroom as a whole. In more 
detail, LECTORviewer offers the following: 
 
One-click enabling or disabling of the LECTOR’s 
monitoring facility. 
 
One-click enabling or disabling of the LECTOR’s 
intervention mechanism. 
 
An overview of the attention level of the entire 
classroom that also facilitates focusing on particular 
students. 
 
A mechanism that asks the educator’s opinion 
regarding ambiguous student behaviors. 
 
A mechanism that gives educators control over 
approving or dismissing an intervention. 
These functionalities are provided through an intuitive 
user interface which mainly consists of (i) a main dashboard 
that displays information regarding all the classes an educator 
teaches, and (ii) the representations of each class (i.e., class 
view) containing details about its students, displayed either in 
a seating chart layout or a list view. 
All the classes that an educator teaches can be found in a 
sortable list on the main dashboard, where valuable 
information is available to the educator: (i) the schedule of the 
class (e.g., the assignments that are close to a deadline), (ii) 
reminders of important events (e.g., scheduled exam), (iii) 
details about the fluctuation of the attention levels during the 
last lesson, and (iv) number of successful interventions. This 
type of information not only helps educators to have an 
overview of the class and better organize future lessons, but 
also to judge the efficiency and quality of past lessons based 
on the students’ attention levels. Moreover, by viewing the 
statistics about the effectiveness of past interventions, 
educators can acquire an understanding of the kind of 
interventions that are appropriate for a specific class or 
student, and therefore more effectively choose and manage 
interventions in the future. 
 
Figure 1.  The architecture of the intelligent classroom. 
During a lesson, through LECTORviewer’s class view, 
the educator can get insights regarding students that are not 
paying attention due to factors like fatigue, mind wandering, 
or lack of motivation. However, in some cases, the ability to 
disambiguate student activities depends on information that 
only a human can provide. For instance, students laughing at 
a teacher’s joke is not an indicator of inattention. To that end, 
when the system identifies a behavior that can be 
misinterpreted, it asks for the educator's opinion. These three 
states (i.e., attentive, not attentive and needs revision) are 
coded with appropriate colors (i.e., green, red and orange) 
which are used throughout the user interface so as to help 
educators easily distinguish the current status of the students.  
At the top of the “class view” (see Figure 2a), the educator 
can see at a glance the attention percentage of the classroom 
as a whole. A pie chart, located at the top left of the page, uses 
the aforementioned colors to display the percentage of 
attentive or inattentive behaviors, and situations that require 
revision. At the center of the chart, the percentage of attentive 
students is displayed using bold and large fonts so as to ensure 
that the educator will be able to see it even from a distance. 
Furthermore, the legends of the chart can be used as filters that 
modify its contents, thus enabling educators to customize it 
according to their needs. The representation as a pie chart was  
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

a.
b.
 
Figure 2.  Snapshots of LECTORviewer’s (a) class-view and (b) detailed log. 
considered as the most appropriate alternative to 
communicate this type of information to educators by 
displaying all the data simultaneously; that is because a 
person’s visual system needs less time to understand graphs 
(rather than tables), which give numbers shape and form 
[30]. 
In addition, in order to ensure that educators can freely 
activate or deactivate the monitoring and intervention 
mechanisms according to the class’s needs, the top of the 
page contains the appropriate controls so as to be easily 
accessible. This  functionality is  important  for  an  
environment  full  of students where unforeseen situations 
can emerge; for example, the educator could observe that 
interventions are not effective or disrupt the course’s flow 
at a given moment, and may wish to stop the system from 
making suggestions. Apart from merely (de)activating 
interventions, educators can select to start a specific 
intervention when deemed necessary. The latter ensures that 
educators do not rely on the system’s decisions alone; on 
the contrary, they can initiate custom interventions in case 
the system (i) fails to identify that the students require 
remedial actions, or (ii) suggests an inappropriate one. 
Apart from managing the classroom as a whole, the 
educators can focus on individual students as well. In more 
detail, there are two alternative layouts available for 
browsing through the classroom students and observing 
their status.  By default, a “seating chart” layout is 
displayed, where students are represented in a form that 
resembles their actual seating arrangements, while the 
educator can easily switch to a “list view” layout, with a rich 
sorting functionality (e.g., alphabetical order, attention level 
order). For each student, LECTORviewer displays useful 
information regarding their status, as well as the likely 
reason a student is inattentive. 
When the list view of the class is enabled, more 
functionality regarding each individual student is displayed. 
For each student, additional information is available, such 
as details regarding their learning style, attention level, and 
the reason that led the system to identify that they have lost 
focus, if that is the case. Furthermore, in order to provide 
enough context to the educator, in case of inattention or 
behaviors that need revision, relevant tags that reveal the 
reason are available. An indicative tag is “Mobile”, which 
is used to annotate the behavior of students who are not 
paying attention because they are looking at their 
smartphones. Finally, next to each student the educator can 
find the appropriate controls for enabling or disabling 
LECTOR’s monitoring and intervention mechanisms for 
that individual. This is required in a class that is constituted 
of 
different 
students 
with 
varying 
backgrounds, 
personalities, behaviors, needs and learning patterns [31]. 
Additionally, a detailed log (see Figure 2b) is available 
for each classroom that allows educators to revisit –even at 
a later time– LECTOR’s decisions and mark them as 
accurate or not. A mini view of the log is always available 
at the sidebar of the “class view”, enabling educators to 
observe in real time LECTOR’s decisions without 
navigating to a new page. However, if needed, the educator 
can select to view the entire attention log, through which 
they can (i) confirm or invalidate an identified student 
behavior, (ii) stop an active intervention and optionally 
replace it with another one, and (iii) rate elapsed 
interventions. Providing such information is really 
important for “calibrating” LECTOR to a specific 
classroom environment and its students, since this process 
makes the decision-making mechanisms more accurate and 
less prone to false positives. This is a cumbersome task, 
which requires recalling various incidents that occurred 
during a significant amount of time. In order to minimize 
the amount of information someone has to remember, 
LECTORviewer’s log is equipped with a sophisticated 
filtering mechanism, while each log entry is accompanied 
with abundant contextual information (e.g., timestamp, 
teacher’s activity at the time). 
Finally, on the top right of the screen, important 
upcoming activities concerning the current lesson are 
visible. This enables the educator to have a quick overview 
of tasks that are time-critical, thus giving the opportunity to 
better organize activities, while also serving as a reminder. 
Icons visible next to each upcoming activity aid the fast 
recognition of the activity with just a quick glance. 
VI. 
NOTIFEYE 
NotifEye (see Figure 3) is a smart watch application 
able to provide subtle interventions to educators. 
Employing such wearable devices to act as intervention 
hosts seemed natural, since in addition to indicating time 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

they: (i) are increasingly available in the market, (ii) support 
notifications and reminders, and (iii) are appropriate for 
private interventions. 
To this end, NotifEye can be used to provide 
informative interventions regarding important incidents that 
occur during a lesson. In more detail, the application is able 
to display messages dictated by LECTOR, while at the same 
time the watch vibrates to alert the user. For example, when 
the entire classroom displays signs of inattention, NotifEye 
is instructed to deliver the short yet meaningful message 
“CLASSROOM 
TIRED”, 
accompanied 
with 
an 
exclamation mark icon. The use of self-explanatory icons 
that require little effort to see and understand was 
imperative for an application running on a wearable small-
screen device whose target audience must not be distracted 
from its main task (i.e., teaching tasks). 
 
Figure 3.  Snapshot of NotifEye. 
Furthermore, apart from delivering notifications, the 
educator’s smart watch is used as an input device through 
which 
useful 
information 
to 
LECTOR 
can 
be 
communicated. 
Specifically, 
when 
a 
class-wide 
intervention is about to start, NotifEye displays a message 
asking for approval; in case the educator rejects it, 
LECTOR is notified so as to increase the cancelation 
percentage of the selected intervention accordingly. 
VII. PRELIMINARY EVALUATION 
An iterative design process was followed throughout the 
development lifecycle of LECTORviewer and NotifEye. 
The first phase involved the creation of low fidelity paper 
prototypes exhibiting the entire functionality of the system. 
These were initially assessed by three (3) Human Computer 
Interaction experts during a cognitive walkthrough 
evaluation experiment in order to uncover any usability 
errors [6].  
In the case of NotifEye, no important problems were 
identified. 
On 
the 
contrary, 
the 
evaluation 
of 
LECTORviewer revealed some issues related to the 
complexity of the most frequently used screens, and 
secondly to the metaphors used in the design, suggesting 
their refinement in order to simplify the interaction 
paradigm used to execute time-critical or common 
functions expected to occur on a daily basis. Subsequently, 
an improved vertical high fidelity interactive prototype [32] 
was created integrating the feedback received and was re-
assessed by five (5) UX experts via heuristic evaluation [33] 
in order to test the overall usability and address any 
problems before conducting a full-scale user-based 
evaluation with the target audience (i.e., educators).  
The problems identified through that experiment where 
ranked according to their severity by the evaluators. The 
severity ratings range from zero (“not a usability problem”) 
to four (“Usability catastrophe”) [33][32][31][30][29][33] 
and are used to indicate how serious each problem is and 
how important is to fix it. Next, the development team 
ranked each problem with an ease-of-fix ranking ranging 
from zero (“would be extremely easy to fix”) to three 
(“would be difficult to fix”) to designate the amount of 
effort needed to address it. This process revealed 16 
usability issues out of which 2 were ranked as cosmetic 
problems only, 7 were identified as minor usability 
problems, and the remaining 7 were ranked as major issues, 
hence the most important to fix. Major and minor issues 
have been prioritized in the list below, with the most severe 
and hardest to fix problems listed first.  
Priority 3 
 
The extra information that is provided in the list 
view should also be available in the seating chart 
view (ease-of-fix 1) 
 
There should be a summary log for each class, 
containing diagrams that display how many 
interventions have been done during a lesson, and 
the success rate of interventions (ease-of-fix 1) 
 
It was not clear that the pie chart of attention had 
filters (ease-of-fix 0) 
 
The percentages of the pie chart should be 
immediately visible without having to hover over 
them (ease-of-fix 0) 
 
The focus of the main screen should be the students, 
everything else is of secondary importance. The pie 
chart and buttons in the upper part of the screen is 
of secondary importance and should be located 
elsewhere (ease-of-fix 0) 
 
There should be a way to see in which mode I am 
viewing the class: while the lesson is taking place, 
or not? (ease-of-fix 0) 
Priority 2 
 
There should not be paging in the log for the same 
day, for each day there should be infinite scrolling 
(ease-of-fix 1) 
 
Instead of the label “need revision” the label 
“uncertain” should be used (ease-of-fix 0) 
 
In the seating chart layout, there should also be an 
indication of where the educator’s desk is located, 
for orientation purposes (ease-of-fix 0) 
 
Current time should be visible somewhere on the 
interface (ease-of-fix 0) 
 
The messages displaying the status of a student 
should be clearer (ease-of-fix 0) 
 
It is not clear that the orange color represents the 
state that the educator must revise the system’s 
decision (ease-of-fix 0) 
 
It is not clear that the STOP hand icon stops an 
active intervention (ease-of-fix 0) 
According to the above list, fixing the identified issues 
requires minimum effort on behalf of the developers. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper has presented the educator-friendly tools 
LECTORviewer and NotifEye, which aim to assist 
educators in monitoring and managing the attention-aware 
intelligent classroom. In particular, LECTORviewer 
provides an overview of the students’ attention levels and 
asks the educator’s opinion on ambiguous behaviors or 
automatically initiated interventions, while NotifEye aims 
to bring to her knowledge important events occurring 
during the lesson time. The heuristic evaluation of 
LECTORviewer, conducted with UX experts, revealed 
various usability issues, which will be incorporated in the 
next version, to be used to conduct a full-scale user-based 
evaluation of the tool with the targeted end-users (i.e., 
educators) to fine-tune it before its final release. Similar 
evaluation experiments are being planned for NotifEye. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by the FORTH-ICS internal 
RTD Programme ‘Ambient Intelligence and Smart 
Environments’. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Moersch, “Levels of technology implementation (LoTi): A 
framework for measuring classroom technology use,” Learn. Lead. 
Technol., vol. 23, pp. 40–40, 1995. 
[2] M. M. Groves and P. C. Zemel, “Instructional technology adoption 
in higher education: An action research case study,” Int. J. Instr. 
Media, vol. 27, no. 1, p. 57, 2000. 
[3] D. C. Niemeyer, Hard facts on smart classroom design: Ideas, 
guidelines, and layouts. Rowman & Littlefield, 2003. 
[4] Y. Baek, J. Jung, and B. Kim, “What makes teachers use technology 
in the classroom? Exploring the factors affecting facilitation of 
technology with a Korean sample,” Comput. Educ., vol. 50, no. 1, 
pp. 224–234, 2008. 
[5] D. J. Cook, J. C. Augusto, and V. R. Jakkula, “Ambient intelligence: 
Technologies, applications, and opportunities,” Pervasive Mob. 
Comput., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 277–298, 2009. 
[6] E. Stefanidi, M. Doulgeraki, M. Korozi, A. Leonidis, and M. 
Antona, “Designing a Teacher-Friendly Editor for Configuring the 
Attention-Aware Smart Classroom,” in International Conference on 
Human-Computer Interaction, 2016, pp. 266–270. 
[7] R. Spicuzza, J. Ysseldyke, A. Lemkuil, S. Kosciolek, C. Boys, and 
E. Teelucksingh, “Effects of curriculum-based monitoring on 
classroom instruction and math achievement,” J. Sch. Psychol., vol. 
39, no. 6, pp. 521–542, 2001. 
[8] L. France, J.-M. Heraud, J.-C. Marty, T. Carron, and J. Heili, 
“Monitoring virtual classroom: Visualization techniques to observe 
student activities in an e-learning system,” in Advanced Learning 
Technologies, 2006. Sixth International Conference on, 2006, pp. 
716–720. 
[9] A. Brouwers and W. Tomic, “A longitudinal study of teacher 
burnout and perceived self-efficacy in classroom management,” 
Teach. Teach. Educ., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 239–253, 2000. 
[10] D. Börner, M. Kalz, and M. Specht, “Lead me gently: Facilitating 
knowledge gain through attention-aware ambient learning 
displays,” Comput. Educ., vol. 78, pp. 10–19, 2014. 
[11] J. Cain, E. P. Black, and J. Rohr, “An audience response system 
strategy to improve student motivation, attention, and feedback,” 
Am. J. Pharm. Educ., vol. 73, no. 2, p. 21, 2009. 
[12] A. B. de Bruin and T. van Gog, Improving self-monitoring and self-
regulation: From cognitive psychology to the classroom. Elsevier, 
2012. 
[13] R. J. Waller, “A review of single-case studies utilizing self-
monitoring interventions to reduce problem classroom behaviors,” 
Freeman, vol. 1999, no. 2005, 2008. 
[14] I. D. Beatty, “Transforming student learning with classroom 
communication systems,” ArXiv Prepr. Physics0508129, 2005. 
[15] J. Cole and H. Foster, Using Moodle: Teaching with the popular 
open source course management system.  O’Reilly Media, Inc., 
2007. 
[16] M. Loving and M. Ochoa, “Facebook as a classroom management 
solution,” New Libr. World, vol. 112, no. 3/4, pp. 121–130, 2011. 
[17] M. Turoff and S. R. Hiltz, “Software design and the future of the 
virtual classroom®,” J. Inf. Technol. Teach. Educ., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 
197–215, 1995. 
[18] G. Mathioudakis et al., “Ami-ria: real-time teacher assistance tool 
for an ambient intelligence classroom,” in Proceedings of the Fifth 
International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-Line Lerning 
(eLmL 2013), 2013, pp. 37–42. 
[19] Y.-J. Lee, “Empowering teachers to create educational software: A 
constructivist approach utilizing Etoys, pair programming and 
cognitive apprenticeship,” Comput. Educ., vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 527–
538, 2011. 
[20] M. Chaouachi and C. Frasson, “Mental workload, engagement and 
emotions: an exploratory study for intelligent tutoring systems,” in 
Intelligent Tutoring Systems, 2012, pp. 65–71. 
[21] K. Brawner and B. Goldberg, “Real-time monitoring of ecg and gsr 
signals during computer-based training,” in Intelligent Tutoring 
Systems, 2012, pp. 72–77. 
[22] J. M. Aldridge, R. C. Laugksch, M. A. Seopa, and B. J. Fraser, “
Development and Validation of an Instrument to Monitor the 
Implementation of Outcomes‐based Learning Environments in 
Science Classrooms in South Africa,” Int. J. Sci. Educ., vol. 28, no. 
1, pp. 45–70, 2006. 
[23] A. C. Strain, R. Azevedo, and S. D’Mello, “Exploring relationships 
between learners’ affective states, metacognitive processes, and 
learning outcomes,” in International Conference on Intelligent 
Tutoring Systems, 2012, pp. 59–64. 
[24] P. Chalfoun and C. Frasson, “Cognitive priming: assessing the use 
of non-conscious perception to enhance learner’s reasoning ability,” 
in International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems, 2012, 
pp. 84–89. 
[25] A. Leonidis et al., “A glimpse into the ambient classroom,” Bull. 
IEEE Tech. Comm. Learn. Technol., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 3–6, 2012. 
[26] [26] C. Stephanidis, A. A. Argyros, D. Grammenos, and X. 
Zabulis, “Pervasive Computing@ ICS-FORTH,” in Workshop 
Pervasive Computing@ Home, 2008. 
[27] C. Savvaki, A. Leonidis, G. Paparoulis, M. Antona, and C. 
Stephanidis, “Designing a technology–augmented school desk for 
the future classroom,” in International Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction, 2013, pp. 681–685. 
[28] A. Leonidis, D. Arampatzis, N. Louloudakis, and C. Stephanidis, 
“The AmI-Solertis System: Creating User Experiences in Smart 
Environments,” in Proceedings of the 13th IEEE International 
Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and 
Communications, 2017. 
[29] M. Korozi, A. Leonidis, M. Antona, and C. Stephanidis, “LECTOR: 
Towards Reengaging Students in the Educational Process Inside 
Smart Classrooms,” in International Conference on Intelligent 
Human Computer Interaction, 2017, pp. 137–149. 
[30] U. M. Fayyad, A. Wierse, and G. G. Grinstein, Information 
visualization in data mining and knowledge discovery. Morgan 
Kaufmann, 2002. 
[31] R. M. Felder and R. Brent, “Understanding student differences,” J. 
Eng. Educ., vol. 94, no. 1, pp. 57–72, 2005. 
[32] J. Nielsen, Usability engineering. Elsevier, 1994. 
[33] J. Nielsen, Severity Ratings for Usability Problems: Article by 
Jakob Nielsen. nnGroup, 1995. 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

