Understanding and Improving Personal Negotiation Skills With E-learning Tools 
 
Sergio Assis Rodrigues, Jano Moreira de Souza 
COPPE/UFRJ - Computer Science Department, 
Graduate School of Engineering, Federal University of 
Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
sergio@cos.ufrj.br, jano@cos.ufrj.br 
Ekaterina Tskhakaya 
Finance and Credit Department, Sochi State University, 
Sochi, Russia 
catherinet2008@rambler.ru 
Abstract — In the modern world of developing industries, 
people see a growing importance of negotiation skills.  
Businessmen come to the negotiation table as frequently as 
problems occur between two or more parties. Therefore, it is 
essential to evaluate negotiation skills of an individual and 
practice them as much as possible. Contemporary technologies 
like computers and cell phones have made it possible to create 
special interactive programs which serve as a platform for 
practicing deals.  Specific software is aimed at developing 
decision-making approaches by various means and tools and 
enables negotiators to come to mutually beneficial agreements 
with higher frequency and efficiency. Each program is useful 
in its own way and can be applied differently by negotiators all 
over the world.  Therefore, this article shows an e-learning tool 
in which people can discover and improve their negotiation 
skills though several types of computational mechanisms.  
Comparisons and initial results are also mentioned in this 
work. 
Keywords – e-learning; m-learning; negotiation; decision 
making process 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
“The biggest obstacle to innovation is thinking it can be 
done in an old way” said James Wetherbe from Texas Tech 
University. Ways of getting knowledge are undergoing great 
development, evolving into a new generation of e-education. 
With respect to it, global trend in modern business has 
shown an escalating demand in e-learning not only in 
educational establishments but also in companies that are 
interested in increasing the efficiency of the work of their 
employees. According to recently presented data in 2001, 
£224 million was spent by European enterprises on e-
learning projects [1]. Eight years later, the 2010 State of 
Industry Report has calculated that the United States' 
businesses opted for investing $125.9 billion on the 
education of their workforce [2]. The same report revealed 
that the direct costs of learning for American companies 
went up to 0.71 percent from 0.59 of revenue in year 2009. 
The most interesting feature of this tendency is that e-
learning compounded 27.7 percent of the educational 
sessions [2].  The authors of the report (2010 State of 
Industry Report) argue that the growth can be explained by 
high efficiency of the e-learning methods and the ease of 
accessing to e-learning programs. Therefore, it would be 
reasonable to estimate the benefits that modern companies 
see in the e-learning.  
These work aim at presenting an e-learning negotiation 
environment in which people, mainly inexperienced 
negotiators, can learn about negotiation concepts and also 
discover their own psychological tendencies during the 
deals.  The computational environment has been developed 
since 2008 and combines technologies such as e-learning, m-
learning, mining and visualization methods to show useful 
interfaces for all users. 
II. 
BACKGROUND LITERATURE 
A. E-learning 
Howard Hills [3] shows the benefits e-learning could 
bring into the decision-making process of managers. He sets 
an example of the election process of employees by a 
manager. Hills argues that for a manager an employee and 
his skills implies the same thing, but in practice this 
assumption is not accurate. According to his viewpoint, e-
learning motivates employees on fulfilling tasks that most fit 
them and their skills, it gives them a range of choice and 
eases the work of the manager, making his decisions more 
efficient [3]. 
Though e-learning can seem an easy thing to 
comprehend, the understanding of some of its facets may be 
ambiguous and lead to certain problems that will impede 
successful results of using e-learning tools. Rosenberg [4] 
has outlined nine myths about e-learning that can produce 
the mentioned above effect: 
• 
E-learning is easy; 
• 
Anyone can define the term “e-learning”; 
• 
E-learning technology and strategy is the same; 
• 
Functioning of e-learning can bring its user to 
success; 
• 
E-learning will do without classroom 
• 
Online teaching cannot be applied in many contents; 
• 
The decrease of the cost of training delivery lays the 
basis of e-learning`s value proposition; 
• 
“If you build it, they will come”; 
• 
The learners really matter.  
Rosenberg [4] argues that the development of e-learning 
was spurred on by the “e-enablement of business 
operations”, i.e., the fact that every aspect of the modern 
business, be it marketing, commerce, human resources or 
else, was under significant influence of e-technologies 
created the basis for accelerating growth of e-learning that 
fitted the environment with easy availability and application 
of its tools. In the work of Rosenberg [4], it is also stated that 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

the usage of e-learning in the management of a company 
supports innovation in the enterprise; furthermore, it is a part 
of training for the company that can make the decision-
making process more effective. Advocates of e-learning, 
such as Rosenberg [4], claim that companies are more prone 
to using e-tools since it helps them withstand the main 
enemy – time. Here, time zones and organizational walls are 
implied [4].      
B. M-learning 
According to the statistics [5], countries such as Italy, 
United Kingdom and Sweden have 100 percent penetration 
by cell phones. As one of the reasons for this, Prensky [6] 
sees cheap service that telephone companies provide people 
with. Indeed, telephone coverage in regions all over the 
world is growing rapidly enabling people to connect through 
cellphones or use downloaded educating programs wherever 
they are.  In Brazil, for example, there are more cell phones 
than inhabitants [26] - 224 million cell phones against 190 
million of people [27]. 
Prensky [6] claims that there is no limit to the 
educational capabilities of a cell phone if it is designed 
properly. Billy Biggs and Rob Justice [7] assert that m-
learning can be regarded as a supplement to a developing 
strategy of an enterprise. They say that that to improve an m-
learning strategy, managers of a company should follow 
certain steps [7]: 
1. Outline “business challenges” and strategy 
2. Work out a solution 
3. Start-up an “m-learning solution” 
4. Build data and evaluate results. 
5. “Adjust” the problem. 
C. Negotiation 
For sure, there are some drawbacks of e-learning 
communities for the purpose of acquiring negotiation skills. 
McConnell [8] outlines two main problems: 
• 
Production versus community process 
• 
Structure versus negotiation and openness 
 
From the other point of view, McConnell [8] sees that e-
learning is a better tool for studying negotiation process as 
face-to-face discussions fail to involve a large amount of 
individuals negotiating at the same time with the same 
extent. For instance, if there is a big group of negotiators that 
are holding discussions and all are actively participating in it, 
it is extremely hard to keep the discussion going and come to 
a mutual agreement quickly. It takes a lot of time and effort 
[8]. From this perspective, it can be concluded that online 
negotiating tools enable people to train their skills and be 
individually assessed. 
Koskinen [9] classifies negotiation methods as four 
modeling groups: 
“ 
1. Utility function and concession based methods, 
2. Utility function based joint gains searching 
methods, 
3. Interactive methods based on concession making, 
4. Interactive methods searching joint gains” 
It should be noted that some of these methods involve a 
third party in the negotiation process, which is the mediator. 
He possesses specific information about two negotiating 
parties. In computer software, mediator can be the software 
itself or a human being that is supporting negotiations [9].  
III. 
E-LEARNING TOOLS 
Three e-learning tools will be discussed in the further 
part of the article. Each of them will be given a short insight 
that will allow a comprehension of the programs and their 
aims.  All of them have specific mechanisms for decision 
makers and negotiators learning. 
A peculiar approach to decision making-process has been 
discussed by Tanja Arh and Borka Jerman Blažič [12] and is 
denominated as “multi-attribute decision making” [10][11]. 
The main principle of this approach is to divide the existing 
problem into smaller “subproblems” [12]. Hence, it will 
become less complicated and require less effort. Applied in 
practice as an e-learning tool this approach is utilized in an 
interactive expert system DEX [13]. The program is used for 
evaluation of the existing options and supports decision-
making process [14][15]. Therefore, the division of the 
problem comprises a hierarchy. One of the most typical 
features of the method is that its assessing approach is 
qualitative, but not quantitative [14][15]. 
The application of DEX includes such areas as:  
• 
Selection and evaluation of computer hardware and 
software, 
• 
Performance evaluation of enterprises and business 
partners, 
• 
Project evaluation, 
• 
Personnel management. 
The system of DEX includes “tree of attributes” and 
“utility functions”. And the tree itself depicts the decision-
making process. The attributes depend on “characteristics of 
options” [12].  One of the advantages of the program is that 
the attributes can be modified by a special editor. It also 
allows copying and deleting the subtrees. An example of a 
tree editor is presented on Figure 1 [14].  
 
Figure 1.  DEX tree editor [14]. 
What 
is 
more, 
the 
decision-making 
process 
is 
decomposed into five stages:  
1. Identification of the problem, 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

2. Criteria identification and criteria structuring, 
3. Utility function definition, 
4. Description of variants, 
5. LMS (LMS – Learning Management System ) 
evaluation and analysis [12].  
A study held by Ehtamo et al. [16] regards negotiation 
analysis as primarily linked with decision analysis. 
According to [16], the main difference between a mere 
decision making process by an employee, is that negotiations 
create a set of people who are in charge of making decisions 
and that jointly determine the solution of the problem. To 
deal with such situations Joint Gains software, which uses a 
“jointly improving direction method”, has been created 
[17][18][19].  There are several features of the software: 
• 
Every user is able to set up his own case, 
• 
The number of participant must be not less than two, 
but is not limited, 
• 
There are “linear inequality constraints”, 
• 
The number of “continuous decision variables” must 
be not less than two, but is not limited, 
• 
The participants of the negotiations are dispersed in 
the web [20].  
The software becomes a mediator between the parties 
and makes them follow certain steps [18]:  
1. Outline preferred directions of the negotiators at the 
intermediate point, 
2. Decide on a compromise direction according to the 
preferred directions, 
3. Work out a new favored intermediate point “along 
the compromise direction”. 
Ehtamo et al. assume that when negotiators are led 
through these three steps, they reach a “Pareto optimal 
agreement” [16]. They also stress on the fact that if the initial 
point of the process is altered Pareto point will be altered as 
well and move on the graphic presentation of the case. 
Hence, negotiators will approach Pareto frontier [16].   
Within the Joint Gains software students build their own 
case for negotiation specifying the parties and the matter for 
negotiation. An example could be seen in Figure 2 [16].  
 
Figure 2.  Case Creation in negotiation games [16]. 
During the process of negotiations, the software acts as a 
mediator between the parties, elaborating proposals for the 
purposes of negotiations. This interaction can be seen in 
Figure 3 [16].  
 
Figure 3.  Negotiation process [16]. 
The program itself is available to wide audience as an 
online course that takes only 90 minutes. With the help of 
the presented information users of the course become well-
prepared for the negotiations. What is more, the course is 
divided into three sections each of them compounding a 
scenario challenge: 
• 
Collaborative Negotiation 
• 
The ICON Value Diamond 
• 
Conducting the Negotiation. 
The aim of this approach is to enable prospective 
negotiators to have a better perception of the problem and to 
prepare them for an adequate solution for any type of 
negotiations [22].  
IV. 
THE PROPOSAL 
By analyzing some types of learning tools, it is possible 
to see how important the use of such tools is to improve 
concepts of decision making processes, mainly, in the 
learning of negotiation elements. Thus, this paper presents a 
learning tool to be regarded in this context. 
The e-learning negotiation tool proposed here provides 
mechanisms to understand and also improve users' 
negotiation skills. For this purpose, several technologies 
have been used, such as trading games, quizzes, 
psychological tests, wizard forms and visualization reports.   
The e-learning mechanisms proposed here, are parts of a 
Negotiation Support System developed for academic 
purposes and to share negotiation games among universities. 
The framework, called ENEG, is based on such technologies 
as: Knowledge Management [4], Risk Management [30], 
Visualization Methods [25], Text Mining [28][29] and 
Mobile Statements [6].   
These modules were developed based on researches 
about software project negotiations. Although not being 
unique, the focus of this environment is IT projects. Thus, 
the negotiation knowledge flux was a concept to prioritize 
negotiations that involve IT context. 
The Knowledge Management Module aims at controlling 
basic negotiation information, such as: customers, contacts, 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

deadlines, negotiators and initial negotiation prospects, what 
is more, there are several forms and wizards to help the 
users.   
Risk Management is the Module where users can identify 
risks (threats and opportunities) and point out negotiation 
elements that can be impacted by stored risks. Examples of 
negotiation elements are context, concerns, options, 
relationships, power, communication, criteria, legitimacy, 
concessions and schedule. Moreover, this module contains a 
preliminary list of about 500 risks from software projects 
domain that assists inexperienced negotiators to manage 
them. 
Text Mining tools and Visualization Methods are used 
for mining the data stored in the Knowledge and Risk 
Management modules and transform data to information 
through a group of intuitive graphs and dashboards. 
The environment also provides mechanisms to increase 
IT professionals' negotiation skills. For this purpose, e-
learning tools focused on the IT context have been 
developed, e.g., trading games, quizzes and psychological 
tests. This approach is the focus of this article, as shown in 
Figure 4. 
More sophisticated platforms have been developed to 
support experienced negotiators, which require agility and 
the most current available information. Based on these 
requirements, a mobile platform has been developed that lets 
the users to manage data registered in the negotiation. This 
platform is integrated into Knowledge Management and Risk 
Management Modules. 
Currently, this environment is available at and its use is 
free (see [23]). The translation to Spanish, Russian and 
Mandarin is underway. Figure 4 shows the overall 
architecture of this Negotiation Support System, which can 
highlight the e-learning tool, contextualized in this article. 
 
Figure 4.  NSS Architecture [23]. 
The e-learning infrastructure aimed at indicating to users 
which negotiating skills can be discovered and improved.  
Figure 5 shows an example of negotiation games. 
 
Figure 5.  Negotiation Simulation Games. 
Other platforms have been developed to support 
inexperienced and experienced negotiators, which require 
agility and the most up-to-date information.  Based on these 
requirements, psychological questionnaires have been 
developed which let users manage the data registered in the 
negotiation games. This platform is all integrated into e-
learning and knowledge management modules.  An example 
of using psychological questionnaires is depicted in Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6.  Example of phycological questionnaire (questions). 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

After answering each questionnaire, the tool's user can 
see his personal result.  The graphs compare the user`s result 
between IT and non-IT people.  This comparison is part of 
the focus of this academic working group.  
 
Figure 7.  Example os phycological questionnaire (results). 
Figure 7 shows the results of the questionnaire applied in 
the Figure 6.  There are other quizzes, tutorials and games 
that are used to generate personality graphs and highlight the 
professional’s style during conflict management, as showed 
in Figure 8. 
In this example (Figure 8), the results depict styles 
(Collaboration, Competition, Commitment, Accommodation 
and Deviation) and compare user’s profile between IT and 
Not IT people.  Here again, all results can be achieved in the 
website referenced in [23], purpose of this work. 
The graphs depicted in these figures are made through 
the lenses of visualization methods and previous work [25] 
has improved quality and usability of each result. 
Besides, the results of each mechanism of learning 
(negotiation games, questionnaires, quizzes, preparation 
form) are inputs of a text mining tool in which it is possible 
to combine the individual results and, then, generate other 
types of graphs. 
Nearly 80% of data is stored in text [28], so it is 
imperative to be able to recover and share this information. 
Text Mining provides mechanisms to explore large amounts 
of textual data in a reasonable cost, making possible the 
retrieving and analysis of this information [29]. 
 
Figure 8.  Another example of personality graphs (results). 
In the approach proposed here, once there are enough 
data on the process, the tool can use mining tools to cross the 
negotiation data (Figure 9) and then, the visualization 
methods provide reports to highlight possible ways of 
increasing the chances of agreements. 
 
Figure 9.  Textmining techniques. 
As shown in Figure 9, for each text (negotiation data – 
questionnaire, negotiation game, quiz, form, etc), the 
algorithm removes stop words and applies the stemming 
method, which considers the stems to evaluate the number of 
common words (e.g., negotiation, negotiations, negotiator).  
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Afterwards, the process manages the output with a thesaurus 
to balance the weights (proposed by experienced negotiators) 
and relevant word frequency. The quantification criterion 
depends on the type of element (questionnaire, negotiation 
game, etc).  As a default, a merger between words’ 
frequency and weight to find each element value was used.  
At the end, these quantified values will be used to create the 
radar graph, which considers a dynamic number of 
negotiation elements.  In the example depicted in Figure 9, 
ten elements are showed: context, interests, options, 
relationship, 
power, 
cognition, 
criterion, 
compliance, 
concessions and time. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The article has given an insight to several aspects. It has 
been showed that negotiating skills can be acquired not only 
by face-to-face situations but also by online approaches with 
a usage of certain programs that can become available 
through two tools: personal computers and cell phones. Both 
of them are useful although PCs have a wider range of 
products that can be applied to learn negotiation skills. It can 
be concluded that with the help of software negotiators can 
expose themselves to real situations and analyze their results 
and progress. Several types of software have demonstrated 
various approaches to training negotiation skills. One of the 
main differences among them is the distinction of decision-
making process and the way they regard problem solving 
situations. The proposal given in this article is distinguished 
by specification of conflict management styles. The 
suggested learning tool has a wide range of questionnaires 
and is able to give detailed feedback on the results of carried 
out quizzes. One of the other advantages of this tool is that it 
presents a graphic outcome of the case created by a 
negotiator and allows easy perception of results.   
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Kay, “E-learning market insight report. Drivers, developments, 
decisions.” FD Learning 2002. 
[2] L. Patel, “The State of the Industry Report. ASTD’s definitive review 
of 
workplace 
learning 
and 
development 
trends.”,http://www.astd.org/TD/Archives/2010/Nov/Free/1110_2010
+State+of+the+Industry.htm, <retrieved: November, 2011> 
[3] H. Hills, “Individual Preferences in E-Learning”, Burlington, VT: 
Gower, 2003 
[4] M. J. Rosenberg, “Beyond e-learning: approaches and technologies to 
enhance organizational knowledge, learning, and performance”, 2006 
[5] M. Borghese, “Western Europe to be over 100% mobile by 2007”, 
All 
Headline 
News. 
http://www.allheadlinenews. 
com/articles/2230775906, <retrieved: June, 2011>. 
[6] M. Prensky,  “What can you learn from a cell phone? Almost 
anything!”.http://www.innovateonline.info/index.php?view=article&i
d=83 <retrieved: April,2008>. 
[7] B. Biggs and R. Justice, “Mobile learning: The next evolution”, Chief 
Learning 
Officer, 
10(4), 
38-41. 
Available 
at 
http://www.clomedia.com, <retrieved: April, 2011>. 
[8] D. McConnell, “Negotiation, identity and knowledge in e-learning 
communities, University of Sheffield”, 2002. 
[9] [9] V. Koskinen, “E-learning and teaching mathematical models of 
negotiation analysis”, Helsinki University of Technology, Department 
of Engineering Physics and Mathematics, 2003 
[10] R. L. Keeney and H. Raiffa, “Decisions with multiple objectives”, 
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1976 
[11] V. Chankong and Y. Y. Haimes, “Multiobjective decision daking: 
theory and methodology”, North-Holland, 1983. 
[12] T. Arh and B. J. Blažič, “Application of multi-attribute decision 
making approach to learning management systems evaluation, journal 
of compuetrs”, Vol.2, No. 10, 2007. 
[13] M. Bohanec and V. Rajkovič, “DEX: an expert system shell for 
decision support”, Sistemica, vol. 1(1), 1990, pp.145–157. 
[14] M. Bohanec, “DEX: an expert system Shell for multi-attribute 
decision making, user`s manual” (Software version 1.00ITR), Jožef 
Stefan Institute, Report DP-5896, 1990 
[15] M. Bohanec, “Introduction to DEX”. Jožef Stefan Institute, Report 
DP-6240, 1991 
[16] H. Ehtamo, R. P. Hämäläinen and V. Koskinen, “An e-learning 
module on negotiation analysis”, Helsinki University of Technology, 
Copyright 2004 IEEE. Published in the Proceedings of the Hawai'i 
International Conference on System Sciences, January 5 – 8, 2004, 
Big Island, Hawaii. 
[17] H. Ehtamo and R.P. Hämäläinen, “Interactive multiple-criteria 
methods for reaching Pareto optimal agreements in negotiations”, 
Group Decision and Negotiation, Vol. 10, 2001, pp. 475-491. 
[18] H. Ehtamo, E. Kettunen and R.P. Hämäläinen, “Searching for joint 
gains in multi-party negotiations”, European Journal of Operational 
Research, Vol. 130, 2001, pp. 54-69. 
[19] H. Ehtamo, M. Verkama and R.P. Hämäläinen, “How to select fair 
improving directions in a negotiation model over continuous issues”, 
IEEE Transactions on Systems Man and Cybernetics – Part C: 
Applications and Reviews, Vol. 29, 1999, pp. 26-33. 
[20] E. Kettunen and R. P. Hämäläinen,  “Joint gains, negotiation support 
in the internet”. Systems Analysis Laboratory, Helsinki University of 
Technology, 2000. 
[21] G. Lum, “The negotiation fieldbook, second edition: simple strategies 
to help you negotiate everything”, 2004 
[22] Accordence, Available at http://www.accordence.com, <retrieved: 
September, 2011>. 
[23] ENEG, 
Available 
at 
http://www.negociacao.net, 
<retrieved: 
December, 2011>. 
[24] S. A. Rodrigues and J. M. Souza. “E-Neg: An Environment to 
Prepare and Manage Risks in Negotiations”. In: IADIS International 
Conference e-Society 2010, 2010, Porto. IADIS International 
Conference e-Society 2010, 2010. 
[25] S. A Rodrigues; D. Krejci and J. M. Souza, . “Negotiation Supported 
Through Visualization Methods”. In: CLEI 2008, 2008, Santa Fé. 
CLEI 2008 - XXXIV Conferencia Latinoamerica de Informática, 
2008, 2008. p. 1-10. 
[26] OGLOBO, 
O 
Globo 
on 
line. 
Available 
at 
http://oglobo.globo.com/economia/mat/2011/09/19/vendas-de-
celulares-sao-recorde-em-agosto-925391592.asp, 
<retrieved: 
September, 2011>. 
[27] IBGE, Available at http://www.ibge.gov.br, <retrieved: September, 
2011>. 
[28] A. Tan, , 1999. “Text Mining: The state of the art and the challenges”. 
In: PAKDD Workshop on Knowledge Discovery from Advanced 
Databases, Beijing. 
[29] R. Feldman and I. Dagan, 1995. “Knowledge discovery in textual 
database”s, In: Proceedings of the First International Conference on 
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Montreal. 
[30] PMBOK, 2008. ‘A Guide to the Project Management Body of 
Knowledge’, Version 4, Project Management Institute 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

