Designing Principles and Guidelines for a Pedagogical Framework of STEM 
Learning Through Mobile Serious Games 
 
Ignace M. Kasiama 
Department of Educational Technology  
Laval University 
Quebec, Canada  
ignace.kasiama-mupalanga.1@ulaval.ca 
Laurence Capus  
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering  
Laval University 
laurence.capus@ift.ulaval.ca
 
 
Abstract— The urgency of improving science, technology, 
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) learning has been 
internationally recognized. However, the views on the nature 
and development of proficiencies in STEM education are 
diverse, and increased focus on integration raises new concerns 
and needs for further research. The complexity of these factors 
reaches beyond just helping students achieve high scores in 
STEM topics assessments. In practice, teachers struggle and 
lack cohesive understanding of STEM education. Also, 
students are most of the time disinterested in some STEM 
subjects and do not understand how STEM knowledge is 
applied to real-world problems. Connecting ideas across 
disciplines is challenging when students have little or no 
understanding of the relevant ideas in the individual 
disciplines. 
Therefore, 
a 
STEM 
education 
conceptual 
framework is needed to build a research agenda that will in 
turn inform stakeholders to realize the full potential of 
integrated STEM education. In this paper, we present key 
concepts to build an integrated STEM education framework 
through mobile serious games which reflect design principles 
created based on the theoretical understanding of teaching and 
learning. 
Keywords- STEM; Mobile Educational serious games; 
Pedagogical framework; Design principles; Mobile learning 
environment 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Science, technology, engineering and mathematics fosters 
students’ creativity and design thinking [7][12]. Globally, 
educators hope to improve student learning outcomes, such 
as participation, interest, engagement, persistence, and 
aspiration in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and 
mathematics) and STEM-related fields. For Taylor (2016), 
STEM education is a key factor in preparing young people 
to deal positively and productively with 21st century global 
challenges that are impacting the economy and the 
environment. The focus of our paper will be on science, 
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) related 
studies at primary and secondary school levels. As we will 
deal throughout this paper with the design principles and 
guidelines for the pedagogical framework for STEM 
learning through mobile serious games, recommendations, 
and guidelines for considering these design principles in the 
STEM learning design environment using mobile serious 
games and how these principles will be applied including 
concrete examples within the complete framework, will be 
subject of our next research work. As stated by Martin et al. 
[17], it has been widely argued that more active instructional 
methods must be implemented in classrooms. The authors 
refer to the general proposition of Bonwell et al. [3] to define 
these more active instructional methods for students to be 
engaged in usual tasks such as listening, reading, writing, 
discussing, or solving problems but also, and most 
importantly, to be engaged in higher-order thinking tasks 
such as analysis, synthesis, or evaluation and for which an 
inquiry-based approach to STEM subjects can produce good 
results. 
In this context, serious games can play a special role 
because the quantitative and predictive models of STEM 
topics can be used to generate interactive environments that 
can be freely experienced. Serious games have great 
potential to catalyze and support inquiry-based approaches 
to STEM instruction, over-coming curricular and logistical 
barriers [20]. Despite a decade of research emphasis on 
STEM education, there has not been much game-based 
learning for STEM, and the existing one are not consistent 
in terms of activities being monitored and learning 
outcomes assessed [35]. Serious games as a teaching aid can 
stimulate students interest and improve their understanding 
in STEM learning. The use of serious game on STEM 
learning analytics provides assessment data to measure 
student performance and achievement of pre-defined 
learning out-comes [36]. The concept of STEM education is 
an effort to engage students in learning about science, 
technology, engineering, and mathematics [10].  
Today, digital games are considered a popular form of 
activity for children and even for adults. Most students 
cannot imagine a world without mobile technology [31]. As 
the process of technological change in education evolves, it 
must be recognized that mobile technology is part of the 
new education system. They provide personalized distance 
learning and automatic learning using mobile devices for 
students of all ages and backgrounds [5]. STEM learning 
through Mobile devices allows interaction, collaboration, 
and learning in a variety of ways: through apps, videos, 
online presentations, and other interactive tools [15]. The 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

added value of STEM learning games through mobile 
serious games is that they appeal to many players. 
Students can bring knowledge with them wherever they 
go. The growth rate of the mobile gaming market is a force 
to be reckoned with. Currently, there is a lack of high 
quality and critically evaluated interactive educational 
materials or tools available for teacher’s use [9]. There is a 
need for student-centered and design-based approaches to 
STEM education to engage students in STEM fields and 
develop skills basics needed to succeed in a technological 
society. Educational games have been used for decades, 
their affordances serving as primary vehicles of learning, 
but their benefits are limited by their constructivist 
pedagogy. According to McDonald [18], game design as an 
educational tool can meet the needs of contemporary STEM 
educators and become an essential part of future science, 
technology, engineering, and math education initiatives. 
These principles and guidelines for a pedagogical 
framework of STEM learning through mobile serious games 
will be useful for primary and secondary teachers in the 
design of STEM lessons, for example, choices of types of 
tasks and activities, ways of learning, teaching, and learning 
content in the context of STEM subjects. Teachers will be 
able to choose the design principles they deem most relevant 
to consider each time, depending on the specific learning 
objectives, instead of trying to keep all the principles in 
mind. Obviously, Teachers may also choose to focus on 
specific design principles based on their personal 
professional development needs. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Throughout this section will present principles to inform the 
design of innovative learning environments using mobile 
technologies. We will discuss how such design principles 
are an important outcome of creating a learning framework 
using mobile devices. 
A. The role of mobile technology in serious game 
As the world has become a global village because of the 
technological advancement in the world, mobile teaching 
and learning in recent years has become a valuable and real 
contribution to learning environment rather than what it 
used to be in previous years as a theory, academic 
exploration, and technological idea [1]. Obviously, with the 
rapid development of mobile communication technology 
and wireless internet technology, a new learning mode 
named 
mobile 
learning 
is 
quietly 
emerging. 
The 
characteristics of personalized learning at anytime and 
anywhere attract the attention of many scholars at home and 
abroad. However, it has become an urgent problem to 
ensure learners to focus on learning in a mobile learning 
environment for a long time, and that fragmentation learning 
can be effectively integrated into system learning. It is a 
meaningful attempt to integrate edutainment into mobile 
learning. For Husheng et al. [8], with the implementation of 
4G technology, mobile games have made great leaps both in 
the game quality and the game platform. It also provides 
great opportunities for the combination of serious games 
and mobile learning.  
Mobile serious game is serious game in the mobile device 
on the realization of the carrier. It has the characteristics of 
mobile games and serious games and has unique advantages 
in portability and entertainment. Users can use mobile 
phones to play games at any time and place, actively 
acquiring knowledge and skills, and achieving changes in 
attitudes and behaviors. 
Given the fact that there is no single definition for mobile 
learning and stressing that mobile learning has not yet been 
defined, many researchers have put forth proposed 
definitions of the concept. Mobile learning has been 
described as a subdivision or subset of electronic learning 
[22]. Therefore, mobile learning focuses on the mobility of 
the learners, interacting with portable technologies and 
learning that reflects a focus on how society and its 
institutions can accommodate and support an increasingly 
mobile population. 
B. Design principles for mobile learning 
For van den Akker [32], design principles can refer to 
characteristics of a planned learning design (what it should 
look like), or its procedure (how it should be developed). 
Above all, design principles must be expressed in a way that 
can inform practice [33]. Design principles are best 
expressed in active terms that enable their ready use by 
teachers and designers presented with similar contexts and 
problems. They are often presented in a form that lists 
criteria of particular learning environments and outcomes, 
and when presented this way, often start with a verb.  Again, 
design principles are not fixed, and are offered as advice on 
how others might benefit from the findings of a particular 
development and research endeavour. As noted by Reeves 
[24]: ‘Instructional technologists engaged in [design-based] 
research are above all reflective and humble, cognizant that 
their designs and conclusions are tentative in even the best 
of situations’.  
Herrington et al. [6] have outlined design principles for 
mobile learning and the following characteristics are 
recommended for the incorporation of mobile learning into 
an education learning environment: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
 
TABLE I.  
DESIGN PRINCIPLES FOR MOBILE LEARNING 
PRINCIPLES 
DESCRIPTION 
REAL WORLD RELEVANCE 
USE MOBILE LEARNING IN AUTHENTIC 
CONTEXTS 
MOBILE CONTEXTS  
USE MOBILE LEARNING IN CONTEXTS 
WHERE LEARNERS ARE MOBILE. 
EXPLORE 
PROVIDE TIME FOR EXPLORATION OF 
MOBILE TECHNOLOGIES 
BLENDED 
BLEND MOBILE AND NON-MOBILE 
TECHNOLOGIES 
WHENEVER 
USE MOBILE LEARNING SPONTANEOUSLY 
WHEREVER  
USE MOBILE LEARNING IN NON-
TRADITIONAL LEARNING SPACES 
WHOMSOEVER 
USE MOBILE LEARNING BOTH 
INDIVIDUALLY AND COLLABORATIVELY 
AFFORDANCES  
EXPLOIT THE AFFORDANCES OF MOBILE 
TECHNOLOGIES 
PERSONALISE 
EMPLOY THE LEARNERS’ OWN MOBILE 
DEVICES 
MEDIATION  
USE MOBILE LEARNING TO MEDIATE 
KNOWLEDGE CONSTRUCTION. 
PRODUCE:  
USE MOBILE LEARNING TO PRODUCE AND 
CONSUME KNOWLEDGE. 
 
III. 
PEDAGOGICAL FRAMEWORK FOR STEM LEARNING 
AND DESIGN PRINCIPLES 
STEM education is the preparation for STEM fields and 
encouragement of STEM literacy. A commonly accepted 
definition of STEM education is provided by Tsupros et al. 
[30]: STEM education is an interdisciplinary approach to 
learning where rigorous academic concepts are coupled with 
real-world lessons as students apply science, technology, 
engineering, and mathematics in contexts that make 
connections between school, community, work, and the 
global enterprise enabling the development of STEM 
literacy and with it the ability to compete in the new 
economy. As stated earlier on, the importance of engaging 
and effective learning environments for science, technology, 
engineering, 
and 
mathematics 
(STEM) 
has 
been 
internationally recognised [27]. There is a need for learning 
environments that raise interest and motivation towards 
STEM studies and careers (Salmi et al., 2021) and better 
connect STEM competencies to cross-curricular, so-called 
twenty-first century skills, as well as to future workplace 
skills [27]. However, the creation of frameworks that gather 
and represent design principles [34], i.e. organisational units 
for synthesising design knowledge to guide the design of 
hybrid STEM learning environments is much needed [11].  
Considering (a) the lack of a pedagogical conceptual 
framework to guide both educators and developers in the 
design of a learning environment, in the selection of 
effective teaching and learning, methods of teaching and 
learning, particularly in the context of STEM subjects; (b) 
the benefits of a participatory co-design approach for STEM 
educational serious games; (c) the impact of the pedagogical 
framework of STEM learning through mobile serious 
games. The following section will describe how design 
principles have been developed based on the research 
literature. These principles will serve as a research-based 
introduction to the topic after which priorities can be 
defined based on the concrete design target and goals. 
A. Pedagogical Framework structure 
The current state of research on the design of Digital 
Game Based Learning (DGBL) environments call for an 
updated review of the best practices in recent years for 
developing Digital Game based learning environments, 
which prompted our literature review. As outlined by 
Tetyana [30], it draws from successful examples of 
educators implementing STEM learning games in classes, 
and it highlights five key principles that facilitate the 
effectiveness of STEM learning: (1) interactivity; (2) 
immersiveness; (3) adaptive problem solving; (4) feedback, 
and (5) freedom of exploration. Practical examples are used 
to illustrate the effective implementation of these principles 
in STEM learning games environments and to underscore 
the significance of each component.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Principles in STEM learning games 
Using the Pedagogical Framework for STEM Learning 
and Design Principles in the development of educational 
serious games can provide students with a more engaging 
and effective learning experience that helps them develop a 
deeper understanding of STEM concepts. As a result, it can 
help address the challenge of students having little or no 
understanding of the relevant ideas in individual STEM 
disciplines and can promote increased interest and 
participation in STEM fields. As stated by Martin et al., [17], 
it has been widely argued that more active instructional 
methods must be implemented in classrooms. The authors 
refer to the general proposition of Bonwell et al. [3] to define 
these more active instructional methods for students to be 
engaged in usual tasks such as listening, reading, writing, 
discussing, or solving problems but also, and most 
importantly, to be engaged in higher-order thinking tasks 
such as analysis, synthesis, or evaluation and for which an 
inquiry-based approach to STEM subjects can produce good 
results. 
In this context, serious games can play a special role 
because the quantitative and predictive models of STEM 
topics can be used to generate interactive environments that 
can be freely experienced. Serious games have great 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

potential to catalyze and support inquiry-based approaches to 
STEM instruction, over-coming curricular and logistical 
barriers [20]. Also, Young et al. [35] also noted that: Despite 
a decade of research emphasis on STEM education, there has 
not been much game-based learning for STEM, and the 
existing one are not consistent in terms of activities being 
monitored and learning outcomes assessed. According to 
Zaki et al. [36], the use of serious games as a teaching aid 
can 
stimulate 
students' 
interest 
and 
improve 
their 
understanding in STEM learning. The use of serious game 
on STEM learning analytics provides assessment data to 
measure student performance and achievement of pre-
defined learning out-comes. As stated in the previous 
paragraph and similarly by Johnson et al. [10], the concept of 
STEM education is an effort to engage students in learning 
about science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. 
Today, digital games are considered a popular form of 
activity for children and even for adults. 
Their ease of access and mobility allow people, young 
children to play on their smartphones. According to Sauvé et 
al. [26], although playing such games can be considered 
individualistic, studies indicate that online digital games 
allow individuals to connect with others in online virtual 
worlds. Currently, there is a lack of high quality and 
critically evaluated interactive educational materials or tools 
available for teacher’s use. Again, for Jagoda [9], there is a 
need for student-centered and design-based approaches to 
STEM education to engage students in STEM fields and 
develop skills basics needed to succeed in a technological 
society. Educational games have been used for decades, their 
affordances serving as primary vehicles of learning, but their 
benefits are limited by their constructivist pedagogy. In fact, 
the game design as an educational tool can meet the needs of 
contemporary STEM educators and become an essential part 
of future science, technology, engineering, and math 
education initiatives [18]. 
These principles as outlined above, derived from 
successful implementation of digital gaming elements in 
learning, and they provide suggestions and strategies for 
incorporation of these elements based on real-life examples. 
The table below show how each of these elements are 
effectively adopted in STEM educational games and may 
offer ideas for the development of future STEM Digital 
game-based learning designs. Particularly learner-centred 
pedagogical principles have been guiding the framework 
development. The conceptualization of student-centered 
learning is influenced by authors such as Hayward, Dewey, 
Froebel, Piaget, Rogers, and Knowles [21]. All this, relate 
primarily to the constructivist view emphasizing the 
importance of places on activity, discovery, and independent 
learning but also cognitive theory highlighting the activity. It 
also has connections with social constructivist views 
emphasizing the importance of peer interaction in learning. 
O’Neill et al. [21] view student-centred and teacher-centred 
learning as a continuum: 
• 
Low level of student choice - High level of student 
choice, 
• 
Student passive - Student active, 
• 
Power is primarily with teacher - Power primarily 
with the student. 
In the table below, we will present general principles and 
description as well as some examples of how these aspects 
will be considered in the pedagogical framework of STEM 
learning through mobile serious games. 
TABLE II.  
DESCRIPTIONS OF PRINCIPLES IN STEM LEARNING GAMES 
Principle Indicator 
Description 
Interactivity 
Games that offer meaningful interactions 
demonstratively maintain high levels of 
engagement in students and positively 
contribute to their performance on tests when 
compared to regular project-based instruction 
(e.g., An & Bonk, 2009; Barab et. al, 2007).  
 
Immersiveness 
Immersive details and students‟ absorption 
in the activity may lead to the mental state of 
flow (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990), meaning that 
students would intrinsically enjoy the game 
and perceive the involvement in the game 
itself as its own reward (DeCharms, 1972; 
Deci, 1975; Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi, 
2002).  
 
Adaptive problem solving 
Many cognitive psychologists report that 
engaging students in solving real world 
problems positively affects their learning 
gains (e.g., Mayer, 1992; Merrill & Gilbert, 
2008). The challenge to resolve these 
problems needs to be effectively aligned 
with the student‟s ability and skill level to 
ensure effective learning. Therefore, I 
coined the term adaptive problem solving to 
accurately reflect this need.  
 
A well-designed DGBL should offer skill-
level adjustments to the problems that 
students are facing which will ensure gradual 
learning for all students (Wilson et al., 2009) 
and create motivational tension (Driskell & 
Dwyer, 1984) when the challenge of the 
game is optimal for students‟ skills. 
 
Feedback 
As in any form of learning, quality feedback 
helps students evaluate their progress, 
recognize their strengths, and identify areas 
that need improvement (Charles et al., 2009). 
Effective feedback should provide timely 
and relevant information on students‟ 
progress towards their learning goals. 
 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Designing an effective STEM Learning environment 
using mobile serious games that can engage and motivate 
students as well as facilitate their learning is a challenging 
task. In many cases, teachers’ pedagogical expertise does 
not directly translate into game design, and it leaves 
educators with no help regarding the effective ways to 
introduce STEM learning games in a class and what 
elements of games and learning should be prioritized. While 
there is no one correct way to design a digital game-based 
learning that would guarantee its effectiveness for all 
students, previous research can offer successful examples of 
digital games incorporated in classrooms that share common 
principles. The implementation and the effectiveness of 
these principles depend on students’ goals, interests, subject 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

matters, available resources, but they constitute a solid 
foundation for designing or adapting a digital game 
according to the desired learning objectives. The principles 
outlined in this paper provide insights into the potential to 
combine different STEM subjects, learning contexts, 
scenarios, and goals. As educational technologies continue 
to develop, more tools will be available for teachers to 
experiment with and uncover additional benefits and 
effective practices of using STEM digital-based games. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Alzaza, N.S., and A.R. Yaakub. (2011). Students’ awareness 
and requirements of mobile learning services in higher 
education environment. American Journal of Economics and 
Business Administration 3(1): 95–100.  
[2] Ball C, Huang K, Cotten SR, Rikard RV. (2018). Gaming the 
SySTEM: the relationship between video games and the 
digital and STEM divides. Games Cult Nov 29;15(5):501-
528. 
[3] Bonwell, JA Eison. (1991). Active Learning: Creating 
Excitement in the Classroom. Washington, DC: George 
Washington Univ. 
[4] Fisher 
C. 
(2015). 
Designing 
Games 
for 
Children: 
Developmental, Usability, and Design Considerations for 
Making Games for Kids. New York: Focal Press. 
[5] Grant, M. M., Tamim, S., Brown, D. B., Sweeney, J. P., 
Ferguson, F. K., & Jones, L. B. (2015). Teaching and learning 
with mobile computing devices: Case study in K-12 
classrooms. TechTrends, 59(4), 32–45. 
[6] Herrington, A.; Herrington, J.; and Mantei, Jessica (2009). 
Design principles for mobile learning. 
https://ro.uow.edu.au/edupapers/88   
[7] Herro, D., Quigley, C. and Jacques, L.A. (2018), “Examining 
technology integration in middle school STEAM units”, 
Technology, Pedagogy and Education, Vol. 27 No. 4, pp. 
485-498 
[8] Husheng, P., Chenjie, G., Junfu, Y., & Yuehua, C. (2017). 
Research on Design and Development of Mobile Serious 
Game under Mobile Learning Environment. 3rd Workshop on 
Advanced Research and Technology in Industry Applications 
(WARTIA 2017). Advances in Engineering Research (AER), 
volume 148 
[9] Jagoda, P. (2020). Experimental Games: Critique, Play, and 
Design in the Age of Gamification (Chicago:  University of 
Chicago Press, 2020), 386 pp 
[10]  Johnson, C. C., Peters-Burton, E. E., & Moore, T. J. (2015). 
STEM roadmap: a framework for integration. London: Taylor 
& Francis. 
[11] Kali, Y., McKenney, S., & Sagy, O. (2015). Teachers as 
designers of technology enhanced learning Instruc- tional 
Science, 173–180 
[12] Kang, N.H. (2019), “A review of the effect of integrated 
STEM or STEAM (science, technology, engineering, arts, and 
mathematics) education in South Korea”, Asia-Pacific 
Science Education, Vol. 5 No. 1, pp. 1-22 
[13] Kucher, T. (2021). Principles and best practices of designing 
digital game-based learning environments. International 
Journal of Technology in Education and Science (IJTES), 
5(2), 213-223.  
[14] Kukulska-Hulme A, Bossu C, Coughlan T, Ferguson R, 
FitzGerald E, Gaved M, et al (2021). Innovating Pedagogy: 
Open University Innovation Report 9. Milton Keynes: The 
Open University; 2021:1-51. 
[15] Leontyeva, I., Pronkin, N., & Tsvetkova, M. (2021). 
Visualization of learning and memorization: Is the mind 
mapping based on mobile platforms learning more effective? 
International Journal of Instruction, 14(4), 173–186. 
[16] Mäkelä, T., & Leinonen, T. (2021). Design Framework and 
Principles for Learning Environment Co-Design: Synthesis 
from Literature and Three Empirical Studies. Buildings, 
11(12), Article 581. 
[17] Martin Riopel, Lucian Nenciovici, Patrice Potvin, Pierre 
Chastenay, Patrick Charland, Jérémie Blanchette Sarrasin & 
Steve Masson (2020). Impact of serious games on science 
learning achievement compared with more conventional 
instruction: an overview and a meta-analysis, Studies in 
Science Education, 55:2, 169-214. 
[18] McDonald, C. V. (2016). STEM Education: A Review of the 
Contribution of the Disciplines of Science, Technology, 
Engineering 
and 
Mathematics. 
Science 
Education 
International, 27(4), 530–569. 
[19] Motiwalla, L.F. (2007). Mobile learning: A framework and 
evaluation. Computers & Education 49(3): 581–596.  
[20] National Research Council. (2011). Learning science through 
computer games and simulations. In M. A. Honey & M. L. 
Hilton (Eds.), Committee on science learning: computer 
games, simulations, and education. Washington, DC: The 
National Academies Press. 
[21] O´Neill, G. & McMahon, T. (2005). Student-centred learning: 
What does it mean for students and lecturers? in G. O’Neill, 
G. Moore and B. McMullin (Eds.), Emerging Issues in the 
Practice of University Learning and Teaching. Dublin: 
AISHE. 
[22] Peters, K. (2007). m-Learning: Positioning educators for a 
mobile, connected future. International Journal Of Research 
in Open and Distance Learning, 8(2), 1-17. 
[23] Prensky, M. (2001). Digital game-based learning. New York: 
McGraw-Hill Education. 
[24] Reeves, T. (2000). Enhancing the worth of instructional 
technology research through “design experiments” and other 
development research strategies. Paper presented at the 
Annual AERA Meeting, April 24-28, New Orleans. 
[25] Salmi, H., Thuneberg, H., Bogner, F. X., & Fenyvesi, K. 
(2021). Individual creativity and career choices of pre-teens in 
the context of a math-art learning event. Open Education 
Studies, 3(1), 147–156. 
[26] Sauvé, L; Renaud, L; Kaufman, D.(2010). Games, 
simulations and simulations games for learning: Definitions 
and distinctions. In D. Kaufman & L. Sauvé. Educational 
gameplay and simulation environments: Case studies and 
lessons learned, 1-26. 
[27] Struyf, A., De Loof, H., Boeve-de Pauw, J., & Van Petegem, 
P. (2019). Students’ engagement in different STEM learning 
environments: Integrated STEM education as promising 
practice? International Jour- nal of Science Education, 41(10), 
1387–1407  
[28] Taylor, P.C. (2016). “Session N: why is a STEAM curriculum 
perspective crucial to the 21st century?”, 2009-2016 ACER 
Research Conferences. Paper 6, Australian Council for 
Educational Research (ACER), Melbourne  
[29] Tetyana Kucher (2021). Principles and Best Practices of 
Designing Digital Game-Based Learning Environments. 
International Journal of Technology in Education and 
Science. Vol. 5, No. 2, 213-223 
[30] Tsupros, N., Kohler, R., & Hallinen, J. (2009). STEM 
Education: A Project to Identify the Missing Components. 
Pittsburgh, PA: Intermediate Unit 1 and Carnegie Mellon. 
 
[31] Tyurina, Y., Troyanskaya, M., Babaskina, L., Choriyev, R., & 
Pronkin, N. (2021). E-learning for SMES. International 
Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning, 16(2), 108–
119. 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[32] van den Akker, J. (1999). Principles and methods of 
development research. In J. van den Akker, N. Nieveen, R. M. 
Branch, K. L. Gustafson & T. Plomp (Eds.), Design 
methodology and developmental research in education and 
training (pp. 1-14). The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers.  
[33] Wang, F., & Hannafin, M. J. (2005). Design-based research 
and technology-enhanced learning environments. Educational 
Technology Research and Development, 53(4), 5-23.  
[34] Warr, M., Mishra, P., & Scragg, B. (2020). Designing theory. 
Educational Technology Research and Development, 68, 
601–632. 
[35] Young, M. F., Slota, S., Cutter, A. B., Jalette, G., Mullin, G., 
Lai, B., Yukhymenko, M. (2012). Our princess is in another 
castle: A review of trends in serious gaming for education. 
Review of Educational Research, 82(1), 61–89. 
[36] Zaki, N. A. A., Zain, N.Z.M., Noor, N.A.Z., & Hashim, H. 
(2020). Developing a conceptual model of learning analytics 
in serious game for STEM education. Science Education 
Study Program FMIPA UNNES Semarang.in serious game s 
for STEM education. Science Education Study Program 
FMIPA UNNES Semarang. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

