A Social Interaction Taxonomy: 
 Classifying User Interaction Tasks in Web Applications 
Monika Steinberg, Nicole Ullmann, Jürgen Brehm 
Institute of Systems Engineering - System and Computer Architecture 
Hannover, Germany 
[steinberg, brehm]@sra.uni-hannover.de, nicole.ullmann@fiwii.de 
 
 
Abstract – For social web applications, motivated users are an 
essential part. They create the new (Open) Content that is 
presented to users. Without ongoing current content such web 
applications are unviable. Creating and editing content means 
user interaction upon resources and with each other. It is no 
surprise that web applications evermore tend to use game 
design principles to keep their users motivated. In this 
contribution, a Social Interaction Taxonomy (SIT) is presented 
that classifies users for any kind of interaction within any kind 
of web application. For this purpose, we designed a taxonomy 
which classifies typical activities within web applications to 
prepare them for global rewarding with points and special 
awards in the next step. The focus of this contribution lies on 
the classification of user interoperation tasks in social web 
applications and the derivation of our taxonomy. It creates the 
basis for a Global Interaction Rewarding Model (GIAR) via 
RESTful web services. Web applications, that want to reward 
their users’ activity with points, badges or other prizes in a 
global and application-independent way, can embed our 
taxonomy for activity logging with rewarding and the 
generation of activity stats known from game design (user 
rankings, level progression, etc.). By applying simple game 
principles like rewarding points and creating appealing, 
emotive user experience a "boring" vocabulary trainer 
becomes a vocabulary learning game. Students or other users 
of such rewarded interaction stay motivated. They easily walk 
through learning phases because they do not perceive it as 
learning, but as playing. Next to gaming mechanics, the 
developed Social Interaction Taxonomy can be embedded into, 
e.g., web activity monitoring systems to gain classified 
information about the users’ behavior.  
Keywords – Game Design Mechanics; Interaction Taxonomy; 
User Interaction; Social Media, Web Applications. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Since the first days of the World Wide Web, the Web 
design process is changing. Whereas the first available web 
sites presented static content to a user, nowadays users are 
able to interactively create new content. Web design has 
evolved into web application design, where the internet 
browser acts as the operating system and web sites act as 
applications, the user interacts with. As web sites become 
more and more interactive, principles and methodologies 
known from ID (interaction design) must be considered 
during the design process of a web application. One basic 
principle is that there is not "the" solution to a known 
interface design problem, there are always more solutions, 
and hence designing interfaces is always an iterative process 
of building prototypes and testing them with users to validate 
or dismiss a solution. In the past few years, a new trend can 
be observed in popular web applications like Twitter [1] or 
Flickr [2]: using game design principles to motivate 
respectively encourage users to keep being active within 
their applications. 
The great benefit of games is, that people enjoy playing 
them (even for hours or days), because it is fun. It is 
something, they like to do since “play is something one 
chooses to do” [3]. More and more, web applications make 
use of simple game mechanics, like collecting points or 
providing leaderboards to “put the fun in functional” [4] and 
by this, keep their users motivated since they perceive the 
application as a game and have fun using it.  
From this, it follows that designers of modern, interactive 
and engaging web sites must combine tenets from the 
mentioned disciplines: web design, interaction design and 
game design. Incorporating even simple game mechanics 
like rewarding points, leaderboards or level systems causes 
significant overhead during the design process of web 
applications. One has to choose, which interactions to 
reward, develop algorithms and models for leaderboards or 
level systems and compute activity stats to be presented to 
the user. The effort for data management rises as one has to 
manage the content that users create interactively, which is 
still the main purpose of web applications, and the data 
needed for applied game mechanics.  
In some cases the effort of applying game principles does 
not pay off, e.g., for short-term online surveys where the 
main purpose is to aggregate data. But especially for such 
applications the quantity of data is important and this can 
only be accomplished by motivated participants. The quality 
of data is crucial for applications like the qKAI [5] mashup 
framework, which utilizes Open Content [6] [7] for 
interactive knowledge transfer and semantic resource 
annotation. Assessing certain criteria of information quality 
can hardly be managed automatically because they are of 
subjective nature, so it is up to motivated users to make 
statements about such criteria [8]. Utilizing game mechanics 
without the need to integrate them into an application can be 
achieved by using an independent global interaction 
rewarding service that deals with the whole "game" 
administration. One only needs to choose which interactions 
to reward and integrate corresponding service calls into the 
25
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

application to be developed. The service manages the 
interaction logging and rewarding, the evaluation of activity 
stats like leaderboards, level rankings and other kinds of 
information that have the ability to encourage people when 
presented to them. The rewarding service acts completely 
independent of a specific web application and by this can 
aggregate activities within different applications a user is 
active in. This can be used to derive some kind of a global 
WWW-activity ranking that reflects how active users are on 
the internet and may motivate them, to be more active in 
various web applications they have accounts in. 
A. Our Contribution 
This contribution is based on the master thesis of Nicole 
Ullmann [9] and her contribution to the qKAI mashup 
framework [5] [8]. In the following, we propose a Social 
Interaction Taxonomy (SIT) that classifies typical activities 
in (social) web applications by type and purpose. Based on 
this taxonomy we designed a generic rewarding system for 
user interoperation tasks in web applications that rewards 
interactions with points depending on the effort to execute 
them. Beside points users may win awards depending on the 
number of times, certain interactions have been executed. In 
addition, the rewarding system regularly determines the most 
active users within interaction-classes or interaction-skills to 
reward them with special awards. To overcome the 
mentioned need to integrate game mechanics into one’s web 
application a RESTful web service [10] has been designed 
and implemented that enables any kind of application to 
reward users for being active by simply calling the rewarding 
service. The web service provides two types of service calls: 
calls for interaction logging respectively rewarding and calls 
for activity stats known from game design (leaderboards, 
level and skill-rankings, progression and gained awards). 
The focus here lies on game design mechanics and the 
derivation of the Social Interaction Taxonomy as basis for 
Global Interaction Rewarding (GIAR) discussed in further 
publications [9]. 
B. Structure of this contribution 
In Section 2, we introduce some exemplary aspects 
regarding game design. In Section 3, we describe the 
derivation of our Social Interaction Taxonomy (SIT) and its 
interaction classification concept. This contribution ends up 
with conclusion and outlook in Section 4. 
II. 
GAME DESIGN 
Compared to the first existing computer games like Pong 
[11], nowadays developing (good) games is a complex 
process. It may take several years from the initial idea to the 
market-ready product and often involves staff playing 
different roles like producers, publishers and developers. 
Also the development process itself may be comprised of 
several stages like pre-production, production, milestones 
and post-production. It would go beyond the scope of this 
thesis to address the game development process in its 
entirety. So the main purpose of this section is, to give an 
insight into one sub task of game development: the game 
design. According to Wikipedia, game design is “the process 
of designing the content and rules of a game in the pre-
production stage and design of game play, environment and 
storyline during the production stage” [12]. Thus, the first 
two stages of game development deal with game design 
whereas the milestone stage deals with the development of 
ascending game versions like alpha, beta and the final release 
version. The post-production stage deals with game 
maintenance after it has been released. Before we take a 
closer look at game design it must be mentioned that the 
mentioned game development process and its components is 
just a generic sketch of how to create games and can be 
found in (most) game developing companies. It varies from 
company to company and from game to game as it depends 
on the game type/structure/concept itself, the company’s size 
and its experience with game development but the presented 
procedure is a good way to create games. 
A. Basic Game Mechanics 
Games use different mechanics to create an enjoyable 
game play. There is probably no complete list containing all 
possible mechanics, but the following five game mechanics, 
brought together by A. J. Kim [13], have showed up not only 
to be useful for games, but also for interaction designers 
creating social software and web services. 
Points: Rewarding user interactions with points or the 
like is a pretty basic but yet a very effective mechanic that 
almost every computer game uses because they are easy to 
integrate and may serve as a basis for a lot of other 
mechanics. Points may be used to assemble leaderboards, 
which have a great motivational potential, as they tap into 
people’s “innate competitive drive” [14]. Game designers 
need to be aware, that leader board mechanics encourage 
people to "game the system". This colloquially means that 
they learn how to achieve the highest rankings. Another 
application of points, are levels that map user’s in-game 
progress or experience. For example, role-playing games use 
levels to unlock new powers or items. Beyond the game 
industry, points are often used to strengthen the customer 
loyalty by making them redeemable, e.g., like Payback [14] 
(Germany) does. 
Collecting: Collecting is very popular, not just with 
computer games, people collect almost everything: shoes, 
baseball cards or stuffed animals. When it comes to 
computer games, people collect weapons, trophies or set 
items. Completing a set is a highly emotional moment, 
because it often takes a long time to find all set items and 
sometimes this never happens, which is frustrating to most 
players. Collecting mechanics generally have a great 
engaging factor, because people are happy about things they 
discover or gain. Especially, in applications or games with a 
social background, people love to brag about their collection. 
Feedback: A. J. Kim’s [14] definition of feedback as a 
game mechanic is quite the same as M. Prensky’s [3] 
26
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

definition of feedback as a structural key element: feedback 
is the basis for player progression. If a game does not 
provide any feedback on interactions by a player, she does 
not know how these interactions take effect on her 
progression or the game play itself but beside this functional 
aspect of feedback, according to A. J. Kim, feedback makes 
games “more fun & compelling” [9].  
Exchange: 
According 
to 
Amy 
Jo’s 
definition, 
“exchanges are structured social interactions” [14], that can 
be explicit or implicit (in other words emergent). For 
example, most massively multiplayer online role-playing 
games provide options to trade items socially with other 
players and this trading interaction is explicit. A typical 
implicit interaction, mostly known from social browser 
games like Farmville [16], is called "gifting" which means 
that one can make others a present of items they have earned 
or found. 
Customization: 
Almost 
every 
game 
offers 
the 
opportunity to customize it, be it the graphics resolution or 
the volume of sound effects. Beside this technical 
customization, players are able to change their in-game 
character’s 
look, 
attributes 
and 
equipment. 
The 
customization may be performed automatically, e.g., by 
testing a graphics card’s performance and an appropriate 
adjustment of the graphics resolution or by players 
themselves, e.g., by changing the color of a car in a car 
racing game. 
B. Reward Types 
Game designers greatly use their imagination, when it 
comes to the incorporation of engaging rewards as there are 
no limits to possible reward types. However, the following, 
incomplete list introduces typical rewards that can be found 
in some form or other in most modern computer games [17]. 
Skill Rewards are used to enable players to improve their in-
game character’s attributes and/or skills, e.g., increasing 
strength and vitality in Sacred 2 [18], or anything else that 
can be enhanced, e.g., technologies in Civilization [19]. 
Mostly, this is accomplished by rewarding skill points that 
players can freely distribute on different skills/attributes they 
possess. 
Inherent Rewards are not directly given out by a game. 
It is the game’s innards like graphics or sound that players 
enjoy, given that the game has a good design. Things like a 
thoughtful, exciting story or an imaginative, virtual world 
can be very rewarding and by this enhance the experience of 
a player.  
Resource Rewards can be found in games, where 
resources play a role and this reward type can be easily 
included. Typical resource rewards are in-game currencies 
like gold or coins, resources that are "essential for survival" 
like food or health potions and other types of resources that 
are required by the game itself, e.g., armor and weapons. 
These resource rewards can be usually collected and stored 
in an inventory (see Figure 1).  
Extension Rewards are given out if a game can end due 
to time-limitations or because characters die. The game 
rewards extra time or extra lives to extend the time a player 
can spend playing it. A widely known example of extension 
rewards are those green "1-up mushrooms" used in Super 
Mario Bros [20] to extend Mario’s number of lives (see  
Figure 2). 
 
Accomplishment Rewards in general, are challenges, a 
player accomplishes in a game. Accomplishing typical tasks 
in games like leveling up, beating an enemy, answering 
questions or finishing quests can be rewarding if their degree 
of difficulty matches a player’s progress, otherwise they are 
too hard or too easy to handle.  
Motivational Rewards are simple things like points or 
trophies a player can earn respectively win, but they are not 
confined to virtual goods only. Also in-game characters 
encouraging one with words like "well done" or deeds may 
be very motivational to players. 
III. 
SOCIAL INTERACTION TAXONOMY 
In this section, we describe the derivation of the Social 
Interaction Taxonomy (SIT) and its interaction classification 
concept. 
A. Interaction  
Interaction must not only be seen as something that 
happens between a player and a computer, it has also a social 
aspect as a lot of games are played with other people. This of 
course holds true for almost all non-computer games, as the 
amount of games played solitarily, is small compared to 
Figure 2. Mario’s 1-Up reward [20] 
Figure 1. World of Warcraft inventory [21] 
27
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

games played with others. With the rising of the World Wide 
Web, designers of computer games more and more include 
social interactions into their games. There is a huge amount 
of multi mass online role playing (MMORG) games 
available and probably the most successful of them is World 
of Warcraft [21]. Critics stating, that playing computer 
games is an isolating activity, need to be aware of the fact 
that most computer games nowadays involve social 
interactions, although these social interactions are not face-
to-face. However it must be brought into question, whether 
restricting social interactions solely on computer games, does 
not result in another form of social isolation, either. 
B. Lessons Learned From Game Design 
As seen in the Game Design area, user interaction can be 
classified. We extended this approach and developed a 
global Social Interaction Taxonomy for web applications – 
especially in the social media area. We overcome the in-
game restricted rewarding models, choosing this overall 
generic and application-independent approach. The RESTful 
web service design allows embedding the Social Interaction 
Taxonomy in any web application. 
C. Classifying Social Interaction Tasks 
In order to create a global rewarding system, that rewards 
users for any kind of interaction, currently available 
activities in web applications need to be aggregated. Figure 3 
illustrates this aggregation via a Social Interaction Cloud that 
makes no claims of being complete, because it is almost 
impossible to catch all interactions or rather their designation 
from every available web application. Nevertheless, the 
taxonomy that will be deduced in this section is generic 
enough to cover all possible (social) interactions and hence 
can serve as a basis for a global rewarding model. Certainly, 
(social) interactions can be classified in various ways, 
although we must state, that we did not find any available 
interaction taxonomy during research. The taxonomy we 
deduced, classifies interactions using two consecutive 
criteria that are based on two questions. The first question is: 
Who is involved in an interaction? As the overall aim is to 
design a rewarding model that rewards user interactions, 
every interaction involves a user. So the more precise 
question to ask is: With whom or what does a user interact? 
The last question reveals which possible counterparts an 
interaction in this taxonomy may have. It may either be a 
"virtual" object, like a video or a picture, which we will refer 
to as a resource, or it may be another user that in this sense 
constitutes a "real" object. Hence, the first criterion used to 
initially classify interactions is, whether it is a user resource 
or a user-user interaction. In the following, the first criterion 
will be stated more precisely by highlighting the properties 
of a resource respectively a user being part of an interaction. 
Criterion 1 
Criterion 1 classifies an interaction by its counterpart, 
which can be a resource, a user or both. 
Resource: resources are things like videos, pictures or 
blog posts and in most cases they are directly accessible via 
an URI. Otherwise, they are indirectly accessible via the web 
application hosting the resource. Resources miss the 
characteristic of being "active". In an interaction, i.e. they are 
completely passive. Hence a user somehow interacts "on" 
and not "with" a resource.  
User: although users can be seen as some type of 
resource, we make the distinction because users as opposed 
to resources have the characteristic of being "active" in an 
interaction. In the sense of the previous definition, a user 
interacts "with" a user and thus those interactions can be 
referred to as communication between users.  
Both: in general, a taxonomy’s purpose is not, to classify 
an object into exactly one category as they may belong to 
different ones, so for some interactions it is possible to 
classify them into both categories. For example, the grouping 
interaction may refer to group resources as it is possible 
within the social tagging system GroupMe! [22] or it may 
refer to group friends into self-defined friend-lists within 
Facebook [23]. The result of applying the first criterion on 
the given interaction cloud, is illustrated in Figure 4. It splits 
the cloud into two interaction-classes: the user-resource 
interaction-class with a resource as counterpart and the user-
Figure 3. Social Interaction Cloud 
Figure 4. Interactions classified by its counterpart 
28
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

user interaction-class, where a user acts as a counterpart. As 
mentioned before, the classification of interactions is based 
on two (consecutive) questions and the second question is: 
How does a user interact with its counterpart? Both 
interaction classes answer this question from different angles 
and therefore use different criterions to assign their 
interactions to interaction-types. Interaction types belonging 
to the user-resource interaction class make a statement about 
what a user does with a resource. The following criterion 
(Criterion 2.1) gives an overview on interaction-types that 
we have deduced for this class and Figure 5 illustrates those 
interaction-types. 
Criterion 2.1 
Criterion 2.1 classifies user-resource interactions by what 
a user does with a resource.  
Create: creating new resources means to make them 
directly or indirectly available via URIs. If a user uploads a 
picture to an online photo sharing community, the picture 
has been available before but not on the internet. As opposed 
to this, creating a new blog post "really" creates a new 
resource. Indirectly available refers to scenarios, where a 
resource is protected and can only be accessed after an 
authorization.  
Edit: these interactions virtually "happen" around 
existing resources and do not necessarily result in a 
modification of a resource’s contents, e.g., tagging a picture 
does not change it, but all these interactions are related to the 
edited resource. 
Rate: every direct or indirect, positive or negative 
feedback on resources is covered by this interaction-type. 
For example, a book review is a direct rating whereas 
subscribing a GroupMe! group is an indirect rating. 
Explore: 
this 
interaction-type 
covers 
all 
those 
interactions that do not fall into the previous types because, 
to put it crudely, nothing "happens" with a resource, it is 
neither created, edited nor rated - it is just explored. For 
example, if a user plays an online game, she explores but 
does not change it. The allocation of user-user interactions 
roughly follows communication science as it regards those 
interactions as a communication between users. These 
communicative interactions are distinguished into two 
communication types. This distinction is based on how 
intense a communication is. In an intensive communication, 
sender and receiver constantly or at least once change their 
parts. The intention of a sender is always any kind of 
reaction by the receiver and this is not always given in a less 
intensive communication, where a reaction by the receiver is 
not always expected or even wished-for. The intensity of a 
communicative interaction is the last criterion that maps 
user-user interactions into the following types. Figure 5 
illustrates this classification. 
Criterion 2.2 
Criterion 2.2 allocates user-user interactions by their 
communicative intensity.  
One-way: in a less intensive communication process, the 
sender is significantly more active, than the receiver and 
mostly does not get any response by the receiver. This is 
why, we refer to those interactions as being one-way, 
because there is either no reaction by the receiver required or 
the reaction is of no relevance for the sender that it is 
noteworthy.  
Two-way: a two-way interaction, as its name implies, is 
an intensive communication as both, sender and receiver are 
active and constantly change their parts in a communication 
process. Even if sender and receiver only change parts once, 
for example in a scenario, where a user asks a question that 
is answered by another user, it is of high relevance for the 
sending user to get a response from at least one receiver. 
Putting together the mentioned criterions, finally results in a 
(social) interaction taxonomy as it is illustrated in Figure 7. 
Figure 5. User-Resource interaction-types 
Figure 6. User-User interaction-types 
29
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

IV. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
We presented a concept, to integrate an application-
independent model for globally rewarding of user interaction 
tasks. The Social Interaction Taxonomy (SIT) can be 
integrated into web applications by RESTful web services. 
SIT serves as foundation for activity monitoring, interaction 
rewarding or analyzes. Increasing incentive and motivation 
to ongoing participation in social web applications are 
further use cases global interaction rewarding is very useful 
for. Basic game mechanics and reward types are presented 
and have been applied, in order to reward user interactions or 
to give feedback on their effect on users’ progression. Our 
overall goal was, to create a global rewarding system acting 
independently from concrete (web) applications and 
especially from interactions, they offer. Therefore, we 
developed the Social Interaction Taxonomy. This taxonomy 
classifies interactions, at first by its counterpart which can be 
a resource or a user and then by the way a user interacts with 
a resource, respectively by the intensity a user socially 
interacts/communicates with another user. The taxonomy is 
ideal to classify and reward activity in learning contexts 
because it can turn any application into a game this way. SIT 
also allows tracking progress and users’ activity upon web-
based learning resources. An implemented application 
scenario relying on SIT will be exemplified at the 
conference.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Twitter, a microblogging service, http://www.twitter.com, last update: 
2010, retrieved: 2010-12-15. 
[2] 
Flickr, share your photos, watch the world, http://www.flickr.com, 
last update: 2010, retrieved: 2010-12-14. 
[3] 
M. Prensky, “Digital game-based learning”, McGraw-Hill, New 
York, 2001. 
[4] 
A. J. Kim, “Putting the fun in functional - applying game mechanics 
to 
social 
media”, 
http://www.slideshare.net/amyjokim/fun-in-
functional-2009-presentation, last update: 2010, retrieved: 2010-12-
04. 
[5] 
M. Steinberg and J. Brehm, “Towards utilizing open data for 
interactive knowledge transfer”, Proc. Digital World 2009, 
International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning, 
ISBN: 978-0-7695-3528-9, pp. 61-66, 2009. 
[6] 
Open definition, http://www.opendefinition.org/, last update: 2010, 
retrieved: 2010-12-04. 
[7] 
C. Bizer, T. Heath, and T. Berners-Lee, “Linked Data: principles and 
state of the art”, Proc. 17th International World Wide Web 
Conference, WWW2008, ISBN: 978-1-60558-085-2, pp. 1265-1266, 
2008. 
[8] 
M. Steinberg and J. Brehm, “Towards enhanced user interaction to 
qualify web resources for higher-layered applications”, Proc. Digital 
World 2010, International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-
line Learning, ISBN: 978-0-7695-3955-3, pp.105-110, 2010. 
[9] 
N. Ullmann, “Design and implementation of a global rewarding 
model based on user interaction tasks”, master thesis, Leibniz 
Universität Hannover, System and Computer Architecture, 2010. 
[10] R. Thomas Fielding, “Architectural styles and the design of network-
based software architectures”, PhD thesis, University of California, 
Irvine, 2000. 
[11] Wikipedia, Pong, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pong, last update: 
2010, retrieved: 2010-12-04. 
[12] Wikipedia, Game design, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Game_design, 
last update: 2010, retrieved: 2010-12-04. 
[13] J. Porter, “Game mechanics for interaction design: An interview with 
Amy Jo Kim”, 2009, http://bokardo.com/archives/game-mechanics-
for-interaction-design-an-interview-with-amy-jo-kim/, last update: 
2009, retrieved: 2010-12-04. 
[14] A. J. Kim, “Putting the fun in functional - applying game mechanics 
to 
functional 
software”, 
2007, 
http://www.slideshare.net/amyjokim/putting-the-fun-in-functiona, last 
update: 2009, retrieved: 2010-12-04. 
[15] Payback, http://www.payback.de/, last update: 2010, retrieved: 2010-
12-04. 
[16] Farmville, http://www.facebook.com/FarmVille, last update: 2010, 
retrieved: 2010-12-04. 
[17] Casual Game Design, the reward series, part 1: The basics of reward, 
2006, http://www.casualgamedesign.com/?p=42, last update: 2006, 
retrieved: 2010-12-04. 
[18] Ascaron. Sacred 2 - fallen angel, http://www.sacred2.com, last 
update: 2009, retrieved: 2010-12-04. 
[19] Civilization, 
http://www.civilization.com/, 
last 
update: 
2010, 
retrieved: 2010-12-04. 
[20] Super Mario Bros, Wii, http://www.mariobroswii.com/, last update: 
2009, retrieved: 2010-12-04. 
[21] Golem 
Special: 
World 
of 
Warcraft, 
http://www.golem.de/specials/wow/, last update: 2010, retrieved: 
2010-12-04. 
[22] F. Abel, M. Frank, N. Henze, D. Krause, and P. Siehndel, “Groupme! 
- combining ideas of wikis, social bookmarking, and blogging”, 
ICWSM, editors E. Adar, M. Hurst, T. Finin, N. S. Glance, N. 
Nicolov, and B. L. Tseng, AAAI Press, pp. 230-231, 2008. 
[23] Facebook: 
a 
social 
network 
service 
and 
website, 
http://www.facebook.com, last update: 2010, visited: 2010-08-22. 
Figure 7. Social Interaction Taxonomy (SIT) 
30
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

