M-learning System for Learning how to Prepare a Negotiation
Allan Girão, Sergio Assis Rodrigues, Evandro Rocha, Jano Moreira de Souza
COPPE/UFRJ – Computer Science Department, Graduate School of Engineering
UFRJ – Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
[girao, sergio, evandro, jano]@cos.ufrj.br
Abstract—The advance of Internet and mobile technologies
makes
the
use
of
these
elements
become
increasingly
comprehensive, and distance learning is an area that takes
many advantages of these technologies. Some tools and systems
help this process, but the most important tool is e-learning. A
more contemporary version of e-learning is the one found in
mobiles devices, the m-learning system. The rapid advance of
these technologies and their high dissemination determine this
area as an important point in the decision makers’ learning
process. Following this point of view, this paper proposes a
learning tool involving aspects of e-learning and m-learning for
negotiators. This work will discuss how these tools can support
professionals during the learning process of preparation step of
negotiations. What is more, comparative and initial results will
also be presented.
Keywords – e-learning; m- learning; negotiation
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, the demand for trained professionals, with a
deeper and more extensive knowledge of specific subjects
keeps everyone uptodate and obliges them learning new
things in different areas. However, due to limited free time
that people have, some new forms of learning and/or some
new learning tools should be used to achieve this goal.
Distance learnig is not something new. It is a form of
learning that does not require a classroom, where people
(teachers and students) must be present at the same time,
something often unconvenient for a particular group of
people [25].
This form of learning can be supported by tools that use
technologies, called e-learning. These tools can also be used
as a complement to traditional methods, providing materials
for online study.
According to 2010 census, Brazil has 194 millions
inhabitants. It is amazing to know that this number is lower
than the number of mobile devices – 202 millions [13]. What
was once a luxury is now an item of easy access.
Due to this growth, which does not happen only in
Brazil, appeared m-learning, i.e. e-learning applied to mobile
devices. Inspite of the technological limitations of these
small devices, they are powerful tools in the distance
learning process because they can be accessed anywhere and
anytime.
This article proposes a mobile learning tool in the
negotiation area. This paper is divided as follows: the next
section shows a review of literature about e-learning, mobile
devices, m-learning and negotiations; the third section
discusses the integrated web system, used for negotiation
students to learn how to prepare a negotiation, along with the
engaged m-learning system; the fourth section makes a
comparison with other m-learning tools and the tool
proposed; the last section presents the conclusion and further
investigations.
II.
BACKGROUND LITERATURE
This
section
brings
background
literature
of
four
important topics to this work: e-learning, mobile devices,
mobile learning and negotiation.
A.
E-learning
The use of technologies and tools to facilitate the
teaching and learning process is what is commonly called e-
learning [8]. Because of this, it is also usually related to
distance learning, but is not restricted to it and can be used as
support for traditional classes [9]. Its nature teaches that the
learning process can be done anywhere, because then student
is not restricted to a specific place or time, such as
classroom, not restricting student to teacher’s available time,
taking the process and the material used in the learning
process to the Internet [7].
The growth of the Internet and advance of technology
have allowed an unprecedented breakthrough of e-learning
[8]. Its use, however, was not confined with the context of
traditional
teaching
in
schools
and
universities.
Its
advantages
have
also
been
noticed
in
professional
environment, making them use this type of tool [9].
E-learning has many benefits including its accessibility
and the amount of time and money it saves. Flexibility is one
of the e-learning highlights because it allows students to
study at night, keeping their day jobs, fitting the learning
time when it better suits their busy schedules. The student
dictates the pace of learning as suits him best, as well as the
learning style [17].
The downside of e-learning is that students need to have
computers and Internet access, and knowledge of these
technologies to use them, which should be considered in
developing countries. Even though e-learning can fit any
time the student wishes, it still requires available time just as
traditional education method does. It can result in lack of
motivation for the student. Instructors may not always be
online to help the students, which can lead to isolation of a
student. The communication provided only by electronic
means can also cause misunderstandings by both sides [17].
B.
Mobile Devices
There are many kinds of mobile devices in the market,
and choosing one can turn to be success or failure decisive
factor of an m-learning system. Below there is a list of
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

devices, their uses in m-learning, and their pros and cons
[15]:

iPod: the Apple’s device is used to download and
listen to podcasts with video and audio lessons, and
to exchange material between students and teachers.
Its advantage, besides its popularity, is to have many
add-ons that can be useful. Its disadvantages are the
high cost, small screen and the need to use the
iTunes program.

MP3 player: as iPod, students can download and
listen to Podcasts. This kind of device is compacted
and lightweighted, but other devices can replace it in
addition, it is an instrument that has only one way,
i.e., there is no interactivity.

PDA (Personal Digital Assistant): devices that can
use the Internet, play audio and video, access e-
mails, document editing and use communication
assistants. For a mobile device, they have a large
screen
and
also
dispose
of
text
entry.
Their
disadvantages are their size, once they are bulky, and
inconvenience of the entry of long texts.

USB Drive: storage tool that can assist in sharing
audio and videos between students and teachers and
that can be compatible with most computers. But it
is a device with a well defined and single proposal:
storage. Other devices can easly replace it, such as
iPod and MP3 players.

E-book reader: used to download and read books,
can store several books, with the appropriate light
for easy reading and text markup tools being its
strong points. It has a large screen, for a mobile
device, suitable for reading. However, it has a
limited capability of reading different proprietary e-
books formats.

Smartphone: has the combination of several features
of other devices such as the Internet access, storage,
camera, video, mp3 player. From the other side, it
has a high cost, a small screen for a mobile device,
in addition to not being efficient in text input.

Laptops/tablets: the most complete of the devices,
having the Internet access, Bluetooth, storage, Wi-Fi,
easy text input, audio and video player, large screen
and other features. Its disadvantage is the high cost,
and its size that is too large when compared to other
devices and cannot be used while walking, for
example, as MP3 players and smartphones.
In addition to these limitations of each device, only
PDAs, Smartphones, Laptops, Tablets and some types of
iPod are programmable. Due to the growth and practicality
of smartphones, these were the ones chosen for the
development of the m-learning system.
Even though smartphones are being used for the
development of the m-learning system, there is still a very
large range of devices to choose from, and each one has its
own limitation. These limitations are key factors in choosing
a device for the development of the tool [5]. In addition to
the various instrument options there is also a range of
platforms for development. For this work, the platform
chosen was the Android platform, which is Linux-based,
open source, created by Google along with other companies.
The fact of it being present in several models of many
companies was one of the key factors to the decision of using
this platform, because it allows the user to choose which
device best suits his/her needs, taking into account the
usability, although the choice for a specific platform could be
a negative point, due to its possibility to be outdated in a
short period of time.
C.
M-learning
M-learning is a type of e-learning, supported by mobile
devices, which can also be seen as a complement to distance
education [3][9]. It can be defined as an acquisition of any
knowledge
and/or
skills
through
the
use
of
mobile
technologies, resulting in a change of behavior [10].
The m-learning nature has two key characteristics: it can
be accessed anytime and anywhere, it is quite similar to e-
learning, but even more effective, since the mobility these
small devices give is much higher than that given by
conventional computers. In fact, this character develops a
third feature, in motion, since the use of these devices can be
done while walking.
The benefits of m-learning tools, in addition to providing
mobility, are learning through interaction with different
people, the ability to archive and organize a wide range of
information in the devices’ memory and the easiness in
creating documents, texts and attach them into a system, and
reducing
communication
and
cultural
barriers,
using
channels that make the student feel comfortable [15][16].
Challenges in the field of m-learning occur mostly
because of their computational limitations. Among these
constraints we have the bandwidth speed limitation, low
processor speed, small screen size and low resolution,
complicated methods of input, low battery life and low
storage capacity. But the main limitation is the low
bandwidth and processing power [4]. In addition to these
technological impediments, there are other unfavorable
factors in the use of m-learning, such as the fact that students
who are not familiar with the technology will have more
difficulty than others, the speed at which updates occur may
make some content obsolete quickly [15], the conservatism
of educators, the need to produce new content, plus the high
cost of a device and, in some countries, the high cost the
internet connection (WAP, 3G, GPRS) may have [16].
D.
Negotiations
The process in which two or more parties make
decisions, seeking an agreement that brings benefits to all is
called negotiation [11].
The negotiations are present in the daily life of all people,
even though we are not aware of this fact. The joint decision
of possible work themes by teachers and students is a simple
example of a negotiation that can exist inside of educational
environment, since the parties involved try to ensure that
themes remain in their own liking.
Three concepts are important in the negotiation context:
RP (reservation price), ZOPA (Zone Of Possible Agreement)
and BATNA (Best Alternative To a Negotiated Agreement).
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[18] defines RP as the last favorable point to a party which
accepts the agreement. The RP can be understood as the limit
value of the price a buyer will pay for certain goods.
Similary, for the seller, this value is the minimal accepted
value for the purchase.
With the existence of both seller and buyer RP values, if
there are intermediate values that satisfy both parties, there is
a ZOPA. According to [18], ZOPA is an area that satisfies
both parties involved, and then an agreement can de reached.
The concept of BATNA, introduced by [19], says that all
negotiations should have an alternative, just in case the
agreement is not reached. The better the BATNA is, the
more power you have to negotiate, increasing the chances of
an agreement to improve. Negotiation process can be divided
into four phases: preparation, value creation, value division
and execution [12].
The phase in which negotiators define BATNA, try to
improve the relationship and make their positions is the
preparation step [19]. In this phase, the negotiators should
also define ZOPA [18].
The next step, after the preparation step, is the value
creation. In this stage, the parties should explore the interests
of the others, generating alternatives to increase mutual gains
[20]. The value disivion is the stage where division forms are
discussed, among the standards and criteria of division [20].
The final step is the execution. The arrangements for
monitoring and verification of the decisions are established
in this step. After that, the negotiators work continuously to
improve their relationship and to resolve their differences
fairly [6][12].
Among these, the preparation step is the most important,
being the one where information is collected in order to
facilitate the agreement by identifying the interests of all
parties [2].
III.
M-LEARNING PROPOSAL
The
m-learning
tool
proposed
here
is
a
part
of
Negotiation Support System. This NSS involves training,
preparation, risk management and negotiation modeling
tools, as illustrated in Figure 1. The m-learning contemplates
the area of Mobile Statements, Knowledge Management and
Visualization Methods, as seen in demarcated area at Figure
1.
Figure 1.
ENEG environment [14]
The proposal highlighted in this paper discusses how the
learning elements – e-learning and m-learning – can help in
the negotiation preparation.
A.
Preparation Step in the Web Site
The preparation of a negotiation is the most important
phase of negotiation [2], what is more this phase is the main
point where the negotiation students should investigate
deeper.
This step has interfaces to facilitate input of data about
the negotiation, divided into 10 elements: Context, Interests,
Options, Relationship, Power, Communication, Criterion,
Legitimacy, Concession and Time [6].
For each of these elements there are facilitators to the
externalization of the negotiator knowledge. The information
about each of these elements can be informed by free text,
which is more suitable for more experienced negotiators. For
students of negotiation this way of data input is complicated.
For those, other kind of input is available, in the checklist
form, and public and private reports are also ready to be
used.
Figure 2 shows the initial interface of the preparation
step, in the NSS environment, contemplating the Context
element.
Figure 3 shows the final stage of preparation, presented
in a radar chart that, through mining all elements text
inserted before, ponders which are the most relevant for the
negotiation. This chart also takes into the account the risks
associated with each element as it is inserted into the risk
management module.
B.
Using the Mobile System during Preparation Step
Mobile devices, even with all its technological and
usability limitation, can become important tools in the
learning process [5]. And it is not different when learning
about negotiation.
Figure 2.
NSS Preparation Interface [14]
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Figure 3.
NSS Preparation Interface [14]
Figure 4 shows the integration structure between the
mobile platform and the web platform, in the context of data
preparation for negotiatons.
The
tool
brings
to
the
mobile
device
the
entire
negotiation preparation module and a few other features [1].
To keep the integration between these two platforms –
mobile and web – web service is present. Web service is a
tool for integrating applications, independent from the
language and technology.
The tool, at startup, requests a login and password, which
is the same used in the web system. After providing this
information, the user will be directed to the negotiation
preparation screen, containing the same five steps of the web
tool.
These
steps
are:
Context;
Interest
and
Option;
Relationship and Power; Communication, Criterion and
Legitimacy; Concession and Time. In addition to these five
steps presented, the user can view the same charts/reports
presented in the web tool.
Typing on a mobile device can become an obstacle to the
widespread use of a learning tool. To circumvent this
limitation, a feature of data input in the preparation module
was included on the mobile system. Once the mobile devices
have the basic functionality through voice communication, it
becomes natural to use this as a form of data entry.
This mobile learning tool allows the input of voice data,
accelerating and facilitating the insertion process. These
voice recordings are associated with one of the ten elements
of the negotiation where each element can cointain more
than one recording [6].
Figure 4.
System Architecture
Figure 5.
NSS Mobile Interfaces
Figure 5 shows the proposed mobile m-learning system
interface. In this picture it is possible to see the login screen,
display
graphics,
audio
insertion
and
context
step
visualization.
IV.
COMPARISON AMONG M-LEARNING SYSTEMS
To evaluate the proposed mobile tool, a comparisson
with other m-learning tools was made. The tools used for this
purposed are:

MOBILE
(Mobile-Based
Interactive
Learning
Environment) [21]: is an m-learning environment
using PDAs as devices by the students, while
teachers use computers for uploading materiasls like
content and schedule. It has chat to implement direct
communication between teachers and students, and
notes function, quiz and FAQ.

Bluetooth-based E-learning System [22]: as the
name implies, it is a learning system that uses
Bluetooth technology as a mean of communciation,
based on the client/server architecture. Students act
as the client side using any device that supports
J2ME technology and Bluetooth. The teachers act as
the server side, using desktops or laptops. The need
to be close to the Bluetooth server, due to the
technology limitation, hurts the mobility nature of
the m-learning tools.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning


Athabasca University Mobile Library Project [23]:
the project brings the idea of moving the library
content to the student, regardless of where and when
he/she is - a virtual library in the palm of the hand. It
includes a virtual reading room, search engines and
journal
databases.
By
identifying
the
platform
running on device, the content shown is the one that
best fits the specification of the machine, differing
by the format displayed in laptops and devices
running PalmOS and Windows CE.

MOLT (Mobile Learning Tool) [24]: A tool that
sends SMSs (Short Message Service) developed for
running on a Windows PC connected to a phone via
Bluetooth. The cellphone sends messages to students
when the PC requests it. This system was developed
for learning new words, increasing the students`
vocabulary.
Table I was created taking into account the main
characteristics of these four tools in comparisson with the
proposed mobile tool. The characteristics analysed take into
consideration the need of Internet or other kinds of
connection. If there is a bidirectional communication, the
information comes not only to students, but also from them.
The devices and platforms are supported by each tool. The
content type is available in each one and integrations are
possible with other e-learning systems.
TABLE I.
M-LEARNING TOOLS COMPARISSON
Characteristic
Tools
Proposed Tool
MOBILE
Bluetooth-based E-
learning System
Athabasca University
Mobile Library
Project
MOLT
Communication way
Internet
Internet
Bluetooth
Internet
SMS
Bidirectional
communication
Yes
Yes
Yes
No, download only
No, receive only
Devices
Smartphone
PDA
PDA, Smartphone,
Cellphone, Laptop
PDA, Smartphone,
Palm, Laptop
Cellphones
Access via Browser
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Platform-specific
Yes, Android
No
Yes, J2ME at client
side
No
No
Need installation
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Works offline
No
In parts, if the content is
already in the device
Independs of
Internet, but depends
of a Bluetooth
connection
In parts, if the
content is already in
the device
No, needs to be at
cover area to receive
messages
Content
Interactive
Provided by teacher
Providede by teacher
Provided by library
Small texts
Easily adaptable to other
knowledge areas
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
-
Integration with other e-
learnng tools
Yes
-
-
Yes, with online
library
-
Anywhere, anytime
Yes
Yes
No, needs to be close
to server - Bluetooth
technology limitation
Yes
Yes
Teacher independent
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
Each person has his/her own way of learning, so there are
different ways to teach. The traditional teaching, which is
done in classroom, has proven to be effective, however, not
everyone has access to this type of education.
Distance learning is an alternative to the traditional way
of education, not limited to the classroom. Many institutions
offer courses using distance learning.
With the Internet and technologies expansion, distance
learning supporting systems has been developed, providing
faster and greater interactivity. But these e-learning tools are
not restricted to this function, as they also serve as
complementary tools to the traditional methods, by providing
educational materials and learning process.
Technology expansion, however, was not confined to the
Internet, but devices have been shrinking and becoming
more portable, like laptops, palmtops, PDAs, Handhelds,
smartphones and tablets. With this technology, the learning
process can have new tools, which can be accessed anytime,
anywhere. The m-learning tools, however, still have the
problem of low battery life, small screen and etc.
This paper shows a proposal for m-learning tools
integrated with an e-learning tool, where negotiation students
can learn how to handle the preparation step of negotiation,
the most important part of it [2].
There are many evolutions that this tool can undergo.
Transcription of audio files recorded by users, where the
existing text mining can be done is the most obvious one.
Besides, the tool expansion for supporting other negotiation
steps can be developed, such as the risk management step.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. A. Rodrigues, T. S. Silva, C. Pivotto, A. Girão, J. M.
Souza,
and
E.
Rocha.
“Integrating
Web
and
Mobile
Knowledge Management Tools to Improve Negotiations”. In:
The 2011 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics (IEEE SMC 2011), 2011, Anchorage. The
2011 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics (IEEE SMC 2011), 2011.
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[2]
S. A. Rodrigues and J. M. Souza. “E-Neg: An Environment to
Prepare and Manage Risks in Negotiations”. In: IADIS
International Conference e-Society 2010, 2010, Porto. IADIS
International Conference e-Society 2010, 2010.
[3]
S. I. Wains and W. Mahmood. “Integrating m-learning with e-
learning”. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGITE conference
on Information technology education (SIGITE '08). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 2008, 31-38.
[4]
Y.
Liu,
F.
Hu,
and
H.
Li.
“Understanding
learners'
perspectives on m-learning: results from a survey”. In
Proceedings of the 2009 Euro American Conference on
Telematics and Information Systems: New Opportunities to
increase Digital Citizenship (EATIS '09). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 2009, Article 6 , 3 pages.
[5]
A. Serrano-Santoyo and J. Organista-Sandoval. “Challenges
and opportunities to support learning with mobile devices”. In
Proceedings of the 3rd Mexican Workshop on Human
Computer Interaction (MexIHC '10), Eduardo H. Calvillo
Gámez
and
Victor
M.
González
y
González
(Eds.).
Universidad Politécnica de San Luis Potosí, San Luis Potosí,
S.L.P. México, México, 2010, 85-87.
[6]
Y. Duzert. “Manual de negociações complexas”. Rio de
Janeiro:Editora FGV, 2007.
[7]
C. Ardito, M. F. Costabile, A. De Angeli, and R. Lanzilotti.
“Systematic evaluation of e-learning systems: an experimental
validation”. In Proceedings of the 4th Nordic conference on
Human-computer interaction: changing roles (NordiCHI '06),
Anders Mørch, Konrad Morgan, Tone Bratteteig, Gautam
Ghosh, and Dag Svanaes (Eds.). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2006, 195-202.
[8]
S.
R.
Balasundaram.
“Securing
tests
in
E-learning
environment”. In Proceedings of the 2011 International
Conference
on
Communication,
Computing
&
Security
(ICCCS '11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2011, 624-627.
[9]
C. J. Costa and M. Aparicio. “Analysis of e-learning
processes”. In Proceedings of the 2011 Workshop on Open
Source and Design of Communication (OSDOC '11). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 2011, 37-40.
[10] S. J. Geddes. “Mobile learning in the 21st century: benefit for
learners”. Knowledge Tree e-journal: An ejournal of flexible
learning
in VET,
2004,
30(3):
214-28.Tavel,
P.
2007
Modeling and Simulation Design. AK Peters Ltd.
[11] H. Raiffa. “The Art and Science of Negotiation”. Cambridge,
MA, Harvard University Press, 1982
[12] L. Susskind and J. Cruikshank. Breaking the Impasse:
Consensual Approaches to Resolving Public Disputes. Basic
Book, New York, USA, 1987.
[13] Teleco. “Statistics about Brazilian Mobile Phones”. Available
at: http://www.teleco.com.br/ncel.asp. Last access in February
2011.
[14] S. A. Rodrigues, E. Tskhakaya, D. Antunes, A. F. Girão, T. S.
da Silva, C. V. C. Pivotto, E. Rocha, and J. M. Souza. “IT
Projects Assisted to Negotiation Support Systems”. In:
WORLDCOMP'11 - The 2011 World Congress in Computer
Science, Computer Engineering, and Applied Computing,
2011, Las Vegas - Nevada. EEE'11 - The 2011 International
Conference on e-Learning, e-Business, Enterprise Information
Systems, and e-Government, 2011.
[15] J. R. Corbeil and M. E. Valdes-Corbeil. “Are you ready for
Mobile Learning”. Educause Quarterly, Vol. 30, 2007, pp.51-
58.
[16] M. F. Filho, L. Zordam Klein, and M. F. Neto. “M-learning
tools on distance education: Overview and case study”,
Education Engineering (EDUCON), 2010 IEEE, pp.677-683,
2010.
[17] P. Berman. “E-learning Concepts and Techniques”. Institute
for Interactive Technologies, Bloomsburg University of
Pennsylvania,
USA,
2006.
<http://iit.bloomu.edu/Spring2006_eBook_files/index.htm>
[18] R. Luecke. “Harvard Business Essentials”. Harvard Business
School Publishing Corporation, 2003.
[19] R. Fisher and W. Ury. “Getting to Yes: Negotiating and
Agreement Without Giving In”. Boston, Century Business,
1991.
[20] M.
H.
Bazerman.
“Judgment
in
Managerial
Decision
Making”. 5 ed. New York: Wiley, 2002.
[21] Tan-Hsu
Tan
and
Tsung-Yu
Liu.
“The
mobile-based
interactive learning environment (MOBILE) and a case study
for assisting elementary school English learning”, Advanced
Learning
Technologie.
Proceedings.
IEEE
International
Conference on, pp. 530- 534, 2004.
[22] Yonghong Zhang, Shiying Zhang, Son Vuong, and Kamran
Malik. “Mobile learning with bluetooth-based E-learning
system”. In Proceedings of the 2006 international conference
on Wireless communications and mobile computing (IWCMC
'06). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 951-956. 2006.
[23] Yang Cao, Tony Tin, Rory McGreal, Mohamed Ally, and
Sherry Coffey. “The Athabasca University mobile library
project: increasing the boundaries of anytime and anywhere
learning
for
students”.
In
Proceedings
of
the
2006
international conference on Wireless communications and
mobile computing (IWCMC '06). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 1289-1294, 2006.
[24] N. Cavus and D. Ibrahim. "M-Learning: An experiment in
using SMS to support learning new English language words".
British Journal of Educational Technology, 40 (1), pp. 78-91,
2009.
[25] D. Keegan. “Foundations of Distance Education”. Second
Edition. London and New York, Routledge, 1990.
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

