Development and Assessment of CSCL System for Large Classrooms Using 
Collaborative Script 
 
Taketoshi Inaba, Kimihiko Ando        
Graduate School of Bionics, Computer and Media Sciences 
Tokyo University of Technology 
Tokyo, Japan
                                 e-mail: inaba@stf.teu.ac.jp, e-mail: ando@stf.teu.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— In the area of Computer Supporter Collaborative 
Learning (CSCL) research, scripting collaborative learning is a 
relatively new but promising approach to promote learning. 
The term scripting is used to describe ways of prescribing 
relevant elements for collaborative interaction, such as group 
formation, roles, learning activities, sequence of learning 
activities. Many studies have shown that free collaboration 
without 
explicit 
scaffolding 
rarely 
produces 
effective 
interaction and that the script can be one of the most effective 
scaffoldings. Basing on reciprocal learning method, we have 
designed a script which allows students to create questions and 
answer them mutually. To implement this script for large 
classrooms, we have developed a CSCL system which has two 
important functions: automated group formation function that 
can form groups on the fly, based on students’ personal traits, 
and chat function by which students can discuss each other 
within their groupe. For the evaluation, we have conducted an 
experiment with some 300 students in a large classroom to 
evaluate our system and analyze interactions in detail during 
each sequence of learning activities. Based on the assessment 
result, the learners felt encouraged to understand better about 
learning task. At the same time, it became clear that the 
quality of discussion on chat affects reciprocal question posing. 
As well, it was indicated that group size and knowledge level of 
leader or other members affect the process of reciprocal 
actions and activities at some degree. 
 
Keywords-Collaborative learning; CSCL;script. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
A. CSCL and its issues 
According to the social constructionism presented by 
Vygotsky 
and 
the 
theory 
of 
legitimate 
peripheral 
participation presented by Lave and Wenger, the learning, 
which was understood as a cognitive process in an interior of 
an individual leaner, will be recognized as a social process, 
or social cognition that progresses while cooperating with 
others [1]. Far from denying the learning as an individual 
cognitive activity, the social cognition can promote 
knowledge construction at an individual level and 
metacognition for learning strategies, through problem-
solving by discussing with others [2].  
The environment for such collaborative learning is built 
on the computer network, and such computer technologies 
are used as a supporting tool to promote collaborative 
learning, which is called, Computer Supported Collaborative 
Learning (CSCL). Advantages of CSCL over the face-to-
face learning are: learners who are geographically or timely 
distant from each other can learn, a large number of learners 
can learn and be managed, logs of the learning process in 
details can be saved for learners, managers and scholars to 
re-use them, learning software and contents can be used and 
many more.  
On the other hand, many case studies on the 
collaborative learning point out that it is highly unlikely for 
leaners to carry out collaborative activities voluntarily while 
learning without an external scaffolding [3]. For this reason, 
in order to resolve such issues in learning, various methods 
have been developed to appropriately regulate and structure 
the learning process within a group for effective and 
productive work and discussions among learners.  
In this study, one of such methods, “collaborative script” 
was implemented in the CSCL system and used in a large 
classroom in the university. First, the next section will 
provide the overview of the collaborative script.  
B.  Collaborative script and its issues 
The concept of script was originally suggested by Schank 
and Abelson in the field of cognitive science, and it has a 
meaning of internalized knowledge about socially sharing 
steps and rules people should follow in a certain situation 
(e.g., eating at a restaurant) [4]. 
Once the concept was introduced in the field of 
collaborative study, the script became a series of external 
scaffolding 
methods that 
are provided to 
promote 
collaborative learning. The first study on collaborative script 
was proposed by O’Donell and Dansereau [5], which defines 
the script as a scenario for a small learning group, which 
prescribes in details, who is carrying out what kind of 
learning activities and when. Due to the complexity of the 
script before the learning activities themselves, learners 
needed to be trained to follow the script. 
After the script was adopted in CSCL, instead of training 
learners to execute the script prior to learning, the system 
interface was used to indirectly lead them to the scripted 
learning process.  
Many researches indicate that the script can be designed 
at 2 levels in the CSCL environment. First, there is a design 
approach at a macro level; it defines who will learn, what 
assignment subjects for a group and how to distribute tasks 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

among learners. On the other hand, there is a micro level 
approach which consists in prescribing the details of each 
learning activity in order to revitalize social interactions 
among learners. 
 There have been many studies that indicate the 
effectiveness of various CSCL systems with the script, but 
there are some issues at the same time. First, there is an issue 
on controlling a compelling power of the script. In other 
words, it means how to deal with the risk of over-scripting 
which takes too much self-motivation out from learners [6]. 
Next, despite a lot of empirical case studies, yet there are 
very few suggestion on a script design model that can be 
commonly used, with some exceptions [7] [8]. About the 
first issue, we suggested previously a method to flexibly 
adjust compelling power of the script according to learners’ 
traits and learning situation [9]. So, this study focuses on the 
second issue, adopting a design method as the approach in 
order to design the script based on the design principle and 
implement and assess it. 
C. SWISH MODEL as Design Principle 
The purpose of the collaborative script is to support the 
problem solving and knowledge construction by social 
interactions among learners. To do so, a mechanism to 
trigger effective interactions is an important element. A 
Swiss scholar, Dillenbourg, suggests SWISH model as such 
mechanism. This model is the design principle for 
collaborative script that gives tasks that would generate 
conflicts among learners; it is supposed to promote intense 
interactions (statements, explanations, discussion, etc..) to 
overcome these conflicts [10].  
From this model, three script schemata are drawn as 
design guidelines : 1. jigsaw schema, 2. reciprocal schema, 3. 
conflict schema. This time, we adopt the reciprocal schema. 
The most well-known example is Palinscar and Brown’s 
reciprocal teaching method [11]. In this schema, learners 
take turns assuming roles (summarizer, questioner, clarifier, 
predictor). So, Since the steps of the problem-solving process 
are distributed horizontally among learners, they must 
continuously collaborate to build a shared solution. 
D. Structure of this paper 
This paper is structured as follows. Section II presents 
the general outline and the purpose of this study, and 
Section  III  describes our CSCL system for large 
classrooms. The collaborative script design is discussed in 
Section IV. Then, we present our  experiment and results 
from our evaluation in Sections V and VI. Section VII 
concludes the paper. 
II. 
PURPOSE OF THE STUDY 
In this study, the script based on the reciprocal schema, is 
designed and implemented in the system to assess its effects. 
The system is for an environment where several hundred 
students in higher educational institutions cannot interact 
with one another face-to-face. The collaborative learning is 
carried out by those students using the system online.  
As for the assessment, assignments and chat log data are  
used to assess the quality of interactions during the 
collaborative process and its learning effects. By analyzing 
the correlativity between the two, we aim to have some 
guidelines for improving the script and design principle.  
III. 
SYSTEM 
As Fig. 1 shows, our system was developed for an 
environment, such as a large classroom with several 
hundred people at higher educational institutions where 
face-to-face group learning is difficult. A teacher and 
students gain access to the CSCL server through PCs that 
are connected to the network. Learners can form a group 
regardless of where their locations are, and a teacher can 
remotely keep track of learning state of each group. 
A. System Overview 
As Fig. 2 shows, the system consists of different 
functions, such as “automated group formation” and 
“questionnaire preparation” by which a teacher designs a 
collaborative 
learning, 
“assignment 
submission”, 
“reciprocal reviews” and “chat within a group” that provide 
a collaborative environment to learners. “Learners’ 
properties” in  Fig. 2 are drawn from questionnaires and pre-
tests that were administrated before. Based on the properties, 
the system automatically forms groups. 
B. Flow of Collaborative Learning 
The collaborative learning in this system are composed   
of 5 blocks, as Fig. 3 shows. The following is the learning   
flow. 
1. “Prior Setting” allows a teacher to conduct questionnaires,   
prepare pre-tests and register to the system.  
2. In “Pre-learning”, each learner submits the questionnaire 
and pre-test which was registered in “Prior Setting” on the 
system.  
 
 
Figure 1.  System overview 
 
 
Figure 2.  System structure 
 
Large Class Room
Home
Group2
Group1
Student A
Student B
Student C
Student D
Teacher
CSCL Server
Management of
Collaborative
Learning
Design of
Collaborative 
Learning
Environment of
Collaborative
Learning
Automated 
Group 
Formation
Preparing
Questionnaires/
Pre-Tests
Assignment 
Management
Submitting
Questionnaires/
Assignment
Reciprocal
Review
Chat 
In a Group
Group
Management
Learners’ 
Properties
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

3. In ”Group Formation”, the system automatically forms   
groups based on the parameters the teacher has set and 
results of statements/answers by the learners. Small 
adjustments to the group formation can be made manually 
by the teacher. 
4. In ”Collaborative Learning”, reciprocal reviews within a 
group and among groups as well as chat system within a 
group can be done in the system. The learners carry out 
these collaborative works according to the collaborative 
script.  
5. In “Post Assessment”, the teacher reviews and grades 
submitted assignments. 
C. Automated Group Formation Function 
In this study, group formations are made possible in 
various ways that a teacher intends to do, by combining 
multiple elements of user characteristics that are obtained 
beforehand. 
For example, a teacher can freely decide how many 
people to be in a group. He can also form flexibly groups 
with members of which properties are similar, or different.  
D. Collaborative Script Function 
 In collaborative script, tasks are assigned according to 
roles, such as “Preparer”, “Answerer” and “Grader”. In the 
system, the group management function assigns tasks to 
each learner while the assignment management distributes 
allocated tasks. Also, roles which each learner is supposed 
to play and tasks are given automatically so that learners can 
work on their tasks at an appropriate speed without having 
to think about the collaborative script. 
IV. 
COLLABORATIVE SCRIPT DESIGN 
Supposing the experimental environment shown in 
Table1, the details of the collaborative script to be executed 
in the proposed system were designed.  
A. Question-Posing Script 
A script was made for the learning process in the task 
model called “reciprocal question-posing”. The following is 
a flow of ”reciprocal question-posing collaborative script”, 
which was designed in this experiment.  
Phase-1：Preparing individual questions 
A theme of question posing is given to learners. All the 
students prepare a question based on the given theme and 
submit it, including the answer and explanation about the 
question.  
 
Phase-2：Reviews within group 
Regarding the question prepared at Phase-1, 3 members 
within a group are assigned as a question preparer, answerer 
and grader and review reciprocally within the group through 
the following activities (Fig. 4).  
a. An answerer prepares answers to the questions prepared 
by a question preparer and submits the answer and 
evaluation of the question.  
b. A grader grades the answer submitted by the answerer in 
a. and submits the graded result and evaluation of the 
question. 
c. Based on the evaluation submitted in a. and b. a question 
preparer evaluates himself/herself,  
d. The above process from a to c is repeated until all the 
learners rotate to take a different role within the group and 
become a question preparer 
 
Phase-3: Question preparation within a group 
Through a discussion in a group chat, a question must be 
prepared for submission. The answer and explanation are 
prepared along with the question. 
 
Phase-4：Submission and publish of final questions 
Students submit a question/answer/explanation to their 
teacher. The teacher then publishes the questions as a 
assignment among groups. 
 
Phase-5：Solving questions reciprocally among groups 
Students solve group questions that are published. 
V. 
EXPERIMENT OVERVIEW 
To assess this system, an experiment was carried out 
during a class at Tokyo University of Technology. The 
overview is as follows: 
・Targets: Students at Tokyo University of Technology 
Freshman to Senior 298 students, 112 groups 
・Dates for the experiment: January 10 (Tue) and January 
18 (Wed), 2011 
 
Figure 3.  Flow of collaborative learning suggested 
by the system 
 
TABLE 1. PRECONDITIONS OF COLLABORATIVE SCRIPT 
Number of Students
Aboue 300 People
Member of Groups
3 People
Learning Time
90min × 2
Design Guideline
Reciprocal Teaching
 
Pre-Setting
Pre-Learning
Returning
Questionnaires
Group 
Formation
Automated
Not 
Automated
Collaborative
Learning
Reciprocal
Review
Chat 
in Group
Individual 
Assignment
Post-
Evaluation
Review
Teacher
Student
Teacher
Student
Teacher
Preparing
Pre-Tests
Returning
Pre-Tests
Group 
Assignment
Evaluation
Preparing
Questionnaires
 
Figure 4.  Group review 
Question Preparer
Answerer
Grader
Question
Grading
The Answer
Evaluating
Questions
Answer/
Explanation
Evaluating
Questions
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

・Lecture: Basics of the logic 
・Learning assignment: students prepare a question; the 
question has statements in Japanese that represent an 
deductive inference that contain several premises and a 
conclusion. The answer must have a well–formed formula 
that represents correctly the inference, and a truth table that 
verifies the validity/invalidity of the inference. For this 
assignment, several exercises had been done during 
previous lectures. Also, similar question were distributed 
and completed as a pre-test one week before the experiment. 
The pre-test was graded by the teacher in charge. 
 
The experiment was carried out during 2 days in a 90 
minute class. On day 1, 60 minutes were spent for 
answering/evaluating reciprocally within each group. On 
day 2, another 60 minutes were spent for posing questions 
reciprocally within each group. The flows for learning are 
shown in Fig. 5. 
The 
group 
review 
phase 
for 
day 
1 
is 
for 
answering/evaluating 
questions, 
grading/evaluating 
questions and self-evaluation. Fig. 6 shows evaluations of a 
question by a grader’s point of view. 
The group review phase for Day 2 is for preparing group 
question. Using a group chat function, learners discuss how 
to pose the final question.  
In this experiment, a number of group members was set 
to 3, but there were some groups of less than 3 group 
members due to no attendance of some members. Specially, 
since groups could not be changed on Day 1 and Day 2, 
there were many groups of less than 3 group members due 
to no attendance of group members on Day 2. For this 
reason, the evaluation of this experiment was done on only 
93 groups with group members of 2 or 3 on Day 2. Table 2 
shows changes in a number of group members.  
Also, on Day 1 carry out a group review, group 
members of less than 2 members could not carry out a group 
review. In this case, the groups of 2 members continued the 
learning using a different script that allows the 2 members 
solved questions and graded reciprocally. For a group of 1 
member, the 1 member had additional members who came 
in late. 
VI. 
ASSESSMENT 
A. Automated Group Formation 
In this experiment, groups were formed in a way that the 
academic level for each group is similar. Each group 
consists equal numbers of learners who ranked top, middle 
and low in the pre-tests about the content of the lecture. The 
results of the pre-tests were total points (perfect score is 400 
points) of 4 pre-tests that had been implemented according 
to the progress of the lecture. All the grading was done by 
the same teacher. Fig. 7 shows the distribution of individual 
score and average score within group. Because the average 
scores gather in the median, the automated group formation 
functions normally. 
B. Question-Posing Script Evaluated by Learners 
At the end of the experiment, we distributed a 
questionnaire to the students. Fig. 8 shows the responses to 
the question  ”Did you have a deeper understanding 
through posing questions?” Since many responded, 
“Deepened” and few answered, “Not deepened” and “Not at 
all deepened”, the learners find the script effective. 
Fig 9. shows the responses to the question, “what was 
the 
most 
useful 
reference 
while 
question-posing?”. 
Responses as “Chat within Group”, “Evaluation on 
questions by answerers” and “Evaluation on questions by a 
grader”, of which teamwork take a large part, were highly 
evaluated.  
C. Interaction within Groups 
Contents of the chat were divided up into the following 
5 categories: “Detailed discussion on important points”, 
“Discussion on important points”, ”Discussion that often 
went off on a tangent”, “Discussion that were mostly chit-
chatting” and “Pointless discussion”. The categories are 
shown in Table 3. We fixed these categories after the 
attentive reading of the contents of the chat. The evaluation 
was executed by 1 person according to the evaluation 
standard while the another checked the result. 
 
Figure 5.  Flows of learning during experiment 
 
 
Figure 6.  Evaluations of a question by a grader’s 
point of view 
 
Preparing Individual
Question
Answering Question
Evaluating Question
Grading Question
Evaluating Question
Self-Evaluating
1stDay
Preparing Group
Assignment
Submitting
Group Assignment
Inter-Group Evaluating
2ndDay
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Table 4 to 6 are extracted from the chat logs. Table 4 
shows a part of discussions that was evaluated as “Detailed 
discussion on important points”. It shows that 3 people 
consulted with one another on how to carry on. 
Table 5 shows a part of discussions that was evaluated 
as “Discussion on important points”. It shows that only 
some casual conversations were the basis for making a 
decision to carry on. Even after the conversations, there 
were many communications to inform what had been 
decided and agreements on what had been decided. “Going 
off on a tangent” contained chit-chatting in the above 
conversations while “More chit-chatting” had more chit-
chatting than discussions. 
Table 6 shows a part of discussions that was evaluated 
as “Pointless”. It shows that the conversations were going 
into a direction of avoiding deep discussions. 
Fig. 10 shows the quality of discussions by each group, 
of which chat logs were evaluated. In both groups of 2 or 3 
people, more than 70% of all the groups fell into either one 
of the 2 categories, “Detailed discussion on important points” 
and “Detailed discussion”, meaning that many groups had 
good interactions.  
Fig. 11 shows the number of statements made per person 
within each group. In the groups of 2 people, an average 
number of statements made per person is 26.2 while in the 
groups of 3 people, the average was 22.3. These results 
suggest that in both groups, relatively active discussions 
were held, and the interactions were sufficiently activated. 
Also, a number of statements was higher in  the groups of 2 
people rather than in the groups of 3.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Responses to the question  “What was the 
most useful reference while question-posing?” 
 
TABLE 4. EXAMPLES OF “DETAILED DISCUSSION ON 
IMPORTANT POINTS” 
Talker
Contents
D
Where do you want to change?
E
That's right … I guess, first of all, we definitely need to change the
question, and then, what about the well-formed formula?
D
How is it that changes only the third line of the question?
D
Regarding the well-formed formula, it's the final part after ⊃.
E
That's good idea.
F
I agree. How do we want to change that?
 
 
TABLE 5.  EXAPMPLE OF “DISCUSIION ON IMPORTANT 
POINTS” 
Talker
Contents
G
Whose problem will we use? 
H
How about I's Question? I don't have any particular reason for
it though.
I
I think it's OK if it's corrected.
H
Then, let's make corrections on I's question and use itI. 
G
All right, let's work it out.
 
 
TABLE 6. EXAMPLE OF “POINTLESS” 
Talker
Contents
X
It's difficult to make a new question, isn't it?
Y
Why don't we pick the best question among three of us and
submit it?
X
I think that's great!
Y
OK, let's do so. 
 
0
50
100
150
Evaluation by Answer
Evaluation by Grader
Evaluation by oneself
Chat in a Group
Nothing
Others
Number of Person 
 
Figure 7.  Distribution of individual score and 
average score within groups 
 
 
Figure 8.  Responses to the question  “Did you have a 
deeper understanding through posing questions?” 
 
TABLE 2. CHANGES IN A NUMBER OF GROUP MEMBERS 
1st Day
2nd Day
3
77
40
2
32
53
1
3
15
Number of
 Members
Number of Groups
 
 
TABLE 3. QUALITY OF DISCUSSION 
Detailed Discussion
on Importnant Points
Participants discuss carefully and meticulously to
decide how to carry on.
Discussion
on Important Points
Decision are taken by short discussions.
Assignments are completed rapdely with
modifications.
Often Went Off on a
Tangent
Participants discuss on important points. But they
chitchat often.
Mostly Chit-Chatting
Participants chitchat more often.
Pointless Discussion
Participants always chitchat and don't try to
complete the assignments
 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
Ratio of  People or Group 
Score of Pre-Tests 
Indivisual Score
Average With in
Groups
0
50
100
150
200
Very Deepened
Deepened
Neutral
Not Deepened
Not at All Deepened
Number of Person 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

  
Fig. 12 shows the comparison between the average 
scores of the pre-tests within each group and the qualities of 
the discussions. When the average scores were divided into 
the 3 different levels, “100 to 150”, “150 to 200” and “200-
250”, most of those groups that falls into the highest level, 
“200-250”, also falls into “Detailed discussion on important 
points”. 
D. Leader Function on Chat  
 From the chat logs, learners who took a leader role in 
the chat were identified, and the relationship between the 
learners’ rank for the pre-tests within their group and the 
qualities of their discussions was evaluated.  
       Fig. 13 shows a result of the groups of 2 people while 
Fig. 14 shows a result of the groups of 3 people. Based on 
the results, in the  groups of 2 people, when those who 
played a leader role have less academic ability than those 
who did not, their discussion tends to be well. In the group 
of 3 people, on the other hand, when those who had the best 
grade within their group played a leader role, their 
discussion tends to be well. 
E. Evaluation of Group Assignments 
  In this experiment, since the assignments that are 
submitted individually and by groups are the same, these 3 
patterns can be possible as re-submitted assignments: “Re-
submitted 
after 
improving 
individual 
assignment”, 
“Resubmitted the same individual assignments as is” and 
“Submitted completely new”. Those assignments that were 
made completely new include the ones that combined 
several different assignments. Fig. 15 shows a distribution 
of the ways  each group made their assignment. In both 
groups of 2 and 3 people, the results indicates most groups 
“Re-submitted after improving individual assignment”.  
“Re-submitted the same individual assignment as is” does 
not serve the meaning of collaborative learning, and it also 
means the collaborative script did not work well. Fig. 16 
shows the quality of discussion being held by groups who 
“Re-submitted the same individual assignment as is”. Many 
of these groups had a discussion that was “Mostly chit-
chatting” and “Pointless”, so some type of scaffolding is 
necessary for them.  
Figure 10.   Quality of discussions and number of group 
Figure 11.  Number of statements made per person 
person within a group 
 
0
20
40
Pointless Discussion
Discussion That Were
Mostly Chit-Chatting
Discussion That Often
Went Off on a Tangent
Discussion
on Important Points
Detailed Discussion
on Importnant Points
Number of Group 
Quality of Discussion 
Group of 2
People
Group of 3
People
0
5
10
15
20
Number Of Group 
Number Of Statements  Made Per Person 
Group of 3
People
Group of 2
People
 
Figure 12.  Pre-tests and quality of discussions 
 
Figure 13.  Leaders’ rank in the group of 2 people 
 
Figure 14.  Leaders’ rank in the groups of 3 people 
 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Ratio of Number of Group 
Average Score of Pre-Test With in Groups 
Detailed Discussion
on Importnant Points
Discussion
on Important Points
Discussion That Often
Went Off on a Tangent
Discussion That Were
Mostly Chit-Chatting
Pointless Discussion
0
5
10
15
Pointless Discussion
Discussion That Were
Mostly Chit-Chatting
Discussion That Often
Went Off on a Tangent
Discussion
on Important Points
Detailed Discussion
on Importnant Points
Number of Group 
Quality of Discussion 
Rank 1st
Rank 2nd
0
2
4
6
8
Pointless Discussion
Discussion That Were
Mostly Chit-Chatting
Discussion That Often
Went Off on a Tangent
Discussion
on Important Points
Detailed Discussion
on Importnant Points
Number of Group 
Quality of Discussion 
Rank 1st
Rank 2nd + 3rd
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
Table 7 shows a standard for the group assignment, 
“Good”, “Average” and “Bad”, which are used for grading. 
Table 8 shows a comparison between the evaluation result 
and the qualities of the discussions. The evaluation was 
done by 1 teaching staff who carried out the experiment. 
There were 2 different evaluators for this evaluator and the 
one who evaluated the qualities of the discussions. The 
result shows that the better the discussion quality is, the 
higher the assignment evaluation is.  
Also, Table 9 shows a comparison between evaluation 
results and how discussions were carried on. “Made new” 
had a higher ratio of “Good” whereas “No changes” did not 
have any “Good”. As Fig. 16 suggests, “No changes” tends 
to result in “More chit-chatting” or “Pointless”. These points 
indicate that increasing a quality of discussion can lead to 
“Improvement” and “Make from scratch” with assignments 
highly scored.  
VII. 
SUMMARY AND FUTURE ISSUES 
A. Summary 
Supposing a situation where a face-to-face learning is 
impossible, we developed a CSCL system which can form 
many small groups for the online collaborative learning, and 
then the question-posing collaborative script based on the 
reciprocal teaching method was implemented in the system.  
Then, in the environment with 300 people, the 
automated group formation and the collaborative script were 
proved executable and effective.  
 
(1) The learners felt that the mutual work using the 
collaborative script was effective. In fact, discussions 
through the chat were activated while keeping their quality 
high.  
(2) Many groups improved their submitted individual 
assignment through discussions online. Those groups that 
held high quality discussions scored high on their group 
assignment.  
(3) It is suggested that the activation of discussions 
depends on an academic ability of the learners who play a 
leader role within their group. However, depending on a 
group structure, higher (academic ability) does not 
necessarily mean good.  
First, according to (1) and (2), the results showed that 
the design of the collaborative learning in this study was 
mostly appropriate.  
Also, according to (3), it is important to identify the 
most suitable learners to play a leader role and assign them 
in each group. However, the characteristics of learners who 
should play a leader role cannot be selected based on their 
academic ability,  such as scores of pre-tests. To resolve 
such issue, in the future, it is important to develop a method 
to identify learners with an ability to take a leader role from 
a pre-survey and activity logs.  
On the other hand, when the collaborative script is 
executed in a class, it is important to plan for exceptional 
cases, such as students’ no attendance. Collaborative script 
does not allow a progress of tasks to be flexible, so the 
script often gets non-executable when the learning 
environment is off from an original plan. In this experiment, 
there are learners who attended on the 1st day and missed 
the 2nd day, or learners who missed the 1st day and 
TABLE 7.  EVALUATION STANDARD FOR PROJECT 
Good 
Complicated Question than the exercise shown in 
advance and an answer is right. 
Average 
Similar to the exercise shown in advance or 
equivalent in complexity, and a Answer is right 
Bad 
Similar to the exercise shown in advance or below 
equivalent in complexity, and an Answer is mistake 
 
TABLE 8.  QUALITY OF DISCUSSION AND EVALUATION OF 
PROJECT BEING SUBMITTED 
Good
Ave
Bad
Detailed Discussion
on Importnant Points
13
18
9
Discussion
on Important Points
3
18
6
Often Went Off on a Tangent
2
5
7
Mostly Chit-Chatting
3
2
Pointless Discussion
2
4
Evaluation
 
 
TABLE 9.  HOW DISCUSSIONS WERE MOVED FORWARD AND 
PROJECT EVALUATION RESULTS 
Good Average
Bad
Completely New
2
3
1
Improving
16
38
22
No Change
5
5
Evaluation
 
 
 
Figure 15.  How they submitted group project 
 
 
Figure 16.  Quality of discussion held by groups 
without making changes 
0
10
20
30
40
50
No Change
Improving
Completely New
Number of Group 
Group of 3 People
Group of 2 People
0
5
10
Pointless Discussion
Discussion That Were
Mostly Chit-Chatting
Discussion That Often
Went Off on a Tangent
Discussion
on Important Points
Detailed Discussion
on Importnant Points
Number of Group 
Quality of Discussion 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

attended on the 2nd day, so there were many groups that 
could not make progress their learning as planned. Also, 
there were some time limitations, such as a deadline for 
submitting assignments, so there were groups that had to 
submit without having sufficient discussions. Based on the 
above, executing a collaborative script needs some degree of 
flexibility depending on a learning environment and 
conditions of learners.  
 
B. Future issues 
In this study, the uniformed collaborative script was 
executed, but it is necessary to develop and practice 
collaborative script that is adaptable in groups in a way that 
the script changes flexibly depending on a group’s 
characteristics and progress.  
Also, for the automated group formation, it is necessary 
to be capable of forming various groups based on learners’ 
detailed characteristics being specified and to clarify 
characteristics of groups depending on learners included in 
the groups. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Number 23501117. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Miyake and H. Shirouzu, Learning Sciences and 
Technology,The Society for the Promotion of the Open 
University of Japan, 2003, pp.26-38. 
[2] A. King, “Scipting collaborative learning processes: A 
collaborative perspective”, in Scripting computer-supported 
collaborative learning, F. Fisher, I. Kollar, H. Mandl and J. M. 
Haake (ed), Springer, 2007, PP.13-37 
[3] A. Weinberger, “Scripts for computer-supported collaborative 
learning. Effects of social and epistemic cooperation scripts 
on 
collaborative 
construction.”, 
Doctoral 
Dissertation, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, 2003. 
[4] R. C. Schank and R. P. Abelson, Scripts, plans, goals and 
understandings, Laurence Erlbaum, 1977. 
[5] A. O’Donell and D. F. Dansereau, “Scripted cooperation in 
student dyads: A method for analyzing and enhancing 
academic learning and performance.” In Interaction in 
Cooperative groups: The theoretical anatomy of group 
learning, R. Herts-Lazarowitz, and N. Miller, Cambidge 
University Press, 1992, pp.120-141.  
[6] P. Dillenbourg, “Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending 
collaborative learning with instructional design”, In Three 
Worlds of CSCL, P. A.  Kirschner (ed.), 2002, pp.61-91.    
[7]  N. Rummel and H. Spada, “Learning to collaborate: An 
instructional approach to promoting problem-solving in 
computer-mediated settings”, Journal of the Learning 
Sciences vol. 14(2), 2005, pp.201-241. 
[8] A. Weinberger, Cscl scripts: Effects of social and epistemic 
scripts on computer-supported collaborative learning, VDM, 
2008. 
[9] S. Takahashi, K. Ando, S. Matsunaga and T. Inaba: “Utilizing 
collaborative script that is adoptive to learners’ characteristics 
to build and evaluate CSCL system”, Proceedings of the 74th 
National Convention of IPSJ 4, 2012, pp.815-816. 
[10] P. Dillenbourg and P. Jerman, “Designing interactive 
scripts”,in 
Scripting 
computer-supported 
collaborative 
learning, F. Fisher, I. Kollar, H. Mandl and J. M. Haake (ed), 
Springer, 2007, pp.275-301. 
[11] A. S. Palinscar and A. L. Brown, “Reciprocal teaching of 
coprehension-fostering 
and 
comprehension-monitoring 
activities”, Congnition and instruction vol.1(2), pp.117-175, 
1992. 
 
 
 
 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

