Effects of Multiple Viewing of Captions and Subtitles on English Proficiency
Yayoi Anzai
Kyushu University,
Innovation Center for Educational Resource
Fukuoka, Japan
email: anzai.yayoi.450@m.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Kanji Akahori
Japan Association for Promotion of Educational Technology
Tokyo, Japan
email: akahori@japet.or.jp
Abstract— English as a Foreign Language (EFL) teachers
and researchers in Japan have been seeking an effective
way to determine how mobile learning can be best
integrated in language learning. There are also some others
who have been searching the best way to use captions and
subtitles of the English videos to enhance effective language
learning.
They
often investigate the effects of
using
computers. They generally agree that the use of captions or
subtitles is helpful to acquire the target language, and
English captions are found to be more effective than
Japanese
subtitles
to
enhance
English
proficiency.
However, there is a gap between the state of the art and
actual classroom situations. Students spend more time with
smartphones than computers. They watch the same video
a few times combining English captions and Japanese
subtitles, not only English captions. Thus, the purpose of
this study was to find out the immediate effects of both
captions and subtitles on EFL proficiency after viewing the
same English video multiple times, using a smartphone.
The results showed that the group who used both Japanese
subtitles and English captions performed better on the
vocabulary section and had a higher total score compared
to the group who only used English captions.
Keywords-subtitles; captions; EFL; ESL; mobile learning.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Online videos have been flourishing and getting much
attention from language teachers using Computer Assisted
Language Learning (CALL) because of their excellent
educational contents [1]. Massive Open Online Courses,
MOOCs and Technology Entertainment Design (TED) Talks
are good examples.
MOOCs consist of video lectures, an
online community, and exams, while TED Talks are
speeches promoted as “ideas worth spreading.” What they
have in common is that they use English as a global
language, and captions and subtitles are of significant benefit
to English as a Foreign Language (EFL), and English as a
Second Language (ESL) learners [1]-[3].
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
2, we introduce the literature review.
In Section 3, we
describe the methods used in this study.
In Section 4, we
provide the results of our study. In Section 5, we provide
discussion, and finally, in Section 6, we present our
conclusions.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Ample research supports that captions and subtitles have
positive effects on language acquisition [4]-[11]. In Table 1,
we show studies related to subtitles and captions in English
learning.
In the laboratory experimental settings, many studies
have investigated the effects on the target language after
viewing the edited video once. However, there have not been
many studies on the effects of captions and subtitles after
viewing the same video multiple times, though this is what is
often happening in actual EFL/ESL classrooms, since the
students cannot understand everything in the video after
viewing it once. In addition, smartphones were not often
used in the previous studies, though this is the device that the
students carry all the time. Thus, what is missing are the
effects of multiple viewings of both captions and subtitles
together on EFL learners, when they use smartphones.
TABLE 1. STUDIES RELATED TO SUBTITLES AND CAPTIONS IN
ENGLISH LEARNING
Author(s)
Year
Environment
Findings
T.
Kikuchi
[4]
1996
classroom
The study examined the
potential of using English-
captioned movies in the
areas of rapid reading and
listening comprehension.
The results showed that the
group who used English
sound and captions made
statistically much more
progress than other groups
who used captions, pictures
and English sound, or
English sound only.
S. Yoshino,
E. Nojima,
&
K.
Akahori [5]
1997
laboratory
English captions are more
effective than Japanese
subtitles to enhance English
listening.
S. Yoshino
[6]
2003
laboratory
The study examined the
timing of the captions, and
found that more
information was recalled
when L2, second language,
captions were presented
before the corresponding
L2 audio.
K.
Tomita
[7]
2008
laboratory
Immediately after the
experiment, the group who
watched the news video
with superimposed caption
performed significantly
higher than the group who
studied without the caption.
However, there was no
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

significant difference after
three months.
Y.
Anzai
[3]
2016
online class
Subtitles and captions
support Japanese and
international participants to
MOOCs to learn the
subject matter.
E.Peters, E.
E. Heynes,
&
E. Puimege
[8]
2016
classroom
Incidental vocabulary
acquisition while watching
a short video is possible
and captions have more
potential than subtitles for
this purpose. Moreover,
learners' vocabulary size
and an item's frequency of
occurrence in the video clip
have positive correlation
with vocabulary
acquisition.
K.
Hosogoshi
[9]
2016
classroom
The Japanese subtitles
group performed better in
the use of imaginary and
summarizing strategies
throughout the listening.
M.
P.
H.
Rodgers
and
S.
Webb [10]
2017
classroom
The results revealed that
captions on television
programs are likely to aid
comprehension when
episodes are most difficult.
H. S. Mahdi
[11]
2017
classroom
Studying the effect of
keywords videos
captioning on vocabulary
acquisition using mobile
devices. The study found
that keyword captioning is
a useful mode to improve
learners’ pronunciation.
Considering what was missing in the literature and its
importance, this study was conducted in a laboratory setting.
This approach was chosen not to be conducted in a
classroom to eliminate confounding variables as much as
possible while investigating the effects of captions and
subtitles. In addition, the theory of instructional design was
taken into consideration to decide the order in which
captions and subtitles were presented to participants when
watching
the
English
video.
Reigeluth
states
that
“instructional design
is concerned
with
understanding,
improving, and applying methods of instruction” (p.7) [12].
The theory recommends designing instructions to allow
learners to understand the framework before looking at the
details of what they want to understand. Thus, since all the
participants were Japanese, this study of the treatment group
was first shown a video with Japanese subtitles to set them
the framework of the video, and then they looked at the
English subtitles to learn more details about English
expressions.
Under the current educational context, the purpose of this
study was to find out the immediate effects of captions and
subtitles on EFL proficiency after viewing the same English
video multiple times, using a smartphone. Captioning refers
to “L2, second language, subtitled video,” whereas subtitles
refer to “L1, first language, subtitled video” of L2 aural
input. The statistical design used was a series of two-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA).
The independent variable
was Group (a control group vs the treatment group), and
English proficiency (high vs low) was measured using the
Oxford Placement Test. The dependent variables were the
scores taken from the English tests about the video.
The hypothesis of this research was:
Using smartphones, the treatment group with Japanese
captions and English subtitles would perform better in
English tests than the control group who only had English
subtitles.
III.
METHODS
The study was conducted in a university laboratory
setting in September 2016 in Tokyo, Japan. The number of
Japanese students was 60. The length of the video was 1
minute 30 seconds, in English, with English captions and
Japanese subtitles added. Both groups viewed the same video
three times (Figure 1). The control group used English
captions three times, while the treatment group used
Japanese subtitles twice and then, English captions once
(Figure 2).
Figure 1.
Investigating the effects of the video with Japanese/English subtitles
Control Group
Treatment Group
Figure 2. The process of the study
The effects were measured with a test that consisted of 1)
vocabulary, 2) content comprehension, 3) summary, and 4)
listening proficiency. In the first section, vocabulary, the
students were asked to translate English words or phrases
into Japanese. Examples of the tested vocabulary include
“Confucius” and “evolution.” In the second section, content
Pre-survey
English test
captions
1. English
2. English
3. English
subtitles+
captions
1. Japanese
2. Japanese
3. English
Post survey
English placement test
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

and comprehension, they were asked to choose True or False
questions based on the video. An example of the questions is
“We are living in an age of Web2.0.” In the third section,
they were asked to summarize the English video in Japanese.
In the fourth section, listening proficiency, they were asked
to fill in the blanks while listening to the video. An example
includes “Spring time in education for all of us, with the
various new ( 3 ) of learning.”
IV.
RESULTS
We compared the control group who watched English
captions three times with the treatment group who had
Japanese subtitles twice followed by English captions once.
The results showed that there was no significant interaction
between the two groups. Regarding Group, the treatment
group (M = 13.39, SD = 5.22) tended to perform better than
the control group (M = 11.50, SD = 4.67). As for the other
independent variable, English proficiency (high vs low),
there was no significant difference between the two groups.
When we examined each section of the English test, we
found no interaction, but there was a significant difference
between the wo groups (F(1, 56) = 22.02, p < .001. The
treatment group (M = 3.40, SD = 1.35) performed better than
the control group (M = 2.00, SD = .98) on the vocabulary
section, where they were able to translate English words into
Japanese better. In other words, the students were able to
process the two languages at the same time, and picked up
the corresponding words in the other language quickly using
the subtitles, and memorized them. There were no significant
statistical differences between the two groups in the other
parts of the English test.
V.
DISCUSSION
This study revealed that the use of L1 subtitles does not
necessarily
hinder
acquiring
L2.
That
is,
overall,
a
combination of L1 subtitles and L2 caption is more
advantageous than using only L2 captions. Using L1
subtitles to grasp the whole picture before looking at the
details in L2 is one approach to enhance learning.
In addition, as a result of this study, it is found that the
group who used subtitles and captions tended to perform
better than the group with only captions on the total score of
the English test. According to Yoshino, Nojima, and Akahori
[5],
English captions are more effective than Japanese
subtitles to enhance English listening. Thus, it may lead to
the assumption that the effectiveness of the use of captions
and subtitles may go in the order of Japanese subtitles with
English captions, secondly English captions, and thirdly
Japanese subtitles.
The results of this study would be useful to design
English language learning using online videos, such as
MOOCs or TED Talks, equipped with captions and subtitles.
Learners should be flexible to choose when they use L1 and
L2 in their language learning.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In summary, this study aimed to find out the immediate
effects of both captions and subtitles on EFL proficiency
after viewing the same English video multiple times.
Smartphones were used as a learning device for this
experiment. The results showed that the group who watched
both Japanese subtitles and English captions tended to
perform better in the total score, and particularly on the
vocabulary section, than the group who used only English
captions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This study was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific
Research (C), JSPS KAKENHI Number 15K01034 from
April 2015 - March 2019 with representative researcher: Dr.
Kanji Akahori; research collaborator: Dr. Yayoi Anzai.
REFERENCES
[1]
Y. Anzai, “English Education at Universities in Japan and
Open Education,” In Yoshida, H., & Nozawa, K. (Eds.), My
foreign language class using ICT, Maruzen Pranet: Tokyo, pp.
63–76, 2014.
[2]
R. Tabuchi, and E. Yufune, “Analysis on the display time of
TED subtitles and tis educational use, Language education &
technology Vol. 54, pp. 167-192, 2017.
[3]
Y. Anzai, (2016, 12).
Results from JMOOC, Science and
technology of taste and odor, ICER Newsletter. Available
from:
http://www.icer.kyushu-
u.ac.jp/sites/default/files/newsletter201612.pdf/ 2018.03.02
[4]
T. Kikuchi, “The effects of an English-captioned movie on
word recognition and rapid reading,” Proceedings of Annual
Convention
of
Japan
Association
of
College
English
Teachers, Vol. 35, pp. 205-208, 1996.
[5]
S. Yoshino, E. Nojima, and K. Akahori, “The effects of
caption on English listening comprehension, Japan Society for
Educational Technology, Vol. 21, Suppl, pp. 29 – 32, 1997..
[6]
S. Yoshino, “The effective use of timing to increase caption
effectiveness : An experiment,” Japan Society for Educational
Technolog, Vol. 27, 3，pp. 237−246，2003
[7]
K. Tomita, “Effects of a superimposed caption on learners'
listening skills,” Proceedings of Annual Convention of Japan
Association of College English Teachers, Vol. 47, pp. 42-43,
2008
[8]
E. Peters, E. Heynes, and E. Puimege (2016). “Learning
vocabulary through audiovisual input: The differential effect
of L1 subtitles and captions,” Vol. 63, pp134-148, System.
[9]
K. Hosokoshi, “Effects of captions and subtitles on the
listening process: Insights from EFL learners' listening
strategies,” JALT CALL, Vol. 12, 3, pp. 153-178, 2016
[10] M. P. H. Rodgers and S. Webb, “The effects of captions on
EFL learners’ comprehensiion of English-language televisiion
programs,” CALICO Journal, Vol. 34, 1, pp. 20-38, 2017.
[11] H. S. Mahdi, “The effect of key-words video captions on
vocabulary
leaerning
through
mobile-assisted
langage
learning,”
Australian Educational Computig, Vol. 332, 1,
2017.
[12] C. Reigeluth, Instructional-design theories and models: an
overview of their current status. Volume I. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum, 1983
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

