Sustainability and Metaverse in Education and Training: Barriers, Opportunities 
and Environmental Impact  
 
Cinzia Mezzetti 
Piazza Copernico srl  
Rome, Italy 
e-mail: cmezzetti@pcopernico.it  
 
Alessandro Dell’Orto 
Piazza Copernico srl  
Rome, Italy 
e-mail: adellorto@pcopernico.it  
 
 
Daniela Pellegrini 
Piazza Copernico srl  
Rome, Italy 
e-mail: dpellegrini@pcopernico.it
Abstract— The proliferation of training experiences and 
experiments with the metaverse testifies the desire to test new 
instructional models to increase participant engagement, but 
also foster situated learning experiences to increase training 
effectiveness and learning outcomes. However, the creation of 
training paths in the metaverse is supported by an experimental 
approach, but also accompanied by curiosity and expectations, 
as well as by emerging questions about how to combine the 
opportunities of a new training technology with its adoption 
problems. In the definitions and experiences, it seems to be a 
lack of a real educational vision for correctly using this 
opportunity. In this paper, which is an initial approach to the 
problem of choosing a new technology, we want to examine the 
impact both in terms of training and on the environmental 
dimension, which is a generally underestimated topic in edtech 
(educational technology) choices. 
Keywords-metaverse; instructional design; sustainability. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Metaverse is one of current applications that is considered 
most interesting in edtech landscape and cited in trends of 
education & training industry observers in recent years. 
Contextually, both corporate trials and academic studies have 
been conducted with the aim of demonstrating the usefulness 
and educational effectiveness of this technology. At the 
beginning of 2023, however, on the communicative level in 
industry trends, this topic is found with less centrality in favor 
of the contamination of methods for a truly individualized 
(user-oriented) learning. 
Since its first definition, Metaverse is considered 
“a decentralized network of computer-generated worlds, 
where users feel a genuine sense of being in these spaces for 
work, leisure and learning” [22]. Particularly in recent years 
with the increasing development of technology capacity, also 
studies and experimentations increased in a practical use of 
possible applications of the metaverse in education and 
training. Authors who are in favor of using metaverse, identify 
great educational opportunities in creating a virtual and 
interactive equivalent to the physical world through 
exploration on Extended Reality (XR) platforms. This 
definition embraces immersive technologies as Augmented 
Reality (AR), Mixed Reality (MR) and Virtual Reality (VR). 
So, there is a spectrum of virtuality, which are already 
transforming society in technological, industrial, and legal 
worlds [19]. 
The ability to act in a virtual and interconnected world to 
search information, communicate and explore an augmented 
reality led to imagining a future in which only a reduced and 
blurred boundary will exist between the virtual and real 
worlds. As Ng [17] points out, the use of the term metaverse 
has greatly increased after 2020 to identify technologies that 
were being discussed even before that year: 
• 
Since the 2000s to the mid-2010s, researchers used 
the term metaverse to refer to virtual environments 
such as gamification and avatar-based learning to 
indicate platforms e.g. Second Life, Digital Virtual 
World [1] [21]. They emphasized the possibility in 
building immersive, three-dimensional, multi-user 
experiences to create authentic learning environments 
to enrich the educational experience.  
• 
After the mid-2010s, even with a significant 
improvement of technologies, the definition of 
metaverse in education didn’t change so much, i.e., 
 a 3d simulation environment that encourages 
communication (with simulated objects/avatars and 
with other participants), interaction and collaboration 
by providing active agents to build the learning 
process was identified with this term [2]. 
• 
Since 2020, the term Metaverse has returned to 
common interest, however, not changing its intrinsic 
meaning in the educational field. Diaz et al. [5] 
identify with this term virtual spaces that recreate the 
real world, learning processes and experiences, 
through avatars used to interact with other users as in 
real life. Kye et al. [13] describe the metaverse as a 
space for a new form of social communication with 
greater freedom for users to share ideas, thoughts and 
digital artifacts. Reyes' [20] definition fully identifies 
the foundational assets of the metaverse: 
o 
Interactivity that facilitates the construction 
of autonomous and collaborative learning 
scenarios;  
o 
Corporeality that allows people to represent 
themselves through avatars; 
o 
Persistence that enables the construction of a 
virtual world that mimics the real world and 
keeps people interconnected over time. 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

In distance learning, this blended approach allows new 
formal and informal learning modalities emerge, in which 
physical presence is not a mandatory requirement of the 
educational experience [13] anymore. Instead, the use of 
immersive technologies enables educational experiences and 
allows a deeper and longer learning [16].  Girvan [9] argues 
that this new learning formula can ensure a democratization 
of education, allowing access even for people from 
disadvantaged areas. 
We summarize below some emerging indications from the 
literature in comparison with our own critical reading. 
 
TABLE 1 .  OPPORTUNITÀ SEGNALATE IN LETTERATURA E 
VALUTAZIONE DELLE POSSIBILI ALTERNATIVE 
Opportunity statements 
Questions 
Metaverse provides more 
interactive education without 
compromising the classroom 
experience [12]. 
Does interactivity depend 
on used method or 
technology? 
Applications of the metaverse can 
provide a more accessible way for 
communication, improving 
educational quality [4]. 
Can training effectiveness 
also be pursued in other 
ways? 
The teaching process can be 
managed independently from time 
and space with enriched teaching 
experiences. 
Can other technologies 
equally enable the 
exploration of different 
worlds (at microscopic or 
macroscopic level) and 
eras, depending on the 
educational objectives? 
Metaverse provides immersive, 
higher participation learning 
experiences and reducing isolation 
But could it be also the 
other way around? Could it 
increase the risk of 
isolation? 
Students can become knowledge 
creators. 
Is content creation also 
possible with other 
technologies? 
Educational resources will be 
plentiful and increasing 
But what will be the 
necessary investments? 
Online 3d metaverse campuses can
realize rich, liquid, integrated 
learning environments and provide 
rich educational opportunities [3] 
What will be the enrollment
policies to ensure
everyone's right to study? 
 
Possible drawbacks and problems to be addressed are also 
highlighted: 
• 
Teachers need to learn new methods and acquire 
digital, design and instructional process management 
skills in the metaverse. Contact and relationship in 
presence are necessary in educational and training 
activities. 
• 
Investments in technology and development of 
environments and contents with complex, high-
quality graphics are required. There is still a low 
availability of catalogs with digital resources and 
metavers has high production costs and even access 
devices are expensive. Privacy and cybersecurity are 
issues related to the use of digital devices that collect 
and use data (including biometric data) that must be 
ensured under a regulatory and informational 
perspective toward the user. Also a part of little 
knowledge or confidence in technology and 
awareness of educational applications persists [16]. 
• 
Excessive cognitive load for Extended Reality (XR) 
experiences that provide many audio-visual stimuli to 
the user, so it is necessary to identify the correct 
methods to make this aspect become an advantage for 
effective learning and retention, rather than instead a 
barrier. This also requires defining time constraints 
for these experiences estimated at 10-15 minutes [19]. 
• 
The issue of accessibility is very complex under the 
perspective of used technologies. Increasingly, 
technologies must evolve to ensure full and equal 
inclusion and accessibility. [19]. 
Then there are emerging topics related to the use of 
technological environments such as [24] those related to Data 
Management, Digital Copyright, equity and sustainability of 
education, and the impact of algorithms in educational 
processes. There are, however, areas and purposes for which 
experts find the use of Extended Reality (XR) challenging and 
productive, including: 
• 
increase participant motivation and interest: studies 
show an increase in self-efficacy through experiential 
training [14]. 
• 
build comprehensive learning environments in which 
the learner can develop learning through immersive 
technologies enriched by advanced computing  
(AI – Artificial Intelligence, data mining, etc.) by 
developing socialization, collaboration in learning 
environments and decentralization to increase 
learning opportunities and technologies [17]. 
In this scenario and with these available studies, a global 
consideration about impacts in learning and other impacts 
must be done. In Section 2 we discuss effective opportunities 
to implement metaverse solutions in education and training 
with honest remarks about possible problems and alternatives. 
In section 3 we provide a wider perspective on the use of 
technologies in an ESG framework. 
II. OPPORTUNITIES FOR TRAINING AND BARRIERS  
TO ADOPTION OF METAVERSE 
Undoubtedly, metaverse appears to be a very interesting 
chance in the educational and training sector with 
experiencing worlds and eras other than reality, interacting in 
complex ways through avatars in contexts even very distant 
from personal environment, breaking down access boundaries 
and overcoming distance or language limits. 
Metaverse could represent a great opportunity in all those 
training activities that are difficult to replicate or implying 
high risk, as for example, in the training of technicians 
operating in a semi-automated production process. Metaverse 
offers the possibility to engage in trials with equipment, 
processing times, and quality control procedures without 
incurring risks or injuries, even interacting with each other 
and/or with instructors in real time. Creating a safe and 
controlled training environment where users can practice and 
make mistakes without negative consequences is, in our 
opinion, one of the greatest potentials. In addition, learning 
can be adapted to users' background and prior skills or specific 
needs by overcoming barriers to access or habitual behaviors. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

It is important to remember that technology is a tool and 
not a miracle solution [19], that it can support learning 
processes particularly in so-called Dangerous, Impossible, 
Counterproductive, 
Expensive 
(DICE) 
situations,  
and yet it does not solve the problems of a poorly designed or 
managed training process. The application of metaverse 
technologies in training, therefore, requires extensive 
considerations on training objectives and models, user 
experience, and real training potential. As metaverse will 
grow, experiences and content will emerge, and even 
appropriate instructional solutions could be tested to ensure 
that the tool is not just another expensive and underutilized 
training application. 
III. TECHNOLOGY ENVIROMENTAL IMPACT CONCEPT 
It is also important to consider the assessment of the 
environmental impact of technologies, a factor that is often 
overlooked when evaluating opportunities and innovations.  
It is true that calculating the real environmental impact is a 
huge, if not impossible, problem. It is in fact the sum of a 
complex series of types of pollution: gas emissions, water 
consumption, consumption of raw materials, deforestation, 
urban sprawl, human and animal exploitation, and so on. And 
this calculation becomes even more difficult for something 
that does not yet exist: the metaverse. The only certainty we 
have is that as the number of online events grows, so does the 
energy demand of the entire infrastructure. According to the 
Shift Project report [27], digital growth is unsustainable; in 
fact, the energy consumption of current digital activities is 
growing at 9% per year, and with the advent of the metaverse, 
this growth can only continue to grow exponentially.  
The metaverse will rely on an infrastructure based on cloud 
computing, blockchain, artificial intelligence and virtual 
reality. Let's try to analyze them one by one:   
• 
Cloud Computing: cloud services are essential for 
virtual reality and the metaverse. According to a 2020 
analysis by Lancaster University, a scenario in which 
30% of gamers switch to cloud gaming will lead to a 
30% increase in CO2 emissions by 2030 [28]. Not to 
be overlooked is the water consumption required by 
data centers. To get an idea, Google's data centers 
alone used about 16 billion liters last year, which is 
comparable to the water consumption of an Italian 
city with a population of about 185,000 [10] [6]. 
• 
Blockchain: bitcoins alone have a carbon footprint 
comparable to that of New Zealand, producing 
approximately 36.95 tones of CO2 per year [26]. The 
use of blockchain is probably the big change and the 
only real benefit, as the transparency of this 
technology would force companies to track, submit 
and manage their green policies [8]. Below are graphs 
about of the bitcoin network's CO2 emissions (Figure 
1) and energy consumption over time (Figure 2) [27].  
 
 
Figure 1.  Estimated CO2 emission (MT) of the Bitcoin network 
 
Figure 2.  Daily energy consumption (GW) of the Bitcoin network 
• 
Artificial Intelligence: according to Strubell et al 
[23], training a single neural network can generate up 
to 284 tones of carbon dioxide, which is more than 
five times the amount of CO2 emitted by an average 
car (Table 2). Further confirmation of the order of 
magnitude comes from Patterson [18], who calculates 
the emissions for training the model behind OpenAI's 
famous ChatGPT, GPT-3: 500 tones of CO2.  
 
TABLE 2 .  CONFRONTO CONSUMI RISPETTO  
ALL’ADDESTRAMENTO DI UN MODELLO GPU [19] 
 
Consumption 
CO2 (Kg) 
Air flight, 1 passenger, NY ⇔ SF 
900 
Human life, 1 year 
5000 
Life of an American, 1 year 
16400 
Car, whole life 
57153 
Training a model (GPU) 
 
NLP pipeline 
18 
with tuning and experimentation 
35592 
Transformer (large) 
87 
with neural architecture search 
284019
 
Considering these data, it is possible to conclude that a 
public access network that connects various devices or 
terminals throughout, extending the real world, based on the 
mentioned technologies, can only increase the use of all 
technologies and consequently also the ecological impact.   
Finally, we would like to quote Hwang's definition of the 
metaverse [11]: “The metaverse has been recognized as being 
the next generation of social connection. It refers to a created 
world, in which people can “live” under the rules defined by 
the creator. A metaverse could be fully or partially virtual; for 
example, it could be a fully virtual world like a virtual reality 
(VR) system, or a partially virtual world like the use of 
augmented realty (AR) in real-world contexts. In the 
metaverse space, people can engage in social activities such 
as discussing an issue, collaborating on a project, playing 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

games, and learning from experiencing or solving some 
problems.” 
But are we sure that all these benefits are not already 
realized with "the current Internet"? 
 
IV. CONCLUSION 
Despite the enthusiasm and clear benefits of using 
metaverse, we must always maintain a global perspective and 
consider all the issues associated with the use of technology. 
Data use, training ethics and environmental impact are just 
some of the issues that should not be underestimated in the 
conscious adoption of these innovations for training activities. 
Increasingly, companies and training institutions need to 
understand the global impact of their methodological and 
technological choices in the virtual world have on the real 
world. This paper represents the beginning of a corporate 
consideration of how facing emerging technologies. The next 
steps of this research will aim to measure the carbon footprint 
of all digital training products and include it in its quality 
assurance programs and ESG (Enviromental Social 
Governance) policy. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Sincere thanks to the management of Piazza Copernico,  
a digital learning company that decided to adopt a strong ESG 
policy and supports the prosecution of this research. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. A. C. Aguayo, “Democratization of creativity and cultural 
production in virtual worlds: A new challenge for regulation and 
cultural 
management” 
in: 
SLACTIONS 
2009 
International 
Conference: Life, imagination, and work using metaverse platforms: 
Proceedingsof the SLACTIONS 2009 International Conference. 
Universidade de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, p. 53-59, 2009. 
https://dialnet.unirioja.es/descarga/libro/851957.pdf  
[2] 
B. 
Barahona, 
J. 
Ranilla 
and 
E. 
Gallardo-Echenique,  
“The communication in simulated learning environments” in Revista 
Iberoamericana de Educación, Vol. 72, no. 2, 85-101, 2016. 
[3] 
P. Chan, T. Van Gerven, J. L. Dubois, and K. Bernaerts,  
“Virtual chemical laboratories: A systematic literature review of 
research, technologies and instructional design” in Computers and 
Education Open, Vol. 2, no. 100053, 2021. 
[4] 
P. M. Dewantara, I. W. Rasna, and I. B. Putrayasa, “Flexible Learning 
& Pendidikan Karakter: Refleksi Pembelajaran Bahasa Indonesia di 
Masa Pandemi Covid-19. Global Aksara Pers, 2022. 
[5] 
J. Díaz, C. Saldaña and C. Avila, “Virtual world as a resource for 
hybrid education” in International Journal of Emerging Technologies 
in Learning (iJET), Vol. 15, no. 15, pp. 94-109, 2020. 
https://www.learntechlib.org/p/217986  
[6] 
C. Firenzani, Average Water Consumption, The Ranking Of Italy's 
Most 
Wasteful 
Cities. 
Truenumbers, 
17 
Sept. 
2021, 
https://www.truenumbers.it/consumo-medio-acqua/. 
[7] 
T. N. Fitria and N. E., Simbolon, “Possibility of Metaverse in 
Education: Opportunity and Threat” in Sosmaniora: Jurnal Ilmu Sosial 
Dan 
Humaniora, 
Vol. 
1, 
no. 
3, 
pp. 
365–375. 
2022. 
DOI: 10.55123/sosmanior.v1i3.821   
[8] 
L. Gibbons, 5 Ways the Metaverse Can Help with the Climate Crisis. 
4 
Aug. 
2022, 
https://www.blockleaders.io/news/5-ways-the-
metaverse-can-help-with-the-climate-crisis. 
[9] 
C. Girvan, “What is a virtual world? Definition and classification” in 
Educational Technology Research and Development, Vol,. 66, no. 5, 
pp. 1087–1100, 2018. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-018-9577-y 
[10] U. Hölzle, “Our Commitment to Climate-Conscious Data Center 
Cooling.” 
Google, 
Google, 
21 
Nov. 
2022, 
https://blog.google/outreach-initiatives/sustainability/our-
commitment-to-climate-conscious-data-center-cooling/. 
[11] G. J. Hwang, and S. Y. Chien, “Definition, roles, and potential research 
issues of the metaverse in education: An artificial intelligence 
perspective” in Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence. 
Vol. 3, no. 100082, 2022. Elsevier BV.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2022.100082 
[12] J. H. Kim, B. S. Lee, and S. J Choi, “A study on metaverse construction 
and use cases for non-face-to-face education” in The Journal of the 
Convergence on Culture Technology, Vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 483–497, 2022. 
https://doi.org/10.17703/JCCT.2022.8.1.483 
[13] B. Kye, N. Han, E. Kim, Y. Park and S. Jo, “Educational applications 
of metaverse: possibilities and limitations” in Journal of Educational 
Evaluation for Health Professions, Vol. 18, pp. 1-13, 2021. 
https://doi.org/10.3352/jeehp.2021.18.32  
[14] A. Lehikko, “Measuring self-efficacy in immersive virtual learning 
environments: a systematic literature review” in Journal of Interactive 
Learning Research, Vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 125-146, 2021. 
[15] M. Y. Mughal, N. Andleeb, A. F. A. Khurram, M. Y. Ali,  M. S. Aslam, 
and M. N. Saleem, “Perceptions of teaching-learning force about 
metaverse for education: a qualitative study” in Journal of Positive 
School Psychology, Vol. 6, no. 9, pp. 1738-1745, 2022. 
[16] S. Mystakidis, Metaverse. Encyclopedia, Vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 486–497, 
2022. https://doi.org/10.3390/encyclopedia2010031 
[17] D. T. K. Ng, “What is Metaverse? Definitions, technologies and the 
community of inquiry” in Australasian Journal of Educational 
Technology, Vol. 38, no. 4, 2022. 
[18] D. Patterson, J. Gonzalez, Q. Le, C. Liang, L. M. Munguia, D.  
Rothchild, D. So, M. Texier and J. Dean, “Carbon Emissions and Large 
Neural Network Training (Version 3)” in arXiv:2104.10350, 2021. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2104.10350 
[19] D. Pimentel, G. Fauville, K. Frazier, E. McGivney, S. Rosas and E. 
Woolsey, An introduction to learning in the metaverse. Meridian 
Treehouse, 2022. 
[20] C. Reyes, “Perception of high school students about using Metaverse 
in augmented reality learning experiences in mathematics” in  Pixel Bit 
- Revista De Medios Y Educación, Vol. 58, 143-159, 2020. 
https://doi.org/10.12795/pixelbit.74367   
[21] E. Schlemmer, D. Trein  and C. Oliveira, “The metaverse: 
Telepresence in 3D avatar-driven digital-virtual worlds” in  @ tic. 
Revista 
d'Innovació 
Educativa, 
Vol. 
2, 
pp. 
26-32, 
2009. 
https://www.redalyc.org/pdf/3495/349532298005.pdf  
[22] N. Stephenso, Snow Crash (First ed.). New York, N.Y. Bantam 
Books. 1992. 
[23] E. Strubell, A. Ganesh and A. McCallum, “Energy and Policy 
Considerations for Deep Learning in NLP” in Proceedings of the 57th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 
3645–3650, 2019, https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/p19-1355. 
[24] X. Zhai, X. Chu and M. J.Wang, “Educational metaverse: The shape 
challenges and reflections of the new generation of internet education” 
in Open Education Research, Vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 34-42. 2022. 
[25] Bitcoin Energy Consumption Index, Digiconomist, 6 Dec. 2022, 
https://digiconomist.net/bitcoin-energy-consumption. 
[26] Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity Consumption Index (CBECI). CCAF.io, 
https://ccaf.io/cbeci/index. 
[27] Digital Sufficiency - Lean ICT: For a Sober Digital. The Shift Project, 
5 Mar. 2021, https://theshiftproject.org/en/lean-ict-2/. 
[28] “The Metaverse: What Are the Environmental Impacts & Future.” 
Dataquest, 25 May 2022, https://www.dqindia.com/the-metaverse-
what-are-the-environmental-impacts-future/
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

