The O3 Project - Implementing Support For The Transition To Distance Learning 
 
Stephen White, Chris Low 
The University of Huddersfield 
Huddersfield, UK 
stephen.white@hud.ac.uk, c.low@hud.ac.uk
 
Abstract—This paper describes design and implementation of 
an institutionally supported initiative to convert Continuing 
Professional Development courses for health and social care 
professionals, from traditional face-to-face, to an online 
delivery method. E-learning specialists are used to mentor 
subject specialists, in producing effective, high quality online 
courses. Processes and tools have been created to promote staff 
development, for long-term sustainability of the initiative. 
Evaluation of both staff and student experiences will take place 
once the initial courses within the project have completed. 
Keywords - Online learning; Distance learning; e-Learning; 
Higher Education; HE; Institutional change. 
I. 
BACKGROUND 
Health and Social Care professionals within the United 
Kingdom are expected to maintain the currency of their 
skills and knowledge through a process known as 
Continuing Professional Development (CPD). 
The term ‘CPD’ is commonly used to describe a concept 
also denoted as Lifelong Learning, Continuing Professional 
Education, Continuing Vocational Training, and Post 
Qualification Development [1,2]. CPD has been defined as, 
‘a process of lifelong learning for all individuals and teams 
which meets the needs of patients and delivers the health 
outcomes and healthcare priorities of the NHS and which 
enables professionals to expand and fulfill their potential’ 
[3]. 
Courses that facilitate this process are provided either 
within the individual’s workplace, or by an external 
provider; this is usually a Higher Education (HE) institution, 
where the courses are delivered at postgraduate level, and 
are credit bearing. 
However, increased workload pressures from the clinical 
environment are making attendance at external activities 
increasingly difficult [4,5]. This requires institutions to 
consider alternative methods of delivery to provide CPD. 
This paper begins by describing a system that has been 
implemented to promote wide-scale transition from 
traditional to online delivery of CPD courses within a HE 
institution. An overview is presented of the potential 
benefits within the system and issues that may be 
encountered. The paper concludes by confirming that future 
evaluation of the implementation will be undertaken. 
II. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Online learning (used synonymously with e-learning in 
this paper) has the potential to “improve the quality of 
learning, improve access to education and training; reduce 
the cost of education; and improve the cost-effectiveness of 
education” [6]. However, these factors should not take 
priority over the quality of the process, and importantly, 
research comparing online and on-campus education tends 
to find few significant differences in outcomes and 
satisfaction ratings between on-campus and off-campus 
learners [7-14].  
This project, named O3 (Online, Off campus, Out of 
hours), is based on an institutional teaching and learning 
strategy that includes a vision for e-learning. This is 
important, as institutions have been shown not to have 
overall foresight or a cohesive approach to e-learning; and if 
they do, many people are unaware of it [15]. The broad aim 
of the project is to facilitate the long-term sustainability of 
quality online delivery of CPD courses for health and social 
care professionals. In promoting sustainable development, 
teaching and learning in HE organisations can be 
transformed [16]. However, sustainability of e-learning 
initiatives is a common challenge, regardless of the scale and 
focus of the project [15, 17].  
Adopting online delivery and its related technology 
requires an investment in faculty time and resources [18]. 
Many academics report being too busy to prioritise 
exploring new approaches to teaching and learning, with its 
associated problems in finding and learning how to use 
related resources [15]. Sait et al. [19] also identified that 
some tutors are against using technological methods as a 
replacement for face-to-face instruction, which is a type of 
internal resistance that should be taken into consideration. 
As a way of resolving this, supportive leaders are cited as a 
positive influence, although this tends to be based on 
personal relationships rather than determined by policy or 
institutional practice [15].  
Teaching and learning online also requires a different 
pedagogy and unique set of skills from that of the traditional 
classroom [20-25]. Despite awareness of this, it is widely 
acknowledged that most development work in this area is 
currently being done “by faculty with no formal training in 
[…] any of the related e-learning fields” [26]. Academics 
using online delivery methods “are faced with new 
pedagogical issues surrounding student interactions, course 
content 
design 
and 
delivery, 
multiple 
levels 
of 
communication, defining new types of assignments and 
performance expectations, and different assessment and 
evaluation techniques” [26]. The result is courses being 
prepared and delivered with a “systemic lack of awareness” 
in appropriate uses of technology for online education [24]. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

For a programme to be online in design, not just delivery, 
there needs to be an intentional, informed approach to 
instructional design. Therefore, any system that establishes a 
framework that could be used to guide the process, will 
greatly simplify the task of implementing online learning. 
III. 
THE O3 PROCESS 
The principle behind the O3 project is to utilise academic 
staff with expertise in e-learning, to mentor subject 
specialists in the process of moving their traditionally taught 
courses online. This may not, at first glance, appear to be an 
innovative approach, however, the institutional investment 
to the process, is what sets it apart. This support took the 
form of resource allocation and workload accounting, with 
the mentoring activity being recognized within the roles of 
the individuals concerned, demonstrating institutional 
commitment to the activity. A supportive organizational 
structure has: 
• 
an overall teaching and learning strategy that 
includes a vision for e-learning with accountability 
measures at both management and practitioner 
levels; and 
• 
a vision for e-learning that is relevant, coherent 
and shared [15]. 
 
 The e-learning specialists are the enablers within the 
system, and sit at the centre of the process, as can be seen in 
Figure 1. The process begins with meetings between them 
and the subject specialists, where the current course 
curriculum, timetable, materials and methods of interaction 
are identified and discussed; at this point they form what 
could be termed an O3 working group. This activity, in itself, 
has identified a previously ‘invisible’ outcome to the 
process, whereby the subject specialists have found 
themselves challenging and questioning what they have 
already been doing, in the traditional delivery of the courses. 
 
At these meetings, the materials and processes that can 
be immediately transferred online, with little or no change, 
are identified, and a technical support team carries this out, 
as directed by the e-learning specialist. The remaining 
elements of the course form the foundation for discussions 
between the members of the O3 working group, with the e-
learning specialist providing suggestions on possible online 
alternatives, but it is the subject team who ultimately make 
the decision regarding which of these are used. This 
partnership approach aims to achieve a balance between the 
priorities of the project and the autonomy of the subject team 
to define the direction this emergent e-learning course will 
take, resulting in less potential for the ‘not invented here’ 
syndrome to occur [27]. 
Rapid authoring software (Rapid Intake eLearning 
Studio) is used as the vehicle to produce and present the 
course materials. The files exported from this tool are 
SCORM compliant, which enables them to be embedded 
within the institution’s Virtual Learning Environment 
(VLE). Both the VLE layout, and the course delivery 
interface that is produced by the rapid authoring software,  
 
Figure 1.  O3 Structure 
are the same for all courses produced within the O3 process. 
This aims to promote automaticity in its use, so that students 
do not have to focus on how to use the technology when 
they should be devoting their attention to what they are 
expecting to learn. This prevents students from cognitive 
overload, which may decrease learner motivation by 
inhibiting their attention to the actual instructional material 
[28, 29]. This is consistent with the assertion that motivation 
is adversely affected when students feel overwhelmed by the 
mental effort necessary to learn [30], and that cognitive 
overload contributes towards high attrition rates in the first 
few weeks of online courses, especially for students 
undertaking them for the first time [31]. The same, although 
in a slightly different context, applies to the academic staff, 
where familiarity through repeated use of the same interface 
promotes confidence in its use.  
In the early stages of the O3 programme, the e-learning 
specialist and technical support team carry out the 
production of the materials within the rapid authoring 
software. By doing this, they are relieving the subject 
specialists of this added burden on their already full 
workload. It is, however, anticipated that over time, the 
subject specialists will develop the skills to do this, and will 
produce resources specifically for online delivery, rather 
than converting materials originally created for face-to-face 
delivery. The partnership process is facilitated by this 
software, through an online interface that allows the subject 
team to review the course materials in their ‘new’ format, 
and provide feedback; again, allowing them to retain control 
of their course and its associated materials. 
As the transition discussions develop, methods and tools 
for online interaction are usually identified that the subject 
team are unfamiliar with, or have little or no experience in 
using; these are noted, and become the focus for staff 
development 
sessions. 
Professional 
development 
that 
teaches tutors the strategies of online teaching have been 
cited as beneficial in helping faculty members overcome 
difficulties encountered in adopting new teaching and 
learning strategies [32]. It has also been suggested that 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

universities need to investigate how to better support faculty 
in acquiring the knowledge, skills, pedagogical strategies, 
and dispositions that are needed for building more effective, 
interactive, and multi-modal online learning communities 
[33]. Further, it is essential for the faculty to be able to 
deliver online as comfortably as they do in a face-to-face 
setting. Such comfort with the use of e-learning tools and 
methods will ensure effective execution of pedagogy for 
enhancing learning, ensuring the focus remains on the 
teaching role [34]. 
Researchers argue that online delivery increasingly 
demands a shift for tutors to take on roles such as mentors, 
coordinators, and facilitators of learning rather than 
conveyors of information [21, 35]. As such, the tutor 
provides students with experiences that challenge their 
higher-order cognitive skills “as opposed to simply 
transferring content to them” [21]. A change in roles, such 
as this, can be a challenge for many faculty members who 
typically rely on lectures to engage and instruct students 
[24]. 
To support this transition towards online learning, two e-
learning driving licenses were created, one for faculty, the 
other for students. The student license is designed to act as 
both institutional induction, and as a tool to develop 
familiarization with the online systems that are being used. 
The staff license provides information on the pedagogy of 
online learning, and explores the many tools available to 
facilitate this. A self-assessment by the tutor also informs 
awareness of which staff development sessions may be 
required.  
As indicated earlier, staff development activities were 
carried out primarily, but not exclusively, aimed at those 
methods that have been identified for use within the course, 
thus developing the tutors’ knowledge and understanding of 
them prior to actual implementation. It is of note that these 
sessions are facilitated through the medium that they are 
developing, e.g. forums are used for staff development 
sessions on ‘how to use forums’. Researchers agree that 
interaction increases learning satisfaction in online courses 
[18, 36, 37]. Zhao et al.  [38] found that low tutor 
involvement resulted in less positive outcomes, and similarly 
courses where limited interaction with others takes place 
have been described as being less helpful than those courses 
that were more interactive and incorporated the use of 
multimedia [33]. One of the greatest challenges for online 
courses is to “provide a sense of community […] with 
feelings of friendship, cohesion, and satisfaction among 
learners” [24], because building a community of learners 
where students cooperate and learn together can become a 
“powerful motivator and a powerful mechanism” for 
extending learning [39]. For this reason, the staff 
development sessions particularly focus on helping the 
subject team to redefine their facilitation skills, to promote 
effective interactions with off-campus learners [40]. 
Significantly, the O3 process also ensures that the new online 
mode of delivery has the same learning outcomes, as the 
previous face-to-face course, to ensure that it maintains the 
quality and standards that it previously did. The O3 system 
has also been reviewed against recognized educational 
Standards for e-learning, which are clearly met, as indicated 
in Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
O3 PROCESS MAPPED AGAINST THE QAA ‘CODE OF 
PRACTICE FOR THE ASSURANCE OF ACADEMIC QUALITY AND STANDARDS IN 
HIGHER EDUCATION: COLLABORATIVE PROVISION AND FLEXIBLE AND 
DISTRIBUTED LEARNING (INCLUDING E-LEARNING)’ [41] 
QAA code precepts 
O₃ compliance 
B1 
‘students need information 
before 
they 
start 
their 
programme 
of 
study 
to 
enable 
them 
to 
make 
appropriate preparations for 
an FDL approach’ (p.58) 
 
‘study 
materials, 
whether 
delivered 
through…web-
based or other distribution 
channels, 
meet 
specified 
expectations’ (p.59)  
ü - Students complete an e-learning 
driving licence which is available 
through 
the 
institution’s 
website 
before enrolment which introduces 
them to the online approach used in 
the O3 system.   
 
ü - Staff developing online materials 
are supported to meet specified 
expectations by specialist academic 
and technical staff. Key to this is the 
supported use of a common format 
across all modules. Therefore students 
will 
NOT 
suffer 
an 
additional 
cognitive burden when navigating on-
line provision. 
B2 
 
‘FDL study materials are 
subject to the same rigour of 
quality assurance as the 
awarding institution would 
use 
for 
any 
of 
its 
programmes of study’ (p.60) 
ü - This institution’s validation 
process is more rigorous for online 
delivery than traditional programmes 
as it requires scrutiny of all course 
materials by an external assessor. In 
addition materials are scrutinized 
through O₃ pre-submission to this 
external assessment. 
B3 
 
‘Prospective students whose 
only experience of learning is 
through directed teaching… 
may need some introductory 
support, possibly involving 
access to on-line learning 
environments prior to the 
start of the course’ (p.61)  
ü - Students complete an e-learning 
driving licence which is available 
through 
the 
institution’s 
website 
before enrolment which introduces 
them to the online approach used in 
the O3 system.   
 
B4/
B5  
 
Learning support 
 
 
ü 
- 
These 
precepts 
outline 
requirements 
that 
are 
standard 
practice within the institution e.g. 
clarity of expectations about learner 
support; student experience feedback 
mechanisms 
B6 
 
‘Staff who provide support to 
learners on FDL programmes 
have appropriate skills, and 
receive appropriate training 
and development’ (p.64) 
ü - O₃ process diagnoses staff skill 
deficits through a staff e-learning 
driving 
licence, 
which 
leads 
to 
specific 
training 
programmes 
focused on the needs of their own 
course delivery. 
ü - The e-learning specialist provides 
the necessary pedagogical expertise 
and through the partnership process of 
exploring the course design, this is 
developed in the subject specialists 
B7  
 
Assessment 
 
ü 
- 
This 
precept 
outlines 
requirements 
that 
are 
standard 
institutional practice e.g. statements 
of criteria to be used in assessment; 
timeliness 
of 
formative 
and 
summative feedback 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Combining the specific skill set of the e-learning 
specialists, with those of the subject specialists, facilitates a 
process that produces high quality, effective, pedagogically 
focused 
online 
courses. 
Transparent 
and 
realistic 
institutional support encourages faculty members to adopt 
online learning. This in turn will promote confidence in 
using new methods and tools, positively influencing the 
delivery approach.  
Whilst currently implemented for health and social care 
courses, this model is not exclusive to these subjects. 
Grounding in the e-learning pedagogy is an important design 
feature of the O3 process; initiatives such as this should be 
considered 
as 
exemplars 
in 
institutional 
capacity 
development initiatives.  
Initial informal feedback from both tutors and students 
currently involved in courses being delivered within the O3 
system, is very positive; formal evaluation will be 
undertaken and published, once the courses have been 
completed.  
Expressions of interest for collaborative development of 
the distance learning provision at other HE institutions have 
already been received, and others would be favourably 
considered. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Houle, C.O. (1980) Continuing learning in the professions. London, 
Jossey-Bass 
[2] Tann, J., Blenkinsopp, A. and Platts, A. (2001) Teaching and learning 
at the leading edge: leading edge practitioners in community 
pharmacy. Management Learning, 32, (2), pp.163-179 
[3] Department of Health (1998) A First Class Service: Quality in the 
New NHS. Department of Health, London 
[4] Haywood, H., Pain, H., Ryan, S., and Adams, J. (2012) The 
Continuing Professional Development for Nurses and Allied Health 
Professionals Working Within Musculoskeletal Services: A National 
UK Survey. Musculoskelet. Care. doi: 10.1002/msc.1032 
[5] Woodward, S. (2012) Continuing professional development. British 
Journal of Neuroscience Nursing, 8(1), p. 5 
[6] Gilbert, J., Morton, S. and Rowley, J. (2007) E-learning: The student 
experience. British Journal of Educational Technology. 38(4) pp. 
560–73. 
[7] Schoenfeld-Tacher, R., McConnell, S. and Graham, M. (2001) Do no 
harm: a comparison of the effects of online vs traditional delivery 
media on a science course. Journal of Science Education and 
Technology, 10(3), pp. 257-65. 
[8] Duffy, T., Gilbert, I., Kennedy, D. and Kwon, P. (2002) Comparing 
distance education and conventional education: observations from a 
comparative study of post-registration nurses. Association for 
Learning Technology Journal, 10(1), pp. 70-82. 
[9] Caywood, K. and Duckett, J. (2003) Online vs on-campus learning in 
teacher education. Teacher Education and Special Education, 26(2), 
pp. 98-105. 
[10] Harlen, W. and Doubler, S. (2004) Can teachers learn through enquiry 
on-line? Studying professional development in science delivered on-
line and on-campus. International Journal of Science Education, 
26(10), pp. 1247-67. 
[11] Connolly, T.M., MacArthur, E., Stansfield, M.H. and McLellan, E. 
(2007) A quasi-experimental study of three online learning courses in 
computing. Computers & Education, 49(2), pp. 345-59. 
[12] Kessler, G.C. (2007) Online education in computer and digital 
forensics: a case study. Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, Big Island, Hawaii, 3-6 January. 
[13] McPhee, I., Duffy, T. and Marks, D. (2010) Comparison of equated 
learning for online and on campus postgraduate students on academic 
achievement. The University of the Fraser Valley Research Review, 
4(3). 
[14] McPhee, I., and Söderström, T. (2012) Distance, online and campus 
higher education: reflections on learning outcomes. Campus-Wide 
Information Systems, 29(3) pp. 144 – 155 
[15] Gunn, C. (2010) Sustainability factors for e-learning initiatives. ALT-J, 
Research in Learning Technology. 18(2), pp. 89–103. 
[16] Nicol, D, and Draper, S. (2009) A blueprint for transformational 
organizational change in higher education: REAP as a case study. In: 
Education through technology-enhanced learning, ed. T. Mayes, D. 
Morrison, H. Mellar, P. Bullen, and M. Oliver, 191–207. York: The 
Higher Education Academy. 
[17] Guthrie, K.R. Griffiths, and Maron, N. (2008) Sustainability and 
revenue models for online academic resources: An Ithaka report. 
Bristol, UK: JISC/Strategic Content Alliance. 
[18] Ruiz J.G, Mintzer M.J., and Leipzig, R.M. (2006) The impact of e-
learning in medical education. Acad Med, 81, pp. 207-12. 
[19] Sait, S.M., Al-Tawil, K.M., Ali, S.H. and Khan, S.A. (2003). The use 
and effect of internet on teachers and students in Saudi Arabia. Paper 
presented at the Hawaii International conference on Education, 
January 7–10, in Honolulu, HI. 
[20] Fetherston, T. (2001). Pedagogical challenges for the World Wide 
Web. Educational Technology Review, 9, 1 
http://www.aace.org/pubs/etr/fetherston.cfm Accessed November 4, 
2012. 
[21] Hardy, K., and Bower, B. (2004). Instructional and work life issues 
for distance learning faculty. New Directions for Community Colleges, 
128, pp.47–54. 
[22] LaMonica, L. (2001). The role of the instructor in Web-based 
instruction: Are we practicing what we preach? DEOSNEWS, 11(6) 
http://www.geocities.com/llamonica/instructorwbt.html Accessed 
November 4, 2012. 
[23] Oliver, R. (2002). Exploring strategies for online teaching and 
learning. In: L. Foster, B.L. Bower, and L.W. Watson (Eds.), ASHE 
Reader—Distance education: Teaching and learning in higher 
education (pp. 249–257). Boston: Pearson Custom. 
[24] Desai, M., Hart, J., and Richards, T. (2009). E-learning: Paradigm 
shift in education. Education 129(2), pp.327–334. 
[25] Koehler, M.J., and Mishra, P. (2009). What is technological 
pedagogical content knowledge? Contemporary Issues in Technology 
and Teacher Education, 9(1), pp.60–70. 
[26] Moller, L., Foshay, W., and Huett, J. (2008). The evolution of 
distance education: Implications for instructional design on the 
potential of the Web. TechTrends, 52(4), pp.66–70. 
[27] Darby, J. (1992) The future of computers in teaching and learning. 
Computers and Education, 19(1–2), pp. 193–7. 
[28] Hartley, K.W. (1999). Media overload in instructional Web pages and 
the impact on learning. Educational Media International, 36(2), pp. 
145-150. 
[29] van Merriënboer, J.J.G., and Sweller, J. (2005). Cognitive load theory 
and complex learning: Recent developments and future directions. 
Educational Psychology Review, 17(2), pp. 147-177. 
[30] Pintrich, P.R., and Schunk, D.H. (2001). Motivation in education: 
Theory, research, and applications (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall. 
[31] Tyler-Smith, K. (2006). Early attrition among first time e-learners: A 
review of factors that contribute to drop-out, withdrawal and non-
completion rates of adult learners undertaking elearning programmes. 
Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, 2(2), pp.73-85. 
[32] Alebaikan, R and Troudi, S. (2010) Blended learning in Saudi 
universities: challenges and perspectives. ALT-J, Research in 
Learning Technology, 18(1), pp. 49-59. 
[33] Boling, EC, Hough, M. Krinsky, H., Saleem, H., and Stevens, M. 
(2012) Cutting the distance in distance education: Perspectives on 
what promotes positive, online learning experiences. Internet and 
Higher Education, 15, pp. 118-126 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[34] O’Neil, "How Distance Education Has Changed Teaching and the 
Role of the Instructor", in: Froc of ISECON 2007, v24 (Pittsburgh), 
2542. ISSN: 1542-7382. 
[35] Smolin, L.I., and Lawless, K.A. (2003). Becoming literate in the 
technological age: New responsibilities and tools for teachers. The 
Reading Teacher, 56(6), pp.570–577. 
[36] Zhang D. (2005) Interactive multimedia-based e-learning: a study of 
effectiveness. Am J Distance Educ, 19, pp.149-62. 
[37] Wanstreet C. (2006) Interaction in online learning environments. Q 
Rev Distance Educ, 7, pp.399-411. 
[38] Zhao, Y., Lei, J., Yan, B. and Tan, S. (2005) What makes the 
difference? A practical analysis of research on the effectiveness of 
distance education. Teachers College Record, 107(8), pp. 1836-84. 
[39] Collins, A., et al. (1987) Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the craft 
of reading, writing, and mathematics. National Institute of Education 
Technical Report No. 403. Urbana, IL: Center for the Study of 
Reading. 
[40] Thurmond, V.A. and Wambach, K (2004) Understanding Interactions 
in Distance Education: A Review of the Literature. International 
Journal of Instructional Technology and Distance Learning, I (I), pp. 
9-26. 
[41] QAA (2010) Code of practice for the assurance of academic quality 
and standards in higher education: Collaborative provision and 
flexible and distributed learning (including e-learning). The Quality 
Assurance Agency for Higher Education, UK.	  	  
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

