Multi-Level Image Presentation Method to Quickly Know Operation Processes of
Students for Finding Erroneous Operation
Kenta Morita
Graduate School of Engineering
Mie University
Mie, Japan
Email: k-morita@ip.elec.mie-u.ac.jp
Haruhiko Takase
Graduate School of Engineering
Mie University
Mie, Japan
Email: takase@elec.mie-u.ac.jp
Naoki Morita
Graduate School of Information and
Telecommunication Engineering
Tokai University
Tokyo, Japan
Email: morita@tokai.ac.jp
Abstract—In this paper, we developed a system that helps teachers
to identify the erroneous operations of a student in computer
literacy classes quickly. We considered two requirements for
the system: (1) recording all operations, and (2) providing
summarized information according to teacher’s requests. For
the ﬁrst requirement, the system records screen image for all
operations that are acquired by global hook events. For the second
requirement, we proposed the multi-level image presentation
method. First, all captured images are grouped hierarchically
according to their contents. Then, teachers browse captured
images by controlling the level of grouped images. Consequently,
they reduce the number of images to be conﬁrmed and ﬁnd
erroneous operations quickly. We conﬁrmed the effectiveness of
the proposed method through the experiment. Subjects try to ﬁnd
erroneous operations from more than 700 images. Subjects using
the proposed method decreased the time for ﬁnding erroneous
operations by 60%.
Keywords–Compute-assisted instruction; Operation Process
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recently, classes in which students use their personal
computers are spreading. For classes of a freshman in college,
students do some kind of work, programming, writing a report
and so on, by using their computers according to a teacher’s
guide. Some students cannot do the same operation as the
guide by the teacher and sometimes cause undesired results.
Since students do not understand operations enough, they
cannot be aware of erroneous operations, which are causes
of undesired results. They would be aware that something was
wrong, only after being aware of an undesired result. But they
cannot identify the erroneous operation since they did many
operations before the undesired result and they believe that
their operations were correct. So, they would be confused and
ask for help to the teacher. The teacher identiﬁes the erroneous
operation by inquiring the operations or by his/her experience.
Identifying by inquiring would be hard for the teacher since
the student was already confused. So, teachers want to retrace
operations to the erroneous operation with a supporting system.
To retrace students’ operations, some supporting systems
were developed. They record students’ operations and provide
the teacher with the recorded operations. For example, some
methods recording the screen of the student in video format
and ﬁnding the operation process by seeing the video have
been proposed [1]-[3]. By using these methods, the teacher
can know all operations that the student performed. However,
the teacher would waste time by using these methods, because
it is necessary to conﬁrm the video regardless of presence or
absence of student’s operation. There are several methods that
capture the screen each time a student operates, rather than
always recording [4][5]. The teacher can know the operation
process of the student by conﬁrming the captured images one
by one. However, since most captured operations are correct
operations, looking at all the operations takes time to identify
the erroneous operation. To reduce the time for checking
student’s operations, it is necessary to reduce the number of
images that the teacher checks furthermore. On the other hand,
reducing the number of images would cause the shortage of
information to identify the erroneous operations. The shortage
would be serious for Teaching Assistant(TAs) who are not
familiar with the operation to identify the erroneous operation
by only seeing the limited operations. So, it is necessary both
to record all operations and to easily detect
In this paper, we describe a system to helps teachers
identify the erroneous operations of the student quickly. The
system records all operations and provides the operations so
as to be grasped by them quickly. Recording all operations
is similar to the one from [5], and quickness for grasping is
done by providing hierarchically grouped operations. If the
teacher wants to grasp the operation process roughly, the he/she
checks the images containing only the main operations. Also,
the teacher looks at all the images if the teacher wants to grasp
the operations in detail. By using this method, the teacher can
quickly grasp the student’s operation process without missing
the operations and can identify the erroneous operations of the
student as soon as possible.
This paper contains the following ﬂow. Section II describes
the method underlying the proposed method. In Section III, we
consider how to present the operation information. We discuss
the effectiveness of our proposed method in Section IV. Section
V presents the conclusion and future work.
II.
PREVIOUS METHOD USING GLOBAL HOOK
This section brieﬂy describes the student’s screen recording
method which is one of the previous methods using a global
hook [4]. This method detects students’ operations, captures
the screen of the student each time the student operates and
provides captured images in order to the teacher.
To detect the student’s operation, a mechanism called the
global hook, which is provided by an operating system is used.
The global hook can intercept messages sent by the operating
system to an application. Messages intercepted by the global
hook include messages generated by a keyboard or a mouse.
These messages are sent at the moment each event occurs.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Figure 1. A sample of display by the global hook.
(a) Pressing [space] key, (b) Pressing [1] key, (c) Pressing left click, (d) Releasing left click, (e) Pressing left click, (f) Releasing left click
This method captures the screen when a user’s operation is
acquired with the global hook. Thereby, the operation process
of the student is accumulated in the student’s computer as some
images.
The captured images are sorted and are provided to the
teacher. When the teacher wants to conﬁrm the operation
process of the student, he/she sees the captured images one by
one in order. By conﬁrming the captured images, the teacher
can guess the student’s operation. Figure 1 shows images
captured by the previous method, arranged in alphabetical
order. By looking at these images in order, the teacher ﬁnds
that the student inputs a sentence, then operates a menu with
the mouse, and opens a dialog box.
By knowing the operation process of the student, the
teacher can identify the erroneous operations. However, this
method has a problem in that it is necessary to conﬁrm
all images captured between the moment students started
operating and the moment the teacher was asked for help.
III.
PROPOSAL
In this section, we propose a method that groups operations
hierarchically. With the proposal, the system provides fewer
images than the previous system without reducing captured
images. As a result, teachers should identify erroneous opera-
tions quickly.
The proposed system makes groups from all captured
images. In the lowest level (level 0), each group consists of one
captured image, which represents one student’s operation. In
the higher level (level n), each group is a series of some groups
of the level below (level n-1) and represents a meaningful
operation. The representative image of each group is the last
captured image in the group.
The proposed system provides grouped images hierarchi-
cally. First, the system shows representative images of the
groups only at the highest level. The teacher grasps the
student’s operations roughly and identiﬁes the group to be
focused. Then, the system shows representative images of the
groups in the below level of the focused group. The teacher
narrows the area to be focused. The teacher repeat them until
he/she identiﬁes the erroneous operation.
With the proposed system, teachers can identify the stu-
dent’s erroneous operation quickly, since they can concentrate
only on a subset of images. And they do not miss the erroneous
operation since they can look all captured images if necessary.
The effectiveness of the proposed system is decided by
the rule for grouping. The rule should be decided by the
application, target students and target teachers. Here, we show
an example for Microsoft Word. When working in Microsoft
Word, this method intercepts mouse and keyboard messages
given to the operating system. Because messages in software
can not be intercepted by proposed system in current state
of the art, groups operations similar to messages in software
from keyboard and mouse messages. In level 0, each group
consists of only one captured image. In level 1, each group
consists of a series of groups of level 0 images that represent a
primitive operation: typing a word, operating a keyboard short-
cut, clicking/double clicking a left/right button of a mouse, and
so on. Typing a word is identiﬁed by the sequence of key inputs
except for space or enter key. Clicking the left mouse button
is identiﬁed by pressing/releasing event of the left button of
the mouse. Other operations are grouped in the same manner.
In level 2, each group consists of a series of groups of level 1
that represent a more-abstracted operation: typing a sentence,
a combination of keyboard short-cut, selecting a menu by the
mouse, and so on.
Figure 2 illustrates the grouping result for Microsoft Word
in Japanese. These were taken at the time of writing a report in
Japanese. From the level 0 to 1, the ﬁrst (typing a character) to
the third (typing enter key) images in the level 0 are grouped
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Figure 2. A sample of multi-level image presentation.
as character input. And the ﬁfth (pressing the left mouse
button) and the sixth (releasing the left mouse button) images
are grouped as left clicking. From the level 1 to 2, the ﬁrst
(character input) and the second (character input) images in
the level 1 are grouped as typing a sentence. And the third
(left clicking) and the fourth (left clicking) images in the level
1 are grouped as operating a menu.
When browsing the results shown in Figure 2, the system
provides images of level 2 ﬁrst. Then, a teacher selects an
image on level 2. Then the system shows images on level 1
that are components of the selected image. And the system
shows images on level 0 in the same manner if necessary.
IV.
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we compare the proposed method with the
previous method and conﬁrm the effectiveness. We
A. Experimental Setup
Our aim is that teachers can quickly ﬁnd an erroneous op-
eration of student. To conﬁrm the effectiveness, we measured
the time that it takes testing subjects to ﬁnd an erroneous
operation and compared the case using the proposed method
with the case using the previous method. The number of
subjects is six. We explained only the contents of the exercise
to the subjects. And we asked them to identify the operation
error without informing the contents of the operation error.
Subjects conﬁrmed the operation process in Microsoft Word
exercise. The content of the exercise in this Microsoft Word is
preparation of materials, there are operations such as text input,
size of letters, typeface change and indent adjustment. The
images presented to the subjects were prepared by reproducing
the operation error when the student made a mistake in
selecting the item in the dialog box before. The operation
recorded in this experiment corresponds from the start of the
exercise to the student himself made an operation mistake.
There are 744 recorded operations, and the erroneous operation
is in the 725th. The content of the erroneous operation was to
select First line instead of selecting Hanging. The number of
captured images was 744, and the number of images presented
at each level of the proposed method is shown in Table I.
B. Result
We divided subjects in half and asked each group to dis-
cover operation errors by either proposed method or previous
method. The table II shows the average time it takes for
the subjects to specify the operation mistake when using the
proposed method or using the previous method. Comparing the
two average times, we found that, in the case of the proposed
method, the subjects identiﬁed erroneous operation in about
half the time of the case of the previous method. We got the
following comments from the subjects.
•
Even for the TA, who is not familiar with the operation
to the application, it is possible to grasp the point
where the operation error is likely to be somehow.
There is a possibility that he can also ﬁnd a mistake
by looking closely around the point which is likely to
be bad.
•
In the previous method, it is hard to ﬁnd an operation
mistake because there are a lot of images to be
conﬁrmed.
We observed how to check captured images of the subject.
As a result, we found that the subjects conﬁrmed the image
in order from the image of the operation start regardless of
the method. The subjects conﬁrmed the images one by one
and grasped the operation process of the student. And, when
the subjects found an image when an operation error occurred,
they re-examined the previous image and found an erroneous
operation.
In the case of the proposed method, the subjects used
high level display to grasp the operation process roughly,
when the subjects found an image when an operation error
occurred, they used low level display and found an erroneous
operation. From this, we fathomed that subjects could roughly
grasp the operation process of student even using the proposed
method. Since the proposed method can present the image of
TABLE I. NUMBER OF IMAGES PRESENTED BY THE PROPOSED METHOD.
Display level
Number of presented images
Level 3
255
Level 2
288
Level 1
744
TABLE II. TIME TAKEN TO IDENTIFY ERRONEOUS OPERATION.
Method
Average time(s)
Proposed method
167.3
Previous method
284.6
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

the moment the student erroneously operated earlier than the
previous method by using the high level display, it is possible
to quickly ﬁnd the erroneous operation.
From these considerations, we can afﬁrm that the proposed
image display method is effective.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we developed a system that helps teachers
identify the erroneous operations of the student quickly. We
considered two requirements for the system: (1) recording all
operations, and (2) providing summarized information accord-
ing to teacher’s requests. For the ﬁrst requirement, the system
records screen images for all operations that are acquired by
global hook events. For the second requirement, we proposed
the multi-level image presentation method. First, all captured
images are grouped hierarchically according to their contents.
Then, teachers browse captured images by controlling the
level of grouped images. Consequently, the system reduces
the number of images to be conﬁrmed and ﬁnd erroneous
operations quickly. In the future, we will try to increase global
hook events: not only keyboard and mouse operations but also
other types of information, and discuss strategies for grouping
captured images.
The recording system has privacy concerns. For that reason,
we will implement recording on / off in the future and
investigate how the student’s behavior, such as whether the
student can install this system, is affected.
REFERENCES
[1]
G. Thavamalar, “Successful implementation of e-learning: Pedagogical
considerations”, The internet and higher education, Vol.4 No.3, pp.287-
299.
[2]
R. Stannard, “Screen capture software for feedback in language educa-
tion”, Second International Wireless Ready Symposium, MAR. 2008, pp.
16-20, ISSN 1995-4557.
[3]
J. Nigel, P. Georghiades, and J. Gunson, “Student feedback via screen
capture digital video: Stimulating student’s modiﬁed action”, Higher
Education Vol.64 No.5, pp.593-607.
[4]
N. Morita, “A Programming Process Visualization System With Global
Hooking”, Society for Information Technology and Teacher Educa-
tion(SITE2014), MAR. 2014, pp. 1945- 1953, ISBN 978-1-939797-07-0.
[5]
K. Morita, H. Takase and N. Morita, “Method for Quick Identiﬁcation of
Computer Operations Performed by a Student”, The Ninth International
Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning, MAR. 2017, pp.
90- 93, ISBN 978-1-61208-541-8.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

