The Automatic Evaluation Testing  
Tasks with graphics character 
Martin Němec, Radoslav Fasuga 
Department of Computer Science 
VŠB – Technical University    
Ostrava, Czech Republic 
martin.nemec@vsb.cz, radoslav.fasuga@vsb.cz 
 
 
Abstract—With 
the 
further 
development 
of 
computer 
technology, the non variant test question with automatic 
evaluation has been gradually applied at schools and 
universities, which positively reduces the work volume of 
teachers and demonstrates a proper way to test students. The 
primary aim of this paper is to describe the methods and 
algorithms for determination of equivalency and similarity 
rate of tasks’ graphic outputs in learning management system. 
Among the analyzed types, there are tasks the result of which 
is a graph of corner-edge type, logic circuit, geometric 
construction or graphic behavior of function of one real 
variable. We performed more than 2,000 student’s final tests 
that confirm the applicability of our solutions. 
Keywords-logic diagram similarity; geometric constructions 
similarity; function behavior similarity; automatic testing; e-
learning 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, information technologies are used more 
frequently in the educational process. There are several 
reasons for the phenomenon. The rising number of the 
computers and the Internet access creates a very easy way of 
getting information from the Internet and consequent 
eventual comparison of these information with other 
students. Use of computers in all methods of education helps 
to improve understanding of the created teaching materials 
and also allow students to involve and use several senses into 
the training process. 
A Knowledge Testing is part of the training process. 
Nowadays different learning management systems (LMS) 
enable us to create tests with online assessment [1]. These 
tests are mostly textual and once we need to include the 
graphic questions (charts, diagrams, electrical circuits, etc.) 
the tests can be used in a very limited form or unusable at all 
[2][3]. Another possibility is using the external programs but 
they usually have some compilation issues with LMS and do 
not have automatic scoring feature [4][5]. They can mostly 
be used as tools for practical experiments only, not for 
testing.  
Our aim is to introduce the tool that includes modules for 
processing some of the graphic tasks. These modules extend 
the LMS to the possibility of testing the graphic tasks and 
allow analyzing them automatically. 
  
II. STATE OF THE ART 
Defining the main educational goals is very important 
part of the whole educational process. The aim of education 
is a characteristic change of the student which should be 
generally achieved during a certain period of time (once the 
student has passed the training) [6][7]. 
In the most of the cases, the Bloom's taxonomy of 
educational objectives is considered as a basis. The original 
Bloom's Taxonomy divides educational objectives into three 
domains (Cognitive, Affective and Psychomotor).   
The new revised Bloom's taxonomy (Fig. 1) is aimed just 
for a cognitive domain as the complex domain. This domain 
is prefered by lectors. The revised Bloom's taxonomy divides 
the educational goals into six basic groups [8][9]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The new revised Bloom’s Taxonomy 
Bloom's Revised Taxonomy: 
1. Remembering: can the student recall or remember 
information? 
2. Understanding: can the student explain ideas or 
concepts? 
3. Applying: can the student use information in a 
new way? 
4. Analyzing: can the student distinguish between 
the different parts? 
5. Evaluating: can the student justify a stand or 
decision? 
6. Creating: can the student create new product or 
point of view?  
19
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

It is necessary to test and automatically evaluate more 
sophisticated knowledge than remembering only because we 
need to know whether the student can understand, apply, 
analyze, evaluate and create individual problems (Fig. 1).   
A. Testing 
Examination process is one of the most important parts of 
the whole educational system. Examination is used for 
checking the students’ acquired knowledge, but it is also the 
direct part of educational process. Furthermore, the testing is 
taking advantage at all six points of Bloom’s taxonomy.  
 
Figure 2.  Sample of text variant question 
Variant questions are the most common way of testing 
nowadays (Fig. 2). Mostly the way of testing is especially 
suitable for testing at the first area, such as memory testing 
of a small group of people. Memory testing in a big group of 
people by the method of variant questions is usually very 
hardly achievable, mostly impossible.  
Another way of testing are simply made with questions 
that allow to the author to achieve the specific inquiry where 
students have to create their own answer such as number, 
vector, character string, etc. 
 The students have to make the solution by themselves 
not choosing it from the represented pictures as it happens in 
the case of the variant questions. Unfortunately, simply made 
questions are mainly suitable to present the result in the text 
form.   
The special types of the pictures with graphical form are 
very infrequently or almost never used. The example of these 
kinds of questions may be assembled like a different 
schemes based on the principles of diagrams. Examples of 
such types of questions may be putting together the various 
schemes based on the principle of the charts. This includes 
the UML diagrams, ER diagrams, etc. An example of such a 
diagram is shown in Fig. 3. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Example of E-R diagram 
This type of graphic questions is quite like the variant 
answers. The student has to select the correct answer from 
several variants (Fig. 4). The variant tests are widely used 
today, but this type of testing is good for memory testing 
only, not for other Bloom’s groups (Understanding, 
Applying, Analyzing, Evaluating and Creating) (Fig. 1). And 
these 
educational 
goals 
are 
more 
important 
than 
remembering. 
 When we want to test these educational goals, we need 
to make students creating their own graph, diagram, circuits, 
etc. And we want as well the results to be evaluated 
automatically.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Example of a graphic question with variant answers 
Our aim was to prove that these types of graphics tasks 
can be automatically evaluated with a properly created 
algorithm and with support of software environment.  
As each of the tasks may have different features and 
algorithms, the individual test modules have been created, 
which can be practically applied and tested in education 
process. 
III.  TESTING MODULES 
Currently, we have to verify the functionality of the 
developed and tested modules, which can be divided into 
four categories. The result of this work is to verify the use of 
the test modules in practical teaching process.  
Students have to create their answer using the module 
with graphics interface in a Learning Management Systems 
(LMS), like Blackboard [10], WebCT [11], or Moodle [12].  
A. Tasks with graph result  
In practice we face the tasks of which the result solution 
is a graph (node-edge type). This means that the result is a 
graphical task consisting of a variable number of nodes and 
edges of different types. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Screen shot of testing module for ER diagrams 
20
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

The example of the task can be database’s theory in ER-
Diagram, UML diagram, the diagram in SW engineering, 
etc. The problem arises when we need to check these two 
solutions and figure out if the solutions are equal or similar 
to each other. The basic problem of comparing these tasks is 
their independency on position in a graphical placement of 
chart elements.  
 
 
Figure 6.  Screen shot of testing module for UML diagrams 
Two different-looking graphics tasks can be logically 
identical. One of the goals of this work is to find out methods 
and their corresponding algorithms, which allow evaluating 
these type-task results and comparing the resulting degree of 
similarity between two tasks results. 
The main principle of automatic evaluation is to separate 
a result, which is represented as a node-edge diagram into 
two sets. The first set includes nodes and the second set 
includes edges.  
Some limits enabling identification of particular objects 
are essential to be able to evaluate the tests results 
automatically that´s why the author has to create a set of 
names that contains a variety of node names. Not only the set 
may include the correct nodes, but also the names that are 
not need for a correct result; these names can be used for 
creating more difficult questions.  
As the first step, the algorithm evaluates set of nodes 
with their attributes between original graph A (created by a 
teacher) and evaluation graph B (created by a student). After 
the algorithm evaluates the nodes, it takes the set of edges. 
All edges have self attributes and two nodes. Once we have 
all the sets evaluated, we can calculate the final similarity.    
We use the following equation for evaluating (1), where 
n(x) is the set of edge weight, e(x) is the nodes weight, O(X) 
is the number of elements  and d(A,B) is the measures of 
graph similarity [10]. 
 
( ))
( ),
max(
))
(
)
( (
))
(
)
(
(
1
, )
(
0
0
0
0
A O B
O
e v
e u
n v
u
n
A B
d
q
i
s
j
j
i
p
i
r
j
j
i











      
(1) 
 
The sample modules for testing graph results are shown 
in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6. 
B. Tasks for testing circuit simulation   
In some areas, such as logic circuits, electrical circuits, 
etc., a similar problem occurs as with the graph. Two circuit 
diagrams are given and our aim is to compare these schemes 
to find the accurate connection.  
In this case it is not possible to use a similar principle as 
the comparison in the previous case, as two circuits having 
the same characteristics, but different connection may exist. 
According to the selected type of scheme, there are 
various circuit elements: resistor, coil capacity, power, etc. 
are for electric circuits. The logic gates have different types 
(none, AND, OR, NAND, etc.). 
However, accuracy of the connection depends on 
accuracy of the circuit input and output. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Screen shot of testing module for electric circuits 
Nowadays, there are professional tools for simulating the 
circuits including the setting characteristics of separate 
variables on the relevant parts exist, unfortunately, the tools 
are not intended for learning purpose and require specific 
knowledge of the field. As a result they can’t be used for 
familiarizing the students with the subject. 
 
Figure 8.  Screen shot of testing module for logical circuits 
21
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

The main principle of evaluation is a conversion of the 
graph into the truth function for logical circuits [14] or 
function for analyzing electric circuits [15]. We evaluate and 
compare the student’s final function and teacher’s function.    
We use the equation (2) for evaluation, where yi is the 
value of the student’s function (truth table) and zi is the value 
of the teacher’s function. The aim is to meet the target 
primarily on opportunity of automatic testing and valuation 
of the received information. 
k
z
y
A B
d
k
i
i
i






1
2
0
)
(
1
( , )
 , for k=max(n,m)     (2) 
 
Our module can not only test electric circuits and 
combinational logic circuits, but also sequential logic circuit 
[14]. The sample modules for testing circuit simulation are 
shown in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8. 
C. Tasks for geometric construction  
For teaching subjects such as mathematics, geometry, 
descriptive geometry, computer graphics, etc., it is necessary 
to compare the tasks based on the geometrical structures, for 
which several ways of solution exist. It means that our next 
researched area is the comparison of equivalence of 
geometric structures. 
Design task represents a set of graphical objects (point, 
line, plane, etc.) and a number of construction methods (e.g. 
calculating the intersection of two lines). The whole design 
task can be divided into following sages – the given objects, 
the results of single design steps, and the result – the final 
objects.  
 
 
Figure 9.  Screen shot of testing module for descriptive geometry 
Examples of such types of tasks are geometrical 
constructions in descriptive geometry and computer 
graphics, for example the constructions in Monge projection, 
in axonometry, in oblique projection, etc. 
We can evaluate similarity with equation (3), where vA,i 
is the set of student’s construction steps and vB,i is the set of 
teacher’s constructions steps. In our case we focused on the 
Monge projection only because general description of each 
type of projection would be very extensive and it is not 
necessary for the resulting functionality [16]. 
 
n
v
v
A B
d
n
i
B i
A i





0
,
,
)
(
1
, )
(
         (3) 
 
The sample module for testing geometric procedures is 
shown in Fig. 9. We prepare next modules for other 
projections (axonometric projection, perspective projection 
and others). 
D. Graphic behavior of function of one real variable  
Investigation of graph of the function defined by the 
functional quote y = f (x) is one of the mathematics subjects. 
In this case the task is to calculate the function properties 
based on the function quote (landmarks, the intervals of 
monotonicity, etc.) and use these properties to outline the 
resulting graph of this function [17]. 
 
Figure 10.  A Graph of example function 
The Fig. 10 shows an example of the real function of the 
function f with some elements (points A1, E1, p1 tangent, 
the end points of major intervals i1, etc.) demonstrating the 
basic properties of the investigated function. In general, there 
are the following characteristics such as roots, extreme, 
inflection points, boundedness etc. The attributes are used to 
describe the three basic types of elements.  
 
Basic elements for characterization:  
 
Point – roots, intersections, extremes, etc.  
 
Interval – interval of function increasing or 
decreasing, etc. 
 
Lines – asymptote, tangent line, etc. 
 
The determining of the graph is based on the properties, 
calculated from the specified function y = f (x). Student will 
investigate the resulting graph and draw it manually, based 
on the properties. 
 
22
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

 
Figure 11.  Screen shot of testing module for graphics function 
 
2
))
(
(
))
(
( )
(
1
, )
(
0
n
r
p
a
b
m
i
f
A B
d
n
i
i
i
b
a
i
i














     (4) 
 
The evaluation equation compares distance of the 
accurate graph with the student’s graph approximate curve 
(4).  
The final level of similarity is calculated as the deviation 
of the student sketched curves, comparing actual progress on 
the specified interval <a,b> with accuracy δ. If the graph 
contains a set of characteristics (roots, intersections, 
extremes, etc.), we have to compare this set too. The sample 
test module for testing the function is shown in Fig. 11. 
IV. 
MODULE PROPERTIES 
All generated test modules can be run in three basic 
modes: 
 
Author's Mode - The module runs to allow the 
author to create specifications and sample solutions 
of the tasks. 
 
Student's Mode - This mode enables students to 
create their own final solution. 
 
View Mode - In this mode the module is configured 
to display the final solution without the possibility of 
intervention into the solution. Student and tutor can 
view the student’s created solutions. It can also 
display the correct solution to the student (e.g. 
during self-testing process). 
The author has several kinds of evaluations: 
 
Absolute evaluation – server evaluates full resulting 
and evaluated task as absolutely correct or not.  
 
Percentage evaluation – author can define percent 
evaluation and server evaluates proportional result.  
 
Primary benefits include the following: 
 
The proposed algorithms can be tested by the 
students not only for memorizing the learning 
material but practically at all levels according to 
Bloom's taxonomy (remember, understand, apply, 
analyze, evaluate and create). 
 
Everything can be processed using LM systems 
electronically and transparently, which also allows 
you to get a feedback (which part of education is the 
most difficult for students ). 
 
Tutor has no need to evaluate the tests results 
manually anymore. The modules and process will 
evaluate the tests automatically and display the 
correct results to the students. 
 
Students accessing from the Internet can verify their 
knowledge anywhere and any time. Moreover, as it 
has already been mentioned, testing is a direct part of 
the process of teaching.  
A. The use of testing modules in LM systems 
Test modules is planned to be implemented in the LM 
systems and design of the modules is adapted for this 
installation [10][11][12]. 
It is necessary to define the format of data for their 
transferring between different applications and server, 
processing and storing. This format should be adaptive for 
possible changes, suitable to transfer data via Internet and 
also for processing within the test modules. 
 
Use of LM systems has the essential advantages: 
 
Easy creating and defining of the tests. 
 
Clarity on the test details (when, who performed the 
test, score, duration, number of attempts, etc.). 
 
Easy storage and archiving of all activities using the 
database. 
 
Statistical evaluation of past tests that can help to 
reject the inappropriate tests (a small percentage of 
correct solutions). 
 
SERVER
PHP scripts
Data
XML
XML
DATABASE 
MySQL
INTERNET BROWSER
Java Applet
 
 
Figure 12.  Modules communications 
All communication and data processing scripts are 
created in PHP but they can always be modified for other 
languages, e.g., ASP. Setting of the modules properties using 
a few basic parameters is part of module building-in process 
into the LMS. With these parameters the basic features such 
as an identification key chart type, mode of diagrams, and 
way of storing and retrieving data are set. The build-in 
module with setting is shown in Fig. 12.  
23
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

Current test counts are written in Table I. We have two 
types of tests. Final test must be completed by a student 
before in the end of a semester. Practical test may be 
completed by a student throughout the whole semester 
several times. 
TABLE I.  
TABLE OF TEST COUNTS 
Number of tests counts 
Type of tasks 
Practice test 
count 
Final test 
count 
Module for testing ER diagrams 
1000 
1000 
Module for testing UML diagrams 
1000 
1000 
Logic circuit  
200 
50 
Geometric construction 
100 
20 
Graphic behavior 
100 
30 
 
In the testing, we performed more than 2,000 real final 
tests in education that confirms the applicability of the 
various modules in teaching.  
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
Our goal is to show that the opportunity of automatic 
testing is not limited on using variant and simply made 
questions. It is possible to carry out the automatic check of 
graphic tasks if the objects are properly described.  
The design and implementation of the graphic testing 
modules for chosen areas demonstrates its big contribution to 
training automation sphere. This type of education is very 
practical a useful for both tutors and students. With a help of 
these modules, we can extend our possibilities of automatic 
evaluation. Now we don´t need to use the variant questions 
only because we can require such type of questions as 
“Create the diagram”, “Correct the electric circuit”, 
“Connect logical circuit”, “Draw construction of Monge 
projection” and others.    
In the future we are planning to work over other types of 
graphic problems to demonstrate opportunities of such a 
special type of tasks. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
H. T. Huo, "Study on the Function  of Test Paper and Questionnaire 
in Moodle Course", Proc. International conference on modeling and 
simulation, May 2009, pp. 271-274. 
[2] 
Z. Xiaochun, Z. Bo, L. Juefeng, and G. Qiu, “A test automation 
solution on GUI functional test”, IEEE Conference on Software 
Maintenance, July 2008, pp. 1413-1418.  
[3] 
A. Memon, “An event-flow model of GUI-based applications for 
testing”, IEEE conference on Software Testing, Verification and 
Reliability, Vol. 17, September 2007, pp. 137-157.  
[4] 
H. Uzunboylu, "Using dynamic geometry software Cabri 3D for 
teaching analytic geometry", Innovation and kreativity in education, 
vol. 2, 2010, pp. 1385-1389.   
[5] 
H. Pesman and A. Eryilmaz, "Development of a Three-Tier Test to 
Assess Misconceptions About Simple Electric Circuits", Journal of 
educational research, vol. 103, 2010, pp. 208-222. 
[6] 
B. Bloom, "Taxonomy of Educational Objectives, The Classification 
of Educational Goals. Handbook I: Cognitive Domain.", New York: 
David McKay, 1956.  
[7] 
A Taxonomy for Learning, Teaching, and Assessing: A Revision of 
Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educational Objectives, edited by L. W. 
Anderson and D. R. Kraftwohl _Longman, New York, 2001. 
[8] 
C. Johnson and U. Fuller, "Is Bloom’s Taxonomy Appropriate for 
Computer Science?", Proceedings of the 6th Baltic Sea Conference on 
Computing Education Research (AICPS ’06), vol. 276, 2006, pp. 
120-123. 
[9] 
T. Ho and T. Lee, "Teaching Thinking Skills In E-Learning - 
Application Of The BLOOM’S TAXONOMY", ITE Teachers' 
Conference, 2004. 
[10] Blackboard Inc, Blackboard Course Management System [online], 
[cit. 2010-12-10]. Available: http://www.blackboard.com/. 
[11] WebCT, Course Management System [online], [cit. 2010-12-10]. 
Available: http://www.webct.com/. 
[12] Moodle, Course Management System [online], [cit. 2010-12-10]. 
Available:  http://moodle.org/.  
[13] J. Fournier, "Graph Theory and Applications", France, 2009, ISBN 
978-1848210707. 
[14] J. Cavanagh, "Sequential logic: analysis and synthesis", CRC/Taylor 
& Francis, 2007, ISBN 978-0849375644. 
[15] K. Charles and S. Matthew, "Fundamentals of Electric Circuits", 4th 
Edition, McGraw-Hill, 2009, ISBN 978-0077263195. 
[16] E. Watts, "Descriptive Geometry", Watts Press, 2008, ISBN 978-
1443730006. 
[17] L. Graves. "The Theory Of Functions Of Real Variables", Second 
Edition, Dover, 2009, ISBN 978-0486474342. 
 
 
24
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

