Abstract - This article discusses the topic of digital accessibility 
as the ability of information systems to deliver usable services 
and provide usable information, avoiding any form of 
discrimination, including that oriented toward those who 
require 
assistive 
technologies 
or 
special 
computer 
configurations due to disabilities or unsuitable environmental 
conditions. In this paper, the experience of the Piazza 
Copernico's development team is explained in regarding the 
implementation of an accessible and usable course. The paper 
shows the complexity of this topic and the main solutions 
implemented in a real example to guarantee an effective 
inclusive learning environment. 
 
Keywords–Accessibility; Usability; Disability; Inclusion; E-
learning; Universal design 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The topic of accessibility has recently come into the 
spotlight because, thanks to current regulatory and societal 
changes globally, more and more people with disabilities 
can access opportunities that they were previously denied.  
The official definition of disability was provided by the 
World Health Organization (WHO), which defines it as: 
"any restriction or deficiency (resulting from an 
impairment) in the ability to perform an activity in the 
manner and within the limits considered normal for a human 
being" [1]. However, it is important to emphasize that 
disabilities should not be regarded as a disease or defect, but 
a natural part of human diversity. Therefore, individuals 
with disabilities have the right to take full part in the society 
that, for a long time, has been structured on standards 
commonly considered "normal. "Disabilities can be of 
different types and degrees and may be present from birth 
or acquired as a result of illness, accident, or aging. Sensory 
disabilities, such as blindness and deafness, limit the ability 
to see or hear and consequently may limit the ability to learn 
and interact. In addition to sense organ impairment, 
physical, mental, and intellectual limitations are also to be 
considered. 
Respect for and inclusion of all is a social responsibility 
and, as such, must be made explicit in all contexts of an 
individual's life. One of the areas to work on to achieve this 
goal concerns training and, more specifically, e-learning. 
This area requires special attention to design and develop 
accessible e-learning training, it is necessary to take into 
account the many difficulties that any individual may face. 
For example, those with visual impairments often find 
themselves in the condition of not being able to enjoy 
effective learning, either because of the traditional use of 
images and graphics that are significant for the 
achievement of training objectives, or because of 
instructions to be displayed in the interface employed to 
facilitate navigability in the course. From this and other 
needs we are seeing a proliferation of accessibility 
technology regulations and guidelines, which increasingly 
promote the design of accessible online platforms and 
content for all users. So, for Piazza Copernico it rapidly 
became a topic to be studied to promote correct solutions 
to manage learning and promote inclusive learning digital 
materials and courses, accordingly to D&I policy in 
company itself and clients’ requirements. 
II. ITALIAN REGULATION 
The increasingly imminent need to make digital 
environments accessible is regulated in Italy by Law No. 4 
of January 9, 2004 (Stanca Law) [2], which establishes 
provisions to facilitate and simplify access to digital tools 
for users in general and people with disabilities in 
particular. The constitutional framework on which this law 
is based is Article 3 of the Italian Constitution, as it is based 
on the principle of equality and social dignity.  
In Art. 3 of Law 4/2004, moreover, the addressees are 
specified, namely: 
• 
public administrations. 
• 
public economic entities. 
• 
private companies that are concessionaires of 
public services. 
• 
public welfare and rehabilitation institutions. 
• 
transport and telecommunications companies with 
majority public capital participation. 
• 
regional municipal utilities and IT service 
contractor companies. 
Thanks to Law 4/2004, it is possible to obtain a more 
objective framework regarding definitions, particularly of 
"accessibility," understood as: "the ability of information 
systems, in the forms and to the extent permitted by 
technological knowledge, to deliver services and provide 
information usable, without discrimination, even by those 
who due to disabilities require assistive technologies or 
special configurations" (Law 4/2004) [2]. The law also 
provides an accurate definition of "assistive technologies" 
in terms of: "technical tools and solutions, hardware and 
software, that allow the disabled person, overcoming or 
reducing the conditions of disadvantage, to access 
information and services provided by information systems" 
(Law 4/2004) [2]. 
Accessibility in E-learning: From Inclusive Choice to Universal Training 
Saverio Santulli Sanzo, Marta Federici, Silvio Meconi, Daniele Consorti, Alice Antonello,  
Giuseppina Somma, Antonio L’Abbate, Claudia Falconio 
Digital Course Development Area  
Piazza Copernico s.r.l. 
Rome, Italy 
email produzione@pcopernico.it  
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

III.WEB CONTENT ACCESSIBILITY GUIDELINES 
(WCAG) AND E-LEARNING STANDARD 
The spread of the offer in services and courses delivered 
largely via the Web and aimed at post-secondary or 
vocational training rose the need for authorities to adopt 
recognized standards to enable their quality certification 
[3][4]. The International Standard Organization (ISO) with 
the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 
created an international standard, ISO/IEC 24751 (2008) 
[5], which considers the accessibility characteristics that 
"the new training context" must have to be considered 
accessible [9]. 
Among the most comprehensive and important 
guidelines for accessibility, WCAG is a set of international 
guidelines related to accessibility and usability provided by 
the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), an international 
no-governmental association that has been working for 
years to further the web. Web Content Accessibility 
Guidelines (WCAG) 2.1 is the most recent version and was 
released on June 5, 2018. It is based on four core principles: 
1. Principle of perceptibility, states that all interface 
elements should be able to be perceived by the user; 
2. Principle of operability, states that the user must be 
enabled to effectively use the interface;  
3. Principle of understandability, states that the 
content of the interface must be presented clearly and 
unambiguously; 
4. Principle of robustness, states the relative 
importance of an interface's ability to be accessible 
regardless of the technology used by the user. 
Thirteen criteria are also provided within the Web 
Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) to determine 
the level of accessibility of an interface. Depending on the 
fulfillment of these criteria, the interface can be classified 
through three levels of accessibility: A, AA and AAA. 
These levels are progressive, so as accessibility increases 
as the level advances. It is important to emphasize that the 
thirteen criteria in no way represent a regulation with 
normative value, but rather a set of practical and useful 
guidelines for those involved in making digital 
environments accessible. 
IV.MAIN EXISTING METHODOLOGIES  
AND THEORIES 
Considering the theoretical models and methodologies 
employed in e-learning, a major contribution to the topic of 
accessibility comes from Universal Design for Learning 
(UDL), an approach based on modern neuroscience. 
Specifically, Universal Design for Learning (UDL) is a 
framework that addresses the main training difficulties 
present within still rigid, one-way learning environments, 
which raise significant barriers in the process of knowledge 
acquisition by users, not only those with disabilities [6].  
The underlying principle is that there is no one type of 
learner, but everyone learns differently based on multiple 
factors, from physical to sociocultural, and based, 
therefore, on different needs [6].  
Universal Design for Learning (UDL) aims to help 
anyone planning lessons or learning units understand how 
to implement learning pathways. A learning program must 
be able to meet the needs of all students from the outset, 
encouraging the creation of flexible, inclusive and 
customizable designs. In this regard, Universal Design for 
Learning (UDL) has drafted Guidelines to reduce the 
obstacles associated with traditional training and to try to 
reach an increasingly broad range of learners. 
The guidelines drafted by UDL are based on the 
following 
principle: 
provide 
multiple 
means 
of 
representation. This principle is indispensable in the 
absence of a single, optimal tool for all users. In fact, 
learning is impossible if the information is not perceivable 
by the learner, or is perceivable with difficulty (for 
example, if it is presented in ways that require great effort 
or extraordinary help). For information to be equally 
perceivable by all individuals, the Guidelines suggest, for 
example, providing the same information through different 
perceptual modalities such as: sight, hearing, or touch.  
In addition to multiple representations, another strategy 
to try to break down barriers in learning is to offer the user 
information in an adjustable format, such as enlarged text 
and augmented sound. It is especially important to remark 
the role of multiple representations of information in 
learning, as they are useful not only in conveying 
accessible information to users with particular sensory and 
perceptual 
disabilities, 
but 
also 
in 
facilitating 
understanding for many other users. 
V. CURRENT STATUS OF TECHNOLOGIES 
Currently there are many technological achievements to 
overcome obstacles to the accessibility of e-learning paths, 
among them we consider: 
• 
the use of special keyboards.  
• 
the presence of a video with a translator who 
expresses himself through sign language. 
• 
the adoption of joysticks. 
In more detail, mainly used technologies for visually 
impaired people are audio description and image 
magnification using specific software. A tool that can 
implement both mentioned solutions for visually impaired 
people is the multipurpose interface. On the other hand, a 
tool very useful for trainers is the multi-subject database 
[8], which makes it possible to shorten the distance 
between trainers and people with disabilities through a 
virtual repository that can trace the progress of special 
education. 
Technologies to support the blind are called "assistive 
technologies" and are based on the use of hearing and 
touch. Among the various developed solutions, it is 
important to consider screen-reading software that can 
convert content in written form present in an interface into 
audio. Other assistive technologies include alternative 
keyboards (keyguards, adjustable keyboards, miniature 
keyboards, programmable keyboards) and Braille displays. 
To identify the most promising technologies for people 
with hearing impairments, Martinsa and al. [8] pointed out 
that the efforts of industry companies have focused on three 
key aspects: 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

• 
comprehension, as the ability of technological tools 
to recognize gestures, body movements and facial 
expressions in order to grasp the message.  
• 
representation, as the ability to create a virtual 
image 
that 
corresponds 
to 
the 
user's 
communications.  
• 
translation, as the ability of software to convert a 
message expressed through sign language into 
written form. 
Regarding the first aspect, i.e., understanding, there are 
two solutions adopted until today:  
• 
the use of cameras that can record movements. 
• 
the use of gloves that analyze the movement of the 
hand and forearm. 
Several difficulties are currently evident with both 
above-mentioned solutions; on the one hand, the gloves fail 
to capture the message in its entirety because they exclude 
important aspects, such as facial expressions and body 
language; on the other hand, although extremely accurate 
cameras are available, it is difficult to succeed in 
developing software that can process and understand all the 
necessary visual stimuli.  
For sign language representation, on the other hand, a 
tool that has been successful in various areas of 
communication is adopted: the virtual avatar. However, 
much research on the subject shown that there are several 
difficulties [8]. Indeed, making animations capable of 
reproducing specific and complex movements with high 
levels of accuracy and fidelity proved to be a more arduous 
task than expected. 
Finally in the case of translation, the greatest difficulty 
doesn’t involve software, but regards hardware; in fact, it 
is really difficult for modern systems to be able to process 
hundreds of spoken gestures in a few minutes, understand 
them, and translate them into a written format. Software 
based on particularly powerful hardware actually cannot 
process more than eight signs per minute, certainly not 
enough considering the communication speed of a possible 
user.  
Despite great efforts by institutions, the world of 
research, information technology, and new technologies, 
there are still many steps to take to achieve high-impact 
inclusive goals and so accessibility can become an 
established principle in e-learning education. However, 
future of accessible e-learning is very promising. There are 
several emerging technologies that are making e-learning 
increasingly accessible for people with disabilities. One of 
the most important emerging technologies is artificial 
intelligence (AI). AI can be used to create personalized and 
adaptable learning systems to real learner's needs and 
learning abilities. In this way, it become possible to receive 
personalized education tailored to each specific need. In 
addition, there are also emerging technologies, such as 
portable devices and sensors, that can help interact with e-
learning in more intuitive ways. For example, handheld 
devices such as smartwatches can help students with visual 
impairments receive haptic feedback to navigate learning 
content. Then, virtual and augmented reality technologies 
are becoming more accessible and could be used to create 
immersive and immersive learning experiences. 
VI. PIAZZA COPERNICO’S EXPERIENCE 
A. Accessibility vs. Usability 
The adoption of Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 
(WCAG) became increasingly important as more and more 
people use technology to access information, services and 
products. In addition, accessibility has also become legally 
mandated in many countries, especially for public service-
providing organizations.  
Creating e-learning courses that comply with WCAG 
means creating content that is accessible, but also that is 
easy to use and navigate. However, the two do not always 
coincide. With these considerations in mind, the Piazza 
Copernico’s production team started from the question, 
"Will following the WCAG guidelines allow our products 
to be truly usable by anyone?" Indeed, accessibility and 
usability are two different concepts, although they are often 
confused or considered as synonymous. Accessibility 
refers to “a person's ability to access online content 
regardless of his or her physical, sensory, or cognitive 
abilities.  
On the other hand, Usability refers to the ease with which 
a person can use a website or application, that is, its 
efficiency, effectiveness, and satisfaction during use. 
According to the ISO 9241-11 (1998) standard [9], the 
purpose of usability is to study the interaction between the 
user and the site, or between the user and the online course, 
with the aim of highlighting obstacles that prevent effective 
use of information and services. [10] For example, an 
online course may be accessible, because it has text 
alternatives for images and support keyboard navigation, 
but it may not be very usable if the navigation is confusing 
and unclear, with menus and submenus that are not well 
organized and difficult to find. On the other hand, an online 
course could be very usable, that is, easy to navigate and 
use, but not be accessible if it does not support assistive 
technologies or offer text alternatives for images. In the 
goals of accessibility and usability there is an overlap in 
some cases, but the differences between the two areas 
become clearer when considering the entities involved. 
To verify that the accessibility requirements of the 
WCAG guidelines are met, automatic validation of the 
page code using special software and a series of technical 
tests are required. The focus of usability, on the other hand, 
is on the relationship between the product and the end user, 
and the preferred method of validation is a test conducted 
directly with human users.  
In summary, accessibility and usability are both 
important for ensuring a positive and inclusive user 
experience for all users, but they are different concepts and 
require different design and validation approaches. 
Therefore, the appropriate test of whether an online course 
is accessible is whether people with disabilities can use it, 
not just whether it complies with WCAG or other 
guidelines. In fact, Thatcher [11] states that accessibility is 
experiential and environmental and depends on the 
interaction of the content with the user agent, the assistive 
technology, and the user. Obviously, one would hope that 
there would be a high correlation between user 
performance and usability measures on the one hand and 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

WCAG compliance on the other. So far, however, there are 
few studies that have produced evidence underlying this 
relationship [12].  
In the light of these considerations and in response to 
the specific need expressed by the company Enel Spa to 
provide training that would consider the obligations of 
Legislative Decree 2020/76, the production group in Piazza 
Copernico began to think about how to make its products 
accessible 
and 
usable, 
developing 
an 
e-learning 
environment suitable for this purpose. The first project to 
be tested for accessibility was "Being Antifragile": a course 
consisting of four episodes built on the stories of various 
characters in different environments; in each episode a 
typical situation of chaos, stress, risk, error is staged, in 
which the "antifragile" attitude can make a difference in 
improving, learning, evolving. The group worked in 
parallel on the content front and the interface front to 
produce an easily navigable environment for people with 
visual and hearing disabilities and normals with suboptimal 
conditions; the goal was to achieve level AA according to 
the WCAG guidelines. To do this, several measures were 
taken. 
B. Taken measures on the web application 
The development of a web application capable of 
presenting accessible and usable multimedia content 
required a set of best practices to be followed. 
The principles used at this stage followed the guidelines 
outlined by the W3C on WCAG, which state that for 
content to be accessible it must be perceivable, usable, 
understandable, and robust [13]. The robustness of the code 
and the use of semantic tags [13] enabled assistive 
technologies for the blind (screen readers) to convey the 
right information according to the order set in the HTML 
code. The proper use of semantic tags has enabled screen 
readers, for example, to recognize text as a title regardless 
of how it looks on the screen. The inclusion of detailed 
instructions for each button and the implementation of 
keyboard-only interface navigability allowed users with 
screen readers to operate with the application controls and 
know what will happen after each button is selected (see 
Figure 1). 
  
Figure 1. Example of a message read by the screen reader 
About course interface, each button, once selected, 
shows a clearly visible border, allowing users its immediate 
identification (see Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2. Example of key highlighting 
 
Adaptive (responsive) management of the interface 
allowed the visually impaired to be able to enlarge the tabs 
and wording present, without having to give up their 
functionality (see Figure 3 and 4). 
 
Figure 3. Example of focus on 
  
Figure 4. Example of focus on 
C. Considerations on taken measures on the web 
application  
The software and interface design must focus on the 
needs of users by providing tools that are pleasant and 
functional to use, in an effort to provide the best possible 
experience during use. Designing the commands to be 
made available and the information to be communicated at 
each stage of use, presupposes the task of stepping into the 
user's point of view to help them efficiently and 
comprehensively achieve their purposes: in our case, 
education on a given topic.  
In the past, the target user of the graphic and functional 
design of our courses was quite similar in skills and 
possibilities to the people involved in making the course 
itself. Making a web application accessible means taking 
into consideration a multitude of viewpoints or use cases 
related to the different possibilities of fruition of the 
product applicable to users with different abilities and 
limitations.  This is not an easy effort that requires specific 
training on the various usability needs and the use of 
assistive technologies to test and verify the validity of the 
solutions adopted. The immediate visual impact of texts 
and images is no longer the only parameter to be 
considered; the usability of what is shown after activating 
the browser's zoom tool or the use of a screen reader also 
become an integral part of the process of creating our 
courses. 
D. Taken Measures on content 
To make the media content accessible, synchronized 
subtitles are included that report, according to the choice:  
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

• 
the spoken content only, i.e., subtitles for all audio 
content in real time in the form of synchronized 
media types. 
• 
the spoken content and textual description of the 
noises. 
• 
audio description, i.e., audio description provided 
for all pre-recorded video content in the form of 
synchronized media types. Such narration describes 
important visual details that cannot be understood 
through the main audio and includes information 
about actions, characters, scene changes, on-screen 
text, and other visual content (see Figure 5). 
  
 
Figure 5. Example of audiodescription 
 
Subtitles can be set in 4 different sizes (see Figure 6). 
 
 
Figure 6. Audio/subtitle control panel 
 
To further support the audience of hearing-impaired 
people, we have included, on a drag-and-drop panel, the 
ability to enjoy content through Italian Sign Language 
(LIS), a natural language conveyed through the visual-
textual channel, relying on professional interpreters to 
literally translate the content of our videos (see Figure 7). 
 
 
Figure 7. Example of LIS (Italian Sign Language) 
E. Considerations on taken measures on content 
For years now we focused on the use of video for our 
training courses, and working on accessibility necessarily 
means 
going 
to 
work 
on 
these 
as 
well.  
After all, we live in a world increasingly dominated by 
audiovisual content. And access to this content has been 
declared a fundamental human right by the 2006 United 
Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities (CRPD). [15] The first key step involved 
subtitles. Subtitles originated to be aimed at viewers who 
do not speak the language used in the video. Today the use 
of subtitles has changed; just look at the wide use of them 
on social and streaming platforms by all the people who 
enjoy videos in conditions where audio cannot be heard, 
such as in public. The use of Closed captioning (cc) or 
Subtitles for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing (SDH) has since 
evolved further. SDH includes oralists, as deaf oralists are 
people educated to speak, lip-read and understand spoken 
language to the exclusion of Sign Language 
This type of subtitles carries over into the written text 
not only speech, but a whole range of additional 
information useful to people who are deaf and hard of 
hearing, such as:  
• 
sound effects (gunshots, dogs barking, phones 
ringing, etc.). 
• 
identification of the speaker (without a symbol or 
name identifying the speaker, lines of dialogue 
follow one another, leaving the viewer confused as 
to who said what and when, especially for off-
screen interlocutors). 
• 
music, the latter being a basic element in identifying 
the video's tone and atmosphere; it is useful, 
therefore, to make suggestions as to what type of 
music is in the field for the deaf.  
To support users who have difficulty reading, subtitles 
are presented as white lettering on a dark background to 
ensure good contrast no matter what content they are 
displayed on. A further step toward accessibility is the 
translation of our videos into Italian Sign Language (LIS), 
which is increasingly used on TV and in live events to 
engage the signaling deaf community. If subtitles and LIS 
help those who have difficulty hearing, audio-descriptions 
are necessary for those who have difficulty seeing. Audio-
descriptions consist of audio commentaries describing 
scenes that would not be understandable without visual 
support. The difficulty encountered lies in the fact that the 
training products produced are not feature films, which 
have more extended time frames and allow for full and 
detailed audio-descriptions, but short videos, usually at a 
fast pace, that require a specific study of best formula for 
effectively describing a scene. 
F.  Results 
Once the "Being Antifragile" course was made 
accessible, with the described changes on the web 
application and content, it was sent to the client for 
consulting by Salvatore Scaldaferri - Digital Accessibility 
Specialist of Global Digital Solutions of the Enel Group. 
This collaboration allowed us to test and verify the 
effectiveness of the measures undertaken in line with 
accessibility guidelines and to implement them in terms of 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

usability. The Digital Accessibility Specialist's main 
observations concerned: 
• 
the correct reading sequence of on-screen elements. 
• 
the overlap of the audio description with respect to 
the narrative voice of the video. 
• 
the clarity of the instructions regarding the choice 
of subtitles. 
• 
some redundancies in the functionality of the 
buttons. 
The feedback allowed us to refine the functionality of 
the interface and calibrate content interventions according 
to the learning patterns of Enel users with disabilities. 
Changes were subsequently validated by the client, who 
confirmed that the course was usable according to his needs 
and that there were no anomalies that would affect 
compliance with WCAG level AA. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
What we have seen is confirmation that beyond the 
adoption of accessibility guidelines, only the human user is 
the true test of the usability of an e-learning course. Indeed, 
in this context, usability is important because students must 
be able to easily access learning materials, navigate 
between different sections of the course, and interact with 
the available tools and resources. Reflection should also be 
extended to the existing correlation between instructional 
design and usability since a well-designed e-learning 
course should also be easy to use. In fact, it is important to 
remember that when we talk about accessibility in e-
learning we should not refer exclusively to the idea of 
making the platform and learning objects universally 
usable, but we should be aware that the content should also 
be conceived and designed in an accessible and usable way. 
In this regard, there is a lack of guidelines that give 
guidance on how to design in an accessible and inclusive 
way for all users, thus addressing the issue of accessibility 
from a methodological-didactic point of view. Next steps 
for producing highly and globally inclusive educational 
products involve new studies to identify standardizable 
design patterns to ensure full accessibility for all types of 
content while also taking into account the cognitive 
engagement required of the user. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
Many thanks go to Salvatore Scaldaferri, Digital 
Accessibility Specialist, and the Enel Group Global Digital 
Solutions team for their support in improving the usability 
and accessibility of the courses. Thanks also to the entire 
Piazza Copernico instructional design and development 
team for their efforts in implementing the interface and 
content to make them accessible and usable: Claudia 
Falconio, Silvio Meconi, Daniele Consorti, Alice 
Antonello, Saverio Santulli Sanzo, Marta Federici, Thomas 
Mezzetti, Teresa Orlando, Alessia Francocci, Giuseppina 
Somma, and Antonio L'Abbate. Thanks to Daniela 
Pellegrini and the entire R&D group at Piazza Copernico 
for their support, motivation and stimulating exchange. 
Special thanks to Oliviero Vittori (President) and Marco 
Luzzatto (Administrator) who made this possible and to all 
the staff of Piazza Copernico who enthusiastically joined 
the project. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] OMS, International Classification of Functioning, Disability and 
Health (ICF), 2001 
[2] L. 9 January 2004, n.4, Dispositions to promote the access of people 
with disabilities to information technology tools. 
[3] U. Ehlers, L. Goertz, B. M. Hildebrandt and J. M. Pawlowski, Quality 
in e-learning: use and dissemination of quality approaches in 
European e-learning. European Centre for the Development of 
Vocational Training (Cedefop) in “Panorama Series”, pp. 116, 2005. 
[4] N.K. Parker The quality dilemma in online education revisited in T. 
Anderson, The theory and practice of online learning, 2nd edition. 
Edmonton, Canada: AU Press, Athabasca University, 2008. 
[5] ISO/IEC 24751 Information technology-Individualized adaptability 
and accessibility in e-learning, education and training, 2008. 
[6] H. David Rose and J. Grave, Universal Design for Learning (UDL) 
Guidelines version 2.0. CAST, 2011. 
[7] A. Savidis and D. Grammenos, C. Stephanidis, Developing inclusive 
e-learning systems, Springer-Verlag, 2006. 
[8] P. Martinsa, H. Rodriguesb, T. Rochaa, M. Franciscoc, L.  Morgado, 
Accessible options for Deaf people in e-Learning platforms: 
technology solutions for Sign Language translation. In “Procedia 
Computer Science”, Vol. 67, pp. 263 – 272, 2015. 
[9] SO 9241-11, Ergonomic requirements for visual display terminals, 
1998. 
[10] P. Ghislandi and F. Cumer, Accessibility for quality e-learning in 
“TD Tecnologie Didattiche”, Vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 153-160, 2013. 
[11] J. Thatcher, Prioritizing Web Accessibility Evaluation Data. 
Proceedings of CSUN, 2004. 
[12] B. Kelly, D. Sloan, L. Phipps, H. Petrie and F. Hamilton, Forcing 
Standardization or Accommodating Diversity? A Framework for 
Applying the WCAG in the Real World. Conference: W4A, 2005 
[13] https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21 
[14] https://www.w3schools.com/html/html5_semantic_elements.asp 
[15] Booklet_All the Same: Layout 1 (esteri.it) 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

