Digital Transformation of Education Credential Processes and Life Cycles –
A Structured Overview on Main Challenges and Research Questions
Ingo R. Keck
Scientiﬁc Data Management
TIB Leibniz Information Centre
for Science and Technology
Hannover, Germany
Email: Ingo.Keck@tib.eu
Maria-Esther Vidal
Scientiﬁc Data Management
TIB Leibniz Information Centre
for Science and Technology
Hannover, Germany
Email: Maria.Vidal@tib.eu
Lambert Heller
Open Science Lab
TIB Leibniz Information Centre
for Science and Technology
Hannover, Germany
Email: Lambert.Heller@tib.eu
Abstract—In this article, we look at the challenges that arise
in the use and management of education credentials, and from
the switch from analogue, paper-based education credentials to
digital education credentials. We propose a general methodology
to capture qualitative descriptions and measurable quantitative
results that allow to estimate the effectiveness of a digital
credential management system in solving these challenges. This
methodology is applied to the EU H2020 project QualiChain use
case, where ﬁve pilots have been selected to study a broad ﬁeld
of digital credential workﬂows and credential management.
Keywords–Credentials;
Education
credentials;
Digitisation;
Challenges in digitisation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Education credentials are an important part of our modern
life. Pupils exit schools with a set of marks certiﬁed on their
ﬁnal school report, then, based on these results, they are able
to apply for acceptance at higher education institutes or for
apprenticeship. Students and employees continue to collect cre-
dentials at university, at work or via other ways of education.
Even today, when digitisation has entered into almost every
part of our lives, these education credentials often still are
printed and written on paper. These paper-based credentials
present several problems in practice. For example, managing
of these credentials applying for a job position is tiresome for
the applicant and even more so for the company that offers
the position. Indeed, most companies nowadays require scans
of the paper credentials and will only check the validity of
the originals once the candidate for the position has been
selected, to avoid the manual labour involved. Additionally,
surveys show that lying about education and employment
credentials is a common problem. According to a survey by
CareerBuilder [1], 58% of employers have caught a lie on
a resume. Similar ﬁndings arise from another recent survey
by StatisticBrain [2], which reports that over half of resumes
and job applications (53%) contain falsiﬁcations and over
three quarters (78%) are misleading. Digitisation of education
credentials has the potential to make credential handling both
easier and more secure. Nevertheless, it is important to ask the
correct questions to be able to investigate how well a solution
performs in the implementation and management of digital
education credentials.
The main contribution in this work in progress article
is to present the main challenges encountered in education
credential management and usage, and in the changes from
analogue to digital credential workﬂows. We propose speciﬁc
questions that will allow an qualitative and quantitative assess-
ment of the performance of a credential management system
and infrastructure in regard of these challenges (given in Table
I). Finally, we introduce the use case of the EU Horizon 2020
project QualiChain [3], where these research questions will
be evaluated with the help of the participants in the project’s
pilots.
The article is organised as follows: In Section II, we elabor-
ate the different challenges we encountered while analysing the
reports and questionnaires provided by the QualiChain pilots.
In Section III, we propose a set of questions for every challenge
presented in the previous section. In Section IV, we present
the use case of QualiChain. The article closes with Section V
where our conclusions and future work are outlined.
II.
CHALLENGES IN EDUCATION CREDENTIAL
MANAGEMENT
How can the performance of a solution offering the issuing,
management and veriﬁcation of digital education credentials be
evaluated? Based on the results acquired in [4], we propose
to segment the questions of interest into three subtopics, that
follow the process of changing from an analogue to a digital
setting:
A.
Challenges of paper-based credentials;
B.
Challenges of transition to digital credentials; and
C.
Challenges of digital credentials.
In the following sections, we present these experienced difﬁ-
culties and propose ways how to measure the performance of
a presented solution for the implementation and management
of digital education credentials.
A. Challenges of Paper-Based Credentials
Paper-based credentials are the state of the art and have a
history dating back to medieval times. Their use over centuries
makes it obvious that, before digitisation, they were widely
seen as the best solution. However, the developments in the
last decades and the move to digital workﬂows increased
the pressure on analogue, paper-based credentials and lead to
increasing problems, especially in the ﬁeld of fraud prevention.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

1) Fraud and Veriﬁcation: Advances in digital printing
make it continuously more difﬁcult to protect paper-based
credentials against fraud. As already mentioned, a survey by
CareerBuilder [1] reports that 58% of employers have caught
a lie on a resume and 33% of them have seen an increase
in resume embellishments and fabrications like embellished
skill sets (57%), embellished responsibilities (55%), dates of
employment (42%), job titles (34%), academic degrees (33%),
companies worked for (26%) and awards (18%). A different
survey [2] states that over half of resumes and job applications
(53%) contain falsiﬁcations and over three quarters (78%)
are misleading. Most issuers do not have the capabilities to
use advanced falsiﬁcation protection in their paper credentials,
compared to what is done, for example, for paper-based money.
Without a general standard, it would also be impossible for
a non-expert to decide if the credential in front of him/her
has the correct characteristics, as there are over 3000 higher
education establishments in the European Union alone [5].
Instead, institutions and states commonly register important
credentials and allow interested individuals to inquire on the
validity of a presented credential. The UK, for example, offers
the Higher Education Datacheck service [6]. The use of this
service is chargeable, and the process can take up to seven days
[7]. The process is also highly manual and time consuming.
2) Dependence on Issuer: The problems with fraud make
it difﬁcult for other than ofﬁcial education establishments to
issue education credentials. This leads to the problem that
learners will be unable to furnish sufﬁcient and incontestable
proof over several types of qualiﬁcations gained outside this
established system. In the job market, written recommendation
statements (also easy to falsify) or contact persons of reference
are used to compensate for this. These methods are also manual
and time costing for the people involved. The challenge to
correctly identify the issuer of such as statements is related to
this problem. Additionally, this can be the reason why direct
access to reference persons often is preferred, as in this case
the authenticity of the reference person can be checked by
other means, like contact over ofﬁcial phone numbers or email
addresses.
3) Handling: Paper-based credentials are easy to handle
and store for the bearer, but in situations where many cre-
dentials have to be collected, screened and analysed, the high
manual handling costs make their use expensive. This leads to
a time consuming and costly recruitment process. For stafﬁng
private and especially public sector organisations it can be
challenging to efﬁciently handle competency management in
large organisational structures, as was reported in our ques-
tionnaire collection at the QualiChain pilots.
4) Data Security: Using high-quality acid free paper and
storage in low humidity and at room temperature in pest
free environments, paper has successfully been archived over
many decades. Additionally, data protection can be enforced
by physical access restrictions that are commonly available.
However, most users of paper-based credentials outside of
ofﬁcial archives and libraries lack the means of long-term
storage, which makes paper-based credentials vulnerable to
loss and damage. This is made more severe by the impossibility
to create identical copies of paper-based credentials.
B. Challenges of Transition to Digital Credentials
Any solution that asks users to move from a well-
established analogue paper-based workﬂow to a digital work-
ﬂow, will face challenges in this transition. In the following
points we present the issues we encountered in our data
collection.
1) Digitisation of Existing Credentials: Analogue creden-
tials are put into existence using written text, images, drawings
and security characteristics in various forms. To retain all this
information in digital form is difﬁcult, and to efﬁciently work
with the content of the credential, it is necessary to convert
the unstructured text, for example gained by a scan of the
document, into structured data, that has been semantically
enriched.
2) Interaction Between Analogue and Digital Workﬂows:
While workﬂows for both digital and analogue paper-based
credentials exist, it is desirable to cater for both types, if
technically feasible and sensible. Often this will mean making
manual adjustments possible in a digital workﬂow or to
temporarily create digital twins of paper-based credentials to
incorporate them into pure digital workﬂows. This can also
mean that digital credentials are printed out, to be included in
paper-based credential workﬂows.
C. Challenges of Digital Credentials
Digital representations of credentials have their own chal-
lenges, that may be quite different from the paper-based ones.
1) Private Data Protection: Digital data can easily be
copied, and creating identical copies of digital data is part
of the normal workﬂow in IT. If, for example, a digital
credential is sent from the issuer over a secure channel to the
credential holder, its actual data is copied multiple times in
the process: The credential is copied from the data storage at
the issuer to the network stack of the issuers system, then
copied into a transport format, copied over various relays
in the communication system till it is copied once more
into the network stack of the receiver, unpacked and ﬁnally
copied into the receiving application’s memory. However, this
characteristic of digital data makes it also easy to leak private
data in the process. Where in paper-based credentials simple
physical access control often is enough, for digital credentials,
access control has also to be secured digitally.
2) Data Security: Digital data is stored in physical storage
and this storage will degenerate over time. It is, therefore,
important to be able to copy the digital credential to new
physical storage and to continuously monitor the quality of
the storage before the degradation leads to damaged data. In
libraries the ”lots of copies keep stuff safe” (LOCKS) model
has been successfully implemented for electronic publications,
based on the idea that independent copies of the same data in
physical and geographical independent data stores ensure high
data security and availability [8].
3) Data Management: Unlike their paper-based siblings,
digital credentials can only be perceived by the user if their
content or metadata is rendered in a perceivable form (usually
visual). Management systems need to ensure that users know
what is stored and what is transmitted if requested.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

TABLE I. PROPOSED RESEARCH QUESTIONS TO EVALUATE THE PERFORMANCE OF A DIGITAL EDUCATION CREDENTIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM IN
SOLVING THE CHALLENGES EXPERIENCED BY THE USER.
Challenge
Question
Units
Fraud protection and veriﬁcation
How is the system protected against fraud?
qualitative
What are the costs of a successful attack against the fraud protection?
time, money
Issuer dependence
What are the requirements for an issuer of digital credentials?
qualitative
How much does issuing a credential cost?
time, money
Handling
Describe the workﬂow of a credential in the system.
qualitative
How much does handling of a credential in the workﬂow cost?
time, money
Data security
How is the credential stored in the system?
quantitative
Is the credential data format public and open?
yes/no
How many independent copies of the credential are stored in the system at any time?
number
How is the credential secured against accidental loss or data change?
quantitative
How is the credential secured against unauthorised, but intentional, loss or change of data?
quantitative
Digitisation of existing credentials
How can existing analogue credentials be included into the digital workﬂow?
quantitative
Is the content of the analogue credential converted to structured data to the same level of detail as digital
credentials?
yes/no
Interaction between analogue and
digital workﬂows
How can the system interact at the same time with digital and analogue credentials
quantitative
How much increases the effort in the workﬂow, if digital and analogue credentials are mixed?
time, money
Private data protection
How is the private data stored in the system protected against unauthorised access?
quantitative
What are the costs of a successful attack against the private data protection?
time, money
Data management
How is the data managed from the user perspective?
quantitative
Can the user tell at any time of the workﬂow, what data exactly he/she is working with?
yes/no
Can the user tell at any time of the workﬂow, who is able to access the data in question?
yes/no
Data sovereignty
How is data sovereignty enforced in the system?
quantitative
Can the holder of the credential decide at any time of the workﬂow, who is able to access the data in
question?
yes/no
How much does it cost the user to store the data under his/her exclusive physical access?
time, money
What are the costs of a successful attack against the access protection (access, denial of service, data
change)?
time, money
If there are other possibilities of storage, how convenient are they to the user?
time money
What are the costs of a successful attack against these other storage possibilities (access, denial of service,
data change)?
time, money
4) Data Sovereignty: The ease of copying of digital data
allows for the storage of digital credentials physically far from
the users, for example, on the cloud. However, this also means
that the actual data then is outside the physical oversight of
the user. The term ”data sovereignty” [9] has been coined in
recent years to describe ”the idea that users, being citizens or
companies, have control over their data” [10].
III.
PROPOSED RESEARCH QUESTIONS
In this section, we collect the questions whose answers will
be utilised to validate the effectiveness of a system devised
to achieve the challenges presented in the previous Section II.
Each presented topic translates into a set of questions. We start
each topic with a question asking for a qualitative description
of how the proposed solution approaches the relevant challenge
and then, by adding quantitative questions that should enable
us to measure the effect that the proposed solution has on each
challenge in a given use case. Using this mixed qualitative
and quantitative approach, it should be possible to compare
a digital credential solution to the status quo of non-digital
workﬂows.
In Table I, our research questions are presented; they are
grouped according to the challenges presented in Section II.
The challenge data security affects both digital and paper-
based credentials in very similar ways, so we were able to
combine all relevant questions into one ﬁeld.
IV.
USE CASE
The EU Horizon 2020 research and innovation action
QualiChain ”targets the creation, piloting and evaluation of a
decentralised platform for storing, sharing and verifying educa-
tion and employment qualiﬁcations and focuses on the assess-
ment of the potential of blockchain technology, algorithmic
techniques and computational intelligence for disrupting the
domain of public education, as well as its interfaces with
private education, the labour market, public sector admin-
istrative procedures and the wider socio-economic develop-
ments.”[11] The fundamental idea of the project is to build
an open source, distributed platform supporting the storage,
sharing and veriﬁcation of education credentials. This platform
will allow for the implementation of additional services which
will fulﬁl the needs of the participating actors, such as data
analytics and decision support systems. QualiChain hosts ﬁve
pilot projects distributed over Europe (for details please see
[12]), where the system is tested in four real-world scenarios:
•
Lifelong learning;
•
Smart curriculum design;
•
Stafﬁng the public sector; and
•
Providing HR consultancy and competency manage-
ment services
We provided online questionnaires to support the participants
in the pilots in the deﬁnition of the use cases, challenges
and possible research questions, as well as to deﬁne key
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

performance indicators. These questionnaires were ﬁlled in and
discussed with the people involved in the pilots in early 2019.
The process is discussed in detail in [4] and not repeated here
for the sake of brevity.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The intention of this article is to discuss the main chal-
lenges in education credential management and to present a
methodology to both qualitative and quantitative measure a
system’s effectiveness in addressing them. Additionally, we
aim at gathering feedback from the scientiﬁc community
regarding these measurements and their adequacy. We apply
this methodology to the use cases of the Horizon 2020 EU
Project QualiChain, that cover a wide area of applications of
education credentials. This will allow us an in deep evaluation
of the project’s performance. Based on the experience we
will gather in this process, we plan to extend this work
in the future to a full framework for the evaluation of the
performance of education credential management solutions.
This framework should be able to capture the whole life cycle
of education credentials from creation and issuing over storage,
management and access control, towards credential expiring or
retraction.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work has received funding from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant
agreement No 822404 (QualiChain).
REFERENCES
[1]
Fifty-eight percent of employers have caught a lie on a
resume, according to a new careerbuilder survey. [Online].
Available: https : / / www. careerbuilder. com / share / aboutus /
pressreleasesdetail.aspx?sd=8%2F7%2F2014&id=pr837&
ed=12%2F31%2F2014 (visited on 2020-02-24).
[2]
Statisticbrain - resume falsiﬁcation statistics. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.statisticbrain.com/resume- falsiﬁcation-
statistics/ (visited on 2020-02-24).
[3]
QualiChain – decentralised qualiﬁcations’ veriﬁcation and
management for learner empowerment, education reengin-
eering and public sector transformation. [Online]. Available:
https://qualichain-project.eu (visited on 2020-02-24).
[4]
I. Keck et al., “D7.1 – qualichain pilots preparation hand-
book”, Tech. Rep., 2019. [Online]. Available: https://alfresco.
epu.ntua.gr/share/s/AQjQwquNRwOl-CtaHFDBLQ (visited
on 2020-02-24).
[5]
European Commission, The role of universities in the europe
of knowledge, 2003. [Online]. Available: https : / / eur - lex .
europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=LEGISSUM:c11067
(visited on 2020-02-24).
[6]
HECSU, Prospects hedd veriﬁcation + authentication. [On-
line]. Available: https://hedd.ac.uk/ (visited on 2020-02-24).
[7]
D. Matthews, “What blockchain technology could mean for
universities”, Times Higher Education, Aug. 2017. [Online].
Available: https://www.timeshighereducation.com/news/what-
blockchain-technology-could-mean-for-universities (visited
on 2020-02-24).
[8]
V. A. Reich, “Lots of copies keep stuff safe as a cooperative
archiving solution for e-journals”, Issues in Science and Tech-
nology Librarianship, 2002. [Online]. Available: http://doi.
org/10.5062/F47P8WCW (visited on 2020-02-06).
[9]
R. Posch, “Digital sovereignty and it-security for a prosperous
society”, in Informatics in the Future, H. Werthner and F.
van Harmelen, Eds., Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2017, pp. 77–86, ISBN: 978-3-319-55735-9.
[10]
S. Amaro, Europe’s dream to claim its ‘digital sovereignty’
could be the next big challenge for us tech giants, Nov. 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://www.cnbc.com/2019/11/20/us-
tech- could- face- new- hurdles- as- europe- considers- digital-
sovereignty.html (visited on 2020-02-24).
[11]
QualiChain – decentralised qualiﬁcations’ veriﬁcation and
management for learner empowerment, education reengineer-
ing and public sector transformation, Nov. 2018. [Online].
Available: https://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/218758 en.html
(visited on 2020-02-24).
[12]
C. Agostinho et al., “D2.2 – qualichain stakeholders’ re-
quirements and use cases”, Tech. Rep., 2019. [Online].
Available: https : / / alfresco . epu . ntua . gr / share / s /
EﬂUU9mbTESnrZo74WAZHg (visited on 2020-02-24).
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

