A Conversational Agent for Mobile Assisted Language Learning
CPIAbot as a tool for learning Italian as a second language
Giorgio Robino
Institute for Educational
Technology
CNR
Genoa, Italy
e-mail: giorgio.robino@itd.cnr.it
Simone Torsani
Department of Modern Languages
and Cultures
University of Genoa
Genoa, Italy
e-mail: Simone.Torsani@unige.it
Fabrizio Ravicchio
Digital Humanities
University of Genoa
Genoa, Italy
e-mail: ravicchio@itd.cnr.it
Abstract — Learning the language of the host country is one of
the most important aspects of social inclusion for adult
migrants. Within the migrant population in Italy, it is possible
to find a high heterogeneity of language profiles, which differ
in level of competence and degree of literacy. This phenomenon
is reflected in the composition of the classrooms of the
Provincial Centers for Adult Education (CPIA), educational
institutions that offer courses of Italian as a second language to
adult migrants. To meet the needs identified in a preliminary
survey
in
two
CPIAs,
a
conversational
technology
was
developed: CPIAbot. The system is a multimodal and multi-
level chatbot, whose ecosystem is Telegram, to support both
the
communicative
teaching
in
the
classroom
and
the
autonomous
learning
of
CPIA
students.
For
the
implementation of the designed innovations, embedded in the
technology, an ad-hoc system was developed, integrating a
dialog-manager (NaifJs), capable of managing multi-turn
dialogues, and other different solutions for the communication
with external services, aimed to the management of multi-
channel interactions. The contribution, therefore, will describe
the technological solutions adopted, insisting on their link with
the linguistic needs that have emerged from the context.
Keywords-Multimodal/voice chatbot; Conversational Agent;
Task-oriented
dialog
manager;
Mixed-initiative
bot;
Conversational AI; Teachers/Students mobile platform; Social
inclusion for adult migrants; Italian L2 Learning; Adult
Literacy.
I. INTRODUCTION
The social inclusion of migrants poses the problem of
learning the language of the countries of arrival (or transit),
since language is the main means of interaction with the host
society. In Italy, in particular, the migrant population has
very different linguistic and social profiles, including low
educated adults [1]. This phenomenon poses important
challenges to the Provincial Centres for Adult Education
(CPIA), the institutions in charge of offering language
courses [2]-[4], where the heterogeneity of linguistic profiles
is reflected in the composition of their classrooms. Within
the class groups, in fact, it is possible to find students with
different linguistic backgrounds [5], levels of competence
and, in different situations, people that suffer social isolation
and do not speak Italian outside the language class [6].
Moreover, a preliminary survey in two Ligurian CPIAs
showed that, in line with the provisions of the Common
European Framework of Reference (CEFR), the teachers'
teaching is oriented towards a communicative approach and
the topics addressed, as well as the activities proposed, are
relevant to the experiences lived by students outside the
classroom.
In order to respond to the needs expressed by the context
of reference, embracing the Mobile Assisted Language
Learning (MALL) approach [7]-[9], the idea was born to
develop an educational technology, CPIAbot, which can
support teachers during the lessons and students in their
autonomous learning, blurring the classroom boundaries.
The conversational technology described below, therefore,
aims to constitute a support tool that, promoting interaction
based on natural language, can be a bridge between different
educational scenarios.
The importance of research on tools that support
language learning through mobile devices, as pointed out by
Kukulska-Hulme [10], lies in the possibilities of exploiting
the ubiquity of such devices to explore new teaching options
for groups of people with high mobility. Specifically,
conversational interfaces have, today, the possibility to
establish themselves within MALL technologies both thanks
to the learners' confidence with online text and voice,
synchronous and asynchronous, conversations, and thanks to
the development of speech recognition technologies and the
growing
computing
power
and
ubiquity
of
mobile
technologies.
On the other hand, the relaying of conversational
technologies, especially if expressly oriented to language
learning, requires interdisciplinary work and a wide range of
skills. Similarly, the operational development or system
integration of each component of the instrument requires
specific study to ensure sufficient quality in the user
experience and in the didactic value of the technology. This
has been particularly evident in the development of CPIAbot,
as it aims to reach an audience that is heterogeneous in terms
of literacy levels and language skills. On the other hand, the
limitations and challenges of the described experience,
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

highlighted within the contribution, may constitute future
strands of research.
This
contribution,
therefore,
aims
to
describe
a
conversational technology, developed ex novo and expressly
designed for the language learning of adult immigrants,
highlighting the relationship between the needs of the
specific context of reference and the technological solutions
implemented.
The global research question is: What effectiveness can a
chatbot have in replicating/supporting the action of a CPIA
teacher inside and outside the classroom in L2 pre-A1
teaching?
In Section 2, a state of the art of MALL tools developed
for Italian as a L2 will be presented. In Section 3, the
innovativeness of CPIAbot will be described, focusing on the
shift
from
the
Graphic
User
Interface (GUI)
to
the
Conversational
User
Interface/Vocal
User
Interface
(CUI/VUI). In Section 4, the adherence of the chatbot
characteristics with the context one will be addressed,
detailed widespread in Section 5. In Section 6, a reflection on
some technical and UX issues will be explained, while in
Section 7 the teachers’ feedback will be detailed. Finally, in
Section 8, preliminary conclusions are presented.
II. EDUCATIONAL APPS FOR IMMIGRANTS AND
REFUGEES IN ITALY
In Italy, it is possible to find interesting examples of apps
specifically designed for immigrants and refugees, even with
low language skills, that share some common elements.
Most of the software designed for learning Italian as L2
from mobile devices is free of charge. A second feature that
these apps have in common is the fact that they are made in
collaboration with local realities, which offer language
courses to adult immigrants. Finally, in accordance with the
m-Learning principles [11], mobile apps for Italian as a
second language allow users to access multimedia contents
every
time
and
everywhere
and
are oriented
to
the
personalization of learning.
An example is “Presente” [12], realized by CPIA
Bologna
and
Regione
Emilia-Romagna,
whose
main
characteristic is to have, in addition to communicative
exercises focused on listening and reading, a database of
useful sentences organized in daily life situations. Similarly,
the exercises in “Ataya” app [13], focused on the four skills
(read, speak, listen, write), are divided into domains related
to daily life. “Fare parole” [14], instead, is an app oriented to
the graphemic and metaphonetic competence and provides
exercises with a binary feedback focused on listening and
writing.
A peculiar example is “Q-CPIApp” [15], built on the
Learning App platform by the teacher of Lodi’s CPIA, in
order to provide the students exercises available on their
smartphones. The activations are focused on grammar and
lexicon and are organized in levels.
All the described apps are characterized for intuitive
interfaces
and
ease
of
use
that
allows
the
learner’s
autonomous exercise, with short and engaging interactions,
within the classroom and outside it.
The limitations are related to the binary feedback
provided within the exercises, the weak relation between the
interaction and the user’s context, the lack of the students’
interaction tracking (beyond the single session) and the lack
of systems for vocal input management.
It is possible to find some of these elements in brand new
apps recently developed.
“LinguaCuisine” [16], for instance, is an app aimed to
teach Italian to adult immigrants providing cooking recipes.
The main innovation is that the user can upload personal
content that will personalize the learning experience.
Another
peculiar
example
is
“Studiare
Migrando”,
realized thanks to the collaboration between the Scuola di
Lingua Italiana per Stranieri (ItaStra) of the University of
Palermo and the Institute for Educational Technology
(CNR). The focus of the app is language learning for adult
students that are attending compulsory school in CPIAs. It is
based on a truly e-Learning environment aimed to support
students with high mobility (often due to external factors)
[17].
A brand new app, “Mondly”, presents innovative and
disruptive elements. The first innovation that distinguishes it
from the previous app is the automated tracking of the user.
An algorithm, indeed, tracks errors in order to present the
failed attempt items during the same exercise or in another
one. Mondly, in addition, embeds a chatbot that allows
students to practice language within authentic situations. It is
important to notice that users can insert even vocal input
while training with the chatbot. Mondly is a “freemium” app
and, in the free version, users can explore different
resources/units, but just one dialog for lexical domain [18].
CPIAbot, as detailed below, stresses the margin of
innovation in different ways:

It
provides
a
conversational
and
multimodal
interface,

It supports student to access resources or services
with single simple commands, while they are
experiencing
a
learning
scenario
(formal
or
informal),

It offers adaptive feedbacks and different multi-turn
dialogues

It allows teachers to easily assign exercises and to
monitor their students’ interaction with the chatbot.
In brief, the contribution of CPIAbot to the MALL
approach is double. On one side, the conversational interface
promotes interactions in L2 in the whole User Experience, to
access resources and services or to explore multi-turn
dialogues. On the other side, CPIAbot represents a system
that supports hybrid learning environments that actively
engages students and teachers: the former can easily interact
with information useful in the context they’re experiencing
or can explore autonomously automated exercises and the
latter can assign assessment and monitor the students in their
bot usage.
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

It is important to notice that CPIAbot differs from other
systems, like Duolingo and Babbel [19], focused on a
completely informal autonomous learning.
The relation between the chatbot use and the learning
path designed by the teacher is deep, since the teacher’s
mediation in the use of any resource for learning is
fundamental for the low-educated adult learners and, in
general, for the students with low level of competence.
III. A LANGUAGE-FIRST TOOL FOR LANGUAGE
LEARNING
The main innovation of CPIAbot is the language-first
user interface paradigm, also called Conversational UI (CUI)
/Voice UI (VUI) [20], which involves interactions based on
natural
language. This
is
a
completely
different
and
innovative approach, compared to the typical one of mobile
apps on smartphones, where the user navigates a decision
tree through menus, touching buttons on a visual layout (the
usual web GUI). The choice to adopt a CUI/VUI paradigm
derives from two preliminary considerations. On one hand,
with the spread of the conversational paradigm within
everyday systems and devices requires the research on
educational technologies to relate to these interfaces. On the
other hand, while in GUI based language apps the target
language is used on the exit point of interaction, when a
specific exercise starts, within the CUI systems, the language
is the entry point of the interaction with the tool.
Our linguistic-based interface is therefore a challenge on
which we expect important feedback in the experimentation
phase with students.
IV. CPIABOT: FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF
EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES
The adherence of the tool to the characteristics of the
specific context required a design and development effort,
aimed at matching particular requirements:

Accessibility (CPIA students must be able to use
CPIAbot from their own devices)

Ergonomics (a multimodal and multi-level chatbot to
support learning in heterogeneous classes)

Adherence to the teaching approach (interaction in
natural language and possibility to use CPIAbot as a
support for communicative activities)

Hybridization of learning spaces (possibility of
CPIAbot to act as a link between the classroom
lesson and the individual learning of the extra-
school).
Compliance with each of the listed parameters involved
the use of specific applications or the development of ad hoc
software, as none of the (mobile) apps already available was
able to meet the functional specifications required by the
project [21].
The
result,
CPIAbot,
is
a
conversational
server
application on cloud, developed in NodeJs programming
environment, which interfaces to Telegram servers through
the Telegram Bot API [22].
The CPIAbot's software architecture is schematized in
Figure 1.
Figure 1.
Architecture of CPIAbot
The illustrated architecture is the structure on which the
technological
solutions
presented
in
the
following
paragraphs have been implemented.
V. CPIABOT: TECHNOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK
The technological solutions, conceived and developed
for each of the parameters indicated in the previous
paragraph, are illustrated below.
A.
Accessibility: The choice of Telegram instant
messaging app as the chabot channel
In order to facilitate the access to the developed system
for the CPIA’s students, it was decided to develop a chatbot
within the instant messaging app Telegram.
Downstream of an analysis of the best communication
channel for the development of a conversational application,
Telegram was found to have more features suitable to the
conceived
technology with
respect to the other apps
analyzed: Google Assistant voice assistants, Amazon Alexa
(especially through smart-speaker voice interfaces) and
WhatsApp. Therefore, the most suitable platform for the
development of the application turned out to be Telegram for
different reasons.
Costs saving: Telegram app is a free software whose
client-side code is open-source; it does not require the
purchase
of
dedicated
hardware
and
the
Telegram
application can be installed on any personal computer,
already available in the classroom, or on smartphones in the
possession of students. In the case of Amazon or Google
voice
assistants,
instead,
it
is
necessary
to
purchase
expensive hardware devices, with a cost linear with the
number of classes in which to use the devices themselves.
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Low System Requirements: Telegram is a lightweight app
that can also be installed on mobile devices with older
Android/iOS operating systems.
Feasibility: Whatsapp is the most used mobile chat
messaging app in Italy, that is why it would be the preferred
channel for the development of chatbots, but they are here
feasible only through the Whatsapp for Business platform,
now available in private beta. In addition, the APIs of the
business platform allow the exchange of text messages
(SMS-like) but do not allow to manage multimedia content
such as audio, images and video.
B.
Ergonomics: A multimodal and multi-level chatbot for
heterogeneous classes
To face the heterogeneity of the CPIA’s classrooms,
CPIAbot has been conceived and developed as a multimodal
and multi-level chatbot. CPIAbot can be defined as a
multimodal chatbot, as the interface allows users to interact
through different channels. Using multimedia content in the
paratext facilitates the decoding of the written text and
makes the system easy to use, even for low-educated adult
learners.
Three elements characterize the multimodal interface of
CPIAbot:
written
interaction,
oral
interaction,
and
multimedia contents.
Written
interaction:
Telegram
allows
for
written
interaction with the chatbot, otherwise impossible with a
Google and Amazon conversational application; especially
cantered on the use of smart speakers (it is partially possible
even when using assistants via smartphone)
Oral interaction: In CPIAbot the student can interact
either by typing through the keyboard or by speaking,
through a voice message or a video message. The audio
recording is processed by a speech recognition platform,
which converts the user's voice into text. For the speech
recognition task we used the Facebook/WIT.ai API service,
one of the few available free of charge for the Italian
language.
Multimedia contents: The processing of the user request
produces a response to the user which can be textual, vocal
or an integrated multimedia content; for example, an image
(also with subtitles), a video, an audio recording or an
animation.
The answers to the user are translated into speech with a
synthetic voice, thanks to the use of a Text To Speech
platform. The synthetic voice in Italian language used is that
provided by the Google Translate Speech cloud platform.
The multimedia interaction concerns not just contents in
output (to the user), CPIAbot architecture, indeed, is built to
allow users to upload images and video files, besides audio
and text. By example, CPIAbot can process an image
submitted by a learner, trying to understand the content of
the picture and triggering a dialog (future development).
Telegram allows the use of many types of multimedia
contents (audio, images and video), which is not possible
through
Alexa
and
Google
smart
speakers
(Amazon
Echo/Google Home). It would indeed be possible just with
smart display devices (Amazon Echo Show or Google Nest)
but the high cost per device remains an issue.
CPIAbot, on the other hand, can be defined as a multi-
level chatbot, since the outputs of the system, as well as the
channel with which they are transmitted to the user, can be
differentiated according to the level assigned to the user by
your teacher. This is expected to be an important feature in
the integration of CPIAbot within multi-level classrooms,
supporting the personalization of content and activities, with
the aim of reducing the workload of the teacher.
C.
Timing Management: output pauses and input silence
Another peculiar element of CPIAbot, that could support
the
personalization
of
learning
activities
within
heterogeneous classrooms, is the timing management. The
management of timings in the interaction with users is an
element of differentiation of CPIAbot, compared to other
reactive-only chatbots (operating just in pull mode): the
chatbot, for each message issued, can be programmed to
insert pauses (of an arbitrary number of seconds, depending
on the student's learning level) to allow the learner to have
sufficient time to read or listen to the content provided by
the chatbot.
It is also possible to concatenate multiple timeouts in
sequence, engaging the student to continue the conversation
or forcing him to end the dialog.
D.
Adherence to the didactic approach
The adherence between the characteristics of CPIAbot
and
the
communicative
approach,
to
which
teachers'
teaching is oriented, emerges on two levels.
On one hand, in fact, the language-first paradigm of the
chatbot orients the student to interact with the system in the
target language, even using very simple expressions, instead
of continuing the interaction through menu navigation (as
described in the previous paragraph).
On the other hand, CPIAbot's resources allow the
student both to have support for their communicative needs
and to measure themselves in simulated dialogs, pushing
them to exercise their communicative competence in
everyday situations (even if simulated).
That is why CPIAbot provides two types of interactions:
short “user initiative” interactions and dialogs with “bot
initiative” interactions. In the first mode, the student, like
other users, can invoke single function (here defined as user
requests), useful to support both teaching activities and the
use of L2 in daily life, by students. It is the user, therefore,
who guides the conversation. In the second mode, the
student activates a multi-turn dialogue, which proposes a
lexico-grammar or a communicative task. In this case, the
conversation is controlled by the chatbot, which proposes
different conversation turns, prompts and content depending
on the stimuli entered by the user. By virtue of the
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

coexistence of these two human-bot interaction modalities
(reactive and proactive), it is possible to define CPIAbot as
a “mixed initiative” chatbot.
The request message that the user sends to the bot is
processed by a sentence processing procedure (the main
state dispatcher) that matches the natural language sentence,
expressed by the user, with available user requests or
dialogs.
a)
User requests
The application provides primitive functions to support
the
understanding
and
the
production
of
the
Italian
language. These primitive functions are always available to
the student; these are single-turn sequences (where there is
no specific dialogue context, i.e. there is no "conversational
state").
Below, we offer a brief overview of the functions
implemented (all the examples of invocations of functions
are
translated
into
English
to
facilitate
the
reader's
understanding)
Write (Scrivi), displays the written text corresponding to
the speech that the user has sent to the bot with voice
message or video message. The function enables read-write
skills, facilitating sound/sign association. Example:
write supermarket
Read
(Leggi),
activate
the
playback,
through
the
available synthetic voice, of a text written by the user with
the keyboard. This function also enables read-write skills,
facilitating sound/sign association. Example:
read supermarket
Syllable (Sillaba), similar to writing, but breaks down a
word or phrase into its constituent syllables. The function
facilitates the sound/sign association with division into
syllables. Example:
syllable salt
Spell (Compita); scan one-word letter by letter. This
function can be invoked either verbally or in writing and in
the latter case, it is indicated, for each letter, whether it is
written in upper or lower case. Example:
spell tomatoes
Translate (Traduci), allows users to translate from the
Italian language to one of the 104 languages available on
Google Translate or, vice versa, from a foreign language to
the Italian language. The interlanguage translation can be
used in the understanding of terms/phrases in a text, or for
translation from source language to target language to
support oral production. Example:
translate in German good morning
Word (Parola): A simplified glossary was created that
provides static (photos) and animated (gifs and videos)
multimedia material. The lexical database collects the terms
indicated in the Syllabus [23] for the domains "work" and
"purchases" chosen for the bot experimentation phase. The
CPIAbot glossary currently contains about 500 glosses,
inserted in 24 semantic fields (groups). The glossary is a
subset of the total list of glosses that the Syllabus proposes
for the Pre-A1 level (~900 terms) and A1 level (~1000
terms). Each term has an associated data structure, in which
the following attributes are stored: description, usage
examples, multimedia content (an image, or video or
animation), audio recording, grammar notes, category and
group, language level. The attribute "description", in
particular, is co-constructed incrementally by CPIA teachers
through a collection of simplified definitions of glosses
(suitable for Pre-A1 and A1 level learners), provided in
crowd-sourcing mode.
When invoked, the function returns a multimedia output,
and the word insert as parameter of the user request, is
displayed with a picture, a gif or a short video, accompanied
by a synthetic entry describing it together with a sequence
of short sentences.
The glossary can also be queried with semantic filters
with respect to categories and groups of words and/or
grammar rules, thanks to the Give me words user request.
The function has been designed primarily for use by the
teacher in the classroom. Example:
give me six words in category work, singular
b)
Multi-turn Dialogs
Besides,
the
peculiar
feature
of
CPIAbot
is
the
contextual multi-turn dialogues (we call it just dialogs),
which perform lexical and grammar exercises (repetitive
tasks) and real scene simulation dialogues.
Repetitive task dialogs
Listen and repeat - Practice the pronunciation of words,
with repeated exercises. The student listens to a word
extracted randomly from the glossary and reproduced in a
synthetic voice, then has to repeat it. The student can select
words from the entire glossary or from different groups of
words in the glossary, divided by level of pronunciation
difficulty (these levels have been defined in collaboration
with the CPIA teachers).
Read and repeat - Practice the sound/sign association
through repeated exercises. Like the previous exercise, but
instead of listening to the sound of a word, the student must
read an entry from the glossary presented in writing.
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Listen and write - Practice the sound/sign association,
through repeated exercises. The student listens to a word
and then has to write it on the keyboard.
Guess the word - Supports vocabulary acquisition with
image-word association. The learner must guess which word
corresponds to the picture selected randomly by the chatbot.
The exercise can draw on all the words in the glossary or
one of the 24 groups defined in the Syllabus.
Simulated dialogs
The
dialogs
consider
the
authenticity
of
the
communicative situations proposed, also in reference to the
social
practices
of
the
students.
The
conversations,
therefore, are based on the daily life of the learners in Italy
and calibrated to their communicative needs. The dialog
“Let's shop” is an example: in this dialog, the learner is
called to assist a fictitious character in choosing the place
where to buy food. After a short contextualization, in which
the fictitious character illustrates the task (shopping) to the
user, the chatbot proposes some short questions about the
place
where
the
student
prefers
to
accompany
the
protagonist to buy what he needs. At the end of the
dialogue, the chatbot asks the user to identify, between two
images, the one representing the chosen place.
All the structures of CPIAbot's dialogs have elements in
common. The dialog flow is constructed to provide adaptive
feedback
to
the
student,
allowing
them
to
access
resources/contents that support the interaction if the user's
input does not reach a predetermined level of correctness or
does not contain the necessary information to proceed with
the conversation.
The teacher, therefore, can integrate the dialogs with the
chatbot within the design of the learning unit, aimed at
pursuing the objectives identified.
Since all of the dialog types described require the ability
of the conversational system to maintain the context in the
different turns of the conversation, to realize such multi-turn
task-completion dialogs, a special dialog manager, called
NaifJs, has been developed in ITD-CNR.
c)
A dialog manager for task-completion dialogs
NaifJs is a dialog manager that implements dialogue
management with a Finite State Machine (FSM), released as
open source (Git: https://github.com/solyarisoftware/naifjs),
where each input state is a node of "understanding" and
local processing of input sequence patterns, and where each
output state is a node of content production with some
backend elaboration and messaging to user. Each dialog is
activated programmatically with the setting of an initial
state that performs some kind of logic (L, in Figure 2),
presents a message to the user and can store contextual
memory variables (M). The output message to the user can
be a textual description of a scene, a voice message, an
image or audio/video content, followed by a question
(prompt) to the student.
NaifJS supply to in JavaScript developers a simple DSL
(Domain Specific Language) that allows to program stateful
dialogs using simple function statements, as shown in
Figure 2, to manage dialog flow life-cycle (start, end), to
change state (goOut, goIn), to match an input pattern
(match), to output contents (say,
tts), to manage
timeouts callbacks, to manage dialog memory (setvar,
getvar).
In the dialog flow, the output state typically activates a
subsequent state (input state), in which the dialog manager
analyzes the user's response (a sentence in Italian language)
and performs a contextual interpretation based on a Pattern-
Matching (PM). The dialog manager is agnostic with respect
to the Natural Language Understanding (NLU) mechanism
and for simplicity and efficiency; the parsing has been
implemented with the use of regular expressions.
In the case of a positive pattern match, the input
processing node performs some processing and a response is
given to the user (textual, with synthetic voice or other
multimedia audio/video content).
The current state can evolve into a new state or might
not change (loopback), based on a dialog flow programmed
by the designer. The dialog flow finally ends, according to
the application logic and the dialog ends.
Figure 2.
Naifjs dialog manager. Dialog with a single input state (on the
left). 2-states dialog (on the right).
To complete a specific task (as a language exercise), the
multi-turn conversation is implemented as a network of
micro-dialogues,
called
dialog
units
(Figure
3),
each
containing a graph of nodes that allow conversation flows in
a specific domain. These dialog units are concatenated
modules, which can receive input parameters. Each dialog
unit has a short-term memory: temporary variables with
local visibility to the unit itself.
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Figure 3.
Multi-state (5 states) and multi-unit (2 units) dialog example
with Naifjs dialog manager.
E.
Hybridization of the learning environment
The hybridization of the learning environment of Italian
L2 is a process that intersects two dimensions. On the one
hand, the hybridization of learning is guided by the teacher,
within the classes, for instance on the aspects of L2 that
students may have encountered incidentally in the extra-
school time (words, expressions, syntactic constructions,
etc.) [24]. On the other hand, in an inverse process, the
teacher attempts to extend the didactic action beyond the
lesson hours, proposing to the students structured activities
to be carried out autonomously, even at lower levels [25]. In
this, CPIAbot can act as a mediator able to facilitate remote
communication between the teacher and his students or
allowing the teacher's monitoring of his students' interaction
with the system.
The prerequisite that enables such processes is the User
Unique
Identification
(UUID).
In
Telegram,
in
fact,
registered users can be easily and uniquely identified. This
allows, through profiling mechanisms, to customize the
experience
for
each
student,
as
well
as
enable
the
monitoring of interactions and their analysis. The univocal
identification of the speaker is instead a problem in
interactions with Google and Amazon devices, with which
there is, to date, no mature technology available to identify
the voice print of the individual speaker in front of the smart
speaker, positioned for example in the classroom, where the
number of students can be high and may vary over time.
In CPIAbot, therefore, the UUID potentialities are
exploited to allow the creation of different account types:
(1) student accounts, to be used by students inside and
outside the classroom; (2) teacher accounts, to be used by
teachers outside the classroom; (3) classroom accounts, to
be used in the classroom by a teacher and his students. Each
one of these account type can perform peculiar actions in
the system:
Students’ usage: the conversational agent is designed for
personal use inside and outside the classroom with access
via smartphone.
Teachers’ usage: the cloud-based database and logging
system allow the bot to keep information about student
activities both outside the classroom and within the class
group. For in-classroom activities, the conversational agent
can act as a teacher's assistant in the classroom during
lessons. Through the class account (each classroom has his
unique account), the teacher can use all the features of the
bot on the classroom personal computer, often connected to
an Interactive Whiteboard (IWB), to propose exercises and
games to be done in groups or as individual exercises to be
done later "at home".
With the CPIAbot push mode (see below), teachers
can send notifications messages and messages containing
activable
exercises
to
single
students
and/or
virtual
classrooms.
A teacher, interacting with CPIAbot through simple
commands, can create virtual classrooms naming these with
a personal chosen classname (e.g. 3C) and the teacher can
group students in the specified classroom with simple
command messages to the agent.
Each student part of (virtual) classroom 3C just has to
click buttons inside the received message to activate the
corresponding dialogs.
a) Report
Furthermore, teachers can remotely monitor students’
chatbot usage and obtain information on the exercises done
by an individual learner, or statistical information on the
progress of the specified class, just using simple commands
in natural language. Teachers can also get a report
specifying a period of days/months from now. Example:
report for the last week activities of the classroom 3c; report
for the last 2 days’ interactions of the student Giorgio
Robino.
classroom 3C report 1 week
student Giorgio Robino report 2 days
b) Pull and push messaging
CPIAbot mainly performs a reactive interaction (pull
mode): the chatbot is always listening to a user request,
which is typed on the keyboard of the device, smartphone,
tablet or personal computer. The programmer, for example
in relation to the student’s language level, processes by the
conversational agent, which responds immediately, or at a
configurable time, to the user’s request in a similar way to a
man-to-man conversation.
A proactive interaction (push mode) is also developed in
CPIAbot, thanks to a Telegram feature (currently not
available on Google and Amazon smart speakers) which
contacts the user in a deferred time (sending a notification
after the end of a dialogue session). In the push mode, the
chatbot can send unsolicited notifications or start new
conversations with the student (triggered by a backend logic
or human-in-the loop teachers messaging). In this scenario,
the student receives notifications on his or her device, in
which the agent proposes diverse activities to the student,
such as an exercise, a topic conversation, aimed at achieving
one of the training objectives.
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Among other uses, push activable messages, along with
the report function, helped teachers to fully-remotely
interact with students during the COVID lockdown period,
caused by COVID pandemic, allowing them to propose and
monitor distance activities even with the lower educated
students.
VI. TECHNICAL ISSUES, USER INTERFACE (UI) AND USER
EXPERIENCE (UX) OPEN POINTS
The implementation of the functions and dialogues
designed traveled in parallel with the preliminary tests
within PreA1-A1 level courses of the two CPIA involved.
These preliminary tests revealed critical points concerning
the use of the chatbot by learners with low levels of
competence in L2.
A. Speech recognition
The
Automatic
Speech
Recognition
(ASR)
Facebook/WIT.ai technology platform, integrated via cloud
API into CPIAbot, has an excellent level of understanding
of speech input from Italian-speaking beta-testers. In tests
carried out so far with a set of 20 beta-testers, adults
speaking Italian fluently, the Single Word Error Rate
(SWER) was less than 7%. Testing with foreign learners,
the speech recognition system performances degrade a bit,
revealing a higher WER in case of incorrect pronunciation.
Another general open point in speech recognition is
syllables recognition. The used ASR is not able to recognize
single syllables, part of Italian language dictionary. This is a
common issue all available ASR in the market have.
Following this limitation, CPIAbot current version is not
able to correct learner syllables pronunciation.
B. Push to talk and push to listen buttons
The voice interaction using the Telegram app is enabled
by a push-to-talk: the student has to press a recording button
of the message to be sent, at the same time he has to speak
keeping the button pressed and releasing it until you speak,
ending the message. Similarly, to hear the voice response of
the bot, the user must press a button to activate the playback
of the bot response (push-to-listen). In comparison to a
smart speaker wake-word / continuous mode UX usual by
example with Google Home smart speakers (“Hey google,
what’s time is it?”), the push-to-talk / push-to-listen
interaction modality is a bit unnatural and is a friction
element with poorly literate (computer literate) learners.
This
is
a
telegram
UI
limit,
not
a
CPIAbot
limit,
nevertheless this kind of interaction requiring the user to
explicitly press a button to talk and listen, is interesting
from a linguistic/educational perspective because it forces
the learner to be very focused on the voice interaction
sequences, when chatting with the virtual assistant.
C. Language-first for lower-educated adults
After a first experimentation without any button, we
introduced a disambiguation menu to simplify usage. Users
can now interact with the bot just speaking or writing any
word or any sentence; the bot reply with a short list of
options, suggesting buttons that activate related contextual
user request, as write, read, translate, as shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4.
Examples of disambiguation menues
The final UI was successful in teachers and students’
feedback, achieving a versatile and adaptable interaction,
that allows a full natural language interaction for advanced
users (with language level >= A1) and a simplified
experience for PreA1 students (with buttons suggestions).
VII. TEACHERS FEEDBACK
The experimentation of CPIAbot within the PreA1-A1
courses of two Genoese CPIAs was planned for the spring
of 2020 when, due to the COVID lock-down, all Italian
educational institutions suspended their lessons. It should be
noted that the distance teaching carried out by the teachers
during the lock-down was an emergency solution. The
teachers, therefore, sought operational solutions to meet
sudden and changing needs of the context, requiring a
period of adjustment to build a real design of the teaching
actions. In this framework, CPIAbot was immediately used
for the possibility of sending
group
assessments, or
customized for the individual student, which can be
activated without having to navigate complex learning
environments and is usable from their mobile devices. In a
mirror-like manner, teachers used the monitoring functions
integrated in the chatbot to monitor student activities. At the
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

end of the academic year, unstructured interviews were
carried out with six teachers who continued to use the
chatbot even during the COVID lock-down.
The final question of the interview allowed teachers to
give free feedback on CPIAbot. The analysis of the answers
showed that, in general terms, teachers consider the chatbot
a useful tool for teaching Italian as a foreign language, while
highlighting different aspects. Among the elements emerged
in the teacher’s answers,
it is possible to
find
the
representation of CPIAbot as a good tool for teaching
vocabulary, thanks to the multimedia contents. Another
element that emerged is the role of stimulus for the students,
while another teacher underlined the flexibility and the
portability of the tool. This came together with the grade of
detail of the report about the students’ activities, available
within the system. Finally, another important element,
elicited by different teachers was the importance of a
preliminary phase where the teachers mediate the students’
use of the system during classroom activities.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS
Learning Italian is one of the key steps for the integration
of adult migrants arriving in or temporarily transiting
through our country. Among the institutional responses to
this specific linguistic need are the CPIA, which offers L2
courses aimed at achieving different levels of competence.
To meet the needs of the CPIA context, CPIAbot, a
conversational educational technology, has been conceived
and ad hoc solutions have been developed, in order to tailor
the characteristics of the system on the users’ ones.
Accessibility to the system by students, for instance, is
facilitated by the ecosystem in which we chose to develop
the chatbot, i.e. telegram, an open source instant messaging
app,
free
of
charge
and
not
requiring
high
system
requirements to be installed on mobile devices.
The attention to the heterogeneity of the classes has been
translated into the creation of a multi-modal and multi-level
chatbot,
to
allow
students
with
different
degrees
of
competence (and literacy) to interact with technology. The
UX, in fact, includes written and oral human-bot interaction,
occasionally supported by multimedia resources, and the
multi-turns dialogs are tailored to the linguistic competence
of the student.
The adherence to the communicative approach, adopted
by teachers and aligned with the CEFR guidelines, is
implemented in the chatbot on two levels. Firstly, a
conversational “language-first” technology, such as CPIAbot
pushes the student to interact in natural language with the
whole system. Secondly, the content and the activities
proposed by the software are oriented to the communicative
needs of the adult immigrant.
Finally, CPIAbot embeds features that support the
hybridization of the learning spaces, because it bridges the
formal and non-formal dimensions of learning. In particular,
CPIAbot enables the teachers to set up, manage and monitor
activities that consider the autonomous learning of the
students, thanks to the UUID system and to the consequent
account type differentiation (Teacher, Student, Class). This
element played an important role in the (not expected) usage
of CPIAbot during the COVID-lockdown period, when
teachers could interact and monitor their students thanks to
the features embedded in CPIAbot.
CPIAbot, therefore, is a language learning technology
that tries to merge the advantage of the mobile/multi-devices
oriented systems with the conversational approach. The
former represents a solution that supports the expansion of a
personalized learning path outside the classroom, the latter
represents an interface that promotes the use of the target
language as a mean to interact with the system and not only
as the object of a specific exercise.
In conclusion, waiting for the implementation of the
experimental phase of the project, it is possible to say that
the developed technology, CPIAbot, contains within itself
the prerogatives of a tool usable within the heterogeneous
classrooms
attended
by
adult
students
and
could
be
integrated with a communicative oriented didactic, thanks to
its peculiar architecture and interface.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Since the CPIAbot chatbot was developed within a
project of the Institute for Educational Technologies, in
collaboration with the teachers of the Centro-Levante and
Centro-Ponente CPIAs, the authors would like to thank the
people who are contributing: G. Trentin (Project Manager),
L.
Bernava
(ITD
Technician/CPIAbot
contributor),
E.
Spadaccini, P. Cataldo, G. Rocchi, C. Zappalà, E. Simeoli,
A. Gavino, G. Saitto, C. Lazagna, M. Castello, F. Pironi, F.
Amato (teachers).
REFERENCES
[1]
ISTAT, “Vita e percorsi di integrazione degli immigrati in
Italia.” (Life and integration paths of immigrants in Italy.)
2019
[Online]
Available
from:
https://www.istat.it/it/archivio/230556
Retreived:
October
2020.
[2]
M. Catarci, M. Fiorucci, and M. Trulli, “L’ABC della
cittadinanza.”( The ABC of citizenship.) Milano, IT: Franco
Angeli, 2014.
[3]
F.
Martini
and
M.
Bartolini,
“La
Liguria
duale
dell’accoglienza.”( The dual Liguria of hospitality.) Genova,
IT: Genova University Press, 2020.
[4]
MIUR, “10 passi verso i CPIA.”( 10 steps towards the CPIA.)
[Online]
Available
from:
https://www.istruzione.lombardia.gov.it/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/miur-1881-9dic2013-all-ocr.pdf
Retreived: October 2020.
[5]
A. Borri and G. Masiero, “IDEA: interazioni dialogiche e
affini. una proposta di didattica ludica in classi eterogenee di
adulti.”( IDEA: dialogical and related interactions. a proposal
of playful didactics in heterogeneous classes of adults.)
Italiano LinguaDue, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 506-523, 2018.
[6]
P. Nitti, “Un’indagine sui corsi di lingua seconda erogati dai
centri di accoglienza in Piemonte.” (A survey of the second
language
courses
provided.)
Educazione
Linguistica.
Language Education, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 413-438, 2018.
[7]
G. Duman, G. Orhon, and N. Gedik, “Research trends in
mobile assisted language learning from 2000 to 2012.”
ReCALL, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 197-216, 2014.
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[8]
A. Kukulska-Hulme, “Mobile Language Learning Innovation
Inspired by Migrants” Journal of Learning for Development-
JL4D, vol. 6, pp. 116-129, 2019.
[9]
A. Kukulska-Hulme, J. Traxler, and J. Pettit, "Designed and
user-generated activity in the mobile age" Journal of Learning
Design, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 52-65, 2007.
[10] A. Kukulska-Hulme, “Mobile Language Learning Innovation
Inspired by Migrants”. Journal of Learning for Development-
JL4D, vol. 6, no 2, pp. 116-129, 2019.
[11] UNESCO, UNESCO Policy guidelines for mobile learning.
[Online]
Available
from:
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000219641.
Retreived October 2020.
[12] Presente
App
[Online]
Available
from:
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=presente.edizion
ilalinea.it&hl=it. Retreived November 2020.
[13] S. Pasta “Hybridising media education and social pedagogy:
the (missed) opportunity in educational intervention with
refugees in the ‘Italian reception system’ “ Research on
Education and Media, vol 11, no. 12, pp. 38-44, 2019.
[14] Fare
Parole
App
[Online]
Available
from:
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=it.ervet.fareparo
le1&hl=it. Retreived November 2020.
[15] Q-CPIapp
App
[Online]
Available
from:
http://www.cpialodi.edu.it/wordpress3/percorso-alpha-prea1/
Retreived November 2020.
[16] P. Seedhouse, P. Heslop, A. Kharrufa, S. Ren, and T. Nguyen,
“The Linguacuisine Project: A Cooking-Based Language
Learning Application”. The EuroCALL Review, vol. 27, no.
2, pp. 75-97, 2019.
[17] G. Fulantelli, V. Pipitone, D. Taibi, G. Todaro, M. Arrigo,
and D. La Guardia, “Le Tecnologie Digitali per Rispondere ai
Bisogni
Formativi
dei
Migranti
Forzati.”(
Digital
Technologies for Responding to the Training Needs of Forced
Migrants.) In Didamatica 2018. AICA-Associazione Italiana
per l'Informatica ed il Calcolo Automatico, pp. 313-322,
2018.
[18] L. Fryer, D. Coniam, R. Carpenter, and D. Lăpușneanu, “Bots 
for Language Learning Now: Current and Future Directions.”
Language, Learning and Technology, vol 24, pp. 8-22, 2020.
[19] J.P. Bajorek, “L2 Pronunciation in CALL: The Unrealized
Potential of Rosetta Stone, Duolingo, Babbel, and Mango
Languages”. Issues and Trends in Educational Technology,
vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 60-87, 2017.
[20] R. Moore and R. Arar, “Conversational UX Design: A
Practitioner's Guide to the Natural Conversation Framework.”
New York, NY: ACM, 2019. doi: 10.1145/3304087. 2019.
[21] F. Ravicchio, G. Robino, G. Trentin and L. Bernava,
“CPIAbot: un chatbot nell’insegnamento dell’Italiano L2 per
stranieri.”( CPIAbot: a chatbot in teaching Italian L2 for
foreigners.) In G. Adorni e F. Koceva (a cura di), Atti di
Convegno Didamatica 2019, BYOD, realtà aumentata e
virtuale: opportunità o minaccia per la formazione? pp.77-86.
Milano, IT: Edizioni AICA. 2019.
[22] F. Ravicchio, G. Robino, S. Torsani, “A conversational
assistant to support immigrants’ learning of Italian as l2:
CPIAbot”.
In
press.
[Online]
Available
from:
https://ijet.itd.cnr.it/article/view/1142.
Retreived:
October
2020.
[23] A. Borri, F. Minuz, L. Rocca, and C. Sola, “Italiano L2 in
contesti migratori. Sillabo e descrittori dall’alfabetizzazione
all’A1.”( Italian L2 in migration contexts. Syllabus and
descriptors from literacy to A1.) Torino, IT: Loecher. 2014.
[24] T. Magnaterra and M. Pentucci, “Le tecnologie e la didattica
dell’Italiano.”( The technologies and teaching of Italian.) In
“Tecnologie per l’educazione” a cura di P. C. Rivoltella and
P. G Rossi. Pp. 252 –262, 2019.
[25] C. Lai, “Autonomous language learning with technology:
Beyond the classroom.” Londra, UK: Bloomsbury Publishing,
2001.
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

