Blockchain Applications in Education: A Case Study in Lifelong Learning 
Alexander Mikroyannidis 
Knowledge Media Institute 
The Open University 
Milton Keynes, United Kingdom 
e-mail: Alexander.Mikroyannidis@open.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a pilot case study of the 
QualiChain project, aiming at supporting lifelong learning 
through the combined use of Smart Badges and personalised 
recommendations. The pilot case study uses Blockchain 
technology as a means to decentralise lifelong learning and 
provide lifelong learners with transparent and immutable 
educational accreditation. At the same time, lifelong learners 
are provided with personalised recommendations that help 
them reach their personal and professional learning goals. 
Keywords-lifelong learning; blockchain; decentralisation; 
smart badge; personalised recommendation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Education today is still controlled mostly by educational 
institutions, which offer quality, credibility, governance, and 
administrative functions. This model is not flexible enough 
and poses difficulties in recognising the achievements of a 
lifelong learner in informal and non-formal types of 
education. As a result, a lifelong learner’s transition from 
formal to informal education and vice versa can be 
hindered, as the achievements acquired in one type of 
education are not easily transferable to another [1][2]. 
Generally, lifelong learners have limited control and 
ownership over their learning process and the data 
associated with their learning.  
This indicates the need for a decentralised model across 
all types of education, offering learners a framework for 
fully controlling how they are learning, how they acquire 
qualifications and how they share their qualifications and 
other learning data with third parties, such as educational 
institutions or employers [3][4]. In this paper, we investigate 
how Blockchain technologies can help realise this vision via 
a pilot case study for offering support to lifelong learners in 
various stages of their learning journeys and of their career 
trajectories. 
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. In 
Section 2, we introduce the overall framework of the 
QualiChain project. We then proceed in Section 3 to present 
the pilot case study for supporting lifelong learning, its 
scope, the stakeholders involved, the main scenario, as well 
as the outcomes of a series of consultation workshops about 
this pilot. Finally, in Section 4 we conclude the paper and 
outline the next steps of this work. 
II. 
THE QUALICHAIN PROJECT 
The emergence of the Blockchain promises to 
revolutionise not only the financial world, but also 
education in various ways. Blockchain technology offers a 
decentralised peer-to-peer infrastructure, where privacy, 
secure archiving, consensual ownership, transparency, 
accountability, identity management and trust are built-in, 
both at the software and infrastructure levels. This 
technology offers opportunities to thoroughly rethink how 
we find educational content and tutoring services online, 
how we register and pay for them, as well as how we get 
accredited for what we have learned and how this 
accreditation affects our career trajectory. 
The QualiChain research and innovation project focuses 
on the assessment of the technical, political, socio-
economic, legal and cultural impact of decentralisation 
solutions on education. As shown in Figure 1, QualiChain is 
targeting four key areas for exploring the impact of 
decentralisation: (i) lifelong learning; (ii) smart curriculum 
design; (iii) staffing the public sector; (iv) providing HR 
consultancy and competency management services. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The key areas targeted by the QualiChain project. 
QualiChain investigates the creation, piloting and 
evaluation of decentralisation solutions for storing, sharing 
and verifying education and employment qualifications and 
focuses on the assessment of the potential of Blockchain 
technology, algorithmic techniques and computational 
intelligence for disrupting the domain of public education, 
as well as its interfaces with private education, the labour 
market, public sector administrative procedures and the 
wider socio-economic developments. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

III. 
SUPPORTING LIFELONG LEARNING 
As outlined in the previous section, lifelong learning is a 
key area targeted by the QualiChain project. We are, 
therefore, aiming to provide support to lifelong learners in 
various stages of their learning journeys and of their career 
trajectories. In the context of this pilot case study, we 
investigate how Blockchain technologies can support 
lifelong learners in their learning journey and in advancing 
their career. Figure 2 illustrates the main goals of this pilot, 
which are the following: 
• 
Awarding lifelong learners with transparent and 
immutable educational accreditation. 
• 
Offering 
lifelong 
learners 
personalised 
recommendations 
based 
on 
their 
learning 
achievements. 
• 
Supporting lifelong learners in reaching their personal 
and professional learning goals. 
The next sections describe the scope, stakeholders and 
main scenario of this pilot, as well as the outcomes of a 
series of consultation workshops about this pilot. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The overall goals of the pilot on supporting lifelong learning. 
A. Scope 
The scope of this pilot case study spans across the 
following: 
• 
We are targeting both formal and informal learning. 
While formal learning typically happens inside the 
classroom, for example in a traditional university 
lecture, informal learning happens outside of the 
classroom, for example by studying free online courses. 
• 
We are targeting both academic degrees and other 
forms of educational accreditation. For example, open 
badges have emerged as a new form of certifying that 
someone has acquired certain skills and has gained 
specific knowledge upon fulfilling certain criteria, e.g. 
by completing an online course. 
• 
We are supporting the learning journey and career 
trajectory of learners. We are aiming to support the 
whole learning journey of learners by offering them 
recommendations on what to study next. We are also 
offering recommendations about their next career steps, 
based on the educational credentials they have acquired.  
B. Stakeholders  
The two main categories of stakeholders involved in this 
pilot are the following: 
Lifelong learners. The concept of “lifelong learning” is 
based on the fact that learning is not confined to childhood or 
the classroom, but can take place throughout life and in a 
range of situations. Lifelong learners pursue learning 
throughout their lifetime, for either personal or professional 
reasons. They may study to develop new skills that they need 
in their professional life, for example to advance their career 
by finding a new job or by being promoted in their current 
job. They may also study to acquire skills and knowledge for 
personal reasons, for example as a hobby of theirs. Lifelong 
learners may engage in either formal or informal education, 
or both, depending on their current learning goals and 
personal or professional circumstances. 
Lifelong learners face various challenges associated with 
the recognition of their learning achievements, for example 
when transitioning from formal to informal education or vice 
versa. In this pilot, we seek to support them in various ways, 
for example by verifying their learning achievements on the 
Blockchain, 
or 
by 
offering 
them 
personalised 
recommendations about what to study next or which job 
position might be suitable for them. In this way, we aim to 
help lifelong learners reach their personal or professional 
learning goals. 
Educational institutions. These are institutions that 
provide education or training services, either paid ones or 
free. The offerings of educational institutions can vary from 
conventional offline degrees to online free or paid courses, 
such as Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) or Open 
Educational Resources (OERs) [5]. 
In the context of this pilot, we seek to make the awarding 
of accreditation by educational institutions transparent and 
immutable with the use of Smart Badges [6]. Smart Badges 
are dynamic records of accreditation that follow the same 
principles as Open Badges [7] and offer the same benefits in 
recording accreditation. However, Smart Badges are 
immutable and easily verifiable as they are stored on the 
Blockchain. The other novelty of Smart Badges lies in their 
dynamic features. For example, apart from just recording a 
learning achievement, a Smart Badge can also offer job or 
course recommendations, as described in the next section. 
C. Scenario 
In this section, we present the interactions between 
stakeholders in the context of the main scenario of this pilot, 
as illustrated in Figure 3. Let us consider a lifelong learner, 
Michelle, who is looking to expand her knowledge and skills 
on data science, and has thus enrolled in a number of courses 
offered online, including MOOCs and OERs. Each time she 
completes a course, she is awarded a Smart Badge by the 
educational institution that offers the course. This Smart 
Badge includes data about the skills that Michelle has 
acquired upon completion of the course. Each Smart Badge 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Michelle earns is verified and stored on the Blockchain as 
part of her personal ePortfolio.  
After studying for several months, Michelle has mastered 
some basic data science skills, including various computer 
science topics such as databases. Based on these skills, the 
Smart Badges generate recommendations about jobs that 
may be suitable for Michelle. Michelle receives personalised 
recommendations about jobs that fully match her skills, as 
well as about jobs that match her skills partially. Michelle 
may also further personalise these recommendations and 
filter them according to her specific criteria, such as the 
location of the job, salary, employer, etc. 
Michelle is interested in one of the jobs that matches her 
skills partially. She then receives recommendations about 
courses that will give her the additional skills required for 
this job. Michelle enrols for these courses, in order to acquire 
the needed skills. When she has acquired them, she proceeds 
to apply for her desired job and allows the prospect employer 
to access the relevant Smart Badges from her ePortfolio. By 
using this Blockchain-based infrastructure to support her in 
her studies, Michelle has adopted a more efficient and 
targeted approach to learning, towards achieving her desired 
career trajectory. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Stakeholder interactions in the main scenario of the lifelong 
learning pilot. 
Our early work on implementing this scenario can be 
found in [6]. This implementation has been based on the use 
of Smart Contracts for the Ethereum Blockchain platform 
[8]. Smart Contracts are defined as “automatable and 
enforceable agreements” [9] and they constitute one of the 
main features of current Blockchain platforms, including 
Ethereum. In order to collect job market data, we are 
harvesting datasets of current job offers and their associated 
skills from a job aggregator that has been developed by the 
European Data Science Academy (EDSA) project [10]. 
These datasets are placed in Smart Contracts on the 
Ethereum Blockchain and are then used for matching jobs 
with a learner’s badge-based skills. In this way, the awarded 
badges are smart, in the sense that they are being used to 
offer recommendations to learners. 
D. Consultation workshops 
In order to further develop our pilot case study and to 
better understand the current needs of our stakeholders, we 
have performed a series of consultation workshops (Figure 
4). These workshops have targeted different audiences in the 
context of renowned international conferences on open 
education and educational technology. So far, the workshop 
series has been delivered in the context of the following 
events: 
• 
The EATEL Summer School on Technology Enhanced 
Learning (JTELSS 2019), 3-7 June 2019, Bari, Italy.  
• 
The Association for Learning Technology Conference 
(ALTC 2019), 3-5 September 2019, Edinburgh, UK. 
• 
The Online, Open and Flexible Higher Education 
Conference (OOFHEC2019), 16-18 October 2019, 
Madrid, Spain.  
• 
The Open Education Global Conference (OE Global 
2019), 26-28 November 2019, Milan, Italy.  
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Snapshots from the consultation workshop series. 
Participants in these workshops have been early and late 
career researchers, lecturers, technologists and professionals 
from the educational sector. During the workshops, 
participants were introduced to the overall framework of the 
QualiChain project, as well as the scenarios that apply 
Blockchain technologies in education. In particular, 
participants explored the ways that ePortfolios, accreditation, 
tutoring, as well as other aspects of teaching and learning can 
evolve within a decentralised ecosystem based on the 
Blockchain. 
E. Findings 
In order to document requirements for the further 
development of our pilot case study, we asked participants of 
Lifelong Learner
Educational Institution
Smart Badge
Course recommendation
Job recommendation
Studies
Receives
Receives
Receives
Offers
Awards
Personal ePortfolio
Online course
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

our consultation workshops to produce learning scenarios 
that make use of Blockchain technologies in the context of 
lifelong learning. More specifically, participants were asked 
to work in small groups in order to brainstorm the following 
aspects of learning scenarios: 
• 
Persona(s): Who are the typical users in this scenario 
and what do they wish to accomplish? 
• 
Requirements: Documented in the following format: As 
Persona "X", I want to do "Y", so that I achieve "Z". 
• 
Use of Blockchain: How can the Blockchain be used in 
this scenario? 
• 
Related 
resources: 
Any 
links/publications/other 
resources that are relevant to this scenario. 
These group brainstorming activities were followed by 
plenary discussion sessions, where participants presented and 
discussed their scenarios. Figure 5 summarises the main 
findings from the group activities and discussion sessions. 
These findings are presented in the form of requirements 
derived from the learning scenarios produced by participants 
of the workshops, as well as from the main takeaway points 
of the discussion sessions.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Requirements collected from the participants of the consultation 
workshop series. 
First of all, participants pointed out the need for 
ePortfolios to aggregate both formal and informal 
qualifications that will be easily validated by employers and 
educational institutions. This will help streamline the 
admission processes in universities and the hiring processes 
by employers, as well as eliminate falsified qualifications.  
Participants also highlighted the need for learners to be 
guided on how to build lifelong learning pathways in order 
to achieve their learning goals. These learning goals can be 
aligned with job market needs for improving the learner’s 
employability, or they can be associated with the learner’s 
personal progression ambitions. Acquiring micro-credentials 
can help lifelong learners achieve these goals by studying 
short online courses and earning professional or academic 
credentials [11][12]. Micro-credentials are rapidly emerging 
and gaining popularity among lifelong learners, as they 
address their needs for granular certified learning. Renowned 
educational institutions from around the world are currently 
offering a continuously increasing range of micro-accredited 
courses, thus providing opportunities to pursue further study 
in a variety of specialised fields [13]-[16]. 
Career counselling was also featured in the learning 
scenarios and discussions of participants of the workshops. It 
was pointed out that job seekers are in need of acquiring a 
comprehensive overview of the job market and the latest 
market trends, so that they can make informed decisions 
about the next steps in their careers.  
Finally, data ownership and privacy requirements were 
deemed quite important by participants of the workshops. It 
was highlighted that learners and job seekers should own 
their digital identity and the data in their ePortfolio. 
Additionally, they should be able to control who accesses 
their identity and their ePortfolio, which data are accessed 
and for how long.   
These requirements largely validate the scope of the 
QualiChain lifelong learning pilot, while helping us further 
expand it. In particular, we will be addressing the validation 
of both formal and informal qualifications in the form of 
Smart Badges. We will also be facilitating the building of 
lifelong 
learning 
pathways 
via 
personalised 
course 
recommendations, which will help learners choose their next 
online or offline course, towards achieving their learning 
goals. 
Additionally, 
the 
personalised 
course 
recommendations will include micro-accredited courses, in 
order to facilitate the acquisition of micro-credentials by 
lifelong learners. 
With regards to the career counselling requirement, 
personalised job recommendations will provide job seekers 
with advice on their next career steps. We are also 
contemplating offering detailed overviews of the job market 
and its latest trends via interactive dashboards, based on the 
ones we have developed in the context of the EDSA project 
[10].  
We will be extending our pilot case study to address data 
ownership 
and 
privacy 
requirements 
by 
employing 
decentralisation solutions, such as the Solid platform [17] 
and the FAIR TRADE framework [18]. Solid is a 
decentralised platform for social web applications, where the 
data of users is managed independently of the applications 
that create and consume this data. This approach enables 
users to choose where their data resides and who is allowed 
to access it. The FAIR TRADE framework builds on top of 
the Solid approach by defining a set of dimensions relevant 
to data management in decentralised contexts. The 
framework can therefore be used for describing and 
evaluating the management of decentralised data solutions, 
as well as for the development of best practices in the 
developing field of decentralised data management. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Finally, we will be looking into ways of implementing 
Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI) for learners and jobs seekers. 
SSI is a technology that adds a layer of trust to digital 
interactions, thus allowing individuals to own and manage 
their digital identity [19]. There are several implementations 
of SSI in the literature, largely based on the use of 
Blockchain technology [20]-[22]. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND NEXT STEPS 
This paper has presented a pilot case study for supporting 
lifelong learning via Smart Badges and personalised 
recommendations. The pilot case study employs Blockchain 
technology for providing lifelong learners with transparent 
and immutable educational accreditation. It also uses 
personalised recommendations for helping lifelong learners 
reach their personal and professional learning goals. This 
pilot is part of the QualiChain initiative for decentralising 
education and employment qualifications using Blockchain 
technologies.  
Engaging the communities of stakeholders has provided 
us with a valuable insight into the lifelong learning 
challenges they face and their proposed solutions. This 
insight will help us further shape the requirements and the 
implementation of our pilot. We will continue consulting 
with the communities of stakeholders throughout the 
different implementation phases of our pilot, so as to better 
understand and address their needs.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has received funding from the European 
Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme 
under grant agreement No 822404 (QualiChain). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Harris and C. Wihak, "To what extent do discipline, 
knowledge domain and curriculum affect the feasibility of 
the Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) in higher 
education?," International Journal of Lifelong Education, pp. 
1-17, 2017. 
[2] 
B.-Å. Lundvall and P. Rasmussen, "Challenges for adult skill 
formation in the globalising learning economy–a European 
perspective," International Journal of Lifelong Education, 
vol. 35, pp. 448-464, 2016. 
[3] 
A. 
Mikroyannidis, 
A. 
Third, 
and 
J. 
Domingue, 
"Decentralising 
online 
education 
using 
blockchain 
technology," in Proc. The Online, Open and Flexible Higher 
Education Conference: Blended and online education within 
European university networks, Madrid, Spain, 2019. 
[4] 
A. Mikroyannidis, J. Domingue, M. Bachler, and K. Quick, 
"A Learner-Centred Approach for Lifelong Learning 
Powered by the Blockchain," in Proc. EdMedia: World 
Conference on Educational Media and Technology, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2018, pp. 1403-1408. 
[5] 
D. E. Atkins, J. S. Brown, and A. L. Hammond, "A Review 
of the Open Educational Resources (OER) Movement: 
Achievements, Challenges, and New Opportunities," The 
William and Flora Hewlett Foundation 2007. 
[6] 
A. Mikroyannidis, J. Domingue, M. Bachler, and K. Quick, 
"Smart blockchain badges for data science education," in 
Proc. 2018 IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE), 
2018, pp. 1-5. 
[7] 
Mozilla Foundation, Peer 2 Peer University, and The 
MacArthur Foundation, "Open Badges for Lifelong 
Learning," 
https://wiki.mozilla.org/images/5/59/OpenBadges-Working-
Paper_012312.pdf, 2010. Retrieved: February 2020. 
[8] 
V. Buterin, "Ethereum white paper," in GitHub repository 
https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/White-Paper, 
2013. 
Retrieved: February 2020. 
[9] 
C. D. Clack, V. A. Bakshi, and L. Braine, "Smart contract 
templates: foundations, design landscape and research 
directions," arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.00771, 2016. 
[10] A.-S. Dadzie, E. M. Sibarani, I. Novalija, and S. Scerri, 
"Structuring visual exploratory analysis of skill demand," 
Journal of Web Semantics, vol. 49, pp. 51-70, 2018. 
[11] D. Ifenthaler, N. Bellin-Mularski, and D.-K. Mah, 
"Foundation of digital badges and micro-credentials," 
Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, 2016. 
[12] P. A. Lemoine and M. D. Richardson, "Micro-credentials, 
nano degrees, and digital badges: New credentials for global 
higher education," International Journal of Technology and 
Educational Marketing (IJTEM), vol. 5, pp. 36-49, 2015. 
[13] J. Caudill, "The emerging formalization of MOOC 
coursework: Rise of the MicroMasters," in Proc. EdMedia+ 
Innovate Learning, 2017, pp. 1-6. 
[14] T. Hunt, R. Carter, L. Zhang, and S. Yang, "Micro-
credentials: the potential of personalized professional 
development," Development and Learning in Organizations, 
2019. 
[15] P. A. Lemoine, W. M. Wilson, and M. D. Richardson, 
"Marketing Micro-Credentials in Global Higher Education: 
Innovative Disruption," in Marketing Initiatives for 
Sustainable Educational Development: IGI Global, 2018, pp. 
182-204. 
[16] B. Mischewski and A. Christie, "Understanding the 
feasibility of micro-credentials in engineering education," in 
Proc. 29th Australasian Association for Engineering 
Education Conference 2018 (AAEE 2018), 2018, pp. 758. 
[17] A. V. Sambra et al., "Solid: a platform for decentralized 
social applications based on linked data," Technical report, 
MIT CSAIL & Qatar Computing Research Institute 2016. 
[18] J. Domingue, A. Third, and M. Ramachandran, "The FAIR 
TRADE Framework for Assessing Decentralised Data 
Solutions," in Proc. WWW 2019 workshop: Linked Data on 
the Web and its Relationship with Distributed Ledgers 
(LDOW/LDDL), San Francisco, USA, 2019, pp. 866-882. 
[19] A. Mühle, A. Grüner, T. Gayvoronskaya, and C. Meinel, "A 
survey on essential components of a self-sovereign identity," 
Computer Science Review, vol. 30, pp. 80-86, 2018. 
[20] D. Baars, "Towards self-sovereign identity using blockchain 
technology," University of Twente, 2016. 
[21] A. Othman and J. Callahan, "The Horcrux protocol: a 
method for decentralized biometric-based self-sovereign 
identity," in Proc. 2018 International Joint Conference on 
Neural Networks (IJCNN), 2018, pp. 1-7. 
[22] Q. Stokkink and J. Pouwelse, "Deployment of a blockchain-
based self-sovereign identity," in Proc. 2018 IEEE 
International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and 
IEEE Green Computing and Communications (GreenCom) 
and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) 
and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData), 2018, pp. 1336-1342. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

