The Potential of Support-Rich Environment for Teaching Meaningful Mathematics
to Low-Achieving Students
Yifat Ben-David Kolikant
School of Education
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem, Israel
Email: Yifat.kolikant@mail.huji.ac.il
Orit Broza
Levinsky College
Tel-Aviv, Israel
Email: Orit.broza1@gmail.com
Abstract—
We have designed a collaborative, computer-
supported,
rich
environment
to
promote
meaningful
mathematics among low-achieving students (LAS). Fifth-grade
students interchangeably solved decimal subtraction tasks with
peers in the context of a computer game and simulations, and
in discussion sessions, led by their teachers, in foursomes. We
describe the results of the first round of our design-based
research,
where
we
traced
three
such
groups,
using
observations and interviews. We found that the computer
context was both constructive and destructive, in terms of
students’ learning. The group discussions did not yield the rich
discussions we had hoped for. Yet, overall, the environment
was
successful
because
students
gained
meaningful
mathematical knowledge and practiced active, thoughtful, and
collaborative
socio-mathematical
behavior,
which
is
dramatically different from what they were used to.
Keywords-low-achieving students; support-rich environment;
computer games; scaffoldings; computer-supported collaborative
learning.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The question of how students’ construction of meaningful
knowledge can be supported presents an important challenge
to researchers and teachers alike. Teaching the complex topic
of mathematics to low-achieving students (LAS) poses a
special challenge, owing to LAS’s unique cognitive and
behavioral characteristics [12]. The teaching and learning
processes of LAS have been studied by examining different
teaching methods, strategies, and tactics (e.g., [2]). However,
we
found
sparse
work
on
the
effectiveness
of
rich
environments, let alone environments of computer-supported
collaborative-learning (CSCL), on the learning processes and
outcomes of LAS.
In fact, LAS characteristics, which we describe next,
might bring one to suspect the feasibility of teaching LAS
basic mathematics, let alone in (Computer Supported)
Collaborative Learning (CS)CL settings. Nonetheless, we
hypothesized that a rich CSCL environment, involving a
computer game, real context mathematics, peer discussions,
and teacher mediation may be the key for addressing the
LAS’s unique and diversified needs. Here, we describe the
results of the first round of a design-based research we have
conducted to examine these hypotheses. We first describe the
characteristics of LAS. Then, we review the literature and
how it influenced our hypotheses and design. Next, we
describe a study, the first round of a design-based research in
which
we
examined
our
hypotheses.
We
traced
the
participation of 3 groups of four students each in the
activities we had designed, using various data sources, such
as the videotapes and audiotapes of the classes, interviews,
and ad-hoc conversations with the students and the teachers,
along with observations. We discuss our findings and the
practical implications on our design framework and the
broader community. Our main conclusion is that CSCL,
when carefully designed, can promote LAS learning of
meaningful mathematics as well as the development of
socio-mathematical skills.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
II, we review the literature on LAS as well as on successful
interventions in terms of meaningful learning. Then, we
describe our pedagogical design (Section IV), and the
literature that inspired us in the design, such as the decision
to involve a computer-game session in which students work
in pairs, and small-group discussions led by the teacher
(Section III). We then describe the study (Section V). We
examined how the rich environment either hinders or
supports students’ construction of mathematical meaning.
Our focus was on the mutual interplay between the two
contexts in which students worked (on the computer and in
group discussions). We present the findings (Section VI)
and discuss them (Section VII).
II.
LAS AND MEANINGFUL MATHEMATICS
There is no single, definitive profile for LAS [7][16]. In
fact, most of studies have not focused on the methodological
criteria used to identify those students with
learning
disabilities [16]. LAS are commonly identified based on two
factors:
teacher
reports
and
their
performance
on
standardized or informal tests (students’ score below the 50th
percentile on standardized tests; however, they are not
diagnosed as having learning disabilities) [2]. In attempting
to explain LAS’s poor performance, the literature focuses on
cognitive deficiencies and on behavioral manifestations of
their failures. LAS find it difficult to retrieve basic
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

mathematics knowledge from their memory [10]. Craik [5]
terms this difficulty as ‘fragile memory’, a product of
superficial data processing. They also lack meta-cognitive
skills [9], and are sensitive to the learning contexts. They
thus find it much harder than others to solve simple and
complex
addition
and
subtraction
problems.
These
difficulties may lead them to use less sophisticated strategies
and to make more errors.
Recently, Karagiannakis et al. [14] developed a model that
can be used to sketch students' mathematical profiles for four
domains (numbers, memory, number line, and reasoning);
they empirically examined it to determine whether and how
it can differentiate students with and without difficulties in
learning mathematics. According to their analysis, students,
both the normal/high achievers and the underachievers, do
not all share the same sets of strong or weak mathematical
skills. In addition, under achievement in mathematics is not
related to weaknesses in a single domain (e.g., numbers,
memory, number line, and reasoning). They also suggest that
for LAS students, just like for the other students, cognitive
strengths or weaknesses may rely on any of the four domains
(mentioned above) of their model. Their findings empirically
strengthen the heterogeneity of this population group.
Experiencing repeated failures and difficulties in keeping
up with the class might in turn, decrease their motivation and
sense of internal responsibility and make them more passive
learners. It might also lead them to act impulsively, rely on
the judgment and feedback of an external authority [12], and
avoid collaborative work with peers [1]. Their schooling-
purposed interaction in class is, for the most part, with the
teacher.
These characteristics probably underlie many teachers’
beliefs that LAS are unable to deal with tasks involving high-
order thinking skills and that the most effective way of
promoting mathematical performance in LAS is to ‘drill and
kill’, that is, to focus more on the mathematical algorithms
than on the mathematical meaning [15]. However, despite
their difficulties, there is empirical evidence that in certain
environments
LAS
are
capable
of
enhancing
their
mathematical understanding. There is empirical evidence
that LAS can exhibit mathematical reasoning orally when
placed in intimate and supportive learning environments,
such as in small groups where they are tutored [3][15].
Peltenburg et al. [20] show that, in a familiar context with
the help of technological tools, LAS can succeed in solving
subtraction problems by using an indirect addition strategy
spontaneously,
rather
than
the
conventional
direct
subtraction strategy. Karagiannakis and Cooreman [13]
suggest that these interventions should be designed for
repeated success by building on a student’s strengths, while
avoiding use of repetitive tasks that cause repetitive failure
experiences, thereby maximizing the learning opportunities
of all students.
This led us to assume that a rich environment that includes
technological tools, small groups, and teacher's support
building on LAS’ strengths might be the key for their
success.
III.
THE LITERATURE INSPIRING THE DESIGN AND
HYPOTHESES
Our design was inspired by the socio-cultural theoretical
perspective on learning, especially the notion of distributed
scaffolding. Scaffolding is “titrated support that helps
learners learn through activity. It helps learners perform
tasks
that
are
outside
their
independent
reach
and
consequently develop the skills necessary for completing
such tasks independently” [24, p.306] . Because LAS vary in
their behavior, in our design we sought to design distributed
scaffoldings [22], i.e., to integrate and sequence multiple
forms of support via various means. Different scaffolds
interact with each other; sometimes they produce a robust
form of support, a synergy [24], and other times they might
sabotage the learning processes and the outcome.
We were inspired by the Learning in Context approach,
namely, the idea of presenting mathematical concepts and
procedures in a context relevant to the child’s day-to-day life
[11], and in particular, the Realistic Mathematics Education
(RME) theoretical
framework.
According
to
the
RME
framework,
students
should
advance
from
contextual
problems using significant models that are situation related,
to mathematical activity at a higher level (e.g., engaging in
more formal mathematical reasoning). As students progress
from informal to more formal mathematics, their "model of"
the situation is transformed into a "model for" reasoning.
We hypothesized that RME could be the key to promote
meaningful learning for LAS, because the subtraction tasks,
the mathematics to be mastered, will be associated with real-
life experiences, which might mitigate their fragile memory
and tendency for superficial processing of new knowledge.
We aimed at transforming students’ social and socio-
mathematical norms, from passive to active, from isolated to
social collaboration, from impulsive to thoughtful. We were
motivated by the premise that digital games, by the nature of
their design, have the potential to motivate students in
becoming
active
rather
than
passive,
by
enabling
experimentation and exploration without fear of failing in
front of the entire class [8][23]. The use of games for
teaching may be particularly beneficial for LAS because of
their tendency to remain passive and to comply with
authoritative voices. We were aware of the possibility that a
hands-on, minds-off strategy
might
emerge, especially
because of the tendency for impulsivity. This is one of the
reasons students were asked to work with peers in front of
the computer. We assumed that collaborative settings would
trigger twofold interactions: with the system and with the co-
learner. Peers would explain their calculations to each other,
and question other actions, which would bring about
reflection and thoughtfulness [6].
Every session was designed to include interchangeable
students’ work in front of the computer with their peers,
along with group discussions, led by the teacher. Teachers’
interactions with students can create zones of opportunities
that can be directed to scaffold students’ social and
emotional development [19]. The teacher can mediate the
use of tools (e.g., computer games, online units), orchestrate
the students' activities, and reframe them conceptually [17].
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

The
students,
hence,
experienced
two
different
collaborative settings. When students worked (in pairs) in
front of the computer (game or online units), the teachers
were asked to observe them and to offer help when necessary
(for instance, if students maintain trial and error strategies or
are stuck in their calculation process).
In the group
discussions, the teachers were asked to focus the discussion
on various strategies that can be used to solve subtraction
tasks, encourage students to verbalize their thoughts, and
encourage them to rely on each other’s past experience,
thereby facilitating students in learning the meaning of how
to
participate
in
the
community,
i.e.,
support
the
transformation of their sociomathematical norms [4]. In these
discussions, the teachers also introduced students to new
tasks
and
encouraged
them
to
employ
the
strategies
previously used in a supposedly new context. As we will
explain in the next section, in our design we presented tasks
sometimes as stories and sometimes as formal subtraction
exercises,
and
gradually
increased
the
difficulty
of
calculating
the numbers whose decimals
are half, to
numbers, whose decimals include individual units. We
assumed that students’ sense of security when expressing
themselves publicly would increase, since they are in a group
of equals, and will experience active (and successful) work
with their peers in front of the computer.
IV.
THE INSTRUCTIONAL DESIGN
We developed an extracurricular program for fifth grade
LAS. It consisted of ten weekly sessions that focus on
subtraction with decimal numbers, a topic that students had
not yet learned in their regular classes. Students were
categorized into groups of four, according to their regular
class, and each group worked with a teacher trained by the
second author.
We utilized a real life context simulated by an ice-cream
shop computer game. Specifically, during the sessions,
students played a computer game in which they received
orders
from
random
customers,
prepared
the
orders,
calculated the price to be paid, and gave change as needed
(Figure 1). Because of the heterogeneity of the LAS and their
individual needs, we sought to provide a variety of support
types. Therefore, students also worked on supplementary
online study units concerned with the transition between
money and formal representations, as well as change
calculations. Students also enacted game-like situations with
play money in Israeli bills and coins: New Israeli Shekels
(NIS) and agorot (1NIS = 100 agorot, and the smallest coin
is 10 agorot). In order to support the transition from the
concrete
to
the
abstract,
real-paper
worksheets
were
designed, which included exercises in concrete, graphic, and
abstract forms.
In order to facilitate a delicate transition from the realistic
environment
(shop
simulation) to
formal mathematics,
subtraction was first presented through monetary simulations
and calculations only, and formal representations were
interwoven at a later stage. The program progresses in a
spiral-like manner. With the help of the teacher, students are
expected to progress from one level to the next. The tasks at
each level maintain an overall forward trend of increasing
complexity, and students are able to revisit earlier levels and
solve simpler exercises on the computer on their own. The
teachers had the flexibility to attune the program, in response
to students’ emerging needs.
Figure 1. A screenshot of an online learning unit, where the task at hand is
50-38.6.
In each session, students spent almost half of their time in
front of the computer, working in pairs. They were first
introduced through online activity to two avatars, a girl and a
boy, each of whom described a strategy for calculating the
required change. Then they played or worked in pairs on the
computer. The other half was devoted to class discussions, as
described above. Specifically, in order to address LAS’s
tendency to passively rely on external authority and to
encourage them to take personal responsibility, the teachers
were not supposed to correct students’ strategies directly, but
rather, to ask questions to encourage them to talk aloud about
their thinking processes, thus, making diagnosis easier and
potentially leading them to correct their own mistakes, re-
voicing when needed, and referring them to suitable tools in
the environment when necessary. The teacher generally
followed these instructions well.
V.
THE STUDY
Our goal was to examine our design’s hypotheses, i.e., to
examine how the rich environment either hinders or
supports students’ construction of mathematical meaning,
especially the mutual interplay between the two contexts in
which students worked (on the computer and in group
discussions).
A.
Participants
We traced 12 LAS (4 male, 8 female) from 3 fifth grade
classes in suburban schools within the same city, who
participated in the program. All participants were chosen
based on the recommendation of their mathematics teachers.
They all performed under the 50th percentile on standardized
tests, yet were not diagnosed as having learning disabilities.
B.
Data Sources
In two groups all sessions were videotaped. In one group
they were audiotaped. We observed students in their regular
class two times before they began participating in our
activities.
We
also
observed
all
the
sessions,
and
documented how the teacher presented the tasks, focusing
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

on the sequence of activities—of both the teacher (e.g.,
presenting the tasks, intervening during the computer
sessions, suggesting a tool, getting students’ attention,
answering questions) and the students (e.g., how they
interact with the computer, with each other, with the
teacher, and so forth). We conducted interviews with the
CSCL teachers, after the activity as well as ad hoc
conversations after every session. We also talked with the
parents’ class mathematics teachers and to each student after
the CSCL activity.
C.
Methods of Analysis
Our
report
mainly
draws
on
the
analysis
of
the
videotapes. We were inspired by the analysis model of
Powell et al. [21] for developing mathematical ideas and
reasoning.
We
fully
transcribed
one
group
through
videotapes. The transcripts were coded twice by two
researchers. We segmented the text into episodes, each
beginning with the presentation of a new task and ending
with its being accomplished (or the work on it was
terminated). For each episode we examined: (1) who
participated in it; (2) the knowledge pieces that emerged; (3)
the difficulties that arose, including whether they were
solved, and if so, how and by whom, especially (d) the
support provided by the teacher; and (5) whether the task
was successfully accomplished independently or with help
from others. We also coded affective utterances, both
positive and negative. We compared the results with the
video, audio, and notes taken during the observations in the
other groups. Interviews were analyzed thematically.
VI.
FINDINGS
As we hypothesized, the computerized environment,
especially the computer game, encouraged the students to be
active as well as engaged in their task. For the most part,
they were observed to be very focused on the task in hand. In
fact, in 5 sessions, students continued working (or playing)
after the class had ended. The students reported in the
interviews and ad hoc conversations that they had enjoyed
the activity. The following quotes are but two examples of
typical phrases heard throughout the entire program: “it was
fun…not a regular class”, “playing with the computer gives a
sense of fun, [vs.] a blackboard, where you just sit and solve
exercises”.
On the computer the students usually decided to work in
turns. In each turn the one on the keyboard gave ice-cream,
calculated the price, the change, and returned change. For a
few couples, we noticed a different division of labor: the one
on the keyboard interacted with the avatar clients and in the
meantime, the other did the calculations. In a few cases when
one student took over the keyboard the teacher interfered.
During the play, each student solved many subtraction
exercises, manifested by the need to give change to
customers in the shop.
Failures in this context did not discourage them. On the
contrary,
this
is
when
we
observed
collaboration,
mathematical discussions with their peers and with the
teacher. Usually, when they received a response from a
“customer” indicating that the change they gave was
incorrect,
they
were
observed
pausing
to
think
and
sometimes they turned to their peers and verbalized their
“solution
process”.
Sometimes
this
verbalization
was
performed after their peers asked them how they had
worked. The discussion helped them many times to correct
themselves. This behavior was dramatically different from
the observed passivity (or impulsivity) in the regular classes.
Moreover, in this context, the students generally welcomed
the teachers’ intervention and cooperated with them. Hence,
the computer and the peers often generated a synergetic
effect on the students.
However, we also observed an appreciable number of
situations in which students merely employed trial and error,
using the immediate feedback of the computer (“too much”
and “too little”) to guess the correct answer. Usually the
partner
became
silent
in
these
situations.
From
the
conversations in these situations, we learned that the pressure
of time and the wish to gain as many points as possible in the
game in a designated time encouraged this behavior. In one
extreme example, one student stopped working because the
clients became angry, because it took her time to calculate.
We also noticed that in the initial lessons the teacher had to
compete with students’ attention to their computer in these
situations. We observed the teacher, in such situations,
touching the students’ hand or shoulder to get their attention.
We observed many expressions of frustration among the
students during group discussions. The teacher borrowed the
idea of students taking turns when at the computer and asked
them to solve exercises in turns in the group discussions.
However, this idea turned out to be less productive. For the
most part, the interaction took the form of one student
explaining his or her solution process, followed by the
teacher’s verbalization. The teacher sometimes told the peers
to be quiet, in an attempt to assist the individual to think and
(re-)calculate. We thus observed almost no rich peer
discussions about strategies. In her interview she explained
that students’ poor discursive habits made her prioritize the
individual’s
learning
over
building
a
community
and
discursive habits.
We expected that during the participation the students’
ability and wiliness to provide explanations would increase.
During the discussion with the teacher (with or without a
computer) the students were constantly asked to describe and
explain their strategies. The alienation of this request was
prominent in their responses. They became silent, gave
vague or non-informative answers (e.g., “I just did so”), and
sometimes even said, “I don’t remember”.
In some of the students there was evidence of a change in
their discursive manners. In these cases we found that
students relied on the money model (especially the fact that 1
nis = 100 agorot) to explain their subtraction strategies even
when the subtraction task was phrased in an abstract manner
and not in money terms. Real context mathematics, hence,
supported students’ leaning.
We also expected that the students would develop many
strategies for subtraction. Indeed, the teacher posed questions
like “in what way would you like to solve this problem?” at
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

least three times in each of the first three sessions. However,
we did not observe the emergence of a new strategy. One
possible explanation is rooted in our sequencing of students’
activities. In the initial lessons, students were introduced by
an online unit to two strategies, presented to them by two
avatars, who dealt with the task of calculating change.
Possibly,
this
early
exposure,
together
with
students’
tendencies to rely on external authoritative voices, brought
about a fixation in their thoughts. Moreover, sometimes we
were
not
sure
that
students
understood
the
meaning
underlying these strategies.
Nonetheless, in conversations with the teachers in the
regular classes after the program ended, the teachers reported
that the behavior of most of the participants in their class
improved; specifically, that despite their difficulties they
were more motivated and less passive.
VII.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
The findings support the premise that RME is valuable in
facilitating LAS meaningful learning [11]. Students adapted
the real-life money model to resolve the subtraction tasks,
even when given in an abstract form.
The
computer-peer
setting
was
found
to
be both
supportive and destructive in terms of students’ learning. The
computer played a major role in making students active and
engaged in mathematical discussions about the subtraction
task in hand with their peers and the teacher, despite the
students’ fragile knowledge. We saw moments of synergy
[24] when the presence of peers brought about a reflection
about a wrong calculation, and a discussion about the
strategy applied. The teacher’s intervention in this context
was welcomed and fruitful. However, we also observed
situations in which the computer game encouraged trial and
error because of the time factor and the competitive nature of
games.
The group discussions did not yield the rich discussions
we had hoped for. Although we had observed that the ability
of most students to provide explanations had developed
during their participation, these students did not develop new
strategies, but rather, used the strategies they had been
introduced to at the beginning. This behavior aligns with the
LAS’s tendency to focus on a given algorithm, given by an
external authority. In addition, in this context, students’
discursive acts were mostly in response to the teacher and
merely addressed her.
Finally, in our design we had expected a metaphorical
diffusion between the two contexts in which students
performed
and
collaborated—that
students’
activeness,
ability, and wiliness to discuss with their peers when failing
to solve a task on the computer would diffuse to the group
discussion context and that the teacher-led discussions would
enrich the mathematical discursive practices, which would
then diffuse to the computer context.
Apparently, this diffusion is not straightforward and a
fine-tuned design is required to support its occurrence.
Therefore, in in the next round we re-designed the group
discussions
in
consultation
with
the
literature
on
Accountable Talk [18], aiming at better facilitation of
establishing the norms of mathematical peer discussions. We
minimized the time spent in front of the computer game and
instead, added time to the online unit, in which students still
simulated the ice-cream shop, but without the pressure of
time
and gaining points. Finally, we aimed at setting the
students’ mindset right from the beginning by explaining to
them that this class is about their strategies. We omitted the
introduction to the two strategies, and instead, simulated in
class an affair where students brought personal items and had
to give money and get change and then conducted a
discussion on their calculation strategies.
More work is required to fine tune the design. A larger
sample of participants is necessary in order to generalize and
further explore LAS learning processes and outcomes in this
environment and gain insights as to how to support their
learning. Nonetheless, this study shows that overall the rich
CSCL environment was successful not only because students
gained
mathematical
knowledge—they
also
adapted
strategies to solve subtraction tasks. These students also
practiced socio-mathematical behavior different from what
they were used to: from passive reliance on authority,
impulsive, and individualistic interactions in class, to active,
thoughtful
collaboration
about
mathematical
meaning.
According to the regular class teachers, to some extent, this
behavior has diffused to their regular classes. We thus can
conclude that meaningful learning of LAS is feasible and
furthermore, that LAS can benefit from CSCL settings,
which stands in contrast to their characteristics in the
literature as passive or even detached individualists [2]. In
this aspect our work makes a modest step towards achieving
equity in mathematics education by extending the teaching
of
mathematical
meaning
to
academically
diversified
students.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Alexander, “Culture, dialogue and learning: Notes on an
emerging pedagogy”. In N. Mercer and S. Hodgkinson (Eds.),
Exploring talk in school, London: SAGE, 2008, pp.91-114.
[2]
S. Baker, R. Gersten, and D. S. Lee, “A synthesis of empirical
research
on
teaching
Mathematics
to
Low
Achieving
Students,” The Elementary School Journal, vol. 103, 2002,
pp. 51–73.
[3]
D. Chazan, “Beyond formulas in mathematics and teaching:
Dynamics of the high school lgebra classroom”, New York:
Teachers College Press, 2000.
[4]
P. Cobb, "Supporting the improvement of learning and
teaching in social and institutional context", Cognition and
instruction:Twenty-five years of progress, 78, 2001, pp 19-37.
[5]
F.I.M Craik, “Memory: Levels of processing. International
encyclopedia of the social & behavioral sciences”, University
of Toronto, Canada, 2002.
[6]
P.
Dillenbourg
and
F.
Fischer,
“Computer-supported
collaborative learning: The basics”. Zeitschrift für Berufs-und
Wirtschaftspädagogik, 21, 2007, pp. 111-130.
[7]
D. C. Geary, “Mathematics and learning disabilities”, Journal
of Learning Disabilities, 37(1), 2004, pp. 4-15.
[8]
J. P. Gee, “What video games have to teach us about learning
and literacy”. New York: Palgrave Macmillian Publishing,
2014.
[9]
S. R. Goldman. “Strategy instruction in mathematics.”
Learning Disabilities Quarterly, 12, 1989, pp. 43-55.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[10] E. Gray, D. Pitta, D. and D. Tall, “Objects, actions, and
images: A perspective on early number development”, The
Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 18(4), 2000, pp. 401-413.
[11] K. Gravemeijer, “Local instruction theories as means of
support
for
teachers
in
reform
mathematics
education.
Mathematical thinking and learning”, 6(2), 2004, pp. 105-128.
[12] D. Haylock, “Teaching mathematics to low attainers”, SAGE,
1991, pp. 8-12.
[13] G. N. Karagiannakis and A. Cooreman, “Focused MLD
intervention based on the classification of MLD subtypes”,
The Routledge international handbook of dyscalculia and
mathematical learning difficulties, 2014, pp. 265-275.
[14] G. N. Karagiannakis, A. E. Baccaglini-Frank, and P. Roussos,
“Detecting strengths and weaknesses in learning mathematics
through a model classifying mathematical skills”, Australian
Journal of Learning Difficulties, 2017, pp. 1-27.
[15] R. Karsenty, A. Arcavi, and N. Hadas, “Exploring informal
mathematical products of low achievers at the secondary
school level”. The Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 26(2),
2007, 156-177.
[16] K. E. Lewis and M. B. Fisher, “Taking stock of 40 years of
research on mathematical learning disability: Methodological
issues and
future directions”, Journal
for
Research
in
Mathematics Education, 47(4), 2016, pp. 338-371.
[17] M. A. Mariotti, “Artifacts and signs after a Vygotskian
perspective:
the
role
of
the
teacher”,
ZDM
—The
International Journal on Mathematics Education, 41(4), 2009,
pp. 427-440.
[18] S. Michaels, C. O’Connor, and L. B. Resnick, “Deliberative
discourse idealized and realized: Accountable talk in the
classroom and in civic life”. Studies in Philosophy and
Education, 27(4), 2007, pp. 283-297.
[19] V. Morcom, “Scaffolding social and emotional learning in an
elementary
classroom
community:
A
sociocultural
perspective”,
International
Journal
of
Educational
Research, 67, 2014, pp. 18-29.
[20] M. Peltenburg, M. van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, and A.
Robitzsch, “Special education students’ use of indirect
addition in solving subtraction problems up to 100—A proof
of
the
didactical
potential
of
an
ignored
procedure”,
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 79(3), 2012, pp. 351-
369.
[21] A. B. Powell, J. M. Francisco, and C. A. Maher, “An
analytical model for studying the development of learners’
mathematical ideas and reasoning using videotape data”, The
Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 22(4), 2003, pp. 405-435.
[22] S. Puntambekar and J. L. Kolodner, "Toward implementing
distributed scaffolding: Helping students learn science from
design", Journal of research in science teaching, 42(2), 2005,
pp. 185-217.
[23] K.
Squire,
“Video
game-based
learning:
An
emerging
paradigm
for
instruction”,
Performance
Improvement
Quarterly, 21, 2008, pp. 7-36.
[24] I. Tabak, “Synergy: A complement to emerging patterns of
distributed
scaffolding”,
The
Journal
of
the
Learning
Sciences, 13(3), 2004, pp. 305-335.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

