The Normalization of Mobile Devices in Clinical Nursing Education and in Clinical 
Practice 
Dr Kimberley Lamarche 
CNHS, Athabasca University 
Athabasca, Canada    
lamarche@athabascau.ca 
 
Mariann Rich 
CNHS, Athabasca University 
Athabasca, Canada  
 mrich@athabascau.ca 
 
 
Dr Caroline Park 
CNHS, Athabasca University 
Athabasca, Canada    
clpark@athabascau.ca 
 
Dr Shawn Fraser 
FGS, Athabasca University 
Athabasca, Canada  
 shawn.fraser@athabascau.ca
Abstract— Significant knowledge gaps exist in how students 
and clinicians recognize the meaning or coherence of using 
mobile technology in practice, and how they have used this 
technology to develop communities or learners. In investigating 
these gaps, our research has looked at various elements 
including what social or organizational factors influence the 
normalization of the practice of using mobile technology in 
clinical education, and as students’ transition to licensed 
clinician.  This descriptive research currently in progress uses 
qualitative and quantitative methods over a six year period 
(three within nursing education, three as licensed clinicians) to 
ascertain the confidence of our participants in information and 
communication technology, usage information, and their views 
on factors which promote or inhibit successful normalization of 
mobile technology at the point of care. Preliminary data based 
on Normalization Process Theory and the Unified Theory of 
Acceptance and Use of Technology model indicates that mobile 
technology is being normalized in our students’ social realm 
but hindered in the clinical realm by health care policy and 
lack of understanding of the affordances available through the 
technology.  
 
   
Keywords- mlearn, UTAUT, nursing education, point of 
care technology 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
   Mobile technology and hand-held communication devices 
are now a significant part of life for many professionals. 
They 
afford 
both 
unprecedented 
communication 
opportunities (individual, group and mass) anywhere, 
anytime as creative new services are offered from amateur 
creators to gigantic corporations. Research about the 
influence and contribution of mobile communication 
devices to professional life is still emerging. There is a 
change to Canadian culture that has presented itself well 
ahead of our understanding. This is particularly so in 
relation to the impact mobile devices may have on those 
who 
are 
engaged 
in 
formal 
learning.  
     Using mobile phones and nursing resource software from 
an infrastructure grant is allowing us to compare the 
normalization of mobile enhanced clinical practice across 
two nursing education practitioner groups: students in a 
baccalaureate of nursing program, and nurse practitioner 
students. Specifically, we are examining “How and why 
things become, or don’t become, routine and normal 
components of everyday work” [1] and to explore of mobile 
community of inquiry development [2]. Preliminary data 
indicates that mobile technology is being normalized in our 
students’ social realm but hindered in the clinical realm by 
health care policy and lack of understanding of the 
affordances available through this technology. As well, 
professional and moral issues are surfacing in our 
preliminary 
data 
analysis 
of 
the 
interviews. 
     Previous research points to the added value of mobile 
technology in nursing practice education, but demonstrates 
the need to introduce the technology early in the program 
and 
for 
a 
sustained 
period. 
[2] 
     Our program of research continues to builds on our 
previous research and proposes to break new ground in 
terms of: a) longitudinal studies of participants using mobile 
learning technologies b) the diverse comparison groups 
involved, and c) the multi-disciplinary nature of the research 
team.   
This paper will describe our research activities and will 
lead to a new understanding of the role of m-learning in 
education. In addition, we will introduce an innovative test 
of existing theory in distance teaching and learning, the 
Community of Inquiry model, in a context (mobile learning) 
different than that for which the theory was initially 
conceived.  
 
II. 
RESEARCH TO DATE 
Our program of research is currently entering its second 
phase.  In phase one, we have used mobile phones and 
nursing resource software from an infrastructure grant, which 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

has allowed us to compare the normalization of mobile 
enhanced clinical practice across two nursing education 
practitioner groups, i.e., “How and why things become, or 
don’t become, routine and normal components of everyday 
work” [1], and to explore of mobile community of inquiry 
development [2].    
There is a plentiful body of knowledge on the perceptions 
about and ways to use mobile devices in health practice, but 
there is a dearth of information about the added value if any 
of using mobile devices in health care education or practice. 
This study will allow us to “normalize” the use of mobile 
devices in clinical education through the early receipt of 
devices and software and the use and encouragement of use 
over several semesters of clinical use. We expect that 
students who have used the technology through their entire 
program will demonstrate that they have "normalized' the 
technology into their clinical practice leading the way for 
follow up studies in the working world in the future. 
      Preliminary data  from phase one indicates that 
mobile technology is being normalized in our students 
‘social realm but hindered in the clinical realm by health care 
policy and lack of understanding of the affordances available 
through the technology. As well, professional and moral 
issues are surfacing in our interviews.  
The second phase of the study will allow us examine any 
changes in use of the technology in the transition from the 
education 
setting 
to 
the 
work 
setting. 
The 
graduates/participants are either registered nurses or nurse 
practitioners in a variety of work environments across the 
country. Social and policy implications will emerge in the 
data.  
Researchers will benefit from the knowledge of how 
mobile technology is utilized and normalized in practice; this 
in turn will potentially positively impact their ability to 
prepare students for practice. We expect that students who 
have used the technology through their entire academic 
program will continue to demonstrate that they are 
normalizing the technology as they transition into their 
clinical practice.  
The purpose of this research project is to extend the 
normalization of mobile technology in nursing clinical 
education to the workplace, after the participants of our 
concluding project. 
III. 
IMPORTANCE OF RESEARCH 
Our program of research builds on our previous research 
and proposes to break new ground in terms of: a) how long 
participants using mobile learning technologies will be 
studied, b) the diverse comparison groups proposed, and c) 
the multi-disciplinary nature of our research team.   
Our research activities will lead to a new understanding 
of the role of m-learning in education. In addition, these 
proposed research activities introduce an innovative test of 
existing theory in distance teaching and learning, the 
Community of Inquiry model, in a context (mobile learning) 
different than that for which the theory was initially 
conceived. Funders continue to invest money into the 
development of technology, but take for granted the adoption 
and normalization of this technology in teaching and 
learning. This is a missing piece in the use of such 
technology. 
IV. 
CONTEXT 
Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs), laptop computers, 
and MP3 players is now irrefutable [3, 4]. Current mobile 
technologies - especially third generation (3G) wireless 
devices such as the Apple iPhone and Google Android cell 
phone - provide an unprecedented opportunity for 
inexpensive and beneficial computing power for learners [4, 
5]. A recent online poll revealed that seventy per cent of 
wirelessly connected Canadians are accessing the mobile 
Internet for personal e-mail and more than one quarter are 
browsing the web from their mobiles at least once a day. 
Half of those are accessing popular social networking sites 
like Facebook and Twitter directly from their mobile 
devices.   
Educational institutions must meet the ever-changing 
needs of the current and new generations of learners by 
delivering relevant education anytime, anywhere that also 
exposes learners to current technologies [6]. It is pertinent to 
ask why this mobility should not be tapped into to support 
learning. Keegan [4] has declared that the future of distance 
education is wireless and claims that the challenge for 
distance educators is to now develop pedagogical 
environments for mobile devices. 
 To answer that challenge, one must first ask what m-
learning allows educators to do differently than other forms 
of teaching and learning. In 2005, Keegan defined m-
learning simply as the provision of education and training on 
PDAs / palmtops / handhelds, smart phones and mobile 
phones. However, others now see m-learning as more, as the 
use of information and communication technologies to 
facilitate learner’s mobility in different contexts. Kukulska-
Hulme and Traxler [7], for instance, view the most 
significant attributes of mobile technologies as their ability to 
support learning that is more situated, experiential and 
contextualized within specific domains and to support the 
creation and use of more up-to-date and authentic content. 
Access to up-to-date information aligns mobile learning with 
a long standing distance education commitment to improving 
access to learning opportunities. In addition, mobile learning 
supports the more recent commitment to interactive, 
collaborative constructivist learning that distance online 
education offers [9]. Models of online distance and 
distributed education offer insight into the potential benefit 
of mobile devices for learners. The scope and format of 
mobile learning as well as the technologies and devices 
utilized in the process are, indeed, context contingent and 
depend largely on the needs of learners, the unique setting 
and the available infrastructure [6].    
Presently, we are witnessing the advent of the mobile and 
wireless technology era influencing contemporary businesses 
and organizations [8].  Mobile technologies have been used 
broadly across sectors to provide goods and services to 
consumers and have revolutionized how organizations and 
individuals go about their daily activities [6]. Mobile devices 
are significantly changing human–computer interaction, 
communication, and learning activities. Ubiquitous access to 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

remote resources is one of the most interesting characteristics 
achievable by using mobile or handheld devices [10].  
Mobile technologies do not offer just another way of 
doing what is already done, but open up new possibilities in 
terms of learning and teaching. The m-learning literature 
focuses 
on 
changes 
in 
the 
learning 
environment, 
characterized by the pervasiveness and ubiquity of the 
technology, and on the changing characteristics of higher 
education students in relation to their use of mobile devices 
for learning [11].  Few studies have explored the potential of 
existing 
infrastructures 
of 
personal 
mobile 
devices, 
particularly in settings such as placements where access to a 
computer may be difficult [12]. 
 Mobile learning takes place when a student uses portable 
devices, such as smartphones, netbooks or tablets, or 
handheld gaming devices, to access learning materials and 
systems, create content and interact with other students, 
teachers, learning systems and the world around them [13]. 
Mobile Learning (m-learning) refers to the use of emerging 
technologies to enhance students’ learning experiences. The 
m-learning literature continues to debate the pervasiveness 
and ubiquity of mobile devices and their potential use for 
learning [6, 11, 12, 13, 14].  
There is a need to re-conceptualize learning for the 
mobile age, to recognize the essential role of mobility and 
communication in the process of learning, and also to 
indicate the importance of context in establishing meaning, 
and the transformative effect of digital networks in 
supporting virtual communities that transcend barriers of age 
and culture  [15] The scope and format of mobile learning as 
well as the technologies and devices utilized in the process 
are, indeed, context contingent and depend largely on the 
needs of learners, the unique setting and the available 
infrastructure [7]. Learning activities include complex 
cognitive and social processes that are necessarily to interact 
with the world around it. M-Learning systems provide 
opportunities for learners to communicate with the real world 
and to search interdisciplinary domains [11]. Higher 
education establishments will need to shift resources and 
skills in order to fully exploit the potential benefits of mobile 
technology for learning [12]. 
Previous research from our university [16, 17] points to 
the added value of mobile technology in nursing practice 
education, and demonstrates the need to introduce the 
technology early in the program, for a sustained period of 
time. More recently, our research team is concluding a three 
year research project which has permitted us to engage 
student nurses (Licensed Practical Nursing-Bachelor of 
Nursing and Nurse Practitioner) and faculty during the 
clinical practice education at the undergraduate and graduate 
level. 
“Whilst 
universities 
have 
attempted 
to 
integrate 
information and communication technology into nursing 
curricula it is not known whether the skills developed for 
educational purposes are relevant or transferable to clinical 
contexts” [18]. It is prudent therefore to ascertain the 
confidence of our graduates in select areas of Information 
and Communication Technology (ICT) skills. 
V. 
NORMALIZATION PROCESS THORY AND UNIFIED 
THEORY OF ACCEPTANCE AND USE OF TECHNOLOGY 
Our past research identified two major issues that impede 
the “uptake” or normalization of mobile technology in 
practice. Those are, the short time frame of the studies and 
the lack of ownership or lack of “bonding” with the 
technology. This led us to consider Carl May’s [1] 
Normalization Process Theory (NPT) which describes “the 
dynamic process of implementation, embedding and 
integration that run(s) through new ways of thinking, acting 
and organizing” (p.536). While May identifies the 
sociological tools that frame the stages of Coherence, 
Cognitive Participation, Collective Action and Reflective 
Monitoring, the theory has not been tested in relation to 
normalizing mobile technology in education.  
The NPT model briefly defines these terms as follows: 
coherence as the meaningful qualities of a practice; b) 
cognitive participation as the enrollment and engagement of 
individuals and groups; c) collective action as interaction 
with already existing practices and; d) reflective monitoring 
as how a practice is understood and assessed by actors 
implicated in it [1].  
There has also been ongoing research in Information 
Systems for four decades on how and why people adopt 
information technology [19]. A recent cumulative model, 
Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology 
(UTAUT) has been used by several research teams to 
estimate the variance of performance expectancy, effort 
expectancy, social influence, behavioral intention and 
facilitating conditions in the prediction of actual use of 
technology. We believe that the repeated use of the UTAUT 
scale over time, will measure the movement of nursing 
students and faculty along the process continuum of 
normalizing mobile technology into their clinical learning 
and practice, and again as they transition into novice 
practice. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The study of the development of mobile communities of 
inquiry could also prove to be a useful tool as educators 
consider the effectiveness and quality of emerging education 
technologies [20]. Our belief that mobile technology will 
enhance student-faculty, student-student and student-expert 
communication leads to the concept of mobile, virtual 
communities or networks of learners and potentially of 
practicing nurses. This in turn leads us to also consider the 
application of the Community of Inquiry (CoI) model [20] to 
m-learning in this context.  
The CoI model assumes that learning occurs within the 
community through the interaction of three core elements: 
cognitive presence, social presence, and teaching presence. 
Since the educational experience is a social transaction, 
special consideration must be given to the social interactions 
and climate. Teaching presence is defined as the design, 
facilitation and direction of cognitive and social processes 
for the purpose of realizing personally meaningful and 
educationally worthwhile learning outcomes [21]. Three 
elements, design and organization, facilitating discourse and 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

direct instruction, make up the central activities of teaching 
presence.  
We are interested in determining in particular how 
improved communication might help to build and maintain 
learning community by increasing learners’ cognitive 
presence and teaching presence. As such, we are looking for 
the direction and structure of the relationship between an 
online Community of Inquiry and the realities of accessing 
this community through mobile devices. Can mobile devices 
be used to generate and/or sustain community? 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. May and T. Fitch. Implementation, embedding and integrating 
practices: An outline of Normalization Process Theory. Sociology, 
vol. 43 (3),  2009, pp. 535-554.  
[2] R. F. Kenny, M. Cleveland-Innes, M. Ally, M. L. Koole and C. L. 
Park “Developing community of inquiry in a mobile learning 
context”. Presentation at the second International Conference of the 
Canadian Network for Innovation in Education. Ottawa, ON. May 
2009.  
[3] D. Keegan. The future of learning: From eLearning to mLearning. In 
Mobile learning a practical guide. Erikson, Ed. 2005. pp. 119-123. 
[4] E. D. Wagner. Enabling mobile learning. Educause Review, vol. 40 
(3), 2005, pp. 40-53. 
[5] T. R. Hill and M. Roldan. Toward third generation threaded 
discussions for mobilelearning: Opportunities and challenges for 
ubiquitous collaborative learning environments. Information Systems 
Frontiers, vol. 7 (1), 2005, pp. 55-70. 
[6] M. Ally and A. Palalas. State of mobile learning in Canada and future 
directions. Educ@ción Digital Magazine. n147, 2012.  
[7] A. Kukulska-Hulme and J. Traxler, (2005). Mobile teaching and 
learning. In A. Kukulska-Hulme, A. and J. Traxler, Eds. Mobile 
learning: A handbook for educators and trainers. London: Routledge. 
2005, pp. 25-44.  
[8] K. Swan, P. Shea, J. Richardson, J., P. Ice, D. R. Garrison, M. 
Cleveland-Innes and J. B. Arbaugh. Validating a measurement tool of 
presence in online communities of inquiry. e-mentor, vol. 2 (24), 
2008. 
[9] Y. Fujino and R. Kawamoto. Effect of Information and 
communication technology on nursing performance Comput Inform 
Nursing. Vol. 31 (5), 2013, pp. 244-250.  
[10] Liaw, Hatala and Huang. Investigating acceptance toward mobile 
learning to assist individual knowledge management. Computer 
Education. 2009. 
[11] S. Lea and L. Callaghan. Enhancing health and social care placement 
learning through mobile technology. Educational Technology and 
Society, vol. 14 (1), 2011, pp. 135-145.  
[12] P. Young, E. Moore, G. Griffiths, R. Raine, R. Stewart, M. Cownie, 
and M. Frutos-Perez. Help is just a text away: The use of short 
message service texting to provide an additional means of support for 
health care students during practice placements. Nurse Education 
Today, vol. 30 (2), 2010, pp. 118-123. 
[13] H. Ernst and J. Harrison. The use of mobile learning to develop 
understanding of biomedical sciences. 10th World Conference on 
Mobile 
and 
Contextual 
Learning: 
mLearn2011 
Conference 
Proceedings. 10th World Conference on Mobile and Contextual 
Learning, Beijing, China, (66-69), 2011, pp. 18-21. 
[14] J. Anonson, K. Schweitzer, S. Bassendowski, P. M. Petrucka, A. 
Ralston and S. Ollech. Personal Digital Assistants in the Classroom 
and Beyond: A Collaborative Initiative of the College of New 
Caledonia, British Columbia and the University of Saskatchewan. 
Journal of Healthcare Information Management, vol. 22 (2), 2008, pp. 
48-51. 
[15] R. F. Kenny, C. L. Park, J. M. Van Neste-Kenny, P. A. Burton and J. 
Meiers. Using mobile learning to enhance the quality of nursing 
practice education. In Mobile learning: transforming the delivery of 
education and training, M. Ally, Ed,. Athabasca, AB: Athabasca 
University Press. 2009.  
[16] C. L. Park, J. M. C.Van Neste-Kenny, P. A. Burton and R. F. Kenny.  
A model of mobile faculty presence in nursing education practice. 
Canadian Journal of Nursing Informatics, vol. 5 (3), 2010, pp. 21–42. 
[17] E. Bembridge, T. Levett-Jones and S. Y. Jeong. The transferability of 
information and communication technology skills from university to 
the workplace: A qualitative descriptive study. Nurse Education 
Today, vol. 31 (3), 2011, pp. 245. 
[18] M. Willis, O. El-Gayar and D. Bennett. Examining healthcare 
professionals’ acceptance of electronic medical records using 
UTAUT. Issues in Information Systems, vol. IX(2), 2008, pp. 396-
401. 
[19] R. McKerlich, M. Riis, T. Anderson, B. Eastman. Student perceptions 
of teaching presence and cognitive presence in a virtual world.  
Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, vol. 7 (3), 2011, pp. 324-
336. 
[20] S. S. Alwahaishi and V.V. Snasel. Modeling the Determinants 
Affecting Consumers' Acceptance and Use of Information and 
Communications Technology. International Journal Of E Adoption, 
vol. 5 (2), 2013, pp. 25-39.  
[21] L. Rourke, T, Anderson, D. R. Garrison, and W. Archer. Assessing 
social presence in asynchronous, text-based computer conferencing. 
Journal of Distance Education, vol. 14 (3), 2001, pp. 51-70. 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

