 
 
Being There with Bluetooth 
 
Vesa A. Korhonen 
Department of Mathematical Information Technology 
University of Jyväskylä 
Jyväskylä, Finland 
vesa.a.korhonen@jyu.fi
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we describe how a multi-purpose 
Bluetooth communication software could simplify the daily 
routines of a vocational teacher significantly with virtually no 
extra cost and without excessive technical requirements. The 
attendance of the students can be monitored using the system 
described in this article. This feature was discovered when testing 
a 
short-range 
communication 
application 
intended 
for 
information distribution. The conclusion is that, with the 
addition of a tailored report formatting module, this application 
has significant potential to improve the quality of the everyday 
work of both the teacher and the students. 
Keywords-simulation; short-range wireless networks; encounter 
networks; vocational education. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In this paper, we describe how a simple Bluetooth-based 
mobile application can support the everyday work of a 
vocational teacher by providing up-to-date information about 
the attendance of the students. While significantly reducing the 
time required for everyday routines, this application also 
facilitates achieving more accurate results and allows the 
teacher to concentrate on the students during the critical 
moments of starting a lesson. The system described here helps 
both the teacher and the students to stay more focused on the 
subject of the lesson, which is a good starting point for an 
effective learning experience. An important part of this is the 
fact that the utility described here does not require immediate 
attention from either party. Computers (and various mobile 
devices) can be very useful for learning purposes in some 
cases, but according to the common experience of the teacher 
community, they are also notorious for diverting one’s 
attention from the ongoing process, such as the start of a 
lecture. Various network games and social media services are 
often seen to gain the students’ full attention instead of the 
teacher. An information system based on “just being there”, 
allowing the presence of the students being examined later, can 
hence be very effective in such situations. 
This paper is organized as follows: Section II describes the 
related work in the field. Section III gives the necessary 
background information for understanding the problem in 
question. Section IV discusses the solution discovered for the 
problem. Section V describes the field test performed, and 
Section VI draws attention to the open questions and 
challenges in the field. Finally, Section VII sums up the 
process described in the article. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The potential of using different Personal Mobile 
Information Devices (PMIDs) in Short-Range Wireless 
Networking (SRWN) has been examined by us with our 
colleagues. In [3], a generic platform for Bluetooth-based 
communication is described. The potential applications for 
such utility is described in [4], while [5] provides more formal 
approach to this form of communication. These ideas are 
further developed in [6], which also points out the significance 
of just detecting a device, without any communication 
transactions. These papers created the background for the 
contribution of this paper, observing the potential of the 
application in detecting the presence of a Bluetooth device 
users(s). 
The basic concept of encounters between mobile devices 
([7]) is utilized here in its most pure form: As suggested in [3] 
and [6], it is the presence of the device that already provides 
valuable information, not only the (possible) communication 
between the devices. This is the background that the system 
described in this paper is based on. 
The focus of this research is on technically less demanding, 
human time frame applications. We consider this approach to 
be significantly different when compared to more traditional, 
connection/data transfer oriented approaches. For example, 
Sundaresan and Sivakumar [1] search for improvement in 
communication from the antenna technology. Yap et al. [2] in 
turn take a higher-level approach in requesting open systems, 
smoother transitions between different network infrastructures. 
Spyropoulos, Psounis, and Raghavendra [11] apply the most 
traditional approach, how to improve the network performance 
via more efficient data distribution methods. These are all 
important matters and serve well the mobile communication 
community. However, we feel that there is still another area of 
work: Applications and services simple enough to provide 
significant value without any further development on the areas 
mentioned above. In this paper, we describe one such a case. 
III. 
THE BEING THERE PROBLEM 
Vocational education, from the age of 16 and above, is 
supposed to provide students with the professional skills of a 
particular field they have selected ([8]). In Finland, a wide 
variety of areas is commonly available, although some special 
subjects may be provided only by a very limited set of 
educational organizations. The training is organized as three-
year vocational studies, divided into courses consisting of 
lectures (lessons) containing both theoretical and practical 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
approaches to the subject, supplemented with a certain amount 
of supportive courses in, e.g., languages and science. These are 
required since any three-year vocational degree is supposed to 
provide a sufficient background for continuing one’s studies on 
the (applied) university level. 
In most cases, one must be present during the lessons to 
practice and to show that one can actually perform the 
vocational tasks being discussed. If the attendance rate of a 
student is not high enough, the teacher cannot evaluate his or 
her learning and the student hence cannot pass the course. 
For these reasons, the teacher must keep exact track of the 
students’ attendance at each lecture. This information is in 
most cases entered into the organization-wide web-based 
information system (such as StarSoft Wilma, [12]), which is 
used by not only the teachers but also the students and their 
parents (in case the student is under 18 years of age). If a 
student is marked absent, he or she must provide a valid reason 
for missing the class. The parents of a student under 18 years of 
age should confirm the information given by the student. The 
group supervisor of each student group monitores the data and, 
if required, may take necessary measures. 
Due to some of the students coming in late (an unfortunate 
but rather common phenomenon) and the large number of 
students (sometimes up to 35 in a single group), this is a time-
consuming task. For certain workshop environments, the use of 
a standard classroom desktop computer may not be feasible at 
all. 
This process is time-consuming especially for teachers 
working with several groups of students (mathematics-physics-
chemistry teachers, language teachers, to mention but a few) 
who may meet four or five different groups during one day. It 
takes time to learn to know all the students, so for most part of 
the semester a roll call is the only method which can be used to 
monitor the attendance of the students. It takes up a lot of 
precious learning time. Quite often it has also occurred that 
even if, on a good day, the roll call only takes a minute or so, it 
still is a time long enough to divert the attention of the students 
away from the forthcoming lesson. If this could be avoided, the 
lesson could start with a more concentrated group of students. 
Furthermore, it is not mandatory to enter the data into the 
school’s system immediately, since data entry will only 
provide value after the lesson is completed. In most cases it 
would be sufficient to update the information system after the 
whole day is complete. 
Hence, a problem to be solved appears to be how to quickly 
and silently but reliably record the attendance of the students 
and to keep the information available for one or two hours so it 
could be entered into the official school system. 
IV. 
THE SOLUTION 
A Bluetooth-based non-communicating network may offer 
a solution to the problem described above. One can detect the 
presence of a Bluetooth device owner quite fast and quite 
reliably. This is not an absolute process, but compares quite 
well with the standard visual and auditory detection currently 
used. Such device-detecting application can satisfactorily work 
on the human time scale (as noted in [5]). The attendance of a 
student should be recorded with an accuracy of a minute, not a 
millisecond. The delay in the Bluetooth device detection 
procedure is therefore quite acceptable for this application. 
A student project (“SBSB” for “Simple Broadcast 
Service/Bluetooth” unofficially called the “BlueInfo”, a part of 
the subject studies of mathematical information technology at 
the University of Jyväskylä, Finland) related to our research 
work was carried out during early 2010. The project produced 
an application which was able to detect Bluetooth devices and 
pass information to them ([10]). However, it was both 
recognized and requested that the result of the project be a 
generic platform allowing different, yet unspecified uses of the 
software. Being able to detect devices and by request to be able 
to communicate with them via Bluetooth was the essence of the 
project. An exhaustive  event logging system in the ASCII text 
file format was implemented in the software, providing the 
discovery (and discontinuing) times of the devices detected. 
This already provides sufficient data for the presence detection 
software. 
The fact that virtually every student on this level has a 
personal mobile phone with Bluetooth support ensures the 
validity of the scheme suggested here. In addition, since the 
detection can be based on the MAC ID of the device only, no 
special features (such as software installation) are required 
from the students’ side. Unlike NFC technology (described in 
[9], for example), Bluetooth allows the detection within a 
reasonable distance (classroom–sized spaces). 
V. 
TESTING THE SOFTWARE 
The idea has been demonstrated as a part of another 
software test of the SBSB project. It was run on an N810 
device and we wanted to know how the application could 
handle a larger number of devices and to get an impression of 
its performance outside the labs. In April 2010, the following 
test was performed. During a scheduled break between the 
lessons a group of 23 students was asked if they wanted to 
volunteer for a software experiment There were no objections; 
all the students were very interested in the subject (which 
obviously offered well-deserved variation to the math lessons). 
They were asked to turn on their mobile devices’ Bluetooth 
feature so the N810 device application could detect them. This 
was done on a  volunteer basis; one could participate in the test 
if one wished. At most there were 19 Bluetooth devices 
recorded being present within the same classroom. The 
application, not yet being the release version, eventually 
crashed, but during those approximately 10 minutes it was 
working it became clear that such a system would be valuable 
in tracking the presence of other devices. The logging feature 
of the application allows the presence of other devices being 
examined later. It would be a reasonable coding task to create a 
post-processor for formatting the log information into a 
suitable format for the particular use described above. 
The N810, even though obsolete in many ways, is very well 
suited for this kind of task. WLAN and USB connections allow 
the transfer of information to other devices. Furthermore, the 
relatively large display allows manual entry of the data being 
viewed into other systems (even low-tech, still quite a common 
option and cannot be ignored in this scenario). 
One should note that in the group of 23 students everyone 
did have a mobile phone. One student had a phone without 
Bluetooth support. This observation suggests that restrictions in 
usability of the service remain rare (e.g., less than 10 %), and 
the application can still make a significant contribution. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
VI. 
OPEN QUESTIONS 
The most obvious (technical) question is that since the 
range and reachability of Bluetooth devices may vary, 
especially indoors, one could receive inappropriate signals 
from the adjacent classroom, for example. This could be 
avoided by using device IDs containing two parts which 
identify the student group and the student within the group. 
This could also be done on the server side (during the data 
analysis phase) by assigning certain MAC addresses to a 
certain group, i.e., no action would be required from the 
student’s side. However, a permission of the participants (most 
likely in written form) should be received. 
It is highly unlikely that a device within the same area, e.g., 
within the same open space and less than 20 meters away, is 
not detected within a couple of minutes. Again, if such cases fit 
within the 10 % residual, this should not be a problem. 
It is clear that this system cannot be made mandatory 
considering the rights of the students. There is potential for 
legal problems, concerning the storing of the data. In principle, 
similar data has been recorded manually for decades, but one 
cannot guarantee that all the parties involved (teachers, 
administration, students, their parents) will immediately accept 
this more advanced version. On the other hand, it would be 
possible to use nicknames and/or code numbers. As already 
noted above, the Bluetooth MAC address would be sufficient. 
A connection between it and the user could be made in the 
teacher’s system, where the information is already present. 
The reliability of the software should no longer be a 
problem. After the test described above (which led to the crash 
of the software), there were several critical errors which were 
corrected before the end of the project (June 2010). 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we presented a small but frequently occurring 
everyday problem which may be solved quite comprehensively 
with a very simple information system, which, for the most 
part, has already been created. A network without 
communication can still provide information about the devices’ 
presence and the time of arrival (and departure), which, in this 
case, is what the problem to be solved is all about. Immediate 
recording combined with the possibility of analyzing the data 
later is the essential part of the solution. 
Based on the brief test made in a real classroom 
environment, the solution appears to be valid. The creation of 
suitable parser software for providing more readable output of 
the particular data required could be executed as another 
student project. Meanwhile, it is possible to continue field 
testing on a volunteer basis. 
The original purpose of delivering SMS-sized messages to 
the clients could also be used in a classroom environment, for 
“silent communication”. Such needs may occur when, for 
example, a student needs to go to the dentist during the 
following lesson. However, this is an extension to the system 
which requires a separate development cycle of its own. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Sundaresan and R. Sivakumar, “Cooperating with Smartness: Using 
Heterogeneous Smart Antennas in Multi-hop Wireless Networks,” IEEE 
Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 10, issue 12, pp. 1666-1680, 
Dec. 2011. 
[2] K-K. Yap, M. Kobayashi, R. Sherwood, T-Y. Huang, M. Chan, N. 
Handigol, and N. McKeown, “OpenRoads: empowering research in 
mobile networks,” SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev. 40, 1 (January 
2010), 125-126. DOI=10.1145/1672308.1672331. 
[3] V. A. Korhonen, “BlueLearn: Low-Cost Interactive Learning System, 
“Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Internet and Web 
Applications and Services. (Barcelona, Spain, May 9-15., 2010) ICIW 
2010.  
[4] V. A. Korhonen and R. Pyykkönen, ”Creating context as you go,” 
Proceedings of the 13th international Mindtrek Conference: Everyday 
Life in the Ubiquitous Era (Tampere, Finland, September 30 - October 
02, 2009). MindTrek '09. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 37-40.  
[5] V. Korhonen, “Mobile Encounter Network - The Missing Data Link,“ 
Proceedings of MindTrek 2008 conference. (Tampere, Finland, October 
7-9, 2008. ACM ISBN 978-1-60558-197-2. 
[6] V. Korhonen and R. Pyykkönen, ”Utilizing Context in Location-Aware 
Short-Range Wireless Communication,” Hindawi International Journal 
on 
Digital 
Multimedia 
Broadcasting, 
2010 
(2010). 
DOI=10.1155/2010/417213. 
[7] J. Kurhinen, V. Korhonen, M. Vapa, M. Weber, ”Modelling Mobile 
Encounter Networks,” Proceedings of the 17th IEEE International 
Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Communications 
(PIMRC 2006) (Helsinki, Finland, Sep 2006). 4 pages. 
[8] Ministry of Education and Culture: Qualification and Studies (in 
Vocational 
Education 
and 
Training). 
http://www.okm.fi/OPM/Koulutus/ammatillinen_koulutus/opiskelu_ja_t
utkinnot/?lang=en (referred Dec 31, 2011). 
[9] NFC Forum: About NFC, http://www.nfc-forum.org/aboutnfc (referred 
Dec 21, 2011). 
[10] “The SBSB Project, Simple Broadcast System/Bluetooth,” University of 
Jyväskylä, Department of Mathematical Information Technology. 
http://yousource.it.jyu.fi/sbsb (referred Dec 21, 2011). 
[11] T. Spyropoulos, P. Psounis, and C. S. Raghavendra, “Spray and wait: an 
efficient routing scheme for intermittently connected mobile networks,” 
Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGCOMM workshop on Delay-tolerant 
networking (WDTN '05). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 252-259. 
DOI=10.1145/1080139.1080143.  
[12] StarSoft Wilma, http://www.starsoft.fi/public/?q=en/node/4362 (referred 
Dec 21, 2011). 
 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

