Using Virtual Spaces for Learning Communities to Facilitate Project Development and 
Collaborative Learning 
 
Katya Toneva 
Institute For Work Based Learning 
Middlesex University 
London, United Kingdom 
e-mail: Katya147@yahoo.com 
Kathy Doncaster 
Institute For Work Based Learning 
Middlesex University 
London, United Kingdom 
e-mail: K.Doncaster@mdx.ac.uk 
 
Darryll Bravenboer 
Institute For Work Based Learning 
Middlesex University 
London, United Kingdom 
e-mail: D.Bravenboer@mdx.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— With the extensive expansion of the Information 
and Communication Technologies in the learning, business and 
home environments it is becoming apparent that there is 
considerable 
opportunity 
for 
increasing 
collaborative 
interaction if a framework is developed to coordinate the 
activities of the individuals across the different sectors. As a 
possible way of achieving this objective, we present the online 
Community of Practice developed and presently being in trial 
at the Institute for Work Based Learning, Middlesex 
University. In this paper, we describe our approach for 
developing and utilising of this Community of Practice. We will 
describe the benefits of the educational software tools we have 
used in the implementation process.  Through case studies we 
will present two ways in which the online Community of 
Practice is being currently applied. We will outline the main 
advantages and some challenges of using the newly created 
Community of Practice. 
 
Keywords – online community of practice (CoP); Google 
Apps; Web 2.0; social constructivism; interaction; collaboration. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The purpose of this paper is to introduce ways that 
Google Apps and other Web 2.0 technologies can be used to 
develop an integrated virtual space for a learning 
community by putting in place an online Community of 
Practice (CoP). This project has been developed and is 
presently being in trial  at the Institute for Work Based 
Learning, Middlesex University with the intended aim to 
―progress its online learning activities (including an 
increased use of social media) from individual, Programme-
based initiatives to an institution-wide, strategic project 
which will be core to realising strategic objectives in 
learning and teaching‖ [1].  
A well designed online learning environment is seen as a 
means of enhancing the student learning experience: 
students will be able to engage with a variety of online and 
blended activities which will be learner-centred and will 
provide increased flexibility, choice and support.   
The structure of this study is as follows: Section 2 briefly 
depicts the institutional context of the project. Section 3 
outlines possible tools for creating an online CoP and 
justifies the selected approach.  Section 4 describes the 
overall aims of the project and outlines the development 
stages.  Section 5 clarifies the main technical aspects of the 
project framework and identifies initial advantages and 
challenges. Sections 6 and 7 present two examples (case 
studies) for using the newly created online CoP. The last 
section summarises the key outcomes of the Pilot project 
and outlines ideas for future developments.  
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
The Institute for Work Based Learning (IWBL) has a 
long history of on-campus and off-campus innovations in e-
learning and blending learning, as evidenced by BA 
Professional Practice (Arts) Programme web-site [2] and a 
wide range of Institute level good on-learning practices [1].  
The way in which ICT was being utilised by the IWBL, 
whilst being innovative and desirable, lacked a common 
structure which isolated the different stakeholders. By the 
integration of a framework and consistent approach, the CoP 
establishes a wider collaboration and a sharing between 
multiple stakeholder groups.  
In particular, the IWBL staff are seeking developing 
suitable approaches to address the feedback stated in the 
university Validation Report, April, 2011: ―Consider greater 
use of social media to engage all students in communities of 
Learning‖[8]. 
In response, the IWBL envisages that the development of 
a structured online CoP will have a big advantage in terms 
of supporting the attainment of key strategic goals in 
learning and teaching, including:   
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
Student-centred approaches to learning which address 
issues of diversity through flexible and varied modes of 
study;  
 
Flexible approaches to learning, teaching and 
assessment which meet the varied requirements of 
students and of IWBL and academic staff;  
 
Increasing competitiveness of work based learning 
courses;  
 
Increased flexibility in course structures and modes of 
delivery that provides a greater level of interaction and 
feedback between tutors, students and employers.  
 
Development of integrated virtual learning elements, 
resulting in increased efficiency. 
The online CoP aims to expand the effective use of ICT 
towards fulfilling more of its potential and greatly widen the 
participation by providing an integrated virtual space for a 
learning community that will include multiple stakeholder 
groups [1].  
Having developed and established a CoP for staff to 
which they are now actively contributing the remaining 
target for the project is to extend it to the other identified 
stakeholder groups (students and employers) [1]. 
The CoP utilises integrated Google Apps for Education 
including the new Google App called ―Course Director‖. 
The advantages of this online platform are described in the 
next section.  
III. 
RATIONALE FOR CHOOSING GOOGLE APPS FOR 
EDUCATION/COURSE DIRECTOR FOR CREATING COP  
The creation of a suitable virtual online learning space for 
the multiple stakeholders that we envisage using this facility 
made the choice of tool for the development and 
management of the space a crucial one. We aimed to find a 
tool that was simple, accessible, interactive, collaborative 
and cost effective.  
Detailed discussions between the e-resources consultant, 
the IWBL management team and staff as well as with the 
University‘s ICT policy makers have taken place. We 
looked at different Virtual Learning Environments (VLEs) 
including online learning systems.  
As explained in [3], ―commercial VLE products, which 
form the vast majority of VLEs in use in UK FE and HE, 
are generally characterised as ‗content-centred‘, rather than 
being aimed at encouraging the active learning embodied in 
constructivist pedagogies‖. In addition, we share the  
understanding that ―a VLE cannot be implemented 
effectively in an institution without addressing a number of 
management issues, and the complexity of organisational 
structure within further and higher education is impacting 
on VLE uptake‖ [3]. 
Considering the needs of the stakeholders for open access 
to e-resources with no cost for administration and the 
requirement to use an intuitive interface, we have looked at 
flexible online platforms, such as Moodle and Google Apps 
that could meet our requirements.  
Moodle and Google Apps are not the only flexible 
learning environments but they are the ones where the 
flexibility comes at a low cost.          
Moodle provides tools for creating courses in a linear 
form using sites, blogs, online discussion forums, has tools 
for embedding HTML code and has uploading option for 
files. It is easy to create online course activities and 
interactive quizzes, however Moodle requires complicated 
administration.            
Google Apps and Google sites are web-based services 
with more general structure, and are suited to both business 
and educational uses. The services are maintained and 
upgraded constantly by Google.  
Considering our stakeholders‘ needs, we have made a 
decision to set up a CoP based on Google Apps for 
Education and extended by a new Google App called 
―Course Director‖. We have chosen suitable Google 
Apps/Course Director features to assist the development of 
the CoP in terms of sharing e-resources, information and 
archive documents in Google Sites. Stakeholders can jointly 
submit to Google Docs and there can be discussion groups 
for each community of practice in Google Groups.   
Google 
Apps/Course 
Director 
support 
social 
constructivist approaches to learning. Social constructivism 
creates 
a 
learning 
environment 
that 
emphasises 
collaboration and exchange of ideas [4]. Constructivism 
gives people ownership of their learning, since they are 
engaged through questions, explorations, and designing 
assessments [5]. ―Course Director‖ offers educators a set of 
tools to support collaborative forms of learning that can 
encourage publications, multiple literacy and inquiry. As 
suggested by Williams and Jacobs [4], ―learners are able to 
develop new ideas, and transform their own understanding 
through reflection by publishing and sharing their work to a 
wide audience‖. 
In short, a range of free interactive and collaborative 
Google Apps has been installed. Google Course Director is 
the only Google App in the EDUCATION Marketplace to 
be awarded the TRUST e-Privacy certification. Free online 
support is available through a series of help, online demos 
and e-mail advice.  
The desirable characteristics we outlined above as well as 
the fact that we trusted the application were crucial in our 
final decision to use Google Apps/Course Director.  
IV. 
DEVELOPMENT AND UTILISATIONS OF THE ONLINE 
COMMUNITY OF PRACTICE 
The development of the online CoP Pilot commenced in 
September 2011 and has been in trial with academic staff at 
the IWBL with very promising outcomes.  
We are in a process of organising a survey for collecting 
feedback and will complete the Pilot project evaluation 
report by the end of January, 2012.  
    In the next development stage, we are aiming to extend 
the Pilot CoP involving students and other faculties at 
Middlesex University, business organisations, and other 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

stakeholders. Project findings will be presented and 
discussed at workshops organised at Middlesex University. 
   In [1], we stated our overall goals ―to enhance the 
interactivity and connectivity involving tutors, students and 
employers and to achieve greater integration and use of a 
more diverse range of digital media (i.e., video) and social 
media (e.g., Blogging, Wikis)‖. As suggested in [6], these 
technologies can ―provide new ways for students to 
collaborate and communicate within their class or around 
the world‖. 
     In the creation of an online CoP, a real opportunity has 
been given to stakeholders to share best practice, interact 
and collaborate. The contributions each individual gives to 
the community will continually refine the CoP and as the 
contributions and utilisations accumulate it will engage a 
much wider participation. Throughout the trial, academic 
staff have been using the online CoP effectively in this 
manner as will be demonstrated partly in the presented case 
studies.  
     In the next development stage, the IWBL is looking to 
widen the participation in the CoP to include all staff, 
students and external institutions such as businesses. Past 
experience has shown that aligning the sometimes very 
different expectations, priorities and values that pertain to 
different shareholders, for example, students and employers, 
can be difficult.  
    The online CoP approach is considered an effective 
means of achieving this. The CoP project avoids duplication 
of effort by bringing the efforts of the key stakeholders 
together to work towards a common set of principles and 
guidelines for best practice. The development provides 
opportunities for improvement of interaction, sharing and 
collaboration, for developing well-structured e-content, 
potential cost savings and income generation opportunities.  
We are at end of the Pilot stage and we have a number of 
IWBL staff contributions published within the newly 
created collaborative CoP web-site.  
V. 
TECHNICAL ASPECTS OF THE  
FRAMEWORK AND CHALLENGES WITH  ITS IMPLEMENTATION 
Our practical proposal has included the setting up an 
online CoP for staff, students and employers (based on 
Google Apps for Education and extended by a new Google 
App ―Course Director‖). We have benefited with a free trial 
for three months followed by a low cost annual subscription 
fee of 500 EUR. 
    The main features of ―Course Director‖ include the 
following:  
 
Online communities of practice/courses for sharing 
information between tutors/students and employers in 
Google Sites; 
 
Student assignment submission to Google Docs; 
 
Online tests and quizzes in Google Docs; 
 
Discussion 
group 
for 
each 
community 
of 
practice/course in Google Group;  
 
Timetabling in Google Calendar; 
 
Grading, attendance and report cards (if no needed, 
these features can be hidden). 
     We have identified a number of benefits of the chosen 
solution as follows: 
 
With ―Course Director‖ users only have to log on to 
Google Apps not an external Learning management 
System ; 
 
Simple user experience - tutors/faculty don‘t need to 
learn a new system, they learn Google Apps which they 
see as a useful skill. Students already use Google 
products and learning is intuitive;  
 
Simple interface - Google Apps offer a range of 
interactive and collaborative tools that meet most of the 
teaching and learning needs; 
 
Data privacy and security – Google Apps is designed to 
provide the educational institutions with a safe, reliable 
platform for its data offering better security and 
reliability than most educational organisations could 
achieve on their own; 
 
Greater reliability and more hard drive space - Google 
offers 7 GB per user for free on Google Apps. 
     Google Apps administration is very easy and includes 
the following characteristics: 
 
Modular structure - turn off/on selected features;  
 
Import and export spreadsheet data easily;  
 
Quickly create online communities of practice or 
courses, then add/remove tutors/students  or employers; 
 
Create standard online templates, but allow tutors to 
easily customise their community of practice/course 
themselves;  
 
Copy recurring communities of practice/courses, 
together with all files and attachments - no need to 
recreate courses from scratch; 
 
Never have to delete information - keep a full history of 
all your previous communities of practice/courses;  
 
Automatic password reset. 
    One challenge in the implementation of the chosen 
framework is that Google Apps do not support great 
additional customisation. This may restrict development of 
more sophisticated software platforms. However, for the 
purpose of creating communities of practice, using Google 
Apps is a very good idea due to the great interactivity, 
connectivity and collaborative tools.  
 
   While the initial CoP design and the administration 
settings took only a couple of weeks, the maintenance of the 
information flow has been a challenge. The e-resources 
consultant and the technicians have provided continuous 
training and support for the IWBL staff in the process of 
developing of individual and collaborative web-spaces and 
resources. 
At the time being we have thirty –thirty five members of 
staff contributing e-resources, comments, sharing good 
practice, building up collaborative knowledge and expertise 
via the IWBL online community of practice. Five members 
of staff have designed their own Google web-sites aiming to 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

enhance the interaction between tutors, students and 
employers. 
A survey and a full evaluation of the Pilot, including both 
qualitative and quantitative analisys of the collected data 
will be conducted at the end of January, 2012. 
The table below shows some of the benefits and 
challenges we have identified so far as well as the relevant 
success factors we have considered. 
TABLE I: BENEFITS, BARRIERS AND CRITICAL SUCCESS 
FACTORS (CSFS) OF THE ONLINE COP 
Benefits 
Barriers 
CSFs 
Enhanced 
learning 
Environment. 
 
Perpetuation vs. 
variety and 
flexibility. 
 
Good use of 
Google Apps and 
other  Web 2.0 
technologies. 
Knowledge 
sharing. 
Culture of 
independence. 
Institutional 
promotion  
of the online CoP 
as a 
communication 
media. 
Building up 
knowledge and 
expertise. 
Maintaining the 
interaction and 
 information 
flow. 
Common values, 
shared 
understanding, 
varied 
communications. 
Feeling of 
connection. 
Read-only 
participants. 
 
Sense of purpose, 
sense of belonging, 
sense of 
ownership. 
 
We believe that the case studies developed by IWBL staff 
will help to promote the concept of using online CoP at a 
wider level and will engage participation at university level 
and from many more organisations and individuals. 
    We share the case studies via the CoP web-site in order to 
support and disseminate good practice and innovations, both 
internal and external, in online and blended learning 
approaches, including greater use of social media. 
VI. 
CASE STUDY 1: USING THE IWBL COP FOR 
EDUCATIONAL PROJECT DEVELOPMENT 
    The online CoP approach provides an ideal opportunity to 
support projects which have multiple shareholders, all of 
them aiming to contribute to a common outcome. 
    The immediate positive of such a tool is practical as it 
could enable a well structured project approach, make 
resources and on-going comments available at any time and 
remotely during the development stage, and would assist 
researchers and educators to effectively manage the project 
process, to collaborate and take the ownership of the final 
product. 
    At the commencement of a project, we established a 
suitable Google site (CoP) to develop virtual space where 
members of staff were able to share resources and 
comments. This is work in progress, but so far, we have 
found that tutors share good practice and consider advice 
from internal and external advisers.   
     In addition, colleagues prefer addressing project issues 
on an ongoing basis through comments on the online CoP 
rather than reviewing negative aspects after finishing the 
project when it would be too late to make improvements. 
The project web spaces are used for reflection on the 
process of project development, and publishing of relevant 
project materials. 
     We have been using the CoP to develop two project 
proposals – a Joint Information Systems Committee (JISC) -
UK bid proposal and a Higher Educational Academy (HEA) 
- UK travel fund proposal. We are using Google docs as the 
main tool for developing collaborative material. After 
achieving the final product we embed it within the online 
CoP and share it with staff through the CoP site. This 
creates the opportunity for the team members to learn from 
each other and to provide peer feedback. 
    A positive benefit from this collaborative approach was 
that it overcame many of the spatial and temporal 
difficulties often encountered when a project requires 
contributions from a large range of shareholders. The 
opportunity for very rapid feedback and subsequent 
development that moves the project on is continuous and 
uninterrupted by constrains often put upon projects by 
peoples‘ different responsibilities and locations.  
VII. CASE STUDY 2: USING IWBL COP TO SHARE AND 
DEVELOP A SMALL PIECE OF ACTION RESEARCH 
    IWBL is increasingly developing programmes of study in 
partnership with large employers. Some of the challenges of 
such programmes are that they tend to roll continuously 
throughout the year and involve large student cohorts. This 
action research focuses on how we can best operationally 
manage such programmes.  IWBL has considerable 
experience of supporting learning and assessment in a wide 
range of work based programmes and we interviewed 
eleven colleagues for their perspective on this process for 
this piece of action research.  
    The CoP is being used in two ways.  Firstly, it is an 
alternative medium to ‗writing a paper‘ about what emerged 
from this interview data for the IWBL colleagues who are 
the audience for the research. A Google website not only 
allows for non-linear representation of information, but for 
interaction with it. Academic staff can associate the units of 
information on each page and respond to them in the way 
they want.  We hope this will be a creative stimulus to 
developing responses to the complexities of managing these 
large programmes, in a way that the familiar activity of 
simply reading a copy of a paper might not be. 
    Secondly, the CoP is being used as an exemplar of how 
all members of an IWBL programme team might 
collaborate 
and 
share 
core 
information 
about 
the 
management of an actual employer programme, for 
example, by being able to collaboratively develop material 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

using more types of media than just words (pictures, video 
clips, etc.) to give a richer picture. 
    This case study has highlighted that there has had to be a 
lot of learning for staff to understand what a Google website 
can do and how this can be made relevant to real and 
pressing needs in IWBL. For example, embedding Google 
Docs for colleagues to comment on and using a Google 
website to organise and display data in ways that are 
persuasive through their visual representation, are all 
processes that have had to be learned.  Training and support 
have been crucial for colleagues to help them to master the 
technical action required to produce certain effects.  
    We hope that the outcome of this case study will be that 
collaborative CoPs like this can be used as long-term 
resources for employer-based programmes, since they allow 
for the organising, sharing and development of information 
across a whole ‗programme team‘.   
    However, we anticipate that the realisation of this will 
depend on the time and motivation of academic staff to do 
the hard graft of learning how to make the most of this new 
technology. This is costly in time and effort and would need 
technical support.  The extent to which colleagues feel able 
to engage with the CoP developed for this piece of research 
will provide one gauge for the future value of this kind of 
resource in IWBL.  
    It is envisaged that a future development will be to make 
the employers active stakeholders. This should help to build 
the strength of the partnership by providing the employers a 
more active role and an involvement which will promote 
their understanding of the academic processes. Also by their 
comments the IWBL will get a better understanding of the 
employers‘ requirements. In other words, there will be 
promotion of mutual benefits in the partnership. Moreover, 
as [7] depicted, ―Communities among practitioners create a 
direct link between learning and performance‖. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
    Considering our initial experience for using the newly 
created online CoP, we conclude that Google Apps/Course 
Director and other Web 2.0 technologies offer educators a 
set of tools to support forms of learning that can be strongly 
collaborative.   
    Both case studies illustrate key benefits for using the 
online CoP: accessibility at any time and remotely, 
flexibility, collaboration and a sense of ownership of the 
final product.  
    We are aiming to extend the online CoP and involve not 
only IWBL staff, but also colleagues from other faculties, 
students, employers and other stakeholders to develop and 
cultivate 
cooperative 
relationships 
by 
posting 
and 
exchanging digital materials, joining project groups, sharing 
information and building up knowledge together.  
   The CoP is to be designed to support the development of 
collaborative resources, to gain access to e-resources and it 
is needed to protect and increase the value of the content for 
all stakeholders.  We anticipate that the CoP will help to 
continuously enhance the professional practices of IWBL 
staff and collaboration with other stakeholders, and that the 
coordinated and ubiquitous use of e-resources will provide 
increased flexibility, sharing, choice and support. 
    Further refinements of the online CoP should be able to 
effectively 
incorporate 
both 
existing 
and 
future 
developments in social networking taking advantage of 
methods of communications frequently used widely by 
many of the stakeholders.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] K. Toneva and D. Bravenboer, ―Work Based Learning e-
Resources Review And Development – Online Communities of 
Practice Pilot Project Proposal‖, Middlesex University, London, 
Available at the IWBL online Community of Practice: 
https://sites.google.com/a/iwbl-mdx.org/ict--31-01-2012/home 
(Accessed: 10/01/2012) 
[2] BA Professional Practice (Arts) Programme, Middlesex 
University, London, Available: 
http://libguides.mdx.ac.uk/content.php?pid=121076&hs=a 
(Accessed: 10/01/2012) 
[3] City University London, ―The challenges facing VLEs‖, 
Available: http://www.saradunn.net/VLEreport/section06.html 
(Accessed: 10/01/2012) 
[4] J.B. Williams and J. Jacobs, ―Exploring the use of blogs as 
learning spaces in the higher education sector‖, Australasian 
Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 20 (2), 2004, pp. 232-247. 
[5] K. Toneva, ―Using netbooks and Web 2.0 technologies to 
facilitate mobile learning‖, Proc. 10th World Conference on 
Mobile and Contextual Learning (MLearn 2011), Beijing Normal 
University Press, Beijing, China, 18-21 October, 2011, pp. 281-
284 
 [6]  T. Bryant, ―Social software in academia‖, EDUCAUSE 
Quarterly, vol.29 (2), 2006, pp.61-64, Available: 
http://www.educause.edu/EDUCAUSE+Quarterly/EDUCAUSEQ
uarterlyMagazineVolum/SocialSoftwareinAcademia/157402 
(Accessed: 10/01/2012) 
[7] E. Wenger, ―Communities of practice – a brief introduction‖, 
Available: www.ewenger.com/theory, June, 2006, (Accessed: 
16/12/2011) 
[8] Middlesex University,  Institute For Work Based Learning, 
―Validation Report‖, April, 2011, London, Available at the IWBL 
online Community of Practice: https://sites.google.com/a/iwbl-
mdx.org/ict--31-01-2012/home (Accessed: 10/01/2012) 
 
 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

