Open Educational Resources and the Repository Network edu-sharing 
Bernd J. Krämer 
Department of Math. and Computer Science 
FernUniversität in Hagen 
58084 Hagen, Germany 
bernd.kraemer@fernuni-hagen.de 
Michael Klebl 
Lehrstuhl für Wirtschaftspädagogik 
Wissenschaftliche Hochschule Lahr 
77933 Lahr 
michael.klebl@whl-lahr.de
 
 
Abstract—Education providers increasingly integrate digital 
learning media into their education processes and thereby 
recognize the advantages of a sharing and reuse culture.  But 
too many educational resources are still buried in closed 
content management systems, in local databases or on 
individual or institutional websites and are often not 
sustainably maintained. The Open Educational Resource 
(OER) movement aims to overcome such barriers. It has 
adopted a rather broad definition of OER including open 
courseware and content, software tools, and learning object 
repositories. This article argues that edu-sharing, a portal to a 
network of repositories for educational resource management 
provides a comprehensive and suitable infrastructure to 
support the open education movement, but also communities of 
practice that cannot freely publish their educational assets, 
e.g., due to license constraints or other regulatory barriers. 
Keyword: management of open eucational resources; OER; 
learning tools; open courseware; open content; learning object 
repositories; edu-sharing 
I. 
 THE CAMPUSCONTENT PROJECT 
The repository network and portal edu-sharing 
is an outcome of the four-year research and 
development project, CampusContent (2009). The 
project has been funded between March 2005 and 
July 2009 by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
schaft (DFG). It set out to conduct trans-
disciplinary research in a team of computer 
science and pedagogy experts to:  
a) Find answers to the following key research 
questions: 
• How can the visibility and sustainability of 
digital learning resources be improved? 
• How can a sharing and reuse culture for 
high quality content and pedagogical best 
practices be promoted and technically 
enabled across heterogeneous development 
and delivery systems? 
• How can best pedagogical practices be 
smoothly 
conveyed 
to 
practitioners, 
including lecturers, course developers, 
teacher or tutors? 
• How can educational resources be designed 
and adapted to accommodate different 
application contexts?  
b)  Support sharing, joint development and reuse 
of educational resources and pedagogical best 
practices, both through methodological and 
technical contributions. 
The CampusContent Project was strongly 
inspired by design principles for component 
software 
including 
cohesion, 
de-coupling, 
parameterization, and late composition. If these 
ideas could be carried over to digital learning 
resources, there was a good chance that the 
success of component software would come here, 
too. Further, we observed that although a plethora 
of free educational resources exists, suitable 
candidate content is difficult to find and access 
because it is hidden on institutional or individual 
websites, buried in closed content management 
systems or in local learning management systems 
or because it lacks meaningful metadata. Even if a 
promising resource is discovered, important 
context information, such as the pedagogical 
context for which it was designed, ownership 
rights and rights of use, is not documented and 
thus are likely to prevent its proper reuse.  
II. 
THE REPOSITORY NETWORK EDU-SHARING  
As an academic project, CampusContent aimed 
at higher education initially and was inspired by 
our 
experiences 
with 
technology-enhanced 
distance education. In the course of the project, 
however, other educational institutions like 
schools and vocational education providers aspired 
to integrate the methods and technology developed 
51
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

in CampusContent in their e-learning processes. 
Especially local and regional school networks that 
are committed to technology-enhanced learning at 
different types and ages of schooling raised a 
strong demand for content sharing technology. 
Due to the heterogeneous landscape of learning 
technology there was a need to accommodate a 
range of learning management systems and 
authoring tools. To take this wider use of project 
outcomes into account, the project launched the 
product version of its repository network under the 
name “edu-sharing” in August 2009. 
 
Figure 1.  Circle of educational knowledge building and sharing (cf., 
Brown and Adler, 2008) 
The vision behind edu-sharing was to initiate 
and foster a circle of educational knowledge 
building and sharing (Fig. 1) by: 
• Supporting the development of reusable and 
sharable learning content and didactic 
scenarios (create). 
• Encouraging teachers and lecturers to 
discover, review, critique and build on 
others’ work (use). 
• Enable teachers and lecturers to integrate 
others’ work into their own teaching 
(remix). 
Currently 9 didactic scenarios, which have been 
documented comprehensively in pedagogy- and 
methodology-oriented literature, are available in 
edu-sharing as scenario templates. Such templates 
describe learning arrangements in abstract form, 
i.e., without reference to topical content and 
specific implementations of communication and 
collaboration tools. The predefined scenario 
templates include: strategic problem solving, 
puzzle method, simulation, problem-oriented 
learning, project method, or case study. 31 
templates for didactic interactions supplement the 
scenario templates. They include: advocatus 
diaboli, active structuring, flash light brainstorm-
ing and others. 
To content authors and instructional designers, 
edu-sharing offers design methodologies, a range 
of authoring tools connected to the repository 
network, a search engine to discover content and 
predefined scenario templates in the repository 
network, and a personal workspace and a 
community portal for cooperative development.   
Teachers and lecturers will primarily use their 
preferred learning management system (LMS) and 
the search engine to design executable courseware. 
A specialty of the LMSes integrated in edu-
sharing is that they allow the search for content 
and scenarios from within the LMS.  Suitable 
content can then be referenced in a course and 
appropriate scenarios can be imported and 
completed.  
Students typically use their school’s LMS. If 
this LMS is an integral part of edu-sharing, they 
may discover further valuable learning resources, 
such as open content and open courseware, in the 
repository network or in attached content pools 
with the help of the search engine.  
A. Technology 
The core technology is a distributed educational 
resource repository that is organized as a network 
of homogeneous repositories (cf. Fig. 2). Each 
edu-sharing 
node 
is 
typically 
operated 
autonomously by a separate institution, e.g., a 
communal computing center serving the schools in 
their region or a university computing center. This 
institution can decide whether it wants to run its 
edu-sharing repository as an isolated system or 
connect it with other repositories in the edu-
sharing family. In the latter case the users can 
access content and codified learning arrangements, 
so-called didactic scenarios (cf. e.g. Krämer et al., 
2010), from non-local repositories. They can also 
form cross-institutional communities of practice 
(like C1 in Fig. 2), and give external users access 
to all open and selected closed resources. 
Each node in the edu-sharing repository 
network comes with a local repository that is 
enriched by common community services and can 
be embedded in locally preferred learning 
environments and authoring tools for content 
production. The latter include an OpenOffice-
based editor for SCORM-compatible courseware 
and an offline editor for QTI 2.0-compatible tests. 
52
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

Each edu-sharing repository also includes a license 
management component that ensures that each 
resource in the repository has a rights-of-use 
license attached. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Networked repositories with cross-organizational communities 
The edu-sharing system is free open source 
software, which can be downloaded from 
www.edu-sharing.net. The default distribution 
includes several authoring tools and learning 
management systems (Moodle, metacoon, OLAT). 
B. Sharing and Reuse versus Open and Closed 
Content 
As CampusContent started with the aim to 
support the open content movement, it supports 
Creative Commons licenses. But as we went on, 
we learned from potential users of edu-sharing that 
open content and Creative Commons licenses are 
not always the way to go. Schools, for instance, do 
not own much digital content. Rather, in their 
teaching they rely on content bought from 
educational publishers. In Germany, most likely 
also in other countries, this led to the situation that 
different school districts spent money for the same 
resources that they can only maintain in their local 
repository and deliver to schools in their district. 
The heterogeneity of learning management 
systems and a lack of sharing infrastructure 
prevents a more cost-effective collaboration here.  
To cope with such situations, edu-sharing 
allows 
the 
sharing 
of 
resources 
across 
heterogeneous learning management and authoring 
systems. In addition, it provides open interfaces 
and a trusted interaction protocol. Both together 
allow the integration of proprietary content pools 
in such a way that their content can be discovered 
and used from within edu-sharing while obviating 
the necessity to maintain copies of such foreign 
content in the edu-sharing repository. Through the 
trusted interaction protocol, there is also no need 
to maintain user data and access rights in edu-
sharing. Rather, access rights managed by school 
servers are directly forwarded to the foreign 
content pool. Finally, the license management 
component is extensible to serve other licenses 
than Creative Commons, as well. 
C. Collaboration in Shared Workspaces 
Besides providing open access to learning 
content and pedagogical scenario templates, edu-
sharing further supports collaborative work 
processes in networked "communities of practice" 
(Lave and Wenger, 1991). For each registered 
user, the local edu-sharing repository provides a 
personal workspace. Thus, edu-sharing users can 
manage their own, licensed and discovered open 
content in collections, which are represented as 
folders in the workspace and are maintained in the 
repository. All resources in the workspace only 
exist once and are just referenced in collections, 
not copied.  
In their personal workspace, educators may 
simple want to work on their own, first. However, 
once resources are uploaded into or created within 
the edu-sharing system, sharing resources with 
other users or groups is effortless. Particularly for 
the bootstrapping process of communities of 
practice, this strategy is promising. Educators can 
invite trusted peers to access individual resources, 
selected collections or the whole workspace in 
read or write mode.  
III. OPEN EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES (OER) 
From our sketch of the motivation behind the 
CampusContent Project it should be obvious that it 
shares the ideas of open educational resources and 
advances its wider definition of this concept, 
which includes (OECD, 2007):  
53
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

• content of varying granularity; 
• open source software tools for developing, 
discovering, using, adapting, remixing, 
organizing and delivering learning content 
and learning arrangements and functionality 
for organizing communities of practice;  
• implementation 
resources 
supporting 
interoperability and the design of sharable 
content and best practices. 
 
Figure 3.  Conceptual map of OER (following OECD, 2007, p. 31) 
The conceptual map of OER on Page 31 of the 
OECD study (2007) inspired the mapping of the 
CampusContent Project’s contributions onto the 
open educational resources domain (Atkins et al., 
2007) as illustrated in Fig. 3.  
IV. CONTRIBUTIONS OF EDU-SHARING TO OER  
The following discussion is organized along the 
three components of OER: content, software and 
implementation resources (OECD, 2007, p. 31) 
A. Content 
In 
edu-sharing 
educational 
resources 
of 
different kinds can be managed: digital media 
assets including text, illustrations, simulation, 
video and audio clips, photos, maps, or quizzes; 
learning objects, which combine topical content, a 
learning objective and learning activities (Krämer 
and Han, 2009); courses and course components 
(Krämer and Klebl 20009); teaching and learning 
experiences in the form of didactic scenarios 
(Krämer et al., 2010), and reference works like 
glossaries or thesauri.   
Figure 4 is a screen shot of a section of a course 
on German postwar history. The course references 
media assets from within the repository network, 
such as historical speeches of German and 
international 
politicians, 
facsimile 
of 
contemporary newspaper articles and historical 
documents, and short historical videos related to 
the establishment of the Berlin Wall (see, Fig. 5).  
B. Software Tools 
Concerning development and provisioning 
software, edu-sharing comes with a range of end-
user tools for creating media assets, authoring 
courses based on resources and scenario templates 
found in the repository network or personal 
workspaces, editing didactic scenarios, or creating 
QTI-compatible questions and test. The default 
distribution includes popular open source leaning 
management systems (LMSes) that are interfaced 
in such a way that learning resources and didactic 
scenario templates can be linked into a Moodle. 
Conversely, resources stored in the LMS can be 
uploaded in the repository or personal workspace. 
 
Figure 4.  Section of a history course in Moodle referencing edu-sharing 
objects (in German) 
Through 
edu-sharing’s 
rendering 
service, 
repository content can be played in all attached 
LMSes. It uses special modules for reproducing a 
range of graphics, sound and video files, QTI-
compliant tests and exercises, SCORM, Moodle 
and metacoon courses. Resources hosted on closed 
publisher servers play their content on the own 
server on behalf of the customer’s distant LMS-
systems.  
Currently, social software is realized in edu-
sharing in the form of a community portal, with 
community building and information services. A 
rudimentary user tracking service collecting 
dynamic metadata such as the numbers and 
54
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

contexts of use of resources is also available. 
Additional community functions like resource 
rating, user tagging and annotation of resources 
are under development.  
 
Figure 5.  Movie documenting the building of the Berlin Wall 
C. Implementation Resources 
The edu-sharinglicense manager acts like an 
agent that becomes visible whenever a new 
resource is uploaded or rights of use are inspected 
by re-users. Thus our license manager tackles the 
lack of awareness of copyright issues, which 
Hylén (2006) considered a challenge for OER.  
Best practices are supported from three 
perspectives:  
Didactic scenarios capture best practices in 
learning design (Klebl et al., 2010). They describe 
arrangements of learning, teaching and tutoring 
activities and pedagogical interactions. The 
didactics group of the CampusContent team has 
codified widely accepted didactic scenarios in the 
form of content-free didactic scenario templates 
and made them available in edu-sharing. The 
learning scenario editor of edu-sharing allows 
users to edit such templates by adding appropriate 
learning resources and tool bindings (e.g., wiki, 
forum, 
newsgroups, 
etc.) 
and 
refining 
or 
modifying predefined learner and tutor activities. 
Educators can also define their own scenarios and 
publish them with or without content in the 
repository.  
Configurable and pedagogically parameterized 
objects implement design principles that were 
carried over from software engineering and aim at 
improved reusability and effectiveness in content 
production (Krämer and Han, 2009). Configurable 
objects are interactive information or learning 
objects that can be applied in different topic areas. 
They are equipped with “leveling-screws” through 
which they can be adapted to the actual application 
context.  
Design principles, guidelines, help wikis, and 
useful information about various e-learning topics 
are collected and summarized in a comprehensive 
information portal. The categories addressed 
include: e-learning software and tools, best 
practices in e-learning content production, didactic 
scenarios, legal issues and other topics. This 
information portal is jointly developed with DINI 
(Deutsche Initiative für Netzwerkinformation 
e.V.).  
A third element in the implementation 
resources branch of the OER concept map copes 
with interoperability issues, in general, and 
standards 
as 
the 
IEEE, 
IMS 
and 
other 
standardization bodies advance them, in particular. 
We already argued that edu-sharing supports 
major e-learning standards including the OAI 
metadata 
harvesting 
protocol, 
web 
service 
standards and open interfaces. This will allow us 
to 
expand 
the 
homogeneous 
edu-sharing 
repository network to a heterogeneous network, 
which will provide access to foreign repositories.  
D. Sustaining Learning Resource Projects  
With its repository network and personal 
workspace concept, edu-sharing supports both a 
user-producer and a co-production model of 
(open) educational resources (cf., OER, 2007, p. 
13, 14). Through the coupling of different 
repositories and the embedding of heterogeneous 
learning management systems, learning resources 
will become “searchable across repositories” and 
can be “integrated and adapted across platforms”. 
E. Internationalization and Localization 
Specific challenges of OER in a global setting 
are 
issues 
like 
internationalization 
and 
localization. For large bodies of text, there is 
currently no other way than translation. If the text 
55
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

is represented in a specific format like Connexions 
courses are, appropriate editors should allow 
translators 
to 
keep 
layout 
and 
structural 
information, if suitable, and just change the 
language of the text.  
For interactive resources including movies, 
animations, user interaction, graphics and the like 
we have started to develop design patterns and 
structure templates that pull all language-and 
notation-dependent features to the interface such 
that they can be reconfigured. For instance, 
technically, inscriptions in graphics or animations 
can be modeled by variables in the code and 
bound to specific strings in a particular language at 
configuration 
time. 
Audio 
explanations 
of 
animations should be chopped into segments that 
are assigned to the appropriate synchronization 
points 
in 
the 
visual 
animation. 
If 
these 
synchronization points are visible at the object 
interface and the audio segments can be cut out, 
corresponding audio segments in the new language 
can be resynchronized with the visual animation.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Although close in spirit to the OER idea, 
CampusContent was not designed as an OER 
project. Rather it set out to design and construct a 
portal and distributed repository infrastructure that 
supports educators in sharing, joint development 
and reuse of learning resources and best 
pedagogical practices even if they prefer different 
end-user systems including content authoring 
tools, 
learning 
management 
systems 
and 
collaboration and communication services.  
In the end, as we argued in the main body of 
this paper, the project’s contributions address OER 
needs to a great extent. Our discussion emphasized 
technological 
concerns 
such 
as 
storage, 
management, retrieval, adaption, remix and 
delivery of educational content and codified best 
practices.  
With the new version of edu-sharing to be 
released in October 2010, the user interface is fully 
accessible at the cost of double development.   
As edu-sharing has been launched only a short 
while ago, however, current weaknesses include a 
lack of a critical mass of learning resources and a 
relatively 
small 
user 
community. 
The 
sustainability of edu-sharing outcomes, the growth 
of its content base and its community are not 
ensured yet, as for other repository and OER 
projects. 
We have also not yet decided about a suitable 
quality assessment process for open and closed 
content. Our initial idea was to leave the 
organization of such processes to upcoming 
communities of practice to avoid the bottleneck of 
peer reviews or an editorial committee.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank the German Research Foundation (DFG) for 
funding the CampusContent Project under code number 
44200719.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Atkins, D. E., Brown, J. S. and Hammond, A. L. (2007). A review of 
the open educational resources (OER) movement: achievements, 
challenges, and new opportunities. Report to The William and Flora 
Hewlett 
Foundation. 
Retrieved 
August 
28, 
2010, 
from 
http://www.oerderves.org/wp-content/uploads/2007/03/a-review-of-
the-open-educational-resources-oer-movement_final.pdf  
[2] 
Baraniuk, R. G. (2008). Challenges and opportunities for the open 
education movement: a connexions case study. In T. Iiyoshi, M. S. V. 
Kumar and J. S. Brown (Eds), Opening up education: the collective 
advancement of education through open technology, open content, 
and open knowledge (pp. 229–246). Cambridge, MA; London, UK: 
The MIT Press. 
[3] 
CampusContent.(2009). 
Project 
website: 
http://www.campuscontent.de/ 
[4] 
edu-sharing.net (2010). The association edu-sharing.net. Retrieved 
August 
28, 
2010, 
from 
http://www.edu-
sharing.net/mcportal/web/edu-sharing/edu-sharing-verein 
[5] 
Hylen, J. (2006). Open Educational Resources: Opportunities and 
Challenges. 
Retrieved 
August 
30, 
2010, 
from 
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/5/47/37351085.pdf 
[6] 
Klebl, M., Krämer, B. J.,  and Zobel, A. (2010). From Content to 
Practice: Sharing Educational Practice in edu-sharing, British Journal 
of Educational Technology, Vol 41(6), 2010 
[7] 
Krämer, B. J. and Han, P. (2009). Educational content creation and 
sharing in a technology-rich environment. International Journal on 
Advances in Software, 2, 188–201. 
[8] 
Krämer, B. J. and Klebl, M. (2009). Supporting Student Mobility and 
Collaboration through the E-Learning Portal edu-sharing, Fourth 
Colloquium on International Engineering Education, pp. 1-14, 
Research Report 4/2009, Department of Mathematics and Computer 
Science, FernUniversität in Hagen 
[9] 
Krämer, B. J., Klebl, M. and Zobel, A. (2010). Sharing educational 
knowledge 
and 
best 
practices 
in 
edu-sharing. 
International 
Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning. eL&mL 2010. 
St. Maarten, Netherlands Antilles.  
[10] Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate 
Peripheral Participation, New York: Cambridge University Press. 
[11] OECD (2007). Giving Knowledge for Free: The Emergence of Open 
Educational 
Resources. 
Retrieved 
August 
28, 
2010, 
from 
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/35/7/38654317.pdf
 
56
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

