An E-learning Course on E-Commerce 
Designed, developed and delivered as a distance learning course for EU remote communities  
 Thanasis Hadzilacos  
Open University Cyprus  
Lefkosia, Cyprus 
and Computer Technology Institute, Patras, Greece  
Email: thh@ouc.ac.cy 
Angelika I. Kokkinaki 
University of Nicosia, 
Nicosia, Cyprus 
Email: kokkinaki.a@unic.ac.cy 
 Panayiotis Kyriakou 
Open University Cyprus  
Lefkosia, Cyprus 
Email: panayiotis.kyriakou@ouc.ac.cy 
Grigoris Liassis 
Open University Cyprus  
Lefkosia, Cyprus 
Email: liasis.g@gmail.com  
 
Konstantinos Paraskevas 
Email: paraskevasd@gmail.com 
 
  
 
 
Abstract — This paper presents aspects of the design, 
development and implementation of an e-learning course on e-
commerce. This course was delivered as distance learning to 
adults living in remote areas of EU. The course was developed 
as part of the REVIT project, which proved sustainable 
methods for offering courses by employing available ICT 
infrastructure in local schools, after hours, a synchronous e-
learning platform for the weekly lectures and a variety of 
asynchronous tools for communication and support of the 
learners.     
Keywords - e-learning; distance learning; e-commerce; 
REVIT project. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Designing, developing and implementing e-learning 
courses is a complex endeavor involving pedagogical, 
technological and economic aspects.  In REVIT, a project 
that run from 2008 until 2010 in Finland, Poland, Bulgaria, 
Greece and Cyprus and was financed by the LifeLong 
Learning Program (LLP) of the EU Commission, such 
issues were tackled for e-learning courses designed 
specifically for the needs of small remote communities. 
Considerations included the unavailability of local qualified 
teachers, the very small number of people who are 
interested in and capable to follow a particular course in 
such communities, the availability of Internet infrastructure 
and tools, and the need for the methodology developed to be 
scalable. 
 
This paper presents aspects of the design, development 
and implementation of an e-learning course on e-commerce, 
which was developed within REVIT. It was initially 
developed for citizens living in remote areas in Greece and 
Cyprus. As part of the localization process of the REVIT 
project, partners may localize the contents of the course to 
their own special requirements. Beyond its contributions 
within the REVIT project, however, this paper should also 
be of help to others who might wish to use the methodology 
and the e-course design. 
  
In line with these, this paper aims at 1) outlining the 
methodology for identifying users educational needs related 
to e-commerce, 2) presenting a specific framework of the 
design of REVIT e-course on e-commerce, 3) allowing 
partners and others who will be localizing REVIT courses to 
understand the design parameters and thus perform their 
tasks more efficiently, and 4) facilitating the evaluation of 
the design and development of the REVIT e-course on e-
commerce.  
 
For this course, the development team consisted of an 
expert on e-learning pedagogy and technologies, an e-
business 
domain 
expert 
and 
two 
engineers 
with 
specializations on multimedia and e-learning technologies. 
The development team was responsible for the design of the 
course and the corresponding learning material. Three of the 
team members had previous experience in the field of e-
learning. One of them has also launched an actual e-
commerce web site and has applied in practice some of the 
concepts discussed in the course! The domain expert was 
exposed to conventional academic environment and the 
whole process was a learning experience that was 
inspirational to enrich her coursework material as well as 
seminars 
given 
to 
the 
business 
community. 
The 
development team was complimented by the tutor who had 
background in e-business. It is worth noting that the tutor 
12
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

was serving in the military, while delivering the course; this 
experience was both challenging and rewarding. The course 
has been offered once and the feedback received has been 
incorporated in a second version of the design and 
implementation. 
 
The remaining of this paper is structured as follows. 
Section 2 provides a brief literature review on relevant 
pedagogical approaches as well as the methodology used for 
identifying the educational needs of the target audience. 
Section 3 provides a description of the design of a REVIT e-
course along with examples. Section 4 provides the 
preliminary evaluation of the course based on its first 
implementation. Section 5 concludes this paper.   
 
II. 
PEDAGOGICAL PERSPECTIVE AND NEEDS ANALYSIS 
REVIT e-courses were designed according to active 
learning, learner-centered principles. A REVIT e-course is 
conceived as a set of learning activities; its curriculum is not 
a sequence of names (a table of contents, describing what 
the teacher lectures about) but a set of verbs (describing 
what the learner does). The sequencing of these learning 
activities ranges from the simplest, the sequential, to the 
most complex, a labeled directed graph. (e.g. «If you found 
Activity A too difficult, do Activity B; else go to Activity 
D»). A REVIT e-course includes the learning objects 
involved (such as video-lectures, exercises, simulations, and 
text), the learning objectives (and other Metadata: who 
prepared it, when, for what type of learners, prerequisites, 
IPRs, technical infrastructure needed), and the learning 
environment 
(e.g. 
Moodle, 
OpenSim, 
Elluminate, 
Café@Palaichori, + tutor; including the structure of, say, 
Moodle).  
 
The design of a REVIT e-course requires the learner 
profile, the tutor profile, the learning objectives and their 
prerequisites including learning environment structure and 
technical infrastructure. A (high-level) description of the 
learning activities (including learner time/effort required) is 
given, as well as the sequencing of the learning activities 
(including time restrictions or recommended timing: e.g. 
“one lesson per week”). A (high level) description of the 
learning objects, including sizing (e.g. a 2’ video), sources, 
and recourses necessary for implementation;  a prototypical 
‘exam’ (which need not be a standard written exam, but 
something that a learner must be able to do if successful) is 
included in order to determine the level of depth of the 
course. 
 
In line with the overall pedagogical paradigm and in 
order to identify the profile of the learners, the project team 
visited and met the prospective learners to get to know them 
personally and their socioeconomic context. In informal 
discussions during these visits, the topic of how Information 
and Communication Technologies and E-commerce, in 
particular, can be used to promote local products and 
services emerged a number of times. To illustrate these with 
two indicative cases, we included those of Elena and Dimos. 
 
Elena lives in Palaichori, a village in Troodos mountain 
in Cyprus. She works together with her husband in a family 
business, that is, a small retailer of electronics devices. 
Through her acquaintances, she became aware of agro-
touristic 
initiatives 
promoted 
through 
the 
Cyprus 
Organization of Tourism and received funding to renovate 
their old family mansion into a bed and breakfast facility 
offering traditional Cypriot hospitality. Funding was also 
available for developing a webpage, which provides basic 
information about accommodation offered and the vicinity 
area; email is used for preliminary communication and 
provisional booking; transactions are not supported. With no 
formal studies in Business Administration, Hotel and 
Hospitality Management or other relevant field, Elena is in 
charge of most operations in the facility, which operates 
primarily during weekends in the winter time, while it 
enjoys high season during summer. She perceives e-
commerce as a promise but with caution: something to help 
her run the facility more conveniently and effectively but 
also something that will take her in unfamiliar and possibly 
dangerous waters.    
 
Dimos is in his late forties and lives in Ios, a small, 
remote, Greek island, “where three (hectic tourist) months 
feed the other (boring to death) nine”. From an early age, he 
demonstrated his creativity and his artistic inclinations. 
Under his family influence, however, he did not pursue 
studies related to his inclinations; rather, he enrolled in a 
Business School where he has attended several classes 
without graduating. Currently, he works as an employee in a 
Third Party Logistics Operator, by day. After hours, he 
works at a self improvised atelier at home making jewelry 
and other artifacts that are sold via jewelry shops and tourist 
souvenir shops in the island. His designs are popular among 
locals and tourists, alike. However, Dimos feels that his lack 
of specialized studies in design is an inhibiting factor not 
only for the development of this hobby into a full-blown 
business but also for his creativity.  The e-commerce topics 
sounded promising as he could use it to create his own retail 
channel easily and relatively inexpensively.  
 
With these (and other similar) cases, it was decided to 
design a course on e-commerce and include learning 
activities related to the complete business process for 
products and services. The course was to be based on 
tutorial discussions, learning activities, podcasts for 
acquiring additional exposure in the field and homework 
assignments as explained in the following section. 
13
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

III. 
DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE E-COMMERCE 
COURSE 
The learning methodology for this course includes an 
initial two-hour face-to-face meeting in the school of the 
village in the presence of the local coordinator of the 
REVIT project to outline the structure of the course and the 
use of specific tools. An overall description of the E-
commerce course can be found in Appendix A.  Information 
on the design and the development process is available at 
http://revit.cti.gr.   
 
A fundamental principle followed in this project is the 
separation, with clearly defined interfaces, of the design, the 
implementation and the delivery of the course. The design 
requires the combined expertise of e-learning pedagogy and 
technology, and of deep subject knowledge, far beyond that 
which will be delivered in the course. The implementation, 
i.e. filling the educational activities designed with specific 
content, does not require the presence of an e-learning 
pedagogy or technology expert any more. Finally, the 
distance delivery of such a course does not need a 
university-level instructor. It is this separation of levels that 
guarantees scalability and transferability: Although the cost 
of developing and delivering one such course would be 
prohibitive for the small audience that a couple of remote 
communities can provide, to repeatedly deliver it is quite 
feasible. Furthermore, localizing such a course in another 
language and culture did not call for a redesign, nor for 
repetition of the initial research, but mainly for the 
translation and localization of the educational material and 
activities. 
 
The methodological approach allows the learners to perform 
a number of e-learning activities. 
• 
Learners participated in synchronous distance learning 
sessions that entail tutorial discussions on e-commerce 
concepts.  Sessions are coordinated by a remote 
instructor. At implementation level, it is supported by 
Elluminate LiveTM  v.10. 
• 
An asynchronous e-learning system (Moodle v.1.9.4, an 
open source LMS) and various Web 2.0 tools were 
used, including wikis, blogs, pre-recorded podcasts 
with e-commerce case studies and RSS feeds.   
• 
Participants worked on their own using specifically 
designed 
educational 
material 
and 
software 
(asynchronous distance learning). 
• 
They communicated, cooperated and constructed new 
knowledge with their fellow students, using the modern 
tools and communication spaces provided, through well 
designed and structured educational activities.  
• 
Finally, participants had the opportunity to access e-
shops (developed by the design team using a Content 
Management System, JoomlaTM) parameterized and 
personalized to fit their business plan. 
 
The primary aims of this course are to i) let the 
participants perceive the Web as new channel for doing 
business and ii) have them accept the idea of directly 
marketing their products and services using the Web, selling 
their products and services through the Web and facilitating 
some of their business processes with the help of Web-
enabled tools, at large. 
IV. 
ASSEMENT AND CONCLUSIVE REMARKS  
Overall, the course was successful. Trainees learned how 
to use web to investigate for competitors and products, the 
different kinds of online advertising, how to conduct online 
surveys and organize online events, about copyrights and 
personal data safety in online transactions, and how to build 
their own e-commerce site. They understood procedures and 
means that they should be aware for while doing online 
business.  
  
The methodology followed was flexible and easy for 
everyone to follow. Learners founded courses very 
interesting. The one-week time period between classes was 
enough for learners to do their assignments and study 
additional material. Podcasts, were received very positively 
because they contained mostly practical examples and no 
complicated terminology, addressing all the main aspects of 
e-business.    
 
In sum, the learners acquired valuable knowledge in e-
commerce procedures that could be applied in local 
businesses; realized the importance of copyrights and 
personal data security; realized that there exist legislation 
and directives that define commercial online activity; met 
and socialized with new people.  
 
The overall assessment of the project, including 
evaluation of the courses offered is described in detail in the 
relevant 
deliverable 
of 
the 
project, 
available 
at 
http://revit.cti.gr/. It included questionnaires for the 
students, participation in a (multinational) focus group at a 
conference at the end of the project and a directed interview 
with all tutors (also available at the web site for registered 
users). 
 
We reconsider ways to introduce the e-shop platform 
earlier in the course, so that learners complete the 
parameterization of their e-shops in an incremental manner 
along with the topics introduced during weekly synchronous 
sessions. It is expected that in this way, they would have 
time to reflect, review and evaluate their design. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper has been partially supported by the REVIT 
project (143664-LLP-1-2008-1-GR-KA3-KA3MP) funded 
by the Lifelong Learning Program of DG Education and 
Culture, EUC. 
14
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

REFERENCES 
[1] C. Beard, C. and J. P. Wilson, The Power of Experiential Learning, 
Kogan Page, London, 2002. 
[2] M. Csikszentmihalyi, Flow, The Psychology of Optimal Experience, 
Harper Collins, New York, 1998. 
[3] Ch. Dede, “Constructivist Learning Environments: Immersion in 
Distributed, 
Virtual 
Worlds,” 
in: 
Constructivist 
Learning 
Environments: Case Studies in Instructional Design, B. Wilson, Ed. 
Educational Technology Publications, 1996, pp. 165-177.  
[4] M. Fetscherin, and C. Lattemann, “User Acceptance in Virtual 
Worlds,” in: Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, vol. 9, no. 3, 
2008, pp. 231-242.  
[5] S. L. Howell, P. B. Williams and N. K. Lindsay, “Thirty-two Trends 
Affecting Distance Education: An Informed Foundation for Strategic 
Planning,” in: Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration, 
vol. 5, no. 3, 2003. 
[6] P. Jarvis, Adult Learning in the Social Context, Croom Helm, 
London, 1987. 
[7] D. C. Kayes, “Experiential learning and its critics: Preserving the role 
of experience in management learning and education”, in: Learning 
and Education, Academy of Management, vol. 1, no. 2, 2002, pp. 
137-149. 
[8] D. A. Kolb, Experiential Learning: Experience as the Source of 
Learning and Development, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1984. 
[9] M. Ma, and R. Agarwal, “Through a Glass Darkly: Information 
Technology 
Design, 
Identity 
Verification, 
and 
Knowledge 
Contribution in Online Communities,” in Information Systems 
Research, Informs, Maryland, 2002, pp. 42-67. 
[10] A. P. McAfee,  “Enterprise 2.0: The Dawn of Emergent 
Collaboration,” in: Management of Technology and Innovation, vol. 
47, no. 3, 2006, pp. 21-28. 
[11] D. J. Pine, D.J. and J. H. Gilmore, “The Experience Economy: Work 
is Theatre and Every Business a Stage”, Harvard Business School 
Press, Boston, 1999. 
[12] D. Porter, “Innovations, Trends, and Creativity in Distance 
Learning,” in: Proceedings of 4th International Congress on 
Education and Technology – Inter-American University of Puerto 
Rico, 2006,  p. 2. 
[13] E. von Glasersfeld, “A constructivist approach to teaching," in 
Constructivism in Education, L. P. Steffe and Gale Eds. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum, 1995, pp. 3-15. 
[14] J. Walker, “Through the looking glass,” in: The Art of Computer-
Human Interface Design, B. Laurel, Ed. Addison-Wesley, 1990, pp. 
213-245. 
[15] P. Watzlawick, J. N. Beavin,  and D. D. Jackson, “Pragmatics of 
Human Communication: A Study of Interactional Patterns, 
Pathologies, and Paradoxes,” Published by W. W. Norton and 
Co/NY, 1967. 
[16] W. Winn, Learning in Virtual Environments: A Theoretical 
Framework and Considerations for Design, Educational Media 
International, Washington, USA, 36: 4, pp. 271 — 279, 1999. 
 
V. 
APPENDIX A: OVERALL DESCRIPTION OF THE E-
COMMERCE COURSE 
Title: Introductory Course in E-Commerce 
Type of Course: International Course (initially offered in 
Greece and Cyprus, translated in English and localized for 
Bulgaria) 
Dates:  18/01/2010 – 10/05/2010 (every Monday, in total 14 
weekly one-hour synchronous meetings in the form of 
tutorial discussions)  
Short Description: The main aim is for trainees to 
experience through appropriate educational activities, the 
direct marketing of their products and services using the 
Web, selling their products and services through the Web 
and facilitating some of their business processes with the 
help of a Web-enabled tool. The objectives of this course in 
detail are as follows: 
Knowledge 
• 
Use web tools to identify competitors’ offers and 
customers’ needs. 
• 
Define and describe the processes involved in 
electronic business. Identify and evaluate different web 
advertising methods (i.e. banners, paid ads, online 
coupons, promotional emails etc).  
• 
Identify the critical success factors in e-commerce 
(ways to support communications, trust enhancing 
methods, etc).  
• 
Become aware of the challenges involved in e-
commerce and become familiar with best practices to 
overcome them. Understand fundamentals of logistics 
related to the distribution of physical products. Become 
aware of legal and ethical obligations regarding direct 
marketing and e-commerce.  
• 
Get familiar with the process of parameterization of a 
prototype and the reference to a framework that can be 
used to evaluate alternative e-business implementations. 
• 
Become familiar with funding/sponsoring possibilities 
to support future e-business initiatives. 
Skills 
• 
Search the web for products and services relevant (i.e. 
similar or complimentary) to their own and evaluate 
them from a marketing perspective.  
• 
Identify the principles of their electronic retailing (e-
tailing) strategy for products or services.  
• 
Promote and advertise a site. 
• 
Describe their own business and e-business needs 
• 
Customize (parameterize) a template application 
program to derive their e-business implementation. 
• 
Evaluate alternative e-business prototypes for their 
company and decide based on a structured framework. 
 
Attitude 
• 
Adopt a positive, yet realistic, attitude towards e-
business, acknowledging its potentials and limitations.  
• 
Form a well-informed attitude relevant to their 
company’s needs and priorities, their effectiveness, 
complexity, 
advantages, 
limitations 
and 
overall 
feasibility. 
 
A. Teaching and Learning Methodology 
 
Each week there were: a synchronous (1-1.5 hours) 
session through the use of Elluminate and asynchronous 
15
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

learning activities (2-3 hours) developing e-Commerce 
skills. A typical synchronous session would include: 
Welcome (5’-15’):  the participants try to login the 
synchronous 
Elluminate 
application 
and 
check 
the 
functionality of their speakers and microphone. Tutor 
welcomes the participants, asks questions about the 
assignments and tries to prepare the field for the class to 
begin. 
Introduction (15-30’):  The tutor gives an introduction 
on the topic of the day, prepares the class slideshow and 
makes some questions in order to begin a discussion with 
trainees, encouraging their participation. 
Practice (30’-40’): Tutor shares his Internet browser or 
his desktop, so everyone can have access to his material. 
Based on the theory and tutor guidance, participants try to 
execute live some exercises and examples. Normally this 
procedure brings up questions which are discussed during 
the class. In most cases, learners have personal examples to 
share in order for the material to be easier understood. The 
communication with trainees is effected through voice or 
chat. 
Assignment (5’): At the end of the class, tutor gives 
directions to learners about their weekly assignments. The 
assignments are located in the Moodle part of the Revit 
portal and most of the times learners write their answers or 
comments in the forum, which is also located in Moodle.  
Asynchronous Activities All course material can be 
found in Moodle so that learners have always access to it. 
The preferred means of communication for questions and 
clarifications is the Moodle forum; direct communication 
with the tutor through e-mail is also possible. Podcasts were 
prepared corresponding to each week of the course; learners 
could download and listen to them in several means (mobile 
phone, car, personal media player etc.). 
 
Participants’ Profile: 
IOS 
 
: 2 participants (1 male and 1 female) 
PALAICHORI 
: 6 participants (1 male and 5 female) 
 
Some of the learners owned a local business and some of 
them were having unrelated jobs (such as teachers or courier 
employees). They all wanted to attend the course in order to 
create an e-commerce site or expand electronically their 
activities. They had experience on how the use of 
Elluminate, since they had completed the Introductory Revit 
course on Internet Services.  
 
Activities 
The activities designed for the learners were flexible 
enough to match their capabilities and broad enough to 
relate to a large part of the “theory”. Examples include:  
• 
Use of search engines to locate competitors and 
products Identification and description of online ads. 
• 
Drafting the questions for a customer survey  
• 
Creating an online questionnaire  
• 
Listening to the discussions (podcasts) and posting 
comments in the forum 
• 
Registering in an online market and search for products 
related to own or projected business.  
• 
Use of the web to organize own vocation. 
• 
Design, Creation and parameterization of an e-
commerce site.  
 
Learners were following class material and tutor’s 
guidance during synchronous sessions. In asynchronous 
sessions didn’t spend much effort so we were trying to solve 
any problem during the synchronous sessions. Some extra 
Elluminate meetings were made in order for learners to 
understand some course issues.  
 
Platforms Used 
Elluminate LiveTM v.10, Moodle v.1.9.4, Web 2.0 tools 
(wikis, blogs, podcasts and RSS feeds) JoomlaTM. 
 
The overall structure of the course follows. Sections are 
denoted by a three level notation, in the style of Section 
k.l.m. The first level (i.e. k) refers to the lesson during 
which it was delivered. The second (i.e. l) refers to the 
learning objective addressed and the third one (i.e. m) 
relates to the learning activity that supported the learning 
objective.  
 
Section 1.1.1 “Exploring The Business Environment – 
Look Up Competition”: Participate in an online session and 
use Google and Hakia search engines to search for 
competitors, substitute products or services. 
Section 1.2.1 “Exploring The Business Environment –
Search Engines”: Discuss in the forum the cases when 
popularity-based search engines are the preferred choice. 
That is when the desired result is described well by a set of 
keywords. 
Section 1.2.2 “Exploring The Business Environment –
Assignment On Search Engines”: Use a popularity based 
search engine (i.e. Google to search for something related to 
your business (i.e. products/services offered in your region 
similar to yours). Repeat the search with another search 
engine (i.e. Bing).  Add your comments in the forum. 
Section 1.2.3 “Exploring The Business Environment - 
Learn About Semantic Web Or Web 3.0”: Have you ever 
encountered a case in which the selected keywords could 
not yield the desired results in a search engine? If yes, try to 
characterize such cases. If not, try the following case: 
During one of her visits in Bulgaria, one of the contributors 
tasted a white wine that a delicate flavor of roses in its 
bouquet. It was explained to her that this is due to the fact 
that vines absorb aromas from their surroundings and this 
particular vineyard was neighboring to cultivation of roses. 
Unfortunately, she cannot recall the name of the wine, 
although she recalls that the bottle had an elongated shape 
with downward spiral edges and greenish kind of etiquette. 
16
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

Can you find this wine based on this description? Add 
comments in the forum. 
Section 1.2.4 “Exploring The Business Environment – 
Assignment On Semantic Web”: Visit www.hakia.com 
which is an ontological search engine based on Web 3.0 
technologies. Use the phrase “Bulgarian wines with floral 
aroma” Can you locate it? The third link gets you to 
www.alibaba.com and although not helpful at this point the 
trainees should make a mental note about it and we’ll get 
back to this marketplace later. Add your comments in the 
forum. 
Section 1.2.5 “Exploring The Business Environment –
Business Environment Analysis”: Use various search 
engines to collect as much information on the products and 
services they offer and use web assessment tools to evaluate 
their online presence. 
Section 1.2.6 “Exploring The Business Environment –
Business Environment Analysis Discussion”: Discuss the 
analysis you have conducted in the forum. 
Section 2.1.1 “Getting To Know What your Customers 
Want And How to Reach Them”: Participate in an online 
session and do the following tasks: Use the Feedmil search 
engine to search in social media for customers’ perceptions 
and views. Discuss how it could be important to your 
business. Visit the website of a national newspaper or a 
news portal and identify the ads. Go on www.facebook.com 
and visit your Profile or the Profile of your tutor and 
identify the ads. Visit www.google.com and search for a 
keyword and identify the ads. Visit www.youtube.com and 
watch a video and identify the ads and the major differences 
from the previous cases. (Explore different methods of 
soliciting customer’s views and preferences. Use a variety 
of web advertising and online promotions to reach your 
customers. Understand how to measure success of these 
promotional alternatives.) 
Section 2.2.1 “Getting To Know What Your Customers 
Want 
and 
How 
To 
Reach 
Them 
- 
Marketing 
Fundamentals”: Use podcasts to learn the theory on 
Marketing Fundamentals. 
Section 2.2.2 “Getting To Know What Your Customers 
Want And How To Reach Them – Conduct a list of 
questions”: Use a text editor and type some questions you 
would like to ask your customers (demographics, 
preferences, suggestions etc)  
Section 2.2.3 “Getting To Know What Your Customers 
Want And How To Reach Them – Advantages And 
Limitations of Web Advertisements” Use the 7 diffs and 
sims game approach to discuss the web over traditional 
media. 
Section 2.2.4 “Getting To Know What Your Customers 
Want and How To Reach Them - On-line Ads”: Use 
podcasts to learn the theory on on-line ads. 
Section 2.2.5 “Getting To Know What Your Customers 
Want And How To Reach Them – Search On-line Ads”: 
Search ads and display ads. 
Section 2.2.6 “Getting To Know What Your Customers 
Want And How To Reach Them – Evaluate On-line Ads 
Assignment”: Which would you consider as your first 
choice? 
Section 3.1.1 “Getting To Know What your Customers 
Want And How To Reach Them – Online Survey”: 
Participate in an online session and do the following tasks: 
Use the list of questions you prepared at home and a web-
based survey tool to create a preliminary online survey to 
solicit 
information 
your 
customers. 
Consult 
http://groups.yahoo.com and explore how you can use 
Email to send emails to your customers 
Section 3.2.1 “Getting To Know What Your Customers 
Want And How To Reach Them - Online Survey”: Use a 
web-based survey tool (as demonstrated in class) and 
enhance the online survey for your customers. Email the 
link of your survey to a few customers/friends/family 
members and ask them to answer the questions. 
Section 3.2.2 “Getting To Know What Your Customers 
Want And How to Reach Them - Online Survey”: Solicit 
their feedback on the questions. Change questions, Add or 
remove based on the feedback you receive. 
Section 4.1.1 “Getting to Know What Your Customers 
Want And How To Reach Them - Products And Services 
Promotion”: Participate in an online session and do the 
following tasks: Visit www.coolsavings.com. Describe how 
products and services are promoted. Discuss ways to solicit 
answers from your customers for your survey questions. 
Update your survey 
Section 4.2.1 “Getting To Know What Your Customers 
Want And How To Reach Them - Products And Services 
Promotion”: Use podcasts to learn about the theory on Web 
Advertising and become familiar with the terminology and 
the concepts. 
Section 4.2.2 “Getting To Know What Your Customers 
Want And How To Reach Them - Products And Services 
Promotion”: You are given a budget of 1000 Euros for 
promotion of your company for the next three months. What 
would you do with it.  Defend your choice. 
Section 4.2.3 “Getting To Know What Your Customers 
Want And How To Reach Them - Products And Services 
Promotion”: Use podcasts to learn about the theory on 
promotions, online events and attractions. 
Section 4.2.4 “Getting To Know What Your Customers 
Want And How To Reach Them - Products And Services 
Promotion”: Get in groups of 2-3 and organize an online 
event for your region. Present your ideas in class. Vote for 
the best plan and start implementing it. 
Section 5.1.1 “Electronic Commerce Part I: Tangible 
Products” Participate in an online session and visit e-
commerce sites that sell tangible products. Discuss 
advantages and limitations of conventional vs. online 
setting. 
Section 5.2.1 “Electronic Commerce Part I: Tangible 
Products”: Study the material on e-commerce. 
17
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

Section 5.2.2 “Electronic Commerce Part I: Tangible 
Products”: Study the material on disintermediation, channel 
conflict, re-intermediation. 
Section 5.2.3 Electronic Commerce Part I: Tangible 
Products”: Get to www.alibaba.com register (it is for free) 
and put up sales lead for your local products (or ask for 
buying leads for products that you need for the functioning 
of your business. 
Section 6.1.1 Electronic Commerce Part I: Tangible 
Products Shipping And Handling”: Participate in an online 
session and Visit several different sites, place an order for 
several different products and see how shipping and 
handling issues are handled. Study their returns policy. 
Discuss payment methods. Refer to security aspects. 
Section 6.2.1 “Electronic Commerce Part I: Tangible 
Products Shipping And Handling”: Study the material on 
lessons learned and success factors for e-commerce sites. 
Section 6.2.2 “Electronic Commerce Part I: Tangible 
Products Shipping And Handling”: Discuss in the forum 
your concerns on shipping and handling. 
Section 7.1.1 “Electronic Commerce Part II: Services” 
Participate in an online session and plan a trip. Visit an on-
line travel agent. Reflect upon needs/desires that have not 
been satisfied by such sites. Use a destination management 
system such as www.visitbritain.com/  What other features 
could you get from a destination management system? 
Section 7.2.1 “Electronic Commerce Part II: Services 
Travel Agent Services” Organize your trip using at least 3 
of the suggested travel agent sites. 
Section 7.2.2 “Electronic Commerce Part II: Services 
Travel Agent Services” Discuss in a forum advantages and 
limitations on travel online services. Which is your favorite? 
Section 8.1.1 “Electronic Commerce Part II: Travel 
Agent Services”: Participate in an online session and discuss 
about your experiences on travel online services. Use 
special-purpose Web 2.0 tools (www.wayn.com 
or 
www.tripadvisor.com) to see how travelers share tips, 
recommendations and advice. Discuss your findings. Based 
on the analysis of your fantasy trip, now identify points of 
interest, historical sites, local products (oil, wine, aromatics 
herbs etc) and/or establishments (vineries, olive mills, 
crafts, arts etc) special treatments or spas,, that can be 
complementary to your business and may be referred and 
used as marketing tools to promote your services (i.e. to 
extend the length of visits for guests). You may get 
information and inspiration from regions like Napa Valley 
in California or Provence in France. Discuss your ideas (30 
minutes).  
Section 8.2.2 “Electronic Commerce Part II: Travel 
Agent Services”: Study reading material on travel and 
tourism services online and Zaragoza case study. 
Section 9.1.1 “E-environment”: Participate in an online 
session  to learn on Data Protection and Privacy issues as 
well as issues related to the contract law, that is, information 
on  i) The company identity including address; ii) The main 
features of goods or services; iii) Prices information 
including tax and, if appropriate, delivery costs, iv) The 
period for which the offer or price remains valid; v) 
Payment, 
delivery 
and 
fulfillment 
performance 
arrangements; vi) Right of the consumer to withdraw (i.e. 
cancelation terms); vii) The minimum duration of the 
contract and whether the contract for the supply of products 
or services is to be permanent or recurrent, if appropriate; 
viii)  Whether an equivalent product or service might be 
substituted and confirmation as to whether the seller pays 
the return costs in this event. Compare the derived policies 
and negotiate solutions. Visit site www.out-law.com /page -
430 for more details. Visit the www.w3.org/WAI site and 
get to know accessibility issues, the Accessibility Law and 
guidelines to avoid common accessibility problems.  
Section 10.1.1 “E-environment”: Participate in an online 
session. Get to understand how the legislation on 
Intellectual property rights (IPR) (2001/29/EC) extends to 
Internet i.e. through infringement of content (see for 
example 
www.copyscape.com) 
or 
misappropriate 
replication of patented tools (i.e. Amazon’s patented “one-
click” purchasing option. Get to understand issues related to 
tax jurisdiction (Council Directive 2002/38/EC and Council 
Regulation 792/2002) on how Value Added Tax (VAT) was 
to be charged and collected for electronic commerce. List to 
the podcast to learn how the business plan of nau.com and 
how it differs from its competitions. Visit www.nau.com to 
see how the concepts have been implemented in practice. 
Section 10.2.1 “E-environment – European Union”: 
Listen to the podcast to understand what the European 
Union Act 2002/58/EC Directive on Privacy and Electronic 
Communications means in practice. 
Section 11.1.1 “Implementation And Evaluation Of An 
E-commerce Site”: Participate in an online session Visit 
www.useit.com. Learn about the Usability Heuristic 
Evaluation as outlined in Nielsen (2000). Select an e-
commerce site and apply the Usability Heuristic Evaluation. 
Discuss the results. 
Section 12.1.1 “Implementation And Evaluation Of An 
E-commerce Site”: Participate in an online session. Use the 
implemented prototype and learn how to parameterize its 
attributes. 
Section 12.2.1 “Implementation And Evaluation Of An 
E-commerce Site”: Work on the prototype and complete 
your parameterization. 
Section 13.1.1 “Implementation And Evaluation Of An 
E-commerce Site”: Participate in an online session. Present 
your parameterized prototype. Each student may select 
someone else’s e-commerce prototype and apply the 
usability evaluation heuristics to identify advantages and 
limitations. Discuss the results in the forum (1 hour). 
Section 14.1.1 “Implementation And Evaluation Of An 
E-commerce Site”: Participate in an online session. 
Questions and Answers. Explore funding opportunities for 
e-commerce development for each country. 
 
18
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

