E-learning and M-learning in African Languages 
A Survey of Oshikwanyama Students at a Northern Namibian School 
 
Aletta Mweneni Hamwedi 
Education Department 
Rhodes University 
 Grahamstown, South Africa 
alettanghelo@gmail.com 
Lorenzo Dalvit 
School of Journalism and Media Studies 
Rhodes University 
Grahamstown, South Africa 
l.dalvit@ru.ac.za
 
 
Abstract-The paper reports on a small-scale survey carried out 
in a northern Namibian urban school about mobile and 
computer experiences as well as attitudes towards the use of 
Oshikwanyama in an ICT domain among grade 11 students. 
This paper provides some discussion of Learner Centered 
Education (LCE) as a useful framework for research into 
emancipation through technology use. It highlights the 
importance of African language teaching in a globalised 
world. The experiences and attitudes of students in relation to 
ICT and Oshikwanyama are presented and discussed. The 
findings indicate a pervasive access and use of technology, 
particularly mobile. Attitudes towards the use of an African 
language such as Oshikwanyama in the ICT domain 
highlighted some articulation on the part of the students. 
These encourage the further exploration of the potential for 
the use of developing ICT resources in an African language as 
a pedagogical tool, which is the topic of a broader study by the 
authors.  
 
Keywords-Information Communication Technologies (ICTs); 
Mobile learning; Electronic learning; Constructivism; Learner-
centered approach; African indigenous languages.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Governments around the world are adopting policies that 
permit private sector to expand communication network and 
services [11][16][19]. Individual ownership of computers 
and Internet connection is often difficult or impossible for 
most third-world indigenous groups. Community access 
centres are the most common means to provide access in 
developing contexts [11]. This situation is common in 
Namibia where most teachers and indigenous people are 
connected through the internet café and a vast number of 
individuals are connected through the mobile phones. 
Leiberman [11] asserts that “We have to manage the 
process of global integration in such a way that everyone 
can benefit and no one gets crushed.” Since ICT is an 
emerging tool of globalization, there is a need for education 
stakeholders to be involved in its integration into learning. 
Dalvit [4] asserts that “in order for ICT to be effective in 
education, the conditions must be created for students to 
effectively appropriate the use of the new technologies, 
understand how they work and how to use them”. This 
means that teachers need to create opportunities where 
students can interact with ICT; need to research in depth the 
curriculum implementation and the classroom real-life 
situation because that is where the educational products are 
being harvested.  
The focal point of this paper is a small-scale survey of 
the use and availability of ICT tools to students of 
Oshikwanyama as a first language. This serves as an 
explanatory tool for both the benefits of ICT in 
Oshikwanyama learning and the implications of ICT use in 
the classroom. Students' attitudes and previous experiences 
with the use of Oshikwanyama in the ICT domain are part 
of the study. This paper attempts to answer some of the 
following questions: 
 
a. 
What are the current mobile phones and computer 
access and use among students at a High School in 
northern Namibia? 
b. 
What are the perceived benefits and challenges of 
using and learning Oshikwanyama in an ICT 
domain? 
To address these questions, two strands have been addressed 
in the sections that follow. Firstly, is the provision of 
teaching and learning using ICT and secondly, the presence 
of the African languages in the ICT domain. Those are 
discussed in sections two and three. Section four gives a 
description of the methods used in carrying out this survey 
and the last two sections provides the analysis of the 
findings as related to access and use of ICT and the 
students‟ perception about learning Oshikwanyama in an 
ICT domain.          
II. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
When considering the dynamics of mobile and electronic 
learning, several pedagogical principles and theories are 
relevant. The learner must be the agent of change and 
transition at the centre of learning and be given the 
technological tool at his/her disposal to conquer the world in 
which s/he lives. The Learner-centred approach (LCE) is 
rooted in the constructivists, progressivist and Freirean 
models of education and drawing upon Vygotskian theory 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

of social constructivism [15]. Learning is seen as a social act 
and knowledge is viewed as a matter of human construction.  
LCE, underpinned by the emancipationist and liberation 
ideals was adopted as part of a much broader political 
imperative to transform, democratize, and humanize 
teaching and learning [12][13]. Empowering students by 
promoting the use of ICT is aligned with this vision. 
Concerning ICT use in Oshikwanyama first language 
learning, educators need to adopt a constructivist approach 
to learning. Teaching and learning African languages needs 
to be situated and understood within the one of the 
phenomena shaping the student's daily life, i.e., an ever 
more pervasive penetration of ICT (particularly mobiles, see 
[2]).  
Students' experiences and attitudes need to be at the 
centre of research in education. Learner-centered education 
is informed by a view of the student as an active, visible, 
and central position in the pedagogic process, [15]. The 
interest and life-world of the student form the basis of the 
curriculum 
and 
students 
are 
actively 
involved 
in 
determining the content of education [15][14]. Furthermore, 
this principle evokes an emanicipatory vision where 
students take control of their own learning, and are seen as 
active, creative and self-regulatory [12][22].  
III. 
AFRICAN LANGUAGES IN THE ICT DOMAIN 
African language teachers are struggling to overcome 
the limitations in their own education and the shortage of 
indigenous language instructional materials, [11][16]. 
African Indigenous cultures are valuing more and more the 
unique knowledge they possess and are seeking to conserve 
and disseminate this information before it is lost to 
globalization. Osborn [16] stressed that Africa, which is 
recognized today both as a continent struggling with aspects 
of its own development and one where the use of ICT lags 
behind most of the rest of the world, is beginning to see 
some attention to localization, (p. 1). It is also important to 
note that Africa is a large continent and the one with most of 
the multilingual societies in the world, and thus, the 
European languages cannot meet all of Africa‟s needs, and 
African languages have much to contribute, (ibid. p. 5). 
The Millennium Development Goal 8, aim to develop a 
global partnership for development and this includes the 
promotion of Africa‟s Indigenous people‟s participation in 
the Information Society while protecting the traditional 
knowledge against appropriation, exploitation and misuse 
and preserving their rights to access to ICT and connectivity 
[8]. In addition, the languages of indigenous people need to 
be uplifted through ICT, by the people themselves through 
indigenous literacy [18], and skills to compete in 
mainstream society and the need to uphold Indigenous 
culture and identity, [6]. This means that there is a need to 
develop accessible ICT resources in African languages that 
can be used as platforms for ICT content creation and 
localisation of pedagogical tools from everyone who can 
positively contribute.  
According to [1], “the choice of a language of 
instruction in Africa is a political choice, a choice that may 
redistribute power in a global context, as well as within an 
African country”. It is very important to note that many 
Namibian people believe that the previous government 
apartheid policy contributed to the creation of unequal 
language development process, whereby some language 
groups, e.g., Afrikaans and English were given a head start 
while others languished under neglect [7][20]. Oshindonga 
being the first written Oshiwambo indigenous language, 
followed by Oshikwanyama, have been dominated by the 
spread of European languages. However, their promotion is 
found lacking, since many people only advocate the use of 
English because it is the Language of Learning and 
Teaching (LoLT) [20], and many African parents prefer 
their children taught through the medium of English in order 
to gain a head start in life [20].  
It is also important to note that English, Afrikaans and 
other European languages are the dominant languages in the 
ICT domain. African parents and students seem to value 
them more than their own language because they can give 
access to the world and to better jobs. This in turn 
encourages cultural dependency on the western world [4]. 
The mindset of African students has changed with 
globalization. They believe that English gives them a chance 
to face global forces, while their own indigenous languages 
do not.  
Lieberman [11] points out that creative access and local 
dissemination of information within a community though 
ICT will provide residents with timely, useful, and relevant 
information. Thorne [23] indicates that “the internet does 
not exist in a neutral medium; it is rather a cultural artifact”, 
(p. 437). If used wisely, the use of ICT in development of 
responsive pedagogical didactics and programs or activities 
in the classroom can result in the growth of the language at 
the global level and a participation of a wider community 
[11][16]. Paulsen [17] and Shazia [19] propose that the 
Internet presence of language, the appearance of new and 
improved web research tools, strategies, on-line reference 
works and electronic resources; and the development of 
ICTs that facilitate cross-curricular communications and 
collaboration is necessary. Thus, the question is not which 
subject is more conducive to the use of ICT, but how to use 
it across the curriculum, including in African language 
teaching and learning. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
A. Research Context 
This study was conducted in a northern Namibian school 
located in Oshana region. Though representative of other 
Namibian schools, the selected one presents specific features 
such as: 1) the school is one of the top-performing schools in 
Namibia, in an urban area but in one of the previously 
disadvantaged regions in the country. 2) Most of the students 
came from both rural and urban areas in the northern region). 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

3) There are ICT infrastructures at the school, which 
comprise a full-equipped computer laboratory with 22 
workstations as well as personal desktops, connected via 
wireless, (satellite) TV, Video and DVD players and video 
projector. 4) Most of the students have mobile phones 
although, according to the school as well as national policy, 
cell phones are banned from being used at school and 
especially during lessons.  
This research site was purposively chosen because it is 
the school where one of the researchers is currently teaching 
Oshikwanyama as a first language and English as a second 
language. Though a minority language within Namibia, 
Oshikwanyama is the mother tongue of the researcher herself 
and of most students. For the sake of convenience, her 
students were used as a focus group.  
The researched group consists of 32 respondents of 
which 11 are boys and 21 are girls from two grade 11 
Oshikwanyama classrooms, with age ranges from 15 to 18 
years old, the mean age being 16.3. The respondents were 
chosen because of their varying educational backgrounds 
with 63% of students having attended their primary school in 
urban areas and 37% attending primary school in rural areas. 
These students are in their first senior year and did not go far 
with their syllabus, and some of them have done Word 
Processing as a subject in the last 3 years.  
B. Methodological Orientation, Process and Limitations 
A case study approach was chosen as the methodological 
orientation for this study as it may be mostly suitable for 
learning more about a poorly understood or little known 
situation, [10]. This approach is consistent with an 
interpretative-qualitative methodology [3][5][21]. Such an 
approach appears particularly appropriate to explain the 
process of ICT in an African language as a potential new and 
emerging phenomenon and the idea of integrating ICT and 
African languages as part of a constructivist learning 
pedagogy. 
Paper-based questionnaires were administered to 32 
respondents. The questionnaire included 26 open-ended 
questions and 5 closed questions, mostly rating scale 
questions and multiple choices. The questions were set on a 
nine-page questionnaire in English. They covered previous 
and current use of computers and cell phones as well as 
attitudes towards language use in the ICT domain. Questions 
were analyzed qualitatively, although descriptive statistics 
were considered whenever possible.  
 The respondents were briefed on the importance of 
answering the questionnaire and assured that their responses 
would 
be 
handled 
confidentially 
and 
anonymously. 
However, the fact that one of the researchers was their 
teacher might have influenced their responses. Findings 
based on such a small sample are neither reliable nor 
generalisable and the school is not truly representative of 
most Namibian educational contexts. However, reflections 
on students' answers provide a platform to reflect on ICT 
penetration in Africa and the potential role of African 
languages in this domain.  
V. 
ICT ACCESS AND USE 
It is difficult to assess ownership of cell phones among 
low-income youth since there are varying concepts of what 
„to own a cell phone‟ means [9]. This same situation applies 
to computer ownership when most of the students are from 
disadvantaged families and whereby most of them are still 
depending on their parents and guardians, and some came 
from rural houses with no water and electricity, and whereby 
mobile communication infrastructure and network reception 
is very poor. Thus, in measuring, the focus was diverted 
from individual ownership of computers/cell phones to 
individual access at home and school. 
A. Computers 
The findings indicated that only 31% of the respondents 
have access to a computer at home the rest 69% do not have 
access they only see and sometimes use computers at school. 
Over 70% of the respondents have less than 5 years 
experience with the computers leaving 24% with between 7-
9 years experience and only 2% with over 11 years computer 
experience.  
Only 44% of the respondents have basic knowledge 
about computers whereby 20% gained it from the Keyboard 
and Word Processing subject at school and 22% indicated to 
have attended a computer course at their primary schools, 
and the last 2% did not specify, whereas 66% of the 
respondents indicated they had not attended any computer 
course. These figures are consistent with self-assessed 
proficiency, whereby 45% of the respondents rated 
themselves as having basic computer skills, whereas 15% 
indicated to be very good with computers and the remaining 
40% of the respondents‟ competency rated from being poor 
to very poor. None of the respondents had indicated to be 
excellent with the computers.  
The respondents indicated to have used the computers for 
multiple tasks, whereby 50% have indicated to use it for 
school related activities such as research, typing etc, and the 
same percentages use it for connecting to social networks 
like Facebook, Twitter, etc. About 31% of the respondents 
have indicated to use the computer for playing games, 
download music and for journal keeping, alarms, and 
calculator. 
Most of the respondents (about 19.8% at average) have 
never used the fully equipped computer laboratory at the 
school whereas those that have used it, (12.2% at average) 
have done it occasionally, more especially on monthly and 
weekly basis. Over 60% of the respondent have indicated to 
have used the computer lab for research and typing 
documents purposes, with the remaining percentages using it 
for playing computer games (10%), Social networks (16%) 
and other (9%) such as watching movies and videos on 
YouTube. 
B. Cell Phones 
A 97% majority of the respondents indicated they have 
access to a cell phone leaving only 3% without access. Most 
of the cell phone that the respondent have access to are the 
latest models and fancy phones which ranges from the smart 
HTC Hero and Samsung Corby TXT to NOKIA 3310. A 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

78% majority of the respondents indicated they have used 
the cell phone for less than two years, 19% for three to four 
years and only 3% with more than five years usage.  
Over 69% of the respondents have cell phones with 
internet access or connection abilities. Students and other 
users, particularly in developing countries, are not always 
aware of or capable to use all the features of their cell 
phones. However, respondents in the present study seemed 
to be able to do more activities than those supported by their 
phones. The discrepancy between ownership and access 
might provide an explanation (i.e. students knew how to do 
some things the phones they normally had access to did not 
support). A greater percentage of students was able to access 
rather than post content using these applications. The 
distinction between access and production is important in 
terms of language use. Table 1 shows which features a 
student's phone had and what he or she could access/post.  
TABLE 1: CELL PHONE FEATURES AVAILABILITY, PASSIVE 
AND ACTIVE USE 
  
Cell phone 
Feature 
Has 
Can access 
Can post to 
YouTube 
31 
47 
34 
Twitter 
41 
41 
44 
Facebook 
72 
75 
69 
E-mail 
52 
59 
41 
Skype 
19 
22 
22 
IM 
50 
44 
44 
 
The respondents connected to the internet occasionally 
using a cell phone, with 25% connecting on daily basis, 28% 
on weekly basis, and 22% monthly basis. 19% of the 
respondents indicated not to have connected to internet in 
their lives with cell phones. The high percentages in the 
social network category as Facebook (63%) indicates that the 
respondents are hooked on to the internet whereas since the 
respondents are still school students Google and mailing 
services have also aroused their interest more especially for 
research purposes. Of all the 32 respondents, 13% indicated 
they posted something on social networks on daily basis, 
56% occasionally, and 31% indicated to have never posted 
anything. Instant Messaging platforms such as MXit and 
others seems to have been unfamiliar with a large number of 
respondents (N=28). Only 3% of the respondents have used 
Google talk, 9% Yahoo Messenger, 22% MXit. Most of the 
respondents (about 69%) indicated they used Facebook as a 
chatting and messaging platform with their friends. 
VI. 
OSHIKWANYAMA AND ICT 
 The respondents were asked to give their views on the 
use of Oshikwanyama in the ICT domain i.e. computer and 
cell phones. Not surprisingly, Oshikwanyama was used 
extensively in voice communication via cell phone. 91% of 
the respondents indicated that they usually communicate in 
Oshikwanyama on their cell phones when talking to their 
parents, with a reduction to 63% when talking to their 
friends. Only 19% of the respondents indicated they used 
Oshikwanyama on their cell phones when chatting to their 
school friends/colleagues and parents and in cases they 
happen to pick up the phone from an unknown or 
unregistered caller.  
A. Content and Interfaces 
When asked if they post information in Oshikwanyama 
on an English website or web pages, 23% of the respondents 
indicated they do it in rare occasions, but only mostly on 
Facebook whereas 77% indicated they have never done it. 
Furthermore, more than 93% of the respondents indicated 
they had not searched for information in Oshikwanyama 
pointing out that they have never thought it could be 
available on the internet and some have indicated they have 
never thought of it.  
When asked to mention the website that seem favorable 
to use Oshikwanyama and where Oshikwanyama is often 
used, Facebook and e-mail received preferences of 41% and 
22% respectively. Meanwhile, 22% of the respondents feel 
that website would be an appropriate platform to use 
Oshikwanyama as long as it is specifically devoted to 
Oshikwanyama. Other social sites such as Netlog and 
Twitter have received minimal amount of votes since the 
respondents feel that they are not really used by them and 
most of their users are more interested on what is going on in 
the world of entertainment and new and not on developing 
educational matters. 
E-mail was the most important, followed by social 
networks and instant messaging. 39% agreed that Wikipedia 
should be accessible in Oshikwanyama, Skype received the 
lowest percentages of the preference rate, it is indicative that 
some of the respondents do not normally use it and thus not 
sure of how it works.  
B. Use 
Only 6% indicated that Oshikwanyama should be used 
more in the ICT domain as they feel that there are people out 
there who cannot understand English and have to 
communicate in Oshikwanyama at all times. 12% of the 
respondents felt that Oshikwanyama is never used at all 
because not all people have access to the language. However, 
72% felt that Oshikwanyama need to be used more in the 
ICT domain. Cultural preservation was cited as the main 
reason. Respondents also felt that there is a need for 
providing an alternative to English in Namibia and this will 
help improve school grades and understanding of the 
subjects.  
It was apparent that the research participants experienced 
mixed feelings concerning learning Oshikwanyama in an 
ICT domain. Numerous respondents were delighted because 
they think it will make life easier for the people who are not 
fluent in English to be involved in the ICT world. People 
whose language is Oshikwanyama will be able to access 
information faster and have a wider variety of information at 
their disposal. People would experience pride in their mother 
tongue or/and first language, as its use will uplift their own 
indigenous language. Respondents also believe that using 
Oshikwanyama ICT tools will give the language recognitions 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

and the respect it deserve and this will diversify the use of 
the language, allowing pupils to explore an advanced level of 
the language. 
An 82% majority of the respondents identified potential 
benefits if Oshikwanyama was to be used in an ICT domain, 
and only 18% felt it would not be beneficial. Various 
respondents 
highlighted 
that 
the 
introduction 
of 
Oshikwanyama in an ICT domain will enable them to easily 
and efficiently do their Oshikwanyama related work with a 
greater understanding and motivation. They indicated that 
the level at which Oshikwanyama is used/learnt will be 
improved and that this could lead to increased language 
skills. Some respondents indicated that newly devices for 
language learning and studying techniques should be 
developed through ICT.  
C. Challenges 
The findings indicated that although there is a will and 
interest 
among 
the 
respondents 
towards 
learning 
Oshikwanyama in an ICT domain, there are mixed feeling 
concerning the possibility of it happening. This led to an 
upwelling of several challenges. The respondents believed 
that Oshikwanyama is not used enough so increase 
knowledge in this area will not be relevant. This then 
diminishes the interest of students in using the language in an 
ICT 
domain. 
The 
respondents 
maintained 
that 
communicating in Oshikwanyama using ICT domain greatly 
limit the number of people they are able to have 
conversations with, as most of their acquaintances are non-
Oshikwanyama speakers. The respondents indicated that it is 
not easy to find written information in Oshikwanyama (i.e., 
novels, poetry, articles etc.). 
Oshikwanyama was perceived to have a limited 
vocabulary. As a result, ICT tools and manuals would be 
longer and make extensive use of English borrowings. The 
respondents remarked that most Oshikwanyama words are 
longer and they require a larger space, and it is not easily 
abbreviated. One commented that: “English is easier to write 
in short, e.g., hw r u, if you perhaps shorten something in 
Oshikwanyama, one will not know how to translate it and 
know what you mean exactly”. In addition, the respondents 
also felt that the use of Oshikwanyama would cause 
complications and lead to confusion.  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we explored the access and use of ICT by 
Oshikwanyama-speaking students in Namibia, and their 
attitudes towards the use of their mother tongue in the ICT 
domain. In a developmental context, the two are deeply 
interrelated and need to be considered together. Our study 
showed that students in the sample were relatively proficient 
users of ICT. They appeared to be favorable to the use of 
Oshikwanyama in the ICT domain. Most importantly, 
students were able to articulate reasons in favor and against 
the use of their language in such an English-dominated 
domain. 
Promoting 
debate 
around 
language 
issues 
constitutes groundwork to the broader project of which this 
study is part. The project is concerned with the development 
of ICT tools in Oshikwanyama as a pedagogical tool. The 
findings presented here show that students possess the 
necessary skills and sophistication around language issues to 
be involved in this challenge.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to thank all the participants for their 
contribution to this survey, on top of their usual 
commitment. We are indebted to Fortunate Gunzo for her 
kind will to edit this work on such a short notice. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Brock-Utne, B. (2000). Whose education for All: The reconciliation 
of the African mind. New York: Falmer. 
[2] Cobcroft, R. (2006). Literature review into mobile learning in the 
university context. Queensland University of Technology: Creative 
Industries Faculty. 
[3] Cohen, L., Manion, L., and Morrison, K. (2007). Research methods in 
education (6th ed.) London: Routledge Taylor & Fransis Group. 
[4] Dalvit, L. (2009). Multilingualism and ICT education at Rhodes 
University: an exploratory study. Unpublished PhD Thesis. Rhodes 
University. 
[5] Gay. L.R., Mills, G.E. & Airasian, P. (2009). Educational research: 
Competencies for analysis and application. 9th ed. New Jersey: 
Pearson Education International. 
[6] Greville, H. (2000). Walking the fine line: Transforming literacies for 
social change. Washington: Gunada Press. 
[7] Harlech-Jones, B. (2000). Some prevalent assumptions in language 
policy, with contextualisation from Namibia: Keynote theme paper. 
In The British Council (2001). Language and development in 
Southern Africa: Making the right choices .Windhoek: Gamsberg 
Macmillan Publishers (Pty) Ltd. 
[8] Hakansson. A.K. and Deer, K. (2006). Indigenous People and ICTs: 
Millenium Development Goal 8 and the Information Society. 
Mohawk Internet Technologies. Kahnakwe. 
[9] Kreutzer, T. (2009). Assessing cell phone usage in a South African 
Township 
School. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Education 
and 
Development using ICT. Vol. 5, No. 5.  
[10] Leedy, P. D. and Ormrod, J,. E. (2005). Practical research: Planning 
and design (8th ed.). New Jersey: Prentice Hall. 
[11] Lieberman, A. E. (2009). Taking Ownership: Strengthening 
Indigenous Cultures and Languages through the use of ICTs. 
Washington D. C.: Learnlink. 
[12] Namibia. NIED. (2003). Learner-centered Education in the Namibian 
Context: A conceptual framework. Discussion document. Windhoek: 
Namibia  
[13] Namibia. Ministry of Education and Culture. (1993). Towards 
education for all. Windhoek: Gamsberg. 
[14] Namibia. NIED. (1999). How learner centered are you? Windhoek: 
Namibia. 
[15] Nyambe, J. K. (2008). Teacher educator‟ interpretation and practice 
of learner-centred pedagogy: A case study. Unpublished PHd. thesis. 
Rhodes University.  
[16] Osborn, D. (2010). African languages in a digital age: Challenges and 
opportunities for indigenous language computing. Cape Town: 
Human Science Research Council. 
[17] Paulsen, P. (2001). New era trends and technologies in foreign 
language learning: An annotated bibliography. In Interactive 
Multimedia Electronic Journal of Computer-Enhanced Learning. 
Retrieved 
on 
27 
September 
2011 
from 
http://imej.wfu.edu/articles/2001/1/05/index.asp 
[18] Samaras, K. (2005). Indigenous Australians and the „digital divide‟. 
Libri. Vol. 55. pp. 84-85. 
[19]  Shazia, M. (2000). Factors affecting teachers‟ use of Information and 
Communication Technology: a review of literature. Journal of 
Information Technology for Teacher Education. Vol. 9. No. 3. pp. 
319 – 341.  
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[20] Swarts, P. (2000). Language policy implementation in Namibia: 
Realities, challenges and politics. In Trewby, R. and Fitchat, S. 
(2001). Language and development in Southern Africa: Making the 
right choices. Conference proceedings .Windhoek: Gamsberg 
Macmillan Publishers (Pty) Ltd. 
[21] Stake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study. Thousand Oaks. CA: Sage. 
[22] Taylor, N. Muller, J. and Vinjevold, P. (2003). Getting Schools 
Working: Research and systemic school reform in South Africa. Cape 
Town: Pearson Education. 
[23] Thorne. S. L. (2008). Mediating Technologies and Second Language 
Learning. In Leu. D., Coiro. J., Lankshear. C., & Knobel, M. (eds). 
Handbook of Research on New Literacies. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum. 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

