Best Practices in a Redesigned Online Computer Ethics Course 
Cynthia Y. Lester 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Georgia State University, Perimeter College 
Dunwoody, Georgia, USA 
e-mail: clester6@gsu.edu 
 
Abstract – The Babson Survey Research group, in its 13th annual 
survey of higher education, reported that one in four students is 
enrolled in online courses.   The report also stated that the 
number of students taking online courses has continued its 
growth trend of the last 13 years where nearly 5.8 million 
students take online courses.  Furthermore, approximately 28 
percent of higher education students are enrolled in at least one 
online course.  While these numbers are not surprising, they do 
confirm what most educators now know and that is students 
want to learn on their own terms and in their own environments.  
However, challenges in the perception of online education still 
persist, especially in the wake of the most recent scandals 
surrounding online for profit institutions.  Moreover, how to 
best deliver quality online instruction still plagues many 
institutions whether they are traditional brick and mortar with 
an online campus or an online institution where the majority of 
the programs and students are fully online.  Consequently, the 
objective of this paper is to provide a discourse on best practices 
in an online learning environment.  More specifically, the work 
uses as its context an online computer ethics course aimed at 
students in a 2-year degree pathway, at a Research I university 
that was first piloted in 2014.  Since then, the course has been 
revised and has become a regular offering, part of the required 
computer science curriculum.  Also presented are challenges 
and lessons learned with hopes that they further the dialogue 
among educators on how best to design online courses and meet 
the needs of online students.  
 
Keywords – computer ethics; community college; learning 
outcomes; online education; undergraduate computer science. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The United States Department of Commerce, Economics 
and Statistics Administration in its July 2011 report stated 
that Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics 
(STEM) occupations are projected to grow by 17.0 percent 
between 2008 and 2018, compared to 9.8 percent growth for 
non-STEM occupations [1].  According to the U.S. Bureau of 
Labor and Statistics in its January 2017 report, there were 
nearly 8.6 million STEM jobs in 2015, representing 6.2 
percent of the U.S. employment [2]. Moreover, STEM degree 
holders enjoy higher salaries, regardless of whether they are 
working in STEM or not and they command higher wages, 
earning 26 percent more than their non-STEM counterparts. 
[1]. In fact, ninety-three out of 100 STEM occupations had 
wages above the national average [2].  But these higher wages 
also come at a price.  According to the report, over 99 percent 
of STEM employment included occupations that require 
some postsecondary education [2].  Additionally, of the ten 
fastest growing STEM occupations, nearly all required at 
least a bachelor’s degree [2]. So, where does this leave 
students who are attending 2-year institutions and/or 
community colleges and choosing STEM disciplines?   
In a report entitled, “The Role of Community Colleges in 
Postsecondary 
Success,” 
by 
the 
National 
Student 
Clearinghouse Research Center, it is noted that community 
colleges play a critical role in increasing the opportunity for 
many to experience postsecondary education [3].  In 
particular, these institutions provide a critical pathway for the 
under-served and disadvantaged students, working adults, 
and students with family and employment responsibilities 
[3].  In a report by the Community College Research Center, 
the leading independent authority on 2-year colleges in the 
U.S., it was reported that in fall 2015, 38 percent of 
undergraduate students attending college, were attending a 
public or private 2-year institution [4].  Moreover, the report 
stated that of the students who completed a degree at a 4-year 
institution in 2015-2016, nearly 49 percent had enrolled in a 
2-year institution during the previous ten years [4].  
Consequently, the need to ensure that students who are 
attending 2-year institutions receive quality instruction and 
be exposed to opportunities and various learning experiences 
is a must.  Furthermore, for many of these institutions being 
able to offer online education for students is also important, 
because it allows them more flexibility to reach the student 
population which they traditionally serve.  
The Babson Survey Research group, in its 13th annual 
survey of higher education, reported that one in four students 
is enrolled in online courses [5].   The report also stated that 
the number of students taking online courses has continued 
its growth trend of the last 13 years where nearly 5.8 million 
students take online courses [5]. Furthermore, approximately 
28 percent of higher education students are enrolled in at least 
one online course [5].  While these numbers are not 
surprising, they do confirm what most educators already 
know and that is students want to learn on their own terms 
and in their own environments.  Yet for many students, online 
education provides the only opportunity for them to achieve 
their lifelong goal of earning a college degree and provides 
even more accessibility for those students attending 
community college.    
Online education is especially important for first 
generation college students, adult learners, students with 
family obligations, students in remote areas where 
college/universities are not easily accessible and veterans 
returning to school.  41 Facts about Online Students by 
College Atlas revealed that 37 percent of online students were 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

the first among their family members to attend college and 
that 60 percent were employed full-time [6].  To this end, 68 
percent of those surveyed indicated that the reason they 
enrolled in online courses was the ability to balance work, 
family and school responsibilities, while 64 percent stated 
that they appreciated the ability to study at their convenience 
[6]. 
Although online education continues to grow and public 
institutions continue to seek new and innovative ways to 
reach today’s students, there continue to be challenges.  For 
example, faculty members have reported feeling less 
confident about online programs [5].  According to the 
Babson Survey Research report, only 29.1 percent of chief 
academic officers reported that their faculty accept “the value 
and legitimacy of online education [5].”  Additionally, 
academic leaders who regard online learning as critical to 
their long-term strategic efforts dropped 7.5 percentage 
points from 70.8 percent in 2015 to 63.3 percent in 2016 [5].   
  When it comes to community colleges and online 
education, researchers have found differing opinions.  In an 
Inside Higher Ed survey, published April 17, 2015, it was 
reported that “50 percent of two-year-college presidents 
agreed that more courses could be moved online without 
adversely affecting students at their institutions [6].”  This 
stands in contrast to reports that community college students 
are also less likely to do well in online courses [7].  For 
example, in a report by the U.S. News and World Report, 
researchers at the University of California-Davis, found that 
community college students throughout California were 11 
percent less likely to finish and pass a course if they opted to 
take the online version instead of the traditional face-to-face 
version of the same class. The work was presented on April 
18, 
2015, 
at 
the 
American 
Educational 
Research 
Association’s annual conference in Chicago in April 2015 
[8].  Furthermore, one of the authors of the paper went on to 
note that in their study they found that in every subject, face-
to-face students were doing better than their counterparts 
taking the online version [8].   
Consequently, the objective of this paper is to provide a 
discourse on best practices in an online learning environment.  
More specifically, the paper presents an update on an online 
course intended to teach computer ethics aimed at STEM 
pathway students who are enrolled in an Associate’s degree 
granting pathway within a Research I university.  The author 
first presented the development of the course in the 
proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on 
Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning in the work entitled, 
“Developing a Computer Ethics Course for Online Learners 
[9].”  The current work focuses on course improvements and 
results, challenges faced and lessons learned.   
The paper is organized into the following sections.  
Section II introduces the course and provides the rationale for 
course revisions.  Sections III and IV present a course 
overview and the redesigned modules.  Section V includes 
the results, while sections VI and VII present the discussion 
and concluding thoughts. 
II. FRAMEWORK 
A. Background – Pre-consolidation 
As previously stated, course development was described 
in the work entitled in “Developing a Computer Ethics 
Course for Online Learners [9].”  The course description, 
topics covered and learning outcomes remained the same.  
However, there was one significant change in the course 
design which included the prerequisites of the course. When 
the course was developed and implemented in 2014, it only 
had one prerequisite which was the successful completion of 
CSCI 1301 - Principles of Computer Science I with a “C” or 
better, or permission of the Instructor and Department Chair 
[10]. At that time, it was decided that CSCI 1301 would be 
the course prerequisite because it emphasized structured, top-
down development and testing of computer programs. At the 
conclusion of the course, students would be able to utilize 
critical thinking and analytical skills to successfully analyze, 
develop and implement programs in a modern programming 
language.  
In 2014, when the course was developed it was done so as 
a part of Georgia Perimeter College.  At that time, Georgia 
Perimeter College was the largest 2-year institution in the 
state of Georgia with the largest freshman and sophomore 
enrollments in the state, making it the top producer of transfer 
students to 4-year institutions within the state [11].  It had five 
campus locations throughout the Atlanta-metro area and 
serviced approximately 22,000 students either face-to-face or 
through its online campus. Roughly 10 percent of the student 
body took all their classes online [11]. The number of 
students choosing one of the STEM disciplines was roughly 
10 percent [12].  
B. Background – Post-consolidation 
In 2016, Georgia Perimeter College consolidated with 
Georgia State University.  As a result, the new Georgia State 
University has six campuses throughout metro Atlanta, an 
online campus, and is a national leader in serving students 
from diverse backgrounds with a student population of over 
51,000.  Perimeter College became the 2-year arm of the 
university and provides instruction to approximately 21,000 
students, still at its five campus locations throughout the 
Atlanta metro area and online.  It is through Georgia State 
University’s Perimeter College, that students can still earn an 
associate’s degree.  However, as a result of the consolidation, 
many associate degree pathways made significant changes to 
their curricula and one of those was the computer science 
pathway.   
In consultation with the Director for Undergraduate 
Studies for the computer science department at the Atlanta 
campus and with the author (who serves as the computer 
science and engineering department chair at Perimeter 
College), it was decided to change the prerequisites for the 
computer ethics course such that it mirrored prerequisites for 
2000-level courses at the main campus.  To this end, the new 
prerequisites for the course became CSC 1301 and CSC 1302, 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

each with a grade of C or higher or permission of the 
department [13]. The addition of CSC 1302 further 
strengthened the skill set of students had coming and hoped 
to ensure that students were ready for the rigor of 2000-level 
computer science courses.  The next sections provide an 
overview of the course followed by the redesigned course 
modules. 
III. COURSE OVERVIEW 
A. Course Description 
CSC 2920- Ethical and Social Issues in Computing, is a 
three hour course dedicated to the study of social, ethical, and 
legal effects of computing on society and its users.  Ethical 
concepts, professional codes of ethics, and the influence of 
computing on individuals, organizations, and the global 
economy will be addressed.  Students will utilize critical 
thinking and problem solving skills to analyze and debate 
case studies on topics some of which include privacy; 
intellectual property; computer crimes; system failures and 
implications; and, the impact of technology on society [13]. 
The course continued to utilize the College’s Desire 2 
Learn (D2L) learning management system as its online 
portal.  Although redesigned after the consolidation with 
enhanced features, this allowed the author to disseminate 
information, engage students in discussions and perform 
student assessments. 
B. Topics Covered 
The topics covered in the CSC 2920 remained the same 
which included [13]: 
• 
Basic concepts and historical overview of computer 
ethics 
• 
Introduction to issues and themes in ethical 
computing 
o 
Privacy 
o 
Freedom of Speech 
o 
Intellectual Property 
o 
Computer and Network Crime 
o 
Evaluating and Controlling Technology 
o 
Error, Failures and Risks 
• 
Professional ethics and responsibilities 
C. Learning Outcomes 
By the end of the course, students were still expected to 
[l3]: 
• 
Explain 
and 
evaluate 
the 
ramifications 
of 
technological advances brought by the advent of the 
computer on individuals, organizations and society 
• 
Identify ethical and legal issues related to computer 
use 
• 
Develop 
solutions 
based 
on 
the 
computer 
professional code of ethics 
• 
Effectively and succinctly communicate through 
speech, writing, and presentation the themes of the 
course  
D. Student Assessments 
One change that was made was in the area of student 
assessments.  In the pilot study of the course, students were 
required to write and submit a term paper (8 percent of the 
course grade).  Although in the pilot study survey, students 
noted that at first they were somewhat apprehensive about 
writing a “term paper” for a computer science class, they 
enjoyed the assignment and that overall the class average was 
a B [9].  However, the author removed the paper in order to 
give more weight to class participation and incentivize 
students’ online interaction in the course.  Consequently, the 
new areas (with grade weight) in which students were 
assessed included: 
• 
Class Participation = 10% 
• 
Case Study = 10% 
• 
Programming Assignment = 5% 
• 
Exams = 50% 
• 
Final exam = 25% 
The next section discusses three areas of changes in 
course content.  The first is the addition of a new module 
entitled the Class Passport and the other two areas of change 
are to the student assessment areas of class participation and 
case studies. 
IV. REDESIGNED COURSE MODULES 
A. Class Passport 
To engage students from the very beginning, a class 
passport module was developed.  Much like the definition of 
the word, “passport,” the passport module symbolized a 
travel document for the rest of the course and once students 
completed viewing it, they were granted access to the rest of 
the course material.  This high-level of interaction ensured 
that students reviewed the following: 1) online honor code 
policy; 2) the attendance and participation policy; 3) the 
dropping and withdrawal policy; 4) instructor’s expectations 
which were presented in video format; and, 5) the course 
syllabus and semester schedule.  Also, as part of the passport 
module, the first discussion post was presented which asked 
students to address the following: 
• 
Where you are from? 
• 
Why you are taking this class? 
• 
What area of computer science interests you the 
most? 
• 
What are your career plans? 
• 
Is this your first online computer science or online 
college class? 
In particular, it was the answer to the last question that 
helped the author gauge how best to interact with students. 
B. Class Participation 
Previously, class participation accounted for only 2 
percent of the overall course grade [10].  However, based on 
recommendations from students and from colleagues who 
reviewed the course, the instructor changed the weight of 
class participation to 10 percent of the course grade.  
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Participation now carried as much weight as student case 
study presentations, which emphasized to students that 
participating in discussion posts was just as important as the 
case study that they were to present to their peers.  It should 
be noted that an increase from 2 percent to 10 percent for 
participation in an online class seems negligible, especially 
when students report feelings of loneliness in online classes.  
However, because exams and the final exam must be 
weighted 75 percent of the course as required by the college’s 
curriculum committee, only the additional 8 percent was 
available for use in the class participation category.  Hence, 
the author redistributed the weight and increased the class 
participation category. 
There were total of five discussion posts based on central 
themes.  Discussion questions were posted in concert with 
student case study presentations and students were given 
approximately one week to respond.  To guide their response, 
they were asked to: 
• 
Provide an overview of the theme based on textbook 
concepts 
• 
State their opinion  
• 
State the student presentation that best supported 
their opinion 
• 
To encourage responses and replies, the instructor 
would often comment on student posts. 
C. Case Study Presentations 
The author re-worked this module completely.  When the 
course was first developed, this module was named class 
debates.  The intent was for students to be assigned opposing 
sides to discuss course topics.  However, many students did 
not understand how to “debate” a topic but instead just 
recounted the topic background that was initially presented 
by the author in the directions.   
Therefore, to encourage more critical thinking where 
arguments and solutions could be presented, the author asked 
a question at the end of the case study background and 
challenged students to: 
• 
Use the case study background as a framework only 
for the presentation 
• 
Provide an introduction to the topic utilizing 
theoretical concepts covered in the textbook. 
• 
Discuss how the use of technology impacts your 
given role 
• 
Use similar cases/scenarios to further explain your 
position (news articles, cases in the textbook, etc.) 
• 
Present your opinion of the situation (even if it 
differs from your given role). 
An example of a case study based on the themes, 
“Privacy, Technology, and Security” is as follows: 
In  March,  the  House  of  Representatives  approved  the  
Congressional  Review  Act (CRA),  undoing privacy 
restrictions imposed on ISPs during the Obama 
administration. The Senate also passed the CRA].  
Advocates who support privacy noted that the move 
means Verizon, Comcast or AT&T can continue  tracking 
and  sharing  people’s  browsing  and  app  activity  
without  permission.  While supporters  of broadband  
providers  said  the  privacy  rules  were  onerous  and  
unfairly  strapped regulations  on  telecom  carriers,  but  
not  on  web  companies  such  as Facebook  and  Google  
that also provide  access  to  online  content. As asked in 
the textbook, “Technological and social changes make 
people feel uncomfortable, but does that mean the 
changes are unethical?” 
Directions once again included that the presentation of the 
material should be no less than ten (10) minutes and no more 
than fifteen (15) minutes. The presentation should include at 
least three (3) scholarly references from which the 
information was gathered.  Additionally, students were 
encouraged to be creative with technology beyond the use of 
PowerPoint in order to promote interaction and advanced 
technology use. Students were also informed that use of 
PowerPoint only, would garner very few points. Lastly, 
students were informed that they would be assessed on their 
use of technology, style and delivery of the content.   
D. Programming Assignment 
The programming assignment which counted for five 
percent of the total course grade was designed to engage 
students’ critical thinking and problem solving skills while 
also focusing on the course content of ethics.  As a result of 
the new prerequisites, the programming assignment was also 
redesigned to include not only the concepts from CSC 1301 
but also some higher level concepts taught in CSC 1302.  
Since Java was taught as the programming language in both 
courses, the program description was specific to a Java 
implementation.  Yet, keeping in mind that this was not a 
“programming course,” students were informed that they 
would be assessed on their design, efficiency, and 
implementation of the program as a whole. 
E. Exams 
Since exams counted for 75 percent of the course 
assessment as required by the curriculum committee, the 
author added another module which included lectures and 
videos on how to adequately prepare for the exams and the 
final exam (which was comprehensive).  Students were told 
how many questions would be on each exam and the types of 
questions (i.e., multiple choice, matching, essay, etc.).  
Students were also informed that the exam would be available 
for 24 hours, but that once started, it would end 120 minutes 
later.  By providing this level of detail, it was the anticipation 
of the author to level the playing field between those who had 
not taken an online course previously and those who had 
(approximately 36 percent had not taken an online course).  
Also, the announcement feature with e-mail in D2L was 
heavily used as a reminder about upcoming exams and 
logistics.  
Once the exams had been graded and reviewed by the 
author, exam review notes were posted.  The author utilized 
the question statistics and question details features in D2L to 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

determine questions themes on which students had difficulty. 
If 25 percent or more of the students answered a question 
incorrectly, the instructor reviewed that question and its 
corresponding theme and also engaged students in feedback.  
The next section presents the results of student 
assessments in two areas, class participation and the exams.  
Results were not available from the case study presentations 
for reasons explained later in the discussion section. 
 
V. RESULTS 
A. Class Participation 
As noted, class participation was worth 10 percent of the 
overall grade and was implemented through discussion posts.  
There were a total of five discussion posts.  Figure 1 shows 
the overall number of students participating in the discussion 
posts.  Figure 2 shows students participating by discussion 
post. 
 
 
Figure 1. Participation in Discussion Posts 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Participation by Discussion Post 
B. Exams 
There were total of three exams and one final exam.  The 
instructor used the statistics in the D2L to gather information 
not only about the class performance as a whole on each 
exam, but also how students performed on individual 
questions.  By utilizing question statistics and question 
details, the instructor was able to develop exam review notes 
which focused on the themes covered in the question.  Figure 
3 shows the number of questions on which 25 percent or more 
the students answered incorrectly.  Figure 4 shows the types 
of question by exam on which 25 percent or more of the 
students answered incorrectly. 
 
Figure 3. Number of questions by exam for review 
 
 
Figure 4. Questions for review by question type 
 
The next section provides an overview of the results 
presented, followed by concluding thoughts. 
VI. DISCUSSION 
Overall, the instructor was pleased with the changes in 
course content and the heightened level of interaction.  
Results show that on average, the majority of the students 
participated in the discussion posts (approximately 18 each 
time).  The results also show that participation varied 
according to topic, but remained strong throughout the 
semester.   
As it relates to the exams, while it was not presented in 
the results section, the author can attest that with the 
heightened level of communication and constant reminders 
about the exam and exam logistics, no students missed taking 
any of the exams, a first since the author began teaching the 
course in 2014.  However, what is presented in the results 
section that needs more attention is on the concepts and 
wording of the questions for exam #3. It may be that the 
wording of the T/F questions need to be revised and/or that 
the short answer question was too challenging to complete in 
the time provided.  Only little over half of the students 
attempted to answer the question.  
While the author was pleased with the overall 
modifications to course, one point of concern and an obvious 
challenge is the case study module and student assessment.   
The author spent significant time redesigning the module 
with updated content and directions.  The author had hoped 
that students would submit case study presentations that 
encouraged a higher level of critical inquiry which promoted 
discussion and challenged ways of thinking.  Although 
0
5
10
15
Five
Four
Three or less
Number of Students
Discussion Posts
0
10
20
30
#1
#2
#3
#4
#5
Number of Students
Discussion Posts
0
2
4
6
Exam 1
Exam 2
Exam 3
Questions
Exam
0
1
2
3
4
Exam
1
Exam
2
Exam
3
Questions
Exam
T/F
MC
Short Answer
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

students were challenged in their way of thinking and 
conveying the ethical implications of the material, many 
presentations lacked the critical analysis of the literature 
needed to support their claims.  This is a work in progress, 
one that the author will again revisit. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
In closing, the purpose of this work is to further a 
discussion on how best to teach computer ethics in an online 
environment and to identify best practices.  The author 
presents revisions to a course that was initially offered as a 
pilot study.  Since the first offering in 2014, the course has 
been offered each year and has grown in popularity.  
However, certain challenges still remain which include how 
to truly assess if by the end of the course students are able to 
meet the learning outcome of being able to, “Explain and 
evaluate the ramifications of technological advances brought 
by the advent of the computer on individuals, organizations 
and society.”  The author thought that by redesigning the case 
studies and providing students with a framework that 
presentations would engage critical thinking.  However, 
results from this module were inconclusive. 
 
Another challenge that the author did not anticipate was 
that the redesign of several modules and the addition of a new 
module would significantly increase course development 
time.  In an article title, “Does it take more or less time to 
facilitate and develop and online course? Finally some 
answer”, twenty-nine percent of survey participants stated 
that they spent over 100 hours developing their first online 
course [14].  The article went on to explain that number of 
hours was probably due to the fact that 59 percent of 
respondents developed over 90 percent of the course without 
any assistance, which included developing content, 
assessments, assignments, and time associated with course 
design [14].  Although the author used lectures from the first 
implementation of the course, the assessments, assignments, 
and other materials associated with the course redesign were 
new.  Additionally, because the intent was to increase the 
level of interaction and engagement in the redesigned course, 
additional hours were spent on this aspect.  Therefore, the 
author spent approximately 70+ hours in the redesign. 
 
However, through these efforts some best practices did 
emerge, which were in the redesign of the course and that the 
author will carry forward into the next course offering: 
• 
Use of the introductory discussion post to gather 
insightful information on students’ background 
• 
Restricting access to course content until the Class 
Passport module has been completed 
• 
Expanded use of the announcement feature with 
email 
• 
Utilization of the question statistics with details 
In closing, as more and more students choose to take 
classes online and institutions increase their offerings to meet 
the demands of those students, so does the debate on how best 
to offer quality instruction.  This is especially important to 
educators who are interested in increasing opportunities for 
those who desire to experience postsecondary education and 
in expanding the STEM pipeline.  By carefully examining 
course content, delivery, and also understanding who our 
students are, we further our goal as educators in helping 
students who cross our “virtual pathways” to succeed. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Langdon, G. McKittrick, D. Beede, B. Khan, and M.Doms. 
“STEM: Good jobs and for the Future,” U.S. Department of 
Commerce, 
Economics 
and 
Statistics 
Administration. 
http://www.esa.doc.gov/sites/default/files/reports/documents/s
temfinalyjuly14_1.pdf. [Retrieved: February 2018]. 
[2] U.S. Bureau of Labor and Statistics, Spotlight on Statistics.  
https://www.bls.gov/spotlight/2017/science-technology-
engineering-and-mathematics-stem-occupations-past-present-
and-future/pdf/science-technology-engineering-and-
mathematics-stem-occupations-past-present-and-future.pdf 
[Retrieved: February 2018]. 
[3] National Clearinghouse Research Center. The Role of 
Community Colleges in Postsecondary Success. https:/ 
/studentclearinghouse.info/onestop/wpcontent/uploads/Comm
-Colleges-Outcomes-Report.pdf. [Retrieved: February 2018]. 
[4] Community 
Colleges 
for 
International 
Development.  
https://www.ccidinc.org/single-post/2017/05/04/Community-
College-Enrollment-and-Completion [Retrieved: February 
2018]. 
[5] 2015 Online Report Card - Tracking Online Education in the 
United 
States 
https://onlinelearningconsortium.org/read 
/online-report-card-tracking-online-education-united-states-
2015/ [Retrieved: February 2018]. 
[6] 41 Facts About Online.  Students https://www.collegeatlas.org 
/41-surprising-facts-about-online-students.html 
[Retrieved: 
February 2018]. 
[7] Free Community College, Structure Pathways: Survey of 2-
Year College Leaders.  https://www.insidehighered.com/ 
news/survey/free-community-college-structured-pathways-
survey-2-year-college-leaders. [Retrieved: February 2018]. 
[8] Studies: Online Courses Unsuccessful at Community Colleges. 
https://www.usnews.com/news/articles/2015/04/27/studies-
online-courses-unsuccessful-at-community-colleges 
[Retrieved: February 2018]. 
[9] C. Lester, “Developing a Computer Ethics Course for Online 
Learners” Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference 
on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning. Pp. 27-32.  ISBN: 
978-1-61208-385-8. 
[10] C. Lester, 2014. CSCI 2900-099- Ethical and Social Issues in 
Computing. Course Syllabus, summer 2014. Unpublished 
syllabus, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
Georgia State University, Perimeter College, Decatur, GA. 
[11] The University System of Georgia, 2012. http://www .usg.edu/. 
[Retrieved: February 2018]. 
[12] C. Lester, Georgia Perimeter College STEM Annual Report 
Form 2011-2012.  Report submitted to the USG STEM 
Initiatives II Office. Unpublished report, University System of 
Georgia, STEM Initiatives, Atlanta, GA. 
[13] C. Lester, CSCI 2920-Ethical and Social Issues in Computing. 
Course Syllabus, spring 2017. Unpublished syllabus, 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Georgia 
State University, Perimeter College, Decatur, GA. 
[14]  D. Morrison, “Does it Take More or Less Time to Facilitate 
and Develop an Online Course? Finally, Some Answers,” 
https://onlinelearninginsights.wordpress.com/2015/05/08/does
-it-take-more-or-less-time-to-facilitate-and-develop-an-online 
-course-finally-some-answers/ [Retrieved: February 2018]. 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

