Creating a Global Classroom Using a 3D Technology to 
Enhance Language Development 
Kevin Oh, Natalie Nussli 
School of Education 
University of San Francisco, United States 
{koh2@usfca.edu, ncnussli@usfca.edu} 
 
Abstract—This study reports on the findings of a case 
study with English language learners and special 
education teachers who met in Second Life for 
conversation practice. The English language learners had 
a much more positive attitude towards the usability of 
Second Life for language learners than the special 
education teachers. Findings suggest that language 
instructors teaching in a three-dimensional immersive 
virtual world must be equipped with unique teaching 
skills. Interaction among conversation partners must be 
maximized to ensure a successful language learning 
experience. The lesson design must be carefully planned 
to take full advantage of the potential of virtual worlds 
and their relatively authentic and contextualized settings. 
A virtual world may be conducive to oral fluency 
enhancement, provided that activities are set up 
appropriately and there is ample support from the 
instructor. Extensive challenges inherent to the lesson 
design and audio quality were identified. Guidelines on 
how to address these challenges are addressed. These 
findings will be relevant to other language instructors 
who plan to use Second Life for oral fluency 
enhancement.  
Keywords-Second Life; virtual worlds; second language 
acquisition; oral fluency; collaboration; conversation partners 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This article reports on an investigation of the usability of 
Second Life, a highly compelling visual and immersive 
virtual world, to improve English language learners’ (ELLs) 
oral fluency by engaging them in purposeful interaction with 
English native speakers. Oral fluency is a complex, difficult-
to-measure construct. It has been defined as the ability to 
produce language without undue pauses or hesitations [1]. 
Four types have been identified [2]. These include the ability 
to (i) fill time with talk, (ii) produce logical and semantically 
dense language, (iii) have appropriate things to say in a wide 
range of contexts, and (iv) express oneself in a creative and 
imaginative way, using a wide variety of alternative 
linguistic devices and choosing the one that is most situation 
appropriate. 
The current study is situated in a three-dimensional 
immersive virtual world. Schroeder’s [3] definition of virtual 
reality is “a computer-generated display that allows or 
compels the user (or users) to have a sense of being present 
in an environment other than the one they are actually in, and 
to interact with that environment”. Educational platforms can 
be found in the areas of astronomy, medicine, music, 
literature, biology, history, mathematics, forensic science, 
ecology, and tourism, to name a few.  
Second Life provides a powerful platform for situational 
language practice. The most recent studies, which include a 
literature review [4], three qualitative studies [5-7], four 
quantitative studies [8-11], and one mixed-methods study 
[12], indicate that a virtual world can assist language learners 
by extending the traditional language classroom. It provides 
an environment for stress-free, one-on-one oral practice 
through activities, such as role-playing, discussions, 
presentations, debates, games and simulations. English 
language learners, in particular Chinese students, have been 
shown to be apprehensive of spoken communication for fear 
of being negatively evaluated [13]. In a similar vein, the 
results of a study by Wehner et al. [12] suggest that virtual 
worlds may help to reduce student anxiety and increase their 
motivation to learn a foreign language. Virtual worlds could 
be an effective way to help Chinese ELLs overcome these 
fears and inhibitions [11].  
The current study contributes to the research about 
language learning in virtual worlds by identifying students’ 
and special education teachers’ perceptions of Second Life as 
a language learning platform, as well as the unique teaching 
skills required. In addition, the study investigates potential 
challenges and the effects of virtual meetings on ELLs’ 
perceptions of their oral fluency. Continued research on 
virtual worlds is necessary to yield stronger teaching models 
that guide educators in the optimal use of virtual worlds for 
language instruction [6]. As more educators and researchers 
develop pedagogical models for best practices in language 
learning in virtual worlds, taking advantage of such 
resources will become easier [6]. 
Recent studies in the field of second and foreign 
language acquisition will be reviewed in the next section, 
followed by the purpose of the present study. The sample, 
the six data collection instruments, the procedures, and data 
analysis will be described in the method section. Results will 
be organized around the instruments and will be presented 
from the perspective of both the ELLs and the special 
education teachers (SPED). The discussion and conclusion 
section is organized around the research questions and 
concludes with the study’s limitations and suggestions for 
future research. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Through interactions with target language speakers in 
Second Life, ELLs can benefit from immersive language 
practice; tasks for learners at all levels can be designed [6]. 
Second Life has been shown to offer an “interactive, 
immersive and content-rich virtual environment for input, 
interaction, task-based learning and output production” [6]. 
Virtual worlds offer a suitable platform for synchronous 
language interaction and the opportunity for conversation 
and collaboration between language learners and native 
speakers of the target language.  
Wang et al. [11] investigated effective and practical ways 
to integrate Second Life into an English as a Foreign 
Language 
(EFL) 
program 
for 
students 
in 
Chinese 
universities, in which Chinese students conversed with 
American native speakers. Many study participants reported 
having a positive attitude towards using Second Life for 
language learning and perceived the collaboration with their 
American conversation partners as interesting, effective, and 
helpful in improving their English skills. Meaningful and 
authentic interactions with the American students were 
identified as key motivational factors. Once the Chinese 
students were immersed in Second Life, they demonstrated 
more active and sustained speaking events, which helped 
them to improve their communicative abilities. Their positive 
experiences were, however, tarnished by technical problems, 
including poor audio quality (echoing and interrupted audio) 
and frozen screens to an extent that they seriously interfered 
smooth communication and task completion in Second Life. 
Wang et al.’s recommendations for facilitating language 
learning events in Second Life include: preparing students 
for task completion, setting a time limit for any given task, 
closely 
monitoring 
student 
language 
performance, 
encouraging post-task reflection, and providing feedback. 
Overall, the collaboration was found to enrich both the 
cultural experience and the communication with virtual 
conversation partners. 
Similarly, Knutzen and Kennedy [9] reported on a 
partnership between ELLs in Hong Kong and student 
teachers enrolled in a Teaching English to Speakers of Other 
Languages (TESOL) program at a university in the United 
States. The two groups met in Second Life at a virtual 
American diner and communicated through text-chat and 
voice. Among the conditions that resulted in the most 
productive interactions was the use of voice communication 
to practice speaking and listening, as well as the use of 
separate sound parcels in the form of Cadillac diner booths to 
allow private conversations. Wehner et al. [12] investigated 
the relationships between motivation, virtual worlds, and 
foreign language acquisition. One section of a Spanish 
course used Second Life as part of its instruction, while the 
other section participated in the traditional curriculum. 
Overall, the group using Second Life consistently reported 
more positive feelings in all areas of motivation and lower 
levels of anxiety.  
Ishizuka and Akama [14] highlighted the potential of 
Second Life for second language acquisition. Good scenarios 
and controlling learning environments based on second 
language acquisition theories have the potential to change 
language teaching and learning [14]. Several attempts to use 
Second Life for language learning have been made in the 
past. A number of EU-funded, large-scale projects include 
the Access to Virtual and Action learning Live Online 
(Avalon) project, the Networked Interaction in Foreign 
Language Acquisition and Research (NIFLAR) project, and 
the Talk with Me project. These projects aim to facilitate 
cross-cultural language learning by taking advantage of 
virtual worlds to simulate communicative acts and provide 
information on learning models and practices using Second 
Life as a language learning platform [14]. 
The current study reports on the findings of an 
exploratory case study with two groups. International 
students enrolled in an ELL program and SPED teachers 
studying at the same university in the United States met in 
Second Life for conversation practice. The overarching 
question that framed this research was to identify the 
usability of Second Life for oral fluency enhancement. The 
study was guided by the following research questions: 
1. What are the English language learners’ and the 
special education teachers’ perceptions of Second 
Life as a language-learning platform?  
2. What are the unique skills that a teacher should 
have to teach in Second Life?  
3. What types of problems associated with the 
language 
instruction 
in 
Second 
Life 
were 
identified?  
III. 
METHOD 
A. Sample 
Twelve ELL undergraduate students at a university in 
California and 18 special education teachers enrolled in a 
graduate course at the same university participated in this 
research. Prior to this study, a needs assessment was 
conducted to identify the ELLs’ performance gap in terms of 
oral fluency. It revealed that many Asian, particularly 
Chinese, students at this university are experiencing a 
performance gap between their actual oral proficiency in 
American English and the proficiency they need to fully 
contribute to class discussions and be understood when they 
speak. The ELLs were teamed up with 18 SPED teachers as 
their conversation partners. 
B. Data Collection 
Six different instruments were used for data collection. 
The two groups, ELLs and SPED teachers, each received a 
different set of the following instruments: a preliminary 
survey, a mid-reflection, and a post-survey. The preliminary 
survey was completed after watching a 5-minute video 
showing a tour of the National Oceanographic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Second Life region 
and prior to the two virtual meetings. The purpose of these 
meetings in Second Life was to provide the teams with 
conversation practice. In the preliminary survey, the ELLs 
and the SPED teachers were asked about demographic 
information, their technology background, and their 
perception of the usability of Second Life as a language-
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

learning platform. In addition, the ELLs were asked to share 
their perceptions of their oral fluency in English, their 
attitude toward English native speakers, and their perception 
of their motivation and self-efficacy in learning and speaking 
English. Participants replied to the mid-reflection prompts 
after the first of two meetings in Second Life. The prompts 
were designed around the research questions and provided an 
opportunity to reflect on the usability of virtual worlds for 
language learning. The post-survey offered an opportunity to 
reflect on the experiences after the second virtual meeting. 
Respondents were expected to be able to make informed 
decisions about the usability of Second Life for language 
learning after the two virtual meetings. 
C. Procedures 
The two groups, ELLs and SPED teachers, were each 
introduced to Second Life by their instructors, respectively. 
The SPED teachers, for instance, spent 30 minutes in 
Sploland as a class to explore the region and experiment with 
hands-on activities and then teleported to Spaceport Alpha 
for a short fieldtrip. The purpose of these preliminary 
fieldtrips was to provide students with a chance to 
familiarize 
themselves 
with 
navigation 
and 
voice 
communication. The instructor was physically present in the 
computer laboratory, while the second author joined the 
group in-world as a facilitator.  
Next, a small group of ELLs met in Second Life with a 
small group of SPED teachers on EduNation. ELLs and 
SPED teachers met twice for one to two hours each. Sound 
checks were conducted before the meetings. All participants 
were required to use USB headphones. The meetings were 
organized by an external English instructor, who was 
commissioned to design and lead the workshop because of 
her specialization in teaching ELLs in Second Life. 
Examples of the activities include: playing domino to 
increase vocabulary, a scavenger hunt which entailed 
describing interactive household items in the instructor’s 
virtual house, a TV quiz show in a TV studio, playing taboo, 
a grammar rummy, and a murder mystery. 
D. Data Analysis 
In this exploratory case study, the qualitative data, which 
emerged from the preliminary survey, the reflection, and the 
post-survey, have been used to gain insight into the personal 
reflections and perceptions of the participants. Emerging 
themes were identified through open-coding and were 
combined into recurring patterns. Quantitative data from the 
surveys inform the story and substantiate the qualitative 
information.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
The results have been arranged chronologically. 
A. Preliminary Student Survey (ELLs) 
The sample consisted of 12 ELLs between 18 and 21 
years old. Most students’ mother tongue was Chinese. These 
learners reported relatively good aural comprehension in 
English, but difficulty understanding conversations among 
their 
English-native 
peers. 
Most, 
however, 
reported 
struggling to express what they want to say, rarely speaking 
up voluntarily in English, and lacking the confidence to do 
so. All, but one, reported that they believed they could be 
understood mostly well. When asked about the reasons why 
people may have difficulty understanding them, 87% 
reported that it was due to a lack of vocabulary. On average, 
respondents’ motivation to learn English was 5.4 on a 7-
point rating scale (1=weak, 7=strong). On average, their 
attitude 
toward 
English 
native 
speakers 
was 
5.7 
(1=unfavorable, 7=favorable). Most respondents (67%) 
reported that they were not nervous when they had to speak 
English to someone they just met, while 33% reported being 
somewhat nervous. On a rating 10-point rating scale, they 
self-reported their technological expertise at 7.33 (1=lowest, 
10=highest). In terms of 3D virtual worlds, 76% reported 
having no or little experience. Seventy-three percent agreed 
that they did not have to worry about losing face in Second 
Life because their conversation partner could not see their 
real face. In the same vein, 80% replied that the use of an 
avatar in Second Life made them feel more at ease because it 
helped them disguise themselves. 
B. Students’ Mid-Reflection (ELLs) 
The mid-reflection was completed after the first virtual 
meeting with their native English-speaking partners, that is, 
the SPED teachers. All ELLs reported finding the virtual 
meeting with their English native speaking partners useful. 
They all appreciated the opportunity to practice speaking in a 
relaxed environment. It was mentioned that the virtual 
environment may have helped to overcome shyness, to save 
face even when mistakes were made, and that they felt more 
comfortable speaking in an online setting than face-to-face. 
Being able to make friends, engaging in interesting 
interactions in a relaxing, game-like, and visually appealing 
environment were factors that they liked.  
The activities in Second Life, however, could have been 
more interesting, entertaining, and interactive. There were 
too many people at the same place at the same time (lack of 
functioning sound parcels) and it was hard to understand 
each other and the teacher. For example, due to poor sound 
quality and interference, instructions were unclear and the 
Second Life platform was too complicated. ELLs would 
have liked to practice pronunciation, grammar, more 
activities, and to have separate sound parcels for private 
conversations. Despite these challenges, the average rating of 
the usability of Second Life for language learning on a scale 
from 1 (useless) to 10 (excellent) was quite high at 7.7. Most 
students were looking forward to the second meeting. 
C. Students’ Post-Survey (ELLs) 
In contrast to their answers in the pre-survey, no one 
reported difficulties in understanding their native-English 
speaking partners. No one reported difficulties in expressing 
their own thoughts and opinions in English. Everyone was 
confident that they were able to express the full nuance of 
their thoughts and opinions to varying degrees (very 
confident: 33%, quite confident: 50%, moderately confident: 
17%). On average, respondent’s motivation on a 7-point 
rating scale (1=weak, 7=strong) was unchanged at 5.4. The 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

statements about being nervous when they had to speak 
English to someone they just met were almost unchanged, 
compared with the pre-survey. The majority (58%) reported 
technical difficulties.  
Most students reported sound issues. Even when they did 
have sound, some voices could not be heard clearly. Some 
students were frequently logged off and lost valuable time 
having to log in again or having to restart their computer. As 
in the preliminary survey, all students, but one, agreed that 
the use of an avatar in Second Life made them feel more at 
ease due to the anonymity. All students found Second Life 
easy and interesting to use and confirmed its usability for 
language learning, although 83% stated that Second Life was 
not necessary for the type of language practice they had 
experienced. Everyone enjoyed interacting through their 
avatar. Benefits of using Second Life for speaking practice 
were identified as: communicating without seeing each 
other, more opportunities to meet native speakers, reduced 
nervousness, increased confidence, and overall more 
opportunities to speak than in real life. When asked what the 
ELL instructor, who conducted the activities, could have 
done differently, several students stated that they would have 
liked more opportunities to speak with their partners and 
more interesting activities. All students reported being 
satisfied with the experience and encouraged the instructor to 
keep using Second Life as a language-learning platform. 
D. Preliminary SPED Teacher Survey 
Eighty-three percent of the SPED teachers reported 
having little or no experience using virtual worlds. The 
average self-rating in terms of “tech-savvyness” on a 10-
point rating scale (0=lowest, 10=highest) was 7.1. The 
average rating of Second Life for education on a 10-point 
rating scale (1=useless, 10=extremely useful) was 6.28, 
based on the NOAA video they watched. Overall, their first 
impression of Second Life was that it had potential for 
education and seemed user-friendly. When asked what they 
hoped to gain from the two virtual meetings with their ELL 
partners, most said they hoped to identify the best techniques 
to work with ELLs and to see some of the educational 
applications of Second Life from a more active role, rather 
than just being a student in it. 
E. SPED Teachers’ Mid-Reflection 
Nine out of 18 SPED teachers submitted the mid-
reflection. Their usability ratings went down from 6.28 
(preliminary survey) to 4.33 (after the first virtual meeting 
with their ELL partners) on a 10-point rating scale 
(1=useless, 10=extremely useful). The ratings ranged from 1 
to 10. Eight out of nine respondents did not find the first 
virtual meeting useful in order to get teach experience and 
provided several reasons. The set up (i.e., planned activities) 
failed to encourage discussion among the two groups. There 
were too many people and it was hard to talk because 
everyone else could be heard too. Although each team 
worked in a separate room of a house, for example, the lack 
of (functioning) sound parcels resulted in the participants 
hearing everyone speak, which made it challenging to 
identify one’s team members’ voices. Separate sound parcels 
would also have satisfied the participants’ desire for private 
communication. 
More 
interaction 
and 
better 
time 
management would have been appreciated. The following 
statement describes the amount of spoken interaction 
between SPED teachers and ELLs that was distinctive of all 
sessions that the authors observed (eight sessions for all 
teams combined). 
I asked the student I was working with questions about 
herself to get to know her, and she wouldn’t even respond 
to my questions even though I tried to rephrase what I 
was saying to her to help her understand. […] Since it 
was online and you can’t see her face that could be why 
she didn’t respond at all.  
Only two out of nine SPED teachers found the first virtual 
meeting useful in terms of familiarizing with virtual worlds. 
A unique affordance, however, was identified as, “Being 
able to virtually meet with my ELL partner was nice, and I 
couldn’t imagine doing the activity over the phone.” The 
remaining comments were mostly negative. Respondents 
were disappointed because mostly they “just stood there”, 
without having a purposeful role assigned. Due to the lack of 
interaction, they did not have the impression that the meeting 
had helped to improve the ELL partners’ oral fluency. It was 
suggested that a tour would have encouraged interaction 
more effectively. 
The third prompt inquired about features they liked about 
the interaction and their perceptions of the unique benefits of 
Second Life for this type of learning activity. While some 
respondents did not like anything, several respondents 
appreciated that there were no limitations by location or by 
physics. The potential to establish rapport in a virtual setting 
was pointed out too.    
We actually had a few minutes at the end of the activity to 
explore the boathouses’ kitchen and we both agreed that 
it (the kitchen) was very nice and we chuckled about that. 
It was nice being able to connect to my buddy about 
something we both appreciated.  
The virtual environment was described as offering language 
immersion to ELLs and as a way to introduce teachers to 3D 
technologies. 
I realized the usefulness and the possibilities for offering 
an environment that may be less intimidating than face-
to-face meeting for ELLs. I liked interacting exclusively 
with a group that had a facilitator who helped to orient 
the Cohort to the space, and who provided us with a 
shared set of expectations and goals. The unique benefits 
were that it not only provided ELLs with a means for 
immersion, it also gave new teachers access to 
technologies that we may not have engaged before. 
Several challenges were identified. Although some spaces 
offered separate sound parcels, they did not offer enough 
privacy: 
You and your ELL partner had to go to a separate corner 
to work but other people would come and sit with you, 
this loud TV background noise kept interrupting the 
conversation, and other noises were distracting so it was 
hard to work with this student. 
Overall, the first virtual meeting was neither perceived as 
useful for the development of teaching skills nor as an 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

expansion of their virtual worlds skills and experience. The 
unique affordances of virtual worlds were perceived as being 
useful for language immersion (given adequate settings and 
time and room for private discussions), distance learners, and 
for learning activities that would benefit from the absence of 
physical boundaries. The two major challenges were the lack 
of a setting that would encourage discussion, the lack of 
effective private sound parcels, and the apparent technical 
glitches that consumed the major portion of the lessons. Due 
to these impediments, the SPED teachers’ usability ratings of 
Second Life decreased dramatically after the first virtual 
meeting with their ELL partners, to the extent that the 
majority of SPED teachers were not looking forward to the 
second meeting. 
F. SPED Teachers’ Post-Survey 
All 18 SPED teachers completed the post-survey after the 
second meeting. The first prompt asked, “Do you think that 
the meetings between you and your ELL partner(s) have 
helped them to enhance their oral proficiency? How would 
you have designed the meetings to help them improve their 
oral proficiency?” Only two participants stated that the 
meetings may have helped the ELLs to increase their oral 
fluency. Specific instructions and scenarios that would have 
guided the interactions and would have specified the SPED 
teachers’ role would have been appreciated. Suggestions also 
addressed the lack of interaction and highlighted the need for 
a purposeful role of the SPED teachers.  
An activity that might have been more successful would 
have been one that would have required not only 
speaking but actual interaction between the ELLs and the 
native speakers like a guessing game such as a version of 
20 questions or Guess Who. These would give the ELLs a 
chance to practice speaking more than just two words. It 
would also give the native speakers a reason to be there 
and involved. 
Similar to the mid-reflections, it was criticized that the 
instructions were confusing. Several respondents stated that a 
face-to-face meeting would have been more effective and 
doubted the effectiveness of Second Life for these purposes.  
Most SPED teachers acknowledged that Second Life has 
great potential because it allows for more interaction than 
other media, such as a video call, and because 
communicating through avatars appears to be less 
intimidating and to reduce anxiety levels. It provides 
anonymity for the ELL student and allows them to relax. 
Technology, however, was often seen as a barrier to learning. 
“I think that using Second Life as a language learning 
platform makes things harder than they need to be.” The lack 
of social cues, such as facial expressions, was evident. It was 
unclear whether silence meant active listening, confusion, 
disinterest, or headphone issues. The design of the activities 
needs to be carefully thought out in order to allow 
interaction. It was acknowledged that a virtual world may be 
conducive to discussion, provided that activities are set up 
appropriately and there is ample support from the instructor 
and the facilitator(s). When asked if the two teaching 
sessions on EduNation had taken advantage of the potential 
of virtual worlds, most respondents reported that the tools, 
such as a game show set, were not used in a way to promote 
oral communication successfully and failed to allocate the 
SPED teachers a purposeful role.  
The final prompt inquired about the unique skills that a 
teacher should have to teach in Second Life. A long list of 
unique characteristics and abilities was generated: Patience, 
kindness, understanding, non-judgment, technical expertise, 
strong 
communications 
skills, 
knowledgeable 
and 
experienced in the Second Life program, creativity in order 
to make materials enjoyable and accessible to many different 
learners, the ability to anticipate student needs without being 
able to read body language and facial expressions, the ability 
to diagnose a technical problem and troubleshoot, the ability 
to plan and implement a [virtual] lesson, the ability to 
specify and explain expectations and give clear directions in 
a calm manner, the ability to be clear and concise, the ability 
and willingness to organize activities in a way that everyone 
gets an opportunity to engage in an extensive conversation in 
a private chat area, the ability to stay calm in the face of 
technical glitches and not let the participants feel one’s 
frustrations, think through the language demands of any 
given activity, and the ability to accommodate the needs of 
ELLs in a culturally sensitive way in order to allay their 
anxieties. A teacher in Second Life needs a back-up plan if 
technological errors take over the lesson. 
Despite the numerous frustrations that these SPED 
teachers experienced, the post-survey reflected that, overall, 
the respondents found the experience interesting because it 
showed them practical examples of teaching in Second Life, 
although they thought that the unique affordances of Second 
Life were not fully taken advantage of. The potential of 
virtual worlds was recognized, provided that the design of 
the activities is well thought out and that technical glitches 
can be drastically minimized to enhance everyone’s 
experience. 
Fun experience. Frustrating at times, but awesome to see 
where technology can go in education. The thought of 
kids being able to do this on an ipad with more ease and 
perhaps a webcam feature with kids from across the 
planet is a very exciting concept! 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS  
The discussion of the results has been arranged around 
the three research questions. Five recommendations are 
made: anxiety-reducing lesson design, taking advantage of 
the full potential of virtual worlds, training the unique skills 
of a 3D teacher, enhanced voice communication, and 
collaborative design. These recommendations extend the 
guidelines suggested by Wang et al. [12]. 
1. 
What are the English language learners’ and the 
special education teachers’ perceptions of Second Life as a 
language-learning platform? Almost all ELLs perceived 
Second Life as a useful and interesting language-learning 
platform. A perception that was shared by many was that 
they had more opportunities to speak with native speakers 
than in real life. On the one hand, this statement is surprising, 
considering that all ELLs were actually studying at a 
university in the United States where the majority of students 
were English native speakers. On the other hand, it could be 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

an indicator of the difficulties that these students may have in 
engaging in conversations with native English speakers. 
ELLs have frequently indicated that communicating through 
a virtual world helped them to alleviate their anxiety, which 
is in agreement with Wang et al. [11]. Learning activities can 
be designed in a way that only the instructor knows the true 
identity of an avatar for assessment purposes. 
2. 
What are the unique skills that a teacher should 
have to teach in Second Life? The SPED teachers provided a 
long list of qualities that they would like to see in a teacher 
teaching in Second Life. Many of these skills should not only 
apply to virtual worlds teachers, but should be present in all 
teachers. 
Examples 
include 
patience, 
kindness, 
and 
understanding. It is hypothesized, however, that a virtual 
teacher needs to have even stronger skills in these areas 
when teaching in a virtual environment where social cues 
and non-verbal gestures are mostly absent. To give 
directions, for example, an avatar cannot rely on supporting 
verbal directions by gestures. Especially the lack of smiling 
and eye contact makes it more challenging to establish 
rapport and to convey kindness and understanding. Among 
the most frequently mentioned skills of a virtual teacher 
were: the ability to give clear and concise directions, the 
ability to stay calm in the face of technical glitches, and the 
willingness and flexibility to resort to plan B if the lesson is 
not working out the way it was planned.  
3. 
What types of problems associated with the EFL 
program in Second Life were identified? Although the ELLs’ 
perception of the usability of Second Life for language 
learning was much more positive than that of the SPED 
teachers, both groups identified the same two challenges. 
First, the way that the lessons were set up failed to encourage 
interaction between the two groups. On the few occasions 
when they spoke with each other, the ELLs tended to give 
monosyllabic answers. It is recommended that language-
learning activities in Second life be designed in a way that 
opportunities for interaction in private sound parcels are 
maximized. The visually stimulating and interactive 
environment in Second Life lends itself to extensive and 
engaging collaborative activities, such as scavenger hunts, in 
relatively authentic and contextualized settings. Oh and 
Nussli [15], for instance, reported about a lesson plan created 
by special education teachers that was designed around a 
collaborative scavenger hunt at the Star Trek Museum of 
Science in Second Life. 
Technical issues, mainly related to voice communication 
in Second Life, were the second major challenge. Instead of 
the use of Second Life voice chat, it is recommended that 
Skype be used instead to accommodate both text and voice 
chat [16]. It is also recommended that an in-world facilitator 
support the instructor. Prior to the actual Second Life 
assignments, students will appreciate the opportunity to 
familiarize themselves with Second Life. Oh and Nussli [15], 
for instance, started an 11-Step Virtual Worlds Teacher 
Preparation Workshop with an hour-long class fieldtrip to 
five Second Life islands to ensure that students master the 
navigation skills required for the actual assignments. 
Virtual worlds have provided broad access to native 
speaking communities and virtual spaces for learning and 
collaboration [12] and provide the potential to address the 
five 
components 
of 
the 
National 
Standards 
for 
Communication, Culture, Connections, Comparisons, and 
Communities [12]. Collaborative project design, however, 
can be challenging in virtual worlds. The findings of this 
study concur with Warburton and Pérez-García [17] who 
identified a set of guidelines that address factors fostering 
collaboration in 3D environments, such as running a social 
event 
before 
the 
main 
activity, 
ground 
rules 
for 
communication, making collaboration intrinsic to the tasks, 
guidance and regular briefing in order to scaffold gradually 
increasing levels of task complexity, video tutorials, and live 
mentoring/assistance.  
Overall, despite several challenges, the participants in 
this study perceived Second Life as a useful, supplementary 
tool for instructors because it promotes contextualized 
language practice, provided that the lesson design allows for 
maximized interaction and that the participants receive 
support from the instructor and, if possible, a technical 
facilitator. The unique teaching skills were identified as well 
as a list of challenges experienced by both groups. The 
findings and guidelines will be relevant to other language 
instructors who plan to use Second Life for oral fluency 
enhancement. Virtual meetings between ELLs and English-
native speakers in Second Life have the potential to offer an 
innovative, creative, and stimulating way to practice 
speaking English in contextualized settings, provided that the 
activities are framed by a pedagogical rationale that justifies 
the use of 3D technology. If ELLs are teamed up with native 
English speakers, specific roles should be assigned to the 
latter. But, even without the presence of native speakers, 
language learners can benefit from mutual interaction by 
practicing their language skills in content-rich virtual worlds 
[6]. Increased speaking opportunities with English-native 
speakers is likely to enhance ELLs’ confidence and may 
encourage them to transfer the skills practiced in virtual 
worlds to the real world, specifically their university settings. 
Limitations of this research are that all instruments relied 
on self-reporting and the teams only met twice for one hour 
each. Recommendations for future research include a more 
in-depth investigation of the effectiveness of virtual worlds 
on the oral fluency of ELLs and how instructors can design 
in-world activities effectively to take full advantage of 
unique affordances of virtual worlds. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. J. Fillmore, in C. J. Fillmore, D. Kempler and W.S.W. 
Wang (Eds.), Individual differences in language ability and 
language behavior, NY: Academic Press, 1979, pp. 85-102.  
[2] P. Skehan. Second-language acquisition resarch and task-
based instruction. In J. Willis, & D. Willis, Challenge and 
change in language teaching, Oxford: Heinemann, 1996, pp. 
17-30. 
[3] R. Schroeder, “Defining Virtual Worlds and Virtual 
Environments,” Journal of Virtual Worlds Research, vol. 1(1), 
2008, p. 2-3. 
[4] S. Aydin, “Second Life Foreign Language Learning 
Environment: A Review of Research,” Turkish Online Journal 
of Distance Education, vol. 14(1), January 2013, pp.53-63. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[5] C. Balcikanli, “Language Learning in Second Life: American 
and Turkish Students’ Experiences,” Turkish Online Journal 
of Distance Education, vol. 13(2), April 2012, pp.131-141. 
[6] M. T. Thomasy Blasing, “Second Language in Second Life: 
Exploring Interaction, Identity and Pedagogical Practice in a 
Virtual World,” Slavic and East European Journal, vol. 54(1), 
2010, pp. 96-117.  
[7] C. Wang, H. Song, D. E. Stone, and Q. Yan, “Integrating 
Second Life into an EFL Program in China: Research 
Collaboration Across the Continents,” TechTrends, vol. 63(6), 
November/December 2012, pp. 14-19. 
[8] S. Grant and R. Clerehan, “Finding the Discipline: Assessing 
Student Activity in Second Life,” Australasian Journal of 
Educational Technology, vol. 27(5), 2011, pp. 813-828.  
[9] M. Henderson, H. Huang, S. Grant, and L. Henderson, “The 
Impact of Chinese Language Lessons in a Virtual World on 
University Students’ Self-Efficacy Beliefs, Australasian 
Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 28(3), 2012, pp. 400-
419. 
[10] C. X. Wang, B. Calandra, S. T. Hibbard, and M. L. McDowell 
Lefaiver, “Learning Effects of an Experimental EFL Program 
in 
Second 
Life,” 
Educational 
Technology 
Research 
Development, 
vol. 
60, 
2012, 
pp. 
943-961, 
doi 
10.1007/s11423-012-9259-0. 
[11] A. K. Wehner, A. W. Gump, and S.  Downey, “The Effects of 
Second Life on the Motivation of Undergraduate Students 
Learning a Foreign Language,” Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 
vol. 
24(3), 
2011, 
pp. 
277-289, 
doi 
10.1080/09588221.2010.551757 
[12] B. Knutzen and D. Kennedy, “The Global Classroom Project: 
Learning a Second Language in a Virtual Environment,” The 
Electronic Journal of e-learning, vol. 10(1), 2012, pp. 90-106.  
[13] M. Liu and J. Jackson,  “An Exploration of Chinese EFL 
Learners’ Unwillingness to Communicate and Foreign 
Language Anxiety,” Modern Language Journal,  vol. 92(1), 
Spring 2008, pp. 71-86. 
[14] H. Ishizuka and K. Akama, “Language Learning in 3D Virtual 
World: Using Second Life as a Platform,” eleed, vol. 8, 2011, 
http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0009-5-31706 
[retrieved: 
January, 2014] 
[15]  K. Oh and N. Nussli, “Teacher Training in the Use of a 
Three-Dimensional Immersive Virtual World: Building 
Understanding through First-Hand Experiences,” Journal of 
Teaching and Learning with Technology, in press. 
[16] K. Yee and J. Hargis, “Jumping Head First into Second Life 
for Higher Education,” International Journal of the 
Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, vol. 6, 2010, pp. 1-15. 
[17] S. Warburton and M. Pérez-Garcia, “3D design and 
collaboration in massively multi-user virtual environments”. 
In D. Russell (Ed.) Cases on collaboration in virtual learning 
environments: processes and interactions, Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global, 2009, pp. 27-41. 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

