 
Augmented Reality Application for Telecommunications Concepts Learning 
 
Patricia Madrinan  
i2t Research group–CENIT Research 
Center 
Universidad Icesi 
Cali, Colombia 
e-mail: patri@elsitiomio.com 
 Domiciano Rincon 
i2t Research group 
Universidad Icesi 
Cali, Colombia 
e-mail: 
domiciano.rincon@correounivalle.edu.co 
Andres Navarro 
i2t Research group–CENIT Research 
Center 
Universidad Icesi 
Cali, Colombia 
e-mail:anavarro@icesi.e.,du.co 
Abstract—Learning concepts is difficult using only a traditional 
chalkboard 
approach; 
practical 
experience 
to 
develop 
enigineering abilities, however, can be expensive and complex. In 
this setting, a gamification approach is useful and can improve 
the learning process. The objective of this paper is to present an 
educational experience based on a technological development 
that is implemented on a smartphone using augmented reality. 
The purpose of this approach is to facilitate learning by 
maintaining the attention and interest of users/learners through 
game techniques, and to develop soft skills, such as teamwork 
and lifelong learning.   
 
Keywords-games; serious games; engineering education; 
gamification. 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Soft skills, such as teamwork, communication, and lifelong 
learning are essential for today’s engineers but are fairly 
difficult to employ and evaluate. In addition, some concepts in 
radio engineering are traditionally taught in the classroom 
using a mathematical and theoretical approach. In this study, 
we propose a new approach for learning a traditional concept: 
radio 
localization, 
or 
direction 
finding 
(DF). 
Radio 
localization using line of bearing is a well known concept that 
has been described in the literature. However, our field 
experience has demonstrated that although many engineers 
understand the concept theoretically, they are unable to use 
DF equipment to locate an emitter. The use of portable DF 
equipment and illegal emitters is expensive, and there are 
regulations that prohibit the use of real test scenarios for 
training engineering students.  
As a consequence of these limitations, we have developed 
an application called Hunting, with the aim of developing not 
only technical skills pertaining to DF concepts, but also soft 
skills, such as teamwork. Hunting refers to a task in 
telecommunications that involves using the line of bearing 
technique to locate a radio transmitter with a portable device. 
It should be noted that commercial devices for this purpose are 
sold by main test equipment manufacturers.  
Telecommunications, within the context of engineering, 
encompasses a wide range of specific areas. It is a 
multidisciplinary field whose specific language must be 
decipherable by teams having different levels of abilities. 
Presenting an application in this field in a friendly and 
effective manner has been an incentive and challenge for our 
work. 
Engineers, and more specifically engineering students, 
require skills that allow them to experiment proactively to 
acquire long-term learning abilities; simply acquiring 
knowledge that expires in a short time does not suffice. Each 
educational experience can be an opportunity to ask questions, 
make decisions, and dare to challenge previous assumptions.  
The Hunting application serves to teach the basic concepts 
of DF. It is a serious multiplayer educational game that is 
developed as an application for Android cell phones using 
augmented reality. It integrates hardware capabilities to enable 
interaction with the application in the cloud, which can be 
remotely controlled by an instructor from a server, locating 
users in real time and adjusting the location of the goal. 
The cognitive objective is very specific: to locate a source of 
interference. To accomplish this task, the apprentices must 
leave the classroom, or the enclosure, to find the source, aided 
by sounds, animations, and a dynamic map in the application.  
A clear goal, sense of achievement, deciphering an enigma, 
and conquering an objective are the essential components for 
maintaining motivation within the game, all while discovering 
and learning concepts in a pleasant and satisfying way. 
With respect to technological devices, different levels of 
intimacy exist. The cell phone has become an extension of the 
body and is perceived as part of the individual, a prosthesis 
without which life seems unthinkable. This phenomenon 
occurs mainly among young people, who appear as true 
cybernetic organisms, or “cyborgs” [1]. A new category of 
educational mediation based on modern information and 
communication technologies has emerged, taking advantage 
of widespread smartphone use. Combining gameplay, 
usability, interactivity, and empathy, these afore-mentioned 
educational technologies can provide a friendlier learning 
environment than has so far been available. 
Removing students from the classroom and including 
physical movement within a learning activity involves new 
challenges. The main objective of the proposed learning 
activity is to use a technological tool to help break the habits 
of passive learning and to force students to be active 
participants in the learning process. 
Hardware 
limitations 
present 
several 
development 
challenges, however, such as the lack of standardization in the 
technical specifications of various commercial smartphone 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

models. The link between mobile devices, which are 
increasingly affordable for the vast majority of the population, 
and new technologies gives rise to opportunities that transcend 
geographical distance and digital gaps. In this work, these 
opportunities are applied to education in the realm of 
engineering. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In 
Section II, we describe the application and related concepts. In 
Section III, we present several technical matters and 
preliminary results obtained from a small group of students 
and individuals of different ages. In Section IV, we present 
conclusions and proposals for future work. 
II. EXAMPLE OF “LIES” MEDIATED BY A TECHNOLOGICAL 
APPLICATION 
With our hunting application, we introduce the concept of a 
learning immersive experience significant (LIES), a proposal 
for an educational methodology that takes into account the 
experience of the individual and uses an application as a 
technological mediator. We play with the word lies (from the 
verb lie) to express that a virtual, or unreal world, using 
augmented reality (immersive experience) is used to enhance 
the learning experience (significant experience). 
We propose a blended immersive approach, attempting to 
make use of traditional online virtual courses. However, our 
approach is neither a typical face-to-face course nor a virtual 
or traditional blended concept. Instead, it falls between both of 
these teaching methods, supposing a pedagogical mediator. 
On the one hand, there is mobile technology, which offers, 
similarly to tattoos or prostheses [2], an ever-present 
companion that accompanies individuals everywhere. On the 
other hand, there is the instructor, who provides a pedagogical 
experience by guiding a group in an adventure. The 
pedagogical figure has a great significance in all types of 
“disciplines” (which is received from another individual), in 
contrast to “invention” (which is discovered by oneself) [3]. 
Technology acts as the pedagogical mediator [4] between 
the cognitive content of the course and the interpersonal 
relationship between different participants of the same 
experience. It facilitates situations, triggers emotional 
responses, and generates circumstances that extend the 
boundaries of traditional education [5]. 
Fear is a barrier that can stop the immersion that enables 
the empowerment of knowledge [6]. However, the playfulness 
conspires to deal with the initial fear and overcome it. 
Through the game, we can appreciate the way in which the 
intangible becomes visible through a mediating device 
(augmented reality) when paying attention to signals and 
directions that guide us toward an objective. The relationship 
between the digital map and the terrain that we tread and the 
encounter with physical experiences related to a mental 
process generates an educational atmosphere that increases the 
level of consciousness and, therefore, the ability and 
autonomy to solve problems. A LIES search aims to make the 
apprentice, gamer, or user desire to learn and experience the 
following: “Instead of resisting or being scared when facing a 
task, we softly accomplish it, alive and fulfilled with new 
knowledge, and avid to see what comes next” [7].  
The Hunting application is not a competitive game. All 
students must decipher the enigma (the location of the 
emitter), and collaboration is promoted when a team of two or 
more students share a device. The goal is clear: the students 
must locate the pirate (illegal emitter), which is the 
interference source responsible for generating problems 
(represented by a parrot as a figurative image of the target to 
be located). Hunting tasks involve DF issues, in which 
engineers must discover the precise location of the source on a 
map and travel to that location to retrieve it. With the Hunting 
application, students are immersed in the combination of the 
real world and the virtual world (as the information is 
generated in the application), and they must physically travel 
around the campus to find the emitter.  
III. TECHNICAL FINDINGS AND PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
The Hunting application requires an Internet connection, a 
cell phone with a global positioning system, and at least one of 
the following three sensors to be able to operate: digital 
compass; magnetic field sensor; and/or orientation sensor. The 
application uses an accelerometer to determine the position of 
the cell phone with respect to its center, and it uses the 
orientation sensor to determine the position of the cell phone 
with respect to the earth’s north (and in this way, determine 
the direction in which the device points). Initially, we 
expected that most mid- to high-end devices would 
incorporate the required sensors, as they are used in many 
popular navigation applications. 
The application was tested with various devices, including 
Huawei P8, Lenovo Vibe K5, Motorola Moto G2, Motorola 
Moto G3, Motorola Moto G4 plus, Motorola Moto X, 
Motorola Moto Z, Samsung Galaxy S6 Edge, and Samsung 
Galaxy Alpha. Of these cell phones, all the high-end phones 
were compatible with the application; that is, they possessed 
the required sensors. However, game performance in all cases 
was not identical. Samsung phones were expected to have 
superior performance, but their orientation sensor offered 
lower resolution by launching as few angles as possible when 
making a loop with the cell phone. Motorola Moto G2 and G4, 
Moto X, Huawei P8, and Lenovo Vibe K5 offered superior 
resolution in their orientation sensors, achieving improved 
performance by improving fluidity when making a sweeping 
motion looking for the “pirate.” In contrast, to our surprise, 
Motorola Moto G3 and G4 Plus were not compatible with the 
application because they lacked an orientation sensor. We 
expected them to possess the sensor, as they were newer 
versions of the Moto G2 that did possess the orientation 
sensor. Finally, it should be noted that for correct operation of 
the orientation sensor, the mobile device must be shaken in all 
directions before starting the game. 
Until now, we had only tested the application in a small 
group of undergraduate students to obtain an initial impression 
of the user experience. For the majority of the students, the 
use was intuitive, and all teams found the emitter. Some 
students had comments about the initial instructions; however, 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

the application purposely lacks instructions. Because the game 
is intended not only for engineering students, but also for 
individuals from different telecommunications disciplines, the 
friendliness of the interface is important for facilitation of 
usability. Figure 1 demonstrates the initial screen of the 
application, and Figuress. 2 and 3 display students playing the 
game. In both figures, it is possible to see the various lines of 
bearing that are generated by the simulated direction finder in 
the application. 
Figure 1. Welcome image of the application 
 
Figure 2. Student testing the application 
 
Figure 3. Searching for the target. 
 
IV. CONCLUSIONS 
The educational experience process is the pedagogical 
objective itself, where the goal of the game is the excuse and 
learning is an additional gain. The important issue is the 
involvement of the skills necessary to achieve the goal and the 
manner in which this goal is achieved. 
For the first time we propose and apply in this work the 
LIES concept using the Hunting application. This application 
of the LIES method, as a pedagogical mediation exercise 
using a technological development, is an example of a user-
centered activity that offers a simple way of active learning, 
bypassing usual procedures by breaking away from the 
boundaries of the classroom. 
Although technology serves as a mediator of the 
pedagogical process, it is not the center of the experience, but 
rather a tool. Requiring the application of knowledge, and 
transcending traditional classroom borders, the application 
allows for the integration of cognitive abilities and active 
learning. The LIES approach promotes the active role of the 
student, as students are eager to receive feedback that clarifies 
their experience. The Hunting application opens the door to 
learning, offering an autonomous exploratory activity. 
One implementation problem of the Hunting application 
involves the differences in the performances of device sensors, 
as well as the lack of standardization in the technical 
specifications of different smartphone models. This issue 
results in different yields and accuracy of location data, and 
should be addressed in future work. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. M. Kusnagi, "Dispositivos, prótesis y artefactos de la subjetividad 
cíborg,” Jóvenes Tecnofilosofía Arte Digit., p. 41, 2013. 
[2] 
H. Belting, Cruce de miradas con las imágenes. La pregunta por la 
imagen como pregunta por el cuerpo. Universidad de Salamanca, 2011. 
[3] 
E. D. Dussel, La pedagógica latinoamericana. Nueva América, 1980. 
[4] 
F. G. Pérez and D. P. Castillo, Mediación Pedagogica: apuntes para 
una educación a distância alternativa. Instituto de Investigaciones y 
Mejoramiento Educativo, 1996. 
[5]     M. McLuhan, B. R. Powers, and C. Ferrari, La aldea global. Gedisa, 
1995. 
[6] 
J. A. Marina, Anatomía del miedo. Anagrama, 2010. 
[7] 
C. Pinkola, Mujeres que corren con los lobos. Barcelona: Ediciones B, 
S.A., 1998 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

