Creating an Artificial Context Based on Video-Recorded Competitive Games 
for Supporting the Learning of Tacit Skills  
 
Harald Kjellin  
Computer and Systems Sciences Department 
Kristianstad University and Stockholm University 
Stockholm, Sweden 
harald.kjellin@hkr.se 
Houssam Toufaili 
Computer and Systems Sciences Department 
Stockholm University 
Stockholm, Sweden 
toufaili@dsv.su.se
 
 
Abstract— It is easier for students to learn tacit skills if they get 
much feedback on their behavior. Extensive resources are 
required for providing students with enough quantities and 
qualities of a specific feedback that is directly related to the 
students’ skills or lack of skills. We demonstrate how the 
demand for extensive feedback resources can be decreased by 
allowing the students to review film-clips from situations when 
they and their fellow students received qualified feedback. We 
will demonstrate a strategy in which we can film students’ 
behaviors by using cost effective filming techniques. The films 
allowed the students to study their own behavior in detail. Our 
conclusions from the study is that the presented type of 
strategy for supporting learning works very well and we advise 
other researchers to test similar strategies when they need to 
mass-produce teaching of tacit skills. 
Keywords- tacit knowledge; video-clips; filming; feedback 
structures. 
I. 
 BACKGROUND 
Learning based on transfer of explicit knowledge is 
easier to adjust to hybrid learning technology, than is the 
type of learning that is based on transfer of tacit knowledge. 
The explicit knowledge can be transferred via symbolic 
representations of knowledge while the tacit knowledge 
often requires a number of socializing factors to be 
successfully transferred. An an example of tacit knowledge 
is to know how to ride a bicycle. The formal knowledge that 
is written about riding a bicycle might not be enough to 
successfully know how a person can balance himself/herself 
while on it.   
The challenge of sharing tacit knowledge in a systematic 
way is that such sharing is a result of constant interactions 
among individuals and their environments. Tacit knowledge 
is a form of skill or competence that is acquired by extensive 
training and repeated activity. Explicit knowledge, on the 
other hand, is easier to teach because it can be articulated, 
while the tacit knowledge cannot be explained. Michael 
Polanyi describes this phenomenon: “We can know more 
than we can tell” [1] [2].   
The 
use 
of 
mainstream 
media 
like 
PowerPoint 
presentations have shown how important are visual displays 
in the teaching/learning process. Nevertheless, it is not an 
example of an effective way to transfer tacit knowledge, due 
to its short phrases, and summarized information. This is 
another example of a relationship between explicit and tacit 
knowledge. The explicit knowledge may provide us with 
main directions, but if we do not understand the deeper 
context of the directions we may be totally lost. Visualization 
of knowledge is a useful way of creating a context but in the 
form of Power-Point pictures may not provide us with 
enough background information to enable us to understand 
the context of the theories. If we instead have visualizations 
in the form of content intensive film-clips we may be able to 
understand a difficult theory related to the film-clip just 
because the film provided us with such a distinct context for 
a specific piece of knowledge. [3]   
There exists a type of tacit skill that combines several 
other tacit skills. An example of such a skill is the art of 
negotiation in situations when the opponents try to win 
advantages by manipulating a discussion to their favor. 
Negotiation skills often combine the skills of rhetoric, 
communication, emotional intelligence, strategic thinking, 
system thinking, social maturity, etc.  
In ordinary classroom situations it is possible to design 
exercises in repeated training sessions combined with 
extensive feedback to secure that this type of tacit skill 
associated with negotiations can be learned. If students do 
not have the possibility to regularly attend to the classroom, 
or if there is not enough resources for extensive teacher 
training, it is very difficult to teach the practical side of tacit 
skills. In this paper we are investigating to what extent one 
can use hybrid video film techniques to overcome some of 
these obstacles. We focus on the use of video clips from 
filming students’ spontaneous behavior. Such video-clips can 
be available online to enable the students to reflect on their 
behavior when they are not in the classroom. 
The starting point for our interest in video-clips as a 
means to systemize feedback to students was our discovery 
that students could have very good grades on the theoretical 
parts of the course and still have severe difficulties with the 
practical implementations of the theories.  
 
68
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

Moreover, as discussed in [4], students increasingly 
prefer video podcasts more than traditional media like papers 
and slides.  Figure 1 shows the aforementioned claim. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Students responses indicating their preferred 
format for lecture material [4]. 
 
Some of the students could just not make it all the way to 
demonstrate that they have learned the skills. In situations 
like this, it is usually concluded that a substantial period of 
training is needed. However, the problem with training at 
universities is that for the training to be really successful, 
each trainee needs to have enough feedback to understand 
what s/he did right or wrong. An individual trainer/coach 
can, for instance, give direct feedback about what was good 
and what needs to be improved in a person’s behavior. Such 
resources are rarely available at universities and this is 
especially true in on-line/distance or hybrid courses. In such 
courses there is a delay in the feedback, which makes it 
difficult to provide the necessary feedback when it is needed. 
This is especially valid in situations when the student cannot 
remember or is not aware of which specific behavior was 
demonstrated during the training. 
To remedy the shortcomings of lack of individual 
feedback as described above the teachers at a course for 
negotiation at Stockholm University designed competitive 
games that were all focused on students testing their 
negotiation skills while giving each other extensive and 
immediate feedback as a part of how the game was played. 
Course evaluations showed that the videos and the games 
became very popular among students because they could use 
the videos to be inspired to test similar approaches when they 
were competing in the games. It became evident for the 
teachers that the students could learn very difficult tacit skills 
if they were incrementally given more difficult and also 
provided with an environment where they could train their 
skills until they were satisfied with their progress. The 
artificial context of filmed games with other students 
supported them in their training since they could compare 
their own behavior with the behavior of the other students. 
To combine an eLearning approach of studying other 
students’ behavior on filmed clips on the web as a 
preparation for their own game playing was a successful 
combination that we have classified as hybrid learning. To 
first study films and then test it directly in action seemed to 
be an efficient way of transferring tacit knowledge. We were 
told that such training resembled contact sports, where the 
trainees repeat a behavior over and over and compare their 
behavior with the behavior of others until they are satisfied 
with the correctness and speed of their behavior. 
However, some students complained that they felt lost 
when playing the games. They said they did not know what 
to say, or what to do, and asked for more specific 
instructions to be able to handle the complexity of the 
training situation. Since the practiced skills were tacit and 
based on the players intuition it seemed difficult to provide 
the students with enough instructions and feedback on their 
behavior. 
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes 
the problems with video recording students. Section 3 
presents the conclusions from the test of course games in 
university courses. Section IV shows the results that were 
reached after performing the video recording experiments. 
Finally, Sections 5 makes conclusions and suggestions for 
future research steps.  
II. 
PROBLEM 
The problem with video-filming each individual student 
was that this also seemed to require more resources than 
what could be available at the university. We realized that 
there was a need for developing some kind of artificial 
context based on video-filming that would not require extra 
resources and would in one way or the other be integrated in 
the ordinary studies.  Moreover, effort of just producing 
video recording is costly.  [6] 
III. 
CONCLUSIONS FROM INFORMALTESTS OF THE GAMES 
IN UNIVERSITY COURSES 
It was concluded that there was a need for a thorough 
analysis of why certain tacit strategies among students 
worked well, while others did not work so well. It was also 
concluded that the reflective discussions concerning what 
was right behavior and what was wrong behavior could not 
be discussed while the games were going on, due to the 
intensity of the exercises, but should instead be analyzed in 
detail after a game was over.  
There was a need for extensive iterative practices and 
reflections after each practice on each student’s specific 
behavior if some of the students should be able to learn the 
very difficult skills taught during the course.  It was, 
however, assumed, that such extensive training resources 
would not be feasible with the restricted resources provided 
at the university. So we started looking for other means to 
secure that each student could get a detailed response to 
his/her own behavior after they had participated in 
negotiations. 
 
69
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

We had received some hints that video-filming of the 
students’ behavior could solve the problems since it was a 
well-known fact that video-filming behavior enables the 
student to reflect on his own behavior. [5]  
 
A. Purpose 
The purpose with the study was to investigate to what 
extent it could be socially and economically motivated to 
film students when they were engaged in training their skills.  
One aspect of this purpose was to investigate to what extent 
the students could learn from each other and from each 
other’s comments while watching the films. 
B. Method 
Experiments with game playing among students have 
been tested for the last three years at Stockholm University 
and at Kristianstad University. Most of the experiments were 
of the type trial and error, i.e., we tested various types of 
hybrid technology support during the courses and then we 
asked the students questions about their experiences via the 
course evaluation sheets. Step by step our games developed 
to an extent where we could be quite certain during the start 
of a course that the majority of students would appreciate the 
games and would claim that they could detect an 
improvement in their tacit skills. We were not able to argue 
for the value of the games from a scientific viewpoint since 
we could never be sure that students felt motivated solely by 
the entertaining aspects of the methods. Some critics even 
voiced the hypothesis that maybe game playing during 
courses is negative since it may distract students from a more 
serious approach towards learning and instead motivating 
them to a more childish approach to their studies. 
We discovered one distinct shortcoming with the game 
playing and that was the difficulty in giving enough of the 
needed feedback to students that were too defensive to create 
a response, or too shy to ask for a response, or too detached 
to act in a way that motivated a response from other students. 
So, we began by designing controlled experiments with the 
aim of finding indications of the filming activity as a 
substantial addition to the level of useful feedback that the 
students could get during the courses. 
The practical setting of the experiments was quite simple. 
Initially all students were trained over and over at training 
sessions for at least six weeks until they reached a minimum 
proficiency in basic skills like: 1) Focusing on the essence of 
the selling part of the message, 2) Displaying their own 
motives in a suitable way, 3) Being able to react to 
provocations without any unnecessary delay in time, 4) 
Being able to give feedback to other students in a way that 
was appreciated or respected by the other students.  
Once most students reached an acceptable level of 
communication skills, we started to film the games. One of 
the strongest constraints on the whole idea of filming was 
that it was not realistic to spend too many resources for 
filming. It is well known that high quality films could easily 
be an expensive adventure [7]. The combination of the 
following standardized way of filming was the assumed 
solution to the economic aspects of the experiments: 
• 
All films were produced in a real-time editing 
environment with a studio-tool called Tri-
Caster. This enabled one single student to edit 
the games in real-time, i.e., when the games 
were over there was no need to edit the films. 
• 
All games included extensive presentations of 
the artificial context of each game. This was 
designed by allowing the students to win points 
by requesting explanations to any student that 
was not clear enough in the presentations. 
• 
Students could win the games by giving much 
constructive feedback, and they could also win 
the games by being skilled at a quick and instant 
response to provocative behavior. 
• 
The moment the games were completed they 
were put online to allow the students to reflect 
on their own behavior in the filmed video clips 
• 
Finally students were interviewed and were also 
answering inquiries about their opinion of the 
value of watching films of their behavior. 
C. A description of the rules in the filmed games and how 
the rules promoted extensive feedback 
The rules of the filmed games were similar to those of the 
practice games, which helped the students get acquainted to 
the game rules without much explanation from the teachers, 
during the filmed games. The rules were as follows: 
• 
The judges, who are the teachers, will start by 
asking a rhetorical question about a topic that was 
covered during the course. This step is important to 
first, make sure that students are not memorizing 
mechanized answers to straightforward responses. 
Second, they wanted to see new skills, learned from 
the practice competitions, being utilized in different 
situations 
• 
The team that reacts first to the question will be 
given the chance to answer. During the answering 
time, the teachers, are looking at how that team is 
presenting the answer. In addition, the opposing 
team is trying to seek flaws in the answer, as well as 
weak points in the answering team’s presentation 
skills, and whether they are using the skills that they 
learned or not. 
• 
 The opposing team gets the turn to reply to the 
answering team by giving them extensive feedback 
about presenting the answer, as well as its content. 
The answering team gets the chance to listen to the 
feedback, and also how it can be done in a better 
way, by the opposing team. The importance of this 
70
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

lies in the fact that the answer, in its context and 
content, is being done over and over so that students 
can internalize skills. 
• 
After going back and forth with the answer, 
between the two teams, the teachers intervene to 
stop the debate. Then, they give each team feedback 
about what was good about the presentation and 
content, and what can be improved. Based on the 
feedback, they grant each team a score. 
• 
Each team has a personality that they are trying to 
convey during the game. The opposing team would 
try to react to the other team’s personality by 
adopting a counter personality. Here, the teams will 
have to adjust to each other’s strategic behaviors to 
shows the judges how they are using their acquired 
skills in action. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The students used the films for many purposes:  
• 
To see themselves and the way they acted. This was 
probably the major contribution of the films to each 
individual student. We concluded that it supported 
the student in seeing himself/herself as being an 
active role- player in the course, which in turn 
enabled the student to reflect on his/her behavior.  
• 
To play the specific parts of the films where they 
got much feedback from the other students and 
from the teacher. The students could play these 
clips over and over in order to understand why they 
were evaluated and appreciated in a certain way. 
80 students were filmed and many of them were participating 
in a number of games and were therefore filmed at several 
occasions. We do not want to tire the reader here with the 
extensive evaluation material, but it may suffice to say that 
out of the 80 students 74 of them provided us with much 
material concerning how they had benefitted from the films. 
Instead we will just show some examples citations that 
illustrate some opinions of students: 
• 
“When playing the games there was never any 
time to reflect about my behavior so I could not 
manage to understand the essence of the 
feedback I got until I was able to replay the 
film”. 
• 
“The films showed clearly how all people in the 
room reacted to my behavior. I often found that 
the looks on their faces was more useful to me 
than the feedback I got about my behavior”. 
• 
“I have never before so clearly seen talents and 
defects in my own behavior. Probably because 
the games forced us all to act spontaneously”. 
• 
“We simply did not have time act in a controlled 
way during the games, and this made us reveal 
our true nature when communicating”. 
Another way of trying to interpret the value of the films was 
to check how often they were watched. We discovered that 
each single little film-clip was viewed between 5 – 20 times.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
Our general conclusion is that film-clips of students’ 
behaviors, when they play games, can be reused to support 
learning. The filmed clips create a distinct artificial context 
which supports the students learning process. The film-clips 
can also be used to give an intensive feedback to the students 
who can see themselves in the films. All in all we believe it 
is an efficient way of transferring tacit knowledge. Almost 
all students in the experiments claimed that they learned 
much from the course. About one third of the participants 
claimed that it was the most rewarding course they have ever 
attended. We have no other reflections about this response 
from students other than concluding that it highlights the 
possibility to motivate students with a standardized 
workflow for mass production of film-clips. However, our 
most important conclusions came from the statements from 
students, where they claimed that they learned from being 
able to clearly see all the responses they had received from 
all other students. As this could be achieved in a filming 
strategy that did not require extensive technical support, we 
feel that we stand on firm ground when we recommend other 
teachers to test similar approaches to support tacit learning of 
skills. 
The results that were achieved have spurred us to continue 
researching about ways to make those produced video clips 
reusable on a larger scale. In this way, it makes others, not 
familiar with the course, grasp the games concept and rules, 
as well as learn about the knowledge being shared. 
Moreover, we believe that a future research in context 
development of fully online courses can help students, 
studying the course online, manage to perform the games 
virtually while making sure that tacit knowledge is being 
shared. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Polanyi, Personal knowledge: towards a post-critical philosophy. 
Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1974. 
[2] M. Polanyi, The tacit dimension. Chicago, University of Chicago 
Press, 2009 
[3] L. Prusak and E. Matson, Knowledge management and organizational 
learning- A Reader. New York, Oxford University Press, 2006. 
[4] J. Copley, “Audio and Video podcasts of lectures for campus-based 
students: production and evaluation of student use” Innovations in 
Education and Teaching International, vol. 44, 2007, pp. 387-399 
[5] D. Zhang, L.Zhou,B. Briggs, and J.F. Nunamaker, “Instructional 
video in e-learning: assessing the impact of interactive video on 
learning effectiveness” Information & Management, vol. 43, 2006, 
pp.15-27 
[6] J.P. Shim, J.Shropshire, S. Park, H. Harris, and N. Campell, 
“Podcasting for e-learning, communication, and delivery” Industrial 
Management and Data Systems, vol 107, 2007, pp. 587-600   
[7] M. Davis, “Editing out video editing” IEEE Multimedia, vol. 10, 
2003, pp. 54-64 
 
71
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

