Advances in Gamification in Education 
 
Reza Hajari 
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science 
University of Ottawa 
Ottawa, Canada 
e-mail: rhaja050@uottawa.ca 
Won-Sook Lee 
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science 
University of Ottawa 
Ottawa, Canada 
e-mail: wslee@uottawa.ca
 
 
Abstract—Gamification in education is not a new idea and has 
been investigated in the academic research field in the past years. 
In this paper, the latest advances of this topic have been discussed. 
The adaptive gamification approach has been one of the main 
topics in gamification in education lately and many different 
approaches have been proposed to achieve the best possible 
outcome. These approaches will be mentioned, and a comparison 
between them will follow, to identify which one has been the most 
effective yet. Also, the idea of adding narration to gamification in 
education, will be discussed as well. After this survey, it is clear 
that research in this area has not been matured yet, and there are 
many aspects of gamification in education that need more 
attention, to improve the state of it in the education criteria, and 
thus making it more viable. 
Keywords-Gamification; Education; Adaptive; Framework. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Online education has got more attention in the year 2020 and 
2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In these hard times it is 
even harder to get students engaged to their studies. The lack of 
interaction between the teacher and their students, makes it 
harder to hold any classes as exciting as they have been in the 
school. There are many ways to enhance the quality of online 
education or e-learning. There have been multiple tools and 
technologies that have been introduced to overcome such 
challenges. One of these tools is called gamification. 
Gamification is using game elements in non-game environments 
to enhance and improve the engagement of learners to the study 
material by making it more interesting [1]. In this paper we will 
discuss recent publications around the topic of gamification that 
are related to E-Learning. 
In Section 2, different usages of gamification are discussed, 
and how gamification can be helpful within the e-learning 
environment is mentioned. In Section 3, the design of 
gamification, specifically for education contexts, is explained. 
The similarities with video games are also discussed briefly in 
the same section. In Section 4, two different adaptive approaches 
for gamification in education are mentioned [4], and a 
comparison has been done among various applications, which 
employed these approaches based on their contexts. In Section 
5, a novel software design model for adaptive gamification in 
education has been explained. Section 6 will discuss the 
effectiveness of a gamification application, in Higher Education 
Institutions, that was used among 24 Business class students. At 
the end in Section 7, the idea of using narrative for gamification 
in education has been discussed. 
II. USAGE OF GAMIFICATION 
The idea of gamification has been around us for a long time. 
Gamification is tied in with giving different forms of rewards to 
make an action more enjoyable and satisfactory than it is in a 
normal fashion. Even giving ranks, achievements and labels in 
different criteria such as military or offices are considered as 
some forms of gamification. Deterding et al. [1] have defined 
gamification as “the use of game elements and game design 
techniques in non-game contexts”. After the advent of the 
Internet in the last two decades, many online businesses, 
websites, mobile applications, etc. have tried to employ game 
elements into their business models to improve user activities 
and motivations. These elements include leaderboards, badges, 
points, rankings, levels, etc. In the past few years, various startup 
teams and design companies have offered gamification design 
or software-as-a-service packages for other businesses [2]. In the 
year 2020, gamification market share rose up to US$ 9.1 billion 
and is set to grow up to US$ 30.7 billion in the year 2025 [3]. 
This shows a significant opportunity for the industry to adapt as 
quickly as possible to take the most advantage of the situation. 
A study from Markets and Markets back in 2016 had predicted 
the estimate for 2020 gamification growth to be set at US$ 11 
billion [2]. This shows that at the moment gamification has not 
been properly used to its full potential. 
Gamification can be employed by a wide variety of systems 
that involve with education or motivation toward improving the 
user engagement or final user experience. This method is not just 
for the digital era. Gamified elements have been around us for a 
long time. Any type of reward can be a form of gamification 
when the reward has not been the purpose of the system; for 
instance, when parents set rewards for their children if they do 
the assigned chores, or when an employee gets promoted in an 
organization and gets a new title. In general gamification could 
be defined as using gameful elements in the design approach of 
a system in different contexts by simulating familiar experiences 
from games that supports various behaviors and processes [17]. 
Modern gamification gained its popularity from early 2010s. 
It has been a topic of interest in academia and industry for many 
years now. The technological advancements throughout the 
recent years, have enabled more e-learning environments for the 
purpose of education that share some technical aspects in 
relation to video games to make learning experiences more 
immersive and engaging [2]. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-873-0
eLmL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

III. DESIGN OF GAMIFICATION IN EDUCATION 
In the first stages of introducing gamification concept to the 
industry and education, the reward-based version of the system 
was widely being employed in the application design. In this 
method the application would use different rewards based on 
suitable game elements to improve the engagement of its users 
to the system. This type of gamification is effective as long as 
the system is willing to give more rewards. Plus, there must be 
users in the system who are still willing to earn them. There are 
two obvious problems with this methods:  
1. The system should always give more and new rewards.  
2. The users might get tired, and will be less motivated 
toward achieving more rewards.  
Zichermann and Cunningham have mentioned in their book, 
“Gamification by Design” [26], that if you start giving a user a 
reward, you must keep them in the reward loop forever. 
Traditional gamification which is mainly based on giving 
rewards to the users, could be harmful, if the goal is to create a 
long lasting behavior [28]. These types of rewards can replace 
the natural motivation which they are trying to increase. This 
means that if the external rewards are no longer provided to the 
users, then they have little to no intrinsic motivation to do the 
tasks. So, a better way of implementing gamification is required 
to increase the intrinsic stimulus and help the users with their 
tasks. 
System designers should come up with more innovative 
ways of using game design elements to make motivation 
throughout the system rather than just giving external rewards. 
This matter has been done in video game design as well in the 
past years. Video game designers, especially online multiplayer 
game designers, are now facing similar difficulties. They have 
to encourage players to play their games for a long period of 
time. Some video games even last for decades and players still 
enjoy them. They should include internal motivation regarding 
the tasks which are available in the game to be done by the 
players. However, there are quite a noticeable number of AAA 
high budget video games that would lose their player-base rather 
quickly and prematurely due to bad game design. Most of these 
games suffer from bad game design elements that would not 
fulfill the players’ demand, or would bore them after a short 
period of time compared to what the designers were hoping for. 
The importance of a thorough game element design also 
applies to the system designers who are willing to employ 
gamification elements for their system. Specifically in 
education, this is a serious problem to solve since improving 
students’ engagement is very complicated and it comes in many 
forms. So, a single element design might not work the same way 
for all of the students. Here we come to two different ways of 
gamifying a system: Static adaptation and Dynamic adaptation 
[4]. 
 
In static adaptation, the system first categorizes the 
user into different learner profiles. Then the system 
adapts by changing the game elements for each 
distinct learner profile. This way, the system 
assures that each user will get suitable gamified 
elements for their own type, that they know they are 
more interested in. 
The learner profiles are commonly chosen from 
different versions of player types. There are various 
classifications available to choose from, for 
instance Hexad player types [5], Bartle Player types 
[6] and Brainhex player satisfaction model [7]. 
 
In dynamic adaptation, not only is the system 
taking into account what learner profile the user 
belongs into, but also adapts the system to each user 
different behavior and activity within the system. 
This adaptation can be done by either customizing 
the gamification element pool for each user from all 
the available elements, or by changing the 
functionality of a particular game element to further 
match 
the 
players’ 
preferences. 
Dynamic 
adaptation can also be done beside the static 
adaptation, and use the learner profile to improve 
the system. 
IV. ADAPTIVE APPROACH IN GAMIFICATION IN EDUCATION 
There have been many research attempts done in regards to 
static and dynamic adaptation in gamification in education over 
the past few years. In static adaptation, the player type will 
determine the profile for learner rather than his/her personality. 
These player types have been introduced to show why players 
are motivated to play games. For instance, in the Hexad Scale, 
“Socializers” are players who are willing to interact with other 
players and to create social connections, while “Achievers” are 
those who want to tackle difficult tasks to prove themselves [5]. 
In the literature review provided by Hallifax et al. [4] it has 
been stated that there are two different categories of research that 
have been done in the adaptive gamification design: first, papers 
that have put their findings and recommendations based on the 
literature surveys, and second, the group that have based their 
results on user feedback and analysis. Most of the first category 
of papers have linked the gamification elements to the player 
types that we mentioned above, prior to this section. The 
following papers have used this method: [8] and [9]. On the 
other hand, the second category have used different non adaptive 
gamification tools or have based their study based on a user 
review and survey system. These surveys measured the 
participants’ preference, according to their interaction with the 
system. The following papers have followed this method: [10]-
[12]. 
The result of all these different approaches can be concluded 
in the longevity of the studies. The authors of [4] have grouped 
the studies in two categories of short studies and long studies.  
Short studies are studies that lasted less than two weeks. Two 
papers include in this category [13] and [14], which both have 
used a dynamic adaptation approach. All of the studies of this 
kind have reported positive results after the studies were done. 
The research in [13] has shown that the number of errors the 
learners made during two different sessions of adaptive 
gamification system decreased, when the personalized system 
was employed. The authors of [14] have tested two different 
adaptive situations. For the first situation, the time, that was 
given to learners to answer questions, changed according to how 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-873-0
eLmL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

fast they answered prior questions. For the second situation, the 
target score was changing based on the group performance. For 
both situations the authors reported an improvement in the 
learners’ performance, and they did more tasks compared to a 
situation with no gamification involved. 
Long studies are the studies that lasted more than three 
weeks. These types of studies have reported more mixed results. 
In the seven papers that the authors reviewed in this literature 
review, four papers concluded with generally positive results. 
The authors of [15] studied learners that used an online tool for 
one month. Learners were equipped with either random assigned 
game elements, or tailored game elements based on their 
motivation type. The latter resulted in considerable differences 
in engagement, motivation and quiz results, compared to the 
randomly game element assigned learners. The authors of [16] 
divided learners in three groups. First group was given their 
game elements based on their Brainhex player type; Second 
group was given counter-adapted game elements, and the last 
group got their game elements randomly assigned to them. The 
study took three weeks to complete. This study shows that 
learners with adapted game elements spent more time using the 
tool than learners with the counter adapter ones. The authors of 
[17] also concluded a positive impact in their study. Learners 
with adapted game elements correlating to their learning style, 
had a higher task completion rate than the other who had random 
elements assigned to them. This was further proven with the 
self-reported questionnaire, after the study was done. Last paper 
in this group [18] had positive results as well. The impact of their 
adaptation tool was measured via a learner’s questionnaire, after 
using their adaptive learning tool, which reported an 
enhancement in emotional and behavioral engagement. For this 
study, some university students were divided into different 
groups according to their Hexad profiles. They used the learning 
tool for 14 weeks and each group received their own designated 
game elements. However, the results of the study deemed not 
significant, due to the small sample size by the authors. 
The remaining three studies [19]-[21] had more mixed 
results. The authors of [20] employed three structured learning 
sessions over a three-week period, each would last for 45 
minutes. Tasks were given to middle school students, who used 
the tool as part of their normal lesson process. Students with 
counter-adaptive game elements reported to be finding the 
assigned game elements more fun and useful than the other 
students with adapted elements or random ones. Same authors 
studied a similar test [19], this time with adults who voluntarily 
used the adaptive learning tool. This study was also in a span of 
three weeks. They could not find any significant differences 
among the learners afterward. 
To conclude, it has been shown that shorter studies show 
more positive impacts in adaptive gamification than longer 
studies. However, the reason is not entirely clear. One 
conclusion that can be assumed from these studies, is that the 
novelty effect of gamification elements might wear off after a 
particular amount of time. Hamari et al. [22] found the 
significance of novelty effect as well. The other problem is that 
adaptive systems change over time based on the user preference 
and activities, therefore, researchers might need to do even 
longer studies to come up with more substantial results. Another 
factor, could be different or irrelevant metrics that these studies 
used to measure the impact of gamification, since some papers 
report contradictory conclusions in the similar environments, for 
instance [19] and [16]. The research in [17] showed an increase 
in motivation in all of the learners, however, the authors of [19] 
reported motivation increase only for one specific group of 
learners known as the more invested learners. A brief summary 
of the conclusion of this section can be found in table I. 
V. ADAPTIVE GAMIFICATION MODEL IN E-LEARNING 
Design of gamification systems in education has mostly 
followed the same practice in a significant number of developed 
systems. This is due to the fact that gamification systems are 
software, and there are clear and established development 
processes to how implement a software properly, for a long time 
in the industry now. However, gamification is very unique in a 
number of aspects, compared to a typical software. These 
aspects have to be examined and considered, while designing a 
new system for a learning environment. Kamunya et al. [24] 
have introduced an “Adaptive Gamification Model for E-
Learning” that tries to solve this exact problem. 
TABLE I. STUDIES RESULT TABLE BASED ON DURATION (SHORT OR LONG), ADAPTIVITY TYPE (STATIC OR DYNAMIC), 
PROFILE (PLAYER TYPE OR PERSONALITY), ACTIVITY (PERFORMANCE OR BEHAVIORS) AND EFFECTIVENESS (POSITIVE 
OR MITIGATED)
 
Paper 
Results 
Duration 
Type 
Profile 
Activity 
Effectiveness 
[13] 
Short 
Dynamic 
- 
Performance 
Positive 
[14] 
Short 
Dynamic 
- 
Performance 
Positive 
[15] 
Long 
Static 
Personality 
- 
Positive 
[16] 
Long 
Static 
Player Type 
- 
Positive 
[17] 
Long 
Static 
Personality 
- 
Positive 
[18] 
Long 
Static 
Player Type 
- 
Positive 
[19] 
Long 
Static 
Player Type 
- 
Mitigated 
[20] 
Long 
Static 
Player Type 
- 
Mitigated 
[21] 
Long 
Dynamic 
- 
Behaviors 
Mitigated 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-873-0
eLmL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

the authors of [24] have employed the Design Science 
Research Methodology (DSRM) to develop their proposed 
model. To develop this model, they have reviewed 15 different 
adaptive gamification studies. 
Here is a quick review of how the DSRM process works: 
A) Problem identification: In the proposed model by [24], 
the problem can be identified as how an adaptive 
gamification system can be engaging and how to 
improve motivation. 
B) Objectives of the solution: Development guidelines of 
the system should be presented in this stage. 
C) Design and development: The first artifact of the 
proposed model would be created here. 
D) Demonstration: This stage is to show how the artifact 
exactly works. 
E) Evaluation: The effectiveness of the newly developed 
artifact will be determined. 
F) Communication: The result of the evaluation must be 
published. 
 
The authors of [24] have also shared their results after an in-
depth literature review of adaptive gamification studies from 
2013-2019. Nearly 50% of these studies had adaptive proposals 
of various adaptivity framework, in which the different game 
elements were to match with a specific learner profile. Only 
about 33% of the studies had a complete adaptive gamification 
system and evaluations, which about 60% of them had shown 
positive impact for their systems. 
 
Finally, the authors of [24] have proposed their gamification 
framework based on their finding of the literature review. The 
key components of their model are as follows: 
1. Adaptive 
gamification 
engine: 
The 
engine 
is 
responsible for assigning the game elements to learners 
based on their learner profile or characteristics. This 
can be either done in static or dynamic adaptation 
approach. 
2. Management of the platform: This module is defined 
for administrative functions such as role assignment 
and user addition. 
3. Adaptive gamification elements: This part holds all the 
different gamification elements that the system could 
offer. They have been grouped in their appropriate 
category of elements, mechanics and dynamics. 
4. Adaptive gamified course: In this module the course 
will be designed based on the proposed gamification 
approach. 
5. Report: This module is to report the different aspects 
of the system after implementation. This can include 
various concerns such as motivation, engagement, 
effectiveness, efficiency, experience and knowledge. 
The conclusion of the research that has been done in [24] is 
that by employing a proper gamification design framework, a 
better and more suitable adaptive system could be achieved. 
Gamification is extremely related to each individuality of any 
learner, and a competent adaptive system must consider all 
learners’ motivations and different behaviors toward the system. 
The proposed adaptive gamification framework which is 
depicted in Fig. 1 has been designed to answer these concerns 
for future adaptive gamification system designs. 
VI. EFFECTIVENESS OF GAMIFICATION 
A comprehensive study has been done by Hiroko Oe et al. 
[23] on how gamification works in Higher Education 
Institutions. In this study, the impact of gamification has been 
examined in a Business class, which consists of interviewing 24 
different students in the field. These students were using 
gamification for their Business lesson in the form of a Massively 
Multiplayer Online (MMO) game. This game was designed to 
explore the challenges in the business education at higher 
education institutions. The game used a virtual economy that lets 
the participants to make decisions within the community, on one 
shared server in real time for the set subject [29]. Prior to this 
study, the positive impact of employing MMO scheme on 
students’ learning process has been discussed, more specifically 
in business contexts [27]. Therefore, the study in [23] mostly 
aimed for gathering the students’ evaluation of the system, to 
help improving the development of designing a blended learning 
system with gamification. 
The study of [23] was done during the Covid-19 pandemic 
so the students were already engaged with Information and 
Communications Technology-based (ICT) learning. The MMO 
role-playing game was integrated in the ICT-based learning 
system, during classes and seminars. There are some advantages 
 
Figure 1. Adaptive Gamification model for E-learning. Adapted from [24] 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-873-0
eLmL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

and disadvantages with ICT-based learning systems. On one 
hand, students could feel less pressured during a class, and 
participate in more discussions and activities. On the other hand, 
some students who are not comfortable to engage with class 
activities, might feel even less motivated to participate in an 
online environment. Plus, in an online education environment 
the teacher has less control, due to the nature of the class, and 
the fact that class presence cannot be the same as in-person 
classes. 
The conclusion of the study that has been done in [23] can 
be summarized in a few key points. First and for most, the 
students share mostly positive feedback about using the 
gamification system for their business class. They all felt, that it 
could be a useful tool to make the process more interesting and 
exciting to get engaged with. However, a number of students 
said that, although, it seems to be helpful, they were not sure 
about the assessment of the whole system. They demanded a 
comprehensive explanation of how can this system help them 
better than the traditional way of learning this course, so they 
can focus on what makes the best out of the proposed system. 
Another issue to consider is that these specific students were 
already familiar with the MMO game elements and how the 
game design should work, however, that is not always the case 
with the target audience for such systems. 
Overall, the result of the research in [23] was positive. It 
suggested that a good design is necessary for any specific group 
of students and for each individual gamified system. Therefore, 
the optimal impact of learning could be achieved. A 
Gamification conceptual framework can be found at the end of 
the research in [23]. 
 
VII. NARRATIVE FOR GAMIFICATION IN EDUCATION 
It is appropriate to compare gamification systems with video 
games. One can argue, that a gamified system is a type of video 
game on its own. However, the purpose of designing and using 
these systems are vastly different. One is mostly used for 
entertainment purposes, whilst the other is trying to improve and 
encourage students in their studies to perform their tasks more 
efficiently and effectively. But the similarities are quite 
significant, and gamification systems might benefit from more 
video game components than the researchers and designers 
thought could be viable in the first place. One of the components 
that has not been extensively investigated in gamification 
systems is narrative. 
Narrative is often used to drive the story of a video game or 
a movie. However, Paula T. Palomino et al. [25] have proposed 
a concept of Narrative for gamification in education. They argue 
that narrative can also be effective in a learning environment, 
and improve the learners’ engagement. Since there are not a lot 
of studies around narrative for gamification, the authors have 
done a literature review for narrative in other medias, including 
video games. Then, they found the definitions and features, that 
is similar among the studied subjects, to finally achieve a 
common ground, that can be used for gamification purposes. In 
the process they also found out that narrative can also be part of 
the User Experience, since it shares some of the similar 
characteristics with it. 
The authors of [25] have concluded that narrative can be 
used for gamification contexts, only if the following features are 
present in the system: 
1. Actor as the user, learner or student. 
2. The choice element, which indicates options for 
progression based on the answer. 
3. Interactivity. This means that the system should 
response to the users’ actions. 
4. A sequence of events. Progression has to be made in 
logical chain of user and system actions, and should be 
quite clear to the user. 
5. Space, time and date of the interaction. 
 
If these features are parts of the system, then a narrative 
approach for the gamification system could help the students to 
be more involved with the system. There are two different types 
of narrative, embedded and emergent. These are used to 
differentiate the terms, narrative and story. Traditional narrative 
approaches cannot be used directly in the gamification contexts. 
Based on the user experience component of each system, only 
the appropriate parts of a narrative should be used to emphasize 
a particular part of a feature in a gamification system. Each 
component should be individually tested and studied before 
implementing any narrative into it. 
At the end of the study that has been done in [25], the authors 
conclude that due to the limited prior research in this field, they 
could only focus on the theories about narrative. Further study, 
design and implementation is necessary for a more 
comprehensive conclusion in this field. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, recent advances in gamification in education 
were discussed and a conclusion has been provided for each part. 
It is obvious, that the idea of gamification in education has been 
attracting more researchers to study and improve it in various 
aspects of it. These studies mostly suggest positive impacts for 
learner engagement and motivation for their proposed and/or 
tested systems. 
The main problem which remains unresolved is that, there 
are still not enough real life evaluations of such systems to 
provide 
robust 
conclusions 
about the efficiency 
and 
effectiveness of such systems. Although, in the recent years 
there have been improvements in testing such systems, there are 
still numerous problems that need attention. These problems 
include: size of the test audience, the duration of the test, lack of 
proper assessment for the system, inability to scale the result for 
different cases and the rapid evolution of the ICT world. These 
issues make it challenging for researchers and designers to apply 
older conclusions on the newly designed systems. For the future 
work, comparing all the gathered data from different literature 
reviews in adaptive gamification in education, and trying to 
correlate them with various contexts, other than what there were 
tested in, are in order. Plus, there are still numerous aspects of 
gamification in education that have not been discussed in detail 
in this paper. With a thorough evaluation of the results, based on 
the available literature review, and a deep analysis on how each 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-873-0
eLmL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

element could be enhanced, the quality and effectiveness of 
future gamification systems shall be improved significantly. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Deterding, D. Dixon, R. Khaled, and L. E. Nacke, “From game design 
elements to gamefulness: Deﬁning ‘gamiﬁcation’,” In Proceedings of the 
15th International Academic MindTrek Conference: Envisioning Future 
Media 
Environments, 
pp. 
9–15, 
Sep. 
2011, 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2181037.2181040. 
[2] L. E. Nacke, and S. Deterding, “Editorial : The maturing of gamification 
research.” Computers in Human Behaviour 2017, pp. 450–454. ISSN 
0747-5632. 
[3] Markets 
and 
Markets 
Webpage 
: 
https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/gamification-
market-991.html [retrieved:  2021.07.06] 
[4] S. Hallifax, A. Serna, JC. Marty, and É. Lavoué, “Adaptive Gamification 
in Education: A Literature Review of Current Trends and Developments.” 
Transforming Learning with Meaningful Technologies, EC-TEL 2019, 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 11722. Springer, Cham. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-29736-7_22. 
[5] G. F. Tondello et al., “The Gamification User Types Hexad Scale” 
Proceedings of the 2016 Annual Symposium on Computer-Human 
Interaction 
in 
Play, 
pp. 
229–243, 
October 
2016, 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2967934.2968082. 
[6] R. Bartle, “Hearts, clubs, diamonds, spades: Players who suit MUDs.” 
Journal of MUD research, 1996. 
[7] L. E. Nacke, C. Bateman, and R. L. Mandryk, “BrainHex: A 
neurobiological gamer typology survey” Entertainment Computing, vol. 
5, issue 1, pp. 55-62, January 2014. 
[8] M. Denden, A. Tlili, F. Essalmi and M. Jemni, "Educational Gamification 
Based on Personality," 2017 IEEE/ACS 14th International Conference on 
Computer Systems and Applications (AICCSA), pp. 1399-1405, 2017, 
doi: 10.1109/AICCSA.2017.87. 
[9] M. Denden, A. Tlili, F. Essalmi, and M. Jemni, "Does Personality Affect 
Students' Perceived Preferences for Game Elements in Gamified Learning 
Environments?" 2018 IEEE 18th International Conference on Advanced 
Learning 
Technologies 
(ICALT), 
pp. 
111-115, 
2018, 
doi: 
10.1109/ICALT.2018.00033. 
[10] F. Roosta, F. Taghiyareh, and M. Mosharraf, "Personalization of 
gamification-elements in an e-learning environment based on learners' 
motivation," 2016 8th International Symposium on Telecommunications 
(IST), pp. 637-642, 2016, doi: 10.1109/ISTEL.2016.7881899. 
[11] M. A. Hassan, U. Habiba, F. Majeed, and M. Shoaib, “Adaptive 
gamication in e-learning based on students' learning styles” Interactive 
Learning 
Environments, 
pp. 
1-21, 
2019, 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2019.1588745. 
[12] M. Denden, A. Tlili, F. Essalmi and M. Jemni, "An investigation of the 
factors affecting the perception of gamification and game elements," 2017 
6th International Conference on Information and Communication 
Technology 
and 
Accessibility 
(ICTA), 
pp. 
1-6, 
2017, 
doi: 
10.1109/ICTA.2017.8336019. 
[13] T. Jagust, I. Boticki, and H. J. So, “Examining competitive, collaborative 
and adaptive gamication in young learners' math learning” Computers & 
Education, 
vol. 
125, 
pp. 
444-457, 
Oct. 
2018, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.compedu.2018.06.022. 
[14] M. D. Kickmeier-Rust, E. C. Hillemann, and A. Dietrich, "Gamification 
and Smart Feedback: Experiences with a Primary School Level Math 
App." International Journal of Game-Based Learning (IJGBL), vol. 4, no. 
3, pp. 35-46,  2014, http://doi.org/10.4018/ijgbl.2014070104. 
[15] F. Roosta, F. Taghiyareh, and M. Mosharraf, "Personalization of 
gamification-elements in an e-learning environment based on learners' 
motivation," 2016 8th International Symposium on Telecommunications 
(IST), pp. 637-642, 2016, doi: 10.1109/ISTEL.2016.7881899. 
[16] B. Monterrat, M. Desmarais, É. Lavoué, and S. George. “A Player Model 
for Adaptive Gamification in Learning Environments” Artificial 
Intelligence in Education, AIED 2015, Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, vol 9112. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
19773-9_30. 
[17] K. Huotari, and J. Hamari, "A definition for gamification: anchoring 
gamification in the service marketing literature," Electronic Markets, 
Springer, IIM University of St. Gallen, vol. 27, issue 1, pp. 21-31, Feb. 
2017, doi: 10.1007/s12525-015-0212-z. 
[18] A. Knutas, J. Ikonen, D. Maggiorini, L. Ripamonti, and J. Porras, 
“Creating student interaction profiles for adaptive collaboration 
gamication design” International Journal of Human Capital and 
Information Technology Professionals (IJHCITP), vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 47-
62, 2016, doi: 10.4018/IJHCITP.2016070104. 
[19] É. Lavoué, B. Monterrat, M. Desmarais and S. George, "Adaptive 
Gamification for Learning Environments," in IEEE Transactions on 
Learning Technologies, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 16-28, 1 Jan.-March 2019, doi: 
10.1109/TLT.2018.2823710. 
[20] B. Monterrat, E. Lavoue, and S. George, “Adaptation of gaming features 
for motivating learners” Simulation & Gaming, vol. 48, issue 5, pp. 625-
656, Oct. 2017, doi: 10.1177/1046878117712632. 
[21] R. Paiva, I. I. Bittencourt, T. Tenorio, P. Jaques, and S. Isotani, “What do 
students do on-line? modeling students' interactions to improve their 
learning experience” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 64, pp. 769-
781, Nov. 2016, doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2016.07.048. 
[22] J. Hamari, J. Koivisto and H. Sarsa, "Does Gamification Work? -- A 
Literature Review of Empirical Studies on Gamification," 47th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, pp. 3025-3034, 2014, doi: 
10.1109/HICSS.2014.377. 
[23] H. Oe. T. Takemoto, and  M. Ridwan, “Is  Gamification a Magic  Tool?: 
Illusion, Remedy, and Future  Opportunities  in  Enhancing  Learning  
Outcomes  during  and  beyond  the  COVID-19” Budapest International 
Research and Critics in Linguistics and Education (BirLE) Journal, vol. 
3, issue 3, pp. 1401-1414, 2020. 
[24] S. Kamunya, E. Mirirti, R. Oboko and E. Maina, "An Adaptive 
Gamification Model for E-Learning," 2020 IST-Africa Conference (IST-
Africa), 2020, pp. 1-10, 2020. 
[25] P. Toledo Palomino, A. M. Toda, W. Oliveira, A. I. Cristea and S. Isotani, 
"Narrative for Gamification in Education: Why Should you Care?," 2019 
IEEE 19th International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies 
(ICALT), pp. 97-99, 2019, doi: 10.1109/ICALT.2019.00035. 
[26] G. Zichermann, C. Cunningham, “Gamification by Design: Implementing 
Game Mechanics in Web and Mobile Apps”, Aug. 2011. 
[27] D. Wang, Z. Yang, and Z. Ding, “Is Sociability or Interactivity more 
Effective for Enhancing Performance? Findings from a Massively 
Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Game” Journal of Interactive 
Marketing, vol. 48, pp.106-119, 2019 . 
[28] S. Nicholson, “A RECIPE for Meaningful Gamification”, 2015, doi: 
10.1007/978-3-319-10208-5_1. 
[29] A. L. Betts, and M. K. Rothschild. "Massively Multiplayer Online Games 
as Spaces for Metacognition and Self-Regulated Learning." Global 
Perspectives on Gameful and Playful Teaching and Learning, edited by 
Matthew Farber, IGI Global, pp. 78-104, 2020, doi: 10.4018/978-1-7998-
2015-4.ch004.
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-873-0
eLmL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

