Use of Social Media for Health Education: An Example of  
Online Support Group for Individuals with Atrial Fibrillation 
 
Joseph Finkelstein, Eunme Cha, Jeffrey Wood
Chronic Disease Informatics Program, Johns Hopkins University 
Baltimore, MD 
jfinkel9@jhmi.edu, echa5@jhu.edu, jwood27@jhmi.edu  
Abstract—Social media is increasingly used by patients for 
health education, empowerment and support. There is a lack 
of systematic data on what kind of information is being 
sought by patients via social medial channels. By analyzing 
information exchange in an on-line support group we can 
better understand what information is not provided reliably 
to patients in a clinical setting.  The aim of this study was to 
analyze 
a 
content 
of 
messages 
exchanged 
between 
participants in an online support group for people with atrial 
fibrillation. Using Grounded Theory, we conducted a content 
analysis of 626 messages, which were grouped into seven 
categories. We described each category and provided 
examples of users’ citations belonging to each category. In 
addition, proportion of initial posts and responses to them 
was analyzed depending on message category. Social media 
facilitated health education on major topics related to atrial 
fibrillation.  Practical implications of qualitative analysis of 
messages posted on an online support group are discussed.  
 
Keywords-Atrial fibrillation; online support group; qualitative 
analysis; knowledge gaps; social support 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common cardiac 
dysrhythmia which affects over 6 million patients in 
Europe and approximately 2.3 million in the United States. 
The number of patients with AF continues to grow rapidly 
due to an expanding elderly population. AF increases the 
risk of embolic stroke by about 4-5 times [1]. Furthermore, 
AF is responsible for one-third of all hospitalizations for 
cardiac dysrhythmia, and the number of hospital 
admissions for AF increased two to three times from 1985 
to 1999 [1].   
Despite high hospital admission rates and high 
prevalence of the disease, even after emergency room and 
hospital admission, patients with recently detected AF 
have limited knowledge about AF symptoms, purpose of 
medication, stroke prevention, and side effects of warfarin 
[2]. Gaps in knowledge about the disease and its treatment, 
detection of symptoms and how and when to seek 
treatment were found in another study in patients visiting 
emergency room for AF symptoms and 3 months after 
discharge [3].  
AF significantly affects patients’ everyday quality of 
life [4]. It may sometimes limit their everyday and 
extracurricular activities, such as physical exercise, travel 
and others. Treatment for AF symptoms has been shown to 
improve the quality of life [4]. Among treatment options 
available are prescription of medication, electrical 
cardioversion, radiofrequency ablation, implantation of 
atrial pacemakers, surgery and others.   
With wide Internet expansion, individuals affected by 
AF turn to Internet in search of informational and 
emotional support from other people who are also affected 
by the disease by joining disease-specific online support 
groups. Online support groups help individuals to cope 
with their disease-related issues by overcoming distance, 
access, or communication-related challenges [5]. Members 
can share their experiences anonymously and ask questions 
that they may be uncomfortable to ask in person when 
interacting with their peers or a medical professional. 
Moreover, patients get access to more diverse points of 
view and information as compared to what they can get 
through established close relationships [6,7]. Therefore, 
online group members may obtain diverse information 
about their condition, treatment and related issues from 
other members. Such information is based on members’ 
own experience and information from other sources like 
Internet web sites, books, patients’ doctors and others. 
Thus, active participation in an online support group may 
help educate patients about their condition by addressing 
their knowledge gaps.  
In addition to sharing information, patients share their 
emotions and feelings related to their disease. Participation 
in online groups promotes trust, empathy and emotional 
integration into a “virtual community” [8]. Higher levels of 
social support are related to lower psychological distress 
and better mental health in the sense of coping resources 
[9]. Social support buffers effect of stressors, like chronic 
health conditions, negative life events and other long-term 
conditions. In this case, social support may help a patient 
to cope better with the disease. Perceived availability of 
social support serves as a protective factor against 
psychological distress, depression, and anxiety [10,11]. 
Qualitative research methods are widely used to gain 
in-depth understanding of human behavior and the reasons 
that govern such behavior. The content of messages posted 
in online support group web sites may be a valuable 
resource for understanding experiences of group members 
and the utility of online interactions for the group 
participants [12]. Content analysis of the messages posted 
online has been previously successfully applied to 
investigate moderated and non-moderated online disease-
specific support groups [13-14]. However, analysis based 
on Grounded Theory (GT) has not been applied 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

systematically to the content of online support groups, 
particularly in individuals with AF [15].  
The goal of the present study was to analyze  
information content of messages exchanged between 
participants in an online AF support group using 
qualitative methodology in order to identify and classify 
major topics which are being discussed by the group 
participants.  Understanding the everyday concerns and 
worries in the lives of patients with AF can help health 
care 
professionals 
to 
better 
meet 
their 
patients’ 
expectations, 
and 
address 
patient-centered 
values, 
preferences and needs.  
II. 
METHODS 
A grounded theory approach was followed in the 
analysis of online posts [16]. Research based on GT 
employs inductive thinking, aiming to understand a 
situation from 'inside' rather than stating a hypothesis first. 
Therefore, no categories were specified in advance of data 
collection. We analyzed archived messages posted on one 
of the AF support group web site. The content of 626 
messages posted during the period of 1/1 to 1/31 2008 by 
144 anonymous users was analyzed using the NVivo 8 
software. Messages were analyzed in terms of similarities 
or differences, which was followed by finding common 
themes and developing categories. These categories, then, 
were used as a basis for the creation of a hypothesis.  
III. 
RESULTS 
All messages have been grouped into seven major 
categories (see Table 1 for details). The most discussed 
category of messages was related to medications. Within 
this category, group members discussed medications 
prescribed to alleviate AF symptoms, which medications 
helped and which did not, and medication side effects. The 
most frequently mentioned medications were amiodarone 
and coumodin, e.g., “It (amiodarone) got me very very sick 
and I did not know it until I had to be hospitalized.” 
The procedures category included postings about 
effectiveness 
of 
such 
procedures 
as 
ablation, 
cardioversion, and half/full maze procedure, e.g., “My 
ablation healing seems to be progressing very well. My 
EKG is fine. I have been AF free except for three post 
ablation episodes (of decreasing duration) the first week. I 
understand that is part of the healing process.”  
The experiences with AF category contained messages 
describing personal experience with AF symptoms, asking 
how common the symptoms are and how other members 
cope with them, e.g., “Sometimes I will feel dizzy 
beforehand, but very often it will come out of the blue (…) 
My heart does palpitate very strongly several times a day, 
but this seems to happen independently of other 
symptoms.” 
The category named quality of life included messages 
about the impact of AF on quality of life. The members 
discussed limitations in physical exercise and travel: “AF 
was basically ruining my life. I could no longer travel, I 
could no longer feel free to do simple things like paint a 
wall, or work in the garden on a hot day.” Also, members 
shared how the disease affects their everyday life activities 
such as shopping, work, leisure time. 
The diet category reflected the properties of various 
foods and drinks, such as green vs. black tea, fruits and 
vegetables, and how they affect the disease and blood 
coagulation: “A month ago after reading that green tea can 
cause palpitations I stopped taking the tea - and my AF has 
been behaving itself!” 
In helpful links and articles helpful web sites, links 
and other sources of information were posted, e.g., “See 
Medscape, guidelines for the management of AF. Dr. 
Calkins has some very useful comments on Amiodarone in 
his interview with editor.“  
In the last category, devices, two devices helping to 
monitor and regulate the heart rhythm were actively 
discussed - atrial pacemakers and holter monitors, e.g., “I 
had a holter a few years ago, but unfortunately wasn’t able 
to catch any of the episodes on it.”  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Number of initial messages and their discussions in 
each message category 
As seen in Fig. 1, messages posted in some categories 
initiated active discussion of a topic, whereas in other 
categories number of responses was relatively low. For 
instance, the two most discussed categories were 
medications and procedures. At the same time, posts 
related to helpful links and articles were not discussed as 
actively as other messages.  
   
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
Procedures
Medications
Quality of life
Helpful links
Experiences with AF
Diet
Devices
Message 
category
Number of messages in each category
Discussions
Initial messages
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

TABLE I. NUMBER OF MESSAGES IN EACH CATEGORY AND 
SUBCATEGORY AND THEIR PERCENTAGE VALUES 
Message category 
Total number of messages in 
each category and subcategory 
and their percentage 
 
Total number 
% 
Medications 
252 
 
Antiarrhythmic 
drugs 
79   
31.35 
Anticoagulants 
59    
23.41 
Beta-blokers 
27    
10.71 
Calcium channel 
blockers 
9       
  3.57 
Calcium 
and 
potassium 
40   
15.87 
Side effects 
33    
13.01 
Others 
 
5   
  1.98 
Procedures 
239 
 
Ablation 
151   
63.18 
Cardioversion 
26   
10.88 
Maze 
19   
  7.95 
Location 
19   
  7.95 
Other  
 
24   
10.04 
Life with AF 
59 
 
Symptoms 
17 
28.80 
Sleep 
7 
11.85 
Dealing with AF 
4 
  6.77 
AF 
during 
pregnancy 
3 
  5.05 
Other 
 
   28 
47.44 
Quality of life 
44 
 
Exercise  
33    
75.00 
Travel 
6     
13.64 
Influence of AF 
2     
  4.55 
Other 
 
3     
  6.82 
Diet 
39 
 
Green tea 
15  
38.46 
Red tea 
3    
  7.69 
Other 
 
21  
53.84 
Helpful links 
 
28 
 
Devices 
 
18 
 
Holter 
              7         
38.88 
Pacemaker 
4    
22.22 
AfibAlert 
2    
11.11 
Other 
5    
27.77 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
We identified seven major categories of messages 
posted in the AF online support group: medications, 
procedures, life with AF, quality of life, diet, helpful links, 
and devices. With exception of helpful links and devices 
categories, in all other categories the proportion of 
messages offering support was much bigger than initial 
messages. This finding supports previous research 
describing major discussion topics in a disease-specific 
online support group [18].  
We analyzed messages posted on the AF online 
support group during one month. Messages were content 
analyzed and grouped into seven major categories. We 
found that in five out of seven categories AF patients were 
more inclined to offer support than ask for it. This pattern 
was especially evident in topics related to AF medications 
and treatment procedures. At the same time, much less 
interest was expressed toward objective information 
related to atrial fibrillation available online, such as 
articles, web sites and useful links.  
Messages posted in AF online support group provided 
insight into the disease- related topics that are the most 
important for AF patients and which were not addressed 
otherwise. The most common topics in group members’ 
messages were related to AF medications and treatment 
procedures. This finding supports previous research 
demonstrating gaps in AF patients’ knowledge about the 
disease and its treatment [2,3]. It also emphasizes patients’ 
need in opinion from others who have similar condition, 
not just a medical professional. The number of responses 
to posts related to medications and treatment procedures 
was four times greater than the number of initial posts. 
Therefore, group members sought other members’ opinion 
and advice in addition to their doctor’s suggestions, e.g., “I 
have been advised to increase that (medication dosage) to 
400 mg of paceron once a day, 200 in the AM and 200 at 
night. Anyone else take that large a dose with no side 
effect?”, “I think I am ready to say goodbye to the meds, 
talk to my Doctor and go for rate control. Anyone have 
any thoughts or advice?” 
Furthermore, AF patients paid much less attention to 
the discussion of validated sources of factual information 
related to atrial fibrillation available via online educational 
resources, such as articles, web sites and useful links, as 
compared to exchange of personal experiences and 
opinions. This demonstrates that the primary impetus for 
joining the online group for the AF patients was the desire 
to learn more about the disease from other people with the 
same disease, to understand how other people deal with 
this condition, and to validate their personal opinions by 
the group experience. Similar findings were reported in a 
case study of another online support group [8].  Our 
findings also correspond to results of a recent survey 
which demonstrated that patients preferred to discuss 
medical information online before talking with medical 
professionals [17]. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Analysis of the content topics supported the notion 
that participation in the AF online group helped patients to 
cope with life challenges posed by their condition. Sharing 
emotions related to life with AF and getting understanding 
from others reduced psychological distress in patients, e.g. 
“Thanks for the additional information re: other rhythms. It 
has given me some stress relief from the concerns I had.” 
Moreover, in response to sharing personal experiences, the 
patients received information about a wide range of 
disease coping strategies that may be potentially effective 
in patient’s situation. The fact that the group participants 
were more inclined to provide support rather than request 
it 
from 
others 
underscored 
previously 
described 
phenomena according to which providing social support to 
others may result in health benefits comparable to—or 
even greater—than receiving support [19]. 
Previous studies demonstrated the efficacy of 
computer-assisted education in delivering knowledge and 
empowerment for disease prevention and management 
[20-22]. Social media can be used in conjunction with 
other tools available on the internet to improve continuous 
personalized patient education and support [23-25].  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
 
Our study provided evidence that an online 
support group for AF patients can help them to address 
knowledge gaps about their condition based on others’ 
personal experience. In addition, by joining such groups, 
patients can find emotional and informational support and 
resources that can help them to deal with disease-related 
stress. Understanding information needs of people with AF 
can help medical professionals to provide better medical 
care and improve patient-provider communication.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Kannel WB and Benjamin EJ. Status of the Epidemiology of 
Atrial Fibrillation. Med Clin North Am. 2008;92(1):17–ix.  
[2] McCabe PJ, Schad S, Hampton A, and Holland DE. 
Knowledge and self-management behaviors of patients with 
recently 
detected 
atrial 
fibrillation. 
Heart 
Lung. 
2008;37(2):79-90. 
[3] Koponen L, Rekola L, Ruotsalainen T, Lehto M, Leino-
Kilpi H, and Voipio-Pulkki LM. Patient knowledge of atrial 
fibrillation: 3-month follow-up after an emergency room 
visit. J Adv Nurs. 2008;61(1):51-61. 
[4] Thrall G, Lane D, Carroll D, and Lip GY. Quality of life in 
patients with atrial fibrillation: a systematic review. Am J 
Med. 2006;119(5):448.e1-19.  
[5] Braithwaite DO, Waldron VR, and Finn J. Communication 
of social support in computer-mediated groups for people 
with disabilities. Health Commun. 1999;11(2):123-51.  
[6] Wright KB. Computer-mediated support groups: An 
examination of relationships among social support, 
perceived stress, and coping strategies. Communication 
Quarterly 1999;47:402–14. 
[7] Wright KB. The communication of social support within an 
on-line community for older adults: A qualitative analysis of 
the SeniorNet community. Qualitative Research Reports in 
Communication 2000;1:33–43. 
[8] Preece J. Empathic communities: balancing emotional and 
factual 
communication. 
Interacting 
with 
computers 
1999;12(1):63-77. 
[9] Lehtinen V, Sohlman B, and Kovess-Mastefy V. Level of 
positive mental health in the European Union. Results from 
Eurobarometer 2002 survey. Clin Pract Epidemol Ment 
Health. 2005 Jul 21;1:9.  
[10] Cohen S and Syme SL, editors. Social Support and Health. 
Orlando: Academic Press; 1985.  
[11] Cohen S. Social relationships and health. Am Psychol. 
2004;59(8):676-84. 
[12] Christian A. Contesting the myth of the ‘wicked 
stepmother’: Narrative analysis of an online stepfamily 
support group. Western Journal of Communication. 2005; 
69:27-47. 
[13] Donelle L and Hoffman-Goetz L. Functional health literacy 
and cancer care conversations in online forums for retired 
persons. Inform Health Soc Care. 2009 Jan;34(1):59-72. 
[14] Lasker JN, Sogolow ED, and Sharim RR. The role of an 
online community for people with a rare disease: content 
analysis of messages posted on a primary biliary cirrhosis 
mailinglist. J Med Internet Res. 2005 Mar 31;7(1):e10. 
[15] Huws JC, Jones RCP, and Ingledew DK. Parents of Children 
with Autism using an Email Group: A Grounded Theory 
Study, J Health Psychol 2001;6:569-84. 
[16] Glaser BG and Strauss AL. The discovery of grounded 
theory. Chicago: Aldine; 1967. 
[17] Hesse BW, Nelson DE, Kreps GL, Croyle RT, Arora NK, 
Rimer BK, and Viswanath K. Trust and sources of health 
information: the impact of the Internet and its implications 
for health care providers: findings from the first Health 
Information National Trends Survey. Arch Intern Med. 
2005;165(22):2618-24.  
[18] Meier A, Lyons EJ, Frydman G, Forlenza M, and Rimer 
BK. How cancer survivors provide support on cancer-related 
Internet mailing lists. J Med Internet Res. 2007;9(2):e12. 
[19] Musick MA and Wilson J. Volunteering and depression: the 
role of psychological and social resources in different age 
groups. Soc Sci Med 2003;56:259–269. 
[20] Finkelstein J, Lapshin O, and Wasserman E. Randomized 
study of different anti-stigma media. Patient Educ Couns. 
2008;71(2):204-14. 
[21] Lapshin O, Wasserman E, and Finkelstein J. Computer 
intervention to decrease level of psychiatric stigma among 
medical students. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2006:998. 
[22] Finkelstein J and Lapshin O. Reducing depression stigma 
using 
a 
web-based 
program. 
Int 
J 
Med 
Inform. 
2007;76(10):726-34. 
[23] Escoffery C, Diiorio C, Yeager KA, McCarty F, Robinson 
E, Reisinger E, Henry T, and Koganti A. Use of computers 
and the Internet for health information by patients with 
epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav. 2008;12(1):109-14. 
[24] Lapshin OV, Sharma K, and Finkelstein J. Depression 
education for primary care patients using a web-based 
program. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2005:1017. 
[25] Finkelstein J, Lapshin O, and Cha E. Feasibility of 
promoting smoking cessation among methadone users using 
multimedia computer-assisted education. J Med Internet 
Res. 2008;10(5):e33. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

