Use of Tablet in College Chemistry Experiment
- An approach to developing an electronic textbook -
Akira Ikuo, Yusuke Yoshinaga, and Haruo Ogawa
Department of Chemistry
Tokyo Gakugei University
Tokyo, Japan
email: {ikuo, yyoshi, ogawah}@u-gakugei.ac.jp
Abstract—We are developing an electronic textbook for a basic
chemistry-experiment for university students in which reaction
mechanisms are shown by Computer Graphics (CG). The CG
of chemical reaction was made based on empirical molecular
orbital calculations. The CG included following reactions as a
model of Walden’s inversion where drastic change in structure
takes place; hydroxylation of methyl chloride, formation of 2-
butyl alcohol and 1-butyl bromide. The CG can simultaneously
demonstrate the nature of the reaction such as structural
change by the space-filling and ball-and-stick models in
addition to providing an image of energy change by the
reaction profile. The electronic textbook also displays pictures
of apparatus and flow-charts of small-scale experiments.
Therefore, students are able to conduct experiments smoothly
and safely while studying dynamical reaction mechanism
shown by the CG. The electronic textbook on a tablet could be
used to integrate the experimental observable level and the
molecular world.
Keywords-Computer
graphics;
Visualization;
Reaction
mechanism; Electronic textbook; Chemical experiment.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In order to understand the observed phenomena, chemists
imagine and explain observations in terms of molecules.
Observed phenomena and molecular level models are then
represented in terms of mathematics and chemical equations
[1],
[2].
Student’s
difficulties
and
misconceptions
in
chemistry are from inadequate or inaccurate models at the
molecular level [3]. A molecular structure visualized by the
computer graphics (CG) provides a deeper understanding of
a molecule [4].
It is our aim to produce a CG teaching material based on
quantum chemistry calculations, which provides realizable
images of the nature of a chemical reaction [5], [6]. We have
reported that the CG on tablet was effective to provide
images of chemical reaction, such as, “Energy” change,
“Structure” change and “Migration of Electron” [7]. If the
CG
is
linked
with
textbook
for
college
chemistry-
experiment, students could observe the reaction from the
three thinking levels [1], [2], namely, phenomena in the
observable level, the CG in the molecular level, and
chemical equation in the symbolic level. Our ultimate goal is
to produce an electronic textbook of chemistry experiment,
which integrates these three thinking levels.
An electronic textbook has several advantages over the
paper textbook. For example, realistic images can be shown
by photograph, movie and CG. These images may include
experimental procedures, molecular structures and reaction
mechanisms. In addition, programmable capability [8],
hyper-link and networking features provide interactive
operation. Many electronic textbooks of chemistry exist, but
most of them are almost identical to the paper book, and very
few are related to the chemical experiment [9]. Moreover,
tablet applications, which include CG movie of reaction
mechanism related to student laboratory experiments, are not
available.
In Section II of the paper, an approach to developing an
electronic textbook for college chemistry-experiment, which
tries to integrate the observable level experiment and the
molecular world, is described. In Section III, the features of
the proposed textbook are described. We conclude in Section
IV.
II.
PROCEDURE
The flow chart used to develop the electronic textbook
for chemical experiment is shown in Figure 1. The chemical
reaction was selected based on its importance in fundamental
chemistry.
To
exhibit
phenomena
(left
side),
the
experimental condition was optimized for college level
small-scale chemistry-experiment.
Figure 1. Flowchart of Developing Tablet for Chemistry-experiment
To provide the image of the molecular world (right side),
CG images such as realistic shape of molecules and the CG
movies of reaction mechanisms were made, based on the
quantum chemistry calculation [5], [6]. A movie of the
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

reaction path was produced by the software DIRECTOR
(ver. 8.5.1J, Macromedia, Inc.) following the display of the
bond order of the structures of the reactants in each reaction
stage, which was drawn by SCIGRESS (Fujitsu). The
obtained CG was combined with the reaction profile in the
same reaction stage. It was confirmed that the drawn CGs of
the molecular models of reactants moves smoothly. A ball,
which indicates progress of the reaction, was arranged on the
reaction profile and simultaneous movements of the ball and
the reactants were confirmed. The created movie file was
converted to the Quick Time movie for iPad by the Quick
Time PRO (ver. 7.66, Apple, Inc.). After the combination of
the experimental section and the CG section, the electronic
textbook was produced with iBooks Author (ver. 2.1.1,
Apple, Inc.) and was saved to tablet (iPad, Apple, Inc.) by
using iTunes (ver. 11.2.1, Apple, Inc.). In order to use the
electronic textbook on the lab bench, it needed to be covered
with a waterproof, Zip-lock type, case.
III.
PRESENTATION ON TABLET
In the experimental section, enlargeable-photos and flow
charts were used for easier understanding of the procedure,
in addition to regular text-base description. Supporting
information, such as properties of reactants, was also
included. The electronic textbook could acts as an individual
electronic tutor.
The CG movie, shown in Figure 2, can simultaneously
demonstrates the nature of the reaction, such as structural
changes by the space-filling model and by the ball-and-stick
model, in addition to providing an image of energy change
by the reaction profile. Students are able to rotate the
molecule freely and observe molecular geometry by touching
3D-CG on the right side of the text. Students are expected to
obtain the image of an “umbrella reverse” like motion in the
Walden’s inversion while they are watching the actual
reaction progress. This way, the experimental observable
level and the molecular world could be integrated.
Figure 2. CG movies and 3D-CG of 1-bromobutane formation
IV.
CONCLUSION
We developed computer graphics teaching material for
university students, concerning chemical reactions with
drastic change in the structure of reactants. The following
chemical reaction was an example of Walden’s inversion:
hydroxylation of methyl chloride, formation of 2-butyl
alcohol and 1-butyl bromide. The CG could demonstrate the
drastic change of the structure and the reaction profile can
provide an image of the energy change during the reaction.
The textbook could display the picture of apparatus and a
flow-chart of the experiment in addition to CG. From the
preliminary study, students were able to obtain images of
structural changes and conduct experiments smoothly and
safely with the electronic textbook inserted in the Ziploc type
plastic bag. The developed electronic textbook on the tablet
could be used to integrate the experimental observable level
and the molecular world.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Numbers 25350188, 26350227.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. K. Gilbert and D. F. Treagust, in J. K. Gilbert, and D.
Treagust, (eds.), “Models and Modelling in Science Education
vol. 4 Multiple Representations in Chemical Education”,
Springer, pp. 333-350, 2009.
[2]
R. Tasker and R. Dalton, in J. K. Gilbert, M. Reiner, and M.
Nakhleh,
(Eds.),
“Models
and
Modelling
in
Science
Education vol. 3 Visualization: Theory and Practice in
Science Education”, Springer, pp. 103-131, 2010.
[3]
R. W. Kleinman, H. C. Griffin, and N. K. Kerner, J. Chem.
Edu., vol. 64, pp. 766-770, 1987.
[4]
I. Tuvi-Arad and R. Blonder, “Continuous symmetry and
chemistry teachers: learning advanced chemistry content
through novel visualization tools”, Chem. Educ. Res. and
Pract., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 48-58, 2006.
[5]
A. Ikuo, Y. Ikarashi, T. Shishido, and H. Ogawa, “User-
friendly
CG
visualization
with
animation
of
chemical
reaction: esterification of acetic acid and ethyl alcohol and
survey of textbooks of high school chemistry”, Journal of
Science Education in Japan, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 210-215, 2006.
[6]
A. Ikuo, H. Nagashima, Y. Yoshinaga, and H. Ogawa,
Calculation of potential energy in the reaction of “I + H2 →
HI + H” and its visualization, The Chemical Education
Journal (CEJ), Registration #13-2, 2009.
[7]
A. Ikuo, H. Nagashima, Y. Yoshinaga, and H. Ogawa,
“Development and practice of teaching material in tablet
computer based on computer graphics by quantum chemistry
calculation - Reaction of I + H2 → HI + H –”, Proc. 7th IEEE
Intl. Conf. on Wireless, Mobile, and Ubiquitous Technologies
in Educ., Mar. 2012, pp. 82-86.
[8]
W. Singhose and J. Donnell, “Introductory Mechanical
Design Tools”, iBooks Store, 2013.
[9]
C. M. Morvant and R. L. Halterman, “Organic Chemistry
Laboratory Manual”, iBooks Store, 2013.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

