Attention and Meditation Quantification Using Neural Networks 
Anca O. Muresan 
Computer Science 
Cluj-Napoca, Romania  
e-mail: muresan_anca95@yahoo.com 
Felix G. Hamza-Lup 
Computer Science 
Savannah, GA USA 
e-mail: fhamzalup@georgiasouthern.edu
 
 
Abstract— The advancements in dry-sensor technology have 
enabled easy brain activity data collection thorough a variety 
of 
portable 
brain 
computer 
interfaces 
based 
on 
electroencephalography 
(EEG) 
technology. 
This 
paper 
proposes a data analysis framework for evaluating the impact 
of various brainwave frequencies (delta, theta, alpha, beta, and 
gamma) on human attention. Multiple working scenarios have 
been created for the subjects targeting to enhance their level of 
attention. To properly evaluate the data by utilizing the 
artificial neural networks, several hypotheses have been 
defined. Their purpose is to group the brainwaves into low to 
medium frequency type and high-frequency type with the 
attention and meditation values and attempt to establish 
interconnections. 
Keywords-brain-computer interface; attention quantification. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The study of the brain activity is a fascinating research 
topic, due to the inherent complexity of the human brain. The 
brain has remarkable and uncharted abilities to capture, 
integrate and process data. It can be seen as an enormous 
network of neurons that enables vast data processing 
potential. It also acts as a storage center and control, where 
information coming from senses merge and undergo several 
complex processes to help in the decision-making processes. 
Although the full extent of the brain’s capacity it yet to be 
discovered, there are encouraging research avenues that 
advocate for life quality increase, recovery and rehabilitation 
for a plethora of medical conditions, such as stroke [1], 
paraplegia [2], Parkinson’s disease [3], Alzheimer disease 
[4], etcetera.  With the advent of dry sensor Brain Computer 
Interface (BCI) technology, capturing the brain’s electrical 
activity can be done on a large scale. A BCI acts like a 
platform that detects and records small fluctuation in 
electricity generated by the cerebral cortex. The electrical 
activity of the brain is monitored in real-time using an array 
of electrodes, which are placed on the head skin in a process 
known as electroencephalography (EEG). The EEG readings 
represent the user’s perception, and reaction to various 
stimuli from the surrounding environment. The brainwave 
frequencies depend upon the firing speed of the neurons and 
the number of neurons that fire simultaneously.  
BCIs connect the brain with the computer by enabling the 
brain-waves raw data transmission, called neurofeedback. 
BCIs present new methods to enhance human-computer 
interaction, and opens new avenues for augmenting human 
abilities. One promising research direction evaluates brain 
functions via BCI and cures people with brain or spinal 
injuries via micro-grains implanted into the brain [5]. 
Analyzing the brainwave data, input-output patterns can be 
established with the aid of machine learning. The subject’s 
intentions are correlated with specific outside actions.  
Attention and meditation are internal underlying 
activities that occur continuously and are manifested either in 
a conscious or unconscious manner.  Meditation does not 
have a rigid definition or live representation; however, the 
desired purpose through meditation is to reach the so-called 
“Zen” state of mind, to reduce pain or anxiety. Meditation 
aims to better the mindset and to train the mind in order to 
react properly in demanding situations. Attention is an 
internal process represented by an absolute mind state of full 
focus on a given action. Attention is the capability of 
concentrating exclusively on a specific task, while being able 
to ignore other external or internal triggers. The borderline 
between attention and meditation is shallow. One can be 
attentive while in meditation and vice versa.  
In this article, a new method is proposed to evaluate and 
objectively quantify the attention and meditation levels of the 
subject with the aid of the NeuroSky BCI as a hardware 
device and the Neural Network software. The results are 
evidencing some patterns between the type of activity the 
subject is involved in and the brainwaves at that particular 
time. Based on the EEG data collection during various 
scenarios, the aim is to decipher a nuanced understanding of 
the brain during attentive and meditative stages. 
Attention Levels: 
 
Arousal: Refers to our activation level and level of 
alertness, whether we are tired or energized. 
 
Focused Attention: Refers to our ability to focus 
attention on a stimulus. 
 
Sustained Attention: The ability to attend to a 
stimulus or activity over a long period. 
Brain signals can be classified into five basic categories, 
Delta Waves (.5 - 3 Hz), Theta Waves (3 - 8 Hz), Alpha 
Waves (8 - 12 Hz), Beta Waves (12 - 38 Hz), Gamma Waves 
(38 - 42 Hz).  
Rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
presents an overview of the evolution of BCI and their 
applicability. Section 3 depicts the software and hardware 
components utilized, alongside the deployed methodology. 
Section 4 provides the hypotheses and scenarios of the 
experiments. Section 5 outlines the captured results for all 
hypotheses and scenarios. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

II. 
RELATED WORK 
A BCI is a non-invasive approach of retrieving and 
monitoring cerebral activity (EEG recordings), and its 
methodology is seamless; as a result it has a wide range of 
applications. BCI’s and their associated data are used in 
neuroscience, cognitive science [6], psychology [7], 
psychiatric branch [8]. BCI’s area of application has 
extended over the years to neuro-management [9], neuro-
marketing [10], human interactions, and engagement. 
An impressive research effort has been conducted 
towards improving life in many aspects by utilizing brain-
controlled techniques, including the alleviation of comorbid 
psychological disorders. The employment of specific 
neurofeedback protocols serves as a remedial treatment for 
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) [11] and 
Autism 
Spectrum 
Disorder 
(ASD) 
sufferers 
[12], 
normalizing irregular neural activity that occurs during high 
anxiety episodes. Therefore, in some cases neurofeedback is 
considered an alternative for the pharmaceutical treatment. 
Other groundbreaking applications of neurofeedback 
include prosthetic and robotic arms, human gait [13], 
emotion detection, and classification [14]. Newer approaches 
suggest significant advantages in employing EEG interfaces 
in workplace optimization [15] through stress recognition 
[16], in neuro-marketing [17], decision factors, and hyper 
scanning [18] that follows the brain processing, sustaining 
synchronization of actions. With the fast growing horizon in 
life quality improvement, a plentitude of EEG based 
palliative remedies occurred. Among those, BCIs are 
employed both invasively via MEA (microelectrode array)/ 
via brain micro implants and non-invasively via electrodes 
placed on the head, i.e., dry/wet biosensor technology. The 
biosensors detect minuscule amounts of electricity generated 
by the brain and drive various protocols quantifying the 
meditation and attention levels (e.g., for the Attention Deficit 
Hyperactivity Disorder and Autism Spectrum Disorder 
cases). Meditation has benefits in subsiding the severity of 
ADHD [19], ASD [12], depression, stress, anxiety, 
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD), personal disorders 
[20]. 
Although many studies focused on exploring the 
brainwave feedback via EEG in the sphere of neuroscience, 
its application realm broadened and so did the discipline 
fields as shown in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1.  Systematic mapping of EEG applications based on disciplines. 
The systematic mapping depicted in Figure 1 was carried 
out on the Springer database by using the search strings 
indicated on the left, the results were filtered on their release 
date between 2000-2022. 
Over the last two decades, the interest in the BCI 
research topic has exponentially grown. The top five activity 
fields that are tightly connected to the BCI are computer 
science, engineering, biomedicine, medicine and public 
health and philosophy refer to Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Time evolution of BCI interest based on the research topic. 
The brain produces five types of waves (Delta, Theta, 
Alpha, Beta, and Gamma) continuously and for each BCI 
recording, only one of the brainwaves will be dominant 
having the greatest intensity. In case of a single BCI dry 
sensor, its placement is significant in the securing the best 
neurofeedback. For instance, the prefrontal region of the 
brain is in charge of problem solving, generating multiple 
prosaic/routine like judgments, planning, behavior and 
emotions. The Pre-Frontal Cortex (PFC) functions are 
complex cognitive functions as well as shortsighted 
behavior, to be able to act with a goal in mind, and self-
control. It receives the sensory information, plans resources 
based upon that, and keeps close communication with other 
regions of the brain to enact a reaction. The reactions have a 
broad range, and most importantly, they include redirection 
of attention. 
Five types of brain signals are scrutinized, each of them 
epitomizing special features, such as frequency, amplitude, 
shape, activation stimuli, as well as illustrating their own 
peculiarities related to the physiological facet. The EEG 
records the brain activity in employing the operating 
principles of a differential amplifier, which collects two 
electrical inputs and displays the output as the difference 
between inputs. Extremely beneficial while addressing very 
small electrical signals, such as the ones that appear in the 
brain. 
Initially, the literature sustained the idea that the low-
frequency brainwaves directly influence the meditation level, 
and the high-frequency brainwaves are associated with high 
attention levels. As the research interest in brainwave 
activity grew, studies have shown that high-frequency 
brainwaves are also developed while meditating. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

III. 
SYSTEM COMPONENTS 
The systematic sequence of processes employed in the 
paper encompass both a hardware (NeuroSky Headset) and a 
software 
component 
(MindWave 
of 
NeuroSky 
and 
NeuronalNetwork Tool of MatLab). The initial phase is the 
raw brainwave signal acquisition, followed by an intrinsic 
pre-processing step to for feature/pattern extraction. 
A. Hardware Component  
The project employed the Neurosky BCI (link), to collect 
EEG data. As depicted in Figure 3, the NeuroSky’s headset 
fundamental elements are the sensor (electrode) that records 
the EEG data, supported by the ear clip that acts as a ground 
and reference. The electrode and the ear clip of the Neurosky 
BCI record the brain activity by using the operating 
principles of a differential amplifier, which collects two 
electrical inputs and displays the output as the difference 
between them.  
 
Figure 3.  NeuroSky HeadSet. 
The placement of the dry electrode on the Pre-Frontal 
Cortex (PFC) region of the frontal lobe is due to the fact that 
the frontal lobe serves the executive function, making 
decisions and delegating the output supported by the motor 
nerves to the entire body. 
B. Pattern Extraction Neural Network Design 
The process diagram shown in Figure 4 portrays the three 
significant steps followed in pursuance of attaining ready-to-
use data for the neural network procedure. 
 
Figure 4.  Process diagram. 
For pattern extraction we employed the Neural Network 
application (NNstart) of the MatLab environment. This tool 
is designed to mimic the human neuronal system by 
artificially creating a neuronal network, modeled by multiple 
layers of neurons. There are three types of neural layers: 
input, hidden and output layer, as illustrated in Figure 5. 
Within the NNstart, neurons’ pairing is illustrated by 
connection weights of neurons, each neuron has its own 
weight and bias, which is associated with storage of 
information and is fed into the transfer function that serves as 
a liaise model and translates the input variables to output 
variables.   
 
Figure 5.  Multi layered neural network. 
The pre-processed EEG recordings (input data) are 
randomly segregated as follows: 
 
Training - used for training purposes; these are 
presented to the network during the training and the 
network is amended in accordance with its error. 
 
Validation - used to validate that the network is 
generalizing and stop training before overfitting. The 
validation data are used to measure network 
generalization, 
and 
to 
cease 
training 
when 
generalization stops improving. 
 
Testing - used as a completely independent test of 
network generalization. These have no effect on the 
training itself, however they supply an independent 
measure of network performance during and after 
the training.  
 
The input data causes the internal state of the neurons to 
change in accordance to the nature of the input and triggers 
neural activation. The target is the desired output for a given 
input. The output is as close as possible to the target by 
adapting the weights of each node in the network. The output 
of the node is the weighted sum of all inputs and is processed 
by using an activation function that determines the behavior 
of a node. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Artificial Neural Network Structure MatLab. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Figure 6 epitomizes the structure of the neural network in 
MatLab; additionally it presents the input-output connection 
scheme. 
The first part of the functional diagram is represented by 
the NeuroSky headset for  raw brainwave data acquisition; 
Followed by the NeuroSky’s embedded pre-filtering, 
improving the quality of the raw data gathered from neuronal 
activity (weak electrical signals), eye blinking (identified as 
a skin stretch response).  
The pre-processed data is subjected to multiple 
algorithms to be analyzed (feature extraction included) and 
properly interfaced for the user. The result is a document 
containing data values for each brainwave defined by the 
headset’s protocol (Delta, Theta, Alpha1, Alpha2, Beta1, 
Beta2, Gamma1, and Gamma2).  
A proprietary algorithm within the Neurosky’s software 
called NeuroExperimenter computes the levels of attention 
and meditation. For each recorded dataset, there is a time 
stamp, and the sample rate is 1Hz. The second step is to pre-
process the data and prepare it for the actual analysis in 
MatLab software. The pre-processing is represented by 
engaging the data feature engineering technique, which aids 
the prediction percentage in machine learning algorithms, 
handling null values, adequate data import into the NNstart, 
and dataset split into subsets. The third phase achieves the 
pattern extraction with the aid of the NNstart of MatLab. 
C. Parameters Configuration 
To effectively analyze the NeuroSky recordings, input 
and target variables need to be correctly defined within 
MatLab NNstart for each experiment.  The operating scheme 
of NNstart MatLab is the following:  
 
Initialize the weights  
 
Compute the error (difference between output and 
desired output)  
 
Re-compute the weights  
 
Adjust the updated weights  
 
Repeat the process for all training data until the error 
reaches an acceptable level  
 
An epoch represents one training iteration of the data 
though the network, this procedure is repeated until a 
satisfying outcome is obtained. A result that is labeled as 
satisfying entails an error that is below the threshold value or 
the minimum error (difference between the desired output 
and the achieved output). The type of network (feed-
forward), the number of neurons on the hidden layer, the 
training algorithm and inputs and targets vectors must be 
defined. After uploading the data vectors, the program 
divides it into three data categories: training, validation and 
testing, each associated with a percentage. 
The methodology featured in Figure 7 represents a 
graphical illustration of the pathway pursued in order to 
reach the appointed results. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Working methodology. 
IV. 
EXPERIMANTAL SETUP 
The following hypotheses are considered: 
 
 
H0 Both meditation and attention levels are equally 
affected by all eight types of brainwaves defined by 
the NeuroSky headset protocol (Delta, Theta, 
Alpha1, Alpha2, Beta1, Beta2, Gamma1, Gamma2).  
 
H1 The meditation level is equally affected by the 
low to middle frequency brainwaves (Delta, Theta, 
Alpha1, and Alpha2).  
 
H2 The attention level is equally affected by the high 
frequency brainwaves (Beta1, Beta2, Gamma1, 
Gamma2).  
 
H3 contrasting the H2 hypothesis, the meditation 
level is equally affected by the low to middle 
frequency brainwaves (Beta1, Beta2, Gamma1, and 
Gamma2). 
 
H4 contrasting the H1 hypothesis, the attention level 
is equally affected by the high frequency brainwaves 
(Delta, Theta, Alpha1, and Alpha2). 
 
By employing the hypotheses approach, there is a sense 
of inclusiveness, which might open new research avenues. In 
order to complete the cycle, two datasets have been gathered. 
Certain scenarios establish the data acquisition phase: 
Dataset 1: 
 
Scenario 1 - Coding - spent 11 minutes working at 
coding a math game.  
 
Scenario 2 - Simple math - spent 2 minutes doing 
simple math. 
 
Scenario 3 - Reading - spent 2 minutes spent on 
reading the article When Biking and Bears Don't 
Mix (Random article on NY times). 
 
Scenario 4 - Social Media - spent 1 minute looking 
at social media on the phone. 
 
Dataset 2: 
 
Scenario 1 - Baseline experiment for 5 minutes in a 
quiet room. The subject is required to remain silent, 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

stare straight forward at a stationary wall, do not 
move. 
 
Scenario 2 - Simple math for 2 minutes obeying the 
baseline requirements, except the fact that the 
subject must look at the computer’s screen and solve 
math exercises that consist of addition of two 
numbers, both being under 100. The math exercises 
must be taken in the subjects’ head and the solutions 
must not be said out loud.  
 
Scenario 3 - Visual experiment for 2 minutes that 
respect all the criteria mentioned into the baseline 
scenario, except the fact that now the subject will be 
looking at different GIFs or animated pictures.  
 
Scenario 4 - Audio experiment contains three sub-
scenarios that are wrapped into one; the subject will 
listen to three different audio files at different times, 
each audio listening performed by the subject must 
be followed by the brief two-minute baseline break. 
The audio files are very distinct from one another, 
the first and second files contain contrasting music 
genre and aim to determine a personal taste or a 
yes/no reaction. The third audio file is consisting of 
white noise and it is used to observe the subjects’ 
reactions to it. The duration for the first audio 
experiment is five minutes, the second one lasts six 
minutes and the third one four minutes. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
The main parameter that has been closely investigated in 
the experimental analysis is the regression of the artificial 
neural network for all of the hypotheses, scenarios and 
subjects. Regression illustrates the connection between the 
output variables and input variables. The regression values 
were acquired after training the neural network for each of 
the cases.  
The first dataset represents the data from a single subject, 
that performed four scenarios, coding, reading, simple math 
and social media browsing. For this particular case, Figure 8 
portrays some trends and patterns, that can be identified with 
the assumption that the data is influenced by the physical and 
emotional state of the subject and their disposition at the time 
of the recording. The overall score for all the scenarios is the 
highest for hypothesis 0, which states that all brainwaves 
impact the levels of both the attention and meditation. One 
can notice that the highest reading was registered by 
employing hypothesis 0, for the reading scenario and the 
lowest regression score for the reading experiment is when 
employing hypothesis 2.  
Dataset 2 is comprised of the data gathered from two 
subjects that performed exactly the same activities. One 
pattern that arises is that in case of H0, all of the regression 
recordings associated to the scenarios have the highest 
values, indicating a better fit. 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Dataset 1 Experimental Data Comparison Based on Hypotheses 
and Scenarios. 
 
Figure 9.  Dataset2 - Subject 1 Experimental Data Comparison Based on 
Hypotheses and Scenarios. 
 
Figure 10.  Dataset2 - Subject 2 Experimental Data Comparison Based on 
Hypotheses and Scenarios. 
Based on the results featured in Figure 9 and Figure 10, 
an appealing parallel ensues. The Baseline activity developed 
a significant regression value for both participants when 
considering hypothesis 0 and a low regression value for the 
rest of the hypotheses. The Audio scenario employing H0 
establishes that the second subject has an improved response 
to audio stimuli in regards to attention level, scoring a higher 
regression result in comparison to the first subject; The 
results for the rest of the hypotheses in the Audio scenario 
for both participants are similar. Hypothesis 0 in the Math 
scenario is still as effective as before, both subjects scoring a 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

high regression value for it in contract to the other 
hypotheses. A dichotomy is present when H3 is inspected for 
the Math experiment, the second subject's regression value 
exhibits a mismatch, scoring a low regression level, 
juxtaposing with the first subject's regression score. The 
Visual result reiterates the hypothesis 0 as being 
advantageous in the case of these two participants. The 
methodology engaged throughout the paper is an enabler. By 
enlarging the pool of subjects, the diversity of the scenarios 
and by utilizing the presented method of monitoring 
attention and meditation levels can provide instructional 
designers with knowledge for better designing the learning 
mix, evaluating required cognitive efforts to foster 
attentional processes and ensure better training results.  
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Objective attention quantification is a complex task. 
However, attention is an important ingredient of learning. 
BCI provide a noninvasive way to collect brain activity in 
real time and may be employed in user attention 
quantification. In this paper, we evaluate several learners as 
they perform different tasks and discuss various methods to 
analyze and compare brainwave data.  We observe common 
patterns for all users, despite the limitations faced in data 
interpretation. The goal is to expand and increase the 
experiments user base to detect patterns in user attention 
based on the audio-visual content presented. We believe that 
BCI can be employed successfully in improving the learning 
outcomes and fine tuning learning materials for adult 
learning. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. M. Young, et al., "Brain–Computer Interface Training after 
Stroke Affects Patterns of Brain–Behavior Relationships in 
Corticospinal Motor Fibers", Front. Hum. Neurosci, p. 457 
September 2016, doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00457. 
[2] S. 
Shokur, 
"Towards 
Brain-Machine 
Interface-Based 
Rehabilitation 
for 
Patients 
with 
Chronic 
Complete 
Paraplegia", SpringerBriefs in Electrical and Computer 
Engineering, Springer, pp. 
133-141, 
April 
2021, 
doi: 
10.1007/978-3-030-60460-8_14. 
[3] A. Miladinovi, et al., "Evaluation of Motor Imagery-Based 
BCI methods in neurorehabilitation of Parkinson’s Disease 
patients", Annual Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc, pp. 3058-
3061, August 2020, doi: 10.1109/EMBC44109.2020.9176651  
[4] R. Dhanush, S. R. Hemanth, N. Yashaswini,  M. K. Sachin,  
M. N. Suryakanth, "Detection of Alzheimer’s disease using 
BCI", International Journal of Progressive Research in 
Science and Engineering, July 2020, 1(4), 184–190, 
https://journals.grdpublications.com/index.php/ijprse/article/v
iew/127. 
[5] J. Lee, et al., "Neural recording and stimulation using wireless 
networks of microimplants", Nature Electronics, pp. 604-614, 
August 2021, doi: 10.1038/s41928-021-00631-8. 
[6] F. Fahimi, et al., "Inter-subject transfer learning with an end-
to-end deep convolutional neural network for EEG-based 
BCI",  Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 16, 026007, 
November 2018, doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aaf3f6. 
[7] U. Chaudhary, N. Mrachacz-Kersting, N. Birbaumer, 
"Neuropsychological and neurophysiological aspects of brain-
computer-interface (BCI) control in paralysis", The Journal of 
Physiology, vol. 599, pp. 2351-2359, March 2020, doi: 
10.1113/JP278775. 
[8] A. S. Widge1, D. A. Malone Jr., D. D. Dougherty, "Closing 
the Loop on Deep Brain Stimulation for Treatment-Resistant 
Depression", Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 12, p. 175 , 
March 2018, doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00175. 
[9] I. Opris, S. C. Ionescu, M. A. Lebedev, F. Boy, P. Lewinski, 
L. Ballerini, "Application of Neural Technology to Neuro-
Management and Neuro-Marketing", vol. 14, p. 53, February 
2020, doi: 10.3389/fnins.2020.00053. 
[10] M. Aldaye,M. Ykhlef, A. Al-Nafjan, "Deep Learning for 
EEG-Based Preference Classification in Neuromarketing", 
Applied Sciences, vol. 10, p. 1525, February 2020, doi: 
10.3390/app10041525. 
[11] S. Enriquez-Geppert, D. Smit, M. Garcia Pimenta, M. Arns, 
"Neurofeedback as a Treatment Intervention in ADHD: 
Current Evidence and Practice", Current Psychiatry Reports, 
vol. 21, p. 46, May 2019, doi: 10.1007/s11920-019-1021-4. 
[12] A. Sundaresan, B. Penchina, S. Cheong, V. Grace, A. Valero-
Cabré, and A. Martel, "Evaluating deep learning EEG-based 
mental stress classification in adolescents with autism for 
breathing entrainment BCI", Brain Informatics, vol. 8, p. 13, 
December 2021, doi: 10.1186/s40708-021-00133-5. 
[13] S. Said, et al., "Experimental Investigation of Human Gait 
Recognition Database using Wearable Sensors", Advances in 
Science, Technology and Engineering Systems Journal, vol. 
3, pp. 201-210, July 2018, doi: 10.25046/aj030418. 
[14] J.J. Bird, L. J. Manso, E.P. Ribeiro, A. Ekart, and D. R. Faria, 
"A Study on Mental State Classification using EEG-based 
Brain-Machine Interface", 9th International Conference on 
Intelligent Systems, pp. 795-800 September 2018, doi: 
10.1109/IS.2018.8710576. 
[15] M. Hassib, M. Khamis, S. Friedl, S. Schneegass, and F. Alt, 
"Brainatwork: logging cognitive engagement and tasks in the 
workplace using electroencephalography", 16th International 
Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia, pp. 305-
310, November 2017, doi: 10.1145/3152832.3152865. 
[16] H. Jebelli, S. Hwang, S. H. Lee, "EEG-based workers' stress 
recognition 
at 
construction 
sites", 
Automation 
in 
Construction, vol. 93, pp. 315-324, May 2018, doi: 
10.1016/j.autcon.2018.05.027. 
[17] M. Yadava, P. Kumar, R. Saini, P. Roy, and D. P. Dogra, 
"Analysis 
of 
EEG 
signals 
and 
its 
application 
to 
neuromarketing", Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 
76, pp. 19087-19111, September 2017, doi: 10.1007/s11042-
017-4580-6. 
[18] N. Sinha, et al., "EEG hyperscanning study of inter-brain 
synchrony during cooperative and competitive interaction", , 
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics, 
pp. 
4813-4818, 
Octomber 
2016, 
doi: 
10.1109/SMC.2016.7844990. 
[19] X. Y. Lee, et al., "Can We Play with ADHD? An Alternative 
Game-Based 
Treatment 
for Inattentive 
Symptoms 
in 
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity 
Disorder", 
Subconscious 
Learning via Games and Social Media. Gaming Media and 
Social Effects. Springer, pp. 69-88, April 2015, doi: 
10.1007/978-981-287-408-5_6. 
[20] Y. Yang, O. G. Sani, M. B. Lee, H. E. Dawes, E. F. Chang, 
and M. M. Shanechi, "Developing a Closed-Loop Brain-
Computer Interface for Treatment of Neuropsychiatric 
Disorders Using Electrical Brain Stimulation", Brain-
Computer Interface Research, pp. 103-106 , April 2021, doi: 
10.1007/978-3-030-60460-8_9. 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

