Integration of Learning Management Systems with Social Networking Platforms 
E-learning in a Facebook supported environment 
 
Jernej Rožac1, Matevž Pogačnik2, Andrej Kos3 
Faculty of Electrical engineering 
University of Ljubljana 
Ljubljana, Slovenia 
E-mail: jernej.rozac@ltfe.org1, 
matevz.pogacnik@fe.uni-lj.si2, andrej.kos@fe.uni-lj.si3 
Félix Buendía1, José V. Ballester2 
Dept. of Systems Data Processing and Computers1, 
Dept. of Information Systems and Computing2 
Universidad Politécnica de Valencia 
Valencia, Spain 
E-mail: fbuendia@disca.upv.es1, 
jvballester@dsic.upv.es2 
  
 
 
Abstract - This document studies an e-learning process and its 
possibilities of integration with social networks. E-learning 
process, its supporting software and social networks are 
presented exposing the problem of low level of interaction 
among users in existing e-learning environments. Social 
networking tools that could improve the interaction among 
users in e-learning environments are being considered. As a 
possible solution to increase the interaction among users in e-
learning an integration of learning management system with a 
social networking platform is being proposed. A working demo 
of the solution proposed closes the paper with the confirmation 
that integration of social networking platforms and learning 
management systems is needed and possible in practice. 
Keywords - e-learning; social network; user collaboration; 
user interaction; virtual clasroom; learning management system; 
video lecture. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Social networks are large groups of individuals with 
custom connections. Nowadays there are numerous on-line 
social networking platforms with a range of different 
communication and interaction tools available to the users. 
Some of the social networking platforms support the 
integration of custom third party tools – social networking 
applications. Social networking platforms enable complete 
users interaction using different communication channels on 
different end-user terminals. 
Through comparison of the social networking platforms 
with the Learning Management Systems (LMS) it is possible 
to determine that communication and user interactions in 
LMS are relatively low. A hybrid e-learning environment 
using social networking platform tools and LMS features can 
encourage collaboration and interaction among users  [5]. 
Second section introduces general aspects of the e-
learning process and its software (LMS). It exposes the 
weaknesses of LMS in the field of communication and 
collaboration among users. A virtual classroom approach is 
introduced with the basic requirements. 
Third section deals with social networks. It introduces 
Facebook as the world’s most used social network with more 
than 800 millions of users  [9]. Facebook functionalities that 
can be used to build a virtual e-learning classroom are 
presented. 
Section four explains the idea of a hybrid e-learning 
environment combining a LMS and a social networking 
platform. Two options are considered – integration of a LMS 
into a social networking platform and vice-versa. 
Section five presents the results of a practical integration 
of the Coome LMS system into Facebook platform. Basic 
architecture and implementation are explained including 
additional integration of the user progress tracking using an 
external tracking tool. 
Last section explains the main aspects of the practical 
implementation and integration of the presented solution. It 
presents benefits and drawbacks as well as some guidelines 
for future work. 
II. 
E-LEARNING PROCESS AND SUPPORTING SOFTWARE 
E-learning is an interactive process of sharing of 
information, skills and knowledge by using information and 
communication Technologies (ICT)  [1]. Considering the 
general requirements of e-learning in schools and 
universities, e-learning is a process where it is necessary to 
split users in different groups with different requirements  [6]: 
 
Learners. Learners are users who study by using 
the available content in the LMS. The study 
process is either standalone or with collaboration of 
other users. 
 
Teachers. Teachers are users who track progress 
of learners according to LMS data log and give 
learners feedback on progress and assessments 
results. 
 
Developers. Developers are users who are in 
charge of preparing the e-learning content.  
 
Managers. Those users who create user accounts 
and user groups and assign the content to users and 
user groups. 
‎Figure 1 shows the presence and relations of e-learning 
groups in an e-learning process. Not all groups are required 
to start an e-learning process. Where there are present and 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

active all e-learning groups, e-learning process is a guided 
process. 
 
 
Figure 1 
The e-learning process. 
 
The main problem of existing e-learning environments is 
a lack of communication and interaction among users. There 
must be more interaction among learners and more 
communication among learners and teachers. It is expected 
of e-learning environments to be more like traditional 
learning, where the interaction among learners and teachers 
represents a common process. Therefore the goal is to 
provide the same learning experience as it is possible to 
achieve in a regular classroom. This is basically an 
engineering process of upgrading the LMS and a social 
process of converting the users into e-learning community 
members, which will start growing.  
A. Learning management systems 
Nowadays, a vast variety of LMS exist, where most of 
them mainly correspond to all general requirements of e-
learning, like content management, users and groups 
management, 
assessments 
management 
and 
progress 
tracking. LMS completely support the standalone e-learning 
process based on content consumption and basically support 
the interaction among users. Learning through collaboration 
among users in real time is mostly not correctly supported. 
Nowadays lack is in LMS missing the direct relation 
between learning content and users’ collaboration and in an 
inappropriate teachers approach towards e-learning. The next 
step of development of LMS packages is to create virtual 
classrooms where users’ collaboration and social activities 
will be related.  
B. Virtual classroom 
Virtual classroom is an approach to create the 
environment, where it will be possible to complete the 
learning process with a similar user experience as in a 
standard classroom  [11].  Figure 2 shows the virtual 
classroom approach where by using information and 
communication technologies it is possible to achieve a major 
part of normal classroom experience. Basic requirements of a 
virtual classroom must be similar to standard classroom with 
some modifications: 
 
Entering and leaving the classroom must be easy, 
but also logged. Learners must be able to find their 
ways around the virtual classroom easily and be 
able to invite other learners. First entrance to the 
classroom must be approved by the teacher. 
 
Teacher must be able to lead the group through the 
learning process. Learners must be able to interact 
among each other and with the teacher. Virtual 
classroom must support individual chat between 
single users and chat between multiple users.  
 
Access to teaching material should be easy and 
available at any time.  
 
Learner should be able to share their own materials 
and comment and share other people’s materials. 
The goal of virtual classrooms is to make the online 
e-learning experience comparable to real learning 
experience.  
 
Figure 2 
The virtual classroom approach. 
 
To achieve the goal of basic virtual classroom we need to 
upgrade the existing LMS with social functionalities or 
update social network platforms to support e-learning 
processes. 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

III. 
SOCIAL NETWORKS 
Social networks are networks of connected individuals 
who 
share 
custom 
common 
interests 
and 
custom 
content  [12]. The content of social networks is completely 
provided by the members of social networking communities. 
Social networking platforms enable various tools of 
interaction and communication among users and various 
tools for grouping of users. 
Facebook is the biggest and most known social network 
with more than 800 million subscribers. The Facebook social 
platform includes various social-connection tools that can 
enhance 
interaction 
among 
users 
in 
an 
e-learning 
environment  [4]. Selected tools have been considered as 
useful for integration with the virtual classroom for e-
learning: 
 
User profile. Facebook user profiles consist of 
user’s data, user’s pictures and user’s wall where 
other users can append multimedia messages. 
Profile walls are good for general public 
communication, which can also be used for 
messaging within the e-learning process. 
 
Users groups. Users can create custom user groups 
and invite other users to join the groups. This 
feature can be used for management of LMS users 
and groups as well as for the control over content 
access. 
 
Custom pages. Users can create custom pages. 
Pages have the same preferences as user profiles. 
Pages can be used as information points for e-
learning courses or groups of courses through the 
support for discussion boards as well as through 
custom third party control extensions. 
 
Chat. Facebook supports different types of chats. 
Text, audio and video chats are available to the 
users. Users can start many individual or group 
conversations. Use of chat is essential for real-time 
collaboration. 
 
Like and comment functionality. Users can 
comment on other users’ shared content and/or set 
an “I like it” flag on it. This can be used to rate and 
comment the content of courses. 
 
News feed. Facebook news feed is an individual 
information feed shown in ‎Figure 3. It consists of 
important news regarding a single user and its 
relations 
where 
news 
selection 
is 
done 
automatically based on the user’s interaction with 
other users. 
 
Figure 3 
Facebook news feed. 
 
IV. 
MERGING OF SOCIAL NETWORKS WITH LEARNING 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 
LMS are supportive software for management of users 
and content for e-learning. Content creation and distribution 
is well supported in many LMS, while interaction and 
possibility of active participation of the users in the e-
learning process is not. On the other hand there are social 
networks with excellent support for interaction among users 
and creation of communities without any support for e-
learning. Nevertheless there are social tools that can be used 
for e-learning and can improve the e-learning process  [10], 
they are not widely used as they are not integrated with 
LMS. The opportunity here is to integrate social tools of 
social networking platforms to LMS or vice-versa. Both 
types of integrations can be done via open application 
programmable interfaces (open APIs), which need to be 
supported at the social networking platform and at LMS. As 
LMS have a good support for users’ progress tracking a 
hybrid system must support tracking of users’ collaboration. 
This way users’ collaboration can be considered to be a part 
of users’ final success, forcing the users to collaborate 
actively by increasing theirs’ motivation. 
The first step is a choice of the social network, which fits 
the required e-learning needs and offers all necessary open 
APIs to integrate it with an LMS. In case of the pilot 
implementation, described later in this paper, the Facebook 
social network has been selected as it comes out as to be the 
only reasonable choice due to its best support for third party 
controls and numerous active users. In the field of LMS 
selection there are several choices available. In general there 
are no LMS with open APIs available. The possibility is to 
choose one of the open source LMS and upgrade it with 
custom open APIs. In both cases the social networking 
platform is being used as a backend for social tools and LMS 
is being used as a backend for e-learning elements.  
A. Integration of social networking platform tools to a 
learning management system 
Social tools are essential tools of social networks. Some 
social networks offer easily understandable open APIs that 
allow usage of selected social tools in custom applications. 
The focus is on upgrading of an existing LMS with the social 
tools. If all the steps of an upgrade are achieved, the selected 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

LMS can support a basic virtual classroom. This option is 
mostly not considered as it requires more social networking 
APIs to be available – for all the needed social tools. 
B. Integration of a learning management system to a 
social network 
Integration of a LMS to a social network is possible only 
when social networking platform supports third party 
controls to be added for custom users. In this case a new 
interface of an existing LMS with a look and feel of the 
selected social networking platform must be created. As the 
complete process is depending on the social networking 
platform, all social tools available in the platform can be 
used. 
V. 
SOCIAL NETWORK AND LEARNING MANAGEMENT 
SYSTEMS IN PRACTICE 
In practice the integration of the LMS Coome with the 
social networking platform Facebook was made. Facebook 
was selected due to its large user base, support for third party 
applications, 
good 
development 
documentation 
and 
provisioning of all social tools needed to complete a basic 
virtual classroom. Coome is a LMS developed to support the 
production and distribution of multimedia based lectures and 
is being used as the tool of online synchronization of videos 
and presentations  [8]. It has been selected as the LMS of 
choice due to its support for multimedia lectures.  
 Figure 4 shows the main architecture of the implemented 
solution. A custom application was made for Facebook 
social networking platform and Coome LMS was extended 
with specific open APIs. Custom Facebook application 
communicates with Coome LMS and Facebook social 
networking platform via open APIs. Facebook social 
networking platform accepts users’ requests and renders final 
content to the users. 
 
 
Figure 4 
Architecture of the practical implementation of integration of 
Coome LMS with Facebook. 
 
A. Coome 
Coome is a multimedia based LMS. It supports creation 
and management of video lectures synchronized in time with 
the lecturer’s presentation using Microsoft PowerPoint or 
other related tool. Coome is a complete tool for editing and 
delivery of video lectures. Delivery of video lectures is done 
in the same way the content delivery is done in other LMS – 
according 
to 
user 
management 
and 
assigned 
user 
rights.  Figure 5 shows Coome detailed WEB 2.0 based editor 
tool for video lecturers. The process of final creation of a 
video lecture is made in 4 steps: 
 
A lecturer uploads a presentation in Microsoft 
PowerPoint (PPT) or Portable Document Format 
(PDF). Coome processes all pages of the 
presentation and imports them into the data 
storage. 
 
Once the presentation has been imported into the 
system, the lecturer can give the lecture using the 
Coome system. All transitions of the presentation 
pages are being tracked and indexed, while the 
lecturer can be recorded using a standard camera or 
a webcam. 
 
After the lecture presentation is concluded, a post 
production of the lecture recording can be made. 
The video recording of the lecture can also be 
replaced with custom video, which can be 
uploaded or set as an external link. Transitions 
between presentation pages can be updated or 
removed. 
 
Once the editing process is completed the lecture 
can be published and made visible to other 
registered users. Lecture can also be assigned to 
custom categories.  
 
 
Figure 5 
Coome LMS lecture editor. 
 
With the goal of integration e-learning elements with 
Facebook, the Coome LMS had to be extended with 3 
representational state transfer (REST) based open APIs. 
Authentication of users allows the employment of the APIs 
through the application key (API-key) method or a validation 
of client’s internet protocol address (IP address). API-key is 
a user unique value, which is provided as a parameter of all 
HTTP requests. The newly implemented APIs are: 
 
Search lectures API. This API enables the search 
of lectures present in the system. It returns a list of 
maximum 20 lectures with basic description data. 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

This API accepts two parameters – search and 
page. Search is the parameter to be set as the value 
of a search string and page is the parameter, which 
determines the ordering of the returned group of 
lectures.  
 
Lecture data API. This API enables the retrieval 
of lecture specific data such as video location, 
lecture 
presentation 
location 
and 
lecture 
presentation transitions. Lecture identification 
number must be provided as the API parameter. 
 
Categories 
API. 
Returns 
categories’ 
data 
including the number of lectures assigned to each 
category. 
API 
accepts 
parent 
category 
identification number as an optional parameter. If 
this parameter is not set, API returns top level of 
categories (those without a parent category). 
The development of open APIs is essential for the 
completion of the solution. Only this way the Facebook 
application can access the data from the selected LMS. To 
do this, direct access to database and to source code of the 
LMS must be available.  Thus the development of open 
APIs is not possible with all LMS as well as the integration 
with a social networking platform. 
B. Facebook pages 
Facebook pages represent a good starting point for the 
virtual classrooms. Facebook users can decide to follow the 
newsfeed of the pages by liking them – click on the “I like 
it” button.  
Inside a Facebook page the communication among users 
is possible through a discussion board or a page wall. All 
interactions and page changes are automatically set to users 
news feed. In a practical implementation described in this 
paper, a custom Facebook page has been created as a 
starting point of the e-learning process. 
C. Facebook application 
Facebook applications are third party controllers that can 
be integrated into the Facebook platform the way that users’ 
request are always forwarded through Facebook to an 
external application  [2] [7]. Facebook application represents 
a controller with e-learning functionalities.  
A custom Facebook application has been made with the 
goal to integrate basic Coome application functionalities. 
Before the first use of the application, Facebook users must 
confirm the installation of the application to their profile and 
confirm the application rights to access their data – e. g., list 
of friends. Once the installation is completed and the access 
rights are confirmed user can use the application and the 
application can access user data in the read/write mode. This 
is important to encourage interaction among users by 
messaging actions to other users’ news feeds. 
Using Coome open APIs, Facebook application can 
display two basic screens.  
Home screen displays the list of lectures according to 
user’s search input parameters. At the top of the home 
screen the lecture categories tag cloud is displayed. Lecture 
list is displayed at the center of the screen with associated 
thumbnail pictures. At the bottom of the home screen there 
is a list of selected users of the application. 
Lecture screen is used to displays a single lecture as it is 
shown in  Figure 6. A lecture consists of a video 
synchronized with presentation pages. On the lecture screen 
there is a video player located on the left, currently active 
presentation page on the right and a list of all presentation 
pages below. All presentation pages can be previewed with 
hover action on the pages list. Users can comment single 
lectures using a field below the lecture screen.  
 
 
Figure 6 
Lecture screen of the practically implemented solution of 
integration of Coome LMS with Facebook. 
 
As the application is integrated within Facebook, users 
can use it only if they have registered the application and 
after they have logged into Facebook with their account.  
Read only functionalities can be achieved without the 
need for registration with the Facebook application. By 
doing it this way there it is enough to append the Facebook 
application to previously created Facebook page. Without 
requiring from users to register with the application it is not 
possible to access profiles of the users or to read or write 
user profile data, comments, etc. This is a problem, if 
tracking of the learning progress is required. 
D. Tracking users’ progress 
Progress tracking can be performed by sending progress 
requests to Coome. In this case Coome application needs to 
be extended with an open API to store progress of the users. 
In case of the described integration a different approach has 
been selected. Facebook application has been adapted in 
such a way that it forwards Facebook users requests to 
Google Analytics service. Requests of the users are mapped 
to different virtual permalinks, which are forwarded to 
Google Analytics as general web page requests. Information 
included in each permalink is about the user, the lecture and 
the lecture page. Each user’s request is mapped to 4 groups 
of permalinks: 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
Log tracking. It covers a complete tracking of 
access. Permalink includes 3 virtual paths – user, 
lecture and lecture page. This structure of 
permalinks enables complete tracking of user 
requests in Google Analytics. 
 
Lectures tracking. It enables to track lectures 
views. This is important for keeping the basic 
statistics of lectures. By using this approach, only 
the lecture name is tracked.  
 
Lectures pages tracking. By tracking lecture 
pages we can retrieve information about a single 
page visit like visit count number and time spent on 
the page. 
 
Users tracking. It enables calculation of users’ 
ratings according to different parameters such as: 
number of followed lectures, number of visited 
lectures, etc. This permalink consist of user related 
data only. 
Google analytics enables tracking of custom permalinks. 
Permalinks do not need to be valid. All example permalinks 
are not valid, but are used to track different e-learning 
statistics. 
Users’ access data are sent to Google Analytics service 
directly from users’ web browser. By doing this Google 
Analytics gets all the data regarding the e-learning item 
being tracked as well all the data present in regular HTTP 
headers. Google analytics creates aggregated reports 
according to received data. 
In some scenarios transferring access data to a third-
party service can be considered as a privacy issue. Only 
learning object data provided in the URL can be protected 
by using an encryption method. HTTP requests to Google 
Analytics service can be done using the secure connection to 
exclude possibilities of network traffic attacks. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
It seems obvious that the existing e-learning processes 
must be complemented with social networking tools. With 
the presented pilot implementation we have shown that it is 
possible to use a modified LMS platform and the Facebook 
social 
network 
as 
a 
virtual 
e-learning 
classroom. 
Nevertheless, despite the fact that our  implementation has 
been based on the Facebook social network and Coome 
LMS, it can be implemented also by using other social 
networks supporting the implementation of third party 
controls or using other LMS where the access to source 
code is available – e.g., open source LMS or self-developed 
LMS. 
Standard web users are familiar with social networks, 
but not with LMS. Introducing LMS features to social 
networks enables an immediate start of e-learning process 
for the end users without the need of understanding the 
integrated LMS. Other benefits are in use of communication 
tools, 
simplified 
users 
communication 
and 
easier 
information push to users.  
 During an e-learning session the users are always able 
to use all social networking tools. It is not possible to limit 
the use of unnecessary and undesirable social networking 
functionalities for e-learning. This is a drawback as users 
can always use social networking tools for other purposes 
rather than e-learning. 
According to initial feedback of lecturers and university 
students, the social networks will be used for e-learning in 
the future. All lecturers and learning data are stored locally 
on LMS servers. This reduces potential problems with 
Copyright issues. Use of the e-learning material can be 
managed according to user accounts and enabled only to 
selected users.  
In the future a real case scenario of social network e-
learning will be evaluated on a group of students to obtain 
the real feedback and thus improve the benefits and reduce 
the drawbacks of the current system. 
VII. REFERENCES 
[1] Horton, W. and Horton, K., “E-Learning tools and 
technologies”, Wiley Publishing,  pp. 3-6, 2003. 
[2] Graham, W., “Facebook API developers guide”, Apress, pp. 
15-17, 2008 
[3] Premchaiswadi, W., Tungkasthan, A., and Jongsawat, N., 
“Enhancing learning systems by using virtual interactive 
classrooms and web-based collaborative work”, IEEE 
Conferences, Education Engineering (EDUCON), pp. 1532-
1533, April 2010. 
[4] Ractham, P. and Firpo, D., “Using social networking 
technology to enhance learning in higher education: A case 
study using Facebook”, IEEE Conferences, System Sciences 
(HICSS),  pp. 6-8, January 2011. 
[5] Rodrigues, 
J.J.P.C., 
Sabino, 
F.M.R., 
and 
Zhou, 
L., 
“Enhancing 
e-learning 
experience 
with 
online 
social 
networks”, IET Journals, Communications, pp. 1150-1152, 
May 2011. 
[6] Moodle Docs, http://docs.moodle.org, last update: 2011, 
visited: 1. December 2011. 
[7] Facebook Developers, http://developers.facebook.com/, last 
update: 2011, visited: 1. December 2011. 
[8] Coome: 
Integrated 
Multimedia 
Lectures 
System, 
http://www.ltfe.org/english/products/coome/, 
last 
update: 
2010, visited: 1. December 2011. 
[9] Facebook 
Statistics, 
http://www.facebook.com/press/info.php?statistics, 
last 
update: 2011, visited: 1. December 2011. 
[10] 10 
Social 
Media 
Tools 
For 
Learning, 
http://theelearningcoach.com/elearning2-0/10-social-media-
tools-for-learning/, last update: 2011, visited: 1. December 
2011. 
[11] Virtual 
education, 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_education, last update: 
2011, visited: 1. December 2011. 
[12] Social network, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_network, 
last update: 2011, visited: 1. December 2011. 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

