Hybrid Learning: A Summary of Current Models and Research 
 
Stefanie Graban  
Department of Instructional Technology and Leadership 
Duquesne University 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA 
e-mail: grabans@duq.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Hybrid learning is quickly becoming more popular 
in schools across the United States. What exactly is hybrid 
learning? How is it different from other teaching methods? 
And what does research say about hybrid learning? This paper 
summarizes the current knowledge on hybrid learning, along 
with pros and cons of each type of hybrid learning.  
Keywords-hybrid learning; technology in the classroom; 
blended classroom;  flipped classroom. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
Hybrid learning is a classroom orientation that combines 
traditional, online, and collaborative methods [5] [6]. In 
some literature, it is also called “blended” learning. 
According to Crawford, Barker, and Seyam, “[h]ybrid 
classes are a mix of online and face-to-face instruction. 
Generally, the online portion is between 30 and 79 percent 
of the total class schedule” [2]. There are many different 
definitions of hybrid learning and of what it includes. There 
is no one correct way to do it. Hybrid learning can and  
should be tailored to the specific needs of a classroom [8].  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In section 2, 
different methods of hybrid learning are described. In 
section 3, current research on hybrid learning is 
summarized. Finally, the conclusions are in section 4.  
II. 
WHAT DOES HYBRID LOOK LIKE? 
Hybrid learning is different from other types of 
instruction. First, hybrid learning is different from 
classrooms that use technology because hybrid does not 
need to involve technology at all [3] [6]. Hybrid enables 
transformative uses of technology, and does not just use 
technology for technology’s sake [3]. As said by Lin, 
“simply putting materials on the Web will not guarantee that 
students engage with and learn from them” [3]. Second, 
hybrid learning is not merely an online course. Hybrid can 
have online components, but it also incorporates different 
teaching and learning techniques. Asynchronous learning is 
usually an individual learning effort. Hybrid can have 
individual parts, but it is not 100% independent [3]. 
What does hybrid look like? Hybrid learning can be done 
in many ways and can involve a lot of different multimedia 
[3]. One way that hybrid learning can happen is in a 
traditional classroom, where only some students get hybrid 
lessons [6]. This would work well for students who are 
gifted and need an extra challenge, or for students who need 
remediation [3] [6]. “The first important strength of hybrid 
learning was that it provided multiple modes of delivery that 
were more focused on meeting the diverse needs of the 
learners” 
[3]. 
Those 
students 
get 
their 
individual 
differentiation, while others continue with the lesson. This 
method can be difficult because it involves more work for 
the teacher. “The workload associated with designing and 
implementing hybrid courses may seem overwhelming, 
especially for less experienced hybrid instructors” [3]. Also, 
students may not be willing or able to complete assignments 
that are different from what their peers are doing.  
Another example of what hybrid looks like could be a 
flipped classroom. In a flipped classroom, the students learn 
the content on their own as “homework”, while activities are 
done in class [6]. Many students struggle with traditional 
homework, and they may have a better chance of 
succeeding if they complete those assignments in class with 
the assistance of peers and teachers. Removing lecture time 
from the classroom allows for more authentic experiences. 
Also, it can train students to be independent learners at 
home [3]. The downsides for this method include 
availability of technology. Students without technology at 
home would have difficulty completing online notes or 
watching videos [3]. Students who do not have a computer 
at home would be unable to complete any computer-based 
assignment. Students have to be self-directed enough to 
complete their work at home. “Well-designed online 
learning… 
demands 
that 
learners 
accept 
increased 
responsibility for their learning” [3]. Without that work at 
home, the classwork would be useless. Teachers would have 
to re-teach the lesson, taking away the benefit of flipping the 
classroom in the first place. Students must be motivated and 
organized enough to complete their content lessons at home.  
A third example of hybrid learning is blended lessons. 
This is where traditional classroom practices are blended 
with newer technology applications [6]. With all of the 
resources available online, classroom materials can be 
extremely flexible. Students can learn the same content in 
many ways. Note that blended lessons must use technology 
when it fits, and teachers should not force technology into a 
lesson [6]. The major downside to this is when technology 
does not work. If a part of the lesson relies on technology, 
faulty devices or malfunctioning Internet can disrupt the 
entire classroom. “Issues such as lack of technology skills 
and lack of high-speed access for online components of the 
course could negatively impact student attitudes toward 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

learning” [3]. An example of this is Flash simulations that 
are common in science classrooms. Flash does not work 
well with Apple products, so schools that use iPads or Mac 
computers may not be able to use those resources. 
A fourth example of hybrid learning is the hybrid rotation 
model. This is similar to what elementary teachers have 
done for a long time, but adapted for older students. There 
are three stations – direct, independent, and collaborative. In 
the direct station, teachers work directly with the students 
[6]. This is a good chance to work one-on-one with students 
who need some individual attention. In the independent 
station, students work independently on an assignment [6]. 
This would be an opportunity to incorporate technology 
such as educational videos. In the collaborative station, 
students work in small groups to complete an assignment 
[6]. Collaborative can involve technology, traditional paper 
work, or both. The station names and functions may change 
a bit depending on what version of this model is used, but 
the underlying concept is the same. The major advantage of 
the rotational model is that students learn the same topic in 
three ways. Additionally, students get to work with both 
teachers and peers, which makes the lesson more social and 
student centered. Difficulties in this model include timing 
and work completion. The teacher has to determine how 
quickly or slowly to move students through each station. 
Moving too quickly will cause the students to rush and not 
really learn much from their stations. Moving too slowly 
risks students misbehaving or distracting others if they get 
done early. “It seems that instructors need to be more 
sensitive to the course goals when deciding the amount of 
time required for the online component, and to design online 
activities that are in full alignment with course goals” [3]. 
Another downfall is the students’ ability to work together. 
Some students do not understand exactly how to 
collaborate, and may need to be explicitly taught how to 
collaborate with peers. 
III. 
RESEARCH ON HYBRID 
Researchers agree that blended or hybrid learning can 
have benefits for students. According to Alducin-Ochoa and 
Vázquez-Martínez, who studied university students using 
blended learning, “the BL [blended learning] modality 
enabled students to control their learning process and 
received constant feedback, which provided them with 
better opportunities to understand and to broaden their 
knowledge” [1]. The U.S. Department of Education released 
a meta-analysis in 2010 that agrees. “The overall finding of 
the meta-analysis is that classes with online learning 
(whether taught completely online or blended) on average 
produce stronger student learning outcomes than do classes 
with solely face-to-face instruction” [4]. Blends of online 
and face-to-face instruction showed stronger learning 
outcomes, with a significant effect size of +0.35 [4]. From 
the perspective of the educational institution, hybrid can be 
an effective way to offer more classes while reducing the 
overall load on the school. “Research at the University of 
Central Florida found that hybrid courses allowed the 
university to offer more classes at peak demand times of the 
day” [2]. There is a lot more research available for specific 
classrooms and hybrid learning, and there is still much more 
that can be learned as technology changes over time [6]. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In conclusion, technology is a part of all of our lives and 
should naturally be a part of our classrooms. Integrating 
technology into classrooms has proven to be effective in 
multiple studies. However, what is actually effective in any 
one classroom depends on the students [6]. There are 
multiple ways for teachers to use technology in the 
classroom. Teachers should use what is best for their 
students to achieve the best instructional outcomes. Do not 
use technology just for the sake of using technology. Find 
what works for the students, and know that what works 
might change from class to class [6]. Teachers have always 
been able to adapt to new learning conditions. The advances 
in hybrid learning can definitely increase learning for all 
students.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
S. Graban would like to thank Dr. Joseph Kush for 
providing assistance with this paper.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. Alducin-Ochoa, and A. Vázquez-Martínez, “Hybrid 
learning: An effective resource in university education?,” 
International Education Studies, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1-14, 2016. 
DOI: 10.5539/ies.v9n8p1. 
[2] C. Crawford, J. Barker, and A. Seyam, “The promising role of 
hybrid learning in community colleges: Looking towards the 
future,” Contemporary Issues in Education Research, vol. 7, 
no. 3, pp. 237-242, 2014 DOI: 10.19030/cier.v7i3.8645.  
[3] Q. Lin, “Student views of hybrid learning: A one-year 
exploratory study,” Journal of Computing in Teacher 
Education, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 57-66, 2009. Available from 
http://www.tandfonline.com/toc/ujdl20/current, 2018/1/26. 
[4] B. Means, Y. Toyama, R, Murphy, M. Bakia, and K. Jones. 
Evaluation of evidence-based practices in online learning: A 
meta-analysis and review of online learning studies, 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education, Office of 
Planning, Evaluation, and Policy Development, 2010.  
[5] M. B. Pinto and W. Anderson, “A little knowledge goes a 
long way: Student expectation and satisfaction with hybrid 
learning,” Journal of Instructional Pedagogies. Available from 
http://www.aabri.com/jip.html, 2018/1/26.     
[6] H. Staker and M. B. Horn, “Classifying K-12 blended 
learning”, Innosite Institute, 2012. 
[7] J. Thompson, “6 blended learning models: When blended 
learning is what’s up for student success,” eLearning Industry, 
2016. 
Available 
from 
https://elearningindustry.com/6-
blended-learning-models-blended-learning-successful-
students, 2018/1/26.    
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

