Integration of Exer-Learning Games in School 
The Evaluation of HOPSCOTCH as teaching aid in specialised school 
Kati Kraußer 
Fraunhofer Institute for Digital Media Technology 
IDMT 
Ilmenau, Germany 
e-mail: kati.krausser@idmt.fraunhofer.de 
Martina Lucht 
Fraunhofer Institute for Digital Media Technology 
IDMT 
Ilmenau, Germany 
e-mail: martina.lucht@idmt.fraunhofer.de 
 
 
Abstract – This paper examines the benefits of the exer-
learning game HOPSCOTCH for students with special needs. 
We give a thematic overview about the theoretical foundations 
of digital game-based learning and about exercise in 
connection with learning; then we report on an empirical study 
in a public development centre comparing the new teaching 
method HOPSCOTCH and a traditional teaching method (run 
and write). In addition, the students’ mood was examined 
because it was assumed that this factor should be enhanced by 
the integration of the exer-learning game in the classroom 
compared to the traditional teaching method. The results of the 
study have shown that students achieve the same learning 
success with the two learning methods; however, mood is 
increased by learning with HOPSCOTCH.  
Keywords – learning; exercise; specialised school; exer-
learning games; learning success; mood; motivation  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recently, the potential of digital games to support 
learning has been increasingly discussed [1] [2] [3]. The 
underlying assumption of game-based learning is that 
incentives inherent in games can be used to engage and 
encourage children and adults alike in learning activities, 
effectively 
fostering 
meaningful 
learning 
[4] 
[5]. 
HOPSCOTCH is one of a new genre of learning games that 
not only seeks to combine playing and learning but also 
introduces exercise as a principal component. This is the 
genre of exer-learning games. The design concept of 
HOPSCOTCH requires the learner to enter answers to 
simple questions or perform simple tasks, such as translating 
a German word into English, by jumping on a sensor pad. It 
therefore aims at the joyful and physically active acquisition 
of factual knowledge according to Bloom’s taxonomy [6]. 
First studies with HOPSCOTCH showed that this exer-
learning game could not only serve as an additional tool for 
private learning, but potentially could be applied in school 
lessons under special circumstances [7]. The results heralded 
the use of HOPSCOTCH for the education of students with 
learning difficulties. 
This paper, therefore, focuses on the presentation of a 
study where HOPSCOTCH was integrated into everyday 
school life of a school dedicated to persons with disabilities – 
herein referred specialised school. The presented study was 
conducted in order to explore the potential of the 
HOPSCOTCH exer-learning game for students with special 
needs. 
II. 
HOPSCOTCH: A CONCEPT FOR EXER-LEARNING 
In the following chapter a theoretical basis is outlined. 
Firstly, digital game-based learning is examined more 
closely; then the connection between learning and exercise 
is introduced. Putting these components together, exer-
learning games in general and HOPSCOTCH as first 
particular prototype are presented. 
A. Digital game-based learning 
The terms "serious games", "game-based learning" and 
"digital educational games" – widely used synonymously – 
mark the initiative to use the potential of digital games to 
actively engage and encourage players in learning [1] [2] [3] 
[8]. One important goal of game-based learning, however, is 
to foster an increase in intrinsic motivation and knowledge 
acquisition rather than just to provide an opportunity for 
enjoyable play [4] [5]. Intrinsic motivation arises from 
activity-specific incentives that are inherent in games but not 
necessarily in learning activities [9]. This will not necessarily 
lead to better achievements as such, but it could result in an 
increase in learning time. Traditional learning activities are 
often performed to meet certain external success criteria (to 
get good marks, to pass an exam, etc.), while game activities 
are rather focused on fun and flow experiences [10] [11]. 
Game-based learning tries to create intrinsically motivating 
learning experiences through integrated game activities that 
offer activity-specific rewards.  
Several studies were conducted on digital educational 
games as instructional tools in schools – but most of them 
were not integrated into school lessons [12] [13] [14]. 
Recently there have also been attempts to integrate 
educational games within school lessons. Examples include 
the online multi-user virtual environment "anytown" [15] 
[16], or the computer game "Quest Atlantis" [17]. 
B. Learning and exercise 
The body is in movement constantly, because even if we 
sit or lie, activity takes place inside. By the 1990s it had been 
found that the frontal lobes that are responsible for 
coordination of thinking are directly connected with the areas 
of the brain responsible for motor control [18]. As a result of 
the stimulation of the brain’s activity and metabolism by 
movement, information processing is strengthened. Attention 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

increases because the brain is awake and receptive [19]. 
Therefore this strongly suggests that physical exercises 
should be increasingly integrated into learning processes. In 
addition, the brain is „[…] a pattern recognition organ, so 
engaging students in a movement exercise every 30 - 60 
minutes can prevent them from going to sleep and help 
increase attention span” [20]. Investigations have shown that 
children are more attentive and concentrate better after ten 
minutes of exercise than before such physical activity [21]. 
Consequently learning could be intensified by physical 
activity because of improved concentration. The connection 
of mental processes and physical exercises to overcome 
motor deficits can increase confidence in personal skills [22]. 
The connection of learning and exercise could be 
preventive as well as therapeutic for children with special 
needs. In particular children and youngsters with dyslexia 
and dyscalculia can exploit their natural ability to move to 
overcome their inner restlessness that might be a factor that 
amplifies their learning difficulty. Cognitive performance of 
children with learning difficulties can be improved by active 
perception, specific action and personal experience [23]. 
Therefore, it seems that physical exercise should be 
increasingly integrated into schools. The initiative "Moving 
School" contains relevant aspects and developed different 
possibilities for lessons in specialised schools. The aim of 
this initiative is to integrate (1) physical learning, (2) 
physical breaks, (3) physical organisational structures and (4) 
physical thinking into schools [24]. The "Moving School" 
integrates exercise into everyday life of schools; however 
exercise and learning are still divided: Either the children do 
exercise or they learn. In this setting, exercise is an element 
that might promotes faster learning, but it costs learning 
time. It would be better if children could exercise while they 
learn.  
C. HOPSCOTCH: A prototype of an Exer-Learning Game 
Hopscotch is a children’s game where the challenge is to 
hop on a series of numbered squares in the sequence of their 
numbers. The course is drawn with chalk on pavement (see 
Figure 1).  
 
 
Figure 1. Hopscotch playing field 
It is one of the world’s most popular outdoor games for 
children, often played in the schoolyard. The idea of the 
children’s game "hopscotch" has been adopted for the 
concept HOPSCOTCH, to create exer-learning games that 
can be applied for different learning tasks. 
The concept of HOPSCOTCH was developed at the 
Fraunhofer Institute for Digital Media Technology IDMT, 
Germany. Instead of drawing numbered squares on the 
pavement, a dance pad with nine sensor fields is provided as 
an input device. The nine sensor fields resemble the 
keyboard of a mobile phone with numbers and letters for 
writing short messages (SMS). The sensor fields are 
multidimensional in the sense that tapping on a field once, 
twice or three times results in a different letter (e.g., A, B, or 
C when tapping the field "2"). The dance pad can therefore 
be used as an input device for letters and numbers by single 
or multiple taps on a certain field. These letters can then be 
arranged into words by jumping another pattern for the 
second letter and so on. Only the correct input is accepted by 
the system, so the player/learner always gets immediate 
feedback on his input. If he does not know the answer, he 
can find it out by jumping on the pad until all the correct 
letters are logged in. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. HOPSCOTCH exer-learning game 
 
The players can use their hands and feet to enter numbers 
or letters: they can either tap or jump on the sensor pad. 
Further, HOPSCOTCH can be played in single- and 
multiplayer mode. In the multiplayer mode, players can work 
in groups, either jumping words one after the other with the 
hints of their team members or jumping a word together by 
jumping one letter each in order to achieve a faster 
answering time (higher score).  
When playing the game, the player receives questions 
that are presented on a monitor and is then asked to enter the 
solution by jumping on the sensor mat (see Figure 2). The 
game presents one question at a time. The player receives 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

game points as a function of the time taken to enter the 
correct letters or numbers. The playing component of 
HOPSCOTCH is, therefore, to move the body as quickly as 
possible on the sensor pad, touching the correct fields in a 
given order as fast as possible. In the case of a vocabulary 
game, the player may be asked, for example, to translate the 
German word for plum into English and therefore hop the 
word ‘plum’ on the sensor pad. 
Up to now the HOPSCOTCH concept has been applied 
for different learning contents including mathematics 
(multiplication table), history (historical dates, events and 
names) and languages (English vocabulary words, learning 
letters and numbers). The levels of difficulty can be varied 
either by presenting hints (such as the dashes indicating the 
word length in the vocabulary game) or by asking for a free 
input (not providing any hints for the length of the word to 
be entered). Further, the high scores in the game can be 
based on the scores of either different players (norm-
referenced feedback) or on the current player showing his or 
her 
improvements 
within 
the 
game 
(self-referenced 
feedback). 
D. Empiric results with HOPSCOTCH 
Since 2009 HOPSCOTCH has been tested and evaluated 
at fairs and in schools. The purpose was to get feedback on 
the application and to get input for further developments [7]. 
In the following paragraph we report major outcomes from 
these tests and studies. 
 
1) General feedback: HOPSCOTCH was evaluated 
between 2009 and 2011 at an annual trade show focused on 
children entertainment to get first results about user 
acceptance and fun factor. The survey involved scholars (N 
= 276) aged between seven and twenty years (M = 11.41; 
SD = 1.31). The sample consisted of young visitors to the 
fair and school classes which were invited to hold English 
lessons with HOPSCOTCH. Children and adolescents who 
played at least ten minutes were requested to answer a 
questionnaire.  
On a scale from 1 ("very good") to 5 ("poor") 
HOPSCOTCH was valued as "good" (31.3%) or "very good" 
(64.3%). 
The 
vast 
majority 
(87.2%) 
associated 
HOPSCOTCH as a learning game (11.2% sports game; 1.6% 
both). So, 62.5 % would use it for learning. More than a half 
of the respondents (56.1 %) would renounce on another 
present for getting HOPSCOTCH (e.g., their mobile phone, 
clothes, wii). 
In addition to students the accompanying teachers (N = 
33) were asked to fill out an additional questionnaire to get 
information about HOPSCOTCH as a possible teaching 
method. Rated on a scale from 1 ("very good") to 5 ("poor") 
the first impression of HOPSCOTCH was "very good" 
(75%) or "good" (25%). Almost all of the questioned 
teachers see the potential for learning as "high" (68.8%) or 
"very high" (18.8%). They (58.1%) could very well imagine 
using HOPSCOTCH for their classes as a teaching method. 
 
 
2) English lessons in Elementary School: In two 
exploratory studies at a German elementary school, we 
investigated the potential of HOPSCOTCH to engage 
students as well as to facilitate the acquisition of factual 
knowledge (English vocabulary) and to improve the 
attitudes of students towards learning English as a second 
language.  
In both studies a comparison of lessons was conducted, 
where new vocabulary words were learned and practiced via 
HOPSCOTCH in contrast to "traditional" teacher-centred 
lessons that also aimed at introducing and practicing new 
vocabulary words.  
In the first study, 55 students of a 4th grade learned 13 
vocabularies in "traditional" teacher-centred lesson and 
another 
13 
vocabularies 
in 
HOPSCOTCH-lessons. 
According to the results, playing HOPSCOTCH did at least 
not impair the performance of the students on cued recall 
tasks compared to a teacher-centred lesson. This was true 
although the vocabulary words were put into context within 
the teacher-centred lesson which was not the case when 
playing HOPSCOTCH. Further, even on the first encounter 
with the game, the additional exercise component - that may 
require cognitive resources to perform the "dance steps" – 
did not seem to impair learning.  
In the second study we reduced the number of 
vocabularies to be learned. This was due to the fact that in 
the first study the children did not get the whole 45 minutes 
of a usual German school lesson, because the game and the 
rules were introduced by the teacher before starting. 58 
students of the 3rd grade learned 10 vocabularies in a 
"traditional" lesson and another 10 in a HOPSCOTCH 
lesson. In contrast to the first study, the second study showed 
advantages of HOPSCOTCH on cued recall compared to a 
teacher-centred lesson. After playing the exer-learning game, 
the students were better able to remember and correctly spell 
the new vocabulary words. Lowering the number of words to 
be learned in the given time from the first to the second study 
allowed for higher repetition rates per word in the 
HOPSCOTCH lesson. This may then have led to the 
advantage of HOPSCOTCH in the second study suggesting 
that the students need enough time to repeat each word to be 
learned more than five times.  
This result, however, needs further examination. In 
summary, the conducted studies yielded preliminary results 
that HOPSCOTCH, as teaching aid within school lessons, 
may be a fruitful approach to facilitate both active 
engagement and learning. Further, the application of digital 
learning games does not exclusively aim at fostering learning 
in terms of efficiency (learning as much as possible in a 
given time). Rather, it focuses on motivating people to 
engage in effective learning activities. The results of both 
studies showed that students who were below-average in the 
teacher-centred 
lesson 
have 
learned 
most 
with 
HOPSCOTCH. Therefore we assumed that weaker students 
benefit more from HOPSCOTCH. These results led to the 
idea that HOPSCOTCH could well be used for the education 
of children with special needs.  
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

III. 
EDUCATIONAL SUPPORT FOR CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL 
NEEDS 
 There are special schools for gifted and talented learners 
as well as for those with learning difficulties. In this paper 
we only refer to children with learning difficulties when we 
address special schools. For a clear demarcation in this 
context we refer to specialised school. 
Since 2009 the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities requires a reduction of specialised schools 
and integration of impaired students into regular schools 
[25]. Therefore, new innovative teaching methods are 
needed. The following section gives an insight into 
structural conditions and didactic concepts of specialised 
school. 
A. Structural conditions  
For many years school reform has been a controversial 
subject in Germany. The existing system excludes children 
with learning difficulties and puts them in specialised 
schools. Nearly half a million children and youngsters need 
special education. Only 15.7% of them are taught together 
with all other students in regular schools – in contrast to 90% 
in the Scandinavian countries [26]. Once again Germany 
limps behind in the European comparison. For example, Italy 
has abolished the specialised schools in the 1970s; the 
Scandinavian countries generally teach all children, whether 
handicapped or not, together; Austria and the Netherlands 
have been gradually ending the separation of regular and 
specialised schools since 2007 [27]. 
In the discussion about integration of students with 
special needs, politicians have to find a solution by weighing 
the advantages against the disadvantages. On the one hand, 
intellectually disadvantaged children should have same 
chances as others [28]; on the other hand a drop in 
performance is expected by integrating slower learners [25].  
A proper education system needs to offer integrated 
education to all students. So, special requirements have to be 
met by innovative teaching and learning methods whenever 
the need arises. For children for whom the traditional 
teacher-centred approach is not adequate HOPSCOTCH 
theoretically complies with these conditions by integrating 
new media as well as connecting learning with exercise and 
enjoyment. Therefore the concept of exer-learning could 
offer a certain adaptivity which allows an individual support 
within the class. Due to physical exercise an increase in 
success is expected for children with special needs as 
mentioned in chapter II. 
B. Didactic concepts 
From developing-psychological point of view support 
encloses (1) promoting intra-individual changes of people for 
a certain period (for example: learning to swim); (2) 
reducing inter-individual differences between people of 
different ages (for example: learn to read and write) and (3) 
lower inter-individual differences in intra-individual changes 
(for example: individual support to relieve development 
gaps) [28]. Support for all three areas is always adjusted to 
educational aims which should be reached by promotion, 
suggestion and care [29]. The aims of the special-educational 
support are the dismantling of developing problems and 
therefore enabling integration in society [28]. According to 
this discipline, children and youngsters with special needs 
should be encouraged by reducing the differences in 
achievement – not by repressing the achievement more able 
children but by raising the achievement of the less able. They 
should be able to integrate themselves in the existing 
education system and later into the labour market. 
In this area of research there are different fields which 
should be strengthened by certain measures. Besides the 
support of learning there is the strengthening of linguistic, 
intellectual, social-emotional, and motor aspects to be 
supported. The present paper deals with academic success. 
This is defined by two components: (1) ability and (2) 
motivation [30]. With reference to the theoretical outlines of 
chapter II we assume that HOPSCOTCH could support the 
two major components ability and motivation relating to 
academic success.  
Furthermore studies empirically confirmed the effects of 
psychomotor support, showing that the best results are 
observed with slower learners. In particular the long-term 
support shows positive effects concerning the increase in 
output as well as the strengthening of motivational and 
emotional aspects with four to 12 year old children [22]. 
Therefore a specialised school was selected for the present 
study, particularly children of grades three and four. 
IV. 
EMPIRIC EXAMINATION 
As in the aforementioned studies in chapter II, a 
comparison of learning methods – HOPSCOTCH and a 
traditional teaching method – was conducted, to see which 
teaching aid leads to better outcomes in terms of ability. 
Therefore a superior teaching aim had to be determined, 
to which both learning strategies could be adjusted. This aim 
defines a certain qualification which should be provided by 
the teaching-learning process [31]. For the present study the 
chosen aim was to improve the abilities in the field of 
orthography. Spelling is a skill needed in most tasks and for 
problem solutions. In essence, an improvement in a child’s 
ability to spell could strengthen their performance level in 
school.  
The objective of the investigation was that students 
should learn the correct spelling of a defined number of 
words. Half of the words were to be taught with a traditional 
method, the other half by using HOPSCOTCH. 
Also mood was appraised to make some initial 
statements 
about 
the 
multidimensional 
construct 
of 
motivation. On the one hand, mood can determine action 
choice; on the other hand the intensity of action could be 
influenced [32]. Both could implicitly lead to a strengthening 
of academic success. Within the scope of this investigation it 
was assumed that cognitive learning and mood is positively 
influenced by HOPSCOTCH.  
A. Two learning methods 
Because HOSCOTCH has already been introduced in 
detail in the theoretical section of the paper, merely the 
description of the traditional teaching method – run and 
write – will now be discussed. This learning method is 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

traditionally used in the selected school to teach students the 
spelling of new words.  
Different words are hung on the wall of the classroom. 
Then the children walk through the classroom, look at a 
word, memorise it, go back to their seat and write it down. 
After writing, they start with the next word. This process is 
repeated until all of the words are recorded and written. At 
the end the students have to look over their words again, to 
find and to try to correct their mistakes.  
This traditional learning method can be compared with 
HOPSCOTCH very well. First, the systematic repetition of 
words provides the base for both strategies. Second, both 
methods include exercise (walking in the classroom vs. 
tapping on a sensor pad). Nevertheless, there are also 
differences between these learning strategies. One aspect is 
the (immediate) correction. With HOPSCOTCH only correct 
input is accepted by the software. Thus the students do not 
memorise wrong words, because these are indicated always 
correctly. In contrast, in run and write, students sometimes 
memorise a word wrongly and reinforce their mistakes 
before correcting themselves. A second difference between 
these methods is the input that is either hopped or 
handwritten. HOPSCOTCH fosters a connection of each 
word with a special body movement or dance. In contrast, 
the writing process of the words from run and write is made 
without body movement. On the one hand the permanent 
exercise could affect the learning process positively. On the 
other hand the transfer between the HOPSCOTCH way 
(reading and hopping) and the later process of writing on 
paper could be difficult because the kinaesthetic memory of 
hand movements has not been developed. However, as 
outlined in chapter II we suppose that exercise is supporting 
the process of memorization, the dance steps could even 
serve as memory aid to support the recall process. By 
contrast in organisation HOPSCOTCH needs less effort for 
preparation and observation.  
B. Execution and stimulus material 
All together the investigation in school took five weeks. 
In the first week HOPSCOTCH was introduced to teach 
participants the handling of HOPSCOTCH itself, and to 
reduce the novelty value of the exer-learning game. During 
the following four weeks the students practiced twice a week 
using both learning methods for a period of 20 minutes each. 
The observation units were carried out one day on a weekly 
basis. In addition, each learning method was observed to get 
information about the technical handling as well as to get an 
impression about the learning process.  
The content arrangement of the learning methods was 
carried out in close co-operation with the teachers. So, 68 
words (20 adjectives, 20 verbs and 28 nouns) were selected. 
Within those four weeks 34 words should be learned by 
run and write and another 34 by using HOPSCOTCH. 
Adjectives and verbs were given in written notation and 
could be copied by the students (see Figure 3: Type the 
following word! ‘grumble’), while nouns were shown as 
pictures and had to be written by the participants (see Figure 
4: What do you see in this picture?). Two learning units were 
set up. The first learning unit run the first two weeks, 
whereas the second unit run the third and forth week. During 
the first learning unit 34 words were taught (17 words per 
method), in the second unit the remaining words were 
practiced.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Words which were given in written notation 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Words which were shown as pictures 
 
Vocabulary tests were set up at the end of each practice 
week. These tests consisted of 20 words – ten words of the 
practice with HOPSCOTCH and the other ten taken from the 
run and write lessons. Participants’ previous knowledge of 
spelling was not raised. 
C. Analysis 
For the evaluation of the learning success the vocabulary 
tests were analysed by counting the number of correct letter 
sequences. According to this method, the participant gets an 
achievement point when two correct letters follow each 
other. In addition, an achievement point was given for the 
correct initial letter and last letter in each case [33]. 
Consequently a student would get four points for a correctly 
spelt word "cat" (+c+a+t+) whereas he would get just two 
points for the wrong spelling of "dog" - "dok" (+d+ok). 
To visualise an increasing in learning success an 
evaluation standard is needed. A comparison of learning 
success over time used the individual relation norm. Thus 
this relation norm was used to be able to measure the 
changes in spelling ability of the students over the period of 
four weeks. The comparison of the two methods (run and 
write vs. HOPSCOTCH) in terms of learning success was 
assessed by using the objective relation norm. Using this 
objective relation norm learning success could be set against 
a predefined educational objective [34]. 
Mood was evaluated by a short questionnaire after every 
learning unit with HOPSCOTCH and run and write (see 
Figure 5: How do you feel? Mark one smiley!). Therefore 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

the participants had to specify which learning method they 
had used (questionnaire: I learned with () HOPSCOTCH () 
run and write.) With the help of nine different smileys 
current feelings were be given by the pupils.  
 
 
 
Figure 5. Questionnaire about mood 
 
Due to the small sample (N = 30), the significance level 
was fixed to p = .10.  
V. 
RESULTS 
30 students at the age of nine to eleven years (M = 10.40, 
SD = .62) participated in the study – 77% boys, 23% girls. 
The participants attended grade three (n = 16) and grade four 
(n = 14) in the specialised school. This average age 
corresponds with the average age of students in fourth and 
fifth grade in a German regular school.  
In each class HOPSCOTCH was played on average for 
16 minutes (M = 16.34, SD = 2.62). As shown in Figure 6, 
the students of the fourth grade (M = 16.05, SD = 2.78) spent 
as much time practicing as the third graders (M = 16.19, SD 
= 2.54). 
 
Figure 6. Study time of the eight HOPSCOTCH units 
 
A. Improvement of spelling ability 
In a first stage learning success was analysed, to check 
whether students of a specialised school could achieve 
individual improvements with HOPSCOTCH. The variable 
consists of the numbers of words which were learned during 
four weeks. Paired sample t-tests were calculated for the 
comparison of the results of vocabulary tests within each 
unit. 
Contrary to expectations no significant differences were 
found for the learning success within units. The comparison 
of vocabulary tests one (N = 26, M = 52.56, SD = 8.21) and 
two (N = 26, M = 52.31, SD = 9.93) showed no changes 
(t(26) = .14, p = .44, d = .03) as with the tests of week three 
(N = 19, M = 52.53, SD = 10.39) and four (N = 19, M = 
51.95, SD = 13.82) (t(19) .30, p = .38, d = .05). The achieved 
mean values in the vocabulary tests for the words learned 
with HOPSCOTCH are shown in Figure 7. 
a. 62 points could be reached maximum. 
Figure 7. Mean values of correct letter sequences learned with 
HOPSCOTCH 
 
B. Comparison of learning methods 
For the examination of learning methods (run and write 
vs. HOPSCOTCH) the students’ results were compared. 
Table I presents the comparison of the percentage averages 
in performance level which were reached by the two 
different learning methods. 
TABLE I.  
MEAN VALUES OF PERFORMANCE LEVEL FOR BOTH UNITS 
 
learning method 
N 
M 
SD 
Performance 
levelb
 
HOPSCOTCH 
30 
84.31 
14.77 
run and write 
30 
85.34 
13.98 
b. The data are percent values. 
In order to compare the learning success in terms of 
orthographic results towards different methods, paired-
sample t-tests were calculated. As expected no difference 
appears in the learning success with HOPSCOTCH and the 
method run and write (t(30) = -1.12, p = .28, d = .07). For 
teaching German spelling, the use of HOPSCOTCH in 
specialised schools is as good as the use of run and write, but 
needs less effort for preparation as mentioned in chapter IV. 
C. Exploratory data analysis 
During the first two days of introducing HOPSCOTCH 
in school lessons it became obvious that the students were 
particularly open-minded towards the new learning method. 
The children quickly understood the principle of the game 
and had no problems with providing the required input. This 
fact shows that there was no excessive demand on the 
students in contrast to the supposed doubts which were 
expressed by the class teachers before the tests. The students 
got used to the new learning strategy very well and, besides, 
had a lot of fun while testing it out. However, there were also 
few students who were critical and showed little desire in 
interacting with the exer-learning game HOPSCOTCH. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Regarding the material’s degree of difficulty, the 
observations during the four weeks showed that students 
were insufficiently challenged. In particular the fourth 
graders assessed the degree of difficulty as too simple. This 
is supported by the achieved percentages for both types of 
words in the vocabulary tests which were reached with 
HOPSCOTCH. Paired-sample t-tests were calculated to 
compare words to be copied (copy words; see Figure 3) and 
words to be recognized (word pictures; see Figure 4) towards 
the learning success. Words that were learned on the basis of 
pictures (N = 30, M = 88.74, SD = 11.80) were significantly 
more correct (t(30) = -3.86, p = .00, d = .48) than words that 
were written (N = 30, M = 81.66, SD = 11.79). Figure 8 
shows the achieved learning success. 
* significant   
                         
c. The data are percent values. 
Figure 8. Mean Values of correct letter sequences 
 
Also the comparison of the percentages which were 
reached with the run and write shows a significant difference 
with small effects (t(30) = -2.565, p = .00, d = .35) between 
the learning of the transcribed words (N = 30, M = 82.79, SD 
= 16.90) and the word pictures (N = 30, M = 87.80, SD = 
11.92). We assume that the results of the comparison of 
methods could differ if the tasks were more difficult. 
However, the observations and log file data indicate that 
students get much faster in typing the words and make fewer 
mistakes. Especially highly underachieving students showed 
an enormous increase in handling the words. Because of the 
high number of correctly given answers by the many fast-
learning children at the beginning of the evaluation, an 
additional increase over the time was hardly possible. 
D. Mood after learning 
For the examination of mood the feelings after learning 
with HOPSCOTCH and run and write were compared. 
Table II shows the mean values of the variable mood in 
comparison. A lower score signals a better mood. 
TABLE II.  MEAN VALUES OF MOOD 
 
learning method 
N 
M 
SD 
Moodd
 
HOPSCOTCH 
30 
2.00 
1.70 
run and write 
30 
2.44 
2.19 
d. A lower value shows a better mood. 
To compare the mood of the students after learning 
towards the two different methods, non-parametric tests 
were performed As excepted, a significant difference was 
found (Z(30) = -1.65, p = .05, d = .23). The mood after 
learning with HOPSCOTCH was better than by practicing 
run and write. Another interesting point was that pupils love 
to learn generally. Worst moods were mentioned rarely. 
VI. 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 
In this paper we introduced exer-learning games that not 
only combine playing and learning but also integrate exercise 
as principal component of a digital learning game. Physical 
activities may constitute incentives within playing that 
facilitate engagement. Research from different disciplines 
suggests that physical activities may be positively related to 
cognitive performance.  
We reported on a study with HOPSCOTCH over a period 
of four weeks where we compared two learning methods 
based on exercise in school everyday life. The comparison 
results of both learning methods indicate that students can 
learn with HOPSCOTCH as well as with the traditional 
teaching method run and write – but the former with more 
pleasure in learning..  
The explorative data analysis has shown that words with 
a higher degree of difficulty were significantly better 
remembered irrespective of the learning method. So the 
students seemed to be under-challenged with the degree of 
difficulty of the requirements imposed on them.  
Furthermore the difficulty level of the method run and 
write was obviously higher than HOPSCOTCH, because 
students had to memorise the exact spelling of the word 
before writing it down. In contrast, they could copy each 
letter individually when playing HOPSCOTCH and were not 
forced to memorise the word. Therefore, the assumption is 
made that students would have reached better results with 
HOPSCOTCH if the content had been more demanding. It 
seems that the degree of difficulty had to be defined 
individually for each student before the training starts. 
Additional investigations should be done with more difficult 
problems or more comprehensive content of educational 
workload to verify this hypothesis. 
As HOPSCOTCH is based on a digital platform, it offers 
numerous new advantages. The option to integrate adaptive 
elements and individual levels as well as to run it without the 
immediate help of a teacher could support the integration of 
special students in regular schools. Therefore, HOPSCOTCH 
could become part of the new integration reform of students 
with special needs into regular school. 
Slow learners could be supported individually in regard 
to their special needs within a large class. Nonetheless, 
further research is needed to provide more evidence in order 
to confirm this assumption and to optimise the relevant 
applications. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors are in depth to their colleagues at Fraunhofer 
IDMT in general and particularly at the "Data Representation 
& Interfaces" as well as the "Children’s Media" departments 
for their permanent support. Moreover, they would like to 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

thank Paul Cheshire (Independent Consultant; Chair of WG 
"Personal Portable Devices PPD" of the European Federation 
for Medical Informatics EFMI) for his help, his useful 
remarks and his inspiring ideas - we had an exciting and 
rewarding time. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Brannigan and A. Owen, "Game based learning or learning 
based games? A case study," in Digital Game Based Learning 
- Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium for 
Information Design 2nd of June 2005 at Stuttgart Media 
University, M. Burmester, D. Gerhard, and F. Thissen, Eds. 
Karlsruhe: Universitaetsverlag, 2006, pp. 179-196.  
[2] J. P. Gee, What video games have to teach us about learning 
and literacy. New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2007. 
[3] U. Ritterfeld M. Cody, and P. Vorderer, Serious games: 
Mechanisms and Effects. New York: Routledge, 2009. 
[4] T. Dumbleton and J. Kirriemuir, Understanding digital games. 
London: Sage Publications, 2006. 
[5] J. H. Goldstein, D. Buckingham, and G. Brougre, 
"Introduction: Toys, games, and media," in Toys, games, and 
media, J. H. Goldstein, D. Buckingham, and G. Brougre, Eds. 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2004, pp. 1-10. 
[6] B. S. Bloom, M. B. Engelhart, E. J. Furst, W. H. Hill, and D. 
R. Krathwohl. Taxonomy of educational objectives. The 
classification of educational goals (Handbook I, cognitive 
domain). New York: Longman, 1956. 
[7] M. Lucht, S. Domagk, and M. Mohring, "Exer-Learning 
Games: Transferring Hopscotch from the Schoolyard to the 
Classroom," in Artificial Intelligence in Theory and Practice 
III, M. Bramer, Ed. Heidelberg: Springer, 2010, pp. 25-34.  
[8] A. Navarro, J. V. Pradilla, S. londoño, and P. Madriñán, 
"Serious Games: Between Training and Entertainment, " in 
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on 
Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning, G. Karlsson, D. D. 
Burdescu, and B. Krämer, Eds. Gosier, Guadeloupe, 2011, pp. 
72-75. 
[9] P. Vorderer, F. Stehen, and E. Chan, "Motivation," in The 
psychology of entertainment, J. Bryant and P. Vorderer, Eds. 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2006, pp. 137-150. 
[10] T. Malone, What makes things fun to learn? A study of 
intrinsically motivating computer games. Palo Alto: Xerox, 
1980.  
[11] M. Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The psychology of optimal 
experience. New York: Harper & Row, 1990. 
[12] A. Amory, K. Naicker, J. Vincent, and C. Adams, "The use of 
computer games as an educational tool: identification of 
appropriate game types and game elements," British Journal 
of Educational Technology, 30(4), 2008, pp. 311-321. 
[13] J. A. Betz, "Computer games: Increased learning in an 
interactive 
multidisciplinary 
environment," 
Journal 
of 
Educational Technology Systems, 24 (2), 1995, pp. 195-205. 
[14] D. B. Malouf, "The effect of instructional computer games on 
continuing student motivation," Journal of Special Education, 
21 (4), 1988, pp. 27-38.  
[15] S. Warren, M. J. Dondlinger, R. Steinand, and S. Barab, 
"Educational game as supplemental learning tool: Benefits, 
challenges, and tensions arising from use in an elementary 
school classroom," Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 
20(4), 2009, pp. 487-505.  
[16] H. Tüzün, M. Yilmaz-Soylu, T. Karakus, Y. Inal, and G. 
Kizilkaya, "The effects of computer games on primary school 
students' achievement and motivation in geography learning," 
Computers & Education, 52(1), 2009, pp. 68-77. 
[17] J. L. Anderson, The kids got game: computer/video games, 
gender and learning outcomes in science classrooms. 
Dissertation: Boston College Chestnut Hill, MA, USA, 2008. 
[18] C. Hannaford, Bewegung – das Tor zum Lernen. Kirchzarten 
bei Freiburg: VAK Verlag, 2008. 
[19] C. Müller and M. Obier, "Bewegtes Lernen – nur etwas für 
die "Kleinen"?," in Wahrnehmen. Bewegung. Lernen. 
Kindheit in Bewegung, R. Zimmer and I. Hunder, Eds. 
Schorndorf: Hofmann, 2004, pp. 102-106.  
[20] Council for Exceptional Children, Brain Research Sheds New 
Light on Student Learning, Teaching Strategies, and 
Disabilities. 
Retrieved 
19.07.2011, 
from 
http://www.cec.sped.org/AM/Template.cfm?Section=Home&
CAT=none&TEMPLATE=/CM/ContentDisplay.cfm&CONT
ENTID=6271. 
[21] K. 
Mertens, "Anders sein und Mitmachen-Wollen – 
behinderte 
Kinder 
in 
Bewegung," 
in 
Wahrnehmen, 
Bewegung. Lernen. Kindheit in Bewegung, R. Zimmer and I. 
Hunder, Eds. Schorndorf: Hofmann, 2004, pp. 123-134. 
[22] D. Eggert and D. Koller, "Förderung der psychomotorischen 
Entwicklung," in Handbuch Förderung. Grundlagen, Bereiche 
und Methoden der individuellen Förderung, K.-H. Arnold, O. 
Graumann, and A. Rakhkochkine, Eds. Weinheim: Beltz, 
2008, pp. 178-186. 
[23] H. Köckenberger, "Bewegtes Lernen – Psychomotorik im 
Klassenzimmer. Lesen, Schreiben, Rechnen. Lernen mit dem 
ganzen 
Körper," 
in 
Psychomotorik. 
Ansätze 
und 
Arbeitsfelder. Ein Lehrbuch, H. Köckenberger and R. 
Hammer, Eds. Dortmund: Verlag modernes lernen, 2004, pp. 
448-472. 
[24] Bewegte Schule, Homepage. Retrieved 19.07.2011, from 
http://www.bewegteschule.de/redaktion/projekt/index.php. 
[25] K. 
Kutter, 
INKLUSION. 
Schnelle 
Auflösung 
der 
Förderschulen. Online: http://www.taz.de/!31465/ (March 
2009). 
[26] T. Münch and K.-H. Reith, Behinderte Kinder. Das Ende der 
Sonderschule rückt näher. 
Online: http://www.spiegel. 
de/schulspiegel/wissen/0,1518,612642,00.html (March 2009). 
[27] A. K. Schwarze-Reiter, Schulen. Kinder auf dem Abstellgleis. 
Online: http://www.focus.de/schule/schule/unterricht/schulen 
_aid_137199.html (October 2007).  
[28] C. Mähler, "Förderung und Entwicklung: Die Perspektive der 
Entwicklungspsychologie," 
in 
Handbuch 
Förderung. 
Grundlagen, Bereiche und Methoden der individuellen 
Förderung, 
K.-H. 
Arnold, 
O. 
Graumann, 
and 
A. 
Rakhkochkine, Eds. Weinheim: Beltz, 2008, pp. 258-265. 
[29] K. 
D. 
Schuck, 
"Konzeptuelle 
Grundlagen 
der 
Förderdiagnostik," in Handbuch Förderung. Grundlagen, 
Bereiche und Methoden der individuellen Förderung, K.-H. 
Arnold, O. Graumann, and A. Rakhkochkine, Eds. Weinheim: 
Beltz, 2008, pp. 106-115. 
[30] F. Rheinberg "Motivation und Emotionen im Lernprozeß: 
Aktuelle Befunde und Forschungsperspektiven," in Emotion, 
Motivation und Leistung, M. Jerusalem and R. Pekun, Eds. 
Göttingen: Hogrefe, 1999, pp. 189-204.  
[31] F. Rheinberg, "Bezugsnormen und die Beurteilung von 
Lernleistungen," 
in 
Handbuch 
der 
Pädagogischen 
Psychologie, W. Schneider and M. Hasselborn, Eds. 
Göttingen: Hogrefe, 2008, pp. 178-186.  
[32] K. J. Klauer and D. Leutner, Lehren und Lernen. Einführung 
in die Instruktionspsychologie. Weinheim: Beltz, 2007.  
[33] A. Abele, Stimmung und Leistung. Göttingen: Hogrefe, 1995. 
[34] M. 
Grünke 
and 
M. 
Sondermann, 
"Förderung 
bei 
unspezifischen 
Lernschwierigkeiten," 
in 
Handbuch 
Förderung. Grundlagen, Bereiche und Methoden der 
individuellen Förderung, K.-H. Arnold, O. Graumann, and A. 
Rakhkochkine, Eds. Weinheim: Beltz, 2008, pp. 258-265.
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

