Social Computing Solutions for Collaborative Learning and Knowledge Building 
Activities in Extended Organization 
 
Dr. Dragan Stokic, Ms Ana Teresa Correia, Mr Philip Reimer 
Institute for Applied System technology, ATB-Bremen 
Bremen, Germany 
e-mail: dragan@atb-bremen.de 
 
 
Abstract—The research presented aims to support Learning 
and Knowledge Building (LKB) activities of adult learners that 
act under specific contexts within Extended Organizations. 
Under Extended Organization is understood a community that 
emerges as a temporal integration of two or more different 
business, educational communities and organizational cultures 
(industrial, research and educational) and leverages ICT 
technologies to support LKB activities. The objective of the 
research is to explore supportive social computing based 
technologies for (cross-)organizational collaborative LKB 
activities. The technological developments are embedded in a 
pedagogical framework that puts a special focus on the 
harmonization of individual and organizational objectives. The 
proposed extended organizational concept and SW services 
developed to support such concept were investigated within 
two different cross-organizations: one including a large 
industrial company and a research institute and a university 
and the second one including a small industrial company and a 
department of a university. The results of testing and 
evaluation are presented and key lessons learned are discussed. 
Keywords-collaborative learning; social computing; cross-
organsiational learning; organizational learning; ontologies; 
semantic wikis 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
An organization aiming to be an intelligent learning 
organization faces a key problem of how to motivate the 
employees for continuous learning and knowledge building 
(LKB) activities to engage them in an active innovation 
process. The research approach presented in this paper is 
based on a new and developing paradigm of Extended 
Organization (EO). The model proposed emphasizes two 
types of creative cross-over conditions for LKB – vertical 
and horizontal within a single organization a, and horizontal 
between different organizations [2]. This represents the 
paradigm of an Intelligent Learning Extended Organization 
(IntelLEO) which constitutes a temporal alliance among 
different organizations (industrial, research, educational etc.) 
in order to share resources, skills and costs in supporting 
LKB activities [3]. The responsiveness of a learning 
environment within such a complex learning organization is 
crucial and can be strengthened by different means, e.g. by: 
better supporting collaborative learning with an extended 
offer of learning content, assuring better harmonization of 
the individuals’ (members of the organization) and the 
organizational LKB objectives, providing more personalized 
learning paths directed to the organization strategic 
objectives, effectively combining learning and knowledge 
management 
approaches 
and 
systems 
within 
the 
organizations, etc. While each of these means has been 
subject of intensive research, their combination and synergy 
has not been sufficiently investigated. 
In order to effectively support both collaborative LKB 
and 
harmonization 
of 
individual 
and organizational 
objectives within dynamic, flexible (often geographically 
distributed and international) IntelLEOs, efficient technology 
for management (i.e. access, delivery) of content within such 
an IntelLEO is 'conditio sine qua non'. The research 
presented aims to investigate how such a technology may 
bring added-value regarding overall responsiveness of the 
LKB environments in an IntelLEO. This concept of 
IntelLEO 
requires 
technologies 
to 
support 
sharing, 
harmonization, building, and extension of knowledge among 
individuals, industries and universities, and effective 
combination of content and organizational knowledge 
systems (at both universities and industries).  
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a 
brief overview of the state-of-the-art of the technology 
relevant for a support of the LKB activities within EOs. 
Section 3 explains the basic concept, while Section 3 
provides a brief description of the implemented social 
computing services. Section 5 is dedicated to the testing of 
the concept and technology within two real EOs, where 
lessons learned are discussed as well. Section 6 includes 
conclusions and indications of the future research activities.   
II. 
OVREVIEW OF THE RELEVANT STATE-OF-THE-ART 
As explained above, the proposed concept of an 
IntelLEO requires technology aiming to motivate employees 
to actively take part in collaborative LKB activities. Several 
topics are identified as being of key relevance for such 
technological support [3].  
Extensive research and technology development has been 
performed in last decade to support the collaborative work of 
learners which may be applied also for an EO. However, 
since cross-organizational collaborative LKB activities are 
much more complex than collaborative work within single 
departments/organizations, more powerful technological sup-
port is needed. Current solutions are not context-sensitive 
and related to explicit models and ontological frameworks 
allowing for e.g. context sensitive recommendations of 
people appropriate for collaborative LKB within an EO etc.   
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Another relevant area is Monitoring of Human-Computer 
Interaction (HCI) to derive possible meaning and relevance 
of information to the learner. Although such monitoring 
services have been subject of several research initiatives (not 
only within technology enhanced learning domain) the 
solutions to effectively extend contextual data user profiles 
through monitoring of active & passive interactions with 
explicitly & implicitly interacted data to build/deduce a 
possible relevance & meaning of data to user, and thus 
improve performance of other services are not available to 
support LKB activities within an EO.  
Ontologies for formal representation of knowledge 
objects, learning activities and resources are available, but 
they are not well integrated to support LKB within an EO. 
There is no widely accepted model for representing 
competencies. The complexity of the existing models makes 
them difficult to apply in real world settings.  
A relevant area for the presented research is also services 
to support definition of organizational policies for LKB 
activities. Existing organizational policy tools are typically 
focused on only one of the aspects such as organizational 
structure, access control policies, and intra-organization 
competency management and do not provide support for 
LKB activities within an EO. 
ePortfolio software (e.g. Elgg) provides learners with a 
Personal Learning Environment (PLE) and social networking 
tools to focus on their individual learning and participate in 
collaborative LKB activities. Current approaches assume that 
the learning process happens in one system only, which does 
not correspond to the nature of workplace learning and does 
not respond to the needs for integration of informal and 
formal learning. There is no support for personal learning 
planning which stimulates harmonization with organizational 
competencies, and allows for managing and sharing learning 
activities/experience happening in different systems. The 
existing research considers a competency gap-analysis 
approach; however, it relies on a list of available defined 
competences and does not act as a learning organization in 
this regard. Competences are tied a specific context-of-use 
within one organization.  In existing solutions, learning paths 
are static and cannot be adapted based on the dynamics of 
users’ context and/or learning objectives [3]. 
Social software tools, Semantic Wikis (e.g., Semantic 
MediaWiki) enable seamless semantic annotation for 
‘regular’ users [5]. However, knowledge that these tools 
capture is typically unstructured and encoded in proprietary 
formats, not allowing effective sharing of learning and 
knowledge objects within an EO. 
III. 
MOTIVATION  
As explained above, the aim of this research is to 
elaborate and provide technology to support the new 
paradigm of IntelLEO (Fig. 1). An IntelLEO leverages 
intelligent technologies to support LKB activities of a 
community that emerges as a temporal integration of two or 
more different business and educational communities and 
organizational cultures. Various technical solutions to 
support university/industry collaboration, as required within 
an IntelLEO, are developed. However, the key problems of 
how to motivate learners at both ‘sites’ to share learning 
objects and knowledge resources are still not solved, 
especially taking into account complex issues of different 
learning contexts, organizational objectives and IPR issues. 
Portfolio software that can be used both in industry and in 
higher education is of a key importance. An IntelLEO 
model emphasizes that the creativeness of organizations, 
and 
motivation 
of 
individuals 
to 
contribute 
into 
organizational knowledge and proactively learn, depends on 
the possibilities of creating and sharing tacit knowledge 
across various boundaries, externalizing such knowledge 
and grounding it in collaborative groups, and reusing it for 
organizational and individual growth. Shared organizational 
vision and rules among individuals guarantee the directed 
development and enable to keep organizational identity. The 
continuous harmonization of organizational and individual 
rules, values and objectives is the prerequisite to 
simultaneous co-building of organizational knowledge and 
keeping the individual motivation to proactively learn. 
Theoretical models of IntelLEOs, the activities and 
processes 
in 
these, 
and 
the means of 
achieving 
responsiveness are still in the phase of intensive 
development and investigation. By investigating the 
assumed increase of IntelLEOs' responsiveness by providing 
appropriate ICT services, the research actually explores how 
technology creates conditions for effective IntelLEOs.  
 
Intelligent Learning Extended Organisation
IntelLEO
Content/Knowledge
Content/Knowledge
Support harmonisation between 
Individual and Organisational 
Learning
Support Collaborative 
LKB Activities
Students
Employee
Instructor
Employee
…
University
Company 1
Company 2
Employee
Educational 
Organisation
Trainer
Communication Layer
Extended Organisation
Content/Knowledge
Content/Knowledge
Content/Knowledge
Content/Knowledge
IntelLEO
Lecturer
IntelLEO
Services
Intelligent Learning Extended Organisation
IntelLEO
Content/Knowledge
Content/Knowledge
Support harmonisation between 
Individual and Organisational 
Learning
Support Collaborative 
LKB Activities
Students
Employee
Instructor
Employee
…
University
Company 1
Company 2
Employee
Educational 
Organisation
Trainer
Communication Layer
Extended Organisation
Content/Knowledge
Content/Knowledge
Content/Knowledge
Content/Knowledge
IntelLEO
Lecturer
IntelLEO
Services
 
Figure 1 IntelLEO concept [3] 
IV. 
PROPOSED CONCEPT 
The presented research aims to enhance cross-
organizational LKB practices at the workplace, where under 
LKB practices are understood activities that involve the 
Knowledge building process (the individual and social 
constructive process of creating new cognitive artifacts, 
which result in the formation of various forms of 
Knowledge) as well as Learning activities. It aims at 
increasing motivation towards LKB in organizations, 
externalization of tacit knowledge individually for personal 
development, participation in collaboration and knowledge 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

combining practices in EO, and frequent harmonization of 
individual- and organizational objectives when planning, 
conducting and reflecting about work practices.  
To 
support 
such 
EO 
concept 
the 
following 
methodological and technological means are developed:  
• A new Implementation Framework on how to use 
technology to motivate employees to take part in 
collaborative LKB activities in an EO, taking into account 
the best social constructivist and situated learning practices 
in collaborative LKB, 
• Ontological framework for LKB context representation,  
• Generic and widely applicable so-called core services, 
fitting SOA principles, for managing collaborative LKB 
activities and contents in an IntelLEO.  
The proposed ICT environment (Fig. 2) [6] consists of 
several layers,focused around the Core Services (CS) and the 
Ontology Framework. The different layers are the following: 
• 
The layer ‘Knowledge Resources’ represents the 
resources and communication layer in an EO. It serves as 
resource basis for e.g. Process Knowledge, Portfolios, etc. 
• 
The CS layer consists of several services: 
Organizational Policy (OP), Learning Planner (LP), Content 
Knowledge Provision (CKP), Human Resources Discovery 
(HRD), Working Group Composition (WGC), User 
Monitoring & Collaborative Traceability (UMCT). 
• 
The Orchestration layer serves as the service 
integration environment. It combines the CS within 
Application-specific Services needed by the different 
collaborating organizations and users. Specifically, this layer 
links the CS and application specific SW solutions used 
within an EO to ensure Application-specific services which 
support the users in LKB activities. It is to distinguish that 
CS comprise the generic set of services, while Application-
specific Services comprise services for the organizations in 
an EO (e.g. services to support new-comers in an EO). 
 
 
Figure 2 – Proposed ICT environment [6] 
 
The Ontology Framework spans over the whole 
environment and serves as a model foundation and common 
base structure for specific knowledge. The IntelLEO 
ontology set consists of eight ontologies:  Learning Context, 
Activities, User Model, Workflow, Competences, Orga-
nization Structure, Annotations, Competence Management 
ontology.  
To guide the cross-organizational LKB within an EO, 
models that integrate self-regulated learning (reflecting, 
setting/monitoring 
learning 
goals) 
with 
collaborative 
knowledge sharing activities is investigated. The innovative 
approach is to use the so-called SECI-Model [7] as 
pedagogical framework - Socialization (implicit to implicit 
knowledge), Externalization (implicit to explicit knowledge), 
Combination 
(explicit 
to 
explicit 
knowledge) 
and 
Internalizations (explicit to implicit knowledge). Although 
SECI model is initially the model for organizational 
knowledge management, enabling knowledge conversion in 
organizations, this model has been effectively used for 
organizing learning at workplaces. Therefore, approach 
applied to the creation of the concept is that all segments of 
the solution focus around the SECI model. While intuitively 
attractive, there has been limited empirical investigation of 
the SECI model in practice, with this being especially true 
within the context of multi-organizational projects [8]. 
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
The solution has been implemented as a generic system 
thanks to the ontology framework [9], making it easy to 
adapt it for different organizations and contexts. For this, 
different knowledge base could be produced to adapt the 
system usability in a specific context. Specific tools can be 
connected to the CS to respond to the specific organizations’ 
needs, e.g. Semantic MediaWiki and Elgg can be used as a 
collaborative tools and PLE.  Then, the solution can be 
deployed in different contexts.    
Organization Policy CS is used to specify the context and 
priorities at the organizational level. OP CS is consisting of 
five functional modules. One of the aims is harmonization of 
individual learning goals of employees with the goals of 
organization. OP is a tool that is meant to be used by 
managers of organization, in order to define and promote 
contextual 
settings, 
policies 
and 
priorities 
of 
the 
organization. These settings, policies and priorities will then 
be utilized by other CS [8].  
The Learning Planner (LP) CS allows users to have 
ubiquitous access to their personal learning spaces. Through 
this service, users can manage and attain their learning goals 
harmonized with those of their organization, by receiving 
support from the social context of their EO, and also 
contributing back to it through sharing their learning 
experiences. 
Managing 
Learning 
Goals 
functionality 
supports users in planning and managing their personal 
learning goals, choosing/creating the competences to be 
acquired and building learning paths to acquire each specific 
competence. It also helps users to harmonize their learning 
goals with organizational objectives. Contrary to other 
competence-based approaches, here users are not limited to 
choose their learning goals from only a set of predefined 
goals provided by their organization; they can create new 
competences which they desire to achieve or browse the list 
of available competences within their EO and choose the 
ones that they find relevant to their goals [9]. 
 Based on the contextual data about a user’s tasks, 
learning goals, competences and other relevant information, 
this functionality recommends learning paths for achieving a 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

certain target competence to the user. A LP is comprised of a 
sequence of LKB activities along with descriptions 
(metadata) of assets required for performing those activities.  
 Analytics functionality is responsible for processing and 
analyzing the data about users’ learning activities and their 
interaction with diverse kinds of learning resources (e.g., 
learning goals, target competences, activities and knowledge 
assets). It makes use of the interaction data stored in the RDF 
repository to provide users with feedback, primarily through 
different kinds of visualizations, to support them in planning 
and monitoring their learning process. Browsing the 
Analytics of a certain available competence, updates the 
managers of an organization on how frequently this 
competence has been used within the organization, in the 
context of which learning goals, by users of what 
organizational positions, and what the main issues regarding 
this competence are. This allows managers to apply any 
necessary modifications in the definition of the competence 
itself or learning paths associated with it. Social Wave 
receives information about the events occurring in the LP 
and other connected tools, e.g. MediaWiki, and updates the 
social (activity) stream of users who might be interested in 
those events. Semantic annotation and indexing of learning 
resources provides two types of annotations: manual and 
automatic. Semantic Search aims at enabling effective 
retrieval and reuse of stored learning resources, i.e. learning 
goals of other users, competences, LPs, learning activities or 
knowledge assets [10].  
Content/Knowledge Provision (CKP) service aims at 
locating and retrieving appropriate learning and knowledge 
objects and making them accessible either to members of an 
EO or to other services, taking into account the specifics of 
the user's learning context. CKP offers the web browser-
based user interface. It provides three major functionalities: 
(a) bookmark/upload knowledge objects into a designated 
repository, (b) manage uploaded knowledge objects, c) 
perform semantic search of knowledge objects repository. 
Human Resource Discovery and Working Group 
Composition CS offer several functionalities related to 
context sensitive finding human resources and establishing 
temporal working groups with them. These CS offer search 
for persons, working groups or organizations, based on 
several criteria. CS provides contextual recommendation of 
people. CS can select relevant person for collaborative LKB, 
where the recommendations are based on algorithms com-
puting the similarities between different kinds of resources. 
The User Monitoring and Collaboration Traceability 
(UMCT) service implements functionality to monitor user 
interaction, in particular over MediaWiki. The UMCT 
service works in the background of the legacy system, in this 
case MediaWiki (or Elgg), and does the monitoring of a 
specific set of interactions that the user has with the 
MediaWiki in question. These interactions include: open a 
page, create a page, edit a page, upload a document, 
bookmark a page, delete a page or performing a search. This 
set of interactions may be extended and may vary according 
to the system being monitored and the use of the monitored 
data. The information is collected by an extension installed 
on the MediaWiki side and passed to the UMCT web service 
where the activities performed by the user are then saved in 
the ontologies repository. The main objective of these 
services is to extend user profiles through the monitoring of 
active and passive interactions with explicitly and implicitly 
interacted data to build and deduce a possible relevance and 
meaning of data to a user, and improve performance of other 
core services by making the monitored information available 
to these services. The functionality that monitors the main 
activities records certain events occurring during the use of 
other services, such as the creation of a learning goal, 
addition of a competence to a learning path or the creation of 
a learning group by a certain user. The monitored data may 
be visualized in different ways:  in the social wave panel in 
the LP or in the end-user environments, MediaWiki. This 
functionality has as a main objective to build and deduce a 
possible relevance and meaning of data to a user. It is 
possible for the user to define in a fine-grained way what 
information the service is allowed to collect.  
The integration of all developed services was included in 
the conception and implementation of the services and 
Ontology Framework by basing the ICT concept on service-
oriented architecture principles. This principle was applied 
by implementing a set of CS, as explained above. At the 
same time – adhering to SOA’s principle of loose coupling – 
the ICT concept allows for integrating/orchestrating one or 
more of CS – and optionally external systems from the 
existing learning environment – into Application Specific 
Services that provide the combined functionalities to 
implement a specific use case. This integration/orchestration 
is facilitated through the well-defined interfaces, which allow 
each service (as well as external tools) to synchronously 
invoke another service’s functionality – in some cases 
extended to the according user interfaces – e.g. a user 
requests forming a learning group for a particular 
competence in LP, which causes the corresponding user 
interface of WGC Service to open. This synchronous 
integration between services was complemented by an 
extensive event model allowing services and external 
systems to asynchronously notify each other of pre-defined 
events. This event system was especially used when integra-
ting the services with existing tools of the learning 
environment – MediaWiki, e.g. (a)  When a user starts 
acquiring a competence in the LP this competence is automa-
tically added to the user’s profile page in MediaWiki, includ-
ing information about how far the user has progressed in ac-
quiring the competence, (b) Creation of a working group 
triggers the creation of a corresponding page in MediaWiki, 
which contains links to the profile page of each user. All 
services work on a central shared data repository, modeled 
through the Ontology Framework. Universal and transparent 
access to this shared data repository is realized through the 
services of the Ontology Framework. 
VI. 
EXPERIMENTAL VALIDATION 
As the research was following a participatory design 
based research approach an active involvement of all actors 
and especially the future core users is being pursued. Based 
on this approach, the user requirements and scenarios for use 
of the developed services within specific EOs were defined 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[11, 12]. The users were involved in intensive testing and 
evaluation of the results. All test-participants were provided 
with the same set of IntelLEO services during the test-period, 
while the scenarios for the usage of these services were 
adapted to the specific needs and requirements of each EO. 
All test participants were provided with the same set of 
quantitative (pre- and post-evaluation questionnaires) and 
qualitative (focus-groups, expert interviews) evaluation 
instruments to collect their feedback.  
The first case is settled within the big multinational 
corporate in the automotive sector. The specific instances are 
located within the product development department. External 
research cooperation and education/training partners such as 
a RTD institute and University were involved in the cross-
organizational activities. The main challenge in this case is 
related to the issue of motivating employees to document and 
share their experience within and across the departments and 
organizations. In addition, time to competence is of high 
importance for the company, especially in the case of the 
involved department, where there is no specific formal 
educational program for obtaining the specific knowledge, 
skills and competences needed in this department. One of the 
main requirements is the integration of any solution with 
MediaWiki and Semantic Wiki, which is used for LKB.   
The second case is involving an SME providing IT 
services 
especially 
for 
the 
e-Engineering 
and 
e-
Manufacturing sector, and its collaboration partner, a 
University department dealing with software engineering. 
The cross-organizational activities in this case are focusing 
on the specific innovation-driven demands of the SME and 
the relevant scientific expertise at the University department. 
Current cooperation activities between the two organizations 
have been carried out in a rather non-transparent one-to-one 
exchange between staff members. With a more transparent 
approach, supported by ICT, to knowledge exchange and 
collaboration the individual as well as the organizational 
benefits shall be considerably increased. 
The objective of this evaluation was to test and validate 
the prototype of services and implementation framework, 
collect feedback concerning the usability and usefulness of 
the services and to test how these services increase the 
individual motivation for LKB activities, a pre-requisite of 
organizational responsiveness. Both quantitative (and 
qualitative evaluation has been carried out. The analysis 
comprises detailed comparison of the results of evaluation in 
the two different cases. Due to the lack of space, here the 
conclusions made based on these evaluations are briefly 
presented. More detailed results can be found in [6, 8].  
Based on the thorough testing of the services a number of 
improvements in the services were proposed by the users. 
The required improvements have been carefully analyzed, 
lessons learned regarding the developed services have been 
identified and the actions to improve the services to assure 
effective use of the services in the future have been carried 
out. A number of useful conclusions regarding pedagogical 
aspects have been identified as well.  
The results show the importance of collaboration services 
for an increased motivation for learning and knowledge 
building (LKB) activities. The participants who got involved 
in collaboration activities often were amongst the most 
motivated for LKB and showed also the highest self-
efficacy. This result was confirmed by the correlation 
analysis of data on learning and knowledge sharing attitudes, 
which highlighted the relationship between collaboration and 
the motivation to learn, the willingness to share knowledge 
and also the self-efficacy for LKB. A strong positive 
correlation between the motivation to learn and self-efficacy 
for LKB is found, meaning that the more self-confident a 
person is with respect to LKB the more motivated s/he is to 
actually learn. Thus the studies confirm outcomes from 
existing studies on self-efficacy & learning motivation [12]. 
The acceptance of the developed services in real-life 
environments depends very much on the organizational 
context of the test participants. Participants from the large 
company coming from a very competitive work-environment 
are not used to work with prototypes. Thus, feedback is more 
critical than the feedback from the second case. The 
willingness for the further usage of the services for 
promoting LKB after the testing period in the EOs appeared 
to be influenced by the initial organizational LKB culture 
differences. The high motivation to learn, as well as to share 
knowledge with partner organizations in the second case, 
remained high. On the other hand, despite the fact that 
participants in the first case have a high individual 
motivation to learn from other organizations, this motivation 
was extenuated by organizational barriers in form of existing 
policies that impeded e.g. sharing of knowledge. 
The evaluation of the services revealed several 
interesting and useful insights concerning the most important 
drivers and barriers for cross-organizational learning. Cross-
organizational learning in such a continuous and structured 
way, as it is supported by the services, was seen as an 
important benefit from managers and employees in research 
institutions, while users involved in 
the industrial 
organizations reflected critically on this approach. The main 
potential barriers to apply this approach were the privacy 
regulations of large companies, which constrain the 
transparent 
use 
of 
individual 
competencies 
across 
department and organizational borders.  The fear to lose 
intellectual property and knowledge-able workers through an 
increased transparency and cross-organizational learning 
cooperation were mentioned as relevant obstacles [12].  
The participants identified several benefits of the 
developed services for workplace learning:  The requirement 
to structure and document one’s work-relevant knowledge 
and learning processes has been highlighted. The important 
requirement was that the services should support learners to 
stay on the learning track. Therefore, the Social Wave was 
one of the most important features. This functionality helps 
learners to quickly be informed about the latest activities 
involved, the most urgent learning goals, new resources, and 
latest resources book-marked/stored to the system for a later 
enhancement. The challenge for learners is to know which of 
the huge amount of available learning resources are relevant 
at a specific time point to continue one’s learning process 
towards successful achievement. From an organizational 
point of view one of the main contributions was the process 
of documenting the competency needs of the involved 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

organizations. The services are perceived as especially useful 
for newcomers, as they replace a “mentor” [6].  
VII. CONCLUSION 
The proposed approach, including the pedagogical 
framework and developed services, offers a novel 
perspective on supporting LKB in organizational settings: it 
brings together elements originating from and necessitated 
by the social, organizational and informal context of 
organizational learning, along with motivational and self-
regulatory aspects that aim for the individual learning of 
knowledge workers. The services were designed to not only 
support and promote organizational learning in terms of all 
the aspects set forth by the pedagogical framework, but also 
to integrate the various tools and services that employees 
often interact with during their everyday practices. To 
address this challenge, the tools relied on a network of 
ontologies as their common (linked) data model. These 
ontologies provided a basis for all the functionalities of the 
tools, as well as a ground for data linking and exchange 
among the tools integrated. The network of ontologies, in 
particular, facilitates formal representation and seamless 
integration of data about individuals’ learning experiences 
(i.e. learning activities and their context), the knowledge 
being shared, as well as different kinds of annotations that 
capture either individual or collective reflections on the 
shared content/knowledge. Moreover, in the last few years 
the affordances offered by the Social Web, i.e. Web 2.0, 
paradigm have affected the existing learning pedagogies, 
bringing forth the concept of Social Learning, mostly in 
formal educational settings [5, 13]. The evaluation of the 
developed services (and accordingly the pedagogical 
framework) reconfirmed the role and importance of social 
learning in informal organizational learning.  
It may be concluded that the main innovation is the 
approach to align (cross-) organizational LKB policies with 
personal user-centered goals, applying social computing 
approach. Although the research addressed a wide spectrum 
of RTD topics relevant for collaborative LKB activities 
within an EO, many aspects are open for further research. 
Attention in future RTD work will be given to e.g. quality of 
TEL services for collaborative LKB activities in EOs, 
privacy and security issues, further aspects relevant for 
context modeling, etc. Especially privacy issue from 
technical point of view will be addressed in detail (e.g. as the 
Ontology Framework is defined in the OWL language, it has 
to be investigated how such a formal nature of ontologies can 
be leveraged to reason over the various security/privacy 
policies within EO, etc.). The implemented services and the 
Implementation Framework support further use of the 
proposed concept and services. Since the services are 
developed to suit very distinct EOs, it can be assumed that 
the Framework is applicable in various organizational 
settings, not only in EOs but also in complex single 
organizations (e.g. large manufacturing companies for col-
laborative LKB activities among departments/ subsidiaries) 
or smaller organizations (where appropriate selection of the 
services and aspects relevant for an SME could be made).  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The publication was partially supported/co-funded by the 
European Community/European Union under the Informa-
tion and Communication Technologies (ICT) theme of the 
7th Framework Program for R&D, project IntelLEO 
‘Intelligent Learning Extended Organization’ (DG Informa-
tion, Society and Media, project no. 231590). This document 
does not represent the opinion of the EC, and the EC is not 
responsible for any use that might be made of its content.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Helsinki Communique on Enhanced European Cooperation in 
Vocational Education and Training, Dec., 2006. 
[2] 
Beach, K. Consequential transitions: a developmental view of 
knowledge propagation through social organizations. In Tuomi-
Gröhn and Engeström (eds.), Between school and work. New 
perspectives 
on 
transfer 
and 
boundary-crossing, 
Pergamon, 
Amsterdam, 2003,  (pp. 39-61). 
[3] 
IntelLEO D1.1.  IntelLEO - Intelligent Learning Extended Organisa-
tion, Deliverable D1.1 State-of-the-Art Analyses,   Project no. FP7-
ICT-231590, 2010. 
[4] 
Allemang, D., & Hendler, J. Semantic Web for the Working 
Ontologist: Effective Modeling in RDFS and OWL. Morgan 
Kaufmann, 2008. 
[5] 
Vassileva, J. (Towards Social Learning Environments, IEEE 
Transactions on Learning Technologies, 1 (4), 2009,  pp. 199-214. 
[6] 
IntelLEO - Intelligent Learning Extended Organization, Final Report, 
Project no. FP7-ICT-231590, August 2012. 
[7] 
Nonaka, I., Takeuchi, H. The knowledge-creating company: How 
Japanese companies create the dynamics of innovation. Oxford 
University Press, 1995. 
[8] 
Tammets, Kairit; Pata, Kai; Laanpere, Mart, Implementing a 
Technology-Supported Model for Cross-Organizational Learning and 
Knowledge Building for Teachers. European Journal of Teacher 
Education, 2012, 35, pp. 57 – 75. 
[9] 
Siadaty, M., Jovanović, J., Gašević, D, Jeremić, Z. and Holocher-Ertl, 
T: Leveraging Semantic Technologies for Harmonization of 
Individual and Organizational Learning; in Pro-ceedings of EC-TEL 
2010, Barcelona, Spain, LNCS 6383, 2010,  pp. 340-356. 
[10] Siadaty, M.,  J. Jovanović, K. Pata, T. Holocher-Ertl, D. Gašević, N. 
Milikić Gasevic A Semantic Web-enabled Tool for Self-Regulated 
Learning in the Workplace, Proceedings of the 11th IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies, Athen, 
2011, pp. 66-70. 
[11] Holocher-Ertl, T., Fabian, C.M., Siadaty, M., Jovanovic, J., Pata, K., 
Gasevic, D., "Self-Regulated Learners and Collaboration: How 
Innovative Tools can address the Motivation to Learn at the 
Workplace?" In Proceedings of the 6th European Conference on 
Technology-enhanced Learning, Palermo, Italy, 2011. Lecture Notes 
in Computer Science, Vol. 6964/2011, pp. 506-511. 
[12] Holocher-Ertl, T., Kieslinger, B., Fabian C.,  Applying Participatory 
Methods to Address Motivational Aspects in Informal Work-place, 
International Journal of Advanced Corporate Learning, Vol 4, No 1 
2011, pp. 18-24. 
[13] Montalvo, F. T., Gonzalez Torres, M.C. "Self-Regulated Learning: 
Current and Future Directions." Electronic Journal of Research in 
Educational Psychology 2(1): 2004, pp. 1-34. 
[14] McLoughlin, C. and Lee, M.J.W. Pedagogy 2.0: Critical challenges 
and responses to Web 2.0 and social software in tertiary teaching. In 
M.J.W. Lee & C. McLoughlin (Eds), Web 2.0-based e-learning: 
applying social informatics for tertiary teaching, Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference, 2010, pp. 43-69. 
 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

