Web, Social Media and Online Communities for those Studying for Professions: 
Embraced or Tolerated?  
Managing Information Online at The City Law School 
Emily Allbon 
City University London 
London, UK 
e.allbon@city.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—At a time of much debate on the subject of legal 
education within the UK, universities are having to look 
carefully at the content of their courses, their methods of 
delivery and ultimately whether this process is meaningfully 
shaping and future-proofing legal professionals or leaving 
them ill-prepared for practice.  This paper seeks broadly to 
gain an understanding of the online tools law students use to 
support their studies and career progression.  It focuses in on 
the use of social media tools like Facebook and Twitter, 
alongside the ways in which law students both seek and 
manage their information for learning. The online community 
aspect also formed a part of this research. Observations were 
made on the basis of two focus groups at The City Law School, 
City University London with students on academic law 
programmes.  Students at City University have access to a 
custom-built online law portal: Lawbore, which acts as a one-
stop shop, with community and social media elements as well 
as learning objects and multimedia guides. Lawbore has been 
in existence since 2002, and although constantly evolving it has 
never been formally evaluated; this research was prompted by 
needing to dig deeper into what students require from a 
resource such as this.  
Keywords-social media; online communities; portal; content 
generation; information retrieval; legal education 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Higher Education institutions who teach those aiming 
for a career in a profession – whether law, medicine or 
engineering, are facing challenging times.  The cost of 
education is increasing; all undergraduates in the UK must 
now pay at least £9000 per year and they want to see 
tangible benefits from this investment. Of course, 
universities use many strategies to market their worth; 
glamorous estates, publicising successful alumni, cutting-
edge research, prestigious academic staff and close links 
with employers amongst these. In addition, digital 
technology, including social media is increasingly being 
employed to attract and retain students. 
This study focuses on the students of The City Law 
School and their use of the Internet and associated tools to 
support their learning of Law. The research, based on small 
focus groups, looked specifically at how students use 
technology independently, rather than in an organised way 
under the guidance of the Law School. However, the Law 
School’s own portal for students, Lawbore [1], formed part 
of the discussions which comprise the findings in this paper.  
As a resource custom-built for our students, we were keen to 
gain some insight into which features the students felt had 
most impact on their learning. This would then help to 
inform future developments of the site and perhaps give 
some indication of which tools we should be promoting to 
our students.  
The paper includes a methodology, detailing the focus 
groups and participants. We will go on to give a brief 
overview of both the legal education system in the UK and 
the use of technology within those Law Schools.  
II. 
METHODOLOGY  
Data has been collected informally (via unprompted student 
comments) as well as formally via focus groups and basic 
website statistics (within a university recognised ethical 
approval process). The focus groups were small - eleven 
students across two groups, and they included students from 
each of our academic law programmes. These are the three- 
year undergraduate degree (known as the ‘LLB’), the two-
year degree for graduate entry students (the ‘GELLB’) and 
the one-year law conversion course – the Graduate Diploma 
in Law (the ‘GDL’). Different years of those courses were 
also represented so we had the views of first, second and 
third year undergraduates. Students volunteered to take part 
after receiving an all-school email invitation. Some element 
of bias could be evident as by definition more enthusiastic 
students would be more likely to put themselves forward.  
The composition of the groups was as follows:  
Group 1:  
A total of 7 students made up this group:  four female 
and three male.  Three GDL students, a second-year GELLB 
student and one student was present to represent each of the 
three years of the LLB.  
Group 2:  
A total of five students made up this group: four female 
and one male. Two first-year LLB students, one second year 
LLB student, one third year LLB student and a first-year 
GELLB student. 
Both groups included international students – three in 
Group 1 and 2 in the second. 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

The focus group sessions were very detailed and lasted 
between 90 minutes and 2 hours, with views flowing easily. 
They were filmed in their entirety in order to be able to 
pinpoint in the analysis which type of student was 
responsible for which comment. Questions posed covered 
two key areas: content generation tools like Facebook and 
Twitter and content consumption tools.  
In terms of content generation, discussion ranged from 
social media tools like Facebook and Twitter to the 
perceptions and views on online communities. Questions 
focused on collaboration, portals and digital technologies; 
blogs and publisher resources. For consumption, we were 
keen to learn more about digital literacy in Law: the types of 
information students needed, how they researched, how they 
kept up to date, managed their findings and decided what 
was important.  
As useful background, this paper will briefly introduce 
legal education in the UK as well as giving some insights 
into how technology has been used formally within Law 
Schools.  
III. 
LEGAL EDUCATION IN THE UK 
For students contemplating joining a profession, the 
commitment required both in terms of cost and duration is 
significant. For a law student, even once the academic 
element is completed, there is still the one-year professional 
element (£12,500 for solicitors and £16,000 for barristers).  
Within Law, there is fierce competition for the 
‘apprentice’ stage that follows; the training contract for 
solicitors and pupillage for barristers. Without this, a student 
career path stalls and can go no further. In 2013, there were 
1700 students called to the Bar and fewer than 400 
pupillages on offer [2].  
Against this backdrop, law schools and universities in 
the UK are also undergoing a wholesale review: the Legal 
Education and Training Review (LETR) [3], which 
questions whether the academic stage of law remains fit-for-
purpose. 
The view of the employers – the law firms and the 
chambers - is that they have concerns about the quality of 
trainees: noting the lack of understanding about the 
commercial world, a canyon between their academic 
achievements and real-world business acumen. LETR 
articulates this: ‘there are areas of cognitive expertise that 
are not adequately captured by conventional notions of the 
core. Key examples are professional ethics and values and 
‘commercial awareness’ [4].  
IV. 
TECHNOLOGY IN HIGHER EDUCATION AND 
LAW SCHOOLS 
In terms of technology, universities are keen to exploit 
the tools available: in order to streamline their offerings, 
support students outside of core hours and enhance the 
learning experience.  Technology is ‘one of the most 
significant mechanisms currently transforming the learning 
process’ [5]; at a basic level, most institutions have a virtual 
learning environment which would offer students a place to 
find materials for their courses (handbooks, reading lists) 
and the facility to submit assessments. The more 
adventurous uses may facilitate the use of more interactive 
options - wikis, reflective blogs, peer feedback and quizzes 
in order to engage their students more actively.  
With so much discussion around whether legal education 
is fit for purpose: what do law students really want from 
their institution in terms of support online? What tools do 
they use to assist them? More importantly perhaps, research 
is required around how students work to see what 
technological solutions are most useful.  
Education for the professions has in the past been largely 
delivered via lectures and tutorials, but the rise in 
multimedia has altered the landscape. In Medicine, video 
how-tos are now commonplace – there have been many 
apps developed to assist medical students with directories of 
clinical information and virtual anatomy tours such as 3D 
Brain, Radiology 2.0 and Muscle and Bone Anatomy 3D. 
This is also becoming more familiar within Law, although 
progress is much slower. Some years ago, Paul Maharg 
pioneered the use of simulations by designing a virtual town 
(Ardcalloch) where his Strathclyde students could become 
solicitors at virtual law firms acting for virtual clients [6]. 
More recently, The University of Law took the decision that 
all its lectures were online only, saving its lecturers for the 
more interactive tutorials, now known as the flipped 
classroom model.  
At City Law School we have developed a custom-built 
portal to support our students (est. 2000). The Lawbore and 
Learnmore [7] websites run alongside and complement 
Moodle, 
the 
Virtual 
Learning 
Environment 
(VLE). 
Learnmore offers law students nationwide open access to 
legal skills materials, integrating video clips and guidance 
materials in which students and alumni feature.  
Lawbore offers a gateway to supporting resources for 
different modules in Law, a hub for accessing and 
understanding e-resources, a careers blog, Learnmore (the 
skills wiki mentioned above) and many community 
elements; news, events calendar, Twitter integration, legal 
feeds and small ads. The blog and Learnmore invite 
contributions from students, which could be articles about a 
pro bono experience, advice on how to come across well in 
interview, tips on networking, an interview with a 
prominent lawyer or a write-up of an event. The website has 
received much recognition from both the Higher Education 
and Law communities [8], and students from all over the 
UK value it. The website receives in excess of 2000 visitors 
a day and its popularity is best summed up by this email 
received from a student on returning from the National Law 
Student Forum in 2012: “…when the students knew I was 
representing City University they couldn’t stop talking 
about Lawbore. Words can’t describe how happy I was to 
see students outside our university talk about it and use it. I 
couldn’t but explain to you how thankful I am of you, and 
all that effort we see you put-in, pays off”. Students use it as 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

a starting point for research; a support network and a place 
to check-in and find out what’s going on within the Law 
School or in the wider legal world. We hope that it adds 
value to their studies, but had only ad hoc unprompted 
feedback as a basis for this.  
V. 
LAW STUDENTS AND CONTENT 
GENERATION TOOLS 
Lawbore isn’t interactive in the sense that students can 
create content instantaneously, but it does encourage 
students to get involved. The blog invites contributions from 
students and they submit content from event reviews to 
accounts of work experience. Lawbore has a Twitter 
account which features on the hub part of the site; students 
using Twitter do frequently ask questions and advice as well 
as mention content featured here: 
@lawbore: Studying Equity & Trusts this yr? Check out 
free issue of Trusts & Trustees jnl for inspiration! 
Ow.ly/oWltg (via roxanneselby) 
@D_Taylr: @lawbore Some great articles in there 
relevant to my dissertation! Thanks Emily, hope all’s well!  
Learnmore is loosely built using a wiki structure and 
also features content which the Law School and students 
have collaborated on. Examples include guides co-written 
with students, video clips starring students demonstrating 
practical legal skills like mooting and articles from our 
alumni offering tips based on their experience.  
A. Social Media 
Recent years have seen many success stories around the 
use of social media in teaching, but we were more interested 
by how students used such tools self-sufficiently. Selwyn 
[9] notes how Facebook’s role seems to be more about 
social support – a place to go to sound off about your study, 
your lecturers and how badly an essay is going, than as a 
place for learning collaboration. It is seen as a place to seek 
clarification when official channels are not clear or 
unavailable. The perception is that most students will use 
social media regularly, but it is not as clear how it is used 
for study-related purposes. In Hrastinski and Aghaee’s [10] 
2012 study, all but one of the students used social media 
daily but “they perceive that their use is not related with 
their studies”.    
The professions in general have a mixed relationship 
with social media, balancing the benefits (networking, 
current awareness, promotion) with the risks (professional 
integrity compromised). Law websites, like the gossipy 
Legal Cheek [11] thrive on exposing lawyers who have used 
social networking sites ill advisedly. Professional standards 
are an essential part of ensuring public trust in a profession 
and students of that discipline are expected to abide by these 
also. Social media has meant that the world in which these 
standards apply has extended vastly.  Codes of practice will 
normally specify that members will maintain professional 
integrity at all times, which would encompass guidance on 
confidentiality and appropriate boundaries, e.g. between 
doctor-patient or lawyer-client. Mansfield et al. [12] note 
that in the medical world students are not expected to 
develop quite the same professional ethics as doctors. This 
is despite 60% of deans of US medical schools reporting 
unprofessional postings from students online [13], however 
some of these incidences did result in official warnings and 
dismissal.  
‘Experiences that were once ephemeral in nature 
are now being captured and archived by social 
media technologies, allowing such experiences to 
be re-examined in the future, when they may be 
seen in a different light’.  This has the potential to 
not only erode the public’s trust in the medical 
profession, but also to mar the professional 
reputation of individuals’ [14].  
UK Professional bodies like the British Medical 
Association [15], Chartered Society of Physiotherapy [16] 
and The Law Society [17] have all compiled their own 
guidance and toolkits on using social media. The Web is 
alive with tales of social media bloopers, particularly in the 
legal world – but this is no new thing. Employees sending 
out emails to their whole firm rather than one individual, 
boasting of the previous night’s exploits or detailing their 
views of the company, have been commonplace for many 
years:  
“I’m busy doing jack shit. Went to a nice 2hr sushi lunch 
today at Sushi Zen. Nice place. Spent the rest of the day 
typing e-mails and bullshitting with people.” [18] 
Pitfalls aside, increase in users of social media is steep. 
Research from 2012 showed that 47% of staff from the Top 
50 law firms had profiles on LinkedIn, nearly double the 
number than in 2010 [19]. Similarly, many lawyers are now 
blogging; many with the intention of making law more 
accessible to the general public, others to raise their profiles. 
David Allen Green, Head of Media at law firm Preiskel & 
Co has seen his profile rocket – becoming perhaps the 
leading UK lawyer on social media after championing the 
underdog by taking on the R v Paul Chambers case (the 
‘Twitter Joke Trial’) and writing about the law on his blog, 
Jack of Kent [20]. Green now writes for the Financial Times 
in addition to his media practice, and has a significant 
Twitter follower count.  Law students are also blogging, 
although some Law Schools in the US are warning students 
off such mediums [21]. 
With all this in mind, and no ready data, it was desirable 
to investigate via the focus groups what social media tools 
law students are making use of. What emerged very strongly 
from these groups is that these students were consumers 
rather than creators “I don’t tweet but I like to use it to 
search for information”; but social media was far from 
being an essential tool for them, even as users. The 
undergraduates showed more enthusiasm for Twitter and 
Facebook than the postgraduates.   
Facebook 
proved 
unpopular 
(“too 
much 
of 
a 
procrastination tool”); and those who were members 
mainly limited use to the purely social. Sets of barrister’s 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

chambers who used Facebook were flagged up by one 
student as being useful for “getting a feel for the set which 
doesn’t come across on their website as they are trying to 
sell themselves to potential clients”. Likewise, law firms 
who used their Facebook pages for more interactive 
dynamic content were praised; particularly those who shared 
blogs from their trainees.  
Students seem protective of their own space on social 
media; Jones et al. (2010) speak of the divide between ‘life’ 
and ‘studying’ [22] and how students don’t want the two to 
crossover via social media, and the focus groups backed this 
up.  There was some discussion amongst undergraduates 
about a programme director who had tried to join their 
Facebook group but who had been blocked.  
Twitter fared a little better, but with only three 
enthusiastic users. However, students listening to the 
individual speak about the benefits in Group One were 
really interested. Comments included “if you have 
questions, best way to get answers” and “I've found Twitter 
really helpful. Just for a quick snapshot I can check it daily. 
Obviously you have to go further for a little more depth. 
Depending on who you follow it's been really useful”.  
Students liked the Lawbore Twitter feed; “really 
important that it’s there…as our librarian it makes you a bit 
more human. Someone you could go and talk to”.  
They liked it when academic staff tweeted too (although 
this was not a common occurrence), with lecturers 
recommending others to follow and blog posts of interest: 
“they give you a look at what your professor’s opinion is on 
the latest news, they would respond to articles – interesting 
to see where they’re looking for their information”.  
Surprisingly, few students noted blogs as a worthwhile 
academic source, tending to stick to print books and legal 
databases to find their commentary within academic 
journals. One student noted: “I used blogs when studying for 
exams especially for constitutional law – much debate over 
topics – constantly changing. In exams where you know they 
will be heavily based on essays. Nice to get different 
opinions. All written by professors or scholars – not just joe 
schmo writing about…” Many highly regarded law 
professors are now blogging, so this is another very useful 
source for students [23].  
The comment above shows that, despite long-standing 
perceptions about students not being able to judge the 
quality of sources, these students seemed very canny – 
discussing when they would use google as a search engine 
or look something up in Wikipedia [24]:  “First port of call 
is a Wikipedia article to get a broad overview. If I need 
more information I’ll go to Westlaw [25] or Lexis [26]”.  
One student mentioned the use of podcasts online where 
they had caught up with an episode of the Radio 4 Law in 
Action programme and one of the subjects covered had 
come up in a scholarship interview. The students were all 
very complimentary about the video resources available in 
Learnmore, particularly the mooting section.  
B. Online Communities 
Lawbore plays an important role in creating a 
‘community feel’ for the law school; inviting contributions 
from users and providing all-round information relevant to 
the students. Students really liked that it links up academics, 
current students and alumni: “really liked how in the piece 
about national essay competitions you linked to the work of 
City students who had won it in previous years – this 
bolstered my confidence to enter”.    
Law students are often seen as very competitive; The 
Princeton Review in the US surveys students and ranks law 
schools. Competitiveness is part of this, with students asked 
about the number of hours they sleep per night, hours spent 
studying, how many hours they think their peers are 
studying and competitiveness [27].  
In the UK, we were keen to see whether this was true in 
relation to their study and career progression and the groups 
were asked how readily they shared information with their 
peers.  Surprisingly, the postgraduate students were far more 
open with their work; they used Dropbox to set up shared 
folders in their tutorial groups for people to add their 70%+ 
essays and revision notes. One GDL student noted: “the 
only way you are going to get through the GDL is by 
making friends. No way you're going to do all the work and 
know everything…we've all done a degree before we're not 
so competitive about it…we just need to get the 
commendation as a minimum and you'll be ok. Didn't really 
matter if we're going to share our notes. You didn't really 
feel like it was going to have much impact on the rest of 
your life”. There was a clear imperative to collaborate just 
to get the work done.  
This wasn’t always the case for the undergraduates – 
several students were against sharing any information “if it’s 
for coursework and you found an article that was brilliant– 
I’m sorry I don’t mean it in a horrible way but I’m selfish 
like that. My coursework is being compared to someone 
else’s. If we all put the same thing we’re not going to get a 
good grade” (LLB2). A third year LLB student mentioned 
that amongst her small group of friends they would share 
assignments and work out together where they may have 
been able to improve.  
This echo’s Selwyn’s findings [28] (2009, p.167) in 
whose study “it was noticeable that students were generally 
unwilling to offer extensive assistance to each other”.  
When securing paid employment is so tough, we were 
curious whether their views on sharing information altered 
when it concerned opportunities. This was mixed, with 
some stating that they alerted each other to application 
deadlines and even recommended their friends to firms or 
chambers they’d had work experience at. Others hadn’t been 
as lucky: “…sometimes competitiveness will get in the way 
of that - I had a couple of times where people I was 
reasonably good friends with were like 'oh the deadline for 
that just passed did you apply for that?' They hadn't applied 
either but had engineered it so that I wouldn't apply. You 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

could just tell. I think competitiveness does come into it, 
word of mouth not always effective.” 
VI. 
LAW STUDENTS AND CONSUMPTION 
A. Seeking Information 
Locating information is an essential part of life at any 
higher education institution; students need to learn new 
tools (databases) and also gain an understanding of the 
required sources, as well as how to distinguish between 
authoritative and untrustworthy information. Taking our law 
and medicine disciplines again; obviously using the wrong 
information goes far further than just failing an essay – 
using a case or medical procedure that is out of date can 
have significant consequences. Ethics and accountability are 
integral to these courses from Day One.  
What kinds of information were our law students 
looking for?  
Legal materials for study (cases, journal articles, 
legislation, practitioner commentary) 
Information about future employers – law firms, 
barrister’s chambers 
Information about work experience – pro bono, 
internships, mini pupillages, vacation schemes 
Research 
materials 
to 
prepare 
for 
interviews/applications 
Upcoming events  
How they found these types of materials varied hugely; 
they understood the need to be up to date and used strategies 
from the basic (“checked noticeboards outside careers 
centre”) to the academic (“I’ve been using the Student Law 
Review recently as it gives roundups of all the latest case 
law in different practice areas”) and did use technological 
solutions available (“I get the Guardian Law newspaper 
bundle into my email. I’m generally quite lazy so it’s good if 
something comes to me”.  They liked the various legal news 
feeds on Lawbore.   
Interestingly, this group was far more convinced by the 
power of word of mouth than any technology solutions. 
Does this tie into the perceived ‘exclusivity’ of Law – a 
world where only contacts count? They sought information 
from their peers “I spoke with students from year above in 
terms of what courses I might want to do in year 3” and 
from practising lawyers where possible. Finding work 
experience was definitely an area they felt this was 
particularly true; “Word of mouth has probably been 
responsible for 75-80% of anything I’ve ever done”. They 
saw no shortcuts to this kind of information but strongly 
believed in networking but not that of the virtual kind. This 
again resonates with Hrastinski whose students felt social 
media lacked efficiency when compared with face-to-face 
contact [29].  
Law apps in the UK are few and far between – in 
discussion, just one student mentioned a legal dictionary 
and the others more general scheduling and flashcard tools 
for exam revision purposes.  
B. Organisation 
As mentioned already, students used file-hosting 
services like Dropbox [30] or Google Drive [31] to store 
and share essays, revision notes and useful legal materials 
they discovered in database searches. They founds this 
useful because of portability: being able to access from any 
device. Many students however, still printed out any useful 
sources they found.  
C. Print v Online 
Law more than other subjects is reliant upon students 
having expertise in both types of materials; e-books had a 
mixed reception “...with an e-book I might miss something 
because I can’t flick through it like a book”. Searching for 
specific keywords quickly within a big text was seen as a 
benefit however. One GDL student tried to explain using 
print and online was a physical representation of what law 
students are doing mentally: “Take lots of information and 
form it into a cohesive argument”.  
D. Authority 
Asking whether they used Google resulted in a resounding 
‘yes’. Students noted that they’d found lots of useful 
information, and found it especially helpful if searching for 
something really simple or to find “a couple of different 
explanations so you can pick and choose”. They showed 
awareness of its limitations however: “I wouldn’t use it in 
an academic essay” and “You have to be careful. Like if it’s 
reputable or not”. Undergraduates at City receive guidance 
on this in compulsory legal research classes in Year One.  
They had picked up that certain authors were more 
influential than others “if you see Martin Dixon you know 
it’s authoritative”, detailing the various methods used to 
find materials “looking at footnotes in practitioner texts – 
might be obscure but useful”. They also set themselves high 
standards, asking themselves whether they’d be happy to 
use a reference in Court before using it in an essay.   
VII. 
IMPLICATIONS FOR TEACHING AND LEARNING IN THE 
PROFESSIONS 
Nationally, the Legal Education and Training Review 
pushed for greater cohesion between the profession and 
academia – more flexible (and affordable) routes to entry 
and for an academic stage with an increased practice-base.  
Those in the legal profession are using social media and 
other digital tools extensively, but on the basis of this 
limited study it would seem a long way off before law 
students embrace social media tools and online communities 
in the same way. They have a good understanding of 
sources and traditional tools but their use of the 
collaborative tools is more limited. This may go some way 
to explaining why the Lawbore portal has achieved some 
success – as a bridge between these two worlds – allowing 
users to keep up to date with what’s going on at City and the 
wider legal world but not demanding interaction.  
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

The intensity of the Law courses doesn’t leave students 
with a great deal of time to experiment with new tools, but 
is does seem that there is a case to be made for academics 
and other university staff to promote the use of such tools 
more extensively. The students knew about the various tools 
available, and the advantages they offered but just hadn’t 
integrated them into their research practice.  As we saw with 
the Twitter example, when they saw their lecturers using the 
tools they were inspired to do so too.  
Universities need to take steps to encourage student use 
of the tools that can make their lives more efficient; in legal 
practice, steps forward in technology have meant that the 
ways lawyers work have changed. Professor Richard 
Susskind, IT Adviser to the Lord Chief Justice of England 
and Wales called for law schools to start preparing students 
to be ‘Tomorrow’s Lawyers’ (also the title of his latest 
book) and equipping them with the skills to carry out these 
jobs of the future. Included in his list are roles such as:  
enhanced practitioner, legal knowledge engineer, legal 
technologist, legal hybrid, legal process analyst, legal 
project manager, online dispute resolution practitioner, legal 
management consultant and legal risk manager [32].    
Exciting worldwide initiatives are underway which link law 
and technology – Law Without Walls [33] is an innovative 
legal and commercial education project started at the 
University of Miami. Students from 26 universities around 
the world team up and develop business plans to tackle real-
world challenges within legal education and practice, whilst 
being mentored by academics, lawyers and entrepreneurs. 
LWOW X [34], an all-virtual pilot version was launched, 
aimed at spreading the opportunities more widely.  
Open Law Lab [35] seeks to link creativity and Law – 
with creator Margaret Hagan working on several themes in 
which she envisages interdisciplinary teams collaborating. 
Her ideas around visual law link in with the work done on 
Learnmore via illustrations, video and talking slideshows – 
helping bring text-heavy legal resources alive.  
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This is a small-scale qualitative study, which has 
attempted to explore some of the values and attitudes that 
students bring to their use of digital technologies in pursuit 
of their law studies. A wider survey could include both 
qualitative and quantitative data collection.  
However, the study does offer key observations around 
the somewhat ‘take it or leave it’ approach to social media 
displayed by the students. This was unexpected, as was the 
real disparity around sharing of information between 
undergraduates and postgraduates.   It was encouraging to 
see how quality of information is important to them and 
forms a part of the decision-making process in deciding 
which source to use within their studies. Similarly 
reassuring was the professional focus that the participants 
had throughout, with tools assessed not just in terms of their 
value for learning, but also with an eye on their long-term 
usefulness for their future career path.  
There is some hint that Lawbore seems to offer a halfway 
house between the institutional VLE, Moodle, and the 
students’ personal use of social media tools. This 
bifurcation could perhaps be a result of tensions around 
‘enforced’ institutional participation in VLEs.  
We intend to report further on this research, the 
preliminary results of which are discussed here. Future 
evaluations will be on a more ambitious scale and will seek 
to bring further clarity to the information gathering habits 
and social media use of law students. We will also seek to 
extend the reach of the research by doing some comparison 
work with trainee solicitors and pupil barristers, and place 
this within the wider sphere of other professions.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Lawbore, http://lawbore.net [retrieved: February 2014].  
[2] A. Aldridge, “Do we need more law courses asks top QC as 
new BPTC course with pupillage numbers at their lowest 
level in a generation,” 2013. 
http://www.legalcheek.com/2013/11/do-we-need-more-law-
courses-asks-top-qc-as-new-bptc-course-opens-with-
pupillage-numbers-at-lowest-level-in-a-generation/ [retrieved: 
February 2014].    
[3] LETR Setting standards: the future of legal services education 
and training regulation in England and Wales, June 2013. 
http://letr.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/LETR-Report.pdf 
[retrieved: February 2014]. 
[4] LETR Setting standards: the future of legal services education 
and training regulation in England and Wales, June 2013, 
section 
4.64, 
http://letr.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/LETR-
Report.pdf [retrieved: February 2014]. 
[5] J. Laru, P. Naykki and S. Jarvela, “Supporting small-group 
learning using multiple Web 2.0 tools: A case study in the 
higher education context,” The Internet and Higher 
Education, 
vol. 
15, 
2012, 
pp. 
29-38, 
doi:1096-
7516/j.iheduc.2011.08.004. 
[6] P. Maharg, “Virtual firms: transactional learning on the web,” 
Journal of the Law Society of Scotland, vol. 49:10, 2004.  
[7] Learnmore, http://learnmore.lawbore.net [retrieved: February 
2014]. 
[8] Winner of Routledge/Association of Law Teachers Teaching 
with Technology Award 2013. Emily Allbon named a 
National Teaching Fellow by the Higher Education Academy 
partly on basis of work with Lawbore (2013). 
[9] N. Selwyn, “Faceworking: exploring students’ education-
related use of Facebook,” Learning, Media and Technology, 
vol. 
34:2, 
2009, 
pp.157-174, 
doi: 
10.1080/17439880902923622. 
[10] S. Hrastinski and N.M. Aghaee, “How are campus students 
using social media to support their studies? An explorative 
interview study,” Education and Information Technologies, 
vol.17:4, 2012, pp.451-464, doi: 10.1007/s10639-011-9169-5. 
[11] Legal Cheek, http://www.legalcheek.com [retrieved: February 
2014]. 
[12] S.J.Mansfield et al, “Social media and the medical 
profession,” Medical Journal of Australia, vol. 194:12, June 
2011, pp.642-644. 
[13] K.C. Chretien, S.R. Greysen, J.P. Chretien and T. Kind, 
“Online posting of unprofessional content by medical 
students,” Journal of the American Medical Association, vol. 
302, 2009, pp.1309-1315, doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.1387. 
[14] S.J.Mansfield et al, “Social media and the medical 
profession,” Medical Journal of Australia, vol. 194:12, June 
2011, pp.642-644. 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[15] British Medical Association, Using social media: practical and 
ethical 
guidance 
for 
doctors 
and 
medical 
students 
http://bma.org.uk/practical-support-at-work/ethics/medical-
students-ethics-tool-kit/students-and-social-media 
[retrieved 
February 2014]. 
[16] Chartered Society of Physiotherapy, Social media guidance, 
2012, 
http://www.csp.org.uk/publications/social-media-
guidance [retrieved February 2014].  
[17] Law Society, Social media practice note, 2011 
http://www.lawsociety.org.uk/advice/practice-notes/social-
media/ [retrieved February 2014]. 
[18] B. McGrath, “Oops,” The New Yorker, June 30 2003 
http://www.newyorker.com/archive/2003/06/30/030630ta_tal
k_mcgrath [retrieved: February 2014]. 
[19] N. Rose, “Lawyers embracing LinkedIn says research as Law 
Society issues first social media guidance,” Legal Futures, 4 
January 
2012, 
 
http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/latest-
news/lawyers-embracing-linkedin-says-research-as-law-
society-issues-first-social-media-guidance 
[retrieved: 
February 2014]. 
[20] Jack of Kent http://jackofkent.com/ [retrieved: February 
2014]. 
[21] K. O’Keefe, “Law school advisors telling students to stay off 
blogs and social media”, Real Lawyers Have Blogs, October 
5 
2013, 
http://kevin.lexblog.com/2013/10/05/law-school-
advisors-telling-students-to-stay-off-blogs-and-social-media/ 
[retrieved: February 2014]. 
[22] N. Jones, H. Blackey, K. Fitzgibbon and E. Chew, “Get out of 
MySpace!” Computers in Education, vol.54:3, 2010, pp.776-
782, doi: 10.1016/j.compedu.2009.07.008. 
[23] Public 
law 
for 
everyone 
http://publiclawforeveryone.wordpress.com/ 
[retrieved: 
February 2014]. 
[24] Wikipedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page [retrieved: 
February 2014] 
[25] Westlaw, http://legalresearch.westlaw.co.uk/ [retrieved: 
February 2014] 
[26] LexisLibrary, [retrieved: February 2014] 
[27] “Survey tags Baylor Law School as having most competitive 
students,” 
Texas 
Lawyer, 
October 
2011,  
http://texaslawyer.typepad.com/texas_lawyer_blog/2012/10/s
urvey-tags-baylor-law-school-as-having-most-competitive-
students.html [retrieved: February 2014]. 
[28] N. Selwyn, “Faceworking: exploring students’ education-
related use of Facebook,” Learning, Media and Technology, 
vol. 
34:2, 
2009, 
pp.157-174, 
doi: 
10.1080/17439880902923622. 
[29] S. Hrastinski and N.M. Aghaee, “How are campus students 
using social media to support their studies? An explorative 
interview study,” Education and Information Technologies, 
vol.17:4, 2012, pp.451-464, doi: 10.1007/s10639-011-9169-5. 
[30] Dropbox, https://www.dropbox.com/ [retrieved: February 
2014] 
[31] Google Drive, https://drive.google.com/ [retrieved: February 
2014] 
[32] R. Susskind, Tomorrow’s Lawyers: An introduction to your 
future , Oxford: OUP, 2013 p.109-111. 
[33] Law 
without 
walls 
http://www.lawwithoutwalls.org/ 
[retrieved: February 2014]. 
[34] LWOW 
X 
http://www.lawwithoutwalls.org/lwow-x 
[retrieved: February 2014]. 
[35] OpenLaw http://www.openlawlab.com/ [retrieved: February 
2014]. 
 
 
 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

