Peer-to-Peer Communication for Computer-supported Collaborative Learning 
The PeCoCC Framework 
 
Mais Hasan 
Communication Networks Group 
Technische Universität Ilmenau 
Ilmenau, Germany 
Mais.Hasan@tu-ilmenau.de 
Jochen Seitz 
Communication Networks Group 
Technische Universität Ilmenau 
Ilmenau, Germany 
Jochen.Seitz@tu-ilmenau.de
 
 
Abstract— Computer-supported collaborative learning is an 
important domain of e-learning dealing with researching 
efficient methods to encourage the people to learn together 
with the help of their computers. The learning environments 
used in this domain are usually client-server based solutions 
with some extra functionality needed for the collaboration 
between the members. Because of its architecture, which is 
similar to the collaborative learning network, the peer-to-peer 
(P2P) technology is suggested as a better solution. This paper 
introduces a P2P-based framework for applications in the area 
of computer-supported cooperative learning. This framework 
embodies a platform for P2P learning applications and consists 
of four different layers. It includes different P2P modules and 
chooses the module that works best according to the 
application requirements. The paper shows the advantage of 
the proposed framework.  
 
Keywords-Peer-to-peer communications; computer-supported 
collaborative learning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
During the last decade, online learning has gained 
enormous interest in most educational institutes. E-learning 
can be defined as the process of using electronic media, 
information and communication technologies in education. 
E-learning includes numerous 
forms 
of educational 
technology in learning and teaching and can be used jointly 
with the conventional face-to-face learning. E-learning can 
occur in or out of the classroom. It is suited to distance and 
flexible learning and can be asynchronous or synchronous.  
As a result of the rapid improvement in the areas of 
education, information and communication technologies, 
various e-learning forms have evolved. This evolution started 
with using the information technology in the Computer 
Based Training (CBT) and develops in the direction of 
exploiting the internet and social interaction in the Virtual 
Learning Environments (VLE) and Computer-Supported 
Collaborative Learning (CSCL) applications [1]. 
The most used learning environments were based on the 
client/server approach. A server is the source of services and 
information, several clients have access to. However, the 
approach suffers from two main problems: scalability and 
single point of failure. Thus, different approaches to 
overcome these problems have been developed. One of 
these is a paradigm shift to the P2P model. In this approach, 
the communication partners act as server and client at the 
same time. They all offer a part of the information and 
retrieve information from other nodes known as peers. The 
more peers take part in a P2P communication, the better this 
network scales and the higher its reliability is. Several 
application fields have utilized this P2P approach so far. In 
this paper, we introduce a framework to apply this approach 
for computer-supported collaborative learning. 
Therefore, the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
shortly 
deals 
with 
computer-supported 
collaborative 
learning and reviews some CSCL-tools based on P2P 
technology. Different P2P technologies and their properties 
are analyzed in Section 3. Section 4 presents our designed 
CSCL-tool, the peer-to-peer communications for computer-
supported collaborative learning (PeCoCC) framework and 
its functioning. Section 5 gives an overview of the current 
state of the work and summarizes the paper. 
II. 
PEER-TO-PEER COMPUTER-SUPPORTED 
COLLABORATIVE LEARNING 
Computer-supported 
collaborative 
learning 
is 
an 
emerging branch of e-learning allowing several students to 
cooperate with each other and with the teaching staff online 
in order to solve shared tasks or to exchange their skills. 
Computer-supported collaborative learning is related to 
collaborative learning and Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work (CSCW). By collaborative learning we generally 
mean that a group of students work together to discuss, 
solve or evaluate teaching materials; on the other hand, 
computer supported cooperative work addresses the 
technologies and tools supporting people in their work. 
Hence, computer supported collaborative learning refers to 
the use of CSCW- technologies and tools by a group of 
collaborative students in a learning process. These 
technologies and tools have been developed to provide an 
efficient learning process. Woodill [2] gives an overview of 
all the different technologies used to support collaborative 
learning (see Figure 1).  
As mentioned above, one of the suggested approaches to 
overcome the problem of the client-server model in 
collaborative learning is using the P2P technology. There is 
already some research work done in this area. Some 
educational P2P applications like, e.g., COMTELLA, EDU-
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

COSM, Edutella, and Groove have been developed for some 
specific needs and they are still under development 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Information technologies used to support 
collaborative learning [2] 
 
COMTELLA is a P2P file sharing system that allows 
students to contribute and share class-related resources with 
their community [3]. The shared papers are annotated with 
respect to their content in categories. COMTELLA uses a 
modified version of the Gnutella P2P protocol and instead 
of sharing the actual files, only their URLs are shared. A list 
of the shared articles, their URLs in the web and the 
corresponding comments are distributed among the users. 
There is one list for every category. If a student searches for 
a paper, he should only search the list of the matching 
category. Students can view and read the papers without 
downloading them by clicking on the “Visit” button in the 
COMTELLA user interface, which starts the default 
browser with the URL of the paper.  
EDUCOSM is a web-based learning environment 
providing a shared view to the Web [4]. It consists of a 
collection of server-side scripts and an HTML and 
JavaScript based client that runs inside a web browser. The 
role of the server is to store the data and act as a proxy 
between the client and the rest of the web. The principles of 
EDUCOSM and COMTELLA are similar with the 
difference that the storage of the data in COMTELLA is 
distributed among the users. 
Edutella is an educational P2P network built on Sun 
Microsystems JXTA Framework [5]. Edutella is an open 
source P2P application for searching semantic Web 
metadata. It uses the resource description framework (RDF) 
for presenting information in the web. Edutella deals with 
metadata about content, not with content itself. It adds a 
search service to the JXTA framework, so that any node that 
carries metadata about some resource can announce an 
Edutella search service to the network. The nodes in 
Edutella have actually at least one of three types of roles: 
provider (provides a query service), consumer (asks 
questions) and hub (manages query routing in the network).  
The previously mentioned three P2P collaborative 
systems offer only one collaborative tool, mostly a file-
sharing application, which is not sufficient for efficient 
collaboration among the users. These systems suffer the 
absence of a coordinative tool like a group calendar which is 
typical for team or group software. They also do not support 
cooperation applications like a whiteboard or a text editor. 
These problems have been tried to be solved in one of 
the popular collaborative environments, Groove. It is a 
collaborative groupware based on the principle of a shared 
workspace [6]. Tools like a shared browser, a shared 
drawing board or a file archive are used to operate in this 
shared workspace. Groove provides servers that are used to 
detect new peers in the network and to store content if one 
or more peers are offline and cannot see the changes made 
at that time. Using server-based services threatens the 
availability of these services if one of these servers fails. 
Groove is targeted at small workgroups and has its own 
protocols. It is only available for the windows platform, so it 
suffers interoperability problems. This manifests the need 
for 
a 
collaborative 
environment 
providing 
many 
collaborative 
and 
coordinative 
tools, 
supporting 
interoperability, and basing on fully distributed server-
independent P2P communications and services. However, 
there is no open source software having the mentioned 
functionalities available at the moment. 
III. 
PEER-TO-PEER TECHNOLOGIES 
In contrary to the client-server model, all the members 
of a P2P network are equally offering and requesting 
services. Generally, we can assert that every P2P network is 
established on an overlay network, mostly based on 
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) or on Hypertext 
Transfer Protocol (HTTP) connections. Thus, the overlay 
and the physical network can be separated completely from 
each other. Hence, the overlay connections do not reflect the 
physical connections. Nevertheless, it is possible to match 
the overlay to the physical network if necessary. P2P 
networks can be divided into two classes: unstructured and 
structured P2P networks. 
In a structured P2P network, the network topology and 
the location of content is determined by employing a P2P 
protocol. In these networks, the content and the participating 
nodes share the same address space which makes it easy and 
expeditious to reach any content in this space. Structured 
P2P networks are based on a Distributed Hash Table (DHT) 
and have no central entities. Frequent signaling traffic is 
necessary to maintain the network awareness of the nodes. 
Pastry, Chord and Content Addressable Network (CAN) are 
examples for this class. 
The distribution of nodes and content in unstructured 
P2P networks is executed randomly. The position of content 
can only be resolved in a local proximity of a node and only 
by flooding the request to a particular extent. In this way, 
these networks consume the bandwidth, which has been 
saved by their random distribution. Unstructured P2P 
networks can be centralized with an index server like 
Napster, hybrid with dynamic super nodes like Gnutella 0.6 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

and JXTA, or pure without any central entities like Gnutella 
0.4 and Freenet [7].  
IV. 
THE PECOCC FRAMEWORK 
Until now, most P2P collaborative environments are 
developed for specific needs and a central entity is used in 
most of them. Therefore, we have developed a P2P 
framework for computer-supported collaborative learning, 
which we called PeCoCC. The PeCoCC framework uses 
different P2P overlays to support different applications. This 
characteristic of the PeCoCC framework enables completely 
separate working of the applications, which increases the 
robustness of the system. The PeCoCC framework has a 
layered architecture depicted in Figure 2.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. The PeCoCC framework 
 
The main functions that this framework has to provide are 
as follows: 
Collaborative Tools – the PeCoCC framework provides 
three applications, which are important to cooperate 
efficiently. A shared calendar will be used to allow the users 
to organize their regular meetings; a distributed text editor 
can be used to jointly make notes on a given subject or to 
brainstorm about a topic and P2P file sharing allows users to 
access the distributed contents they need to cooperate.  
Group Management – The framework must include 
functions 
to 
manage 
the 
communication 
among 
collaborative group members. 
Recovery – The framework implements a “late join” 
mechanism to consistently provide the information for 
latecomers to enable them to participate in the ongoing 
session. This is typically achieved by getting the state of the 
distributed application from the current participants and by 
initializing the application of the latecomer with this 
information. 
Synchronization – For some application modules (e. g., 
distributed text editor), the group members need to be 
synchronized to interpret the events in the correct time and 
order. 
Security – The framework provides security mechanisms 
(e. g., encryption) to keep personal data integer and secure.  
The PeCoCC framework consists of four different 
layers, which support its main functionalities. The layers are 
introduced in the next subsections. 
A. Application Layer 
The application layer consists of three main parts. The 
graphical user interface allows the interaction between the 
user and the framework. It facilitates a consistent operation 
of all the desired CSCL services. The PeCoCC Management 
and Control (MC) module is responsible for controlling the 
data flow through the framework and the work flow among 
the users. It influences the application program and also 
saves a list of the cooperating participants, their application-
dependent roles and their priorities. The peers should be 
identified by the MC module to be allowed to enter the 
system. The rights of the users can be defined by the 
applications themselves. In a file sharing application, for 
example, all the users have equal rights, while in a text 
editor, the teacher should have more possibilities to 
manipulate the entered information than the students. 
Furthermore, in sessions without a dedicated chair, the MC 
module is responsible for defining the user that has the 
according rights of a chair.  
The third part is composed of application modules. 
These can be freely chosen and added on demand. As stated 
above, the first modules of our choice are a distributed text 
editor application, a calendar, and a file sharing application. 
These modules interact with the graphical user interface and 
the MC module. 
B. Session Layer 
The session layer provides general mechanisms that are 
necessary for the offered applications. Currently, we have 
concentrated on two mechanisms. The security module is 
responsible for securing private user data and the 
synchronicity module, which provides a mechanism to 
synchronize the different group members so that all of these 
receive the events in the same order. This service is 
necessary for real time applications like a distributed text 
editor. Since the using of P2P overlay in the PeCoCC 
framework is application dependent, the session layer 
includes the Overlay Selection (OS) module, which is 
responsible for saving the information about the appropriate 
P2P overlay for each application. 
C. Peer-to-Peer Middleware Layer 
As P2P technologies exist with respective advantages 
and disadvantages, the PeCoCC framework allows the usage 
of different pure P2P technologies. Each technology is 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

encapsulated in a P2P module and offers its communication 
functionality. Which module should be used is selected by 
the OS module in the session layer according to the needs of 
the application. To illustrate the functionality of this layer, 
we have started with two well-known P2P approaches. The 
content addressable network (CAN) can be used for an 
efficient distribution of information and teaching materials. 
It is a structured P2P network based on DHT. CAN offers 
high scalability and reliability and provides more load 
balancing than any other pure P2P overlay [8], but it does 
not take into account the underlying network conditions. 
Therefore, it is not suitable for real-time applications due to 
the fact that it does not make any correlation between the 
overlay distance and the actual number of unicast hops 
between the hosts in the underlying network. PASTRY, 
another structured P2P network considers the underlying 
network topology and supports a scalable and distributed 
object location and routing in application layer [7]. The 
PASTRY protocol can thus be integrated in a P2P module 
for applications like a distributed text editor and instant 
messaging.  
Furthermore, in each network the users belonging to one 
user group have to be managed. This is done in the module 
called group manager. This module is responsible for 
forming and supervising a collaborative user group. Finally, 
this layer comprises a set of services that extend the P2P 
modules with late join, retrieval and repair functions.  
D. Transport Layer 
The transport layer provides access to different 
commonly used transport protocols. These are selected 
accordingly to the requirements of the applications. For 
example, the distributed text editor utilizes the Transmission 
Control Protocol, which provides a reliable transport service. 
E. Functioning of the System 
When the user starts one of the available applications 
(e.g., a distributed text editor), the MC module is activated 
and sends a CHOOSE message to the OS module in the 
session layer containing information about the opened 
application. 
The OS module then decides on the basis of the opened 
application which P2P module is more appropriate for this 
application and replies to the MC module in the application 
layer with an OVERLAY message. The OS module also 
activates the necessary services for the opened application.  
The MC module receives the OVERLAY message and 
retrieves the saved list of the expected participants (the 
participants of an application should be previously 
registered by the MC module and saved in a specific list). 
The MC module then sends a START message to the 
corresponding P2P module in P2P middleware layer. 
In the P2P middleware layer, the selected module starts 
the P2P connection and sends a DISCOVERY message to 
find out if the P2P network has already been built or not. If 
it gets an answer, it will take part in the P2P network. The 
group manager then sends a JOIN message with the group 
ID using the overlay multicasting protocol to join a 
collaborative group and retrieve the information about the 
participating peers as well as the important data to interact 
in the current session. If a collaborative group does not 
exist, the group manager will send a CREATE message in 
the P2P network to create a collaborative group with a 
specific group ID. 
The information retrieved by the group manager from 
the members of the group is returned to the MC module to 
specify the role and the rights of the peer in the session. The 
role of the peer will appear in form of active or inactive 
interaction possibilities in the user interface. 
Which rights and roles the user has, is managed in tables 
and saved in the MC module. One table is defined for each 
application. In the case where all users have the same rights, 
a mechanism to manage and identify the roles will be used. 
This mechanism can take into account the registering 
sequence of the participants or the alphabetic order of the 
user ID names, etc. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, an overview about the current P2P 
collaborative environments and their use case has been 
presented. The P2P technologies have been briefly 
highlighted. We have also introduced our PeCoCC 
framework to allow computer-supported collaborative 
learning based on pure P2P networks that provide fully 
distributed and server-independent P2P communications 
and services, which increase the availability of these 
services and solve the problem of single point of failure 
present in server-based systems. The PeCoCC framework is 
still in implementation phase. It supports the interoperability 
and is being implemented in Java using the integrated 
development environment eclipse. A distributed text editor 
is being built on the top of the PASTRY algorithm and is 
using the PASTRY overlay multicasting protocol SCRIBE. 
To evaluate the performance of the framework, a P2P 
simulator named Peerfactsim.KOM will be used. This 
simulator has a similar layered architecture like the PeCoCC 
framework and supports many forms of messages to 
communicate among the layers in the host. It is also 
implemented in java and it offers a user-friendly graphical 
user interface [9]. In the future, a file sharing application 
will be built on the top of the content addressable network 
P2P algorithm. A mechanism for structured metadata will be 
needed to fulfill the educational purposes in P2P networks. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. Moore, C. Dickson-Deane, and K. Galyen, “e-Learning, 
online learning, and distance learning environments: Are they 
the same?,” Journal of Internet and Higher Education, vol. 14, 
Mar. 2011, pp. 129-135, dio:10.1016/j.iheduc.2010.10.001 
[2] G. Woodill, “Computer Supported Collaborative Learning in 
Education and Training: Tools and Technologies,” Phil. 
Trans. Brandon Hall Research. San Jose. CA. USA, 2008. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[3] J. Vassileva, “Harnessing P2P power in the Classroom,” Proc. 
7th International Conference, ITS, Aug. 2004, pp. 305-314, 
doi:10.1007/978-3-540-30139-4_29 
[4] M. Miettinen and J. Kurhila, “EDUCOSM – Personalized 
Writable Web for Learning Communities,” Proc. Information 
Technology: Coding and Computing, ITCC, Apr. 2003, pp. 
37-42,  doi:10.1109/ITCC.2003.1197496  
[5] C. Qu and W. Nejdl, “Interacting the Edutella/JXTA Peer-to-
Peer Network with Web Services,” Proc. IEEE Symp. 
Application 
and 
the 
Internet, 
2004, 
pp. 
67-73, 
doi:10.1109/SAIT.2004.1266100 
[6] http://technet.microsoft.com/enus/magazine/2006.10.intothegr
oove.aspx 
[7]  E. K. Lua, J. Crowcroft, M. Pias, R. Sharma, and S. Lim, “A 
survey and comparison of peer-to-peer overlay network 
schemes,” Communications Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 
7, 2005, pp. 72-93, doi:10.1109/COMST.2005.1610546  
[8] D. Boukhelef and H. Kitagawa, “Efficient Load Balancing 
Techniques 
for 
Self-organizing 
Content 
Addressable 
Networks,” Journal of Networks, vol. 5, Mar. 2010, pp. 321-
334, doi:10.4304/jnw.5.3.321-33 
[9] https://sites.google.com/site/peerfactsimkom/?p=413 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

