Integrating Social Media in Tertiary Education 
Experiences and Predicaments 
 
Werner Beuschel 
University of California 
Bren School of Information & Computer Sciences 
Irvine, CA 92697, USA 
beuschel@ics.uci.edu 
Susanne Draheim 
University of Hamburg 
Office of Quality Management and Legal Affairs 
20354 Hamburg, Germany 
Susanne.Draheim@verw.uni-hamburg.de
 
 
Abstract—High hopes and positive assumptions accompany the 
advent of social media use in learning and teaching 
environments. The careful examination of social aspects of 
technology and experiences based on case studies show 
nevertheless that there are predicaments that should be 
pondered when courses for tertiary education with hybrid 
learning concepts are set up. This paper outlines an 
introductory freshmen course at a university, shows its 
evaluation, and discusses sensitive areas for successful social 
media use. 
      Keywords - case studies; educational implications; hybrid 
learning; social media; tertiary education; weblogs. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A whole new generation of internet users grows up using 
applications like Weblogs, Social Networking Sites, Wikis, 
and other web-based technologies on a day-to-day basis [1, 
7]. Some of them may opt to use a system for very personal 
reasons like a photo and video sharing service. Others may 
sign up to a system for finding people with similar ideas and 
interests and still others may use an application to buy and 
sell items. The personal, group and economic aspects form 
different 
and 
nevertheless 
intertwined 
aspects 
of 
applications, usually combined under the umbrella terms of 
social media, social software or Web 2.0 [6, 12, 17]. The 
greater social context supports ideas of people interacting to 
accomplish personal aims, exploring and shaping their 
identity through social groups, and exploring online 
marketplaces. They may become persistent users and invite 
others to use the application, due to the social opportunities.  
In the educational context the question evolves, how 
these recent internet phenomena could and should be used 
for teaching and learning purposes [2, 3, 8, 14]. High hopes 
have been expressed by educators on using social media in 
education, expressed by the term “Education 2.0”. But it 
seems that in a pedagogical context the appropriation of 
social media is different from everyday applications and 
possibly more difficult. Creating learning environments that 
foster social interaction is not such an easy task. While there 
is reason to assume that we are only in the early stages of a 
very 
broad 
movement 
towards 
user-generated 
data 
production, implications for the educational system seem 
nevertheless to be important if we do not want to risk an ever 
widening gap between learners and teachers, not only but 
specially in institutions of tertiary education where students 
usually have all media freely at hand. 
The topic at stake is whether or not the undoubted 
relevance and promise of social media and software 
applications hold up in the context of educational use, 
specifically in tertiary education. To answer this question, 
three aspects shall be reflected in this paper, derived from 
case studies: what are prerequisites of using social software 
successfully under institutional and formal circumstances? 
How well does an application support the user‟s need for 
social exchange and integration? What conclusions can we 
draw in relation to designing didactic scenarios for courses?  
The paper starts with a literature review, putting special 
focus on experiences with Weblogs as one of the main 
instances of social media. Then a course is outlined which 
provided the background for two case studies at a medium-
sized German university of applied sciences. Analysis and 
evaluation of the studies follow suit. The discussion brings 
up six pedagogical issues. The conclusion considers inherent 
tensions and predicaments in applying social media in 
education; a number of open research questions are 
articulated. 
 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The following theories are considered with regard to our 
main focus, integration of social media for tertiary education: 
Web 2.0 as „two-way-web“[1], namely as place, structure, 
tool, and media for social networking and digital self-
expression [4, 5, 6]. Weblogs considered as "micro 
publishing tools" [7, 8] in (informal) learning environments. 
Hence, we will concentrate on aspects of Weblogs as one 
important and well-researched tool in the sphere of Web 2.0. 
Literature research provides the following characteristics 
of Weblogs: 
Weblogs can be viewed as tools of publication, based on 
the principles of hypertext. That means they are “fringeless 
text”, oscillating between the traditions of oral and written 
communication [16]. They transcend formal teaching and 
learning contexts and are not immediately amenable to a 
direct representation of analogue practices in the World 
Wide Web. This could also be interpreted as “liminal space” 
as described by Boyd [4].  
76
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

The individual perspective (personalized expression) is 
central for blogging [10, 11]. Activities comprise: doing 
research, processing information, building knowledge, 
reflecting, commenting, and representing personal identity. 
Thus, the process of fabricating thoughts becomes visible 
and in this course vulnerable, by means of its own sequential 
documentation.  
Identity representation seems to be the central motivator 
for the widespread adoption of social software tools. But it is 
not immediately clear how we can use this in learning 
environments. Proposals to use Weblogs comprise learning 
diaries, e-portfolios, comments for projects or courses. 
Social software tools, being offered by teachers for 
learning purposes, are not self-sufficient. The adaptation 
through learners has to be strongly motivated and moderated, 
so that something like a ritualized routine is reached [15].  
A reverse way to use social software tools could refer to 
those tools which were adopted by students beforehand and 
are being used as support for informal learning and 
communication [2]. Examples are instant messaging, Social 
Networking Platforms, Wikis, podcasts, RSS, peer-to-peer 
exchange. This requires a high degree of media competency 
on either side, teacher or learner, and the consideration of 
privacy aspects. This approach incorporates as well the 
conflict between motivation and control.  
Media competency means to support the ability to handle 
personal data turned public. According to many stories in 
current media reports this fluctuates between “too much” and 
“not enough” of personalized information. So students need 
to develop sensitivity toward the specifics of social and 
communicative 
aspects 
in 
Web-based 
environments. 
Context-specificity makes the task even more difficult, 
determining an ever-shifting but appropriate amount of data 
and information, represented by style or scenario.  
 
III. 
CASE STUDIES WITH SOCIAL MEDIA IN TERTIARY 
EDUCATION 
Insights drawn from the relevant items above led to 
designing the following course, which was also the basis for 
the case studies. In addition, prior to the project case studies, 
an exploratory study on integrating Weblogs into courses 
was executed [3] and results were also employed for the 
course design. Especially a cautioning experience from the 
exploratory case study was considered, namely that Weblogs 
cannot be ascribed to students like any ordinary learning 
tool. They demand active participation in discussions, what 
in the class room is not every student‟s strength. As course 
participants realized that entries are possibly visible to the 
outside world - and the lecturers - not everyone was eager to 
join in contributing or commenting.  
The following two case studies describe an effort to 
integrating social software tools, in this case Weblogs, into 
regular courses. In the background they employ a variety of 
didactic concepts (self-organized learning, group work, 
feedback groups). Evaluation results are lined out in 
quantitative as well as qualitative ways. The courses relate to 
the curriculum of informatics, which is a subfield of applied 
computer science. The overarching goal of the courses was 
to find ways to enhance coordination and collaboration of 
freshman student groups.  
 
Case study 1: Project course for Computer Science 
freshmen (Bachelor of Science) 
This case study drew on the evaluation of the exploratory 
study, probing the use of Weblogs as part of a regular course. 
The course and study took place in the winter semester of 
2006/07. Beginners at the department of Informatics and 
Media at a medium-sized German university of applied 
sciences are generally required to start with the course 
“Project-oriented Studies”. Right at the beginning, course 
concept and the purpose of Weblogs within this framework 
are explained. At the end, the course is evaluated and the 
results presented to the students.  
Didactic intentions and their objectives of the course 
were defined as: 
• Social event: beginners get to know each other 
• Propaedeutics: introduction for students of the program 
with relation to practical application 
• Learning competency: the ability of “learning to learn” 
is supported through group processes and self organization 
• Experimental culture of learning: project-oriented 
studies are an integral part of the department, providing 
innovative impulses for teaching and learning. 
These objectives were intended to ease the introduction 
process for beginning students and help them to get 
acquainted with each other. Furthermore, the practice-
oriented claim of the department should be related to 
students. Finally, focussing on student group work as one of 
the essentials from the beginning should help the willingness 
to cooperate as well as the motivation to actively participate 
in the studies.  
Within this context the introduction of a Weblog was 
aimed at serving students to organize the temporal and local 
requirements of their group work. Based on an earlier 
investigation in which one of the authors took part [9] the 
hypothesis was defined that upper-division students are able 
to use Weblogs for self organization and personal knowledge 
management. This supported the introduction of Weblogs in 
the beginner‟s course. 
The project oriented study started with a first phase of 
orientation where students need to be present. Topics of this 
first and second day are workshops for scientific writing, 
library usage being an integrated part, information on the IT-
infrastructure in the department, curricula and enrolment 
procedures, touching even mathematical and logical riddles. 
The second day concludes with a kick-off meeting for the 
eight-week part that represents the complex phase of the 
study, where lecturers present themselves with their projects. 
Their topical tasks can be chosen by the students in 
combination with enrolling in the basic study modules. 
These group processes are presented by students in a rotating 
procedure. The challenge of this procedure is that the 
traditional roles and frameworks of studies are transcended 
and both sides, lecturers and students, are required to 
organize themselves in flexible ways and meet “in between” 
the formal structures. 
77
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

A Weblog from Wordpress was used to support this 
process, serving as a blackboard for news as well as a 
platform for information exchange on project results. Group 
supervisors sent e-mail to students to make them aware of 
this new tool at the beginning of the project phase. They 
were asked to register after groups were set up. Supervisors 
received different access rights for the Blog being “editors” 
while students represented “authors”. Certain fixed posts in 
the Weblog were installed to serve as basic information for 
use procedures and the concept of project-oriented studies.  
Following the introduction phase the student groups were 
required to organize themselves via Weblog communication 
for another phase of about 8 weeks. The participating 
observation of the study organizer provided data for a 
provisional analysis, depicted in the items below:  
 
 
Participants: 37 registered users, 5 writing, 
about 20 reading guests 
 
Who is writing: 6 lecturers, 25 students, of 
which 5 are actively writing, out of 11 groups 
 
Weblog content: 53 posts, 3 pages, 74 
comments (work results, schedules for work 
and coordination, announcements, feedback, 
social comments, hints for usage, polls, 
informal items. 
 
Who writes in which style: Students comment 
posts, questions are frequent; lecturers inquire 
about group organization and work results. 
 
The following paragraphs show results of the student 
questionnaire. One of the somewhat unexpected results was 
that the general evaluation received positive grades, while 
Weblog use did not.   
Regarding Weblog usage in the course1 only 14 persons 
(n=78) stated to use the Weblog in a regular manner. 11 did 
not see any necessity as they claimed to meet face-to-face, 
while 23 indicated to use “other” media – specifically a 
forum created by the same cohort of students. In sum, 19 
persons answered the question on improvement suggestions, 
stating that the Weblog should be replaced by a forum. 
Reasons given were “better overview” and the opportunity to 
stay anonymous in face of the supervisors and lecturers. 23 
persons suggested improving the Weblog according to 
criteria like „better introductory information, surveyability, 
usability, group areas, and more motivation”.  
The following table shows results from the quantitative 
evaluation 2  of three closed questions on Weblog usage, 
concerning the course of winter 2006.  
 
                                                           
1 Cf.: http://zeus.fh-brandenburg.de/pst2006. 
2 Legend: 
1) Is correct to a high degree 
2) Is correct to a large degree 
3) Is neither correct nor incorrect 
4) Is correct to a low degree 
5) Is not correct 
 
TABLE I.  
QUANTITATIVE EVALUATION OF WEBLOG USAGE 
 
Question 1:  Question2: Question 3: 
Number 
of 
answers 
"1" 
5 (7%) 
3 (4%) 
17 (23%) 
Number 
of 
answers 
"2" 
12 (16%) 
8 (11%) 
23 (32%) 
Number 
of 
answers 
"3" 
20 (28%) 
10 (14%) 
14 (19%) 
Number 
of 
answers 
"4" 
16 (22%) 
24 (33%) 
9 (12%) 
Number 
of 
answers 
"5" 
20 (27%) 
28 (38%) 
10 (14%) 
 
N = 
73 
73 
73 
 
Question 1: 23% of participants answer „to a high 
degree“ or „to a large degree“. 28 % think the answer is 
„neither correct nor incorrect“, while 49% subscribe to „a 
low degree“ or „not correct“.  
 
Question 2: 15% of participants agree with „to a high 
degree“ or “to a large degree”, 14 % think it is “neither nor”. 
71% find the statement to be “correct to a low degree” or 
“not correct”. 
 
Question 3: 55% of participants answered with 1) and 2). 
19 % choose 3), while 26% statements 4) or 5) assume.  
 
Being an integral part of this course „Project-oriented 
Studies“, the Weblog has only been used selectively by 
students, though it was introduced with much enthusiasm by 
course organizers and lecturers. 2 out of 11 groups 
participated regularly, 3 on occasion. The active groups were 
“very content” with the tool. Reasons for non-usage or 
rejection were “not accustomed/not clear”, pointing to the 
new course structure. Also the previous knowledge of 
beginners with regard to their internet-related skills turned 
out to be very uneven, so that other media were preferred or 
the groups met face-to-face.  
 
 
78
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

Case study 2: Project course for Computer Science 
freshmen, B. Sc. 
In the subsequent winter semester of 2007/8 the course 
was repeated at the same German university, just a few 
elements were changed. In order to support all working 
groups the learning management system MOODLE was 
integrated. Version 1.8.2 of MOODLE includes Web 2.0 
components (such as Weblog, Wiki, RSS, etc.) as a standard.  
Drawing consequences from the preceding year‟s 
evaluation result that students in their first semester should 
be made familiar with communication tools as Weblogs or 
Wikis (which only seem to be self-explanatory), a special 
workshop on using these tools was provided in the context of 
the introduction of MOODLE. Two teachers were selected to 
present the communicative principles of Weblog and Wiki 
technology first in an intuitive way, without using 
computers. The students had to produce paper prototypes for 
Weblogs, Wikis, and - as the so far best known tool - forums.  
The title of this experiment was „Social Software Tools“, 
its aim being to confront the students with the 
communicative, cooperative and social specificity of the 
respective medium. As for Weblogs, the principles of 
personalization (presenting identities) and connectivity 
(interlinking and tagging) were central. Wikis were presented 
as mainly concerned with the principle of cooperation and 
the production of knowledge. The prototype of the Forum 
gained a certain autonomy in the course of group work, since 
the students were already relatively familiar with its 
principles. They began to use the question-response structure 
of the diverse threads for getting into contact with one 
another (e.g. with questions such as „Who lives in the 
dorm?“, „Where may I go sailing?“, or „Who has a free 
room to offer?“). 
In the second part of the introductory workshop the 
students began to adopt MOODLE step by step, from the 
first login and course enrolment to the design of a personal 
profile. They also transferred the content of the paper 
prototypes to the respective medium to create initial content 
for the group work phase. Interestingly, in this phase only the 
general POS Forum was successful as a group connecting 
communication platform, while personalized Weblogs 
remained practically unused and Wikis only where put to 
practice when teachers and their assignments motivated their 
use. 
Evaluation: Table 2 shows the results for the learning 
system MOODLE in context of the students‟ evaluation of 
“Project Oriented Studying” in winter semester 2007/8. As in 
the preceding year, this was a questionnaire exploring the 
acceptance and subjective satisfaction of the students with 
the whole teaching unit. Concerning the use of MOODLE, 
the following questions were to be answered on a scale from 
1 to 53. 
                                                           
3 Legend: 
1) Is correct to a high degree 
2) Is correct to a large degree 
3) Is neither correct to a high nor to a low degree 
4) Is correct to a low degree 
1) MOODLE supported the individual organization of 
learning within POS. 
2) MOODLE supported group communication within 
POS. 
3) MOODLE supported content-oriented group work 
within POS. 
 
The compressed results show as follows: 
Question 1) = 31% (1+2), 29% (3), 40% (4+5), n= 108 
Question 2) = 20% (1+2), 23% (3), 57% (4+5), n= 107 
Question 3) = 21% (1+2), 28% (3), 51% (4+5), n= 107 
 
The numerical data unequivocally show that there was no 
majority accepting the learning environment MOODLE as 
supportive or satisfactory. With 31% assent (meaning a 1 or 
a 2), the function of “individual learning support” (question 
1) is still relatively well evaluated, compared to the functions 
of “group communication support” (question 2) and 
“content-oriented work support” (question 3), where assent 
was only given by 20% respectively 21%, that is one fifth of 
the whole cohort. Questions 2 and 3 also strike with more 
than one half of the students, 57%, respectively 51%, who 
could confirm the proposed statement only to a low degree 
or not at all.  
More specific information about the background of these 
results may be gained indirectly from the way the four open 
questions were answered: 
1) What, on the whole, did you find especially 
positive? 
2) What, on the whole, did you find especially 
negative? 
3) Which propositions for enhancing and optimizing 
the learning program would you like to make? 
4) Which further comments, hints, and ideas do you 
have concerning POS? 
Results of the open questions: Comparable to the POS 
Weblog in the preceding year, MOODLE was only used 
selectively by the POS groups. Although heavy users were 
quite content with the tool, a majority of all students whished 
that MOODLE would be used “more uniformly and more 
content-oriented”, i.e. more groups should mainly work with 
the system, for coordinating purposes as well as directly and 
visibly content-related (for instance in filing documents). 
Within MOODLE, students especially used the Forum as 
an “informal” discussion platform. The effort of some 
committed students to establish an own, access restricted 
Forum failed. The individual Weblogs MOODLE offers 
were basically not used, and the Wiki was used only in cases 
of its use being required by the teachers. Still MOODLE did 
perform its function as a supporting tool of learning 
organization for at least 31% of the participants. It was also 
MOODLE where links to external social networking 
platforms as StudiVZ (the German social networking site 
equivalent to Facebook) were published. 
On the platform StudiVZ, students create and cultivate 
their personal networking profile, connect and communicate 
with friends and fellow students on the basis of shared 
                                                                                                  
5) Is not correct 
79
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

attributes like the same institution, photos, likes and dislikes, 
and so on. Communicating in StudiVZ is rather informal, 
oral and ephemeral, textual messages are akin to SMS 
messages with only a few signs, while emoticons and 
abbreviations find rich use. Communication seems to consist 
more of poking than constituting a coherent conversation, or 
hinting to other contexts as the math course or the last party 
which are digitally edited at other places. 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Although expectations are generally high, it seems that 
the use of Weblogs (and to a certain degree all of social 
media) 
in 
formal 
tertiary 
education 
creates 
some 
predicaments that need attention:  
- 
According to their media character, Social Software 
systems are not just tools to be used. As new media 
they need time, motivation and careful preparation 
if used in education. 
- 
Requirements in formal education sometimes run 
the opposite way of activities in Social Software 
use: ability to ascribe results to single students 
versus cooperation. 
- 
The work-in-progress character of Weblogs makes 
it difficult to evaluate and archive results. 
- 
The expectations towards the reflective aspect of 
Weblog use are usually too high and need more 
support. 
One important result, supported by earlier investigations 
on learning environments is that social software media 
cannot just be “prescribed” in an institutional setting. The 
share of informal activities, non-planned and spontaneous, is 
higher than with other application. The target groups need 
time to appropriate the systems. As a consequence the early 
process in the course should devote more time to explain 
blogging and the specifics of Weblogs. Informal media need 
much extensive work on motivation and moderation. 
The purpose of the case studies was to find out about the 
challenges with which lecturers are confronted who are 
willing to include instances of social software into their 
regular courses, in our case Weblogs. These examples may 
not be representative in all circumstances, but they should 
provide the basis for some conclusions. The following theses 
are derived from the material, pointing to requirements of 
social media use in education: 
 
Thesis 1:  
Usage of social media by students cannot simply be 
administered. A unified and obliging policy for both, users 
and administrators, needs to be developed and applied, 
especially if there are several lecturers involved. If this is not 
available, active users can get discouraged by non-actives. 
 
Thesis 2:  
Severely recommended for any course is an introduction 
into media aspects and usage of social software tools, 
especially for beginner‟s courses. Beginners will be more at 
ease to question and change their organizational competence 
when it comes to learning.  
Thesis 3:  
When students acknowledge the added value of social 
media 
for 
their 
own 
learning 
organization, 
group 
communication, 
or 
knowledge 
management, 
their 
satisfaction is significantly high. In concordance with thesis 
1 intrinsic motivation seems to be an important factor for 
dealing with social software tools successfully.  
 
Thesis 4:  
Social media tools are suitable to bridge the „empty 
space“, that frequently occurs in collective activities. The 
tools are able to fill these gaps by means of their “digital 
orality”, a quality of their media character. This aspect can 
be used as motivating support for the learning process, 
provided the communication policy stays intact.  
 
Thesis 5:  
Social media tools enable - for the first time in education 
- a digital representation of oneself that is based on the 
presumptions of continuous exchange and expandability. 
Supposedly, this is what makes these tools so attractive for 
young people. The challenge still is to incorporate this 
communicational fervor into a didactic framework in a way 
that the boundary between private and public data becomes 
negotiable.  
 
Thesis 6:  
Building up media competency is usually imagined to be 
the remedy for the field of tension as described in thesis 5. 
But, as every teacher may experience by him- or herself, the 
development in the realm of social media is so versatile, 
diverse, and dynamic, that it is not easy to keep pace. From a 
pedagogic point of view the reflection of one‟s own “Web-
persona” could be a good starting point. Teachers could 
establish scenarios for discourse, which are critical and 
emancipatory by reflecting on key issues of privacy, identity 
and anonymity. Aspects of privacy in the realm of 
commercial use of personal data should be discussed as well. 
Styles of communication and group processes in specified 
platforms and systems should be analyzed. 
 
Thesis 7:  
The field of tension between individual achievement of 
students using social media and collective action by a group 
remains at all times. Students like to work in groups, but they 
are aware of grading necessities. The tension may be eased 
in the framework of this course, as cooperation on projects is 
introduced and argued as being the main goal. Nevertheless, 
social media seem to create this predicament as soon as any 
individual attribution comes into play. Interestingly enough, 
this tension is also present in professional activities. Here, 
collective cooperation with electronic media is even more 
valued, while individual assessment is usually a stable 
element of organizational and personnel development. Any 
objective policy in any environment needs to take that 
inherent double tension into account: within a cooperative 
situation 
and 
along 
development 
from 
student 
to 
professional. 
 
80
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

V. 
SUMMARY AND RESEARCH PERSPECTIVES 
The paper set out to investigate the implications for using 
social software as media in tertiary education. Along two 
case studies, which employed Weblogs and other tools in 
diverse student classes and group work, the analysis showed 
that the promises of Web 2.0 are not easily fulfilled. Rather it 
can be seen that dilemmas arise from the transfer of social 
media into educational environments.  
Based on the analysis we discussed how these 
predicaments could be avoided by carefully reflecting the 
lecturer‟s position and adapting the didactic framework.  
For school teachers and university docents alike it may 
be interesting as well as confusing to observe that students 
are sharing private details of their lives with unknown people 
by means of Weblogs or Social Networking Sites. At the 
same time we observe that other students in the same 
environment are hesitant to collaborate on a project Weblog 
in a formal learning environment. That leads to the 
conclusion that the “communicative hub on the web” [16], 
which Weblogs are supposed to constitute, is limited in 
formal settings.  
One of the main characteristics of Weblogs, described as 
“unedited personal voices” by Efimova and Fiedler [7], 
seems to be controlled and repressed by the formality of 
context in a tertiary learning environment. That induces an 
ambivalent tension between blogging as a self-determined 
and social activity [10, 11] and the necessity of a didactic 
framework.  
We stated in the beginning that media competency means 
to support the student„s sensitivity of handling personal data 
turned public, among other things. That ability might be the 
key to overcome problems in lacking student‟s participation. 
Thus, further course concepts need to support the 
development of knowledge toward the specifics of social and 
communicative aspects in Web-based environments.  
Another continuing research question is to what degree 
non-controlled environments are a necessary prerequisite for 
broad and successful student contributions. One of our 
evaluation results is that a small number of students are very 
enthused about blogging in their project study group. We do 
not know much about their motivations yet because our 
present data did not bring them out. Future students may 
develop a better understanding of what their personal surplus 
is, but meeting the grading demands might be a plausible 
reason for them as well. 
Although the course that served for the studies had its 
fair share of problems in experiencing integration 
requirements, it was and still is successful in introducing 
freshmen into organizational matters of their studies. It is 
part of the regular curriculum since several years now. 
Following up on the first courses described here, onto the 
present year, another department of the university adopted 
the course, serving freshmen introduction as well. So the 
course can also be seen as an example for the ongoing 
necessity to adapt and co-develop the web-based and face-to-
face elements in didactic frameworks for hybrid learning. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Berners-Lee, “Weaving the Web”. San Francisco, Harper, 2000. 
[2] W. Beuschel, B. Gaiser, and S. Draheim, “Communication Needs of 
Online Students. In Aggarwal, A. (ed.). Web-based Education, 
Learning from Experience. Idea Group Publ., Hershey/MA: pp. 203-
222, 2003. 
[3] W. Beuschel, “Weblogs in Higher Education”. In: Hatzipanagos, S. 
and S. Warburton (eds.). Handbook of Research on Social Software 
and Developing Community Ontologies. IGI Global, Hershey/MA: 
pp. 41-52, 2009. 
[4] D. Boyd, “Broken Metaphors: Blogging as Liminal Space”. Paper 
presented at Media Ecology Conference, New York NY, 2005 
http://www.danah.org/papers/BrokenMetaphors.pdf (12/02/2010). 
[5] D. Boyd, “A Blogger's Blog: Exploring the Definition of a Medium”. 
In 
Reconstruction 
6 
(4), 
 
2006. 
http://reconstruction.eserver.org/064/boyd.shtml (12/03/2010). 
[6] D. Boyd, "Social Media is Here to Stay... Now What?" 2009. 
http://www.danah.org/papers/talks/MSRTechFest2009.html 
(12/02/2010). 
[7] L. Efimova, and S. Fiedler, “Learning webs: Learning in weblog 
networks”. In P. Kommers, P. Isaias, & M. B. Nunes (Eds.), Proc.  
IADIS International Conference Web Based Communities, 2004: pp. 
490-494. Lisbon, Portugal: IADIS Press. 
[8] S. Fiedler, “Introducing disruptive technologies for learning: Personal 
Webpublishing and Weblogs”. Proc. World Conference on 
Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia and Telecommunication: pp. 
2584 ff, 2004. 
[9] B. Gaiser, S. Panke, and S. Draheim, „Blogs in Aktion: private, 
berufliche und pädagogische Einsatzpraktiken“. Proc. GeNeMe 2006, 
9ter Workshop Gemeinschaften in Neuen Medien. Dresden: 
TUDpress: pp. 63-74, 2006. 
[10] B. Nardi, D. Schiano, M. Gumbrecht, and L. Swartz, “Why we blog”. 
Communications of the ACM, 47 (12): pp. 41-46, 2004. 
[11] B. Nardi, D. Schiano, and M. Gumbrecht, “Blogging as Social 
Activity, or, Would You Let 900 Million People Read Your Diary?” 
Proc. CSCW'04, ACM 6 (3): pp. 222-231, 2004. 
[12] T. O‟Reilly: “Web 2.0 Compact Definition, Trying Again”. 2006. 
http://radar.oreilly.com/archives/2006/12/web_20_compact.html 
(12/02/2010). 
[13] T. 
O‟Reilly, 
“What 
is 
Web 
2.0?” 
2005. 
www.oreilly.de/artikel/web20.html (10/13/2010). 
[14] L. Press: bpastudio.csudh.edu/fac/lpress/471/blogfeedback.htm, 2005 
(09/30/2010). 
[15] R. Trimarco, “Use of Blogs in Online College Classes”. In B. 
Hoffmann (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Educational Technology, 2004 
http://coe.sdsu.edu/eet/articles/blogonlineclass/start.htm 
(02/20/2008). 
[16] E. Wijnia, “Understanding Weblogs: a communicative perspective”. 
In T. Burg (Ed.): Blog Talk 2.0: The European Conference on 
Weblogs: pp. 38-82. Norderstedt, 2004. 
[17] Wikipedia, en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weblogs (11/20/2010). 
 
81
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

