eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020. ISBN: 978-1-61208-764-1
96
 
Rethinking Self-directed Learning for Information Managers  
- A process model for self-learning materials regarding the degree of complexity - 
Gerrit Wucherpfennig, Monika Steinberg, Anke Wittich 
Faculty of Media, Information and Design - Information and Communication Department 
University of Applied Sciences and Arts Hannover 
Hannover, Germany 
e-mail: [gerrit.wucherpfennig, monika.steinberg, anke.wittich]@hs-hannover.de 
 
 
Abstract - Self-directed learning is an essential basis for lifelong 
learning and requires constantly changing, target group-
specific and personalized prerequisites in order to motivate 
people to deal with modern learning content, not to overburden 
them and yet to adequately convey complex contexts. Current 
challenges in dealing with digital resources such as information 
overload, reduction of complexity and focus, motivation to 
learn, self-control or psychological wellbeing are taken up in the 
conception of learning settings within our QpLuS IM project for 
the study program Information Management and Information 
Management extra-occupational (IM) at the University of 
Applied Sciences and Arts Hannover. We present an interactive 
video on the functionality of search engines as a practical 
example of a medially high-quality and focused self-learning 
format that has been methodically produced in line with our 
agile, media-didactic process and stage model of complexity 
levels. 
Keywords 
- 
Self-directed 
Learning; 
Information 
Management; Reduction of Complexity; high-quality Learning 
Formats; Constructive Alignment; Motivation; Media Didactic 
Concept; Digital Wellbeing . 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As part of the QpLuS IM [1] project, the bachelor's degree 
programs 
Information 
Management 
and 
Information 
Management extra-occupational (IM) at the University of 
Applied Sciences and Arts Hannover will be further 
developed with regard to their competence profiles, blended 
learning scenarios and assessments. The focus is on the 
support of competence development of students through self-
directed learning in digital learning scenarios. In this way, the 
degree programs contribute to a modern securing of skilled 
labor by addressing different target groups of prospective 
students. The courses of study support and accompany the 
development of students' self-control competences as 
information managers in digital learning formats.  
A. Reduction and Complexity 
On the one hand, e.g., in the case of technical topics, a 
reduction in complexity is required in order to facilitate access 
to more in-depth content with an increasing degree of self-
regulation. On the other hand, a flexible deepening of the 
content by exploring further learning resources (as text, audio, 
video, animation, website, book, blog, etc.) should be possible 
at any time, if the learner wishes or if it is necessary for the 
subject. Within the context of a media-didactic concept for 
newly conceived, self-directed learning scenarios in the 
Information Management course of studies (regular and extra-
occupational), we develop an agile, multidimensional process 
model taking into account complexity reduction as an 
ambivalent construct in learning settings. Our target group, 
the students of Information Management and Information 
Management extra-occupational, focuses on mediality 
(interactivity, multimodality, design quality), adaptive, 
competence-oriented (low-threshold to profound) information 
access 
(complexity, 
information 
reduction) 
and 
cognitive/psychological dimensions (degree of self-control, 
attention span and learning motivation).  Digital Wellbeing 
and mental health play an increasingly central role in the 
context of the educational society, aggravated by the corona 
crisis, and must no longer be missing as a superordinate cross-
cutting theme in learning, working and leisure. The media-
didactic concept for self-directed learning described here was 
already developed before Corona, but the Corona crisis has 
intensified the focused aspects and made them even more 
concise in dealing with online teaching. 
B. A Media-didactic Concept for Information Management 
Students 
Blended learning and self-directed learning are not new 
learning/teaching concepts. Nevertheless, it is currently 
becoming 
clearer 
than 
ever 
that 
these 
traditional 
teaching/learning concepts must face new challenges in order 
to be successful and healthy in the long term. Current 
characteristics, as well as problems in dealing with digital 
media (also social media) and interaction must be taken up 
and considered in innovative learning settings in order to 
support the target group of students (in our case) cognitively 
and medially where they are competent.  
Digital competence or media competence is now so 
complex, that not all students can always keep up with the 
immense digital dynamics that can suddenly be experienced 
at universities due to corona. The variety of tools and the great 
creativity of the teachers sometimes seem chaotic, over-
enthusiastic and confusing from the students' point of view. 
The high degree of self-control, that is suddenly demanded of 
students in the context of exams by activating digital learning 
formats and tools is sometimes perceived by our students as 
strenuous and as more work than face-to-face courses. The 
real contact to fellow students and teachers is missing for 
perfect communication.   
From first evaluations, we learn that some students wish 
to have the pre-corona back. Nevertheless, we will continue 
the increased use of digital learning/teaching resources in a 

eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020. ISBN: 978-1-61208-764-1
97
 
meaningful way, but hopefully gradually supplement this with 
more face-to-face sessions. There must now be order in the 
digital tool chaos, but here at University of Applied Sciences 
in Arts Hannover, the central choice has already been made 
for Moodle [2], BigBlueButton [3] and Zoom [4], so that 
structure is now in place. 
Now, we have to reduce the hot-needle emergency online 
mode with more attention to detail and focus on learning goals 
and skills to be promoted in order not to lose or regain the trust 
and interest of the students. The boundaries between work and 
leisure time have long since become blurred and the 
consequences can be felt by every individual. 
The paper is structured as follows: in Section II, we 
present the current state of research on self-regulated learning. 
In the following section III, we introduce our own developed 
process model for self-directed learning against the 
background of mediality, complexity and learning motivation. 
The section is divided into the subsections A (Process model 
for learning assets) and B (Four levels of complexity). Section 
IV discusses the importance of digital focusing and reduction, 
with regard to mini-lectures and digital wellbeing. This 
section is also divided into two subsections. Subsection A 
deals with multitasking and overwhelming and subsection B 
deals with the balancing act of dealing with information and 
complexity.  The reference to practice then arises in Section 
V, in which our interactive video entitled How Search Engines 
Work is explained didactically, technically and aesthetically. 
Section VI forms the conclusion and outlook on how digital 
self-learning materials can be effectively used for information 
managers in the future in terms of media didactics. 
 
II. 
STATE OF RESEARCH: DIMENSIONS OF SELF-
REGULATED LEARNING 
Self-directed learning requires modern conditions adapted 
to the target group of our students in order to be successful in 
the 
currently 
very dynamic 
teaching 
and 
learning 
environment. Dyrna and Riedel [5] describe it aptly:  
"Self-directed learning is a goal-oriented, multi-
dimensional process in which learners subjectively recognise, 
master and use the didactic scope for decision making, design 
and action that objectively exists with regard to the goals, 
content, sources, methodology, assessment, partners, the 
path, time and place of their learning. The greater the use of 
this scope, the more self-directed the learning process is."  
Besides the specific design of a media learning offer, as 
well as the methodical-didactical embedding of learning 
media in a learning arrangement, various personality traits of 
the learners are also important, they continue to write. [5]  
In Constructive Alignment [6] [9], we see a promising 
approach to generate continuous feedback on learning 
progress and interaction in the exploration of learning assets.  
The Office of University Didactics & E-Learning HdEL 
Bern [7] cites the degree of self-regulation and immediacy in 
combining asynchronous and synchronous learning units in a 
variety of ways: "The learning process should be diverse and 
varied. Therefore, (a)synchronous learning scenarios and the 
degree of self-regulation should vary, be didactically taken 
into account and used in a targeted manner". And in a text in 
the book Educational Psychology it says: 
“Self-regulation describes the ability to purposefully 
control one's own thoughts, emotions and actions. It is a basic 
prerequisite for setting and achieving goals. This applies to 
all areas of life; for sports as well as for professional life, for 
leisure time as well as for school and studies.” [8] 
Ryan, Richard and Deci, for example, write about the 
connection and interaction between motivation, self-
regulation, social development and wellbeing [10]: 
"Specifically, factors have been examined that enhance 
versus undermine intrinsic motivation, self-regulation, and 
well-being. The findings have led to the postulate of three 
innate psychological needs--competence, autonomy, and 
relatedness--which when satisfied yield enhanced self-
motivation and mental health and when thwarted lead to 
diminished motivation and well-being.” 
III. 
PROCESS MODEL FOR SELF-DIRECTED LEARNING: 
MEDIALITY, COMPLEXITY AND MOTIVATION TO LEARN 
The aim of our media didactic concept is to create varied and 
flexible learning settings in terms of information density and 
access (content complexity), interactivity/multimodality 
(mediality) and self-control. Agile learning scenarios are 
implemented according to a methodical process model as a 
loose network of semantically related learning resources of 
varying complexity, mediality and varying degree of self-
control, which are prepared in a motivational sophisticated 
way and allow for directed exploration. Our target groups are 
Millenials and Generation Z, who are considered digital 
natives and actively use social media. Multimedia formats 
such as Spotify, Instagram, Snapchat or TikTok [11] enjoy 
sustained popularity and are part of everyday life. Our target 
group is "digitally spoiled" and demanding. Motivation is a 
basic prerequisite for long-term interest in specialist topics 
and self-directed learning. Sustainable learning success is 
only possible if the use of digital tools is also mentally 
appropriate. 
A. Process model for learning assets 
Our process model [12] is designed to combine the 
networking of lightweight learning formats (as uncomplicated 
access to new topics) and more complex formats enhanced by 
modality and interaction (in order to deepen knowledge) in a 
didactically meaningful way in terms of the target group and 
the learning goals to create an explorative, varied learning 
scenario. Through the agile combination of learning assets 
with different degrees of complexity we approach complexity 
reduction as an ambivalent topic. 
The complexity for learning assets is derived from the 
three following dimensions: 
 
Mediality (interactivity, multimodality, design) 
degree of modality/mediality (text only, video only, 
video with audio, etc.) and interactivity (no 
interactivity, basic activity, branching up to being 
active/creative yourself) 
 
Complexity of content and subject (reduction of 
focus, information density), degree of complexity of 

eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020. ISBN: 978-1-61208-764-1
98
 
the content (basic knowledge, further resources, 
prerequisites required, ...) 
 
Cognitive/psychological 
dimension 
(self-
control/motivation/wellbeing), degree of self-control 
(cognitive aspects, motivation, self-regulation, self-
creation of content as the highest degree of self-
control and often learning objective) 
 
To start with, the focus is on the motivation of the students, 
who in the best case are "triggered" and become enthusiastic 
about, e.g., challenging, technical topics. We would like to 
pick up the students who are e.g., influenced by social media 
where they are. At the beginning, we focus on short attention 
spans and then, if there is interest, we deepen our knowledge.  
Device-independent 
presentation 
and 
interaction 
according to the 24/7 paradigm and the "mobile first" 
approach ("anytime, anywhere, anyplace learner") are basic 
requirements for the learning formats to be designed.  
B. Four levels of complexity 
In order to accommodate research into learning materials 
of varying degrees of complexity on IM topics, we propose a 
preliminary, agile categorization into four levels of 
complexity for learning materials to be created, which will be 
adapted and expanded step by step. The four levels of 
complexity are: 
 
A: Social media compatible information for getting started, 
e.g., IM glossary at Instagram. 
B: Multimedia learning assets for teaching basic knowledge 
e.g., educational films, screencasts with Camtasia [13]  and 
Open Broadcaster Software (OBS) [14]  lecture recordings, 
explanatory videos, podcasts, animations, lecture with audio. 
C: A, B or other Open Educational Resources (OER) [15] 
with in-depth information and interaction (self-active and 
thinking along, exploration) e.g., via H5P [16], quizzes, 
tutorials, autonomous creation and publication of media 
content for the IM curriculum. 
D: Branched learning offers (remix, exploration, self-active, 
thinking along, knowledge transfer) with personalized 
learning path (Branching Scenario) e.g., via H5P. 
IV. 
DIGITAL FOCUSING AND REDUCTION: MINI 
LECTURES AND DIGITAL WELLBEING 
The cornerstone of the project is a dynamic, agile media-
didactic concept that is continuously updated. At the center of 
the media didactic considerations formulated therein are the 
aspects of digital focusing and reduction against the 
background of a constantly increasing flood of information.  
Various studies have already shown that multitasking, and 
thus the attempt to process or edit a lot of information at the 
same time, has a negative effect on concentration and 
productivity [17]. In addition, several studies have shown the 
associated effects on the human perception of stress. For 
example, the research team around Professor Clifford Nass of 
Stanford University found in their publication Cognitive 
Control in media multitaskers in 2009 that trying to perform 
several tasks at the same time leads to mental impairment. In 
addition to a constant state of stress, the ability to remember 
also suffers from multitasking [18][19].   
A. Multitasking and overwhelming 
However, due to the increasing amount of information on 
digital media, we experience more than ever a kind of 
permanent state of multitasking, for example when we open 
ten different browser windows with different information at 
the same time while working on the computer and checking 
our e-mails and WhatsApp messages. Psychology professor 
and computer scientist Gloria Mark of the University of 
California, Irvine, explains this in the film documentary 
Always networked - When the brain is overwhelmed [20]: 
"People have been doing several things at once for a long 
time. They make phone calls, listen to the radio... but what has 
changed in the workplace is that digital media has given them 
access to more information faster than ever before. People 
suffer from burnout because they have to constantly focus on 
new tasks. It's a burden. So we know that multitasking and the 
interruptions it causes lead to stress and cognitive overload."  
In general didactic terms, but also specifically for our 
QpLuS IM project, the consequence of these findings must be 
to counteract this development. Especially as a project within 
our study program Information Management at the University 
of Applied Sciences and Arts Hannover, a constructive and 
responsible handling of information must be the focus for 
students and learners. In order to cushion the problem of the 
negative effects of multitasking and the processing of too 
much information at the same time, the QpLuS IM project is 
developing a media-didactic approach that is concentrated 
around a formal focus and reduction to the essentials.  
Within the QpLuS IM project, digital self-learning 
materials are produced according to this principle (e.g., mini-
lectures). Formally clearly structured and tidy user interfaces 
are fundamental for the communication of central learning 
contents. The developed self-learning materials are intended 
to act as supporting and, especially on basic knowledge, 
focused supplements to the courses of the study programs 
Information Management and Information Management extra 
occupational.  
B. The balancing act in dealing with information and 
complexity 
It is crucial that students receive compact information 
snacks in a tidy digital learning environment, if possible in the 
sense of "mobile first", considering the ubiquitous use of 
mobile devices. In the learning environments produced, a 
large amount of simultaneous information should definitely 
be avoided, so that stress and excessive demands on students 
are noticeably reduced. However, such a reduction of 
complexity is a very ambivalent construct. On the one hand, 
the method of this formal reduction and focusing seems to be 
the only way to stimulate today's generation of students to a 
deeper examination of the respective subject matter without 
excessive demands, and in such a way that they do so out of 
intrinsic motivation. The challenge here is to produce 
substantial learning material with digital, reduced means that 
makes students want more and is not too superficial. The 
content must therefore be prepared creatively and excitingly 

eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020. ISBN: 978-1-61208-764-1
99
 
despite the reduction. It is essential that a small amount of 
selected information is concentrated and prepared in as 
complex a way as possible so that learners begin to understand 
education as a multifaceted and reflective process.  So-called 
branching scenarios, which can be generated in interactive 
learning videos with the free and web-based tool H5P [21], 
allow creative experimentation here. Ultimately, the aim must 
be to reduce the complexity in terms of information overload 
in order to keep the stress level of the learners low. On the 
other hand, this must not undermine the learning process of 
training multi-layered, complex thinking. On the contrary, the 
complexity of the information flood should be significantly 
reduced, but by concentrating on a small amount of 
information, individual topics can be deepened and complex 
thinking improved, especially with the help of our model of 
complexity levels. A positive learning experience and a 
productive learning process should be the result of such media 
didactics. The following chapter describes a practical example 
from our project that takes up these considerations. 
V. 
INTERACTIVE VIDEO: HOW DO SEARCH ENGINES 
WORK?   
In 2019, a professional interactive video was produced as 
part of the QpLuS IM project, which explains the basic 
functions and mechanisms of search engines [22].  
The idea was to digitally and interactively process a 
complex topic as a film in such a way that the rough contexts 
and individual components of the search engines are also 
easier to understand for beginners through a formally and 
content-wise focused, reduced processing. The video is based 
on an analogue model, which was developed by our colleague 
Monika Maßmeyer and which has already been used several 
times in her courses in the Information Management study 
program. 
 
 
Figure 1. Interactive video on how search engines work; exposition 
 
 
Figure 2. Interactive video on how search engines work; medium long shot; 
Duplo figure represents hyperlink 
 
A. Concept of an interactive learning video of complexity 
degree D 
In the video the important elements of the search engine 
such as crawler, searcher and indexer are personified, i.e., they 
are "brought to life" by human actors. The web, i.e., the 
individual web pages and their structure, for example 
graphics, hyperlinks or "dead links" are represented with the 
help of Duplo stones. 
The aim of the interactive video is to provide users with 
basic knowledge about how search engines work in a focused, 
reduced and creative way. With the implementation of a so-
called branching scenario, however, the user is encouraged to 
think actively and can deepen his knowledge beyond that. The 
interactive video thus functions in the sense of our complexity 
level D.  
With an aesthetically appealing video look, video effects 
(e.g., glitch) and a playful, humorous presentation as well as a 
compact length, the aim is to "encourage" learners to deal 
with the topic.An impression of these aesthetics is shown in 
Figure 1 and in Figure 2. What makes the video special, 
however, are the individual interactivities. In line with our 
media-didactic concept, these are as reduced and sparingly 
used as possible and, in addition, are easy for the user to 
understand. Thus, there are some interactivities that function 
as in-depth information pop-up windows. As soon as 
corresponding scenes are shown in the film, in which 
important basics of the search engine function are presented, 
these pop-up buttons appear with corresponding captions. 
If, for example, the World Wide Web is visible in the form 
of Duplo stones at the beginning of the film, a pop-up button 
with the inscription "World Wide Web" appears automatically. 
The user of the video now has a few seconds to click on this 
pop-up button. If he clicks on it, a detailed info text appears; 
if he does not click on the button, it disappears again after a 
few seconds.  
For a superficial understanding of the topic, passive 
reception of the video without interactivity is theoretically 
sufficient, but in order to obtain more detailed information 
about what is shown, the video consumer himself must 
become active and "interact". Thus, interactions are not an 
end in themselves, but should encourage active self-learning 
by the video users. 
A special feature in our interactive video is the 
implementation of the branching scenario already mentioned. 

eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020. ISBN: 978-1-61208-764-1
100
 
Branching scenarios have been used repeatedly in the history 
of entertainment media and are part of non-linear storytelling. 
Norbert Braun writes the following in his dissertation on non-
linear storytelling [23] : 
"The non-linear story is constructed from different 
branches [...]. Fixed branching points are integrated into 
each branch of the non-linear story. At these points decisions 
are made which lead the participant of the story into a new 
branch of the story. For each branch there is a predefined 
dramaturgy, which the user lives through until the next 
decision point."  
With H5P, however, there is now a provider that even 
explicitly offers a Open Source tool for branching scenarios. 
In addition, branching scenarios can be created manually 
within H5P's interactive video tool using the Crossroads 
feature. This is also the case in our interactive video on how 
search engines work. 
The possibilities with branching scenarios within 
interactive learning videos to encourage learners to think 
actively, self-directed and above all explorative are manifold, 
but also depend on a video production that is as creative and 
innovative as possible. We wanted to meet these demands 
with our interactive learning video and the production was 
accordingly professional.  
The branching scenario in our video confronts the video 
user with a decision-making question. In order to make the 
right decision, the learner must have been self-learning in the 
previous video and have read the interactive info pop-ups 
carefully, as shown in Figure 3.  
If the video user or learner makes the wrong decision, a video 
sequence is played showing the consequences of the wrong 
decision.  
In this way, the active video user is also more likely to be 
inspired to reflect on their own learning. To ensure this 
reflected self-learning, it is important for the video user or 
learner that the video and the interactions implemented in it 
are based on a consistent and thus comprehensible 
architecture and design.  
In order to create an innovative and coherent interactive 
self-learning video, it makes sense to concentrate on the 
aspect of focus and reduction in order to guarantee a high-
quality User Experience (UX). Michael Richter and Markus 
Flückiger write the following: [24]  
"An essential task is to avoid unnecessary complexity, to 
reduce the functional range of a product to an ideal minimum 
for the user and thus to optimize the functionality of the 
product. The technical system should support the user 
optimally in the execution of his goals and is designed exactly 
for this purpose. This reduction to the essentials does not 
come automatically and the decision which functions to offer 
and which to leave out usually requires some work and 
coordination.  However, the effort pays off in the realization 
at the latest".  
Our interactive video on how search engines work is also 
based on a tidy and reduced User Experience design. 
Thus a manageable number of interactions are 
implemented in the video with H5P. The learners should not 
be overwhelmed by a multitude of information and 
possibilities. Rather, the focused interactions and information 
should be processed cognitively in a sustainable and 
concentrated manner.  
With these parameters, the interactive video on the 
functioning of search engines thus fulfills the demand for the 
three dimensions mediality, complexity, as well as the 
cognitive and psychological dimension in the sense of our 
complexity level D. 
The logistical, creative and technical complexity of the 
video makes it clear, that this is learning material of category 
D. Although this is not always a prerequisite for a complexity 
level of categorization D, a scenic video with many creative 
elements and different action sequences requires a certain 
amount of production time. In this case, the pre-production 
(brainstorming, idea sketch, storyboard, planning of logistics) 
took about one month, the filming took four days, five to eight 
hours each, and the post-production (video editing, sound 
post-processing, color grading and effects processing) another 
twenty days. This time should be planned for the production 
of a professional scenic learning video, especially if you are a 
small team and have other work to do on the side. 
Alternatively, this work can be outsourced to an external 
agency, but this would involve an enormous financial effort.  
For the project QpLuS IM, learning formats of the 
complexity categorization D, such as the interactive video on 
the functioning of search engines, will be supplemented in 
future by further productions of the complexity category A, B 
and C. Thus, a social media glossary of the complexity 
categorization A is planned for the further course of the 
project. For this purpose, basic terms from the Information 
Management 
and 
Information 
Management 
extra 
occupational courses of study will be explained briefly and 
concisely in text and pictures, for example via Instagram Post. 
However, our interactive video is to be understood as a 
prototype to show which media-didactic possibilities are 
feasible with such a video. A survey of the learning benefit of 
students through the video has therefore not yet taken place. 
 
 
Figure 3. Interactive video on how search engines work; close-up Searcher; 
opened informational Text-Pop-Up-Window 
 
B. Implementation of interactive branching element in detail 
For the branching scenario in the interactive video on how 
search engines work, the H5P tool Interactive Video and the 
Crossroads feature it contains was used. With Crossroads, a 
branching pop-up menu can be integrated into the video that 
appears at the selected timecode position,  as shown in Figure 
4. In this pop-up menu you can now define various time codes 

eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020. ISBN: 978-1-61208-764-1
101
 
with text headings. If the user clicks on a timecode-defined 
heading, the video jumps to the corresponding timecode of the 
video. In this way, it is possible to jump to different action 
sequences in the video. When an action sequence ends, the 
branching menu reappears and the video user can again select 
how the video should continue. 
In the case of the interactive video on how search engines 
work, there are two action options available.  
Even though H5P is under constant development, there is 
still the limitation that the official Branching Scenario feature 
is still in beta and is not included in the Interactive Video 
feature. In the Interactive Video feature, the branching 
scenario must be created manually with the Crossroads tool. 
In this context, it would be welcome if H5P were to offer its 
users even more consistent and interlinked features in the 
future. There are also limitations in terms of aesthetics; for 
example, there are hardly any free design options for text 
overlays.   
 
 
Figure 4. Interactive video on how search engines work; close-up Searcher; 
Branching-Scena 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Against the background of rapidly changing digital 
education, especially in times of the corona pandemic, in 
which self-directed learning is becoming increasingly 
important, the QpLuS IM project is concerned with the 
development of an agile, multidimensional process model in 
the sense of a media-didactic concept for the study courses 
Information Management and Information Management 
extra-occupational, which takes into account in particular the 
ambivalent handling of complexity.  
In addition, a four-level complexity model (A to D) was 
developed, which is based on the parameters mediality, 
complexity and cognitive and psychological dimensions. 
This model can be used, for example, to efficiently determine 
learning goals and learning methods in the context of 
Constructive Alignment. The four levels  are: 
A: Social Media compatible information for the introduction. 
B: Multimedia learning tools to impart basic knowledge.  
C: A, B and further OER with in-depth information and 
interaction. 
D: Branched learning offers with personalized learning path. 
With the complexity level model, the digitally "spoiled" 
generations of learners and students are not cognitively 
overtaxed or stressed (in the sense of digital wellbeing), but 
can acquire basic knowledge in a targeted and reduced self-
determined way and, if necessary, deepen this knowledge. 
There is already an interactive video about the functioning 
of search engines available for the courses of studies 
Information Management and Information Management  
extra-occupational, a self-learning resource of the complexity 
category D for practical use. With the planned further learning 
resources, such as the information snack glossary on basic 
terms of information management on Instagram, further 
complexity levels are to be served. 
The aim is to create a modern, intuitive and consistent 
network of digital self-learning materials for the study 
programs 
Information 
Management 
and 
Information 
Management extra-occupational, which can be used in 
addition and integration to the official courses.  
In order to achieve this goal, we want and need to do more 
research on the importance of self-directed learning, for 
example how the use of interactive tools like H5P affects the 
learning behavior of students. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work described in this article is supported by the 
Center for Teaching and Counseling and is funded by the 
Ministry of Culture and Science of Lower Saxony as part of 
the Quality plus - Program for the Development of 
Tomorrow's Studies funding program. We gratefully 
acknowledge these contributions. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] QpLuS IM Project, [Online]. Available from: https://q-plus-
im.wp.hs-hannover.de/ [retrieved 10.2020] 
[2] Moodle, 
[Online].Available 
from: 
 
https://moodle.de/  
[retrieved 10.2020] 
[3] BigBlueButton, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://bigbluebutton.org/ [retrieved 10.2020] 
[4] Zoom, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://zoom.us/de-
de/meetings.html [retrieved 10.2020] 
[5] J. Dyrna, J. Riedel and S. Schulze-Achatz, “When is learning 
with digital media (really) self-directed? Approaches to enable 
and promote self-direction in technology-supported learning 
processes [Wann ist Lernen mit digitalen Medien (wirklich) 
selbstgesteuert? Ansätze zur Ermöglichung und Förderung von 
Selbststeuerung in technologieunterstützten Lernprozessen 
],“2018. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://nbn-
resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:bsz:14-qucosa2-338278 [retrieved 
10.2020] 
[6] Constructive Alignment, 2019. Available from: https://www.e-
teaching.org/didaktik/konzeption/constructive-
alignment/constructive-alignment [retrieved 10.2020] 
[7] Department of University Didactics & E-Learning HdEL Bern, 
“Media-didactic considerations on distance learning and tool 
use - self-regulation [Medien-Didaktische Überlegungen zu 
Distance learning und Tool-Einsatz - Selbstregulation] ,“ 
Fachstelle Hochschuldidaktik & E-Learning HdEL Bern. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://pbs.twimg.com/media/ET3vkvcXgAAHG5G?format=
png&name=4096x4096, [retrieved 10.2020] 
[8] M. Landmann, F. Perels, B. Otto, K, Schnick-Vollmer and B. 
Schmitz, 
“Self-regulation 
and 
self-regulated 
learning 
[Selbstregulation 
und 
selbstreguliertes 
Lernen,”] 
in 
Educational Psychology [Pädagogische Psychologie], E. Wild 
and J. Möller, Eds. 2 Edition, Berlin-Heidelberg: Springer, p. 
46,  2015. 

eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020. ISBN: 978-1-61208-764-1
102
 
[9] J. Wildt and B. Wildt, “Learning process-oriented testing in 
Constructive Alignment [Lernprozessorientiertes Prüfen im 
Constructive Alignment],” in New Handbook of University 
Teaching, Part H: Examinations and Performance Checks. 
Further development of the examination system as a 
consequence of the Bologna Process [Neues Handbuch 
Hochschullehre, Teil H: Prüfungen und Leistungskontrollen. 
Weiterentwicklung des Prüfungssystems in der Konsequenz 
des Bologna-Prozesses ],  B. Berendt, H. P. Voss and J. Wildt, 
Eds. Berlin: Raabe, pp. 1 -46,  2011.[Online]. Available from: 
https://www.hrk-nexus.de/fileadmin/redaktion/hrk-nexus/07-
Downloads/07-03-Material/pruefen.pdf [retrieved 10.2020] 
[10] R. Ryan and E. Deci, “Self-Determination Theory and the 
Facilitation of Intrinsic Motivation, Social Development, and 
Well-Being. The American psychologist,” pp. 68-78, 2000. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/11946306_Self-
Determination_Theory_and_the_Facilitation_of_Intrinsic_Mo
tivation_Social_Development_and_Well-Being 
[retrieved 
10.2020] 
[11] JIM-Study, “JIM Study 2019 - Youth, Information, Media. 
Basic research on media use of 12 to 19-year-olds. Media 
education research association southwest [JIM-Studie 2019 - 
Jugend, 
Information,Medien. 
Basisuntersuchung 
zum 
Medienumgang 12 bis 19-jähriger. Medienpädagogischer 
Forschungsverbund Südwest ],”[Online]. Available from: 
https://www.mpfs.de/fileadmin/files/Studien/JIM/2019/JIM_2
019.pdf [retrieved 10.2020] 
[12] G. Wucherpfennig, M. Steinberg and A. Wittich, “Media-
didactic concept QpLuS-IM-Project [Mediendidaktisches 
Konzept QpLuS-IM-Projekt ],” University of Applied Sciences 
and Arts Hannover,  pp. 7 - 13, 2020. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/341900843_Medien
didaktisches_Konzept  [retrieved 10.2020] 
[13] Camtasia, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.techsmith.de/camtasia.html  [retrieved 10.2020] 
[14] OBS, [Online]. Available from: https://obsproject.com/de  
[retrieved 10.2020] 
[15] Open Educational Resources, [Online]. Available from: 
https://en.unesco.org/themes/building-knowledge-
societies/oer   [retrieved 10.2020] 
[16] H5P, [Online]. Available from: https://h5p.org/ [retrieved 
10.2020] 
[17] A. Baethge and T. Rigotti, “Effects of work interruptions and 
multitasking on performance and health. A diary study among 
health 
and 
nursing 
staff. 
[Auswirkung 
von 
Arbeitsunterbrechungen 
und 
Multitasking 
auf 
Leistungsfähigkeit und Gesundheit. Eine Tagebuchstudie bei 
Gesundheits- und KrankenpflegerInnen],” Dortmund / Berlin / 
Dresden. BAUA, p. 16, 2013. [Online]. Available from: 
https://d-nb.info/1037119606/34 [retrieved 10.2020] 
[18] E. Ophir, C. Nass and A.D. Wagner, “Cognitive control in 
media multitaskers,” PNAS. September 15, 2009. Vol. 106. 
No. 
37, 
pp. 
1-3 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.pnas.org/content/pnas/106/37/15583.full.pdf 
[retrieved 10.2020] 
[19] A. Gorlick, “Media multitaskers pay mental price, Stanford 
study shows,” Standford Report, August 24, 2009, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://news.stanford.edu/news/2009/august24/multitask-
research-study-082409.html [retrieved 10.2020] 
[20] G. Mark, Interview partner in, “Hyperconnected, the brain in 
overload [Hyperconnectés, le cerveau en surcharge],” 
Documentary, TV report, Broadcast: Arte, 2016. 
[21] A. Bieberstein, “Create interactive videos with H5P. E-
Learning Working Group [Interaktive Videos mit H5P 
erstellen. E-Learning Arbeitsgrupp],” Technical University of 
Darmstadt, 2019. [Online]. Available from: https://blog.e-
learning.tu-darmstadt.de/2019/07/15/interaktive-videos-mit-
h5p-erstellen/ [retrieved 10.2020] 
[22] QpLuS IM Project, “How search engines work [Die 
Funktionsweise von Suchmaschinen],”An interactive Video 
with H5P. [Online] Available from: https://q-plus-im.wp.hs-
hannover.de/einblick-in-die-suchmaschinen-welt-aus-duplo-
steinen [retrieved 10.2020] 
[23] N. Braun, “Nonlinear Storytelling: Programmed, interactive 
narrative 
approach 
for 
continuous 
media 
[Nonlinear 
Storytelling: Programmierter, interaktiver Narrationsansatz für 
kontinuierliche Medien],” Technical Univesity of Darmstadt. 
Dissertation. P.40, 2003. 
[24] M. Richter and M. Flückiger, Usability and UX compact. 
Products for people [Usability und UX kompakt. Produkte für 
Menschen], 4th Edition. Springer Vieweg. Berlin Heidelberg. 
P.16., 2016. 
 

