Education 4.0 Supporting Remote, Hybrid, and Face-to-Face Teaching-Learning 
Systems for Academic Continuity during the COVID-19 Global Pandemic 
The Mechatronic Product Design Course in Higher Education as Case Study 
Jhonattan Miranda 
School of Engineering and Sciences 
Tecnologico de Monterrey 
Mexico City, Mexico 
e-mail: jhonattan.miranda@tec.mx 
Donovan Esqueda-Merino 
School of Engineering and Sciences 
Tecnologico de Monterrey 
Mexico State, Mexico 
e-mail: donovan.esqueda@tec.mx 
María Soledad Ramírez-Montoya  
Institute for the Future of Education 
Tecnologico de Monterrey 
Monterrey, N.L. Mexico 
e-mail: solramirez@tec.mx
 
Abstract—The COVID-19 global pandemic provoked the 
emergence of new teaching-learning systems necessary to 
guarantee academic continuity at all levels, resulting in remote, 
hybrid, and face-to-face teaching-learning processes becoming 
more robust and efficient. However, higher education faces a 
significant challenge because, in many cases, the physical 
infrastructure 
with 
face-to-face 
access 
to 
specialized 
laboratories must have integrated, functional, and practical 
learning to train disciplinary competencies. Consequently, it is 
required to implement new pedagogical procedures and remote 
technologies to compensate for the lack of face-to-face access to 
laboratories. This study examines Education 4.0, the 
intersection of technology and pedagogy in today's higher 
education landscape. A case study is presented to provide a 
comprehensive comparison of remote, hybrid, and face-to-face 
learning modalities, illustrating their unique features and 
effectiveness in different educational contexts. 
Keywords-Education 4.0; Higher Education; Educational 
Innovation;  Engineering Education. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The global pandemic caused by the coronavirus (SARS-
CoV-2) has resulted in the most significant health crisis of the 
modern era, causing social and economic devastation 
worldwide. One of the most affected sectors was education at 
all levels. During 2020 and 2021, face-to-face academic 
activities were suspended worldwide due to prevention and 
mitigation measures to contain the spread of the virus. For 
several months, the uncertainty and prolongation of the health 
crisis forced educational institutions to develop various short, 
medium, and long-term solutions that incorporated new 
pedagogical models, learning methods, delivery modalities, 
and teaching-learning programs powered by 4.0 technologies. 
These solutions aimed to guarantee academic continuity at all 
levels and make remote teaching-learning processes more 
robust and efficient. In 2021 and 2022, the return to face-to-
face instruction occurred mainly in hybrid and face-to-face 
teaching-learning modalities. However, the courses had to be 
flexible enough to adapt to the possibility of returning to a 
remote education format at any time. These activities were 
accompanied by implementing safety measures such as mask-
wearing, social distancing, best practices, and knowledge 
gained during the crisis. 
During academic continuity efforts amidst the pandemic, 
various challenges arose, including infrastructure issues such 
as access to platforms and devices, stable electricity and 
connectivity, training stakeholders in Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICTs), and designing new 
pedagogical procedures to maintain student engagement and 
assess their knowledge effectively. Higher education faced 
unique difficulties, particularly with face-to-face access to 
specialized labs needed for practical learning and developing 
disciplinary competencies. To address these challenges, the 
educational sector embraced Education 4.0, a combination of 
technological advancements and pedagogical procedures [1]. 
The implementation of existing and emerging ICTs, 
including virtual classrooms, virtual labs, and remote labs, 
played a vital role during the pandemic. Studies showed that 
students could learn and develop disciplinary competencies 
with favorable outcomes using these technologies [2][3]. 
Virtual laboratories utilized traditional multimedia resources, 
2D 
simulations, 
and 
immersive 
3D 
environments, 
incorporating Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality 
(AR) techniques. Successful examples of these technologies 
were seen in teaching basic sciences, such as physics, 
chemistry, and mathematics [4][5]. 
In higher education, VR and AR have also been observed 
in various implementations, for instance, during the design 
process and development of technology-based products. 
Furthermore, the combination of virtual environments with 
hardware systems employing haptics and joysticks has made 
the learning experience highly relevant, as students can 
combine tactile sensations, vision, and proprioception during 
their learning process. Examples can be observed in physics 
[6], medicine [7], and engineering [8], among others. Most 
recently, the integration into higher education of Natural 
Language Processing (NLP) systems based on Artificial 
Intelligence (AI), such as those developed by the OpenAI 
company, has the potential to significantly improve the 
efficiency of tasks, such as grading and content creation [9]. 
In the case of engineering education programs, the use of 
Learning Management Systems (LMSs) has enhanced their 
capabilities to provide access to specialized virtual 
laboratories in engineering. For example, specific features 
have been included to support Computer-Aided Design, 
Manufacturing, and Engineering Systems (CAD, CAM, CAE) 
and other more complex and robust systems, including 
Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) software and 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems 
[10]. Also, Engineering Education has implemented 
simulations of manufacturing plants and industrial robotics, 
the latter using software for simulating discrete events and 
digital twins' techniques [11]. 
On the other hand, remote laboratories have grown 
exponentially 
due 
to 
technological 
advances 
in 
communication and connectivity. Today, Cyber-Physical 
Systems (CPS) laboratories are a type of laboratory where 
physical elements and software components intricately 
intertwine. Remote laboratories allow the experience of 
telepresence in physical laboratories, carrying out practices 
and remote experiments with actual equipment with the 
advantages of flexibility in time and place [12]. 
This work uses the concept of Education 4.0 to design new 
teaching-learning systems and pedagogical procedures, with a 
case study on the "Mechatronic Product Design" course 
demonstrating the application of ICTs and learning methods 
for remote, hybrid, and face-to-face dynamics. 
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 
introduces the concept of Education 4.0. In Section 3, the 
Education 4.0 Reference Framework is presented as a 
conceptual foundation for designing teaching-learning 
systems in higher education. Section 4 provides a case study 
illustrating the design, development, and implementation of a 
new teaching-learning system within the context of Education 
4.0, using the "Mechatronic Product Design" course as an 
example. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 5. 
II. 
EDUCATION 4.0 IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
The Education 4.0 concept has been implemented in 
various contexts and described by different authors. 
Therefore, the education sector has been evolving and 
leveraging particular technologies of the fourth industrial 
revolution, such as generic technology for connectivity, 
datafication, digitalization, smartification, and virtualization. 
The combination of these technologies with active learning 
methods 
and 
professional 
instruction 
to 
train 
key 
competencies in students today is known as Education 4.0. 
Also, Education 4.0 can refer to the training and development 
of core competencies in engineering education for Industry 
4.0 [13], according to the Education 4.0 Framework proposed 
by the World Economic Forum. The Education 4.0 framework 
is characterized by critical shifts in learning content, the 
development of essential skills and competencies, and 
experiences to redefine quality learning in the new economy 
[14]. In addition, the fostering of self-learning (heutagogy), 
collaboration (peeragogy), and the highlighted use of ICTs 
(cybergogy) is included in Education 4.0. 
This work considers the use of 4.0 Technologies with 
current techniques and methods in education for the 
development of desirable competencies in the profile of 
today's students. We use the following concept of Education 
4.0 applied to higher education as a reference: "Education 4.0 
is the period in which the education sector takes advantage of 
emerging ICTs to improve pedagogical processes that are 
complemented by new learning methods and innovative 
didactic and management tools, as well as smart and 
sustainable infrastructure used during current teaching-
learning processes for the training and development of key 
competencies in today's students" [1]. 
Therefore, identifying the key enablers to achieve the 
Education 4.0 vision is crucial to guide educators during 
teaching-learning. Additionally, designers, researchers, and 
specialists in teaching-learning programs and instructional 
design should refer to these key enablers. 
Six categories of key enablers are used in the design and 
implementation of today's teaching-learning systems, and 
Figure 1 summarizes the key enablers of Education 4.0 [15]. 
 
Figure 1.  Six key enablers of Education 4.0, adapted from [15]. 
1) Training key competencies, covering both soft and hard 
competencies for students. 
2) Applying active teaching-learning methods with 
various modalities, such as problem-based learning, project-
based learning, experiential learning, and gamified learning. 
3) Utilizing 4.0 Technologies, which involve connectivity, 
datafication, digitalization, smartification, and virtualization. 
4) Implementing innovative infrastructure, including 
services, facilities, devices, and physical-virtual environments 
to enhance teaching-learning processes. 
5) Involving relevant stakeholders, such as internal actors 
(teachers, students, staff) and external actors (government, 
industry, society, other universities) in the teaching process. 
6) Considering sustainable impacts by aligning with the 
UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) to create positive 
social, economic, and environmental effects. 
III. 
THE EDUCATION 4.0 REFERENCE FRAMEWORK FOR 
DESIGNING TEACHING-LEARNING SYSTEMS 
The Education 4.0 Reference Framework for designing 
teaching-learning systems was used in this work [15]. This 
reference framework allows designers to be guided during the 
design and development processes of new educational 
products, teaching-learning processes, and educational 
infrastructure, considering the concept and vision of 
Education 4.0. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

This reference framework is justified by the need to create 
integrated systems where product, process, and infrastructure 
interact for improved performance. Additionally, these 
systems must adapt to existing contexts and environments 
while considering the key enablers of Education 4.0. The 
reference framework incorporates the six key enablers of 
Education 4.0, enabling resources to support training in 
transversal and disciplinary competencies through active 
teaching-learning processes in various delivery modes (face-
to-face, hybrid, remote). This innovative infrastructure, with 
the participation of key stakeholders and the support of 4.0 
Technologies, facilitates positive social, economic, and 
environmental benefits. It is, therefore, necessary to have an 
integrative vision that can offer a new education product, a 
new 
teaching-learning 
process, 
and 
the 
necessary 
infrastructure to achieve more efficient and effective 
processes and a better user experience. Although this 
framework allows an integrated design (product-process-
infrastructure), it can also facilitate the design process for 
individual entities, as presented in the case study section for 
the design of a "teaching-learning process."  
 
 
Figure 2.  The Education 4.0 reference framework for designing teaching-
learning systems. 
This reference framework comprises four design stages of 
the product development lifecycle in a systematic design 
process: (i) Ideation, (ii) Basic development, (iii) Advanced 
Development, and (iv) Launching. Figure 2 presents the 
general model of the Education 4.0 Reference Framework for 
designing teaching-learning systems. 
IV. 
CASE STUDY: THE MECHATRONIC PRODUCT DESIGN 
COURSE IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
Innovation and entrepreneurship among today's students 
lead to creative, efficient, and practical solutions to society's 
challenges and problems and achieving sustainable goals. 
However, the current social context, technological advances, 
necessary processes of digital transformation, and new 
paradigms in education bring challenging teaching-learning 
scenarios for educators. The lack of specialized guides and 
resources to address these challenges is a current problem. In 
addition, engaging and motivating students in current 
teaching-learning processes is necessary. Consequently, 
efficiently teaching and inspiring the next generation of 
students/entrepreneurs 
is 
challenging 
for 
educational 
institutions. Therefore, access to high-quality, innovative, and 
affordable teaching-learning systems is needed to contribute 
to forming highly competitive professionals. 
The course "Mechatronic Product Design" is presented as 
a case study to illustrate the design, development, and 
implementation of new teaching-learning systems in 
Education 4.0 to design teaching-learning processes. This 
course is among the academic offerings in the mechatronics 
engineering 
and 
mechanical 
engineering 
careers 
at 
Tecnologico de Monterrey in Mexico. Implementing this 
course was justified as part of the emerging programs to 
ensure academic continuity in this institution during the 2020 
- 2022 global health crisis.  
Tecnologico de Monterrey implemented a strategy to 
redesign its face-to-face courses in a remote-hybrid format 
applying a flexible-digital model [16]. Online resources and 
4.0 Technologies were primarily implemented to carry out this 
transformation. Also, national and multi-campus courses were 
opened to optimize resource use and leverage the benefits of 
distance formats. Therefore, students attending the 26 Tec 
campuses in Mexico enrolled in these courses. 
In engineering education, teaching-learning processes 
require physical infrastructures, including specialized 
laboratories and tools, because they are necessary for training 
disciplinary skills/competencies and experiential and practical 
learning.  
Mechatronic engineering was a challenging area because 
it encompasses various disciplines such as mechanics, 
software, electronics, and control systems and is also one of 
the engineering areas most impacting industry thanks to the 
implementation of emerging technologies in new products and 
the generation of best practices in current production systems.  
In addition, the emergence of smart and sustainable 
products and processes has assumed significant relevance in 
recent years. That is why holistic designs of new products, 
manufacturing processes, and production systems are 
necessary for mechatronics. Therefore, distance teaching and 
practical activities in this field have become challenging. 
The Education 4.0 Reference Framework for designing 
teaching-learning systems was taken in this work's redesign 
process, and particular requirements were considered. In 
addition, the four stages of transformation from traditional 
courses (face-to-face) to online distance "remote" and 
"hybrid" courses (flexible-digital) as part of the program 
designing activities were also used: (i) planning, (ii) 
synchronous elements, (iii) asynchronous elements, and (iv) 
preparation for delivery. Figure 3 summarizes the four 
implemented stages during the transformation process. Table 
I summarizes the application of the four design stages of the 
Education 4.0 Reference Framework for designing teaching-
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

learning systems. Table II presents the teaching-learning 
process, highlighting how the Education 4.0 enablers shaped 
the "Mechatronic Product Design." 
 
 
Figure 3.  The transformation model from traditional courses to remote 
and hybrid courses. 
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF THE DESIGN PROCESS, TEACHING-LEARNING 
PROCESS ENTITY 
# 
Activities 
Particular Model 
1 
Problem and 
Requirement 
identification 
specification 
Problem: Redesign the "Mechatronic 
Product Design" course from face-to-face to 
remote and hybrid delivery modalities and 
provide adequate training and development of 
key transversal and disciplinary competencies 
considering experiential and practical learning 
as core issues. 
Student profile: Undergraduate 
Mechatronics Engineering and Mechanical 
Engineering students at Tecnologico de 
Monterrey, Mexico. 
Semester: 8 or 9. 
Previous knowledge: Embedded systems, 
computerized control, and machine analysis 
and synthesis.  
Duration: 22 sessions (2 hours per session), 
44 hours for summer sessions. And 16 sessions 
(3 hours per session), 48 hours for a semester 
session.  
Delivery Modality Goal: Remote 
(synchronous and asynchronous) and Hybrid. 
Academic periods to be implemented: 
Summer courses and Semestral courses. 
2 
Learning goals 
definition and 
instructional 
design concept 
Learning Outcomes: At the end of this 
program, participants learn best practices and 
apply the appropriate tools of technology-
based and mechatronic product, process, and 
manufacturing systems designs, create working 
prototypes, identify market segments, and 
define business models and manufacturing 
systems. 
3 
Process 
designing and 
process 
assessment. 
Program 
assessment 
Process designing: Application of the 
transformation model from traditional courses 
to remote and hybrid courses: (i) Planning, (ii) 
Synchronous elements, (iii) Asynchronous 
elements, and (iv) Preparation for delivery. 
Assessment Instrument: The "i-Scale" 
was implemented [17]. This tool covers 
qualitative evaluations for learning outcomes, 
the nature of innovation, growth potential, 
institutional alignment, and financial viability. 
This evaluation indicated that this course has 
few or no drawbacks to be implemented. 
6 
Program 
implementation 
The number of students and delivery 
modality: 28 students from 7 campuses 
across Mexico (Summer 2020, Remote). 56 
students from 2 campuses in the Central 
Mexico region (February-June 2021, Hybrid 
and Flexible). 50 students from 2 campuses in 
the Central Mexico region (February-June 
2022, Face-To-Face and Flexible). 
Students' assessment method: Mixed 
method analysis applying surveys about the 
perception of the transversal competencies 
trained and a qualitative evaluation of the 
working prototypes. 
Research question for quantitative 
analysis: What is the student's perception of 
the training of transversal competencies in 
these courses? 
Research question for qualitative 
analysis:  
What are the results of developing mechatronic 
working prototypes in these courses? 
TABLE II.  
THE  MECHATRONIC PRODUCT DESIGN COURSE 
CONSIDERING THE EDUCATION 4.0 ENABLERS 
Modules 
Education 4.0 Enablers 
Goal 
1. Introduction 
to innovation and 
new product and 
process design 
Key concepts related 
to innovation and 
methodologies for 
new product and 
process design and 
development.  
Main Competencies:  
Soft: Critical Thinking; Hard: 
Methodologies Design 
Main Active Methods: 
Active Learning and Flipped 
classroom 
Main 4.0 Technologies: 
LMS, Web-conference 
platform, and instant message 
systems.  
Main Infrastructure:  
At institutional, access to 
remote labs and virtual 
classrooms 
At home, connected and 
connectivity services 
Main Stakeholders:  
At least two teachers were 
involved  
Sustainability:  
SDGs were promoted 
• Identify 
types and 
sources of 
innovation. 
• Identify the 
methodolog
y and 
techniques 
to be used. 
2. Mechatronic 
Product Design 
Design and 
development of a 
mechatronic product 
through four stages: 
(i) Conceptual 
design, (ii) System 
design, (iii) 
Engineering and 
detailed design, and 
(iv) Prototyping and 
validation. 
Main Competencies:  
Soft: Collaboration, 
Cooperation, Creativity & 
Innovation.  
Hard: Mechatronic principles 
and integrated product design 
Main Active Method: 
Blended-based Learning and 
Learning by Doing 
Main 4.0 Technologies: 
LMS, Virtual labs for 
simulation, and 3D modeling 
systems 
Main Infrastructure:  
At the institution, access to 
physical and remote labs and 
virtual classrooms 
At home, connected and 
connectivity services 
Main Stakeholders:  
At least two teachers and one 
specialist from the industry 
were involved  
Sustainability:  
Design for Sustainability (DfS) 
and Life Cycle Assessment 
(LCA) 
• Identifying 
opportunity 
areas 
• Understandi
ng painful 
situations 
and 
customer/us
er 
requirement
s. 
• A prototype 
of the 
proposed 
mechatronic 
product. 
• Evaluation 
of the 
mechatronic 
working 
prototype. 
3. Manufacturing 
Process Design 
Main Competencies:  
Soft: Collaboration, Critical 
Thinking. 
• Definition 
of materials 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Design and 
development of a 
manufacturing 
process through 
three stages: (i) 
Conceptual design, 
(ii) Technology 
selection, (iii) 
Production Plan. 
Hard: Process Design, 
Production Scheduling, and 
Virtual Commissioning. 
Main Active Method: 
Blended-based Learning and 
Learning by Doing 
Main 4.0 Technology: 
Spreadsheets, Software for 
Plant Design, Project 
Management, and Plant 
Simulation  
Main Infrastructure:  
At institutional, access to 
remote labs and virtual 
classrooms. 
At home, connected and 
connectivity services.  
Main Stakeholders:  
At least two teachers and one 
specialist from the industry are 
involved.  
Sustainability:  
Design for Sustainability (DfS) 
and Life Cycle Assessment 
(LCA) 
and 
processes to 
be used. 
• Organizatio
n of the 
plant and 
schedule of 
activities. 
• Analysis of 
main costs 
and 
projected 
sales. 
4. Business 
Model and 
Launching 
Define and validate 
the value proposition 
of the 
product/process/busi
ness and product 
pitch. 
Main Competencies:  
Soft: Communication.  
Hard: Enterprise creation and 
marketing principles  
Main Active Method: 
Blended-based Learning and 
Learning by Doing. 
Main 4.0 Technology: 
LMS, Virtual Classroom, and 
Collaborative Virtual 
Platforms. 
Main Infrastructure:  
At institutional, access to 
remote labs and virtual 
classrooms. 
At home, connected and 
connectivity services. 
Main Stakeholders:  
At least two teachers and one 
specialist from the industry are 
involved.  
Sustainability:  
Business sustainability 
assessment (short-medium-
long term). 
• Product 
market-fit 
• Product 
pitch 
• Product 
business 
model 
 
Building upon the Education 4.0 concept, this study 
utilizes the Education 4.0 Reference Framework to design 
teaching-learning systems that cater to the evolving needs of 
the education sector. By incorporating the four stages of 
transformation 
(planning, 
synchronous 
elements, 
asynchronous elements, and preparation for delivery), this 
research effectively adapts traditional face-to-face courses to 
the online distance "remote" and "hybrid" formats, which are 
better aligned with the flexible-digital approach in Education 
4.0. 
Figure 4 presents the results of an applied survey about the 
perception of the trained transversal (soft) competencies 
during the impartation of this course. The graphics compare 
both surveys, a pre-survey based on the perception of how 
often these competencies are trained during their classes and 
a post-survey based on the perception of how often the 
competencies were trained during the boot camp. These 
surveys were applied during three periods (2020, 2021, and 
2022) to analyze how the three different delivery modalities 
impacted the designed course. The presented results show that 
most of the students perceived that the promoted key 
competencies were trained during the activities of this course. 
Figure 4 shows a significant increase in the feeling of 
accomplishment of the students regarding the soft 
competencies that were designed and implemented in the 
course. Additionally, general satisfaction with the course 
experience was positive in 75% of the cases. 
Also, in this course, the students were encouraged to 
develop collaborative and cooperative mechatronic projects; 
then, group activities were promoted, and teams were formed. 
For the case of the remote course, the teams were integrated 
by students from different campuses; for hybrid and face-to-
face, the teams comprised students from different areas in the 
mechatronics and mechanics fields. Therefore, the formed 
teams allowed students to propose various new mechatronics 
products and their manufacturing processes and business 
models. These products aimed to address current social needs, 
pursue sustainability, and follow technological megatrends to 
be updated and remain competitive in the marketplace. 
For this study, 16 new mechatronic products were 
evaluated. The projects presented corresponded to 3D models 
accompanied by simulations, Apps, and in some cases, rapid 
prototyping through 3D printing methods and rapid 
prototyping with Arduino boards. It was possible for the three 
formats (face-to-face, hybrid, remote) thanks to the provision 
of physical and virtual infrastructure at both levels, 
institutional and home. The positive results obtained highlight 
the potential of these new teaching-learning systems and 
modalities in fostering essential skills and competencies 
required for the new economy. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Due to global lockdowns resulting from the COVID-19 
pandemic, institutions have rapidly transitioned to digital 
education models, supported by diverse ICTs, leading to the 
emergence of Education 4.0. Through this paper, a framework 
for designing courses within the context of Education 4.0 is 
presented. 
The framework introduced is explained with a case study 
of an engineering course involving the process and design of 
a mechatronic product. This course was chosen as a practical 
example of implementing a highly complex course on multi-
campuses and surveying students in the same major but with 
different educative backgrounds. Moreover, the course format 
facilitated interaction among students from different 
campuses 
and 
disciplines, 
creating 
active 
learning 
environments with synchronous and asynchronous teamwork 
activities. 
Throughout the three different delivery modalities (face-
to-face, hybrid, remote), the course demonstrated adaptability 
and flexibility in response to varying circumstances. The 
consistent positive outcomes across modalities indicate that 
the Education 4.0 framework is robust enough to 
accommodate diverse teaching and learning needs while 
maintaining high-quality education. 
The results showed that aligning the learning goals with 
the key competencies to be trained and applying correct 
learning methods supported by adequate ICTs of 4.0 
Technologies and infrastructure made it possible to generate 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

product ideas and conceptual products and create physical and 
working prototypes. It demonstrated that students could 
implement the acquired knowledge and integrate core 
concepts in this engineering area. Likewise, this new class 
format allowed students to interact with others from different 
campuses and disciplines and generate active learning 
environments with synchronous and asynchronous teamwork 
activities.  
Finally, this paper encourages further investigation of the 
Education 4.0 framework across various disciplines, levels, 
and cultural contexts. By examining the framework in diverse 
environments, researchers and educators can enhance 
understanding of its potential and limitations, ultimately 
guiding best practices and policies for future teaching and 
learning. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors acknowledge the financial and technical 
support of Writing Lab, Institute for the Future of Education, 
Tecnologico de Monterrey, Mexico, in the production of this 
work. Also, the authors appreciate the financial support from 
Tecnologico de Monterrey through the "Challenge-Based 
Research Funding Program 2022". Project ID # I004 - IFE001 
- C2-T3 – T. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Miranda, et al., “The core components of education 4.0 in 
higher education: Three case studies in engineering education,” 
Computers and Electrical Engineering, vol. 93, pp. 107-278, 
2021. 
[2] D. Keddi, and S. Frerich, “Enhancing Engineering Education 
by Virtual Laboratories,” International Conference on Remote 
Engineering and Virtual Instrumentation, Springer, Cham, pp. 
359-365, 2022.  
[3] E. García-Morán, et al., “Industry 4.0 Competencies as the 
Core of Online Engineering Laboratories,” Design and 
Technology Education, vol. 26, no.3, pp. 30-51, 2021. 
[4] O. C. Agbonifo, O. A. Sarumi, and Y. M. Akinola, “A 
chemistry laboratory platform enhanced with virtual reality for 
students' 
adaptive 
learning,” 
Research 
in 
Learning 
Technology, pp. 28, 2020.  
[5] N. Ahmad, and S. Junaini, “Augmented Reality for Learning 
Mathematics: A Systematic Literature Review,” International 
Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning (iJET), vol. 15, 
no. 16, pp. 106-122, 2020.  
[6] L. Neri, et al., “Improving the learning of physics concepts by 
using haptic devices,” IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference 
(FIE), pp. 1-7, 2015. 
[7] D. Escobar-Castillejos, J. Noguez, L. Neri, A. Magana, and B. 
Benes, “A review of simulators with haptic devices for medical 
training,” Journal of Medical Systems, vol 40, pp. 1-22, 2016. 
[8] R. L. Williams, X. He, T. Franklin, and S. Wang, “Haptics-
augmented engineering mechanics educational tools,” World 
Transactions on Engineering and Technology Education, vol. 
6, p. 27, 2007. 
[9] D. Baidoo-Anu, and L. Owusu Ansah, “Education in the Era of 
Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI): Understanding the 
Potential Benefits of ChatGPT in Promoting Teaching and 
Learning,” SSRN 4337484, 2023. 
[10] X. L. Liu, W. M. Wang, H. Guo, A. V. Barenji, Z. Li, and G. 
Q. Huang, “Industrial blockchain-based framework for product 
lifecycle management in industry 4.0,” Robotics and 
Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, vol. 63, p. 101897, 2020. 
[11] D. Chavarría-Barrientos, et.al., “A methodology to support 
manufacturing system design using digital models and 
simulations: an automotive supplier case study,” IFAC-
PapersOnLine, vol. 51(11), pp. 1598-1603, 2018. 
[12] C. Terkowsky, S. Frye, and D. May, “Using Constructive 
Alignment to Evaluate Industry 4.0 Competencies in Remote 
Laboratories for Manufacturing Technology,” International 
Conference 
on 
Remote 
Engineering 
and 
Virtual 
Instrumentation, Springer, Cham, pp. 603-613, 2020.  
[13] S. Das, D. K. Kleinke, and D. Pistrui, “Reimagining 
engineering education: Does Industry 4.0 need Education 
4.0?,” Virtual Annual Conference Content Access, 2020. 
[14] World Economic Forum, “Schools of the Future, Defining New 
Models of Education for the Fourth Industrial Revolution,” 
Geneva: World Economic Forum, 2020. 
[15] J. Miranda, M. S. Ramírez-Montoya, and A. Molina, 
“Education 4.0 reference framework for the design of teaching-
learning systems: two case studies involving collaborative 
networks and open innovation”. Smart and Sustainable 
Collaborative Networks 4.0: 22nd IFIP WG 5.5 Working 
Conference on Virtual Enterprises, Springer International 
Publishing, vol. 22, pp. 692-701, 2021. 
[16] Tecnológico 
de 
Monterrey, 
Educational 
Innovation 
Department, “Report FDM,” 2020. 
[17] C. S. López-Cruz, and Y. Heredia, “Escala i, Guía de 
Aplicación,” Tecnológico de Monterrey, México., 2017.
 
 
Figure 4.  Survey results comparing the key transversal competencies trained before and after the course (2020 – 2021 - 2022). 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

