PLAIME: Multimedia Platform for the Integration of Handicapped Children in 
Music Education 
 
Maria-Dolores Cano, Antonio Martinez-Rojo, Ramon Sanchez-Iborra, Andrés Cabrera-Lozoya, Fernando Cerdan 
Department of Information Technologies and Communications 
Universidad Politécnica de Cartagena 
Cartagena, Spain 
{mdolores.cano, antoniom.martinezrojo, ramon.sancheziborra, andres.cabrera, fernando.cerdan}@upct.es
 
 
Abstract—This paper focuses on the use of multimedia 
technology to augment instruction for a special population. In 
Spain, the main musical instrument used in music classes is the 
recorder. However, the integration of children with disabilities 
in music classes that strictly follow a traditional learning 
system can be very difficult or even intractable, resulting in a 
negative effect on students. Information technologies represent 
a valuable means to overcome this potentially negative 
situation. In this work, we present the PLAtform for the 
Integration of handicapped children in Music Education 
(PLAIME), a multimedia tool to assist children in learning 
music, disregarding having some disability that inhibits 
handling the recorder. This tool is not intended to replace the 
teacher but to serve as a complementary learning mechanism, 
integrating e-learning with traditional learning. PLAIME 
includes 
theoretical 
lessons, 
customized 
activities, 
and 
collaborative games using peer-to-peer technology. Initial 
results show a positive acceptance by children.  
Keywords—media 
in 
education; 
computer-assisted 
instruction; 
handicapped 
children; 
interactive 
learning 
environments; music learning tool. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Information Age is imposing new challenges in 
current education systems. In Spain, one of the compulsory 
areas for primary education is Artistic Education that 
includes Music and Plastic. The curricula for primary 
education include two significant goals. The first goal is to 
use Information and Communication Technologies (ICT). 
ICT functions as a facilitator of active learning and higher-
order thinking and also serves as a tool for curriculum 
differentiation, adapting the learning content and tasks to the 
needs and capabilities of each individual pupil [1]. 
Moreover, the significance of cooperation and interaction in 
the classroom environment in order to promote the 
acquisition of learning skills and social relations has been 
demonstrated in previous works [2], and [3] has shown the 
positive impact of software games on pupils’ logical and 
strategic reasoning skills. The second goal is to be able to 
communicate through oral, corporal, visual, and musical 
means, developing the capacity of enjoying artistic 
expressions. The combination of these two goals results in an 
interesting music learning approach, e.g., Chan et al. [4] 
identified that ICT enabled pupils to approach music-based 
activities with greater confidence, a deeper level of 
understanding, and appreciation. Moreover, music has 
gained recognition through the years, and is playing a key 
role in the field of learning disabilities, providing a better 
quality of life to this group [5]. 
Although the current offer of software tools for music 
learning is varied, there is still a gap on the use of ICT in 
music teaching. With our proposal, we propose to address a 
current problem in Spanish primary schools: how to 
approach to a handicapped student during music classes? 
Through the collaboration between music teachers and 
university researchers in the telecommunications field, we 
present PLAIME (PLAtform for the Integration of 
handicapped children in Music Education), a useful 
multimedia tool for both teachers and pupils in primary 
music education. With PLAIME, a handicapped student can 
learn at the same pace as other pupils using the software tool 
instead of playing the recorder. Thus, PLAIME assists 
children to learn the primary education music curriculum 
whatever their physical condition is, creates a common 
ground for music learning promoting social inclusion, and 
fills the gap between ICT and music teaching. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
reviews other similar tools for music education with 
children. In Section 3, we identify the goals of our platform 
and describe its functionalities. A first insight on children’s 
attitude towards the platform is included in Section IV. The 
paper ends summarizing the most important facts. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Networked DrumSteps is a free tool for meaningful, 
collaborative, 
interaction 
in 
a 
constructionist 
music 
composition environment. It allows multiple users in 
different locations to collaborate in the process of music 
composition, but without the use of standard notation. 
Students that were tested confirmed that music composition 
in groups was much more fun and different than working 
alone, hence proving the advantages of collaborative 
software for music learning. Gall et al. [7] evaluated the 
impact of eJay in the development of composition skills in 
children aged 10–11 using Dance eJay. This music software 
provides the user with a variety of short musical samples that 
students can organize to create their own piece of music. 
After their study, authors argued that the use of eJay in the 
classroom led to a collaborative work among students that 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

increased their music creativity. In a similar way, the 
commercial software Teach me Piano Deluxe (TPD) teaches 
basic practical keyboard skills in music, focusing on rhythm, 
staff notation, and fingering. After being studied, authors 
concluded that TPD had clear effects on high school 
students, enhancing their rhythm, note-reading, and pitch.  
The i-Maestro project [8] is intended to develop 
interactive 
multimedia 
environments 
for 
technology 
enhanced music education. The main technical objectives of 
the project include: basic research and development on new 
solutions and enabling technologies to support traditional 
pedagogical paradigms for music training, novel pedagogical 
paradigms, and a framework for technology-enhanced music 
educational models and tools to support the creation of 
flexible and customized e-learning courses to improve 
accessibility to the musical knowledge. Compared with our 
proposal, i-Maestro is a more ambitious project tackling 
much deeper music knowledge, excellent for arts schools, 
but maybe less indicated as a supportive application for a 
primary school curriculum. As a minor observation, it has 
been thought for string instruments, whereas in this proposal 
we work with a wind instrument due to its popularity in 
Spanish primary education. Finally, Lenmus [9] is a free 
open source program to practice music reading skills, to 
improve aural recognition abilities, and to acquire theoretical 
music knowledge. It also includes a score editor. Above all, 
it focuses on recognition of intervals, chords, scales, and 
tonality. It is based on the use of music books written in 
XML that teachers have to create using the DocBook XML 
format. In our opinion, Lenmus is not children-oriented, and 
would be recommended for music knowledge much deeper 
than the requirements of a primary education music 
curriculum. Moreover, the use of XML syntax is not 
straightforward, requiring an extra effort from the teacher’s 
point of view. Table I summarizes PLAIME’s features 
compared to these tools from the related literature. The 
comparison has been completed based on the corresponding 
works mentioned above. Observe that, up to the knowledge 
of the authors, none of these works makes any reference to 
disabled pupils. 
III. 
PLAIME 
PLAIME is a complementary method for music learning 
in primary education, promoting social inclusion of 
handicapped children in a music learning environment. With 
the proposed multimedia platform, children with disabilities 
will be able to emulate music practice at the same pace of 
other pupils. Although they will not play the instrument 
physically, they will become more knowledgeable in music 
basics and will be part of the same educational environment. 
Designed for children, PLAIME includes basic concepts 
about the recorder and assists in acquiring competences such 
as basic scores and notes identification. Following guidelines 
from the teachers and from the primary education Spanish 
curriculum, PLAIME provides a gradual acquisition of 
music knowledge. 
Bearing this in mind, the specific challenges of the 
platform can be described as follows. This tool has to be 
useful in order to help in the understanding of music in 
primary education, thus being necessary to attend the music 
teacher demands to achieve a real useful tool, and to avoid 
teachers’ negative beliefs about the benefits of ICT on 
primary education [10]. The platform has to be interactive 
and versatile through the combination of theory, exercises, 
and games. Outstanding over other platforms, activities and 
games in PLAIME address student differentiation issues. 
Particularly, games and exercises of our platform can be used 
not only in the classroom but also in extracurricular activities 
or at home. The graphical interface has to be simple, 
attractive, and intuitive for teachers, parents, and children, 
carefully taking into account design requirements for 
handicapped children. Previous works [11] have verified the 
relationship among button size and number of buttons in a 
touch screen and the effectiveness of the assistive 
communication 
device 
interface. 
We 
follow 
these 
recommendations. Observe that a normal screen could be 
also employed. Last, Java is the selected high-level object-
oriented 
programming 
language. 
With 
platform 
independence, PLAIME can be run in any software or 
hardware platform. We have followed the Factory and 
Singleton programming patterns, which allow an easier error 
recovery and memory saving, particularly interesting when 
using a graphical interface. In addition, the system has been 
designed to take advantage of polymorphism to reduce 
processing load. 
The platform starts with a launch screen, a user selection 
screen, a character screen, and a main menu screen (see Fig. 
1). Regarding the pedagogical agents (character), we decided  
TABLE I.  
COMPARING PLAIME WITH OTHER AVAILABLE MUSIC LEARNING TOOLS (L≡LOW;M≡MEDIUM; H≡HIGH) 
 
i-Maestro 
Networked DrumSteps 
eJay 
TPD 
Lenmus 
PLAIME
Audience 
All ages 
All ages 
All ages 
All ages 
All ages 
All ages 
Instruments 
String 
Drums 
Several 
Piano 
Several 
Recorder 
Music knowledge 
H 
L 
M 
H 
M 
L 
Lessons 
Yes 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Practice 
Yes 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Games 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Composition 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Collaborative 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
Yes 
Contents’ flexibility 
H 
L 
L 
L 
M 
H 
Teacher’s required ICT knowledge 
M 
L 
L 
L 
H 
L 
Children-oriented graphical interface 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Adaptability to primary schools’ curriculum 
L 
M 
M 
M 
L 
H 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

to incorporate an unrealistic character integrated with the 
whole application design as an onscreen trainer, which 
makes students to learn better [12]. The character is active 
only for the explanations (lectures), not participating in 
games or in activities. This is the best approach to not 
distract the learners attention, i.e., to not interfere negatively 
on the learning process, but at the same time fostering 
learning [13]. The characters included in PLAIME are 
simple, 2D, as preferred by children [14]. On the other hand, 
for the designs used to show the positions of fingers over the 
recorder, we use a more realistic approach, since they try to 
“reflect” the student’s hands. 
Lectures have been developed following an example of 
Spanish 
music 
curriculum 
for 
primary 
education. 
Accordingly, PLAIME comprises seven theoretical lessons. 
The structure of a lesson includes an explanation (whose 
content can be read by the character), examples, and practice 
(see Fig. 2). Contents include: recorder history, recorder 
structure, basic techniques regarding tongue and finger 
position and breathing, practicing how to play the recorder, 
and reading and writing scores. In a traditional classroom 
environment, the teacher explains and then the pupils play 
(physically) the recorder. From the disabled pupil’s 
perspective, the practice section of each lecture provided in 
PLAIME allows him to perform virtually with the advantage 
of being in the classroom with the other students. Being with 
their peers has social benefits for children with disabilities. 
Moreover, children with peer interaction skills are more 
likely to be accepted by their peers, and are less likely to 
experience the negative effects of social rejection [15]. 
With PLAIME, students can load activities created by 
their teacher or even by their parents using a built-in 
activities content manager. Students can complete these 
activities at the school or a home, benefiting from parental 
participation in their education. An activity can include as 
many exercises as necessary, and exercises belong to eight 
different types: test, questions, score to note, note to score, 
recorder to note, note to recorder, score to recorder, and 
recorder to score. Tests and questions are the traditional 
exercises to evaluate theoretical knowledge. The work with 
notes is divided into six different exercises that increase in 
complexity, from the simplest “score to note” to the toughest 
“score to recorder” (see Fig. 2). The platform is designed so 
that solved exercises can be saved in the computer, printed, 
or sent by email to the teacher. Handing in the answers in 
any of the available methods (e.g., email) is the way to get 
personal feedback from the teacher, and to obtain an 
explanation on why the exercise is right or wrong. Observe 
that feedback is often the weakest link in educational 
software, often offering nothing more than an indication of 
whether an answer is right or wrong [16]. The activities 
content manager is an additional built-in program that allows 
the teacher or the parents to create a new activity or to open 
an existing activity for edition. 
Games have been included in PLAIME because they can 
be effective teaching and learning tools and the incorporation 
of multimedia stimuli and games is a motivational factor for 
children, enticing them to use the software [16]. Moreover, 
by using these games, pupils (handicapped or not) play with  
 
Figure 1.  Character screen. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Example of explanation and practice. 
their peers in the classroom (or at home) favoring the 
creation of an inclusion environment, which will have a 
positive effect on their social and educational behavior [15]. 
PLAIME contains six games, each one designed to develop a 
specific music skill, such as writing and reading scores or 
performing a score with the recorder (see Fig. 3). It is also 
possible to play with two players in the same local area 
network using Peer-to- Peer (P2P) technology. All games 
provide feedback on the learner’s performance, thus he 
progresses at his own pace. 
IV. 
INITIAL EVALUATION APPROACH 
A first experience on children acceptance of this tool was 
carried out in the Information Society fair for citizens, which 
takes place annually in the Autonomous Community of 
Murcia (Spain). During two days, we presented our platform 
in one of the stands and let children use it. More than 20 
children between 6 and 11 years old accompanied by their 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

parents showed spontaneous interest in PLAIME and 
decided to use it (see Table II). More than 90% of these 
children found it fun and useful, spending in average 14 
minutes using it. Their parents also found the platform as 
very useful. Nevertheless, only 75% rated it as easy to use 
mainly because of the use of the activities content manager. 
This is only an initial observation, and a deeper study is 
needed to collect teachers’ experience and measuring the 
effect on children’s music and social attitudes. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
PLAIME is a multimedia platform designed to promote 
the integration of children with special educational needs in 
music classes. With this software tool, we create a common 
ground for music learning that allows differentiation 
requirements, but at the same time is compatible with a 
traditional music curriculum approach. The platform is 
highly flexible, allowing the teachers to customize contents 
and exercises, so that all students can learn at their own pace. 
PLAIME provides several games to be played by one or two 
players becoming a collaborative environment that benefits 
social inclusion. Special needs of handicapped children 
within music classes are not covered by other known 
applications because they are not designed as supporting 
tools for the primary education curriculum. From the initial 
evaluation, PLAIME is a competitive multimedia platform 
whose content’s flexibility and design make it a potent tool 
to integrate traditional learning with innovative learning. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Example of games. 
TABLE II.  
RESULTS OBTAINED IN A PRELIMINARY SURVEY (X≡
MEAN; S≡STANDARD DEVIATION; (1) ≡CHILDREN; (2) ≡ PARENTS) 
 
Children 
Parents
 
mean std_dev mean std_dev
Age (years) (1) 
8,25 
1,79 
-- 
-- 
Spent time using PLAIME (min.) (1) 
13,9 
4,72 
-- 
-- 
Useful (yes/no) (1) (2) 
90% 
-- 
100%
-- 
Fun (yes/no) (1) 
95% 
-- 
-- 
-- 
Easy to use (yes/no) (1) (2) 
90% 
-- 
75% 
-- 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the MICINN/FEDER 
project grant TEC2010-21405-C02-02/TCM (CALM) and 
"Programa de Ayudas a Grupos de Excelencia de la RM, de 
la Fundación Séneca, Agencia de Ciencia y Tecnología de la 
RM”. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E., Smeets and T. Mooij, “Pupil-centred learning, ICT, and 
teacher behaviour: observations in educational practice”, 
British Journal of Educational Technology, 32(4), pp. 403-
418, 2001. 
[2] E. B. Susman, “Co-operative learning: a review of factors that 
increase the effectiveness of computer-based instruction”, 
Journal of Educational Computing Research, 18(4), pp. 303-
322, 1998. 
[3] R. M., Bottino, L. Ferlino, M. Ott, and M. Tavella, 
“Developing strategic and reasoning abilities with computer 
games at primary school level”, Computers & Education 49 
(4), pp. 1272-1286, 2007. 
[4] L. M. Y. Chan, A. C. Jones, E. Scanlon, and R. Joiner, “The 
use of ICT to support the development of practical music 
skills through acquiring keyboard skills: a classroom based 
study”, Computers & Education 46, pp. 391-406, 2006. 
[5] D. Savarimuthu and T. Bunnell, “The effects of music on 
clients with learning disabilities: a literature review”, 
Complementary Therapies in Nursing & Midwifery 8, pp. 
160-165, 2002. 
[6] C. McCarthy, J. Bligh, K. Jennings, and B. Tangney, “Virtual 
collaborative learning environments for music: Networked 
DrumSteps”, Computers&Education 44, pp. 173-195, 2005. 
[7] M. Gall and N. Breeze, “Music and eJay: An opportunity for 
creative collaborations in the classroom”, International 
Journal of Educational Research 47, pp. 27-40, 2008. 
[8] B. Ong, N. Mitolo, and P. Nesi, “i-Maestro: Interactive 
Multimedia Environments for Music Education”, LNCS, vol. 
5105, pp. 770-776, Springer, Heidelberg, 2008. 
[9] Lenmus, http://www.lenmus.org. Last accessed November 
14th, 2011. 
[10] R. Hermans, J. Tondeur, J. Van Braak, and M. Valcke, “The 
impact of primary school teachers’ educational beliefs on the 
classroom use of computers”, Computers & Education 51, pp. 
1499-1509, 2008. 
[11] T. D. Sanger and J. Henderson, “Optimizing Assisted 
Communication 
Devices 
for 
Children 
With 
Motor 
Impairments Using a Model of Information Rate and Channel 
Capacity”, IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and 
Rehabilitation Engineering, 15 (3), pp. 458-468, 2007. 
[12] R.C. Clark and R. E. Mayer, “E-learning and the science of 
instruction proven guidelines for consumers and designers of 
multimedia learning”, John Wiley & Sons, 2003. 
[13] R. K. Atkinson, “Optimizing learning from examples using 
animated pedagogical agents”, Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 94 (2), pp. 416-427, 2002. 
[14] S. Girard and H. Johnson, “What Do Children Favor as 
Embodied Pedagogical Agents?”, LNCS, Vol 6094, pp. 307-
316, 2010. 
[15] M. B. Bronson, P. Hauser-Cram, and M. E. Warfield, 
“Classrooms Matter: Relations between the Classroom 
Environment and the Social and Mastery Behavior of Five-
Year-Old Children with Disabilities”, Journal of Applied 
Developmental Psychology 18, pp. 331- 348, 1997. 
[16] G. Sim, S. MacFarlane, and J. Read, “All work and no play: 
Measuring fun, usability, and learning in software for 
children”, Computers&Education, 46, pp. 235-248, 2006.  
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

