From Lecturing to Apprenticeship 
Introducing play in museum learning practice 
 
Emanuela Marchetti 
Department of Learning and Philosophy 
Centre for Design, Learning and Innovation 
Aalborg University Esbjerg 
ema@create.aau.dk 
Eva Petersson Brooks 
Department of Architecture, Design & Media Technology 
Centre for Design, Learning and Innovation 
Aalborg University Esbjerg 
ep@create.aau.dk
 
 
Abstract— Analysis of museum learning practice, and related 
work, have revealed that communication of historical processes 
resembles school teaching, eventually hindering children's 
participation in museum learning activities. Starting from this 
issue, a new playful installation is being designed, actively 
involving a group of primary school children. Results from this 
process suggest that museum learning practice could be 
enriched, by moving toward a more non-formal learning 
approach, in which children and adults could engage in shared 
problem solving activities. Play is envisioned as an effective 
framework to support shared problem solving, also allowing 
for a symmetric dialogue to emerge between children and 
adults. 
Keywords-non-formal 
learning; 
historical 
process; 
apprenticeship; object-mediated interaction. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Museums are currently facing a challenging innovation 
process, including re-shaping of, for example, their way of 
communicating historical and cultural knowledge to visitors. 
Many researchers have dealt with this challenge from 
different angles, from an institutional perspective [15] or 
from the visitors' perspective, either looking at what they do 
[6] or proposing new design solutions to enhance museum 
learning practices [14]. Despite these many contributions, 
these re-shaping processes are short off a clear direction 
toward innovation [15]. This situation has implications for 
museum learning practices, which still keeps a traditional 
and formal approach. 
Conducting a Participatory Design (PD) study with a 
group of 25 Danish children around 10 years old, aimed at 
designing a playful installation to enhance museum-learning 
practice, a main issue was identified in the communication of 
historical processes. According to our study, museum 
practitioners consider guided activities as the most valuable 
learning method. Hence they tend to communicate historical 
processes through lectures, primarily in the form of one-way 
communication, based on chronological sequences of events, 
with the consequence of neglecting their actual complexity 
and embedded meaning. 
Moreover, observations of primary school children 
attending a guided tour suggest that they perceive museum 
experience as another class to attend, in which the guide acts 
like a lecturing teacher as they walk through the exhibition 
space. As a result, the guided tour mainly elicits a form of 
static interaction mode, similar to traditional school lectures, 
in which children are supposed to listen quietly and raise 
their hands whenever adults ask them questions. 
Therefore, starting from the data collected through the PD 
process, it is being suggested that museum learning practice 
could be enriched by introducing playful and shared problem 
solving activities, in which children could participate more 
actively in a form of apprenticeship [25]. Learning 
experiences concern active participation in activities, leading 
to knowledge and skills [25, 21]. In this way, the intention is 
to initiate and enhance a dynamic communication, in order to 
foster a symmetric dialogue between children and adults 
during guided museum tours. This, in turn, is supposed to 
allow for a more effective communication, including a richer 
understanding of the actual meaning of historical processes. 
In the next section related work is presented, then, in 
section 3 research methods and an analysis of museum 
learning 
practice 
are 
discussed, 
focusing 
on 
the 
communication of historical processes. In section 4 the 
design outcome and implications for museum learning 
practice are presented, finally in section 5 conclusions and 
future works are discussed. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Different studies have been published in the past 20 years, 
about the use of interactive technologies in museums. The 
first solutions to be proposed were “kiosk-based computer 
exhibits” [14] showing audio and video material. Nowadays, 
more interactive interfaces have been created, promising a 
more engaging museum experience.  
An interesting approach is represented by interactive 
environments, in which technology is hidden. Hence the 
visitors can simply interact with the exhibitions space and 
the objects available, focusing on the interaction itself, its 
output, and the exhibition content. The Kÿla installation 
follows this approach. Designed to enhance visitors' 
experience of an exhibition about archaic culture from 
Karelia, Finland, the installation is a dark exhibition space, 
where the visitors can look at old paintings, while walking 
through the space with a candle. Sensors are hidden close to 
the paintings, so that whenever the visitors approach a 
painting with the candle, an old Karelian music is played 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[12]. Observations show that the installation elicits interest 
and emotional responses among the visitors. A similar 
setting is proposed by Hall and Bannon, exploring how 
ubiquitous computing could enhance children's experience of 
museums [8]. The setting has been tested in the Hunt 
Museum in Limerick, Ireland, dedicated to the memory of 
archaeologist John Hunt, who donated his collection to the 
people of Limerick. The exhibition is conceived as an RFID-
based interactive space, in which children can interact with 
copies of the collection objects. For instance, they can leave 
their feedback about the exhibition, by talking to a phone and 
listen to others' activating a radio [8]. 
Multi-touch tabletop interfaces for museums seem to have 
a similar approach, in providing an interactive setting with a 
valuable affordance for social/playful interaction among the 
visitors [11], hiding the technology and enhancing content. 
These kinds of interfaces are often represented by interactive 
navigation systems, allowing visitors to access information 
in a different way, compared to traditional brochures or 
audio-guides. For example, “Tree Life Table” displayed at 
the Museum of Natural History in Berlin and “Kurio”, where 
the first installation is a multi-touch interactive surface, 
allowing visitors to search for information navigating 
through popping up bubbles, containing questions about 
different species. Ethnographic observations, conducted in 
the museum, reveal that people might engage in playful 
interaction, experimenting with what they could do with their 
hands, e.g. tapping with more than one finger at the same 
time, or caressing the surface with a flat hand [11]. Kurio 
[20] proposes a similar approach, but introducing play more 
explicitly, in the forms of shared problem solving, to 
enhance families’ museum experience. Kurio is a hybrid 
system including tangibles, a PDA, and a tabletop display. 
The visitors are invited to play the role of time travelers, 
stranded in the present time, who have to collect information 
about their current time, in order to go back to their own 
time. 
Exploration of the domain of interactive technologies for 
museums is wide. These cases have been selected as they 
attempt to introduce playful interactions, to enhance learning 
in museums. Similarly, this study explores the possibility to 
use role-play and cooperation, as a way to acquire 
knowledge and experiencing historical dynamics.  
III. 
MUSEUM LEARNING PRACTICE 
A. Methods 
This study is based on ethno-methodologies, such as 
participant 
observations, 
situated 
interviews, 
and 
participatory design (PD). Each session of field study and 
design process has been documented through video 
recordings and/or pictures, when possible, and field notes, to 
be available for qualitative analysis [26]. 
The project is conducted in cooperation with the Viking 
Museum in Ribe, in South-West Jutland (Denmark). This 
museum has been chosen because of its interest in 
communicating the story of the local community and its 
development. This form of complex historical processes is 
the focus of our study. The Viking Museum in Ribe is placed 
in the oldest town in Denmark, Ribe, which was originally a 
seasonal market place. In 700 King Godfred turned the 
market place into a permanent settlement, dividing the land 
into smaller lots, which could be rented or sold to merchants 
and craftsmen. Hence, Harald Bluetooth, in 900, developed 
Ribe into a town, mostly by having fortifications placed 
around the settlement it [7]. 
The story of Ribe represents a typical case of urban 
development, 
unfolded 
through 
an 
intertwining 
of 
sociomaterial practices, such as: production of goods, 
technical and economic innovation, and political decisions. 
The political aspect was expressed through manipulation of 
the territory, mainly in the form of infrastructures placement 
and maintenance, as discussed by Akrich [1]. 
 
 
A field study has been conducted, so to reconstruct 
museum experience from the perspective of all the “users” 
involved. Hence museum practitioners were interviewed and 
a group of 25 children around 10 years old were involved in 
a PD process, to gain an understanding of their values and 
dilemmas about museum learning practice. This particular 
target group was selected as they have already started to 
learn about history in school, they have probably visited 
several museums, and they are able to provide well-
formulated accounts about their previous experiences. 
The PD process was held at an after-school institution in 
Denmark, which became a design collaboratorium [5]: a 
space for co-design activities, where the prototypes could be 
stored for future investigations. In the beginning the children 
were interviewed about their previous experience of 
museums, supported by a few tasks. For instance, the 
children should write on a sheet of paper the museum they 
last visited and an adjective to describe how this visit was. 
Afterward their comments were shared in a joint 
conversation. Later the children were asked to comment 
upon pictures showing objects displayed in Ribe Museum. In 
the following session the children were invited to freely visit 
the museum, which offered opportunity to observe how they 
engaged, verbally and non-verbally, with the exhibition 
space (Ill.1). Finally the children were invited to co-design a 
game about the Viking Age and were provided with design 
materials: Lego bricks, modeling clay, colored pencils and 
Illustration 1: Free visit in Ribe. 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

papers (Ill.2). All the participants in the co-design session 
engaged in a material brain storming, where ideas for the 
game were expressed through the creation of game pieces, 
which were tested and played with. Hence several artifacts 
were produced and, furthermore, a cardboard prototype was 
created and tested twice. Currently, a working prototype is 
under development to be tested in situ, at Ribe Museum 
(Table 1). 
 
Table 1. Process Diagram. 
  
 
 
B. Learning Practice and the Diachronic Perspective 
 
Exhibitions have always been the main communication 
mode between museums and their public. Besides, 
publications, guided tours and other activities are offered to 
young visitors, so as to support them in gaining knowledge 
about the exhibition in question. The objects displayed, and 
the way they are being displayed, play a central role in 
museum learning practice, as this creates conditions for the 
ways learning, as well as social interaction, might emerge. 
The exhibition and the displayed objects constitute resources 
for communication enacting different functions:  
• 
ideational (enacting “what goes on in the 
world”);  
• 
interpersonal (enacting relations between the 
visitors and between the visitors and the 
exhibition); and,  
• 
textual (enacting the combined whole – the 
exhibition) [9]. 
 
Museum tours, guided or not, are a form of object-
mediated interaction [10]. The exhibition is created to 
convey knowledge from the museum to the visitors, and for 
visitors to communicate with each other, verbally and non-
verbally, through the exhibition space and the objects 
displayed [17].  
Furthermore, despite that many tangible or interactive 
exhibition settings are being proposed by museums and 
researchers, a gap has been identified in relation to 
communication of history from a diachronic perspective, 
which deals with historical processes through time. It seems 
that such settings aim specifically, at providing an immersive 
experience, about how it might feel to be in a specific point 
in time, from a synchronic perspective. Somehow they 
represent an attempt to shorten the time distance between the 
past and the present. Interviews with museum practitioners 
reveal that tangible representations of the diachronic 
perspective are seen as an interesting possibility, but also as 
difficult to achieve. Instead, lecturing and story telling are 
seen as the most suitable communication mode, because of 
their sequential nature. 
Generally, the only tangible representation of a 
diachronic perspective is the exhibition configuration, which 
starts with the oldest findings and ends with the most recent. 
Hence the museum tour acquires the shape of a walk through 
time. This is to say that complex historical processes, such as 
urban development, socio-cultural change, or technological 
innovation, most often are conveyed through lectures and 
written publications or, more briefly, through explicative 
signs. Our study suggests that this approach may have 
implications for learning and social interaction conditions, in 
the museum context. In this way, the real complexity of 
historical processes is hidden. By historical processes it is 
intended socio-material interaction among a group of people, 
within and through the natural environment and its 
affordances, as it emerges from historical [7] and 
anthropological studies [1, 13]. These processes embody 
sociopolitical thinking and have strong impact on emerging 
communities, so that they become part of their identity. 
Similar cases are discussed by Ingold [13], who specifically 
studies how humans relate to their environment, and Akrich 
[1], who discusses how infrastructures placement might 
embody complex political agendas, such as developing rural 
areas. The story of Ribe provides an interesting case of such 
dynamics, as urban development took place through socio-
material actions, such as land partition into lots, development 
of the market place, and construction of defensive walls. 
A tacit awareness about this kind of dynamics would be 
beneficial for young visitors’ understanding of history, as 
well as for their social and cultural identity formation. 
Therefore, it was decided that the design outcome, from the 
present study, should aim at supporting learning of urban 
development, through playful and tangible interaction. 
Illustration 2: A participatory session. 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
C. Social interaction in museums: guided versus free tours 
 
Observations conducted during our field study and 
related work, show that emergent interaction among 
children and adults in museum, may assume different forms. 
According to our data, during free tours some children 
explore the exhibition space divided into small groups, 
looking and commenting what they see. They may also be 
quite active physically, while others prefer a quiet walk by 
themselves. Furthermore, studies conducted on families 
visiting museums, suggest that many children have already 
learnt a lot by themselves about a specific topic, before 
coming to the museum. These children tend to comment the 
exhibition with their parents, showing off what they know, 
often criticizing the written explanations provided by the 
museum as incomplete or even wrong [6].  
Instead our field work reveals that guides see their job as 
telling a “nice” story, that could be informative but also 
engaging for the children. They also would like to actively 
involve the children in the story telling process. The guides 
have developed a few strategies for that purpose, such as: to 
compare past and present, or to ask the children questions 
about the displayed objects to keep their attention alive, or 
even they try to “look at what they are looking at”, so to 
dynamically shape the story according to the children’s 
interest [17]. However, it is hard to understand if these 
strategies are as effective as desired, only a few children in 
fact seem to respond as expected. Most of them remain 
silent, wondering around the exhibition in small groups. This 
may happen because guides are perceived as authorities 
giving a lecture, and not as more equal facilitators. 
Considering the analyzed dynamics, it seems as guided 
tours facilitate a static form of interaction, while free visits 
seem to afford a more playful exploratory interaction style, 
allowing for individual needs to be expressed, such as: chat 
with friends or enjoy a bit of calm. However, guides’ notion 
of story telling seems worth to pursue. It may also benefit 
from introducing play and/or playfulness, which could 
provide a safe and relaxed atmosphere, for children and 
adults to communicate as peers. Therefore, we propose to 
enhance children's museum experience, by introducing forms 
of tangible play, as a communication mode: so to provide a 
playful-material grounding to understand the complexity of 
historical processes and to provide an informal environment, 
facilitating the emergence of a symmetric dialogue between 
adults and children [22].  
The scenario proposed in this study, is that museum 
learning practice should become a form of sociomaterial 
participatory apprenticeship. According to Rogoff [25] 
apprenticeship is a learning practice, in which individuals 
and their social partners are engaged in situated activities 
together, as an organic unit within the activity [25]. 
 
IV. 
MICRO-CULTURE 
A. Design concept 
A playful interactive installation has being conceived 
through the PD process, in the form of low-fidelity 
prototypes. It is intended for the children to experience, 
through play, the meaning of historical processes as 
sociomaterial interactions, specifically in relation to urban 
development and placement of infrastructures on the 
territory. The installation is called Micro-Culture to suggest 
a biological metaphor, in which the children are supposed to 
observe cultural phenomena in act, as biologists do with 
bacterial culture. Hence the children are expected to get a 
clearer picture of the dynamics behind urban development 
and of the implications of placing infrastructures, on land 
and people's everyday practices. 
The game is designed as a mixed reality tangible 
installation, in which sociomateriality in play is being 
emphasized. In this way, children's attention should be 
focused on the learning content and the game. Furthermore, 
since social interaction and participation, in experiencing 
historical processes, is the central element of the game, the 
setting is intended to facilitate eye contact among the 
players, eventually resembling a mixed reality board game. 
Ideally the players should engage with an interactive surface 
projected on the floor. In this way, there would be no chairs 
and the playing surface could be wide enough, to afford free 
participation from anyone. Moreover, physical engagement 
should emerge without fear of breaking anything. But for 
practical reasons, a screen will be used for the test, placed 
horizontally on the floor. On the screen a simulation of a 
population and a landscape is being showed from above. 
 
 
The population includes people at different ages in 
lifespan; they can be newly born, move around to different 
environments, grow up and have children of their own, and, 
then, grow old and die. This lifespan aspect allows to make 
the population more realistic and to take advantage of 
children's interest for human bones, and their instinctive 
sympathy for stories about people from the past [18]. 
Moreover, since we are dealing with a diachronic 
 
Illustration 3: Test of the low-fidelity prototype. 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

perspective, the succession of generations, coming and 
leaving the world one after the other, can be used to provide 
a representation of time passing by. After a few generations, 
it should be possible to decide that an age is over and, 
consequently, move to another time. Hence the people could 
build different houses, wear different clothes, and behave 
differently. 
 
B. Learning process 
The design of Micro-Culture is motivated by the 
intention to enrich museum learning practice, so to transform 
it into a participatory apprenticeship. According to Rogoff, 
children acquire knowledge and skills, by being involved in 
goal directed activities, together with adults and/or peers, 
who act as guides through the learning process [25]. Rogoff's 
main references in this respect are Vygotsky [29] and 
Lenont’ev [16], who consider children as “active participant 
in their understanding”, while engaged in “shared problem 
solving” together with their guides. Social interaction is 
considered to be essential for learning to happen, where adult 
or peer guidance is necessary in supporting the child to reach 
the “zone of proximal development”, the region of sensitivity 
where the support from adults and/or peers is required for the 
child to reach beyond his or her limits [28, 29]. The 
prototype may act as a mediating resource, facilitating 
learning and social interaction [21]. 
The depicted situation has a few similarities with 
museum learning practice, as children are supposed to learn 
by coming to museum exhibitions and being guided by adult 
experts. Play and a playful approach offer a promising 
framework, when it comes to introduce shared problem 
solving within a given game. Furthermore, this could 
leverage on the guides’ values, providing play as a 
communication mode for collaborative story telling. A goal 
could be directly embedded in the narrative, so as to 
facilitate individual play, for instance in trying to create a 
lively village or socially, in stealing peasants from each 
other. 
Therefore, in our studies, play and playfulness may 
provide a valuable framework to introduce a goal-directed 
shared problem solving activity, enhancing children's 
participation in learning and social activities. Play is 
associated with exploration [24, 27]. Exploration occurs in 
novel situations where the child asks, “what can this object 
do?” whereas play occurs in familiar situations where the 
child asks, “What can I do with this object?”; situations 
where expressions and actions are experienced as sensations 
[22]. Accordingly, play consists of a variety of activities that 
involve manipulation of the environment. Bundy [3], 
Petersson [21], and Brooks and Petersson [2], have 
described play as a transaction between the individual and 
the environment, which creates situations that are 
intrinsically motivated, internally controlled, and free of 
constraints of an objective reality. According to cognitive 
developmental theories play is a cognitive process and a 
voluntary activity and as such it contributes to cognitive 
development, problem solving and creative thought. 
Furthermore, play develops innovation, flexibility, enhanced 
problem solving and adaptation [28, 30]. Socio-cultural 
theories of play emphasize that through play with others, 
children learn social rules and norms; aspects that are 
practiced through play [19]. In this study, we address play 
not just as an activity, but as a state of mind; a playful 
attitude, and we apply Bundy’s [4] Model of Playfulness 
where playfulness is determined by: the presence of 
intrinsic motivation; the internal control; the freedom to 
suspend reality; and social play cues.  
Initial testing with a low-fidelity prototype showed that, 
by playing, children could engage in a friendly dialogue with 
the researchers. Specifically, they started asking questions 
about the prototype and the purpose of the tangibles. Hence, 
while engaging into role play or in setting up their village, 
they often commented or asked us suggestions about what 
could be added or changed. Moreover, questions were raised 
by the children about how people died and how they lived in 
the past. They also asked playful questions, both during 
design and testing sessions, e.g. they asked if there were 
lions or snakes in Viking Denmark. This behavior might be 
facilitated by the different features of the prototype and game 
play. A board games-like configuration of the prototype and 
exchange of tangibles facilitated eye contact and social 
interaction among the players. Moreover, the absence of a set 
of specific rules, allowed the children to feel relaxed and to 
explore what they wanted to do without any fear for failure, 
for example by building a settlement or attacking and teasing 
each other, as they were rival land lords1. 
Certainly children's relaxed behavior may also be related 
to the fact that they became acquainted with us through a one 
year long PD process. Therefore, a working prototype needs 
to be tested in the museum, to verify if the same relaxed 
interaction style can emerge, also between the children and a 
guide they have never met. Moreover, a test should be 
performed also with occasional visitors, taking part to a 
guided or a free tour. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Starting from data collected during a one year 
participatory study and related work about museum learning 
practice, addressed to primary school children, this study 
discusses open issues regarding learning and social 
interaction in museums. 
The main issue identified in our study is the use of 
conveying notions related to historical processes through 
lecturing. In this way children's museum experience 
resembles a lot school teaching, hence children are usually 
very quiet and it is not clear what they are learning. 
Moreover, the real complexity of historical processes may be 
hidden behind nominal sequences of facts. 
A PD process has been conducted for one year involving 
children 8-10 years old; in order to design a playful setting 
that could support such learning practice. The outcome of the 
process is Micro-Culture, a playful installation, based on 
                                                             
1 A detailed discussion about emerging forms of play will be 
provided in a future publication. 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

tangible interaction and augmented-reality, aimed at 
conveying historical processes through play, emphasizing 
their meaning and complexity. 
This study proposes to enhance learning in museums, by 
introducing play, so as to move from lecturing to 
apprenticeship, as defined by Rogoff [25f2]. The proposed 
approach intends to enrich story-telling practices, already 
present in museums, through play. Hence children and adults 
could both cooperate in creating their story, by playing 
together. 
Initial testing seems to reveal that children could engage 
in play and informal dialogues with the researchers. More 
testing is needed in the museum, so to evaluate if and how 
playful interaction could be elicited between children and 
guides and what would be the learning implications. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Akrich, “The De-Scription of Technical Objects”, in 
Shaping 
Technology/Building 
Society, 
studies 
in 
sociotechnical change, Bijker and Law, Eds. MIT Press, 1992 
pp.205-224. 
[2] A. Brooks and E. Petersson, “Play Therapy Utilizing the Sony 
EyeToy®”, Presence 2005, London, UK, 2005 pp. 303-314. 
[3] A. Bundy, “Measuring Play Performance”, in M. Law, D. 
Baum and W. Dunn (Eds.). Measuring Occupational 
Performance Supporting Best Practice in Occupational 
Therapy, 89-102. NJ: Slack Inc., 2001. 
[4] A. Bundy, “Play and Playfulness: What to Look for”, In L.D. 
Parham and L.S. Fazio, Eds. Play in Occupational Therapy 
for Children, St. Louis, MO: Mosby, pp. 52-66, 1997. 
[5] S. Bødker and J. Buur, “The Design Collaboratorium – A  
Place for Usability Design”, in ACM Transactions on  
Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 9, No. 2, June 2002, pp. 152– 
169, 2002. 
[6] K. Crowley and M. Jacobs, “Building Islands of Expertise  
in Everyday Family Activity”, in Learning Conversations  
in Museums, G. Leinhardt, K. Crowley, & K. Knutson,  
Eds. Mahwah, NJ., Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2002. 
[7] J. Graham-Campbell and M. Valor, “The archaeology of 
Medieval Europe , vol. 1, eighth to twelfth century AD,” 
Aarhus University Press, 2007. 
[8] T. Hall and L. Bannon, “Cooperative design of children's  
interaction in museums: a case study in the Hunt Museum”,  
in CoDesign, vol. 1, n. 3,  pp. 187-218, 2005. 
[9] M. A. K. Halliday, “An Introduction to Functional  
Grammar”, London, Edward Arnold, 1985. 
[10] A. Henare, M. Holbraad and S. Westel, “Thinking through 
Things, Theorising artefacts ethnographically”, Routledge, 
2007. 
[11] E. Hornecker, “I don’t understand it either, but it is cool” –  
Visitor Interactions with a Multi-Touch Table in a Museum”,  
in Proceedings IEEE Tabletop 2008, pp.121-128, 2008. 
[12] T.Ilmonen, “Tranquil interaction: exploring archaic  
culture in the Kÿla installation”, in Proceedings of the  
2007 conference on Designing pleasurable products and  
interfaces, 22 August, Helsinki, Finland, pp. 92-106, 2007. 
[13] T. Ingold, “The perception of the Environment, Essays in  
livelihood, dwelling and skill”, Routledge, 2000. 
[14] J. Kidd, I. Ntala, and W. Lyons, “Multi-touch  
interfaces in museum spaces: reporting preliminary  
findings on the nature of interaction,” in Re-thinking  
Technology in Museums: Emerging Experiences,  
Ciolfi, Scott and Barbieri, Eds. University of Limerick, 2011.  
[15] C. Lang, J. Reeve and V. Woollard, “The responsive museum: 
working with audiences in the twenty-first century”, Ashgate 
2006. 
[16] A. N.Leont'ev, “The problem of activity in psychology”, in  
The concept of activity in Soviet psychology, Wertsch, Ed.  
Armonk, NY Sharpe, 1981. 
[17] E. Marchetti, “Story Telling and Riddle Games” in  
Proceedings of Pinc 2011, Participatory Innovation  
Conference, Sønderborg, Denmark, 13-15 January 2011. 
[18] E. Marchetti, “Myth and Bones: Museums Socio-epistemic  
practice and children's values”, in Proceedings of  
InterSymp'2011, The International Institute for Advanced  
Studies in Systems Research and Cybernetics, IIAS 2011, 
1st Symposium and Panel on The Art of Relational Living  
in the Communication Age, 1-5 August 2011, Baden-Baden,  
Germany, 2011. 
[19] G. H. Mead, “Mind, Self, and Society”, Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press, 1934. 
[20] K. Muise and R. Wakkary, “Bridging Designers’ Intentions to 
Outcomes with Constructivism”, in Proceedings of the 8th 
ACM Conference Design of Interactive Systems, Aarhus, 
Denmark, 2010.  
[21] E. Petersson, “Non-formal Learning through Ludic Engagement  
with in Interactive Environments”, Doctoral dissertation,  
Malmö University, School of Teacher Education, Studies in  
Educational Sciences, 2006. 
[22] E. Petersson and A. Brooks, “Virtual and Physical Toys:  
Open-Ended Features for Non-Formal Learning”,   
CyberPsychology & Behavior, 9:2, pp. 196-199, 2006. 
[23] E. Petersson and A. Brooks, “Non-formal Therapy and Learning  
Potentials through Human Gesture Synchronized to Robotic  
Gesture [HRI] within a Virtual Environment [VE]”, Universal  
Access in the Information Society, 6:166-177, 2007. 
[24] A. L. Robinson, “Play the arena for acquisition of rules for 
competent behavior” American Journal of Occupational 
Therapy, vol. 31, pp.248-253, 1977. 
[25] B.Rogoff, “Apprenticeship in Thinking, Cognitive 
Development in Social Context”, Oxford University Press, 
1990. 
[26] D. Silverman, “Doing Qualitative Research”, Sage, 2005. 
[27] B. Sutton-Smith, “The role of Play in Cognitive 
Development”, in Young Children, pp. 361-369, 1967. 
[28] L. S. Vygotsky, “Play and its role in the mental development  
of the child”. Voprosy Psikhologii, 12, pp. 62-76, 1966. 
[29] L. S. Vygotsky, “Mind in society: The development of  
higher psychological processes”, Cambridge, MA, Harvard  
University Press, 1978.  
[30] L. S. Vygotsky, “Thought and Language”, Massachusetts: The 
MIT Press, 1997. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

