Evaluating the Effectiveness of a Multiprofessional Online Mentor Update Tool	  
 
Stephen White, Karen Ousey 
The University of Huddersfield 
Huddersfield, UK 
stephen.white@hud.ac.uk , karen.ousey@hud.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents evaluation data following the 
implementation of a multiprofessional online mentor update 
tool designed to meet the learning needs of mentors in clinical 
healthcare practice. The huge resources needed to sustain 
traditional delivery of the updates, plus the inability of mentors 
to attend these events, were amongst the main drivers for the 
development of this tool. Results of the evaluation have 
identified that the flexibility of the online tool promotes 
engagement for both mentors and their line managers, and in 
doing so provides academic staff to alternatively utilize the time 
saved delivering it. The multiprofessional originality and 
uniqueness of the package has also promoted users to consider 
the mentor role from an inter-disciplinary perspective. With 
the Nursing and Midwifery Council praising the package as an 
example of innovative good practice, it is intended to promote 
its use in other regions that provide healthcare education.  
Keywords - Educational technology; Online learning; Mentor 
update; Multidisciplinary; Interdisciplinary 
I. 
BACKGROUND 
In healthcare education, the fundamental 
purpose of the mentor’s role is to support students 
and facilitate their learning and experiences within 
the clinical area; in order to achieve this, the 
mentor has to be adequately prepared for their role, 
understanding the mentor role and the educational 
needs of their mentees. This paper presents the 
results of an evaluation of an interactive multi 
professional 
web-based 
update 
package 
for 
mentors of nursing, midwifery and healthcare 
professionals. The package, originally conceived at 
the University of Huddersfield [1], has now been 
designed for use by fourteen professional groups; 
nurses; 
midwives; 
operating 
department 
practitioners (ODPs); occupational therapists; 
physiotherapists; 
dieticians; 
podiatrists; 
audiologists; clinical physiologists; diagnostic 
radiographers; radiotherapists; social workers; 
speech and language therapists and paramedics 
across the nine Higher Education Institutions 
(HEIs) in the Yorkshire and Humber Strategic 
Health Authority [2].  
This paper offers an overview of the need for an 
alternative mentor update package, identifying and 
exploring the impetus for its development; 
progressing to discuss data collection and analysis 
of an evaluation undertaken on the effectiveness of 
the package. Themes that have arisen from the 
analysis, developing knowledge, duration, usability 
and accessibility are discussed. Finally, a summary 
of the results and future developmental plans are 
presented.  
II. 
THE NEED FOR AN ALTERNATIVE MENTOR 
UPDATE PACKAGE 
The purpose of the update is to inform mentors 
of curricula amendments, any changes within the 
Higher Education Institutions (HEI) that may 
influence students’ learning, as well as offering a 
forum for mentors to discuss issues and to ask 
questions. 
Traditionally 
within 
the 
United 
Kingdom (UK), the programme of updates for 
these professional groups, in particular nursing, 
midwifery and ODP, has been undertaken by each 
HEI, in a uni-professional fashion, within or 
around the clinical areas. These updates have been 
known to last from two hours, to all-day and are 
generally led by a member of academic staff; when 
considering the vast numbers requiring updating 
each year, combined with their widespread 
geographical locations, it can be seen how this 
places a significant burden on the HEI’s resources 
and requires a large number of registered health 
practitioners to leave the clinical areas for a 
substantial amount of time. However, despite these 
events regularly being made available, the numbers 
of attendees can be small, even as few as one or 
two. To determine why this is, a process of 
informal discussions with mentors, combined with 
evaluation 
through 
the 
audit 
process 
was 
undertaken [1]. This ascertained that a significant 
number of mentors are not attending due to 
increasing 
workloads, 
plus 
limited 
staffing 
6
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

resources; they are prioritising the adequate 
staffing of clinical areas over attendance at mentor 
updates, supporting the earlier findings [3]. 
The role of the mentor has been investigated [4] 
and it was identified that most mentors were aware 
of the significance of their role in facilitating the 
development of students’ clinical skills and 
experience and acting as a source of support. 
However there are barriers that can sometimes 
hinder the effective mentor role; mentors in Myall 
et al.’s study [4] highlighted staff shortages and 
increasing demand on placement capacity as 
contributing to an increased workload which often 
led to a lack of time to carry out the role, with 
many completing assessment documentation in 
their own time. Such constraints were also 
identified as preventing mentors from attending 
regular updates, resulting in some feeling they had 
unmet continuing professional development needs. 
There was a genuine belief that the mentor role 
was 
pivotal 
to 
students’ 
clinical 
learning 
experiences and as such it was vital that the mentor 
was able to access ongoing support and preparation 
in carrying out this role ensuring that students 
could be supported to become confident and 
competent practitioners [2]. The development 
process and structure of the online package itself is 
described in detail in previous publications [1, 2]. 
III. DATA COLLECTION 
A questionnaire was made available to all 
mentors accessing the tool and was completed on a 
voluntary basis.  No personal details were required, 
but respondents were asked to identify which 
professional group they belonged to, to ascertain 
whether or not all professional groups were 
accessing the information. The questionnaire 
contained 
both 
quantitative 
and 
qualitative 
questions (Table I). A Likert scale [5] was used to 
extract data: strongly agree – agree – neutral –
disagree – strongly disagree with space available to 
add in comments.  
IV. DATA ANALYSIS 
To date six hundred and fifty-two mentors have 
undertaken the online update over a ten-month 
period; Table II shows the demographic of the 
disciplines. Although the majority of mentors 
accessing the update were nurses, this was to be   
TABLE I.  
EVALUATION QUESTIONS 
This update activity has helped me in knowing where to access 
information relating to the mentorship of students? 
I have an improved understanding of how the mentor role can function 
in a multi-professional way? 
I have been given all the relevant information to assist me in my role? 
My ability to mentor has been enhanced through carrying out this 
activity? 
There are accountability and responsibility issues associated with 
mentoring – this update has improved my understanding of them?  
Through this activity my understanding of how to improve the learners’ 
experience has been enhanced? 
This activity has developed me professionally? 
The update package was easy to navigate? 
Carrying out the update was an enjoyable experience? 
Overall, the package has met my needs? 
The content in the initial generic section was relevant to my role as a 
mentor? 
The content in the Sets was relevant to my role as a mentor? 
The content in the profession-specific area(s) was relevant to my role as 
a mentor? 
Overall, the update activity was relevant to my role as a mentor? 
How long, not including breaks, did the update take you to complete? 
Were you given time during your working day to complete this update? 
With 1 being the lowest and 10 being the highest, how would you rate 
this online package when compared to other updates you have 
experienced? 
Following this experience, would you, by choice, undertake other 
activities online? 
What did you like most about the update? 
What did you like least about the update? 
 
expected, not only because they are greater in 
number across the region, but because this 
professional group (and midwifery) are required to 
update yearly. ODPs are the next most-regular 
group to update, every two years, whilst other 
professional 
groups 
accessing 
the 
package 
currently have no mandatory requirement to update 
themselves while undertaking the mentor role. 
V. 
DEVELOPING KNOWLEDGE 
The update provided all of the relevant information 
relating to the mentorship role, as reported by 83% 
of mentors, with 86% indicating that it helped  
TABLE II.  
NUMBER OF MENTORS IN EACH DISCIPLINE THAT HAVE 
COMPLETED THE UPDATE PACKAGE (N= 652) 
Audiology 
3 
 Operating Department Practitioner 14 
Clinical Physiology 
4 
 Paramedic 
0 
Diagnostic Radiography 
2 
 Physiotherapy 
4 
Dietetics 
0 
 Podiatry 
0 
Midwifery 
30  Radiotherapy 
0 
Nursing 
593  Social Work 
1 
Occupational Therapy 
1 
 Speech and Language Therapy 
0 
7
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

provide them with the knowledge of where to 
access information. In relation to specific sections, 
positive responses were received from 87% of the 
users on the generic content (17% Strongly Agree, 
70% Agree), 85% on the content in the Sets (16% 
Strongly Agree, 69% Agree), and 89% on the 
profession-specific content (20% Strongly Agree, 
69% Agree). 91% were in agreement that 
undertaking the online update had been relevant to 
their mentor role (19% Strongly Agree, 72% 
Agree) (Figure 1).  
One mentor commented, ‘Good update - 
interaction good as makes you consider all areas. 
Good to reflect on past experiences whilst having 
update and relevant learning criteria’, however, 
two mentors commented that they would have 
preferred a face-to-face update and would prefer 
the information to be paper based; it is worthwhile 
noting that there were consistent negative 
responses from two mentors for every question, 
clearly indicating a dislike for anything computer-
based. However the majority reported that they 
preferred the online version as ‘it made me think’ 
and ‘more interactive than sitting listening to a 
tutor’; a sentiment echoed by another mentor ‘i 
had to engage a lot more than i do in the attended 
updates where i don’t always concentrate’. 
VI. DURATION 
The online update had been developed to 
overcome the problem of clinical staff struggling 
to find time to attend scheduled update activities, 
and instead allow them to update as and when they 
found appropriate, additionally allowing the 
academic staff more time to visit the clinical areas 
and provide support to both students and clinical 
staff.  
When asked ‘How long, not including breaks, 
did the update take you to complete?’ the mentors’ 
responses indicated that 48% took less than 2 
hours to complete it, and 76% completed it in 
under 3 hours (Table III). In contrast, 8% of 
mentors responded that the update had taken 
longer than 4 hours; it is not an unreasonable 
assumption that this was due to them accessing 
multiple areas of content, because students from 
more than one discipline were placed within their 
clinical area. This would have traditionally 
required them to attend multiple update events. 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Overall
Relevance
Professional
content
Sets
Generic
content
Strongly Disagree
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
Strongly Agree
 
Figure 1.  Relevance of the content 
 
When asked ‘Were you given time during your 
working day to complete this update?’ it was 
interesting to note that 64% of mentors had been 
given the time, which appears to contradict the 
supposition that mentors had not been able to 
attend the face-to-face update sessions due to work 
pressures. It is not unreasonable to surmise, based 
on some qualitative comments, that in response to 
a new system being introduced, line managers had 
made time available; one mentor stated that this 
was the ‘first time ever that I have been given 
time…’ Another mentor identified that ‘I have just 
started a new job so had the time during working 
hours as part of induction programme’. However, 
not all mentors were afforded time to undertake the 
package, but due to the nature of the delivery were 
able to complete it in personal time, one mentor 
said, ‘Because of the shortage of staff on our unit 
time was not available to allow me to complete this 
in works time’. Indeed one mentor; ‘found quiet 
time within night shift to complete’ which would 
not have been possible to achieve had they been 
expected to undertake the traditional face-to-face 
TABLE III.  
TIME TAKEN TO COMPLETE THE UPDATE 
Less than 1 hour 
5% 
1 to 2 hours 
43% 
2 to 3 hours 
28% 
3 to 4 hours 
15% 
4+ hours 
8% 
8
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

session.  Respondents did state that they would 
have found it beneficial to be informed of the 
approximate time it takes to complete the update, 
prior to starting it, so that they could plan their 
time accordingly. They also commented that they 
would have liked to see a ‘timeline’ on each page 
so they knew how much they had completed. 
These issues are being addressed, with the 
evaluation data on duration, discussed above, 
being used to provide guidance on the average 
length of time it may take to complete the package. 
A progress indicator is also being introduced; 
however this is proving more difficult than 
anticipated due to the ‘looping’ options available 
to the mentors as they progress through the 
package.  
VII. USABILITY 
The online package was reported as easy to 
navigate by 73% of the mentors (18% Strongly 
Agree; 55% Agree), with a further 17% providing 
a Neutral response. Despite this being a positive 
outcome for a new tool with an untested design, 
and although one mentor commented that ‘I am not 
the best IT person but find it so easy to use’, the 
data suggests there is still room for improvement 
(Figure 2).  
Ease of use featured regularly in the qualitative 
comments, with mentors indicating that the tool 
was ‘easy to navigate’, ‘easy to understand and 
follow’, ‘straightforward to use’, and ‘user 
friendly’. Arguably one parameter from which 
usability could be determined is how enjoyable the 
mentors found the experience. 36% of the mentors 
indicated positively with regard to enjoyment of 
the activity (6% Strongly Agree; 30% Agree), with  
 
 
Figure 2.  The update package was easy to navigate 
42% staying Neutral in their response; this means 
that 22% did not enjoy the experience (16% 
Disagree; 6% Strongly Disagree). It is not possible 
from this data alone to determine if these mentors’ 
lack of enjoyment is a direct result of this 
particular package, or the delivery method, nor 
whether the actual experience of updating is 
enjoyable, in itself. However, when asked if they 
would, by choice, undertake other activities online 
following this experience, 81% of the mentors said 
‘Yes’. Also, when invited to rate this package in 
comparison to other updates they have experienced 
(1 being the lowest and 10 being the highest), 70% 
valued it 6 or above, with 16% providing a neutral 
response (Figure 3).  
The outcome of these two questions suggests 
that overall the package was well received and the 
lack of enjoyment experienced by some may not 
be specifically related to the tool. 
VIII. ACCESSIBILTY  
The inability of mentors to attend traditional 
updates had been cited as one of the main drivers 
for the initiative and therefore accessibility of the 
package was an important factor in determining 
how successful the tool had been for mentors. 
 Flexibility and convenience were repeatedly 
mentioned when mentors were asked what they 
liked most about the update, particularly being able 
to undertake it in a place of their choice, rather 
than having to attend a session in a specific 
 
Figure 3.  With 1 being the lowest and 10 being the highest, how would 
you rate this online package when compared to other updates you have 
experienced 
9
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

location, ‘it was convenient for me to do at home 
because I have childcare issues to think about’; ‘I 
could do it at work and not attend a study day’; ‘if 
I have to attend a day course it is 140 miles round 
trip’; ‘I could sit in my lounge and drink tea!’ 
Being able to undertake the update at a time of 
their own choosing, was also perceived to be 
beneficial by mentors, ‘I could complete it in my 
own time when convenient for me’; ‘able to do 
online read at your leisure’; ‘it could be done 
when it was convenient to me and my workplace’; 
‘it was on line so didn’t need to go to a lecture and 
could do it when i wanted’; ‘the ability to complete 
update without attending a teaching session, made 
it easier to fit in work commitments’.  
In addition, the ability to work at their own rate, 
as and when practical for each mentor, was 
identified as advantageous, ‘was able to complete 
at a convenient time and pace’; ‘able to complete it 
at my own speed’; ‘I was able to work at my own 
pace’, as was the functionality that permits 
mentors to carry out the update intermittently, 
returning as and when time permits, ‘because the 
ward has been so busy i have been able to do this 
in my own time and be able to go back to it from 
time to time’; ‘could log out and complete the 
course in sections rather than having to complete 
it in one go’; ‘liked the ability to log in and out and 
not complete the update in one sitting’. 
IX. SUMMARY 
‘Yes, it exceeded what I thought I needed but in 
reflection may be it was just what the doctor 
ordered’. 
As indicated by this quote from one of the 
mentors, the online mentor package has evaluated 
positively during the evaluation period. Users of 
the package have found it easy to navigate, whilst 
also identifying that it has met the learning and 
information needs required to undertake their 
mentor role effectively.   
The inability of staff to attend updating 
activities [1,3] appears to have been remedied in 
many ways through the online version, with 
significant numbers undertaking the update in a 
short period of time. This would appear to not only 
be due to its flexible access allowing staff to fit it 
into their schedules [6,7], but also as a result of a 
visible shift in the line managers’ willingness to 
give time during the working day. It may be that 
the stimulus of a new approach was the cause of 
this, but whatever the reason, it contradicts 
suggestions that staff lack motivation and incentive 
to attend [8], if provided with the opportunity.  
Somewhat surprisingly, staff also stated that 
they generally enjoyed the experience, and whilst 
it is unknown whether this also applied to the 
traditional approach, there is clear evidence that 
this tool was appreciated, in the main, above 
previous 
update 
experiences. 
This 
supports 
findings that online approaches to learning can 
provide stimulus and interest for students [9], 
promoting meaningful learning [10]. 
The 
multi-professional 
originality 
and 
uniqueness of the package has also promoted the 
professional groups to learn about the mentor role 
from 
an 
inter-disciplinary 
perspective, 
and 
importantly it has provided them with a ‘one stop 
shop’ to enhance their knowledge base in 
mentoring students from more than one discipline 
and one HEI at one session.   
It is anticipated that freeing academic staff from 
the ‘burden’ of delivering the updates will now 
enable them to concentrate this time more 
effectively in providing further support for the 
mentors within the actual placement environments; 
thus meeting their identified needs [3,11]. 
A limitation of this evaluation is that the 
majority of the participants are from one 
discipline, nursing, which may make it difficult to 
generalize the results. However, this can also be 
construed as a positive, because for this 
professional group, annual updating will have been 
‘the norm’ throughout their career; as such they are 
the group most suited to evaluate this new tool 
against their previous, traditional, experiences. 
X. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The development and implementation of the 
package has proved successful in meeting the 
mandatory training needs of mentors in practice. 
Additionally it has identified the importance of 
clinical practitioners learning together and has 
promoted interdisciplinary learning.  The Nursing 
and Midwifery Council have praised the package 
as being an example of innovative good practice, 
and as such it is intended to promote use of it in 
other regions that provide healthcare education.  It 
10
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

is also anticipated that the structure underpinning 
the tool may be utilized for other subject areas. 
Future work includes continual evaluation of 
the package to ensure the information maintains its 
relevance and currency; it is anticipated that this 
will 
be 
achieved 
through 
delegation 
of 
administrative rights to each discipline or 
institution, allowing self-management of the 
content. 
Further development of the chat tool is also 
being considered, to introduce video functionality, 
in order to enhance the interactions between the 
mentors. However, initial investigations into this 
suggest there may be problems accessing video via 
some institution’s networks, due to current security 
settings. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Ousey, K.J. and White, S.A. “Developing a multi-professional e-
learning mentor update package”, Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning, elml, 2009, pp. 
103-107. 
[2] 
Ousey, K. and White, S. “A case study exploring a multi-disciplinary 
collaborative initiative to use e-learning to meet the professional 
learning needs of health care practitioners,” in Interprofessional E-
Learning and Collaborative Work: Practices and Technologies, A. 
Bromage, L. Clouder, J. Thistlethwaite and F. Gordon, Eds. IGI-
Global: Pennsylvania, 2010, pp. 286-300.  
[3] 
Pulsford, D., Boit, K. and Owen, S. “Are mentors ready to make a 
difference? A survey of mentors’ attitudes towards nurse education”, 
Nurse Education Today, 22(6), pp. 439-446, 2002. 
[4] 
Myall, M., Levett-Jones, T. and Lathlean, J. “Mentorship in 
contemporary practice: the experiences of nursing students and 
practice mentors”, Journal of Clinical Nursing, 17(14), pp. 1834-1842, 
2008. 
[5] 
Trochim, 
W.M. 
“Likert 
scaling”. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.socialresearchmethods.net/kb/scallik.htm. Accessed: 01 
December 2010 
[6] 
O'Malley, J. and McGraw, H. “Students perceptions of distance 
learning, online learning and the traditional classroom”, Online 
Journal of Distance Learning Administration, 2(4), 1999. 
[7] 
Sit, J.W.H., Chung, J.W.Y., Chow, M.C.M. and Wong, T.K.S. 
“Experiences of online learning: students’ perspective”, Nurse 
Education Today, 25, pp. 140–147, 2005. 
[8] 
Joshua-Amadi, M. “Recruitment and retention: a study in motivation”, 
Nursing Management, 9, pp. 7–21, 2002. 
[9] 
Rosenlund, C.H. and Damark-Bembenek, B. “Assessing the 
effectiveness of an online program”, Nurse Educator, 24(1), pp. 5–6, 
1999. 
[10] Jonassen, D.H. “Transforming learning with technology: Beyond 
modernism and postmodernism or whoever controls the technology 
creates the reality”, Educational Technology, 40(2), pp. 21–25, 2000.  
[11] Hutchings, A., Williamson, G.R. and Humphreys, A. “Supporting 
learners in clinical practice: capacity issues”, Journal of Clinical 
Nursing, 14, pp. 945–955, 2005. 
 
 
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
 
11
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

