Evaluating Virtual Reality as a Learning Resource: An Insight into
User Experience, Usability and Learning Experience
Katherina Gallardo
Tecnologico de Monterrey
School of Humanities and Education
Monterrey, Mexico
Email: katherina.gallardo@tec.mx
Nohemi Rivera
Tecnologico de Monterrey
School of Humanities and Education
Chihuahua, Mexico
Email: nohemi_rivera@tec.mx
Abstract—Information
and
Communication
Technologies
(ICT) are powerful tools that support teaching and the case of
Virtual Reality (VR) is especially promising because of its
unique characteristics. In this paper, we report on a project
that aims to describe how variables such as usability, user
experience and learner interface experience might affect
learning results while using VR resources. We present the
preliminary results of a mixed-methods study, including the
students’ perceptions collected in two focus groups. These
undergraduate students were exposed to the use of VR
resources for learning purposes. These preliminary results
invite us to think about the inclusion of different indicators to
strengthen the VR resources evaluation process in higher
education.
Keywords-Learning assessment; Learning interface experience;
Usability; User experience; Virtual reality; Higher education;
Educational innovation.
I. INTRODUCTION
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) are
powerful tools to support
learning
because
they
allow
students to be reached at any place and time, reducing the
costs of traditional learning methods. Digital technologies
provide materials for active learning that more fully engage
learners [1]. The case of Virtual Reality (VR) is especially
promising because of its unique characteristics. VR is a term
used
to
describe
an
absorbing,
interactive,
computer-
generated 3D virtual experience in which a person interacts
in real time with simulated objects that seem real [2], and it
can be used as a learning environment for different levels
and disciplines [3]. Most VR environments are primarily
visual experiences, but they may also include auditory
simulation, which is very useful because vision provides the
most information, followed by hearing; probably 90% of our
world perception is visual or auditory [2]. Furthermore, the
VR content can be delivered in a variety of ways, including
specially made VR headsets, smartphones and computers [1].
We can group the VR systems depending on the level of
immersion they offer to the user. There are different kinds of
immersions that can be achieved in a virtual environment
[2]:

Tactical immersion: Experienced when performing
tactile operations.

Strategic immersion: Related to mental challenge.

Narrative
immersion:
When
players
become
invested in a story (like reading a book).

Spatial immersion: When the simulated world is
perceptually convincing (feeling of being there).

Psychological immersion: When a player confuses
the game with real life.

Sensory immersion: Experiencing a unity of time
and space (fusing with the image medium).
VR headsets (immersive system) provide the greatest
sense of immersion by completely replacing the real world
with the virtual one, but they are also the most expensive
way to deliver it [1]. This type of system provides a
stereoscopic view of the scene according to the user’s
position and orientation [2]. Computers (non-immersive
system), on the other hand, are the simplest and most readily
available method for VR playback, but they greatly reduce
the sense of immersion [1]. In this case, the user views a
virtual environment through one or more computer screens
and is able to interact with the environment without being
immersed in it [2].
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
II, we present the related work. Section III presents the
structure of the project, as well as the research methods and
instruments used in the gathering and analysis of the
preliminary data. Section IV presents the most relevant
results of the two focus groups, and Section V critically
analyzes the main findings and the future work to be done.
II. RELATED WORK
The immersion, presence and interactivity are some of
the features that make VR different from other traditional
media. Furthermore, the autonomy, the free navigation in a
3D space, the intuitive and realistic interaction with virtual
objects and the first-person point of view are some of the VR
features that contribute to a sense of presence inside the
virtual environment and make the users feel as being in a real
laboratory [2][3]. Mikropoulos and Bellou [3] found that all
these VR features play an important role for knowledge
construction, and presence is the principal feature that
contributes to positive learning outcomes. Thus, these
features should be taken into consideration when designing
virtual environments, in combination with the discipline and
specific content under study. VR implementation is mainly
found in high school, college and university; with healthcare
and engineering being the most investigated subject areas,
followed
by
computer
sciences,
culture,
history
and
automotive. In addition, professional education domains are
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

now incorporating VR technologies to train their employees
[4].
The implementation of VR in education is based on
constructivism, which emphasizes the dynamic aspect of
learning. Experiential learning is constructivist, and it
emphasizes the central role that experience plays in the
learning process [5]. Unlike passive information transference
methods (such as lectures), VR experiences allow the learner
to control the pace of the process and make decisions that
influence the outcome, making a virtual world feel real and
increasing memory retention [1]. When the learning process
involves learners’ emotions and social life, they can better
master the knowledge. Using VR allows learners to gain
information from an experience that is not easily accessible
or does not exist in real life, and encourages them to use their
imagination when manipulating the environment, which
eases the active construction of models and the skills
development [2][6]. Also, creative learning and the ability to
innovate can be stimulated and improved. Another advantage
is that there is no risk in virtual training, learners can practice
repeatedly until they master a skill [6]. For example, Tsai [7]
found that using VR during training could reduce the anxiety
caused by emergencies. In short, immersion in a virtual
world
allows
us
to
construct
knowledge
from
direct
experience, not from descriptions of experience [8].
Durrani and Pita [4] found that VR has a very positive
effect on learning. 92% of the studies they analyzed showed
a positive impact of integrating VR, and the other 8% of the
studies showed a neutral effect. In line with this, Marks [9]
found that the exploration of a 3D model really helped
students to understand the spatial structure. In addition, the
VR application promoted discussions among the students
and, when compared with the group using traditional
materials, they showed a higher cooperation. Moreover, the
VR group showed the most significant difference in the
question about stimulating interest in the topic. This is where
VR seems to show more promise [9]. Hence, VR can
enhance the learning process, but it is not appropriate for
every instructional objective or learning content. Therefore,
to decide if using VR is the best option, it is necessary to
evaluate the type of contents that will be taught and identify
the experiences that would be difficult, dangerous or
impossible to provide in formal education. Strategic and
descriptive knowledge can often achieve good results
without using a virtual experience. Furthermore, it is crucial
to consider if creating a simulated environment is relevant to
the learning objective [6][10]. Creating a pedagogical
foundation when designing VR modules is an important step
in their development. This process requires script writing and
expert content evaluation before the modules can be
recorded. Students may benefit greatly if provided with safe
and effective experiential learning opportunities through VR
[1].
Besides the pedagogical foundation, the application of
VR
technology
to
education
requires
students
to
be
autonomous learners and to have learning initiative. This
learning way is student-centered, emphasizing that students
need to demonstrate their enthusiasm and initiative in the
learning process [6]. However, it is important to consider
that a purely exploratory tool, such as a VR application, is
not sufficient to guide the students through the whole
learning process. Marks [9] discovered that even though the
3D model they used in the VR tool presented all the
necessary information, not all of it was discovered or
remembered correctly by the students. Therefore, teachers
should not think that using VR can be enough for students to
finish learning. On the contrary, the use of VR in education
has high requirements for teachers, who play a guiding role
in the entire process and must constantly improve themselves
and adapt to the needs of future teaching [6]. It is also
helpful to have some guidance in the VR application besides
previous oral indications delivered by teachers, such as a list
of items to work through or an audio or textual narrative.
Regarding this, the majority of the participants in Marks’ [9]
study requested a guidance mechanism for the exploration
process and short comprehension tests of the content before
unlocking the next part of the tour. In conclusion, VR is a
promising
tool
for
educators,
presenting
important
advantages like the ease of use, the increased motivation and
the non-symbolic, first-person experience. However, to
maximize the benefits, it is important to consider the whole
context of the education process in the design of any VR
application [8][9] as well as the instructional decisions
teachers take to insert this kind of material for learning
purposes.
As mentioned previously, many authors have evaluated
the usability of VR technology [9] and the students’
experience when using it as a learning tool [11], but there is
very little research on its instructional usability, which is the
degree in which the tool is really motivating and helping
students to achieve the learning objective. In this sense, the
objective of this paper is constructing an evaluation process
for VR resources that considers all the aspects of the
learning process.
III. METHODOLOGY
A. Design
This is a mixed-methods study [11]. The objective is to
describe how variables such as usability, user experience and
learner interface experience might affect learning results
while using VR resources.
B. Context and participants
This study took place in a private university located in
northeastern Mexico. Undergraduate students from different
programs such as engineering, medicine and business were
exposed to the use of VR resources for learning purposes.
The results presented in this paper focus on a VR resource
that was designed to collect, calculate and estimate data from
a daily activity: going to buy groceries at a supermarket. This
VR tool attempted to achieve spatial immersion (a simulated
world that is perceptually convincing).
In sum, 268 students from engineering and business that
were taking the course “Mathematics and Data Science”
used the VR tool in Monterrey; 76 students were studying at
the campus in a presence-based modality and the rest were
online students. The students used the VR tool for about an
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

hour and, during this time, they had to choose 5 foods, trying
to get the smallest number of calories possible. The objective
of the VR tool was to help students to calculate their caloric
intake and stimulate their interest in the nutritional value of
the food they choose.
C. Instruments
Two instruments were adapted for responding to research
questions: The first instrument was a questionnaire with 21
items using Likert scale (1= completely disagree, 2=
disagree, 3=somewhat disagree , 4=somewhat agree, 5=
agree, and 6= completely agree) divided into two sections:
usability and user experience statements [9][12]–[15]. The
quantitative results obtained from this questionnaire will be
presented in future work. The second instrument was a
mixed questionnaire [9], [12]–[16]. In this case, this
instrument was applied in a focus group technique. The
instrument was divided into four sections.

Section 1: contains 6 items about usability and 5
items about user experience. All of them are open-
ended questions.

Section 2: contains 12 items related to instructional
issues and learning experience. These items use a
six-point Likert scale (1= little 6= a lot), open-
ended questions and statements that need to be
qualified according to a scale in consensus.

Section 3: Contains one open-ended question to
make a global appreciation of students’ perception
of the learning experience using VR and how to
improve it.

Section 4: Contains a single-word multiple choice
question that asks to select the word that best
represents
how
they
felt
about
the
learning
experience with VR. There are eight possible
options that go from positive to negative emotions
or feelings. A mode value is obtained after voting.
Five
educational
experts
in
tertiary
education
and
educational
technology
usage
made
a
first
validation
procedure for both instruments before application.
D. Procedures
At the time this contribution has been written, we had
some partial results, as this research project is still in
progress. Thus, two focus groups were formed. 13 students
were randomly chosen to participate in the two focus
groups. The application of the questionnaire using Likert
scale is still open for collecting data and two other focus
groups are pending.
The steps corresponding to the methodology procedures
of this study are the following:

Design of the instruments.

Validation of each instrument by experts.

Adjustment of the instruments according to expert’s
opinion and suggestions.

Application of the questionnaire using an electronic
format for collecting data.

Application of focus group, with the participation of
at least 7 students in each one.

Transcription of focus group dialogues using the
Amberscript online service.

Ensure
transcription
in
verbatim
format
corresponding to the content of each audio files.

Analysis of data using IBM SPSS and ATLAS.ti
software respectively.
IV. RESULTS
The preliminary qualitative results of the study are
presented in this section. The expected and emergent
categories are presented, along with the most representative
students’ comments, which invite us to think about the
inclusion of different indicators to strengthen the evaluation
process of these resources, considering three dimensions:
usability, user experience and learning experience.
Usability: The majority of the students said that adapting
to the VR was a trial and error process because people
guiding them could not know for sure what they were going
to do; but they felt this adaptation process was pretty fast;
they agreed that the interface was very simple and easy to
use. Even though the interface was perceived as very simple,
students agreed they needed someone to tell them how to use
it, and some of them faced some issues at the beginning and
at the end of the activity and needed further instructions.
They mentioned the end of the activity was confusing
because it was not well defined. Students who saw their
classmates do the activity first or had previous experience
using VR technology were more comfortable with the
environment from the beginning, but all of them would have
preferred to have more instructions included directly in the
VR.
With respect to the complexity of the environment, the
students mentioned it was comfortable and practical. Some
students perceived this simple interface as an advantage.
They said supermarkets are a lot bigger compared to the one
in the VR, so, this simplified things for people that do not
know how to use it because they could easily reach and
count everything. However, other students perceived this
simplicity as a disadvantage because they felt it limited their
options or made it less realistic.
User experience: Students agreed that it was an attractive
experience that excited them. They were glad to have the
opportunity to do something new and go out of the regular
classroom activities. Some of them said the VR exceeded
their expectations and they never imagined being able to
have something like this in a class. They felt having VR tools
is an advantage and the school should invest more in this
technology. A few students said they even took some extra
time after finishing the activity to explore the environment.
Regarding immersion, students said they were not
conscious of what was happening around them, just the VR,
so they felt they were the character they were controlling.
They liked the 360 degrees view because they could turn
their head anywhere, which made them feel immersed in the
environment. The students also mentioned it was important
not being told what to do, in order to feel free to experiment
in the environment; they liked to have a feeling of control.
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

One of the issues that affected their sense of presence
was that they could not find everything they were looking
for, which made the experience less real. Also, they
mentioned they would have felt more immersed if they had
been able to walk and listen to the kind of music you find in
a supermarket. Not being able to walk also made some
students feel dizzy after the experience. Furthermore, they
mentioned that the quality of the graphics is a key element to
experience inside the game; as well as being able to do all
the normal activities one can do in the real environment and
interacting with the objects in a natural way, like placing the
products in a shopping cart and paying for them at the
cashier, in this case.
Learning experience: In general, students thought that
using VR is a good way to learn because it takes them out of
their routine. They also thought the learning objective was
clear, the activity was related to their class and the VR
complexity was adequate for the purpose of the activity.
About the effort they had to do to learn, they said they did
not have to focus a lot because the objective was clear, they
were familiar with the context and they were comfortable
with the use of technology. They added that the mental effort
would have been a lot greater if they had not had any
instructions. In relation to the physical effort, they said no
effort is needed and anyone can do it, even a person with a
physical impairment can enjoy it.
Although students thought the VR experience was related
to their class, the majority expected a more analytic
experience, in which they could see graphics and interpret
information. Considering this, the majority of the students
agreed this experience is more relevant as an introductory
activity, to learn a new concept, rather than a practice. In
addition,
they
thought
having
more
products
in
the
supermarket would have also enhanced their learning
experience because they would have been able to analyze
more data. They also emphasized having the right calorie
values is important in order to use those values in their
analysis.
With respect to the time they had for the learning
experience, students in the two
groups had different
opinions. In one of the groups there were more students, so
they felt they did not have enough time to interact with the
VR tool. The other group had very few students and they felt
they had a lot of time for the activity, they even mentioned
the activity should have a limited amount of time in order to
be more like a game and compete with their classmates. In
addition to the competition, students also mentioned they
would like this tool to allow a more social learning. They
said they would like to have more people connected in the
same virtual environment, including the teacher.
Students concluded this tool should be used in more
subjects at the university, and they should be able to use it
more frequently. They even mentioned they would be able to
learn more and benefit more from the tool if they could
access it at any time, using it as a reference material.
Students say they can not really learn anything if they only
use the tool once.
Table
1
summarizes
the
most
relevant
students’
comments for each dimension.
TABLE I.
STUDENTS’ PERCEPTIONS
Dimensions
Students’ comments
Features appreciated in
the VR
Missing features in the VR
Usability
“I adapted very fast, it
was really easy to use
and simple”
“I had seen others do it,
so it was easier”
“I feel that if more things
are added, people who
don’t know how to use
the VR will start to get
confused”
“If there had not been a
professor
explaining
everything,
I
wouldn’t
have known what to do”
“I finished and I did not
know what to do next”
“The game does not have
a lot of food options, so it
is easy to repeat other’s
actions”
User
experience
“I
really
liked
the
experience, and when I
finished,
I
wandered
around
to
see
the
products”
“It is a new experience
for many of us and you
go out of the
classroom, because it is
very tedious to be in the
classroom all the time”
“What
made
me
feel
immersed is the fact I
could
turn
my
head
anywhere
freely,
see
everything,
and
move
anywhere I wanted to”
“I could not find meat,
chicken
or
something
more similar to what I
really eat”
“I would have preferred
to
walk
instead
of
teleporting”
“The music of a normal
supermarket, or hearing
people
talking
would
have made me feel inside
a supermarket”
“To
be
like
a
supermarket, we should
have been able to pay for
the
products,
having
a
shopping cart and going
to the cash register”
Learning
experience
“The
program
was
simple, but we did not
need a lot more detail for
the learning objective we
had”
“It meets the objective
and it’s very simple”
“The way to use it was
so simple and clear that
it did not require a lot of
mental
effort
to
understand
what
you
were doing, maybe you
need a little bit more
effort
to
apply
it
in
class”
“We understood the data
collection,
but
not
its
analysis,
which
is
the
focus of the course”
“I would prefer to have
this activity starting the
semester
and
build
on
this
experience
to
do
further activities”
“I did not like to feel
pressured by the time”
“I would like it to be
more competitive”
“I
imagine
having
a
digital
class
with
everyone connected; like
an interactive classroom”
“We should be able to
access
the
resource
freely”
This preliminary qualitative analysis allows us to rethink
about the indicators that should be considered to evaluate a
VR didactic resource for learning processes in higher
education.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
These preliminary results seem to confirm that the
features proposed by Mikropoulos and Bellou [3] strongly
contribute to a sense of presence when using a VR tool.
Students agreed that the free navigation, the autonomy, the
360 degrees view and the interaction with the objects made
their experience more realistic. They also mentioned they
would have appreciated involving more senses in the
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

experience, for example listening to the type of music they
would hear if they were really in the place.
However, VR tools should be used carefully because they
are not appropriate for every instructional objective. The
students in this study said that they would have preferred to
have this experience at the beginning of the semester and
build on it for further activities. In addition, they felt that the
resource objective was limited; they would have appreciated
analyzing the data they collected during the experience. This
supports
Pantelidis
[10]
suggestions
about
creating
a
pedagogical foundation when designing VR modules; the
interaction with 3D objects by itself will not be enough to
achieve better learning outcomes.
Furthermore, this study corroborated that teachers play
an essential role when using this technology [6]. Teachers
should clarify the learning objective of the resource before
using it, and they should also define the steps students should
follow and what is expected from them. After the experience,
it is also important for teachers to engage students into a
discussion about what they learned and how they can apply it
to further class activities and to their daily life.
This study presents qualitative preliminary results, but
the three dimensions will be evaluated using quantitative
data, and interviews with teachers will be done. VR
resources have demonstrated to have a great potential to
enhance the learning process, but we must carefully define
the learning objective and guide the students’ experience. It
is important to continue evaluating the characteristics that
must be considered when using VR tools in higher
education.
In this respect, future work must consider students’
characteristics,
analyzing
any
differences
in
the
VR
experience related to their gender, the program they are
studying, their previous experience using VR, and their
learning styles. In order to generalize results, it is important
to include larger samples of students in different disciplines
and with different characteristics. This could also allow
measuring other variables such as acceptability of VR tools
and user satisfaction.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial and
the technical support of Writing Lab TecLabs, Tecnologico
de Monterrey, Mexico in the production of this work.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Hickman and M. Akdere,
“Developing intercultural
competencies through virtual reality: Internet of Things
applications in education and learning,” 2018 15th Learn.
Technol. Conf. L T 2018, pp. 24–28, 2018.
[2]
S. Mandal, “Brief Introduction of Virtual Reality & its
Challenges,” Int. J. Sci. Eng. Res., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 304–309,
2013.
[3]
T. A. Mikropoulos and J. Bellou, “The unique features of
educational
virtual
environments,”
Teach.
Learn.
with
Technol. Beyond Constr., no. January 2006, pp. 249–258,
2010.
[4]
U. Durrani and Z. Pita, “Integration of Virtual Reality and
Augmented
Reality:
Are
They
Worth
the
Effort
in
Education?,” in Proceedings of 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Teaching, Assessment, and Learning for
Engineering, TALE 2018, 2019, no. December, pp. 322–327.
[5]
D. A. Kolb, R. E. Boyatzis, and C. Mainemelis, “Experiential
Learning Theory: Previous Research and New Directions,”
Perspect. Thinking, Learn. Cogn. Styles, no. January, pp.
227–248, 2018.
[6]
J. Jiang, L. Zhi, and Z. Xiong, “Application of Virtual Reality
Technology in Education and Teaching,” Proc. - Int. Jt. Conf.
Information, Media Eng. ICIME 2018, pp. 300–302, 2019.
[7]
H.-H. Tsai et al., “An Interactive Virtual Reality Application
in Education for Soil and Water Conservation,” 2019 Int.
Symp. Educ. Technol., pp. 60–64, 2019.
[8]
W. Winn, “A Conceptual Basis for Educational Applications
of Virtual Reality,” Washingt. Technol. Cent. Univ., no. R-
93-9, p. 0, 1993.
[9]
S. Marks, D. White, and M. Mazdics, “Evaluation of a Virtual
Reality Nasal Cavity Education Tool,” Proc. 2018 IEEE Int.
Conf. Teaching, Assessment, Learn. Eng. TALE 2018, no.
December, pp. 193–198, 2019.
[10] V. S. Pantelidis, “Reasons to Use Virtual Reality in Education
and Training Courses and a Model to Determine When to Use
Virtual Reality,” Themes Sci. Technol. Educ., vol. 2, no. 1–2,
pp. 59–70, 2010.
[11] F. Serenelli, E. Ruggeri, A. Mangiatordi, and P. Ferri,
“Applying the multimedia learning theory in the primary
school: An experimental study about learning settings using
digital science contents,” Proc. Eur. Conf. Games-based
Learn., vol. 2, pp. 943–952, 2011.
[12] R. B. Johnson and A. J. Onwuegbuzie, “Mixed Methods
Research: A Research Paradigm Whose Time Has Come,”
Educ. Res., vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 14–26, 2004.
[13] B. G. Witmer and M. J. Singer, “Measuring presence in
virtual environments: A Presence Questionnaire,” Presence,
vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 225–240, 1998.
[14] M. Usoh, E. Catena, S. Arman, and M. Slater, “Using
presence questionnaires in reality,” Presence Teleoperator
Virtual Environ., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 497–503, 2000.
[15] B. Sun, U. Chikwem, and D. Nyingifa, “VRLearner: A
Virtual Reality Based Assessment Tool in Higher Education,”
pp. 1640–1645, 2019.
[16] P. Truchly, M. Medvecký, P. Podhradský, and M. Vančo, 
“Virtual Reality Applications in STEM Education,” ICETA
2018 - 16th IEEE Int. Conf. Emerg. eLearning Technol. Appl.
Proc., pp. 597–602, 2018.
[17] S. G. Hart, “NASA-task load index (NASA-TLX); 20 years
later,” Proc. Hum. Factors Ergon. Soc., pp. 904–908, 2006.
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

