VirtuElec : A Tool Designed by and for Students for Training in Electrical Hazards 
 
Jean-Pierre Toumazet1, Laurence Hamon2, Carine Robles2 
1 Institut Universitaire de Technologie Clermont Auvergne – dept. GEII (electrical engineering) 
2 Pôle IPPA – Learn’in Auvergne program 
Université Clermont Auvergne 
Clermont-Ferrand, France 
Email : j-pierre.toumazet@uca.fr 
 
 
Abstract— The teaching of electrical hazards for future 
professionals is an important issue. This problem is complex, 
because to train students in risk, it is necessary to confront 
them with dangerous situations, but without making them take 
risks. The VirtuElec project was born in this context: co-
producing, with a company specialized in virtual reality, an 
environment simulating electrical hazards and allowing to 
train according to different scenarios at different levels of 
competence. The originality of the project is to involve the 
students themselves in the construction of this environment. By 
integrating a project team, they worked in a design office to co-
develop this tool and enrich it with video and virtual supports: 
a training support carried out by students and for students. 
Students who participated in this project gained knowledge in 
the areas of electrical hazards, virtual reality, and teamwork, 
but they felt they gained the most proficiency in the last two 
skills. 
Keywords- Co-design ; Electrical hazards Simulation ; 
Immersive 
Virtual 
Reality ; 
Interactive 
Devices ; 
Multi-
disciplinary ; Problem-Based Learning ; Professional gestures 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
It is essential for students in the field of competence of 
electrical engineering to have a good knowledge of 
electrical hazards, in order to be able to identify them and 
prevent accidents, which are usually very serious. This is 
indispensable first in the context of their training and for the 
actions they will have to carry out in the professional world. 
This is all the more true since, with the development of 
apprenticeship 
training 
and 
more 
generally 
the 
professionalization of training, learners are increasingly 
confronted in their training course with situations of 
potential danger in an industrial environment. 
At present, training exists for the students concerned, but 
it takes place under conditions quite different from those 
they will face in their professional activity. Even if some 
interventions are indeed carried out in conditions close to 
the industrial context, on a real electrical cabinet, they 
require the presence of a trainer for a student, due to the 
presence of very real risks. Moreover, this situation is 
stressful for the student faced with the risk (even if all 
precautions are taken) and for the trainer, who assumes a 
heavy responsibility. 
The objective of the project, co-developed with a 
company specialized in virtual reality, was the design of a 
virtual environment presenting different scenarios of 
electrical risks. Depending on the level of expertise of the 
learner, a mission is given to him or her and he or she must 
take the right decisions in terms of choice of intervention 
and protection equipment, of behavior in the face of a risk, 
and of control of professional gestures. 
The objective is to have a unique, innovative, modern 
and efficient tool developed specifically for our training 
needs. The originality of the project is that it is a real 
partnership with a company, really involving students who 
have worked in a design office context, co-developing the 
tool in terms of ergonomics and functionality: An 
educational tool developed by students for students. After a 
presentation of the context of the use of virtual reality for 
the prevention of occupational risks and the modalities of 
development of the project in Section 2, the Section 3 
describes the methodology followed by the project team, the 
functionalities of the tool developed, and the Section 4 
presents first results of the evaluation of the perception of 
the project by the students who participated in its 
conception. 
II. 
CONTEXT 
The use of virtual reality for education has been the 
subject of many articles in recent years, addressing both the 
interest of this new tool, but also its limitations [1]-[4]. If 
we refer more specifically to the field of occupational safety 
and health, realistic virtual environments have many 
advantages [5][6]. The first and most obvious is the 
possibility of exploring an environment of potential danger, 
without taking risks, but also without putting colleagues at 
risk or causing damage to equipment. The learner also has 
the opportunity to perform actions and make mistakes 
without risk to him or her, and without feeling the pressure 
of other colleagues or the assessor, as would be the case in a 
real-life scenario [7]. He or she also has the possibility of 
being wrong, without consequence, and as many times as 
necessary. All these conditions lead the learner to be a real 
actor of his or her formation: the solution cannot come from 
elsewhere; the learner is obliged to act, to interact with what 
surrounds him or her, to progress in the mission. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-873-0
eLmL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

The specific case of electrical hazards, which currently 
remains one of the main causes of fatal accidents in 
industrial environments, has been the subject of numerous 
studies and developments in the field of virtual reality. In 
particular, mention may be made the application of virtual 
reality for the training of electricians working on substations 
[8][9], in the field of construction [10] or power distribution 
networks [11], and more generally in all fields where 
electrical risks are present [12]. These generally concern 
tools for experienced professionals, the aim of which is to 
enable them to train on devices on which it is usually 
difficult, if not impossible, to train, either because of their 
difficult access or because it is impossible to manoeuvre on 
these elements without causing a customer blackout. Other 
types of educational tools exist in the context of electrical 
risk training, the most common being based on videos 
illustrating risk situations and including quizzes that allow 
students to position themselves in terms of what to do when 
an electrical risk appears. Even if these tools illustrate 
realistic situations, the students are always in the position of 
an outside observer, and are never really confronted with the 
potential danger. These learning conditions are therefore far 
from reality. 
The VirtuElec project’s approach is complementary to 
these developments: it aims to enable the training of 
students with no professional experience related to 
interventions on electrical installations. In this context, the 
virtual environment is of course intended to reproduce as 
closely as possible the real environment, but not in order to 
remind the learners of their daily life, but on the contrary to 
make them discover what their real future environment will 
be. In these circumstances, it is important to simplify the 
environment by not including too many non-essential 
elements, so that the learner can quickly focus on his or her 
mission. In addition, the target audience is wide, and skill 
levels in electrical hazard situations are very different. It 
was therefore necessary to provide a virtual environment 
compatible with several intervention scenarios. 
III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The first step in this work was to constitute a 'project 
team'. The work carried out is highly multidisciplinary and 
has been the subject of a close partnership between (1) the 
"Electrical engeneering team” including two teachers in the 
field of electrical hazards, two technicians specialized in this 
field, and 9 undergraduate students; (2) the “partner 
company”, a specialist in virtual reality and recipient of 
several awards in this field, (3) the “audio-visual team”, 
composed of two technicians, for the production of audio 
and video media and (4) the “pedagogical engineering 
team”, made up of two pedagogical engineers whose 
mission is to ensure the accompaniment of all the actors in 
this innovative approach (Figure 1). 
From a practical point of view, the virtual environment 
was developed to be implemented on Oculus Quest 2 virtual 
reality headsets, which are autonomous headsets allowing 
greater freedom of movement and better portability of the 
device [13]. The possibility of connecting the helmet to a 
large screen for demonstrations was also provided. Finally, 
the tool made also allows recording the journey of each 
learner in the virtual environment in video format, to be able 
to debrief a posteriori. 
 
Figure 1 : Synoptic of the VirtuElec project 
 
The actions carried out by the students in relation to the 
project teams can be divided into 3 main steps: 
The first consisted of the design of the 3D environment, 
including the virtual electrical cabinet on which the learners 
will have to intervene, but also the operative part, consisting 
of a robotic arm, as well as a intervention preparation room 
where the necessary equipment is available. For more 
realism, a real device present on the training center inspired 
this virtual set. In this context, the students had to imagine 
the virtual electrical installation, draw up the electrical 
diagram, define and then model all the components, and 
finally to design the implementation in the complete virtual 
environment (Figure 2) 
 
 
 
Figure 2 : Actual electrical cabinet (a) and associated VR modelling (b) 
 
The second step was to design the intervention scenarios 
for electrician apprentices, simulating 3 
levels of 
competence in a professional environment. The simplest is 
the beginner level, (including two options: step-by-step 
guidance or free learning) during which the operator must 
replace a defective element that was previously indicated to 
him. The most complex is the autonomous level (autonomy 
in actions, alerts are displayed in case of error and aids are 
available) during which the operator must look for the cause 
of a failure and perform troubleshooting. Finally, the expert 
(a)                                        (b) 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-873-0
eLmL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

level (anticipation of risks before the intervention) during 
which the operator must manage the safety of a team 
working on an installation. For each of these levels, the 
learner is expected to be able to choose the protective 
equipment and tools required for their mission, follow the 
correct procedure, and perform the correct technical actions. 
In order to have a common language between the 
“electrical engineering team” and the “virtual reality team”, 
the scenarios description was developed in Grafcet (graphic 
programming, easily interpretable by all). For the virtual 
experience to be realistic, it was essential to give the learner 
the 
opportunity 
to 
make 
mistakes 
up 
to 
virtual 
electrification, 
simulated 
by 
a 
vibration. 
Three 
configurations are the possible (Figure 3): (a) the operations 
are performed correctly, (b) some errors require to stop the 
current action and to start it again (the troubleshooter does 
not intervene on the right element for example) and (c) the 
errors don’t have an immediate consequence, but will cause 
an accident in the long term (the operator has incorrectly 
assessed the risk, or poorly chooses its protective 
equipment). In case of false manipulation, a vibration of the 
joysticks and a flash light simulates the electric shock. 
 
 
 
Figure 3 : Programming of intervention scenarios 
 
 
 
Figure 4 : Image extracted from a video explaining the voltage 
measurement process 
Finally, to illustrate the complex technical gestures, 
difficult to represent in the virtual environment, because 
demanding in terms of calculation capabilities, videos are 
accessible in the form of help in the virtual environment. 
These videos were shot with immersive cameras to illustrate 
as accurately as possible the technical actions to be 
performed, as shown in Figure 4 in a troubleshooting 
procedure. The final step, which is still partially in process, 
is the encoding of the scenarios algorithm by the partner 
company and their testing in the virtual environment for 
validation. 
During the entire development phase of the project, a 
double follow-up was carried out: first, a technical follow-
up, with regular meetings (each week) including the 
different teams involved in the progress made, and a 
pedagogical follow-up in the form of questionnaires offered 
to students in order to collect their feelings on different 
aspects of the project. The areas questioned were the 
evaluation of the accompaniment in the project, the links 
between the project and the teaching, the material and 
technical environment and the contributions for them of the 
project, in particular its multidisciplinary aspect. 
IV. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
The pedagogical interest of this project lies at two 
different levels; the creation of a custom VR tool for the 
training of students on the one hand, and the pedagogical 
approach of co-design of this tool, including future users in 
the design of the training tool on the other hand. Now, the 
tool is still under development, and it is therefore too early 
to assess its impact on the electrical risk training of students. 
This analysis will of course be carried out as soon as the 
tool is in place, scheduled for September 2021. Following 
this initial implementation and feedback from the student 
evaluations, we plan to continue to evolve the scenarios and 
to a lesser degree the virtual environment, in order to make 
it even more efficient. This evolution will be based on the 
results of surveys submitted to students in order to analyze 
their appropriation of the virtual reality tool. These tests will 
be carried out at two levels: firstly with beginners, for whom 
the virtual environment will be the only experience of 
electrical risks, but also with final year students, who will 
have had the opportunity to work on real electrical 
installations. The idea behind this double evaluation is to 
assess the tool's ability to address both the problem of 
discovering electrical risks for non-electricians and the 
realism of simulated situations for more experienced users. 
The analysis that we have already been able to do relates 
to the approach of co-designing the teaching support by 
involving the students themselves. The results of the 
evaluations, relating to the items described in the description 
of the method, made it possible to highlight several 
interesting elements. 
First, the students expressed an overall satisfaction level 
of 9.5/10 for this project. They particularly appreciated the 
autonomy they were given (100% satisfaction) as well as the 
support and follow-up (89% very satisfied, 11% satisfied) 
In terms of support, the students did not have any difficulty 
managing the high number of interlocutors around them. On 
the contrary, they appreciated the cohesion and the diversity 
of this team and the associated skills was really experienced 
as an asset. Collaborative work with specialists in other 
technical fields was evaluated as an asset by 78% of 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-873-0
eLmL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

students, both an asset and a constraint by 11% and neither 
an asset nor a constraint by 11% of students 
In terms of the links between the project and teaching, 
the students' perception is clearly that they have developed 
competence in fields not directly related to their core 
training, electricity: 56% strongly agree and 44% agree with 
this perception. They are also aware that they have made 
progress on aspects related to electrical safety, but less 
noticeably: 0% strongly agree 78% somewhat agree and 
22% somewhat disagree with this perception. It is clear that 
in this respect, students are underestimating their rise in 
competence in their field of specialization. To be able to 
write the intervention scenarios in the virtual environment, 
students had to reach a high level of mastery of the 
intervention rules in a context of electrical risk, but this 
essential aspect appeared secondary to the students 
compared to the new skills in virtual reality and video 
production. The reason may be that these two areas are 
completely absent from their initial competency panel, so 
the discovery was total.  
In terms of the contribution of the project, the 
multidisciplinary and collaborative dimensions of the 
project were the most appreciated by the students, more than 
the technical contribution on the heart of the subject, that is 
to say the management of electrical risks. Thus, to the 
question of the main skill developed in the framework of 
this project, 56% of the students answered the ability to 
communicate with interlocutors from various fields of 
competence, 33% the ability to formalize expectations and 
only 11% the ability to master the technical elements. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The developed system allows the learner to be truly 
immersed in the virtual context. It allows students to project 
into their future professional world, and to progress at their 
own pace, and with a level of autonomy that they can 
manage, by requesting or not to contextual aids present in 
the virtual environment. 
The realization of this project by the students aroused a 
great deal of enthusiasm and the organisation of the project 
team as an engineering office allowed a lot of interaction 
within the micro-enterprise thus formed. While the initial 
idea of involving students in the design of teaching tools 
was primarily intended to enable students to develop 
technical and pedagogical skills, rather, it was found that 
they placed greater emphasis on the opening of their field of 
expertise to virtual reality, video production, and team-
based collaborative work experience. This awareness of the 
perceived gap in the interest of the project between teachers 
and students was only possible thanks to the support of the 
project by the pedagogical team and the associated desire to 
better understand how this type of pedagogical initiative is 
perceived 
by 
the 
main 
stakeholders. 
This 
better 
understanding of the expectations and motivations of the 
various people involved will make it possible to sustain and 
strengthen these actions and better support future initiatives. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was financed by the French government 
IDEX-ISITE initiative 16-IDEX-0001 (CAP 20-25). In this 
context, the “Learn'in Auvergne” program was launched, 
with the aim of supporting educational teams in the design, 
implementation and evaluation of educational and digital 
innovations. Thanks to J-F Vérité (2JProcess company), J-J 
Diaz and B Beghein (Electical Engineering team), A. 
Cauchy and D. Saint-Gérand (Audiovisual Team), and the 
students in charge of the project: T. Clair, S. Coletto, C. 
Duplessy, T. Sauvagnat, F. Harduin De Grosville, B. Collet, 
M. Rumeo, M. Poillot, A. Da Costa for their contribution. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Radianti, T. A. Majchrzak, J. Fromm and I. Wohlgenannt, “A 
systematic review of immersive virtual reality applications for higher 
education: Design elements, lessons learned, and research agenda”, 
Computers & Education, vol. 147, 2020. ISSN 0360-1315. 
[2] L. Jensen andF. Konradsen, “A review of the use of virtual reality 
head-mounted displays in education and training”, Education and 
Information Technologies, vol. 23, no 4, pp.1515–1529, 2018. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10639-017-9676-0. 
[3] J. Martín-Gutiérrez, C. E. Mora, B. Añorbe Díaz, and A. González-
Marrero, “Virtual technologies trends in education”, EURASIA 
Journal of Mathematics, Science and Technology Education, vol. 13, 
no 2, pp.469–486, 2017. 
[4] M. Němec, R. Fasuga, J. Trubač andJ. Kratochvíl, “Using virtual 
reality in education”, 15th international conference on emerging 
elearning technologies and applications- IEEE, pp.1–6, 2017. 
[5] M. Kassem, L. Benomran and J. Teizer, “Virtual environments for 
safety learning in construction and engineering: seeking evidence and 
identifying gaps for future research”, Visualization in Engineering 
vol. 5 no 16, 2017. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40327-017-0054-1 
[6] P. Wang, P. Wu, J. Wang, H.L. Chi and X. Wang, “A critical review 
of the use of virtual reality in construction engineering education and 
training”, International Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health, vol. 15 no 6, p 1204, 2018. 
[7] K. Patel, J.N. Bailenson, S. Hack-Jung, R. Diankov and R. Bajcsy, 
“The effects of fully immersive virtual reality on the learning of 
physical tasks”, Proceedings of PRESENCE 2006: The 9th Annual 
International Workshop on Presence, August 24 – 26, Cleveland, 
Ohio, USA, 2006. 
[8] M. Da Silva, and M.H.,  Cascone. “Immersive Virtual Training for 
Substation Electricians”, IEEE Virtual Reality (VR), pp.451–52, 2017 
[9] E.H. Tanaka, J.A. Paludo, C.S. Cordeiro, L.R. Domingues, E.V. 
Gadbem and A.,Euflausino, “Using Immersive Virtual Reality for 
Electrical Substation Training”, International Association for 
Development of the Information Society, 2015. 
[10] D. Zhao, J. Lucas and W. Thabet, “Using Virtual Environments to 
Support Electrical Safety Awareness in Construction”, Proceedings of 
the 2009 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC) pp. 2679–90, 2009. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/WSC.2009.5429258 
[11] T.M. Buriol, M. Rozendo, K. De Geus, S. Scheer and C. Felsky, “A 
Virtual Reality Training Platform for Live Line Maintenance of 
Power Distribution Networks”, ICBL2009-International Conference 
on Interactive Computer Aided Blended Learning, pp 1–13, 2009. 
[12] M. Halpin, R. Halpin and P. Curtis, “Simulation-Based Electrical 
Safety 
Training,” 
IEEE 
15th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Environment and Electrical Engineering (EEEIC), pp.1137–42, 2015. 
[13] C. Hillmann, “Comparing the Gear VR, Oculus Go, and Oculus 
Quest” Unreal for Mobile and Standalone VR”. Apress, Berkeley, 
CA. C., pp.141-167, 2019.  
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-873-0
eLmL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

