Knowledge-Building Support through Social Navigation 
in Learning Community 
Miki Yamamoto,  Fumihiko Anma,  Toshio Okamoto 
Graduate School of Information System 
 The University of Electro-Communications  
1-5-1 Chofugaoka, Chofu-shi, Tokyo 182-8585 Japan   
myamamoto@ai.is.uec.ac.jp, anma@ai.is.uec.ac.jp, okamoto@ai.is.uec.ac.jp 
 
 
 
Abstract—In information search on Web as learning activities, 
by utilizing social bookmarks as a mechanism to classification 
and organization of the collected information, tags are added 
when individual learners bookmark a Web page, to be shared. 
In this paper, we describe the method for building knowledge 
models by analyzing the structure and the temporal nature of 
tags to estimate the knowledge structure of learners and 
learning community. We propose supporting information 
search on Web based on the knowledge model, and a mutually 
supportive learning environment to achieve knowledge 
building in the learning community. 
Keywords-Learning Community; Information Search; Social 
Bookmark; Knowledge Structure; Ant Algorithm. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the development of social web technologies, 
Internet-based learning activities have become increasingly 
diverse. In particular, the learning support focused on 
knowledge sharing in communities formed by Wiki, Blog, 
Wiki, Blog, and SNS (Social Network Service) have been 
actively researched. On the other hand, in the technology to 
support information search on Web, social navigation and 
social search have been remarkably widespread [1] [2]. 
Reflecting that, the learning support utilizing social 
navigation [3] [4] has been attracting attention.  
In this research, our purposes are to support information 
search on Web as a learning activity, and   to promote of 
mutual support for building knowledge in the learning 
community. We perform our purpose by utilizing the 
technology of social bookmarking to realize social 
navigation based on the concept of sharing bookmarks. Also, 
in this paper, we define the group of learners sharing the 
common learning objectives taken from the viewpoint of 
knowledge, skills and applications, problem solving, as 
"Learning Community". 
By utilizing social bookmarks, they consider the 
classification of a bookmark pre-arranged, they add to the 
bookmark information (e.g., title, URL, and evaluation) the 
equivalent of a bookmark metadata called "tag", and they 
register them on the Web site. Social bookmark is a social 
web technology to share and manage tags by multiple users. 
Tags associated with the Web pages based on user's 
knowledge, represents the user's own expertise [5]. In 
addition, differences in the classification system for Web 
pages by tagging interact in communication between users, 
and influence the formation of community. 
When analyzed in terms of the Bloom's Taxonomy of 
Learning, learners who use tags show evidence of moving up 
the hierarchy from the lower “consumption”-based levels of 
learning (knowledge and comprehension) to higher levels of 
applied and metacognitive knowledge (application and 
analysis). Further, reviewing of tags (i.e., comparing tags 
used by a community of taggers) would potentially facilitate 
the move to the highest levels of Bloom's Taxonomy of 
Learning (synthesis and evaluation) [4]. 
Therefore, in this paper, in inquiry learning including 
information search process on Web depending interests and 
purposes of individual learners to achieve the learning 
objectives, we propose a knowledge-building support by 
utilizing 
social 
bookmarking 
as 
a 
mechanism 
to 
classification and organization of the collected information. 
First, in information search on Web as learning activities, we 
provide support by the navigation of Web pages based on the 
knowledge model of learners and learning community. Next, 
we will provide mutual support for building knowledge in 
the learning community, by encouraging participation to the 
community, and by recommending members to the 
community. 
The paper is as follows. In Section 2, we discuss related 
work, and examine the use of social bookmark to support 
knowledge-building in the learning community. In Section 3, 
as our research approach, we explain how to create the 
knowledge model of learners and learning communities. 
Then, we propose social navigation based on the knowledge 
model of the learning community. In Section 4, we describe 
overviews of our system and the details of important 
processing module. In Section 5 shows a running example 
and discuss the preliminary experiment. In Section 6, we 
describe future plans. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Social navigation [6] is a technique to support the 
activities of learners by using information about other 
learning activities. For example, learning support using 
bookmarks, links, and annotation [3] in learning activities, 
has been researched. In this section, we describe related 
research studies focusing on social bookmarks created by 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

collaborations in the community. Then, we discuss creating 
learner's model utilizing social bookmarking, and examine 
techniques to support knowledge-building.    
A. Social Navigation and Learning Support 
Social navigation is intended to support information 
search using bookmarks, links, and annotations created by a 
collaboration of the community [1] [2]. Farzan [3] realized 
learning support using the AnnotatEd (Annotations for 
Education) by incorporating the annotation to provide social 
navigation in e-Learning. In addition, Bateman [4] focused 
on the potential educational benefits of collaborative tagging 
proposed by John [5], and developed collaborative learning 
system OATS (Open Annotation and Tagging System) as an 
open source tool. Bateman showed the possibility of 
adaptation of collaborative tagging on e-Learning by 
analyzing learner's tagging, automatic tagging provided by 
system, and expert's (instructor) tagging for e-Learning 
contents, from data obtained by experiments. However, any 
support is limited in the areas that the learning content 
domains in e-Learning. For information search on Web, 
learning support has not been done according to interests and 
purposes of individual learner.  Also, the environment as the 
interaction between learners is not provided. 
In this research, in inquiry learning activities on Web, we 
provide an environment for social navigation and community 
as a learning support by utilizing social bookmark applying 
the capabilities of collaborative tagging and Folksonomy (i.e., 
classification by people). 
B. Social Bookmark and Learner's Knowledge Model 
John [5] proposed two methods for ranking ExpertRank 
to quantify the expertise of the user in the context of a 
specific tag. One is a simple way that is not expected in the 
relationship between the tags on unstructured tag space, the 
other is a realistic way that assumes the classed tag space. In 
the latter method, each cluster of tags can be represented 
graphically. Nodes represent tags, and edges between nodes 
represent the strong contextual relationship between tags.  
 ExpertRank, instead of determining all areas of expertise 
for a specific user, that is important to find a user who is 
familiar with a specific area. However, the temporal aspects 
of the tag have not been considered. So, Michlmayr [7] 
proposed the Add-A-Tag algorithm for profile construction, 
which takes account of the structural and temporal nature of 
tagging data, as a complementary approach to John's 
proposals. Michlmayr extended the co-occurrence approach 
[5] with the evaporation technique known from Ant 
algorithms, in order to consider the time course of the 
bookmark. However, the relationships between the tags are 
not the result of a community-driven process, but entirely 
created by one user instead. Hence, the relationships between 
the tags might not make sense to anyone except to the user 
who created them. 
In this research, our system accumulates, as learning 
history, tags granted to a Web page when individual learners 
bookmark, and semantic tag consisting features of Web 
pages, rating, registration date. We extract tags that represent 
concepts from the stored data. By analyzing timing of the 
appearance of concept tags and subsequent relationship 
between concept tags considering the temporal aspects, we 
estimate the knowledge structure of learners and learning 
community. Thus, we represent model of their knowledge to 
the graph. 
C. Social Bookmark and Navigation 
Social bookmark has achieved social navigation by the 
recommendation of Web pages based on information 
obtained through the sharing of useful bookmarks. The 
methods of navigation are classified as recommendation by 
analyzing the contents bookmarking, recommendation by 
analyzing the co-occurrence, and recommendation of the 
graph-based user model by analyzing the structure of tags.  
As a graph-based recommendation, Sharma [8] applied 
the strategy of evaporation of the pheromone of ants to deal 
with the temporal nature of the tags that Michlmayr [7] 
proposed. Their method is different from the way to add 
weight to the edges of Michlmayr. In the proposals of 
Michlmayr, the evaporation is done at all edges and the 
weights are added to the specific edge. In the proposals of 
Sharma, if not already present as nodes in a graph of all the 
tags associated with a specific user at a specific time, nodes 
are added with equal weight. Then, evaporation is performed 
on the existing edges, which consists of tags provided by 
users than the specific user.  Thus, the recommendation 
considering the temporary user interest has been discussed 
and that it is beneficial to specific users. However, if a 
specific user provides tags, we consider evaporation is 
reasonable to be done on the edges, which consists of tags 
provided by the specific user. 
In this research, we also apply the update strategies of the 
Ant Algorithm to the time course of the tag. However, our 
approach is different from related research in terms of the 
method to update the edge weights and to reflect the 
recommendations of dynamic interest and purpose in the 
community using the knowledge structure of the learning 
community. 
D. Social Bookmark and Community 
The concept of community is the basis for social Web. 
Lacher [9] discussed that members of the community can 
facilitate 
communication 
because 
members 
share 
perspectives common to observe the real world, and 
vocabulary, common concepts and common system of 
concepts are prescribed in terms of this common. Based on 
this basic concept, Ogure [10] proposed the method for 
automated information retrieval system utilizing the concept 
of experts as the community ontology. However, in the 
method of Ogure, there are problems that the cost of building 
the community ontology is high, and non-experts have to 
search for information using unfamiliar ontology of experts. 
In these problems, Bateman's [4] results of a comparative 
analysis of tagging by learners and experts showed that to be 
effective Collaborative tagging. On the other hand, Freyne 
[2] proposed a method to collect the wisdom of the 
community by integrating social search and social navigation. 
Therefore, our approach is utilizing the knowledge 
structure of the learning community built by social 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

bookmarking as community-particular conceptual system, to 
support the individual learner's information search. In 
addition, by implementing the search function of learning 
communities and community members, we provide mutual 
support for building knowledge in the community. 
III. 
OUR PROPOSED APPROACH 
In the learning cycle assumed by our research, first, we 
describe how to create the knowledge model of learners and 
learning communities. Then, we propose the method for 
social navigation based on the knowledge model of the 
learning community. After, we describe how to encourage 
participation for mutual support for building knowledge in 
the learning community. 
A. Learning Cycle 
In this research,  as  shown in Figure 1, we assume 
learning 
cycle 
to 
repeat 
"Search", 
"Browse", 
and 
"Classification and Organization by Bookmarks" on Web 
[11]. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Learning Cycle 
First, learners search by keywords or tag cloud (list of 
tags) for individual interest and purpose. Then, they select a 
page from the list including the title of Web page, URL, etc. 
that is presented as a search result to browse for their 
interests and purposes. When they bookmark the pages they 
visit, they store tags and semantic information in the system 
and work together to classification and organization of Web 
pages. 
In this system, log data of tagging behavior in 
information search on Web (i.e., the title and URL of Web 
page bookmarked,  important keywords), tags and semantic 
information (purpose of the tag, reading amount, difficulty 
and importance, usefulness, registration date) is stored in a 
database as a learning history. 
B. Knowledge Model of Learners and Learning 
Community 
In this system, target learner's model of learning support 
is created based on the accumulated history of individual 
learning. We determine from semantic information of 
individual learning history and extract the tags that represent 
the concept. Then, we represent learner's knowledge model 
to the graph containing the concept tags extracted as nodes, 
and co-occurrence as edges. Moreover, as with the proposal 
of Sharma, we apply the update strategy of Ant algorithm to 
the weight of the edge of the graph by considering the 
passage of time. However, our method is different from the 
way to add weight to the edges of Sharma. We proposed to 
make the evaporation on the graph that consists of tags of 
target learner. Because, if the target learner will make a new 
tag, target's interest will fade from existing tags. Thus, the 
graph of other learners is not affected, but the graph of the 
learning community will be affected. 
The graph of a learner G = (V, E) has node set V and 
edge set E where: V = {v1, v2, ....,vn} is (corresponding to 
tags t1, t2, ..., tn) and E = {e1, e2, ...., en}. If tags ti and tj 
appear at the same time, the edge corresponds to tags ti and 
tj, the weight assigned to the edge is represented as wij. 
We describe the weight wij update procedure, as follow: (1) 
to (3). 
 
• 
If there is not vi, all tag ti will be added to the graph 
as a vertex v. 
(1) 
 
• 
Evaporation is performed using the following 
formula on the existing edges, which consists of 
specific learner's tags.  
 
wij=(1-ρ)*wij 
(2) 
• 
If there is an edge between vertices vi and vj, the 
weight (wij) is as follow:  
 
wij= wij + β 
(3) 
Here, β is a real constant, β> 0. 
Otherwise, it will be added as a weight wij = α to the 
edge between vertices vi and vj. 
Here, α is a real constant, α> 0. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Knowledge Model of Learners and Learning Community 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

On the other hand, the knowledge model of the learning 
community is created based on the learning history of 
learners that participates in the community. Similar to the 
learner's knowledge model, we represent the knowledge 
model of the learning community to the graph. Here, the 
weight wij of the edge corresponding to the tags ti and tj, is 
the sum of edge weights wij corresponding to the tags ti and tj 
of the individual learner. Once the update is made under the 
weight of the individual learner, the update will be done in 
the community. Thus, the dynamic interest and purpose of 
individual learners will be reflected in the community. 
C. Social Navigation using the Knowledge Model of 
Learning Community 
As stated previously, our system will also create the 
knowledge model of the entire system (i.e., social), while 
creating the knowledge model of learners and learning 
community.  
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Social Navigation utilizing the Knowledge Model of Learning 
Community 
Therefore, as shown in Figure 3, if a learner will 
participate in the learning community with a aim, for 
example, if the learner has learned "PHP" will participate in 
the learning community has learned "Perl" already with the 
aim of learning "Perl", to support to explore the appropriate 
Web pages for search keywords of the learner, based on the 
knowledge model of the learning community, our system 
extracts concept tags needed by the target learner, and 
recommends the Web pages associated highly with those 
tags. For example, if the learner's search keyword is 
"MySQL", 
the 
traditional 
social 
bookmarking 
sites 
recommend highly relevant pages with "MySQL". However, 
they are not always highly relevant pages with "Perl". If the 
system recommends based on the learner's past history, it 
recommends highly relevant pages with "PHP". On the other 
hand, if our system recommends using the dynamic 
knowledge structure of the learning community, it reliably 
recommends highly relevant pages with "Perl", which has 
been formed in the community at that time. 
 
D. Mutual Support for Building Knowledge  in Learning 
Community 
I this system, by implementing the search function of the 
learning community, it would recommend the learning 
community to adapt for learner's new interest and purpose, 
based on the knowledge model of learners and the 
community. In addition, it presents the community 
recommended in the page of "Learning Community 
Bookmark". 
On the other hand, by implementing the search function 
of members for additional members of the learning 
community, it would recommend additional learners needed 
to achieve the objective of the learning community, based on 
the knowledge model of learners and learning community 
seeking additional members. In addition, it presents the 
member recommended in the page of "Learner's Bookmark". 
By the recommendation of members and learning 
communities, it promotes the participation of the community 
for mutual support for building knowledge in the learning 
community. 
IV. 
SYSTEM CONFIGURATION 
As shown in Figure 4, our system is comprised of "Social 
Bookmark Database" and the seven processing module. 
Among them, the following describes the details of 
important processing module in the learning community; 
"Community 
Bookmark 
Management", 
"Community 
Bookmark 
Recommendation", 
"Learning 
Community 
Recommendation", 
and 
"Community 
Member 
Recommendation". 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  System Configuration 
A. Community Bookmark Management Module 
In learning communities, this module performs main 
processing; to search information, to represent search results, 
and to register tags and semantic information at the time of 
bookmarking. Learners enter b), d), h), i), and j) of Figure 5 
by themselves during the registration. Otherwise, our 
system automatically extracts, and store  in the database. In 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

addition, it extracts the concept of tags based on "Content 
Theme", "important keywords in the content" in i), and 
items without "after" in h). Mainly, Learners search by 
keywords or tag cloud, and store tags and semantic 
information in our system when they bookmark the pages 
they browse. Our system automatically extracts the title of a 
Web page and keywords at URL that learners entered during 
registration, and stores them in the database.  
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Tags and Semantic Information 
Also, in Community Bookmark Management Module,  
our system has performed navigation by presenting high 
ranked pages calculated based on the knowledge model of 
the learning community from the top of the search results. 
B. Community Bookmark Recommendation Module 
The consensus among learners in the learning 
community that are built in the community is done on 
special Web page classification using particular tags. Also, 
as shown in Figure 2, the weight of edges in the graph of the 
knowledge structure of learning communities is the sum of 
the weight of the corresponding edges of each learner. Thus, 
dynamic interest and purpose of individual learners will be 
reflected, and the knowledge structure of the community is 
continually updated and is codified by evaporation. So, 
based on the dynamic knowledge structure of the learning 
community, our system recommends Web pages tagged 
with particular tags related search keywords  in the 
community. Thus, we navigate common keywords in the 
community and relevant knowledge has become a subject of  
interest and purpose.  
First, in order to narrow the search results with related 
tags for search keywords, our system extracts tags to 
recommend in the learning community. If there is a node in 
a graph of the knowledge structure of the community, our 
system extracts the edges with Top-k weights connecting 
the node to the other nodes, and recommend tags combined 
of the search keywords and the extracted node tags. Then, 
by the relevance between Web page and tags to recommend, 
we obtained in accordance with the following calculation 
method to rank the page. Our system presents high ranked 
pages from the top of search results. 
The page's rank is calculated as follow: 
Calculate the relevance between the page P and tag T. 
 
P = ΣWi 
(4) 
(Wi is the important keywords contained in the page P) 
Let the relevance between the page P and the tag T be rel (P, 
T),  
  
rel (P, T) = Σrel (Wi, T) 
(5) 
Here, rel (Wi, T) and T is the relevance between Wi and T. 
Thus, the page rank is calculated as follow:  
 
page's rank = Σrel (P, Tj) = ΣΣrel (Wi, Tj) 
(6) 
C. Learning Community Management Module 
1) Recommendation of the Learning Community:  
Our system calculates CommunityRank for search 
keywords, and presents high CommunityRank communities 
from the top of search results. In the page of "Learner's 
Bookmark", the search keywords is the tags in the learner's 
most recent bookmarks. 
CommunityRank is calculated as follow: 
The graph of  the learner's knowledge structure G = (V, 
E) has node set V and edge set E where: V = {v1, v2, .... ,vn} 
is (corresponding to tags t1, t2, ..., tn) and E = {e1, e2, ...., en}. 
Where a set of keyword search is K = {k1, k2, ...., km}, and ki 
is an element of K, ki ∈ V, if there is eij ∈ E, eij is the 
edges corresponding to a tag ti (= k) and tj, and the weight 
represented as wij. This time, let a set of ti and tj with Top-k 
(wij) be VTop. On the other hand, let the graph of the 
knowledge structure of the learning community be Gc = (Vc, 
Ec). Where VTop = {v1, v2, ...., vn }, an element of VTop is vi 
∈ Vc, if there is ec ∈ Ec, the weight of the edge ec 
represented as wcij.  
Thus, CommunityRank is calculated as follow: 
 
CommunityRank = Σwcij 
(7) 
2) Recommendation of the Community Member:  
Our 
system 
calculates 
MemberRank 
for 
search 
keywords, and presents high MemberRank learners from the 
top of search results. In the page of "Learning Community 
Bookmark", the search keywords is the tags in the learner's 
most recent bookmarks. 
MemberRank is calculated as follow: 
The graph of  the knowledge structure of the learning 
community Gc = (Vc, Ec) has node set Vc and edge set Ec 
where: Vc = {v1, v2, .... ,vn} is (corresponding to tags t1, t2, ..., 
tn) and Ec = {e1, e2, ...., en}. Where a set of keyword search 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

is K = {k1, k2, ...., km}, and ki is an element of K, ki ∈ Vc, if 
there is eij ∈ Ec, eij is the edges corresponding to a tag ti (= 
k) and tj, and the weight represented as wcij. This time, let a 
set of ti and tj with Top-k (wcij) be VcTop. On the other hand, 
let the graph of the learner's knowledge structure be G = (V, 
E). Where VcTop = {v1, v2, ...., vn }, an element of VcTop is vi 
∈ V, if there is e ∈ E, the weight of the edge e represented 
as wij. 
Thus, MemberRank is calculated as follow: 
 
MemberRank = Σwij 
(8) 
V. 
THE PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENT 
As shown in Figure 8, we have developed the 
knowledge-building 
support 
system 
that 
provides 
supporting information search on Web as a learning activity, 
and mutual support for building knowledge in the learning 
community. In a) of the figure, learners search information 
and bookmark as learning activities in the learning 
community. Our system represents high ranked pages from 
the top of search results. When learners bookmark, they 
register tags and semantic information in b). As shown in c), 
learners are able to see the knowledge structure of the 
learning community. As shown in d), our system 
recommends members, and it is possible to see the 
bookmarks and the knowledge structure of members. If 
necessary, they are able to invite members to their 
community. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  The data used to create the knowledge model of Learners 
 
 
Figure 7.  The data used to create the knowledge model of the learning 
community 
(tag_id, tag_name)=(3, php), (17, Web), (49, MySQL), (73, database), (74, 
html), (75, css), (84, primer), (85, Reference), (110, command), (172, 
dump) , (173, dumpdata), … 
In July 2011, we conducted the preliminary experiment 
intended for students of the information system course. As a 
result, as shown in Figure 6, we obtained the data used to 
create the learner's knowledge model. If we focus on the 
learner (c_member_id: 35), information about MySQL 
(tag_id: 49) has not hardly been collected. On the other hand, 
as shown in Figure 7, we obtained the data used to create the 
knowledge model of the learning community model. The 
community (c_commu_id: 1) shown on the left, has been 
collected information about the dump of MySQL. The 
community (c_commu_id: 4) shown on the right, has been 
collected a lot of information about entry-level MySQL. If 
the learner (c_member_id: 35) joins the community of right, 
and search "MySQL", the entry-level information about the 
MySQL will be recommended using the knowledge 
structure of the community. In addition, the community of 
right will be recommended to the learner as highly 
CommunityRank. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed the learning environment to 
support information search on the Web as a learning activity, 
and to promote of mutually support for building knowledge 
in the learning community. As the technique to achieve 
knowledge-building support, we have developed the system 
to take advantage of social bookmark in the process of 
information search on the Web. The results of preliminary 
experiments, we confirmed that it is possible to extract the 
respective interests and objective by using the knowledge 
model of learners and learning community.  
In the future, we continue to inquiry learning including 
information search process on the Web, we will evaluate the 
effectiveness of knowledge-building support system that 
focuses on the dynamic knowledge structure of the learning 
community. 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

REFERENCES 
 
[1] Toyoaki Nishida, “Community Technologies and Social 
Intelligence Design”, Japanese Society For Aftificial 
Intelligence, Vol.22, No.3, 2007, pp. 374-382. 
[2] Jill Freyne, Rosta Farzan, Peter Brusilovsky, Barry Smyth, 
and Maurice Coyle, “Collecting community wisdom : 
integrating social search & social navigation”, Prc.IUI-2007, 
2007, pp. 52-61. 
[3] Rosta Farzan, and Peter Brusilovsky, “AnnotatEd:A Social 
Navigation 
and 
Annotation 
Service 
for 
Web-based 
Educational Resources”, New Review of Hypermedia 
Multimedia, Vol.14, No.1, 2008, pp. 3-32. 
[4] Scott Bateman, Christopher Brooks, Gordon Mccalla, and 
Peter Brusilovsky, “Applying Collaborative Tagging to E-
Learning”,  Proceedings of the Workshop on Tagging and 
Metadata for Social Information Organization, the 16th  
International World Wide Web Conference, 2007. 
[5] Ajita John, and Dorée Seligmann, “Collaborative Tagging and 
Expertise in the Enterprise”, Proceedings of the Workshop on 
Collaborative Web Tagging, 15th International World Wide 
Web Conference 2006. 
[6] Andreas Dieberger, Paul Dourish, Kristina Hook, Paul 
Resnick, and Alan Daniel Wexelblat. Social Navigation: 
Techniques for building more usable systems. interactions, 
Vol.7, No.6, pp. 36-45, 2000. 
[7] Elke Michlmayr, and Steve CayZer, “Learning User Profiles 
from Tagging Data And Leveraging them for Personal(ized) 
Information Access”, Proceedings of the Workshop on 
Tagging and Metadata for Social Information Organization, 
16th International World Wide Web Conference,  2007. 
[8] Ravish Sharma, and Punam Bedi, “Personalized Tag 
Recommendations to Enhance User’s Perception”, 2009 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advances 
in 
Recent 
Technologies in Communication and Computing, 2009, pp. 
944 - 947. 
[9] Martin S. Lacher, Wolfgang Worndl, Michael Koch, and 
Harald Bredeet, “Ontology mapping in community support 
systems”, Dept. of Computer Science,Techniche Universität 
München, 2000, pp. 1-16. 
[10] Takuya 
Ogure, 
Keiichi 
Nakata, 
and 
Kazuo 
Furuta, 
“INFORMATION RETRIEVAL USING COMMUNITY 
ONTOLOGIES”, JOURNAL OF SHAKAI-GIJUTSU (in 
Japanese), Vol.3,  2005, pp. 102-110. 
[11] Miki Yamamoto, Fumihiko Anma, and Toshio Okamoto, 
“Learning Support System by Estimation of Knowledge 
Struture using Social Bookmark”, Japanes Society for 
Information and Systems in Education(JSISE) Research 
Report, Vo25, No.1,  2010,  pp. 35-38. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  A Running Example of our System 
a) Our system presents high ranked pages from the top of search results. 
b) Learner registers tags and semantic information. 
c) Our system presents the knowledge structure of the learning community. 
d) Our system recommends members, and presents bookmarks and the knowledge structure of members. 
 
 
a) navigation in search results 
d) recommendation of members 
b) knowledge structure 
c) tags and semantic information 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

