Conversation: Loose Parts - A Pathway from Play to Technology
Julia Williams, David D. Carbonara, Rose Mary Mautino
School of Education, Duquesne University, USA
williamsj@duq.edu, carbonara@duq.edu, mautino@duq.edu
Abstract--Computational thinking was defined as a way humans
solve problems.
It is not trying to get humans to think like
computers.
There has been a lack of interest for computational
thinking in higher education.
This presentation is calling for an
innovative approach that starts with the identification of a
discipline specific problem space within a higher education
student’s program of study.
Keywords- loose parts; imaginative behavior; instructional design;
computational thinking.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This
presentation
is
designed
to
engage
participants in an active discussion of critical thinking,
computational thinking [18], creativity, imagination and
loose parts. Imagination is a life-long cognitive endeavor
and acts as the catalyst for all creative functions. If we
believe that experiences expand imagination and that
imaginative acts expand our reality, we consider how we
can create meaningful and creative experiences for
students of all ages. As educators, we create meaningful
experiences for our students. Some of these experiences
take the form of STEM-based technology actions [7].
However, at the higher education level, we sometimes
forget
the
fundamental
nature
of
meaningful
play
experiences.
The concept of loose parts provides the
vehicle for higher education faculty and students to
practice problem-solving strategies in discipline-specific
situations.
The practice is often considered ‘risky’
because solutions are not always known. However, the
success/failure cycle that often occurs in ‘risky’ problems
acts as a catalyst to create and enhance problem-solving
schemas.
The process starts with parts that can be
moved, carried, combined, redesigned, lined up, and
taken apart and put back together. These actions can be
repeated in coding, in STEM activities and in any
discipline-specific content that encounters problems and
dilemmas. After all, computational thinking is about the
schema we form to create workable heuristics and
algorithms. The nature of playing with loose parts shows
the user that designing and redesigning is a welcome
practice.
Loose parts form the basis for future problem-
solving schemas.
This discussion will provide loose
parts with which the participants can play.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Imagination is a life-long cognitive and affective
act. It serves as the catalyst for all creative actions [10]
[17]. This essential dynamic serves both our cultural and
scientific lives. Vygotsky [17] stated, and was later re-
interpreted by Moore [11], that imagination is the link
between emotion and thought and between reality and
imagination. Piaget [14] makes a connection between the
initial stage of imaginative autistic thought, which later
develops into a stage of realistic thinking. This notion of
imagination and play is later found in Hewes [6]
discussion of play as essential for optimal development.
Our notion of introducing play at an early age supports
the development of students’ cognition to perform coding
and to build robots later in life.
Imaginative behavior is based on the brain’s
ability to draw upon and combine elements from our
previous experiences. These experiences are cumulative
and are based on both informal and informal learning
processes that shape our future behavior. As teachers, we
can structure these experiences so that we are infusing
imaginative thinking into the curriculum. Our curriculum
becomes experiences that promote imagination and we
welcome imaginative behavior. Vygotsky [17] states that
the brain not only stores and retrieves our experiences but
also combines those experiences into new meaning and
permits our behavior to change. Thus, when we learn to
code or to build robots, we often combine parts together
in unique ways to form new mindful structures.
Loose Parts is a term that was created by
Nicholson [12] in the 1970’s.
This term is defined as
providing children with “loose” materials that can be
carried, moved, revised, taken apart and put back
together. Loose parts not only develops all areas of the
domains of child development but also encourages
creativity
and
develops
problem
solving
skills
[1][11][13].
Loose parts can be the use of natural
materials such as stones, bark, sand, but also can include
construction materials such as wood, wire, plastic and so
on.
When children manipulate such materials, they are
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

expanding their ideas and are often collaborative with
others in order to make meaning from their creations [5].
As we use these loose parts in our imaginative
behavior, we often find ourselves repeating processes that
serve our purpose at the time.
Our purpose could be
solving problems that have known solutions as in learning
environments or as problems that do not have known
solutions as in authentic living. Jonassen [8] discussed the
process
of
solving
well-structure
and
ill-structured
problems.
He wrote that novice problem-solvers often
rely on listed heuristics while experienced problem-
solvers use analogical stories that are similar to a current
problem situation.
He posited how a problem-solver
moves from listing the discrete parts of a solution to
telling a story about the problem so as to solicit a
solution.
We find that our experiences change our
behavior over time and if we are permitted to experience
loose parts at the beginning of our learning, then we can
use our imagination to alter our behavior.
Thus, we can
use our imaginative behavior during the building of code
and the construction of robots or any other task that
requires computational thinking. As teachers, we need to
acknowledge the importance of imagination in the
process of creating products [2].
Instructional design principles are used to create
the Loose Parts curriculum. An awareness of the barriers
[3] to learning new techniques begins the process. Some
of these barriers are internal doubts about our ability to
solve a problem or the external barriers of insufficient
time or materials to solve a problem.
The internal and
external barriers are considered by the instructors who
start the process to learn about the students.
The design
begins with the instructors talking with the students to
identify their internal fears about performing in a Loose
Parts environment.
The design phase continues in the
construction of the learning environment so that time and
resources and support are readily available to the students
[16]. An empathetic atmosphere is presented to alleviate
fears and to create a warm and welcoming environment.
Social connectedness is designed into the process
as influenced by Slagter van Tryon and Bishop [15].
People often work well together to solve problems. The
sharing of ideas helps to build heuristics and algorithms.
Students are encouraged to discuss the process of Loose
Parts with each other and to build on the sharing of ideas.
Additionally, the concept of Loose Parts could be
considered as an ill-structured problem.
However, the
awareness of this phenomenon could provide a catalyst to
design the learning environment to embrace the problem-
solving strategy where the complete solution is unknown
[4]. Drag and drop programming is a visual programming
language that requires low reading levels and almost is
absent of syntactical structure [9]. The low reading level
is important so that we can show children in grade 1 or
even in Kindergarten how to program in code.
The
process starts with an avatar on a screen and our desire to
make it move.
Movements such as left, right, up and
down are easily understood by most students between the
ages of five and eight. It is a powerful tool for students to
effectuate action such as sequential movements and loops
[9].
We may be familiar with the Logo turtle robot
created by Seymour Papert in the 1960’s.
This same
programming environment was converted to drag and
drop programming in apps such as Hopscotch, Scratch
and Alice.
III.
OBJECTIVES
1.
Participants will be introduced to the concept of loose
parts.
2.
Participants
will
discuss
how
imagination,
computational thinking is integral in engaging the use
of technology.
3.
Participants will create structures using loose parts
4.
Participants
will transfer created
structures
into
technology pieces.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
It is important to learn problem solving skills and
higher order thinking and creativity early. Student can
progress into computational thinking as part of their
second nature and not as a new skill to acquire in upper
grades or at the university. Students will spend a lifetime
of learning in the realm of solving problems.
They will
learn the power of imagination to develop habits of mind
to think of new ways to solve problems.
This practice
permits them to constantly build on their learning.
REFERNCES
[1] S. Bredekamp and C. Copple. (Eds.) Developmentally appropriate
practice in early childhood programs serving children from birth to
age 8. Washington, DC: NAEYC. 1997.
[2] A. Echhoff and J. Urbach. Understanding imaginative thinking
during
childhood:
Sociocultural
conceptions
of
creativity
and
imaginative thought. Early Childhood Education Journal, 36(2). pp.
179-185. 2008.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[3] P. Ertmer. Addressing first- and second-order barriers to change:
Strategies
for
technology integration.
Educational
Technology
research and Development, 47(4). pp.47-61. December 1999.
[4] P. A. Ertmer, D.A. Stepich, C.S. York, A. Stickman, X.L. Wu, S.
Zurek,
and
Y.
Goktas.
How
instructional
design
experts
use
knowledge
and
experience
to
solve
ill-structured
problems.
Performance Improvement Quarterly, 21(1), pp.17–42. 2008.
[5] J. L. Frost. Play and playscapes. Albany, NY: Delmar. 1992.
[6] J. Hewes. Let the children play: Nature's answer to early learning.
Early Childhood Learning Knowledge Centre. 2006.
[7]
P. Hopkinson and P. James. Practical pedagogy for embedding
ESD in science, technology, engineering and mathematics curricula.
International Journal of Sustainability in Higher Education, 11 (4).
pp.
65-379.
2010.
https://doi.org/10.1108/14676371011077586
[Retrieved: January, 2018].
[8] D. H., Jonassen. Instructional design models for well-structures
and ill-structure problem-solving learning outcomes.
Educational
Technology Research and Development, 45(1). pp. 65-94. 1997.
[9] C. Kelleher and R. Pausch. Lowering the barriers to programming:
A taxonomy of programming environments and languages for novice
programmers. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 37(2), 83-137. 2005.
[Retrieved April 2016]
[10] G. Lindqvist. Vygotsky's theory of creativity. Creativity Research
Journal, 15(4). pp. 245-251. 2003.
[11] R. Moore. Childhood’s domain: Play and place in child
development. Berkeley: MIG Communications. 1990. [Retreived May
2015].
[12] S. Nicholson. The theory of loose parts: An important principle
for design methodology. Studies in Design Education Craft &
Technology, 4(2). 5-14. 1972. [Retrieved May 2015].
[13] S. Nicolson and S.G. Shipstead. Through the looking glass (3rd
edition). Columbus, OH: Merrill Prentice Hall. 2002.
[14] J. Piaget. Play, Dreams and Imitation in Childhood. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd. 1951.
[15] P. J. Slagter van Tryon and M. J. Bishop. Theoretical foundations
for enhancing social connectedness in online learning environments.
Distance Education, 30(3), pp. 291–315. 2009. [Retrieved April,
2014].
[16] J. J. G. van Merriënboer and P. A. Kirschner. Ten steps to
complex
learning:
A
systematic
approach
to
four-component
instructional design (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Routledge. 2013.
[17] L. S. Vygotsky. Mind in society:The development of higher
psychological processes (M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner & E.
Souberman., Eds.) (A. R. Luria, M. Lopez-Morillas & M. Cole [with J.
V. Wertsch], Trans.) Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
(Original manuscripts [ca. 1930-1934]) 1978. [Retrieved August 2014]
[18] J. Wing. Computational thinking. Communications ACM, 49(3).
33-35. doi: 10.1145/1118178.1118215. 2006. [Retrieved October
2014].
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

