Training Science Teachers to Design Inquiry-Based Lesson Plans through a Serious 
Game 
Petros Lameras, Panagiotis Petridis, Kate Torrens, Ian Dunwell, Maurice Hendrix, Sylvester Arnab 
Serious Games Institute 
Coventry University  
Emails: {PLameras, PPetridis, KTorrens, IDunwell, MHendrix, SArnab}@cad.coventry.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— A significant challenge for science teachers’ training 
is to understand how to enact teaching strategies that would 
encourage students to perceive learning as a memorable 
experience instantiated through an activity; and thereby 
getting involved in a process of meaning-making. This paper 
describes SimAULA, a serious game that aims to integrate 
inquiry learning into game dynamics for scaffolding science 
teachers’ efforts to design their lesson plans. To this line, the 
paper proposes a 7-step process of orchestrating inquiry 
features that enable science teachers to think about inquiry in 
the context of creating activities based on real-world situations 
that map closely on to students’ understandings rather than 
those with naturally occurring complex patterns. SimAULA’s 
overarching architecture is presented in the context of the 7-
stage inquiry process to be implemented and evaluated in a 
number of schools across Europe.  
Keywords: serious games; inqury-based learning; science; 
teacher training 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Scant attention has been given in training teachers to 
prepare lesson plans using a serious game. Although there 
are some instances where teachers are using digital tools for 
professional development, these are mainly focused on 
traditional content-based approaches via the use of an 
institutional virtual learning environment. The advent of 
digital games used for education and training, also known as 
‘serious games’, may facilitate teachers on designing, and 
orchestrating lesson plans and managing the overall 
classroom environment based on pedagogically-driven 
strategies.  
The movement towards the use of serious games as 
learning tools in schools is proliferated by the perceived 
ability of such games to create a memorable and engaging 
learning experience. Various commentators and practitioners 
alike argue that serious games may develop and reinforce 
21st century skills such as collaboration, problem solving and 
communication [1]. While in the past, teachers have been 
reluctant in using serious games for improving their teaching 
practice, there is an increasing interest, especially in science 
disciplines, to explore how serious games could be used to 
improve lesson planning and classroom management [2]. 
The overarching assumption made is that serious games are 
built on sound learning principles encompassing teaching 
approaches that support the design of authentic and situated 
learning activities in an engaging and immersive way.  
Developing serious games based on student-centred 
pedagogies that enable students to engage actively with 
questions and problems associated with their subject or 
discipline is an empowering approach with benefits for 
subject learning as well as for developing a wide range of 
important high-order intellectual attributes including the 
notion of ‘transferability. Inquiry-based learning is perceived 
as an emerging learning approach for transferring learning in 
real-worlds situations. It can be seen as a variant of active 
learning in which students carry-out research like activities 
to explore and master an existing knowledge-base - and as a 
tool for developing relevant discipline-based and other 
transferable capabilities and understandings.  
The serious game SimAULA supports the readiness of 
science teachers to design inquiry-based lesson plans as well 
as to manage the classroom while engaging in virtual 
situations. One of the benefits of using SimAULA is that 
experiences acquired in the virtual environment are 
transferrable to the real classroom and to new settings and 
contexts. In addition, the opportunity science teachers have 
to master the process of lesson planning at their own pace 
and time supports the development of confidence into the 
realms of genuine scholarship, positioning them as engaged 
producers or authors of knowledge with potential to generate 
original intellectual or creative outcomes. In the following 
section, the state-of-the-art in serious games design is related 
to the design of serious games for teacher training, the design 
of learning activities using the inquiry-based learning 
approach, and inquiry-based serious games for science 
education (Section 2) followed by the underpinning inquiry 
framework developed for the game (Section 3). Then, the 
paper describes the game’s approach and architecture 
(Section 4) and concludes with a reflection on future plans 
for uptake and usage across schools in Europe in the 
forthcoming years (Section 5).     
II. 
BACKROUND 
The 2013 NMC Horizon Report [3] asserts the 
perspective that games are effective tools for increasing 
student’s motivation and engagement by involving them into 
a memorable learning experience. A serious game can be 
defined as “a game in which education (in its various forms) 
is the primary goal, rather than entertainment” [4] p.21. [5] 
added the element of a contest played with a computer in 
accordance to specific rules. [6] carried out a study to 
identify the possible relationships between the ability to 
identify mathematical patterns and the ability to play games 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

with certain rules and victory conditions. The study showed 
that students were able to identify mathematical patterns 
more effectively by playing a game in comparison to 
traditional face-to-face teaching practices. Furthermore, 
concept scaffolding and simulation of real world experiences 
may be triggered effectively in order to solve problems and 
enhance student’s performance. For example, [7] surveyed 
264 students playing an online educational game and found a 
relationship between rewards and motives. [8] have shown 
that games can support novel approaches to learning by 
scaffolding players’ experiences in new worlds and learn by 
trying to solve ill-defined problems inside the game, bringing 
to the fore the notion of ‘learning by doing’.   
In recent years, different aspects of serious games have 
been widely discussed including their impact and outcomes 
([9], [10]), motivating features [11] and in-game learning 
design [12] led to an assumption that games might provide 
an environment where learning and teaching becomes 
engaging, memorable and fun [13]. [14] argued that 
pedagogically-driven games reflect strong commitment to 
educational values and have great potential to drive students 
in achieving intended learning outcomes.  
In contrast to the commonly used term game-based 
learning, 
which 
predominantly 
focuses 
on 
student 
motivation, game-design features, learning achievements, 
learning attitudes and in-game assessment, game-based 
teaching refers to the teacher practices involved in designing, 
selecting, facilitating and validating the use of games for 
educational and training purposes [15]. There are a number 
of inter-related aspects in game-based teaching surrounding 
teachers’ conceptions of, and approaches to, serious games 
[16]; teacher’s role in facilitating learning in the game [17] 
and the relationship between teacher’s approaches of 
teaching and the learning models applied in games. 
Identifying the appropriate pedagogical approach and 
aligning it to an intended learning outcome specified by the 
teacher may determine what kind of learning processes, 
scaffolds and activities a particular type of game will afford. 
Thus, training teachers to adopt pedagogical approaches 
based on certain learning outcomes that are supported by 
different types of games will potentially enhance their 
educational value. From a pragmatist perspective, however, 
this does not mean that certain pedagogies are more cohesive 
than others as this always depends on the complex interplay 
between the learning environment, the level of students and 
the learning situation the teacher aims to introduce.  
A. 
Games and virtual worlds for teacher training 
Using technology, as a training tool is predominant as 
technology becomes integral in modern workplaces, yet 
some teachers have shown an unwillingness to adapt their 
teaching style as many of these teachers are overwhelmed 
with the plethora of the teaching approaches that could be 
adopted to support the specific modalities of a digital tool. 
Current research finds that a popular method of using 
technology in teacher training is the use of virtual worlds 
([18], [19]). A virtual world is a useful tool in education, 
which provides teacher-students with “lived experiences”.  
A taxonomy of virtual environments from [20] propose 
that inclusion and accessibility need to be considered during 
development, to ensure that no minority group are excluded. 
The taxonomy further explains that it can be difficult for 
trainers to oversee educational progress of teacher-students 
using a virtual world, compared to in-class activities. 
Suggestions for an environment where trainers can observe 
and monitor the educational process ought to be considered 
in future research, to produce simulations that ensure 
teacher-students are not simply "playing" a game, but 
scaffold teachers to become engaged into in-game learning 
activities for extending their subject-content knowledge and 
projecting the curriculum. 
TABLE I.  
INQUIRY TYPES (ADAPTED FROM [25] NRC 2000) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Structured 
 
Strongly teacher-directed. Students follow 
their teacher’s direction in pursuing a 
scientific investigation to produce some form 
of prescribed product, e.g. they investigate a 
question provided by the teacher through 
procedures that the teacher determines, and 
receive detailed step-by step instructions for 
each stage of their investigation. 
 
 
B. Guided 
 
More loosely scaffolded. Students take some 
responsibility for establishing the direction 
and methods of their inquiry.  The teacher 
helps students to develop investigations, for 
example offering a pool of possible inquiry 
questions from which students select, and 
proposing guidelines on methods. 
 
 
C. Open 
 
Strongly student-directed. Students take the 
lead in establishing the inquiry question and 
methods, while benefiting from teacher 
support. For example, students initiate the 
inquiry process by generating scientific 
questions and take their own decisions about 
the design and conduct of the inquiry and the 
communication of results. 
 
 
D. Coupled 
 
A combination of two types of inquiry, for 
example a guided inquiry phase followed by 
an open inquiry phase. 
 
 
B. 
Inquiry-based learning  
‘Inquiry’ is referred to in the science education literature 
to designate at least three distinct but interlinked categories 
of activity: what scientists do (investigating scientific 
phenomena by using scientific methods in order to explain 
aspects of the physical world); how students learn (by 
pursuing scientific questions and engaging in scientific 
experiments by emulating the practices and processes used 
by scientists); and, a pedagogy, or teaching strategy, adopted 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

by science teachers (designing and facilitating learning 
activities that allow students to observe, experiment and 
review what is known in light of evidence) [21]. For the 
purposes of the SimAULA’s educational design, our focus is 
on inquiry as an active learning process engaged in by 
students and modelled on the inquiry practices of 
professional scientists.  
Inquiry learning science activities encompass a broad 
spectrum ranging from strongly teacher-directed to strongly 
student-directed [22]. Since science teachers need to adopt 
different strategies according to different intended learning 
outcomes, the needs of students, and the specific 
circumstances of their own (diverse) science classrooms, 
understanding different types of inquiry learning and 
teaching will help them to create learning activities that are 
appropriate in context. A continuum of types of science 
inquiry, which we refer to as ‘structured’, ‘guided’, and 
‘open’, based on usage in the literature, is often described 
(e.g., [23]) and is reflected, although not systematically, in 
the Examples of Teaching and Assessment provided by [24] 
and illustrated in Table I. 
The US National Research Council report on Inquiry and 
the National Science Education Standards proposes a 
definition of inquiry teaching and learning that brings to the 
fore “...the abilities of inquiry, emphasizing questions, 
evidence and explanations within a learning context” [25] 
p.24. At the centre of its definition are five ‘essential 
features’ of classroom inquiry. These five essential features 
emphasize a process of active engagement in scientific 
investigation, in which the focus is on students learning 
through and about scientific inquiry rather than on teachers 
presenting scientific content knowledge as portrayed in 
Table II.  
TABLE II.  
FEATURES OF INQUIRY AND THEIR VARIATIONS ([25] NRC 
2000, P.29) 
 
 
NRC [25] created these inquiry-based categories and 
their variations to map the entire spectrum of using inquiry-
based learning according to the needs and level of a 
particular classroom. For example, when the teacher wishes 
to have control over the inquiry activity, then inquiry design 
is focused on teacher direction and support. If the teacher 
decides to allow students to direct the inquiry, then inquiry 
design becomes more open and student-directed.    
C. 
Inquiry-based  Serious Games for Science 
Designing effective inquiry-based learning activities in 
serious games have not been evidenced in many serious 
games. However, there some examples of inquiry-based 
serious games that have been used particularly in science. 
For example the North Carolina State University developed 
the serious game Crystal Island that targets science 
education for eight grade students. The game adopts inquiry-
based learning to explore concepts related to microbiology. 
The learning environment (see Figure 1) is set on a volcanic 
island where a research centre has been established to study 
the flora and fauna. The player is free to explore the world, 
to constitute evidence and collect it, as well as interacting 
with other characters. As some members of the research 
team fall ill, the player needs to identify the cause of their 
illness. The user can perform various scientific investigations 
including experiments in the laboratory, interacting with 
other characters, reading virtual books on diseases and 
collecting data about what poisoned the members of the 
research team.  
 
 
Figure 1.  The Crystal Island game environment.  
Another example of an inquiry-based serious game for 
science is the RiggleFish developed by the UL Lafayette’s 
centre 
for 
Innovative 
Learning 
and 
Assessment 
Technologies. In the game the players take the role of a 
geneticist tasked to discover a fish species. Players work on a 
research laboratory to breed a type of RiggleFish that 
produces Omega X. To accomplish the task, students must 
determine through scientific investigation and observation 
the phenotypes and genotypes of fish collected and then 
breed the fish to obtain the RiggleFish (Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2.  RiggleFish instruments and information resources  
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Based on a similar game pattern, the Crazy Plant Shop 
serious game help students learn about genes and 
inheritance. 
Special 
order 
requests 
from 
mysterious 
customers require students to understand dominant and 
recessive traits and how genetic traits get passed from one 
generation to the next (Figure 3). The game is designed for 
science classrooms and being used by students that adopt 
inquiry learning for investigating how cells grow and their 
transfer from the parent cells to the offspring.  
 
 
Figure 3.  A mysterious customer enquiring for a mysterioufifs plant 
Bringing the pervasiveness and interaction of a 
Massively Multiplayer Online Game (MMOG) to classroom 
teaching, MIT developed The Radix Endeavor for Science, 
Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) in high schools. 
The game covers topics in biology, statistics, geometry, 
algebra and probability. The story unfolds on an island with 
many unknown species and plants waiting to be discovered 
using inquiry and scientific investigations. The type of game 
structure has affordances based on inquiry-learning and 
scientific ways of approaching a phenomenon. Within the 
game a player can collaborate with other online players for 
comparing ideas and solve problems, as well as for 
conducting their own experiments to develop hypothesis 
while being immersed by the social and contextual elements 
of the MMO’s distinct game-play, mechanics and goals 
(Figure 4). 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  The MMO game environment 
MMOs seem to be used frequently for promoting social 
learning and participatory processes between dispersed 
players around the world. The aim is for different players 
wih disctinct skills to collaborate together for achieving a 
common goal.  
III. 
SIMAULA’S INQUIRY MODEL 
The NRC features of inquiry (Table II) are essential for 
driving SimAULA’s pedagogical model. Therefore, we have 
adapted NRC’s features of inquiry to match the distinct 
characteristics 
of 
a 
game-based 
learning 
approach 
encompassing the game mechanics and game play of 
SimAULA. 
The 
adjustments 
entail 
some 
structural 
considerations as well as the addition of ‘Reflection’ as a 
further essential feature. This is consistent with widespread 
recognition of the importance of student reflection activity in 
many recent conceptualizations. The Inquiry model is 
perceived as a cyclical path of the inquiry process where 
inquiry starts with asking questions and ends with reflection. 
Each step in the process leads to the next, generating new 
questions, 
constituting 
evidence, 
analyzing 
evidence, 
formulating 
explanations, 
connecting 
explanations, 
communicating findings and reflecting on the process. 
(Figure 5). These overarching features of inquiry learning are 
integrated to the Simulation core of the game and when 
selected associated inquiry activities will be evoked based on 
the feature selected. For example, when an activity is 
associated with the ‘Evidence’ feature the student might 
collect evidence through a WebQuest [26] designed by the 
teacher or student, guided by peers or teacher or fully 
controlled by the teacher.   
 
 
Figure 5.  The SimAULA 7-step Inquiry Model 
IV. 
SIMAULA  DESCRIPTION AND ARCHITECTURE 
SimAULA places a virtual practicum in the form of a 
three-dimensional world adapted in the context of teaching 
and learning in schools. Both in-service and pre-service 
teachers interact with student’s avatars and develop lesson 
plans in the virtual classroom. The teacher develops the role 
of a science teacher in a biology classroom as an avatar and 
develops a number of lesson plans for the students. Students 
are expected to react in different ways as they would do in a 
traditional 
classroom. 
The 
teacher 
tests 
skills 
and 
competencies for managing class and enhancing learning. 
The objective is to accompany the student through the lesson 
making as well as making appropriate decisions to reach the 
learning aims. A real teacher controls the teacher avatar 
while the computer controls the student avatar. The main 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

way of communication and interaction is by selecting the 
options offered by the system. Students are reacting 
according to the selections the teacher makes, as the 
objective is to develop and manage the classroom during the 
lesson and resolve and possible conflicts that may appear. 
The design consists of three key sub-components: the 
Student Model, the Classroom Model and the Pedagogical 
Model. Inquiry learning will be applied in different types of 
classrooms, with different ICT and resource availability, and 
with a different range of learning activities.  
The system is divided into two parts. The first part 
contains the GUI core - the graphical interface which is 
based on Unity3D, and the second part contains the 
Simulation Core - hosting the inquiry model. This module is 
also 
responsible 
for 
driving 
the 
simulation. 
The 
communication between the two different parts/modules of 
the system is made through a webservice. The Simulation 
Core and the GUI core are comunicating via the phases 
shown in Figure 6. In order to increase interactivity of the 
game, a number of additional interactive elements are 
implemented into the game, these include:  
 
• 
Whiteboard - Users can write on the whiteboard and 
also watch video footage of various school lessons.  
• 
Computer - The user can use the computers mouse to 
select icons on the screen.  
• 
Microscope - A microscope slide is shown out of 
focus, the user must focus the microscope correctly.  
  
  
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Communication between GUI and Simulation Cores   
The teacher is able to configure the desk arrangement in 
order for students to enact individual, group-based inquiry 
and whole classroom inquiry activities (see Figure 7).  
 
 
Figure 7.  Desk arangement based on individual, group and whole 
classroom inquiry activities.  
The rationale of the simulation is to allow the teacher to 
vary some attributes and experience how behaviours can 
vary. But the final goal of the simulation is not to represent 
in a realistic way the complex interaction taking place in a 
school classroom. The main learning objective is to foster 
student teacher’s reflection on his/her inquiry choices and to 
play with different alternatives in a protected virtual 
environment. Once the user launches the simulation, the 
simulation requests from the user to select the type of 
activity from the 7 inquiry features presented in Figure 5. 
Then, the sequence of activities is provided for a student to 
decide about how the student will go with the activity (open, 
structured, and guided) (Figure 8).  
 
 
Figure 8.  The sequence of SimAULA inquiry process and acitivities 
taking place in the game  
The system is available for PC and MAC and we are 
currently working on making it available online via Unity 
Web Player. The system displays the intended learning 
outcomes related to a specific inquiry activity, it describes 
the teacher’s and student’s role (individual and group-based), 
the tools (e.g. textbook, worksheet, etc) used to implement 
the activity and type of activity (individual, group-based, 
whole classroom) (Figure 9). 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  GUI displays the intented learning outcomes, description of 
teacher and student roles and inquiry activity type.  
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented the overarching inquiry-based 
model used to inform the pedagogical design of SimAULA, 
the in-game inquiry-process encompassing the associated 
inquiry activities and student response along with the core 
game system architecture. Drawing on the wider evidence 
base, we have identified seven (7) essential inquiry features 
as elements of effective practice for triggering student’s 
attention, provoke wonder and engagement in scientific 
activities including asking questions, planning an conducting 
investigations, drawing conclusions, revising theories, 
communicating results and reflection.  
We are working further on the inquiry-based model to 
better reflect the associated inquiry activities for each of the 
different phases. We are also working on highlighting the 
various inquiry types and their connection to intended 
learning outcomes and phases of inquiry in the context of the 
game.  
In terms of future research, SimAULA is going to be 
implemented and evaluated at large scale in Europe in the 
context of a European project. In congruence with the project 
objectives, SimAULA is going to be tested in 5,000 schools 
using a variety of tools for collecting data including surveys, 
interviews and observations, as means to evaluate the uptake 
and efficacy in training science teachers to understand 
inquiry-based lesson planning across Europe, through a 
game-based intervention, realised over the next 2 years. 
Testing the proposed inquiry model and aligning it to 
learning outcomes and assessment is being undertaken 
through the iterative and participatory design processes 
within the project.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper leading to these results has received funding 
from the European Community’s Competitiveness and 
Innovation Framework Programme (CIP/2007-2013) under 
grant agreement n°325123 Inspiring Science.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
L. Galarneau and Zibit, M, "Online games for 21st century skills. 
Games and simulations in online learning," Research and 
development frameworks, vol. 59-88, pp. 35-43. 2007. 
[2] 
K. Schrier, "Using augmented reality games to teach 21st century 
skills," in SIGGRAPH 2006 Educators Program. , ed: ACM, 2006, 
p. 15. 
[3] 
L. Johnson, Adams, L., Cummins, M, Estrada, V, Freeman, A, and 
Ludgate, H, "NMC Horizon Report: 2013 Higher Education Edition 
", Austin Texas Available at: http://www.nmc.org/pdf/2013-horizon-
report-HE.pdf2013. [Retrieved: 10 February 2014] 
[4] 
D. Michael and Chen, S, Serious games: Games that educate, train 
and inform. Boston MA: Thomson Course Technology, 2006. 
[5] 
M. Zyda, "From visual simulation to virtual rality to games," 
Computer, vol. 38, pp. 25-32 doi:10.1109/MC.2005.297, 2005. 
[6] 
D. Ferreira, Palhares, and P., Silva, J, "A perspective on games and 
patterns," in New pedagogical approaches in game enhanced 
learning: Curriculum integration, S. de Freitas, Ott, M., Popescu, 
M., Stanescu, I, Ed., ed Hershey PA: IGI Global, 2013, pp. 60-80. 
[7] 
W. H. Huang, Huang, and W.Y., Tschopp, J, "Sustaining iterative 
game playing processes in DGBL: the relationship between 
motivational processing and outcome processing," Computers & 
Education, vol. 55, pp. 789-797, 2010. 
[8] 
S. Schaffer, Squirre, K., Halverson and R., Gee, J, "Video games and 
the future of learning," Available at: 
http://www.academiccolab.org/resources/gappspaper1.pdf . 
[Retrieved: 13 February 2014] 
[9] 
T. M. Connolly, E. A. Boyle, E. MacArthur, T. Hainey, and J. M. 
Boyle, "A systematic literature review of empirical evidence on 
computer games and serious games," Computers & Education, vol. 
59, pp. 661-686, 2012. 
[10] 
Y.-G. Cheong et al., "A computational approach towards conflict 
resolution for serious games," presented at the Proceedings of the 6th 
International Conference on Foundations of Digital Games, 
Bordeaux, France, 2011. 
[11] 
T. Hess and G. Gunter, "Serious game-based and nongame-based 
online courses: Learning experiences and outcomes," British Journal 
of Educational Technology, vol. 44, pp. 372-385, 2013. 
[12] 
C. Obikwelu and J. C. Read, "The Serious Game Constructivist 
Framework for Children's Learning," Procedia Computer Science, 
vol. 15, pp. 32-37, 2012. 
[13] 
S. de Freitas and Routledge, H, "Designing leadership and soft-skills 
in educational games: The e-leadership and soft skills educational 
games design model (ELESS)," British Journal of Educational 
Technology, vol. 44, pp. 951-968, 2013. 
[14] 
G. J. Hwang, Sung, H.Y., Hung, C.M., and Huang, I, "Development 
of a personalized educational computer game based on students’ 
learning styles," Educational Technology Research & Development, 
vol. 60, pp. 623-638, 2012. 
[15] 
T. 
Hanghoj, 
"Game-based 
teaching: 
Practices, 
roles 
and 
pedagogies," in New pedagogical approaches in game enhanced 
learning, S. de Freitas, Ott, M., Popescu, M., Stanescu, I, Ed., ed 
Hershey PA: IGI Global, 2013. 
[16] 
P. Lameras, "University teachers' conceptions of using serious 
games," unpublished. 
[17] 
T. Hanghoj and Brund, C, "Teachers and serious games: Teacher 
roles and positionings in relation to educational games," in Serious 
Games in Education, B. Meyer, Sorensen, B.H., Nielsen - Egenfeldt, 
S, Ed., ed Aarhus, Denmark: Aarhus Univrrsity Press, 2011, pp. 125-
136. 
[18] 
M. Childs, "Real learning in virtual worlds," Warwick Interactions 
Journal, vol. 30 (2). 2007. 
[19] 
P. Twining, "Exploring the educational potential of virtual worlds  - 
some reflections from the SPP " British Journal of Educational 
Technology, vol. 40, pp. 496-514, 2009. 
[20] 
I. Duncan, Miller, A. and Jiang, S., "A taxonomy of virtual worlds 
usage in education," British Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 
43, pp. 949-964, 2012. 
[21] 
D. Minner, Levy, J and Century, J, "Inquiry-Based Science 
Instructrion - What Is It and Does it Matter: Results from a Research 
Synthesis Years 1984 to 2002," Journal of Research in Science 
Teaching vol. 47, pp. 474-496, 2010. 
[22] 
L. M. Hansen, "Defining inquiry: exploring the many types of 
inquiry in the science classroom," The Science Teacher, vol. 69, pp. 
34-37, 2002. 
[23] 
M. Zion, Cohen, S and Amir, R, "The Spectrum of Dynamic Inquiry 
Teaching Practices," Research in Science Education, vol. 37, pp. 
423-447, 2007. 
[24] 
R. W. Bybee, "Teaching science as inquiry," in Inquiring into 
Inquiry Learning and Teaching in Science, J. Minstrell, van Zee, 
E.H, Ed., ed Wanshignton, DC: AAAS, 2000, pp. 20-46. 
[25] 
National Research Council, "The National Science Education 
Standards," National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.1996. 
[26] 
L. Leite, Vieira, P, Silva, R, and Neves, T, "The Role of WebQuests 
in Science Education for Citizenship," Interactive Education 
Multimedia, vol. 15, pp. 18-36, 2007. 
 
 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

