Saudi Arabian Students’ Attitudes to and Perceptions of Social Networking for 
Educational Purposes 
Sulaiman Alqahtani 
School of Information Systems 
Curtin University 
Perth, WA, Australia 
S.alqahtani8@student.curtin.edu.au 
Tomayess Issa 
School of Information Systems 
Curtin University 
Perth, WA, Australia 
Tomayess.Issa@cbs.curtin.edu.au
Theodora Issa 
School of Management 
Curtin University 
Perth, WA, Australia 
Theodora.issa@cbs.curtin.edu.au 
Pedro Isaias 
The University of Queensland  
Brisbane, Australia 
Pedro.isaias@uq.edu.au 
Abstract— Web 2.0 applications, in the form of social 
networking sites, are increasingly being repurposed as 
academic tools in higher education institutions. In this 
context, social networking sites are used to support a 
number of key academic functions including the sharing of 
ideas between students and academic staff, the forming of 
dedicated study groups, the exchange of links and other 
academic objects and self-publication. While these tools are 
readily being adopted in mainstream Western contexts, little 
is currently known regarding whether – and how – social 
networking sites are used in other geo-cultural regions. This 
study sought to redress this research gap by investigating 
how often and in what ways Saudi Arabian students use 
social networking for learning purposes as well as how they 
perceive these instruments as educational instruments. The 
study was based on the analysis of results derived from focus 
group discussions with university students at four Saudi 
Arabian universities. The research found that Saudi 
Arabian students are aware of, and welcome, social 
networking sites and are starting to use them for academic 
purposes in the same way that university students do in 
more mainstream contexts. However, it is evident that, in 
Saudi Arabia, the utilization of these sites for teaching and 
learning purposes is not yet widespread, nor is it 
particularly sophisticated in terms of user knowledge of a 
range of social networking sites and their application to 
higher education. The study concluded that, due to students’ 
enthusiastic reception of these sites, Saudi Arabia is well-
placed to adopt them in a considered and organized manner, 
looking to global best practice usage.  This study is part of a 
wider research project and the outcomes will be used as the 
basis of an in-depth survey which will be published in future 
research.  
Keywords; Web2.0; Social Network; Education; Saudi 
Arabia. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Social networking sites, such as Facebook and 
Twitter, have developed under the umbrella of the 
interactive and collaborative platform known as Web 
2.0[1]. Such applications offer users the opportunity to 
dynamically create and share self-generated content in 
communities defined by common interests and purposes.  
Whilst initially intended for social and leisure usages, 
these applications have penetrated a number of sectors 
such as business, healthcare and government, changing 
the landscape of human communication and interaction 
[2]. One sector that has particularly benefitted from the 
advantages offered by social networking sites is higher 
education where these applications have been put to use 
for educational purposes such as the establishment of 
academic groupings or networks, the dissemination of 
materials, the sharing of ideas and resources, and 
engagement with group-based collaborative projects [3]. 
World-wide, there has been a shift from informal and 
incidental usages of social media in education by students 
themselves 
to 
more 
purposeful 
and 
intentional 
incorporation of social networking into university 
courses, often at faculty-wide level. However, much of 
the research into the use of social networking in higher 
education has occurred within mainstream, Western 
contexts and little is known about how social networking 
is regarded and employed as an educational tool in non-
mainstream contexts which may differ markedly in terms 
of pedagogical understandings, technological resources 
and cultural backgrounds. Saudi Arabia is one such non-
mainstream context, and therefore does not offer a clear 
picture of how social networking is used and perceived as 
a pedagogical instrument. The aim of this study was to 
analyse data obtained from student focus groups in an 
attempt to determine their attitudes to and perceptions of 
the use of social networking for educational purposes. 
In order to contribute to the body of knowledge about 
the use of social networking sites in the higher education 
sector in Saudi Arabia, this research addressed two main 
questions: 
 
In what ways do Saudi Arabian students use social 
networking in learning activities? 
 
What are students’ attitudes to and perceptions of 
social networking for educational purposes? 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
The paper is structured into six sections: section I 
introduces the key themes aims and objectives of the 
paper, followed by Section II which describes how social 
networking has been used in higher education settings as 
both an informal and formal learning tool.  Section III 
surveys the sparse literature on social networking in 
universities in Saudi Arabia while Section IV discusses the 
focus group as a research methodology as well as explains 
the approach used in this study. Section V reports the 
findings arising from the focus group sessions and Section 
VI extrapolates the key discussion points from the 
findings. Finally, the paper concludes by reiterating the 
main themes that have emerged from the research. 
II. 
SOCIAL NETWORKING IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
Higher education is considered to be a natural arena 
for the adoption of social networking technologies for two 
main reasons:  firstly, the vast uptake of social networking 
by “Digital Natives” [4], or a post-1980 cohort born into a 
networked society, and secondly, the suitability of 
interactive technologies to serve the purposes of higher 
education where creating, sharing and disseminating ideas 
in academic communities is of primary importance. 
University students as a demographic tend to be 
technologically aware, bringing with them to university 
their established networking usages, habits and practices, 
as well as the capability to acquire new ones. Indeed, it is 
claimed that social networking is as “natural to education 
as the commute, the computer and everything else which 
students bring” [5]. 
Since the advent of social networking, an increasing 
number of studies have explored the intention to use, the 
rates and sectors related to usage, and the purposes and 
effects of usage of such sites by university students so as 
to learn more about how they communicate and interact 
by means of modern collaborative technologies [6]- [9].  
In examining the purported purposes of social 
networking usage by university students, studies reveal 
that, apart from social and leisure uses, respondents use 
these tools for contacting peers and “talking about” 
academic work [6]-[9].  According to Selwyn [10], social 
networking is used by students as a means of discussing 
learning experiences, exchanging factual information with 
peers, and seeking moral support. Furthermore, there is a 
shift towards the formal incorporation of social 
networking sites by universities themselves, rather than 
simply leaving students to their own independent usages.  
A number of studies Saxena and Majumdar [11], Cuesta, 
et al. [12], Lahiri and Moseley [13], El Bialy and Jalali 
[14] attest to social networking as a formal method of 
student-student interaction and collaboration, student-
instructor engagement, contribution and discussion of 
ideas, clarification of concepts, information posting (e.g., 
announcing assignments or events), information and 
resource-sharing (articles, course notes, video clips, links 
to 
webpages 
or 
blogs, 
photos) 
and 
self-
reflection/publication [11]- [13], [15].  
Research into the use of Facebook as an official 
educational tool, for example, confirms its powerful 
ability to create groupings or communities of users, acting 
as a dedicated shared space for the interactions of targeted 
students, often with university instructors or tutors as 
participatory or mediating interlocutors [11]-[13], [15]-
[21]. While not as prolific as studies on Facebook within 
the higher education setting, research on Twitter confirms 
its serviceability as a convenient and cost-effective 
conduit for tapping into internal and external scholarly 
networks, allowing for   immediate information sharing 
and updating [22]-[34]. Similarly, resource-sharing sites 
have been heralded for their relevance to higher education 
tasks, especially the use of social bookmarking sites as a 
means of annotating, categorising, exchanging and storing 
online documentary resources within the context of   
groups united by common academic pursuits [35]-[41].  
Scholarly attention has likewise been paid to content-
creation tools as learning accessories, such as blogging 
[42]-[47] and wikis [48]-[51].  In particular, studies of 
blogging and wikis as communication tools in tertiary 
settings emphasise their ability to enhance critical 
thinking, to develop a student “voice”, as well as to 
facilitate collaborative group processes [52]-[58].  
III. 
SOCIAL NETWORKING IN THE HIGHER EDUCATION 
SECTOR IN SAUDI ARABIA 
While 
there 
is 
evidence 
that 
Saudi 
Arabian 
universities are making some use of social networking 
platforms, their usage appears to be largely restricted to 
communicative 
functions 
rather 
than 
educational 
engagement. University websites incorporate Facebook, 
Twitter and other Web 2.0 tools but only as a means of 
recruiting, informing and updating students and their 
parents [59], Ahmad, et al. [60] However, little published 
research is available to support enquiry into how Saudi 
college students perceive and make use of social 
networking as a learning tool and whether any usage is 
self-directed or a faculty directive [61].  
Of the handful of studies that do exist, many focus on 
“e-learning” or distance learning technologies and classic 
Learning Management System [62] tools as opposed to 
more contemporary collaborative Web 2.0 instruments 
[59], [63]- [67]. Moreover, many of the more recent 
studies do not clarify the intended purposes of the 
applications.  For example, a recent study at the 
University of Dammam found that respondents use the 
Internet accompanied by Facebook, Twitter and YouTube 
to support their studies without differentiating between 
students’ independent, informal usage and the more 
formal 
university-driven 
incorporation 
of 
social 
networking sites in higher education [68].  In addition, 
while a study by Alwagait, et al. [69] explicitly references 
Twitter and Facebook usage by Saudi Arabian university 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

students and suggests that using these sites does not 
adversely impact on GPA, it also does not clearly specify 
what these networking sites were being used for or 
whether indeed they were used for educational purposes 
at all. Generally, then, current research tells us little about 
whether and how social networking is actually used by 
students in university settings in Saudi Arabia. 
In terms of barriers to uptake, Almalki [67] suggested 
that the main impediments to the penetration of social 
networking in universities in Saudi Arabia are the poor 
quality of internet connections in the country, and trust 
issues related to intellectual property and privacy. 
Another study concluded that the lack of wireless internet, 
poor maintenance of technology tools and the need for 
user training were the main barriers preventing the 
adoption of this technology by tertiary institutions [68]. 
Other obstacles cited by researchers are the lack of Arabic 
interfaces in social networking platforms, lack of Arabic 
user support documents and lack of online Arab content, 
as well as resistance to uptake due to traditional face-to-
face, storytelling-focused and rote-based learning styles 
which are valued in this society [61], [70], [71]. Sultan, et 
al. [70] analysed a number of key cultural issues 
associated with the use of contemporary technologies for 
teaching and learning purposes in Saudi Arabia: one 
important question is how the deeply entrenched practice 
of “wasta” which is a personal influence through social 
connections, might fare when democratized digital forms 
of learning are used [70]. Another consideration is how 
well digital learning mechanisms align with typical Arab 
characteristics such as extreme politeness conventions and 
the avoidance of making critical comments to and about 
others. Moreover, Sultan, et al. [70] raise the question of 
how to equip Arab learners with global digital 
competencies such as the ability to filter content and 
make judgements about quality and trustworthiness of 
information within an education system that favours 
memorization and traditional examination success as 
measures of successful pedagogy. This is compounded by 
the dearth of Arabic open access content and the limited 
English possessed by Saudi citizens, making participation 
in an information culture extremely challenging. Against 
this background, this study aims to gauge current usage of 
social networking for educational purposes by Saudi 
Arabian students, as well as their attitudes to and 
perceptions of these sites. 
IV. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
Focus groups have been in use for several decades in 
various fields such as healthcare, marketing and numerous 
academic sub-disciplines within the social sciences. This 
is a qualitative method of collecting and analysing data, 
and is distinct in methodology from other qualitative 
techniques such as interviews and surveys [72]. Primarily, 
focus groups are intended to elicit data regarding the 
personal experiences and insights of individual members 
of the group in a relaxed and interactive environment. 
Each member of the focus group is encouraged to engage 
and converse with the moderator and other respondents 
[73].  
In a typical focus group, the researcher facilitates the 
discussion rather than conducting individual interviews.  
Usually, a group will consist of five to twelve 
participants, and it is limited to this small number of 
participants to allow each participant to express an 
opinion about each question or statement, while providing 
the opportunity to agree or disagree with the opinions 
expressed by others in the group. Typically, the chosen 
participants are members of a particular group of interest 
to the research, and they are available. In this way, a focus 
group can help to indicate whether there is general 
agreement or consensus regarding a particular viewpoint. 
For this study, university students were selected because 
the research examines whether social networking should 
be incorporated into the university’s educational regimen.    
The usual procedure is to record the discussion and 
transcribe it.  It is also important for the facilitator to 
ensure that everyone in the group has a chance to share 
his/her ideas and that any of the more assertive group 
members do not dominate the discussion [74]. 
Based on the guidelines mentioned above for using a 
focus group, four focus groups were conducted with 
Saudi Arabian university students who would be the 
target sample for the investigation into social networking 
at university.   These four focus groups constituted the 
pilot study conducted prior to the subsequent more in-
depth survey of students designed to provide a 
quantitative analysis of the different views and attitudes 
of the students.  The findings from the focus group 
provided the basis for survey questionnaire. 
The students were recruited by inviting interested 
students to participate on the grounds that they were 
social media users who actively used Facebook, LinkedIn, 
Twitter, or other popular social media platforms. 
Each group comprised 7 to 10 students, with a gender 
balance so as to provide a representative sample of the 
student body at universities. The focus group discussions 
were conducted by the researcher in one of the lecture 
rooms on campus and the opinions and responses were 
recorded and transcribed. The universities were selected 
based on their classification as government or private 
universities, as well as their high ranking within the 
country [75].   
TABLE I.  
FOCUS GROUPS  
 
Male 
Female 
Total 
University A 
8 
- 
8 
University B 
5 
3 
8 
University C 
5 
4 
9 
University D 
6 
4 
10 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
The focus group discussions covered several areas, 
namely, usage of social networking, purposes of usage, 
benefits of social networking, how best to incorporate 
social networking into the Saudi Arabian higher education 
sector, as well as the barriers to and drivers of social 
networking specific to Saudi Arabia. This study addressed 
only the student attitudes to and perceptions of social 
networking as an educational tool. 
V. 
FINDINGS 
The research found that the student participants in the 
focus groups actively used social media, especially 
Facebook and Twitter, and were very receptive to having 
it incorporated into the Saudi educational system.  They 
felt that social media provided them with many benefits 
for both university work and entertainment, including 
using it to obtain information and communicating with 
other students as well as watching videos on their 
smartphones.  They expressed a preference for professors 
providing them with course information online.   
The students indicated that they frequently used 
different social media platforms, especially Facebook and 
Twitter.  They used it for both work and in their social 
life, 
for 
entertainment, 
watching 
videos 
and 
communicating with other individuals.  Students cited a 
number of benefits, including being able to do things such 
as finding information online more easily and quickly.  
Several mentioned using it for learning - looking up 
words or finding interesting articles.  Another perceived 
advantage was that it allowed students to work from 
home, which saved them time commuting,  
Some students were able to create groups to enhance 
their learning, sharing links to specific information and 
sharing this information with each other, which saved 
time as they did not have to do these tasks independently.  
For instance, one male student commented: 
“We 
used 
it 
for 
both 
(work, 
entertainment, or learning).  For 
example… (we used) video clips…on 
YouTube to learn more about a 
subject.” (UniCM1) 
Another male student observed: 
“We use it for learning about different 
things. Sometimes people share useful 
links that I save in my favorites for 
future used…The young men have 
formed a group and forums for 
intercommunication.  They explain to 
one another and send messages through 
the sites.” (UniCM2) 
Several students pointed out that social networking 
platforms enabled them to receive feedback and guidance 
from others. Commenting on these advantages, one male 
student stated:  
“I have used SNS in one of the projects 
that I was working on…We used SNS to 
get feedback and the perception of 
people about our project, mostly after 
we have started the development and 
the operation stage…We viewed the 
feedback that we received from the 
people 
for 
the 
service 
we 
organized…and try to improve our 
service based on the feedback…until 
our project received high satisfaction 
from the users…So (SNS) was a quick 
point for communication with the 
people.” (UniCM3) 
Some of the students indicated that they were able to 
learn more from each other in a time-efficient manner by 
posting questions and then obtaining answers from other 
students.  Furthermore, this helped them because they 
were able to acquire more knowledge and insights from 
others.  As one male student commented: 
“We made an account on Facebook.  
Some Wikipedia issues were raised.  
Always the students and doctors were 
communicating with each other whether 
for homework or any other thing related 
to the subject.” (UniDM1) 
Another male student observed: 
“It was very nice (to use the SNS). If I 
have any question, I write it on 
Facebook. Next morning, I find the 
answer…Another student gives the 
answer. 
It 
was 
very 
beneficial.” 
(UniDM2) 
A third respondent pointed out that he was 
able to obtain information from other students if 
he was not able to attend lectures; moreover, he 
could receive input from lecturers in regard to 
study materials.   As he commented: 
“I have obtained considerable benefits 
in entertainment and work, both.  For 
instance, with respect to Whatsapp, if I 
could not go to the university, I would 
ask my groups on Whatsapp about what 
we had covered…Or take Twitter. If the 
lecturer would like a emphasize a 
certain point or request consulting 
references for a particular subject, he 
would say, for example, review that 
subject. It would be discussed further.” 
(UniAM1) 
Another student simply observed: 
“I use social networking sites, including 
Whatsapp and Twitter for both work 
and entertainment…as my colleague 
has maintained.  In the case of absence, 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

you may inquire about the subjects 
taught.” (UniAM2) 
A third echoed a similar experience in the following 
comment: 
“As for social networking sites, I use 
Twitter, 
Snapchat, 
and 
Whatsapp.  
Whatsapp is, of course, for work and 
communication with friends if there was 
a lesson that I missed do to my 
absence…(And) 
lecturers 
do 
communicate with us. If a lecturer was 
absent for any reason he would inform 
us.” (UniAM3) 
Still other students pointed to the advantages of using 
social media for distance learning.  It helped them with 
research project designs and provided them with answers 
to any problems they encountered along the way.  It also 
enabled them to work at home which was very convenient 
and saved them time. As one male student commented: 
“My program was distance learning…I 
used it in making questionnaires and 
obtaining answers (from Google).  I 
followed Twitter summaries and cues.” 
(UniBM3) 
A female student concurred: 
“It allows you to work from your house.  
I used Instagram for work for certain 
periods.  It was extremely marvelous 
and beneficial. (UniBF2) 
Another male student stated: 
“If I would (use it) to search about any 
information or face a problem in using 
my mobile, I normally find the answer 
in the program, mainly in Twitter for 
solving the problems or obtaining other 
information.” (UniBM1) 
“In terms of the learning, it is 
beneficial.  I use it for several things, 
(such as) for finding words and other 
things I feel are interesting.” (UniDM3) 
“We were a group.  We agreed to 
prepare the graduation dissertation. All 
of our communications were maintained 
using Facebook.” (UniBF3) 
Some students also stated that they found it helpful to 
transfer written materials into electronic documents which 
could be shared, while hard copies documents could not 
be disseminated as efficiently.  As one male student 
explained: 
“The first thing to do is transfer the 
educational subjects into electronic, 
and then we introduced the social 
networking sites.  It is not easy to 
introduce social networking sites when 
the learning is still paper-based.” 
(UniBM1) 
In some cases, the students were able to use social 
media for posting and promoting programs they had 
developed, such as video clips.  As another male student 
explained: 
“We were making films for the 
university…We planned to form a 
website onto which we downloaded 
educational 
video 
clips 
that 
we 
designed” (UniBM2) 
Another advantage of the social media mentioned by 
many students was its speed, enabling them to do 
whatever they wanted to do very quickly.  For instance, 
two male students offered these comments: 
“As I work in the media, the most 
convenient use and most easy method 
for obtaining information and news is to 
access Twitter.  It is very fast.” 
(UniBM2) 
“We can do things easily and faster 
anywhere.” (UniDM3) 
Similarly, the female students who participated in the 
focus groups used the social networking sites for both 
leisure and learning, though the female students stressed 
the use of social networking for entertainment and did not 
participate as much in the general conversation.  As some 
of the female students commented: 
“I mostly use it as a form of 
entertainment” (UniCF2).  
The student was referring to Instagram, Twitter, and 
Facebook, wikis, and blogs. 
“We have used Twitter and Instagram.  
The objective varies from person to 
another.  Sometimes (it is) for leisure 
and some time to learn new things. (It) 
depends on the individual’s interests.” 
(UniCF1). 
VI. 
DISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS 
As this research shows, the students in the focus group 
had had some favourable experiences with using major 
social networking sites for studying and learning 
purposes, 
most 
notably 
Facebook, 
Twitter, 
and 
WhatsApp. They especially liked the fact that these could 
be used quickly and easily as a means of keeping them 
connected with others.  In general, in relation to their 
tertiary studies, the respondents used social networking 
sites for searching out and obtaining required academic 
information, connecting with others and forming study 
groups, learning about topics from video clips, and 
problem-solving by posting questions and receiving 
answers from other users. There was also some evidence 
of lecturers using social networking sites to post materials 
and to keep in contact with students, usually due to 
lecturer or student absence. The respondents also 
commented on the convenience of being able to use social 
networking sites from home. This positive orientation to 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

using social networking as an educational tool suggests 
that, despite the barriers to uptake particular to Saudi 
Arabia, there is a high level of student acceptance of 
social media as an educational instrument and a desire to 
use it to facilitate the learning experience.  
 
However, while the research reveals an enthusiasm for 
and a desire to use social networking for educational 
reasons, there is also evidence that most students 
independently use social media for personal reasons. 
While there is some suggestion that instructors engage 
with students via social networking platforms, it seems 
that there is limited formal inclusion of social networking 
sites in Saudi Arabian universities as a planned 
pedagogical aid. Hence, Saudi Arabia has not yet fully 
harnessed the benefits of social networking sites for 
teaching and learning purposes in higher education, with 
current usages being relatively unsophisticated and at an 
individual level of endeavor. It is also evident that Saudi 
Arabian students use a relatively narrow range of social 
networking sites, namely, Facebook, Twitter, WhatsApp, 
Snapchat and Instagram. Other applications which are 
advantageous to higher education, such as wikis, blogs 
and social bookmarking, were not mentioned by any of 
the respondents.  
The significance of this study is that it indicates that 
there is great scope for Saudi Arabia to look to world-
wide trends and developments so as to more formally 
incorporate social networking into its teaching and 
learning activities at a broader faculty or university-wide 
level using a range of interactive Web 2.0 tools. 
 
This study had several limitations, namely, the small 
sample size as well as the restricted participation of 
females who were reluctant to share their views despite 
the best efforts of the researcher, in comparison to males. 
This can be attributed to cultural values in a 
predominantly patriarchal society.  A further limitation 
was the limited knowledge of the participants who were 
unfamiliar with sophisticated usage of social networking 
as it applies to formal education. Moreover, the 
respondents had a limited awareness of the wide range of 
available social networking applications. Lastly, this 
study covers only a part of the focus group data as the rest 
of the data will be presented and discussed in future 
research.  
VII. 
CONCLUSION 
Social networking sites have a natural affinity with 
higher education due to their interactive and collaborative 
capacities. Universities world-wide have begun to 
actively tap into the potential of these sites as pedagogical 
tools in order to capture the interest and attention of 
millennium students. While there remain some barriers to 
the widespread uptake of this technology, Saudi Arabian 
universities are ideally positioned to harness the benefits 
of social networking sites in education due to the wide 
acceptance of these applications by students. Whilst usage 
is currently relatively incidental and unsophisticated, 
there is vast potential for Saudi Arabia to reap the benefits 
of these technologies by implementing them for teaching 
and learning purposes.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. O’Reilly, "Web 2.0: Compact Definition?," ed, 2005. 
[2] T. Issa and P. Kommers, "Social networking for web-based 
communities," Int. J. Cont. Engineering Education and 
Life-Long Learning, vol. 23, pp. 1-1, 2013. 
[3] K. Seo, Using Social Media Effectively in the Classroom: 
blogs, wikis, twitter, and more: Routledge, 2012. 
[4] M. Prensky, "Digital natives, digital immigrants," Gifted, 
pp. 29-31, February 2005 2005. 
[5] M. Allen, "An education in Facebook," 2012. 
[6] A. Kosik, "The implications of Facebook," Sharing the 
Commonwealth: Critical issues in higher education 9–10, 
2007. 
[7] C. Madge, J. Meek, J. Wellens, and T. Hooley, "Facebook, 
social integration and informal learning at university: 'It is 
more for socialising and talking to friends about work than 
for 
actually 
doing 
work'," 
Learning, 
Media 
and 
Technology, vol. 34, pp. 141-155, 2009. 
[8] T. E. Bosch, "Using online social networking for teaching 
and learning: Facebook use at the University of Cape 
Town," Communicatio, vol. 35, pp. 185-200, 2009. 
[9] K. F. Hew, "Students' and teachers' use of Facebook," 
Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 27, pp. 662-676, 2011. 
[10] N. 
Selwyn, 
"Faceworking: 
exploring 
students' 
education‐related use of Facebook," Learning, Media and 
Technology, vol. 34, pp. 157-174, 2009/06/01 2009. 
[11] A. Saxena and P. Majumdar, "Use of Facebook in Higher 
Education: An extension of classroom learning," IMS 
Manthan (The Journal of Innovations), vol. 10, 2015. 
[12] M. Cuesta, M. Eklund, I. Rydin, and A.-K. Witt, "Using 
Facebook as a co-learning community in higher education," 
Learning, Media and Technology, vol. 41, pp. 55-72, 
2016/01/02 2016. 
[13] M. Lahiri and J. L. Moseley, "Learning by Going Social: 
Do We Really Learn from Social Media?," International 
Journal of Learning, Teaching and Educational Research, 
vol. 11, 2015. 
[14] S. El Bialy and A. Jalali, "Go Where the Students Are: A 
Comparison of the Use of Social Networking Sites 
Between Medical Students and Medical Educators," JMIR 
Medical Education, vol. 1, p. e7, 2015. 
[15] S. El Bialy, A. Jalali, and A. Jaffar, "Integrating Facebook 
into basic sciences education: a comparison of a faculty-
administered Facebook page and group," Austin J Anat, 
vol. 1, p. 1015, 2014. 
[16] A. N. Çoklar, "Evaluations of Students on Facebook as an 
Educational Environment," Turkish Online Journal of 
Qualtitative Inquiry, vol. 3, pp. 42-53, 2012. 
[17] R. Judele, D. Tsovaltzi, T. Puhl, and A. Weinberger, 
"Collaborative learning in Facebook: Adverse effects of 
individual preparation," in System Sciences (HICSS), 2014 
47th Hawaii International Conference on, 2014, pp. 1616-
1624. 
[18] S. H. Sarapin and P. L. Morris, "Faculty and Facebook 
friending: Instructor–student online social communication 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

from the professor's perspective," The Internet and Higher 
Education, vol. 27, pp. 14-23, 10// 2015. 
[19] M. Demirbilek, "Social media and peer feedback: What do 
students really think about using Wiki and Facebook as 
platforms for peer feedback?," Active Learning in Higher 
Education, June 10, 2015 2015. 
[20] R. Wang, P. Scown, C. Urquhart, and J. Hardman, 
"Tapping the educational potential of Facebook: Guidelines 
for use in higher education," Education and Information 
Technologies, vol. 19, pp. 21-39, 2012. 
[21] R. Gray, J. Vitak, E. W. Easton, and N. B. Ellison, 
"Examining social adjustment to college in the age of social 
media: Factors influencing successful transitions and 
persistence," Computers and Education, vol. 67, pp. 193-
207, 2013. 
[22] N. Saeed and S. Sinnappan, "Adoption of Twitter in higher 
education – a pilot study," Proceedings of ASCILITE - 
Australian Society for Computers in Learning in Tertiary 
Education Annual Conference 2011, pp. 1115-1120, 2011. 
[23] G. Veletsianos, "Higher education scholars' participation 
and practices on Twitter," Journal of Computer Assisted 
Learning, vol. 28, pp. 336-349, 2012. 
[24] S. A. Ferreira, C. Castro, and A. Andrade, "Morphology of 
cognitive communication 2.0 in Higher Education 
classroom," 2011, pp. 1-7. 
[25] E. Kassens-Noor, "Twitter as a teaching practice to 
enhance active and informal learning in higher education: 
The case of sustainable tweets," Active Learning in Higher 
Education, vol. 13, pp. 9-21, 2012. 
[26] T. B. Clarke and C. Leigh Nelson, "Classroom community, 
pedagogical 
effectiveness, 
and 
learning 
outcomes 
associated with Twitter use in undergraduate marketing 
courses," 
Journal 
for 
Advancement 
of 
Marketing 
Education, vol. 20, pp. 1-10, 2012. 
[27] R. Junco, C. M. Elavsky, and G. Heiberger, "Putting twitter 
to the test: Assessing outcomes for student collaboration, 
engagement and success," British Journal of Educational 
Technology, 2012. 
[28] T. Tsiakis, "Using Social Media as a Concept and Tool for 
Teaching Marketing Information Systems," pp. 24-44. 
[29] C. Evans, "Twitter for teaching: Can social media be used 
to enhance the process of learning?," British Journal of 
Educational Technology, vol. 45, pp. 902-915, 2014. 
[30] J. P. Carpenter and D. G. Krutka, "How and Why 
Educators Use Twitter: A Survey of the Field," Journal of 
Research on Technology in Education, vol. 46, pp. 414-
434, 2014/10/02 2014. 
[31] J. G. Suárez, C. T. Cervantes, and E. R. García, "Twitter as 
a resource to evaluate the university teaching process," 
Revista de Universidad y Sociedad del Conocimiento, vol. 
12, pp. 32-45, 2015. 
[32] J. Mankoff, R. Kravets, and E. Blevis, "Some computer 
science issues in creating a sustainable world," Computer, 
vol. 41, pp. 102-105, 2008. 
[33] T. M. Stephens and M. E. Gunther, "Twitter, Millennials, 
and Nursing Education Research," Nursing Education 
Perspectives, vol. 0, p. null. 
[34] Z. Bulbulia and J. Wassermann, "Rethinking the 
Usefulness of Twitter in Higher Education," 2015. 
[35] M. Liu, L. Horton, J. Olmanson, and P.-Y. Wang, "An 
Exploration of Mashups and Their Potential Educational 
Uses," Computers in the Schools, vol. 25, pp. 243-258, 
2008. 
[36] D. Churchill, "Educational applications of Web 2.0: Using 
blogs to support teaching and learning," British Journal of 
Educational Technology, vol. 40, pp. 179-183, 2009. 
[37] C. Greenhow, B. Robelia, and J. E. Hughes, "Learning, 
Teaching, and Scholarship in a Digital Age: Web 2.0 and 
Classroom Research: What Path Should We Take Now?," 
Educational Researcher, vol. 38, pp. 246-259, 2009. 
[38] T. Farwell and R. Waters, "Exploring the use of social 
bookmarking technology in education- An analysis of 
students’ experiences using a course-specific delicious," 
MERLOT Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, vol. 6, 
2010. 
[39] G. Edwards and B. F. Mosley, "Technology integration can 
be delicious: Social bookmarking as a technology 
integration tool," Educating Educators with Social Media, 
vol. 1, pp. 207-225, 2011. 
[40] M. B. Zorica, I. O. Biskupic, T. Ivanjko, and S. Spiranec, 
"Students and privacy in the networked environment," 
2011, pp. 1090-1094. 
[41] T. Nashrawan, W. Jamie, and C. Andrew, "Social 
Bookmarking 
Pedagogies 
in 
Higher 
Education: 
A 
Comparative Study," International Journal of Information 
Systems in the Service Sector (IJISSS), vol. 1, pp. 24-36, 
2014. 
[42] K. Y. Lin and Y. F. Shen, "The nursing students' attitude 
toward using blogs in a nursing clinical practicum in 
Taiwan: A 3-R framework," Nurse Education Today, vol. 
33, pp. 1079-1082, 2013. 
[43] D. a. Powell, C. J. Jacob, and B. J. Chapman, "Using Blogs 
and New Media in Academic Practice: Potential Roles in 
Research, Teaching, Learning, and Extension," Innovative 
Higher Education, vol. 37, pp. 271-282, 2012. 
[44] Y.-S. Chang and C. Yang, "Why do we blog? From the 
perspectives of technology acceptance and media choice 
factors," Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 32, pp. 
371-386, 2013. 
[45] K. A. Mills and S. M. Ritchie, "E-motion diaries: blogging 
emotional responses to online learning in higher 
education," 2014. 
[46] B. K. Pursel and H. Xie, "Patterns and pedagogy: Exploring 
student blog use in higher education," Contemporary 
Educational Technology, vol. 5, pp. 96-109, 2014. 
[47] A. R. Stewart, J. M. Reid, and J. C. Stewart, "Students 
engaging in diversity: blogging to learn the history of jazz," 
Teaching in Higher Education, vol. 19, pp. 931-942, 
2014/11/17 2014. 
[48] H. Uzunboylu, F. Ozdamli, R. Ventura, and M. J. Quero, 
"Using Facebook in University Teaching: A Practical Case 
Study," Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, vol. 83, 
pp. 1032-1038, 2013. 
[49] C. Kummer, "Wikis in higher education," Saechsische 
Landesbibliothek-Staats-und 
Universitaetsbibliothek 
Dresden, 2014. 
[50] M. Palomo-Duarte, J. M. Dodero, A. García-Domínguez, P. 
Neira-Ayuso, N. Sales-Montes, I. Medina-Bulo, et al., 
"Scalability of assessments of wiki-based learning 
experiences in higher education," Computers in Human 
Behavior, vol. 31, pp. 638-650, 2// 2014. 
[51] A. Ioannou, S. W. Brown, and A. R. Artino, "Wikis and 
forums for collaborative problem-based activity: A 
systematic comparison of learners' interactions," The 
Internet and Higher Education, vol. 24, pp. 35-45, 1// 2015. 
[52] B. Lamb, "Dr. Mashup; or, Why Educators Should Learn to 
Stop Worrying and Love the Remix," Educause Review, 
vol. 42, pp. 12-25, 2007. 
[53] D. J. Skiba, "Nursing education 2.0: are Mashups useful for 
nursing education?," Nursing education perspectives, vol. 
28, pp. 286-288, 2007. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[54] B. Taraghi, M. Ebner, and S. Schaffert, "Personal learning 
environments for higher education: A mashup based widget 
concept," pp. 15-22. 
[55] S. Wheeler, "Learning Space Mashups: Combining Web 
2.0 Tools to Create Collaborative and Reflective Learning 
Spaces," Future Internet, vol. 1, pp. 3-13, 2009. 
[56] R. Ibrahim, "The Potential for Using Mash-Ups at a Higher 
Education," Research Journal of Information Technology, 
vol. 4, pp. 56-70, 2012. 
[57] S. Bao, C. Zhang, and J. Wu, "A Mobile Learning Platform 
Based on Mashups for Foreign Language Learning," vol. 9, 
pp. 2599-2606, 2012. 
[58] M. L. M. Kiah, B. B. Zaidan, A. A. Zaidan, M. Nabi, and 
R. Ibraheem, "MIRASS: Medical Informatics Research 
Activity Support System Using Information Mashup 
Network," Journal of Medical Systems, vol. 38, pp. 1-15, 
2014. 
[59] H. S. Al-Khalifa and R. A. Garcia, "The State of Social 
Media in Saudi Arabia’s Higher Education," International 
Journal of Technology and Educational Marketing, vol. 3, 
pp. 65-76, 2013. 
[60] P. Ahmad, A. Hussain, M. Aqil, T. C. Ahmad, M. Use, S. 
Arabia, et al., "Use of web 2 . 0 in Saudi Arabia 
Universities," Issn, vol. 3, 2013. 
[61] M. Chaurasia, A. Asma, and A. Ahmed, "Opportunities and 
Challenges of Web 2.0 in Arab Education," in Global 
Learn, 2011, pp. 310-315. 
[62] G. Helmstetter, Increasing Hits and Selling More on your 
Web Site USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
, 1997. 
[63] A. A. Al Saif, "The motivating and inhibiting factors 
affecting the use of Web-Based Instruction at the 
University of Qassim in Saudi Arabia," 2005. 
[64] A. R. Alenezi, A. Abdulkarim, and A. Veloo, "An 
Empirical investigation into the role of enjoyment, 
computer anxiety, computer self-efficacy and internet 
experience in influencing the students' intention to use e-
learning: A case study from Saudi Arabian governmental 
universities," TOJET: The Turkish Online Journal of 
Educational Technology, vol. 9, 2010. 
[65] J. Al-Otaibi, "The Saudi Universities students' use of 
Facebook- an applicable study," College of Arts, Riyadh, 
King Saud University, 2011. 
[66] Y. Al-Saggaf, "The effect of online community on offline 
community in Saudi Arabia," The Electronic Journal of 
Information Systems in Developing Countries, vol. 16, 
2004. 
[67] A. M. Almalki, "Blended learning in higher education in 
Saudi Arabia: A study of Umm Al-Qura University," RMIT 
University, 2011. 
[68] M. T. Al-Hariri and A. a. Al-Hattami, "Utilization of 
internet by health colleges students at the University of 
Dammam," Journal of Taibah University Medical Sciences, 
vol. 10, pp. 66-73, 2015. 
[69] E. Alwagait, B. Shahzad, and S. Alim, "Impact of social 
media usage on students academic performance in Saudi 
Arabia," Comput. Hum. Behav., vol. 51, pp. 1092-1097, 
2015. 
[70] N. Sultan, S. Bunt-Kokhuis, C. Davidson, A. Sentini, and 
D. Weir, "E-Learning in the Arab Gulf: Responding to the 
Changing World of Education," in The GCC Economies, 
M. A. Ramady, Ed., ed: Springer New York, 2012, pp. 33-
48. 
[71] H. S. Al-Khalifa and R. A. Garcia, "The State of Social 
Media in Saudi Arabia’s Higher Education," International 
Journal of Technology and Educational Marketing 
(IJTEM), vol. 3, pp. 65-76, 2013. 
[72] M. D. Myers, "Quantitative Research in Information 
Systems - Section 2: Philosophical Perspectives," vol. 
2013, 2013. 
[73] R. Powell and H. Single, "Methodology Matters," Int J 
Qual Health Care, vol. 8, pp. 499-504, 1996. 
[74] A. J. Veal, Research methods for leisure and tourism: A 
practical guide: Pearson Education, 2006. 
[75] M. D. Slater, "Academic knowledge transfer in social 
networks," 2013. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

