New Learning Method for Structural Understanding in Architecture Based on
Gamification
Perla R. Santa Ana Lozada
Architecture, Art and Design School
Tecnologico de Monterrey
Mexico City, Mexico
Email: psantana@tec.mx
Aleksandra Krstikj
Architecture, Art and Design School / Writing Lab
Tecnologico de Monterrey
Mexico City, Mexico
Email: sandra.krstik@tec.mx
Abstract—One of the challenges architecture students face is
understanding static structural and mathematical procedures
as part of the structural design concepts they need to apply in
their work. This research hypothesizes that gamification and
smartphone apps with games using topics of structural design
applied
to
architecture
could
improve
the
results
in
architectural education. Based on gamification and e-learning
software, a new learning method was created consisting of six
strategies: understanding the target audience, definition of
learning
objectives,
designing
the
experience,
identifying
resources, application of gamification elements and recap of
the process; the method's importance was found in being the
first in its kind at the architecture undergraduate level. To
assess the effects of this method, a comparison between two
classes (with and without the method) was made. The results
obtained were promising: most students gained motivation,
engagement, and higher final scores in their structural analysis
and design courses.
Keywords
-
educational
innovation;
higher
education;
gamification; architecture; structural design.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the field of architecture, physical and mathematical
concepts are integral to the structural design process.
However, considering the abstract nature of these concepts,
architectural students often find it challenging to understand
the mathematical simplifications for solving the behavior of
structural elements, such as frames, bearing walls, slabs,
columns, and many other built-in structures. In the School of
Architecture at Tecnologico de Monterrey, Campus Ciudad
de México, e-learning is encouraged as a tool for facilitating
course objectives. Thus, in the courses of structural design,
we first implemented an existing smartphone app, designed
by the principal author of this paper exclusively for
practicing physical-structural concepts in architectural design
[1]. This app is a game-based learning method built on the
potential of video games to improve understanding of
structural design concepts such as stresses (tension and
compression) and flexural moment and their effect over
buildings and other structures, such as bridges, following the
game
elements
of
mechanics,
story,
aesthetics,
and
technology.
The software is designed as a virtual laboratory with
practices to help students review the main concepts by a
step-by-step guide to win each game. In the first semester,
students were invited to play with this app as an additional
learning tool. From a total of 22 students in the two groups
of a structural design course, only 13 downloaded the app
and played the games, while the others only followed the lab
practice to win each level and comply with the assigned task.
Even though the content of the application was part of the
course syllabus, the students were not analyzing the concepts
and were not engaging with the subject.
Therefore, the need for a different learning method to
improve student engagement in the structural design course
in
architecture
became
clear.
We
hypothesized
that
gamification, as a learning method that occurs in a non-game
context and focus on students´ engagement and challenge
[2],
could
potentially
provide
better
results
in
the
understanding of structural design for architects. Even
though recently, gamification has been gaining momentum
in education [3], very few studies measure the impact of the
teaching process in the educational context and explore
methods for improving the program by gamifying the course
literature and material from teachers’ point of view [4].
Moreover, no studies have been found by the authors that
explore the gamification method in the field of architectural
education; this is due to most architecture schools' lack of
knowledge on gamification and the existence of free
applications that can be used in education.
This research aimed to design and measure the impact of
a new learning method based on gamification to improve the
structural understanding of architectural education from the
teachers´ point of view. The purpose was to facilitate the
learning of abstract physical and mathematical concepts
related to structural design for architectural students and
improve the overall quality of their architectural proposals.
The benefits of such a method can bring in improving
architectural education are multiple: from better structurally
designed buildings to increasing students’ satisfaction and
self-confidence.
The work done for the research is based on a specific
successful educational experience, but the methodology
described could be adapted to other areas using mathematics
and physics, such as civil engineering.
In order to understand the development and results of the
proposed gamification method and its application, Section II
of this paper presents the steps used to create the proposed
method; in Section III, the working method and class
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

experience are presented, while Section IV presents the
assessment
of
the
learning
method
results.
Students'
feedback and conclusions/future work are presented in
Sections V and VI, respectively.
II.
CREATING THE METHOD FOR STRUCTURAL
UNDERSTANDING IN ARCHITECTURE
Following the six steps proposed by Hsin et al. [3] for
gamification at the Management School at the University of
Toronto, we designed a new learning method for structural
design understanding in architecture with the following six
strategies:
A.
Understanding the target audience and the context
Within the architecture undergraduate program, the Steel
Structural Design course is the last of four courses regarding
Structural Analysis and Design. In theory, that implies that
the students should have already mastered the structural
analysis concepts in previous classes, and the students should
be capable of immediately applying structural analysis in the
course of Structural Design. The first strategy revolves
around verifying students’ abilities in structural analysis and
setting the app tool and course dynamics.

Strategy:
Architecture students arrive at this course with different
levels of understanding of the basic concepts about structural
analysis. To accomplish equal student's understanding, the
following actions are considered: explaining different kinds
of
structural
solutions,
analyzing
iconic
architectural
buildings, and downloading the smartphone app for the
course. Most of the students at Tecnologico de Monterrey
have a smartphone at hand, so the downloading and checking
the app´s function is done relatively fast.
B.
Defining learning objectives
Architecture students go through Structural Analysis
courses without understanding their real application in
designing buildings´ structural elements. The second strategy
is aimed at defining the learning objectives of the Structural
Design course in applying structural analysis concepts to
propose correct, new, and/or sustainable architectonical
solutions.

Strategy:
Explaining general structural concepts and consequences
of using them in architectonical solutions.
C.
Structuring the experience
Students need to understand every stage of the structural
design process. The third strategy deals with structuring the
students’ experience hierarchically, from solving smaller to
more significant tasks, in order to gradually achieve the
course objectives. If students do not understand every stage
of the structural design, they will lose interest in the subject.

Strategy:
Assigning starting exercises focused on smaller tasks to
review the main concepts of the pre-courses and gradually
increase the difficulty of the tasks to achieve the final
solution of the structural design. As an example, we start in
class solving a problem where the relation between the
tension stress, the tension load, and the cross-section area of
a steel cable are related in order to design a staircase
suspended with cables from the ceiling.
D.
Identifying resources
The course followed ¨Problem Based Learning¨ (PBL) [5]
strategy before introducing gamification. To have a smooth
course transition and become acquainted with this new
strategy, at the end of every topic, a PBL challenge was
introduced as part of an everyday exercise in the classroom.

Strategy:
Activities from the gamification process were introduced
as part of everyday work in the classroom; the first exercise
of each theme was developed by writing down each step
used to get the right answer. The following tasks are from
the app, where scenarios are more real and displayed with
the same topics. The students practiced one game per week.
E.
Applying gamification elements
The fifth strategy builds upon the previous experiences in
using the app and introduces more complex challenges to
deepen the students’ understanding of structural design
problems. By using the gamification elements introduced in
this
strategy,
the
students
have
an
opportunity
to
conceptualize better structural solutions and improve their
course evaluation grade.

Strategy:
The app selected must include one of the topics of the
course and the professor should know how the app works to
solve the problem, in order to help students to get the right
answer, play the app and win each game.
The student has to solve problems with different levels
of complexity and win the game at each level in order to
move on to the next level. Every completed practice brings
points when finished successfully, and these points were
calculated as additional points in the monthly evaluation.
Since not all students have the same capacity for solving
mathematical problems fast, extra time was assigned to
specific individuals to complete the task.
Figure 1. Application use in class 1 for steel design.
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

They would take the app practice as homework, getting
an extended timeframe to finish the task. The course teacher
followed up with those students after class by WhatsApp to
answer any doubts. We concluded that it is quite important
to allow students to work in teams since teamwork
discussions encouraged students´ confidence in solving
problems.
In Figure 1, the app scenario for a compression problem
using a parabolic biarticulated arch is presented; the
objective is to understand how the structural design is
applied over an architectural project as this bridge.
F.
Recap
Previous strategies were tested within the real course
focus groups, adapting the strategies to calibrate and improve
the method.

Strategy:
Adapt the method´s strategies to the group´s needs and
capabilities in order to get the best results in the learning
process.
III.
LEARNING EXPERIENCE AT THE CLASSROOM
LEVEL
The above-described learning method was applied to
three different groups of Structural Design courses in the last
three semesters. The courses where the method was applied
were “Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures” and
“Design of Steel Structures.” The main topic of both courses
was the structural design of steel or concrete bearing
elements,
through
theoretical
explanation
of
structural
behavior and application of building codes equations.
The classes were held twice a week and follow the PBL
strategy. The first weekly class was dedicated to an
explanation of a theoretical structural analysis approach and
a presentation of structural element design on the blackboard
with the participation of the students. Since the class time
was
limited,
we
focused
on
solving
small
problems
concerning structural element design.
The second weekly class was dedicated to problem-
solving assignments. To evaluate the students’ performance,
a scenario of a structural problem was presented for students
to solve using the concepts learned in class. Since the
problems tackled in the class were focused on stand-alone
structural elements, students´ found it hard to understand the
relationship between that single element and the complete
structural system. The PBL strategy was found particularly
helpful in establishing the relation between theory and real
examples with a constructive problem.
To incorporate the gamification method in the first-
weekly class concerning the theory of structural analysis,
numerical exercises were designed to be solved together with
the students on the blackboard. The exercises were based on
small real cases of buildings with the same structural
solution so that the students can understand the numeric
results over real elements; different structural solutions were
analyzed as well.
In the second weekly class, the previous exercise was
recalled, and the steps to solve the problem were written on
the blackboard. Working in teams, the students used the e-
learning app to solve the class assignment. The students were
instructed first to read and analyze the problem, and after
that, to start proposing solutions. Each virtual practice (e-
learning software) contained two or three problems, with the
level of complexity increasing as students fulfill each task
(adaptive strategy); while using the virtual practice, students
must choose an Avatar as part of the game mood. The Avatar
is important for game-based learning and gamification in
order to allow students to feel part of the game, get a new
identity that, in some cases, could be more fierce and
challenging.
Students were also allowed to work alone; however, the
formation of teams with 2 to 4 students was encouraged for
better results. At the beginning of the class, the teacher
verified that every student in the class understood the
problem correctly and helped them to confirm the steps
needed to solve the virtual practice.
As each student finished all the tasks (quest) included in
the e-learning software, they got two prizes: game points and
a virtual tour of the case study structure using augmented
reality. The game points could be exchanged for additional
monthly grade points (0.25 additional points for each task
finished, so at the end of each month, they could get one
extra point on their grade). Since some students needed more
time to understand and finish the game quest, they could ask
for additional time, with a week being the maximum time
allowed to finish the task and earn the same amount of points
as the other students. The students showed low interest in the
virtual tour of the building, where information about the
architect and the project was displayed. Students were
already acquainted with this kind of virtual experience as
they have played games with more sophisticated imagery
(i.e., Nintendo or X-Box), so students have not considered
the augmented reality as a grand prize.
After the quests were completed, each team presented
their conclusions about: i) the game; ii) the theory involved;
iii) the architectural project used for the practice. This part
was as important as the game itself because it allowed
students to process all the information and understand the
relationships between theory and practice. As the experience
sank in, the students were able to comprehend the process of
application of theoretical analysis and design in the real
world and to realize the implications structural design has on
the quality of the architectural project.
As teachers, we know that the synthesis of learning and
acknowledgment is very important for students thus, when a
student archived all the learning goals in the one-course
theme, he/she was entitled to a badge: structure expert. This
badge made students feel recognized and more engaged with
the topic. If a student acquired three badges, he/she was
eligible for an exemption from the final exam.
The exams for the structural design courses were also
designed using a PBL strategy. The new learning method
based on gamification helped the students to a) analyze
complex scenario problems with a step-by-step approach; b)
improve the design thinking process to solve the problem in
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

stages; and c) gain confidence in their work, therefore
leading to better results in the exam evaluations.
IV.
ASSESSMENT OF THE LEARNING METHOD
RESULTS
Even though the introduction of the new learning method
based on gamification has been challenging for us as
teachers, the students’ performance in the class improved.
The improvement was observed in the better final evaluation
grades that were mostly due to the better exam performance,
as well as to the extra grade points acquired during the class
activities.
To confirm the effects of the new gamification method
on students learning, we compared partial and final grades
from a selected previous group that did not use the method
(defined by the authors as control group using just PBL) and
a group where the gamification method was used during the
same course with the same length and number of students
(defined by the authors as experimental group using PBL and
gamification).
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
9.00
10.00
1
3
5
7
9
11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25
With Gamification
Without Gamification
Number students
Grade
First Partial Evaluation
Concrete and Steel Design Courses
Figure 2. Comparison of group first partial evaluation.
At Tecnologico de Monterrey, the grade evaluation range
is from zero to ten, where ten is the highest score, and grade
below seven is considered a fail.
In Figure 2, the first partial grades of 52 students were
presented. Red lines correspond to students that took the
courses without the gamification method, and blue lines are
the grades of students that took the same courses with the
gamification method. As can be seen from the graph, the
grades were relatively higher in the courses with the
gamification method. More importantly, there were no
grades below seven in the gamification courses. These
results are essential for the class, as dropping out from the
course is diminished.
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
9.00
10.00
1
3
5
7
9
11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25
With Gamification
Without Gamification
Second Partial Evaluation
Concrete and Steel Design Courses
Number students
Grade
Figure 3. Comparison of group second partial evaluation.
In the second partial evaluation (Figure 3), the students
from both courses, with and without the gamification
method, had higher grades compared to the first partial
evaluation. This behavior could be explained by the fact that
as students progress through the course, they get better
acquainted and more confident with structural design topics.
In Figure 4, we compared the final exam grades in
courses with and without the gamification method. We
found a considerable improvement of the average final
grade in the courses with the gamification method (average
of 8.0), compared to the average grade in the courses using
just PBL without gamification (average of 6.8). The
increment in the course grades means that students got a
better understanding of each topic and its application in real-
life problems, like the ones solved in the mobile app.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
With Gamification
Without Gamification
Number students
Grade
Final Exam Concrete and Steel Design Courses
Figure 4. Comparison of final exam grades between courses.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

V.
STUDENTS FEEDBACK REGARDING THE NEW
METHOD
We designed and conducted a questionnaire to
analyze students´ feedback regarding the effectiveness of the
new
learning
method
based
on
gamification
in
the
experimental groups. The purpose was to quantitatively
assess student personal achievement using the Likert scale
[6], ranging from 1 = not at all characteristic of me, to 5 =
very characteristic of me. To understand the results in the
context of previous courses without the gamification or
control group, we conducted the same questionnaire to those
groups as well. The mode (statistic) is presented as the
evaluation result for each subject.
As presented in Table I, students in the experimental
groups were more engaged during the class, asking more
questions, and putting more effort into completing the tasks
assigned. The experimental groups were also more inclined
to using the e-learning software app after class.
TABLE I.
EVALUATION OF STUDENTS COURSE
ENGAGEMENT QUESTIONNAIRE (SCEQ)
No.
Evaluation
Behavior, thoughts, and feelings
Control
group
Experimen
tal group
1
Participating in class
3
4
2.
Asking the instructor questions
for a better understanding
3
5
3.
Asking the instructor questions
to get the application game done
0
3
4
Playing the application
game
after class
0
3
5.
Putting forth effort
3
4
6.
Desire
to
learn
the
material
using the application game
1
3
7
Playing the application in teams
0
4
8
Explaining the solution to solve
the
app
quest
between
companions
0
4
Looking at the answers for questions 7 and 8, and
watching
their behavior in
class, we
discovered
that
teamwork is one of the necessary conditions for better
student engagement. The students felt that within a team,
they could quickly clarify misunderstandings from the
theoretical aspect and achieve faster and better solutions. The
teamwork also positively affected the feeling of confidence
while working.
We also evaluated the students´ satisfaction with the
courses based on the new learning method. The scores were
again based on a Likert scale in five-point grade, five being
the best score (Table II). It was assessed that the students´
experience with the course using gamification was overall
positive;
students
were
motivated
by
the
prizes
and
considered the application fun to use, which led to a better
understanding of the theory.
TABLE II.
EVALUATION OF STUDENTS METHOD
PERFORMANCE
No.
Evaluation
Phrases
Evaluation
1
Performance of the course
4
2.
The application game
helps to
understand structural behavior
4
3.
Playing the application in the
classroom was challenging
but
fun
4
4
The
application
clarifies
the
theory applied to real cases
4
5.
Getting badges and points is
adequate
4
Finally, students were asked to evaluate the course
teaching approach of mixing the new learning method for
class activities in 70% of the course with a more traditional
lecture style for the theoretical part in the rest 30%. To our
surprise, students considered interesting the combination of
strategies during the course that provided time for playing
with the app and standard lecture time. Moreover, most of
the students were grateful for the extra time allowed for
finishing the tasks, as they could try out different answers
while playing that led to a better understanding of the
theory.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
By analyzing the grade results and students´ feedback,
we concluded that the students´ understanding of structural
design was enhanced in the courses that applied the new
learning method based on gamification. 90% of students
finished all the games assigned in the semester, and 60% got
the badge ¨structure expert¨, which implies significant
improvement in students´ engagement compared to previous
courses that did not utilize the gamification method. Since
the first courses using the new method also included 30% of
more
traditional
lectures,
we
assume
that
students´
performance could improve even more if the new method is
applied more consistently.
One of the most interesting observations was that
millennial students do not consider competition as an
incentive; they prefer to work at their own pace without
pressure and in teams. The preference for teamwork was
found in the opportunity to collaborate with more skillful or
well-informed students. In fact, students confirmed that
giving level awards made them feel uncomfortable, thus in
the future, we will only focus on awarding one type of
badge to all who complete the game quest.
Time was found to be an important factor in the
success of the learning method since less skillful students
needed extra time to accomplish their tasks at their own
pace. Avatars were found to be slightly significant while
playing with the e-software app, however extra points that
students acquired for the class activities were found to be
incentivizing. Immediate feedback was also appreciated, as
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

students could quickly adjust their work and search for
better solutions without wasting time.
The gamification method proposed is more than game
points; it is a strategy where the professor gets more
acquainted
with the student, giving confidence while
learning how to solve real-life problems using today's
technology; the virtual environment experimentation to
solve real-world challenges offers the students a better
understanding about the mathematical solution and its
application over real architectural projects. In the real world
context where stakes are high and human lives at risk,
better-prepared architects with a deeper understanding of
structural problems are the goal of education.
With
the
game-based
learning
app
used,
made
especially for this courses, students knew immediately when
they were making a mistake, and that instant feedback
allowed them to progress faster, ultimately providing them
with a better understanding of structural design. In Mexico,
the gamification method has not been developed; there is a
world of free apps that can be used for teaching, but a
method is needed in order to achieve each course objective.
Teachers may find the following difficulties using the
method proposed for other courses: a) finding the best app
for each subject; it should get the results needed to get the
students understanding and engagement; b) the app must
exist for IOS and Android system so every student can use
it; c) time should be programmed in order to give the
student the theory, its application and solving the problem
while playing with the app.
However, there is still more work to be done to
improve
the
method,
mainly
to
increase
students´
participation
and
engagement
further.
The
level
of
challenges has to be reconsidered carefully since time
management is crucial for the success of the method —
professors using apps in class need to know how they work
and the theoretical concepts they follow in order to choose
the one that fits for the subject of each class and guide the
student learning with a specific purpose.
Finally, further
studies are necessary to enrich the students´ educational
experience and find ways for better access to teachers’
feedback.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial and
the technical support of Writing Lab, TecLabs, Tecnologico
de Monterrey, Mexico, in the production of this work.
REFERENCES
[1]
P. Santa Ana and L. Santa Ana, “Apprendestructo: Learning
app joining together structural analysis with architecture
project,”
[Apprendestructo:
Aplicación
que
integra
el
conocimiento estructural dentro del proyecto arquitectónico],
Repentina, UNAM, México, pp 23-25, September 2017.
[2]
S. Snezana, Z. Nada, and M. Tripo, “Gamification in higher
education
learning
–state
of
the
art,
challenges
and
opportunities,” Proc. The Sixth International Conference on
e-Learning, (eLearning 2015), pp 128-134, September 2015.
[3]
W. Hsin, H. Yuan, and D. Soman, “A practitioner's Guide to
Gamification of Education,” Economic School, University of
Toronto, 2013.
[4]
G. Barata, J. Gama, and D. Goncalves, “Engaging engineering
students
with
gamification,”
Proc.
5th
International
Conference
Games
and
Virtual
Worlds
for
Serious
Applications (VS-GAMES), pp 1-8, September 2013.
[5]
E. Christiansen, M. Leena, and B. Lindstrom, “Problem-based
learning for the 21st Century,” Aalborg Universitet, Denmark,
2013.
[6]
M. Handelsman, W. Briggs, N. Sullivan, and A. Towler, “A
measure of college student course engagement,” The Journal
of Educational Research, Vol. 98, No. 3, pp. 184-192, 2005.
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

