Incorporating Cyber Competencies in K-12 
 
Rachel M. Stange 
Bethany College 
Bethany, WV, USA 
Email: rstange@bethanywv.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Over the past several years, the kindergarten 
through twelfth (K-12) community has been told to include 
computer science and cybersecurity in all curriculum. 
However, the K-12 community does not have the proper 
knowledge to do so. This paper includes a guide on what to 
teach to meet the requirements, how to teach it in order to 
engage students, and how to incorporate it into the curriculum. 
This guide is different from others because it works with new 
or existing curriculum and it incorporates the entire K-12 
community. 
Keywords- 
Computer 
Science; 
Cybersecurity; 
K-12 
Education; K-12 Curriculum. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In 2016, President Barack Obama released the Computer 
Science (CS) For All initiative. The goal of CS for All is to 
teach K-12 students about computer science and provide 
them computational thinking skills [2]. The issue with CS for 
All is that many K-12 educators are not knowledgeable in 
computer science and cybersecurity. As many K-12 school 
systems are trying to add computer science and cybersecurity 
into the curriculum, they are realizing that they tend to teach 
cyberbullying, cyber safety, and certifications without 
providing educators the needed education to fully understand 
the fundamentals of computer science and cybersecurity. 
This is often due to administrators and educators themselves 
not understanding what cyber competencies are actually 
needed due to constantly changing fields. At the same time, 
K-12 continues to teach the Generation Y (Millennials) way. 
Studies show that social engineering, hacking and defending, 
cyber awareness, and personal connections have more 
impact on Generation Z and Generation Alpha students [14]. 
To many people’s surprise, Generation Z is more similar 
to older generations than Generation Y which means that 
most of the educational changes put into place for 
Generation Y needs to be reversed. Generation Y, or 
Millennials in the United States, do have a few differences 
from Generation Z, in part because of the majority of the 
group’s parents being Generation X. Due to lower attention 
span, Generation Z want ‘snackable’ content meaning that 
one communicates in bite-sized messages [14]. To reach 
Generation Z, content must become visually based with text 
being left as a witty caption, headline, or replaced by an 
emoji. A large portion of Generation Z have a digital 
footprint, but they do not know what it is, how it is affected, 
or that googling themselves actually puts their information 
into Google’s repository to have their information appear 
higher in the results [14] Generation Z is truly a ‘digital first 
generation’ and has a very high trust level which is why it is 
important to ensure they are taught by cyber competent 
educators. 
Currently, K-12 students are getting the impression from 
educators that computer science and cybersecurity is just 
programming. This is seen in many school systems when 
looking at the curriculum and standardized testing. For 
example, there is a new high school in Virginia, USA that is 
supposed to focus on computer science and cybersecurity 
education, but when you look at the curriculum, they are just 
teaching coding and different coding concepts. For those 
educators who are trying to teach more than programming 
they are struggling as they are using canned lessons to teach 
students. Canned lessons are lessons that have been made by 
qualified educators, educators who know the material, for 
educators that do not know the material to use. The issue 
with canned lessons is that the educators do not know the 
material, so they are teaching how to use the system or 
program and not the concept behind the system or program. 
The traditional way of fighting cyberbullying is giving 
the definition and examples students cannot relate to. The 
traditional way of fighting cyberbullying is ineffective with 
Generation Z and beyond because they have heard the same 
thing for so long, so they are no longer listening. The best 
way to address cyberbullying is to educate on the issues that 
lead to cyberbullying by using cyber competencies. 
In Section 2, the four main cyber competencies are 
described and examples of how to present to students are 
 The author’s efforts started out to help her peers and 
have since spiraled into a crusade to improve cyber 
competencies within K-12. Two other students who were 
bullied through cyber stalking and classroom discussion 
boards had an impact on me. During my sixth grade year, a 
fellow student killed herself after being cyberbullied, and 
school officials were unaware. Amanda was a 14-year-old 
girl from my local community who was cyber stalked, 
abducted, raped, and left for dead, but sadly, local educators 
talking about these topics did not know of her story. Now, 
the book [1] telling her story is in school libraries and used in 
English classes. Amanda and her mother speak to ninth 
grade health classes in hopes to prevent this from happening 
to others. Amanda’s story has been combined with two other 
stories to create the movie Finding Faith [5]. 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

given. In Section 3, the additional cyber competencies are 
described and examples of what to present to students are 
given. In Section 4, the solution model for including cyber 
competencies in K-12 is presented. In Section 5, the success 
of using this model and this model’s development is given. 
II. 
MAIN CYBER COMPETENCIES 
The four main cyber competencies are digital footprints, 
social media, security, and cyber laws. The components of 
the four cyber competencies are shown below in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. Cyber Competencies & Components [12]. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Digital Footprint Competency Phrases [14]. 
 
When giving examples, educators should be able to 
connect them to the phrases and make sure they are able to 
be related to by the students. An example for phrase three is 
if someone posts something that you view as inappropriate, 
do not join the conversation unless it is in an attempt to 
encourage mature and responsible comments. For phrase 
seven, have students think about what their digital posts will 
say about them as a person to others. A phrase eight example 
would be, just like a tattoo on your thigh, an embarrassing 
post or tweet can last a lifetime. 
For the social media competency, explain the purpose of 
social media sites, why there is required age limits, and the 
legal consequences of lying about your age to create an 
account. For example, you are supposed to be sixteen-years-
old to use SnapChat, but many educators encourage 
SnapChat use in their classrooms for students under that age. 
SnapChat is a mobile application that allows pictures, 
messages, and short videos to be sent to others with them 
only being available for a limited amount of time. Generation 
Z and Alpha students have heard several times that they have 
to be a certain age and the purpose of social media, so keep 
this part of the lesson short. The social media competency is 
mainly taught to students with examples that allow educators 
to point out good and bad pieces of the situation. Two 
examples of cyber issues related to social media that can be 
real life examples used when teaching this competency is 
Jojo Siwa and the Blue Whale Challenge. 
JoJo Siwa is a 16-year-old from Nebraska, who became 
famous after being on Dance Moms, Abby’s Ultimate Dance 
Competition, and her upbeat songs. During a TV interview 
she said that she turned the commenting feature on her 
Instagram off after someone posted a bad comment. 
However, commenting is still on for Instagram and she never 
considered changing her settings on YouTube. During 
another TV interview, she encouraged children ages four to 
thirteen to follow her on Instagram and YouTube. Talking 
point one is that Instagram requires you to be 13 years of age 
to create an account, but even at that age parent approval is 
still needed. Talking point two is children ages 4-13 should 
not be creating accounts on YouTube to follow because they 
should be using YouTube Kids, which has more security 
protocols as they expect younger members of society to be 
using it. Talking point three is parent approval should be 
obtained before creating an account on any social media 
sites. Talking point four is that famous people and friends 
should not influence whether you have social media. 
The Blue Whale Challenge is a challenge that exists on 
YouTube. The challenge is linked to human trafficking and 
forced suicide. Teenagers appear to be drawn into online 
forums where suicide was being discussed. In those forums, 
blue whale memes where being shared. But the idea of a 
sinister game, one that slowly roped in vulnerable teens and 
led them down an increasingly tortured path to suicide, 
seems th be a simplistic explanation for a complex problem. 
Participants of the Blue Whale Challenge have a whale 
drawn on their wrist. The last challenge is to either run away 
into human trafficking or to kill yourself. Talking point one 
is if you ever find yourself in this situation or know someone 
in this situation, then you need to tell a trusted adult 
immediately, even if told or asked not to. Talking point two 
is that misuse of YouTube needs to be reported. 
For security competency, talk about network security, 
passwords, personal identity, social engineering, and 
cyberbullying with how they are all interconnected. For 
example, the social engineering discussion should include 
geotagging, background of pictures, and the amount of 
information shared online. The network security discussion 
1. 
Don’t be a DIGITAL DUMMY: Get real! The Web is public and permanent 
2. 
Don’t be a DIGITAL GOSSIP: Talking about others negatively, makes you look shallow 
3. 
Don’t be DIGITAL WEAK SAUCE: Don’t let friends influence your better judgement 
4. 
Don’t be a DIGITAL DIVA/DIVO: Inappropriate Screen names/pictures & legal issues 
5. 
Don’t be a DIGITAL DAREDEVIL: Be careful about sites & friends 
6. 
Don’t be a DIGITAL CREEPER: Be careful about what you download, look at, even for a laugh 
7. 
Don’t be a DIGITAL MEAN KID: Don’t hide behind your computer 
8. 
Don’t be a DIGITAL DORK: Information about you is impossible to remove 100% 
9. 
Don’t be a DIGITAL PRIVACY KIDDIE: There are always ways to get around privacy settings 
For the digital footprint competency, one must explain 
what they are, how they help sites and stalkers track one, and
 how privacy is being given up. Students need to understand 
all the information online posted by them or by those with 
access  to  their  social  media  sites.  The  goal  of  the  digital 
footprint competency is to stress to students that people learn
 about  them  from  their  actions  on  the  Internet  of  Things 
(IoT).  People  learning  about  one  online  use  what  one 
searches,  where  one  searches,  what  one  posts,  and  what 
others post about one or in response to one. The easiest way 
to  teach  this  competency  is  by  using  nine  phrases,  shown 
below in Figure 2.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

should be about the differences in public and secure wi-fi 
and when it is safe to connect to public wi-fi. 
For the cyber law competency, explain the categories of 
cybercrime, intellectual property, the categories intellectual 
property is broken into within cyber laws, and the new cyber 
laws being put into effect. Intellectual theft is stealing or 
using without permission of someone else’s intellectual 
property. Intellectual property is protected by patent for 
inventions and copyrights in creative pursuits such as music, 
photos, and poems. Cyber law is any law that applies to the 
Internet and Internet related technologies. The categories of 
cybercrime, which should be discussed with students are 
people, property, and government. Cybercrimes against 
people include cyber harassment and stalking, distrubtion of 
child pornography, spoofing, credit card fraud, human 
trafficking, identity theft, and online related libel or slander 
[14]. A real life example of a cybercrime against people is in 
2017 journalist Juan Thompson was sentenced to five years 
for stalking former girlfriend Francesca Rossi. Cybercrimes 
against property include Distributed Denial of Service 
(DDOS) attacks, hacking, virus transmission, cyber 
squatting, computer vandalism, copyright infringement, and 
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) violations [14]. A real life 
example of cybercrime against property is the Wanna Cry 
ransomware attack of 2017 which targeted computers 
running the Microsoft Windows operating system by 
encrypting data and demanding ransom payments in the 
Bitcoin currency. Cybercrimes against government include 
hacking, accessing confidential information, cyber warfare, 
cyber terrorism, and pirated software [14]. An example of a 
cybercrime against government is the 2016 election 
intrusion. 
III. 
ADDITIONAL CYBER COMPETENCIES 
For the high schools that offer computer science and 
cybersecurity courses there are two additional cyber 
competencies that are to be taught to students in those 
courses. The two additional cyber competencies are 
computer science and cybersecurity. The components of 
these two competencies are shown below in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3. Additional Cyber Competencies & Components. 
 
The 
computer 
science 
competency 
aligns 
with 
CSTransfer2017 [7] so that it allows for better flow from K-
12 to college. CSTranfer2017 created by the Association of 
Computing Machinery (ACM) Committee for Computing 
Education in Community Colleges (CCECC) is a computer 
science curriculum guide for Associate Degree transfer 
programs [7]. For the computer science competency, teach 
secure coding, the seven big ideas of computer science, data 
analysis, machine language and Artificial Intelligence (AI), 
and logical vs syntax errors. The seven big ideas of computer 
science that should be taught are shown below in Figure 4. 
 
 
1. Computing is a creative human activity that engenders innovation and promotes 
exploration 
2. Abstraction educes the information and detail to focus on concepts relevant to 
understanding and solving problems 
3. Data and information facilitate the creation of knowledge 
4. Algorithms are tools for developing and expressing solutions to computational problems 
5. Programming is a creative process that produces computational artifacts 
6. Digital devices, systems, and the networks that interconnect them enable and foster 
computational approaches to solving problems 
7. Computing enables innovation in other fields including science, social science, 
humanities, arts, medicine, engineering, and business 
 
Figure 4. Seven Big Ideas of Computer Science [14]. 
 
The cybersecurity competency aligns with Cyber2y2020 
[6], CSEC2017 [4], and the Accreditation Board for 
Engineering and Technology (ABET) so that it allows for a 
better flow from K-12 to college. Cyber2y2020 created by 
the ACM CCECC is a cybersecurity curriculum guide for 
Associate Degree programs [6]. CSEC2017 created by an 
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers Computer Society 
(IEEE-CS), Association for Information Systems Special 
Interest Group on Information Security and Privacy (AIS 
SIGSEC), and International Federation for Information 
Processing Technical Committee on Information Security 
Education (IFIP WG 11.8) joint taskforce is a cybersecurity 
curriculum guide for post-secondary degree programs [4]. 
The cybersecurity competency aligns with ABET’s program 
accreditation criteria for Associate Degree programs. 
For component security, teach the security aspects of the 
design, procurement, testing, analysis, and maintenance of 
components integrated into large systems. For data security, 
teach the protection of data at rest, during processing, and 
transmit. For software security, teach the development and 
use of software that reliably preserves the security properties 
of the protected information and systems. For connection 
security, teach the security of the connections between 
components, both physical and logical. For system security, 
teach security aspects of systems that use software and are 
composed of components and connections. For human 
security, study the human behavior in the context of data 
protection, privacy, and threat mitigation. For organizational 
security, 
teach 
how 
to 
protect 
organizations 
from 
cybersecurity threats and managing risk to support successful 
accomplishment of the organizations’ missions. For social 
security, teach the aspects of cybersecurity that broadly 
influence society as a whole. 
IV. 
SOLUTION 
The solution to the problem has four steps, as shown 
below in Figure 5. This solution model has had a positive 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

impact in reducing the amount of K-12 cyber distress for the 
many school districts using it. 
 
 
Figure 5. Solution Model [12]. 
 
Step one is the most time consuming and difficult as it 
involves training and convincing educators and staff to 
change the way they think about cyberbullying and being 
open minded. For example, do not share students’ personal 
information with third party vendors for classroom tools. 
Educators and staff need to be trained on the cyber 
competencies, how to apply the cyber competencies, and 
actions that should be taken when dealing with students in 
cyber distress. An example of a good training program is the 
First Bytes Academy that Lord Fairfax Community College 
in Virginia has. In First Bytes Academy, educators and staff 
learn the four main competencies through classroom lectures 
and hands on activities. During the academy, educators and 
staff work with students so that they can practice different 
techniques for teaching the cyber competencies to their 
students. The First Bytes Academy teaches the two 
additional cyber competencies to those educators and staff 
who are at schools that would need them. Also, the First 
Bytes Academy has professionals come and train the 
educators and staff on how to properly handle cases of cyber 
distress. 
Step two requires support from administration and 
collaboration between school system IT staff, educators, and 
students. The cyber taskforce should actively be sharing 
cyber competency resources with all members of the K-12 
community. By sharing the cyber competencies with the 
entire K-12 community there will be more people aware of 
the different causes of cyber distress so they will be more 
active in protecting their information and more aware if the 
signs of cyber distress. The cyber taskforce is comprised of 
administrators, educators, staff, and students from the school 
district. The cyber taskforce is to work together and integrate 
the cyber competencies into the already existing curriculum 
for each grade level. This process will seem time consuming, 
but once you figure out how to integrate it at one grade level 
you can replicate it at another just with either a higher or 
lower degree of difficulty. 
Step three is presentations have to be relevant and 
relatable at a local level. For example, have a local cyber 
victim speak or have a student panel allowing students to 
express their concerns. The in school presentations should be 
one of two ways. The first way is bringing in a professional 
from the area who has a personal experience with cyber 
distress and someone the students can relate to. The second 
way is to have student panels where students can share their 
experiences with cyber distress and share with the school 
how they think they could help those in cyber distress. The 
out of school presentations involve partnering with 
organizations such as the Girl Scouts, the Boy Scouts, the 
Moose, and the Elks. The school partners with these 
organizations and hosts events or presentations for them in 
which the students at the school teach the cyber 
competencies to the community. This allows school 
administration to ensure students are understanding the cyber 
competencies and students are teaching their peers which 
Generation Z and Alpha are more willing to learn from. 
Also, during this step school administration needs to be 
actively informing parents about all of the web usage that 
their child is being required to do for school. The parents 
also need to be informed of the offline options for the web 
usage in case the parents do not feel that it is safe for their 
child to be using certain tools online. 
Step four is important to ensure that cyber education at 
the K-12 level is successful. The cyber plan needs to 
continuously be reevaluated and updated to stay current with 
modern technology and generational times. For example, 
many school systems are still focusing on what Generation Y 
needed instead of Generation Z and Alpha demands. The 
cyber taskforce should constantly be collecting feedback 
from educators, staff, administrators, parents, and students 
about the integration of the cyber competencies into the 
curriculum. If a component of the cyber competencies is not 
being perceived well, then the cyber plan needs to be 
reevaluated to have that component incorporated in a 
different way. 
Many organizations are trying to aid in the effort of 
educating through the cyber competencies. Some of the 
organizations that are the most active in educating through 
the cyber competencies are the Safe Surfin’ Foundation [15], 
Bikers Against Child Abuse [3], National CyberWatch 
Center [9], Internet Safety 101 Organization [8], and 
StopBullying [16]. 
Incorporation of cross-curricular cyber problems leads to 
students that are actively engaged in solving the problems. 
Educators and staff are more competent in the CIA 
(Confidentiality, Integrity, Accountability) Triad and can 
encourage student learning beyond a canned lesson plan to 
produce better mastery of and interest in computer science 
and cybersecurity. This method focuses on the outcome of 
increasing the number of computer science and cybersecurity 
professionals while keeping students involved and providing 
a solution that they can have a voice in. Educators are held 
accountable for understanding the risks involved with using 
free tools just because they are cool. Finally, this method is a 
source of open communication and partnership between K-
12 school systems, higher education institutions, computer 
science organizations, and cybersecurity organizations. 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

V. 
CONCLUSION 
Frederick County Public School System in Virginia, 
USA and Texas Public School System in USA have found a 
decrease in K-12 cyber distress and an increased interest in 
computer science and cybersecurity courses as a result of 
using this model. To ensure that K-12 and higher education 
expectations are in line, community college professors 
should serve on K-12 program advisory boards and K-12 
representatives should serve on the community college 
curriculum advisory committee. Community colleges that 
take this approach have found that it has allowed for open 
discussions on how to better connect K-12 computer science 
and cybersecurity courses to community college computer 
science and cybersecurity courses. 
In conclusion, my efforts to improve K-12 cyber 
education and increase cyber enrollment has evolved through 
national organizations, such as Safe Surfin’ Foundation by 
providing speakers at schools and educational materials. 
Early parts of this model have been vetted by inclusion in the 
National CyberWatch’s 2017 [11], 2018 [10], and 2019 [13] 
Innovations in Cybersecurity Education. Also, parts of this 
model have been vetted through the National Center for 
Women & Information Technology (NCWIT) AspireIT 
Grants and Aspirations in Computing (AiC) awards and 
Girls Scouts USA Gold Award. Other parts of this model 
have been supported by research presented at the 2019 
Federal Partners in Bullying Prevention (FPBP) Summit on 
Cyberbullying Prevention. This solution was initially 
presented at the 2019 Association for Computing Machinery 
(ACM) Special Interest Group on Computer Science 
Education (SIGCSE) [10] and updated model presented at 
the 2019 Community College Cyber Summit (3CS) [11]. 
This solution continues to evolve into a duplicable K-12 to 
higher education cyber curriculum model that engages 
students in cyber at the elementary school level to high 
school seniors, so that they will want to continue in the field. 
REFERENCES 
[2] About CSForAll. Retrieved August 2, 2020, from CSForAll: 
https://www.csforall.org/about/. 
[3] Bickers Against Child Abuse. Retrieved November 14, 2020 
from: https://bacaworld.org/. 
[4] M. Bishop, S. Buck, D. Burley, J. Ekstrom, L. Futcher, D. 
Gibson, E. Hawthorne, S. Kaza, Y. Levy, H. Mattord, and A. 
Parrish “CSEC2017,” ACM, IEEE-CS, AIS SIGSEC, & IFIP 
WG, 2017. DOI: 10.1145/3184594. Retrieved November 1, 
2020 
from:  
https://www.acm.org/binaries/content/assets/education/curricu
la-recommendations/csec2017.pdf. 
[5] Finding Faith. 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2020, from 
IMDb: https://www.imdb.com/title/tt2201760/. 
[6] M. Geissler, C. Servin, M. Stange, C. Tang, and C. Tucker, 
“Cyber2yr2020,” Association of Computing Machinery 
(ACM) Committee for Computing Education in Communty 
Colleges 
(CCECC), 
2020. 
United 
States. 
DOI: 
10.1145/3381686. Retrieved November 1, 2020 from:  
http://ccecc.acm.org/files/publications/Cyber2yr2020.pdf. 
[7] E. Hawthorne, T. Moore, C. Servin, C. Tang, and C. Tucker, 
“CSTransfer2017,” Association of Computing Machinery 
(ACM) Committee for Computing Education in Community 
Colleges 
(CCECC), 
2017. 
United 
States. 
DOI: 
10.1145/3108241. Retrieved November 1, 2020 from: 
https://ccecc.acm.org/files/publications/CSTransfer2017.pdf. 
[8] Internet Safety 101 Organization. Retrieved November 14, 
2020 from: https://internetsafety101.org/. 
[9] National CyberWatch Center. Retrieved November 14, 2020 
from: https://www.nationalcyberwatch.org/. 
[10] R. Stange, “Cyber Tween,” National CyberWatch 2018 
Innovations in Cybersecurity Education, p. 61, 2018. 
[11] R. Stange, “A High School Sophomore and CSTA Cyber 
Teacher Leads Her Peers In Day of Cyber,” National 
CyberWatch 2017 Innovations in Cybersecurity Eductaion, p. 
42, 2017. 
[12] R. Stange, “Increase K-12 Cyber Competency to Prevent 
Cyberbullying,” Association of Computing Machinery 
(ACM) SIGSCE, 2019. 
[13] R. Stange, “Increase K-12 Cybersecurity Competencies to 
Increase Cybersecurity Enrollment,” National CyberWatch 
2019 Innovations in Cybersecurity Education, p. 59, 2019. 
[14] R. Stange, M. Stange, and H. Coffman, “Increasing K-12 
Educator Knowledge to Prevent Cyberbullying & Enhance K-
12 Cybersecurity Courses,” Community College Cyber 
Summit (3CS), 2019. 
[15] Safe Surfin’ Foundation. Retrieved November 14, 2020 from: 
https://safesurfin.org/. 
[16] StopBullying. 
Retrieved 
November 
14, 
2020 
from: 
https://www.stopbullying.gov/.
 
[1] V. Johnson, “A Lifetime Promise: The Amanda Straubs 
Story,” 2014. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

