Setting the Climate: The Impact of Multimedia on Online Learning 
Hwangji S. Lu 
Department of Business Administration  
Colorado Technical University 
Aurora, CO, USA 
E-mail: Hlu@faculty.ctuonline.edu 
 
Abstract—The innovation of information technology 
has transformed the education world. Multimedia has 
been integrated into online classrooms in various ways. 
The use of multimedia could result in a positive impact 
on student’s learning experience. A master’s course 
offered exclusively online is redesigned to incorporate 
multimedia into course content, courses delivery, and 
assessments. The aim of this case study is to investigate 
the relationship between student’s satisfaction, as well as 
student’s learning outcomes, and the effectiveness of the 
multimedia-enhanced course. Student’s performance, 
student’s engagement, and student’s stratification show 
improvement in the redesigned course. The implications, 
limitations and further research are also discussed in this 
paper. 
 
Keywords-multimedia; online learning; learner-centered 
teaching; student engagement; student satisafction. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION   
With the advance of the Internet, distance learning in the 
higher education has developed its popularity in the world 
[1]. The Internet has shortened the distances among people, 
while distance learning transforms the way education has 
been delivered and defined; this new way   of interactive 
teaching uses the latest technologies to deliver the 
instructional materials to learners [2]. Thus, the geographical 
boundaries and scheduling conflicts are no longer the 
obstacles to learning. The paradigm has shifted to a learning 
environment that promotes learning through the interactivity 
feature of the technology [2][3][4].  
The research described in this paper investigates the 
effectiveness of a multimedia-enhanced online course. A 
literature review on the impact of multimedia and learner-
centered 
teaching 
will 
be presented. The 
research 
methodology, results, and discussion will be reviewed. 
Finally, implication, limitation, and further research will be 
examined.  
II. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
A. Multimedia 
Multimedia refers to the combinations of different types 
of media that appeal to more than one perceptual sense to 
convey information; the examples of media include sound, 
text, animation, audio, video, image, and mixes of all these 
objectives 
[1]. 
With 
the 
rapid 
development 
of 
telecommunication 
technology, 
multimedia 
has 
been 
increasingly used in education, especially in the online 
environment, as it provides the learners with an alternative 
means to acquire new knowledge.  Four main benefits of 
multimedia have been attributed to better learning outcomes.  
 
Multimedia can help students with various learning 
styles learn better because multimedia instructional 
materials are more dynamic than text-oriented online 
classrooms [3][5]. 
 
Multimedia can engage the learners to keep learning 
[3]. As an effective instructional tool, multimedia is 
playing an active role in education because the 
content delivery of multimedia is more vibrant and 
can draw the learners’ attentions better. 
 
The use of multimedia fosters deeper learning [3]. 
Multimedia instructional materials, indeed, help 
learners better comprehend key course ideas by 
stimulating learning at both cognitive and emotional 
levels—reaching a deeper learning. 
 
The multimedia tools help transform the traditional 
instructor-centered teaching toward learner-centered 
teaching [2][3]. 
B. Learner-Centered Teaching 
In the learner-centered environment, students play an 
active role in the learning process. They are actively engaged 
in constructing new meaning within the context of their 
current knowledge and experience. When learners construct 
their acquired knowledge successfully, they tend to work in 
collaboration with others [6]. Learners share their 
commitments to learning and see collective learning as an 
imperative part of their educational experience. Learner-
centered instructors also promote the development of a 
learning community to engage learners and provoke the 
learners’ critical thinking and problem-solving skills [3][6]. 
However, this approach can work well only for the mature 
and self-efficient learners [7]. 
III. 
CASE STUDY 
An U. S. university offers the master’s program of 
healthcare administration exclusively online. The original 
courses relied solely on text, requiring a large amount of 
reading and writing. Such a course design may have a 
negative impact on students’ learning and satisfaction. In 
2014, the author redesigned a healthcare administration 
course in the master’s program.  The redesigned course has 
incorporated multimedia into course content, course delivery, 
assignments, and e-textbook. Assessing the effectiveness of 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

the redesigned course and student’s learning outcomes is 
needed to reflect the depth and breadth in instructional 
design principles. Thus, two research questions are raised: 
(1) How do multimedia instructional materials enhance 
student’s learning? (2) What are the relationships between 
multimedia instructional materials and student’s satisfaction? 
The purpose of this study is to examine the association 
between the effectiveness of this redesigned course and 
student’s satisfaction, as well as student’s learning outcome.  
A. Research Methodology 
The data were analyzed with a comparison between FY13-
14 and FY14-15 courses. Simple comparative tests 
including analysis of variance (ANOVA) were performed 
using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) 
software.  Student achievement was evaluated by a 10 to15- 
page final research paper. Student engagement was 
measured by the number of posts and time spent per 
discussion board in the five selected discussion boards. 
Students’ 
satisfaction 
was 
investigated 
using 
the 
University’s standardized end-of-course evaluation survey. 
B. Results and Discussions 
1) Student Achievement: As shown in Figure 1, the 
mean score of the final research paper from the FY14-15 
courses (n = 621) was 23.1, which is statistically higher (p < 
0.001) than  22.3  of the FY13-14 courses (n = 695). 
2) Student Engagement:  Figure 2 exhibits a signficant 
lower (p < 0.05) number of postings, 3.27, per discussion 
board in FY14-15 comparing to 3.39 in FY13-14. This 
might result from the impact of a new university policy. 
Two months after this revised course was implemented, the 
univiersity changed its discussion board expectation for the 
instructors by reducing the requrired postings. Research 
studies have shown that instructor’s intervention affects the 
quantity of students’ posts in the discussion boards [8][9]. 
The result from this research study is in accordance with 
other research findings. Even though students in the FY14-
15 courses posted fewer responses, they indeed spent 
signficantly longer time reading their peers’ postings. 
Students in FY14-15 courses spent 158.2 mintues per 
discussion board in the five selected discussion boards 
comparing to 106.06 mintues in FY 13-14 courses (p < 
0.001) displayed in Figure 3. 
3) Student Satisfaction: Figure 4 shows students’ 
perception and feedback on the course in the 16-item end-
of-course survey. The overall satisfaction score, 3.46, in the 
FY14-15 courses (n = 156)  is higher  than 3.38 in the 
FY13-14 courses (n = 134)   (p < 0.05). 
C. Conclusions and Implications 
Despite the fact that students’ learning styles influence 
the outcomes of the collaborative learning [7], the findings 
from this study show positively on students’ performance, 
engagement, and satisfaction. The findings suggest that with 
the exponential development of multimedia technology, 
educators might integrate it into the course content and 
course delivery to engage learners in a deeper learning, as 
well as raise learners’ interest and satisfaction in the online 
environment. Educators might also take advantage of a wide 
variety of multimedia learning tools to improve the quality of 
online experience, foster a sense of community, and prepare 
learners to be lifelong learners with critical thinking and 
problem-solving skills. 
D. Limitations 
Several multimedia creations are used to enhance the 
course, and there is no way of knowing exactly which 
multimedia is responsible for the improvement. Additionally, 
there are potential confounding factors, such as student’s job 
status, student’s family issue, instructor’s profile, and 
instructor’s teaching style, all of which may interfere with 
students’ learning and objective evaluation on the course. 
E. Future Reseach 
The examination of the correlation between students’ 
attitudes about multimedia learning materials and their 
actual academic achievement is demanded.  There is a need 
to investigate the relationship between the instructor’s 
teaching style and students’ achievement, students’ 
engagement, as well as students’ satisfaction. There is also a 
need to explore the association between the instructor’s 
profile, such as age, gender, race or ethnicity, and students’ 
achievement, 
students’ 
engagement 
and 
students’ 
satisfaction.   
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Y. W. Li, X. Wang, and M. Yu, “A research on cultivating 
method of college students’ online learning ability,” 
International Journal of e-Education, e-Management and e-
Learning, vol. 1, no. 1, April 2011, pp. 69-74. 
[2] F. Leow and M. Neo, “Interactive multimedia learning: 
Innovating classroom education in a Malaysian University,” 
The Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 
13, no. 2, April 2014, pp. 99-110. 
[3] Y. W. Li, “Transforming conventional teaching classroom to 
learner-centred 
teaching 
classroom 
using 
multimedia-
mediated 
learning 
module,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Information and Education Technology, vol. 8, no. 2,  2016, 
pp. 105-111.  doi:10.7763/IJIET.2006.V6.667 
[4] M. Neo, K. T. Neo, and H. Y. Tan, “Applying authentic 
learning strategies in a multimedia and web learning 
environment (MWLE): Malaysian students’ perspective,”  
The Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 
11, no. 3, July 2012, pp. 50-60. 
[5] M. V. Miller, (2011, June). “A system for integrating online 
multimedia into college curriculum” Journal of Online 
Learning and Teaching, vol. 7, no. 2, June 2011, pp. 294-296. 
[6] M. Weimer, Learner-centered Teaching: Five Key Changes to 
Practice (2nd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2012. 
[7] P. Serdyukov, “Does online education need a special 
pedagogy?,”  Journal of Computing and Information 
Technology, no. 1, 2015, pp.61-74. doi:10.2498/cit.1002511 
[8] A. Picciano, “Beyond student perceptions: issues of 
interaction, presence, and performance in an online course,” 
Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, vol. 6, no. 1, 
2002, pp. 21-40.  
[9] T. Russo and S. Benson, “Learning with invisible others: 
Perceptions of online presence and their relationship to 
cognitive and affective learning,” Educational Technology & 
Society, vol. 8, no. 1, 2005, pp. 54-62.  
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Mean scores of final reach papers from FY13-14 and FY14-15 (p<0.0001). 
 
Figure 2.  Average numbers of posts per discussion board from FY13-14 and FY14-15 (p<0.05). 
 
Figure 3.   Average time spent per discussion board from FY13-14 and FY14-15 (p<0.0001). 
    
 
 
Figure 4.  Student satisfaction scores from FY13-14 and FY14-15. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

