Classroom of the Future 
A Purposeful Application of Technology and Context to Personalize Adult Learning, Foster Social 
Attachment, and Promote Collaboration 
Murtuza Ali Lakhani 
University of Phoenix 
Apollo Group 
Roseville, USA 
ali.lakhani@apollogrp.edu 
Michelle Marquard 
Learning & Development Solutions Group 
Cisco Systems, Inc. 
San Jose, USA 
mmarquar@cisco.com
 
 
Abstract—As a principal means of learning, the classroom of 
the future has to embody a barbell function.  On one end, it has 
to leverage digital technology to make education more 
pervasive, increase quality of learning, and lower instructional 
costs.  On the other end, it has to reduce theoretic dogma in 
favor of building proactive, strategic alliances with the 
nonacademic communities to deliver contextualized solutions 
addressing specific challenges facing human advancement and 
organizational development, while laying emphasis on the 
learning proclivities of adult learners. Grounded in empirical 
phenomenology and guided by three objectives, this paper 
explores the characteristics of a technology-enabled, context-
rich classroom of the future.  First, it investigates the specific 
features of the classroom supporting social collaboration, 
fostering communal connection, and tailoring academic 
experiences to learner preferences as well as real-world 
context.  Second, it identifies extant obstacles to creation of an 
effectual classroom for adult learners.  Third, it delineates 
approaches to surmount the obstacles, recognized and 
anticipated.  A model of the classroom of the future is 
presented, along with framework of the components and 
constituents required for the realization of an innovative 
temple of learning that knows no boundaries.  The results 
should prove valuable to scholars, theorists, and practitioners 
in the design and development of a future-oriented classroom 
that decisively conjoins technology and context to personalize 
learning, 
cultivate 
social 
attachment, 
and 
advance 
collaboration. (Abstract) 
Keywords-Classroom of the Future; Learning technologies; 
Online learning; Cohort; Adult learners; Adult learning; Social 
collaboration; Contextualized learning; Social attachment; 
Learning preferences; Academic-nonacademic alliances. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nietzsche once wrote, “The time will arrive when 
everyone’s thoughts will turn to education” [1].  With 
recognition of knowledge as the unassailable source of 
wealth [2], education finds itself front and center on the 
agenda of policymakers.  The dawn of technology has 
altered the Pythagorean notion that earth is round.  
Philosophically, the new world is flat in a way that not only 
renders opportunities equal for its dwellers, but also enables 
best minds to come together, without divisions or barriers, to 
collaborate in service of common missions [3].  With this 
new realization, nations are framing policies to raise 
educational standards, and organizations are fostering 
continuous education to help create competitive advantages 
of lasting value.   
 
Organizational investments into the search of knowledge 
have turned employees into adult learners, who funnel part of 
their spare time into learning to boost their output and value, 
leveraging a pervasive accessibility of learning options in 
and out of their own organizations. An increase in the 
number of adult learners has also brought into focus the 
distinctions in learning proclivities. Whereas a traditional 
learner is used to the established pedagogical methods, the 
adult learner learns more effectively with andragogical 
approaches [4].  Based on the broader life experiences he or 
she brings onboard, the adult learner is capable of thinking 
abstractly with only some facilitation from an experienced 
coach or faculty, and is able to share and create knowledge 
more effectively in social collaboration with his or her peers. 
 
The figurative change in the shape of the world is, 
however, defied by empirical reality in a telling way.  The 
promise of a boundaryless technology-enabled learning 
system for knowledge-hungry businesses and adult learners 
has not been fully realized.  An engaging technologically-
enabled, context-rich classroom for adult learners is one that 
supports cognitive, emotional, entrepreneurial, and values-
related aspects of learning.  It facilitates adult learners to 
work collaboratively in the day to day.  While even the 
extant patchwork of tools has been able to foster an increase 
in the quality of learning experiences, remove situational 
barriers in alignment with cross-border expansion of 
businesses, and make learning cost effective, a systematic 
enabling of spatially-, functionally-, and culturally-dispersed 
learners to collaborate effectively has remained a challenge. 
It is, therefore, important to isolate and examine the role of 
technologies utilized by adult learners in order to understand 
the features of 1) collaborative technologies that learners use 
well, 2) instructive technologies the learners consider 
valuable to an engaging learning experience, and 3) social 
technologies that instill a sense of community though learner 
interactivity, regardless of esoteric or exoteric obstructions. 
  
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

A. The Business of Knowledge 
Learning and knowledge thrive in symbiosis, for the 
garden of knowledge blooms from the seeds of learning.  
Aristotle and Ibn Sina described learning as a process of 
actualization of the mind’s potential [5].   While the principal 
tenets of education have remained unchanged, instructive 
media and methodologies have evolved.  During pre-writing 
period, teachers used oral, visual, and observatory means to 
pass along lessons to their pupils.  With development of 
writing methods, teachers facilitated the knowledge process 
through an accretive loop and enabled the understanding of 
natural phenomena to be accretively passed on from one 
generation to the next in the form of values, traditions, 
methods, and skills.  The invention of the printing press 
further catalyzed knowledge propagation.  Electronic 
technology, the fabric of modern life, delivered the next 
quantum leap, leading up to the Internet-based learning 
platforms. Information systems have liberated access to 
arrays of learning content in the form of text, images, 
lectures, animation, audio, video and games, while 
communication systems have enabled a platform for 
borderless collaboration.  The proliferation of laptops, smart 
phones, tablets, and other mobile devices underscores the 
emergence and promise of virtual learning. 
 
Reference [6] promoted the ideas of knowledge creation 
through conversations within an open community to deepen 
understanding of any phenomena of interest, attack common 
problems, and envision creative solutions.  Referencing the 
Socialization-Externalization-Combination-Internalization or 
the SECI model, Reference [7] put forth a view that 
knowledge creation was a continuous, dynamic process and 
that the transfer of tacit and explicit forms knowledge could 
best be facilitated through social interplay among the 
participants. Reference [8] too held the view that knowledge 
resulted from a synthesis of minds and was an aspect of a 
social bustle embedded in cultural practices.  The recognition 
of knowledge transfer as a social process augurs that the 
more effectively learner collaboration is supported, the more 
successful the learning outcomes. 
 
B. Learning Proclivities of Adult learners 
With talent management turning up as a vital part of the 
learning agenda of organizations, the role of corporate 
education and training has evolved in importance.  Changing 
workplace 
technologies, 
the 
dramatic 
transition 
to 
frontierless knowledge work, and competitive world markets 
have heightened administrative complexities.  Academia and 
training 
institutions 
have 
been 
building 
appropriate 
capabilities to be supportive.  Universities have leveraged 
accessible 
e-learning 
platforms 
to 
offer 
convenient 
educational options for adult learners.  One of the main 
obstacles to a sound educational strategy implementation has 
been the failure to recognize that the learning proclivities of 
adult learners are dissimilar.  There is a temptation to ignore 
the peculiarities of learners, because doing so makes 
educational design a bit more tractable, but the result of such 
platonicity is creation of one-size-fits-all programs designed 
for en masse delivery [4].  Universalized education relies on 
broad strokes in favor of specific focus.  To be more 
effectual, educational establishments would be better served 
by reducing theoretic dogma in favor of seeking to build 
alliances with nonacademic organizations to collaborate on 
addressing specific challenges facing human advancement 
and organizational development and increasing focus on the 
styles of adult learners. 
 
Andragogical principles suggest four adult learner levels.  
Rational (Level I) learners are the kind of learners motivated 
by bounties, such as grades, diplomas, output, and career 
growth.  These learners are interested first and foremost in 
acquiring knowledge that can immediately be applied to 
create measured outcomes.  They are motivated by solving 
problems and finding innovative solutions that can get them 
acknowledged.  Rational learners’ motivation to learn can be 
escalated by a context-content application approach, where 
these learners are exposed to the big picture of the subject 
matter before the small picture is shared.  For example, a 
course in strategy may be prefaced by a presentation of an 
organizational leader on how the lessons may relate to the 
company or functional approach.  The big picture sets up a 
context for the nuts-and-bolts of subject matter.  Before the 
course is wrapped up, concepts are tied back to applications, 
particularly as they relate to learners in their given roles.  
The context-content application approach stimulates rational 
learners by framing sturdy linkages across theory, practice, 
and application. 
 
Emotional (Level II) learners have the same basic needs 
as rational learners, but their genuine motivators are 
relationships.  These learners cherish personal interfaces. 
They are motivated to build enduring bonds that they believe 
will drive collective success.  Emotional learners can be 
motivated by community-based learning systems (social 
networking, gaming, blogs, etc.) that encourage teamwork 
and collaboration, allowing them to tap into the group’s 
explicit and tacit knowledge.  The motivation of these 
learners can be boosted by assembling them into learning 
teams where they feel empowered to create their own goals 
in association with peers.  An intimate atmosphere inspires 
emotional learners to open their minds to new perspectives 
and assume responsibility, resulting in a sustained cycle of 
positive changes and development over time. 
 
Entrepreneurial (Level III) learners bear the seeds of 
rational and emotional learners, but it is action and risk play 
that truly motivates them.  Every chance they get, these 
learners like use hands-on activities to acquire knowledge 
and build their confidence.  They are motivated by 
nonacademic learning environments that allow them to 
express themselves physically and mentally.  Simulations, 
role plays, game boards, and discussions are ideal tools to 
heighten the learning motivation of the entrepreneurial 
learners.  The trick to engaging these learners is to foster a 
culture of sharing, sparring, and validation of ideas in a safe 
environment. Creative design of nonacademic learning 
approaches helps by instilling a sense of confidence that the 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

entrepreneurial learners eventually need to apply capital and 
assume informed risks in the real world. 
 
Spiritual (Level IV) learners are macrocosmic learners in 
that they encompass and embody the qualities of all other 
levels of learning.  They are motivated by the aspiration to 
understand nature.  These learners carry a profound yearning 
to reach beyond humdrum and mundane in search of self-
realization.  Spiritual learners can be motivated through 
facilitation focusing on the illumination of their personal 
values and engagement into learning with authenticity and 
congruency. Through the discovery of biases and mental 
paradigms, these learners can be assembled in trusting social 
interactions on a journey to discovery, transformation, and 
philanthropic contribution.  
 
An employee-competency survey at certain large 
multinational companies found that key higher order skills, 
such as thinking strategically, managing change and conflict, 
communicating and collaborating across cultures, mentoring 
and leading, and innovating thinking have not kept pace with 
needs of business and pointed to a labor-to-talent gap.  These 
institutions could benefit from adopting a barbell approach 
by keeping the goals, motivations, and proclivities of 
learners in mind and embracing alliances with business to 
develop and deliver effective learning content.  By doing so, 
institutions could engage learners, open their minds to 
prepare to apply themselves in the real world, and bring 
increased meaning and performance to their alliance 
partners. 
 
C. Problem Statement 
Companies are investing heavily in the learning needs of 
their workforce in the face of changing organizational 
technologies, labor market shifts, and growing regulatory 
pressures. Talent development has been driving budget in 
excess of $2 trillion on training and education programs 
worldwide [9].  While success in this market requires 
catering to the needs of adult learners, comprehending 
industry- and company-specific workforce challenges and 
ever-evolving needs, and designing a classroom that enables 
spatially-, functionally-, and spatially-dispersed learners to 
come together in social collaboration, the response from 
educational institutions has been lagging [10]. The mitigation 
of this challenge requires a clear-cut understanding of how 
technology and context could be purposefully combined to 
result in personalized adult learning, greater social 
attachment, and increased borderless collaboration. 
 
D. Purpose Statement 
The purpose of this study was to explore the features of 
the technology-enabled, context-rich classroom for adult 
learners.  Three objectives guided this research.  The first 
objective was to investigate the specific features of the 
classroom 
supporting 
social 
collaboration, 
fostering 
communal connection, and tailoring academic experiences 
to learner preferences as well as real-world context.  The 
second objective was to identify extant obstacles to creation 
of an effectual classroom for adult learners.  The third 
objective was to delineate approaches to surmount the 
obstacles, recognized and anticipated.  The findings of this 
research, grounded in empirical phenomenology, were 
based on the lived experiences of seven adult learners 
engaged in a cohort-based, online degree program. 
 
E. Research Questions 
This study posited that a classroom of the future that is 
capable of personalizing adult learning, fostering social 
attaching, and promoting seamless collaboration would 
consist of six key subsystems encompassing reading, 
collaboration, assessment, assimilation, application, and 
relationship building.  The following six questions, as 
presented to participants, guided this study: 
 
1. 
How effective did you find the “reading” tools in 
your learning process?  For example, physical textbooks, 
web-based documents, PDF files, e-readers, etc. 
 
2. 
How effective was the asynchronous classroom in 
fostering your interactions with other learners and with your 
faculty member? 
 
3. 
What 
role 
did 
assessment/testing 
play 
in 
reinforcing and validating your learning in the classroom?  
Assessments may have included writing assignments, 
projects, multiple-choice tests, etc. 
 
4. 
Did 
you 
use 
any 
formal/informal 
project 
management tools to manage collaborative/team-based 
projects?  What was your overall experience? 
 
5. 
Did your experience and learning in the classroom 
help you be more productive in your work?  How?  Has 
your experience helped you think or do things differently? 
 
6. 
Did your interaction and collaboration in the 
classroom help you develop relationships with other 
employees across functions and sites?  Have these 
relationships been useful in your day-to-day work life?  If 
so, how? 
 
F. Data Collection and Management 
As part of an academic alliance between Cisco Systems, 
Inc. and University of Phoenix, a cohort-based Master of 
Business Administration degree program was chartered.  
This initiative was part of a broader portfolio of learning 
and development solutions offered to employees.  The 
cohort program was contextualized for the company through 
collaborative content development and delivery. This cohort 
program was offered on an online learning system 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

proprietary to the University and offered participation from 
employees worldwide.  
 
The target population for this study was knowledge 
workers, defined as skilled, qualified, and experienced 
employees responsible for creating, modifying, and 
orchestrating knowledge. Ten cohort participants were 
identified for data collection and seven agreed to participate. 
These participants represented five functional business 
domains, namely Sales, Finance, Engineering, Services, and 
Supply Chain Operations. Based in the United States, these 
participants 
were 
geographically-dispersed 
with 
four 
coming from California and one each from Illinois, Georgia, 
and Missouri. 
 
II. 
FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS 
Learning and education are both interrelated sociological 
change processes.  While the former is a process for 
preparing individuals to think differently, the latter is one for 
changing behaviors.  As technology becomes increasingly 
pervasive and learning turns into a lifelong process, the 
paradigm of adult education must evolve. The future 
framework of the classroom of the future encompassing six 
dimensions, whose importance is underscored by the impact 
on knowledge building, business value creation, and social 
attachment formation. These dimensions are reading and 
intelligent search, collaboration, assessment, assimilation, 
application, and relationality. 
 
The function of the reading and intelligent search 
dimension is to scan the environment for sources of learning. 
It is estimated that 2.5 quintillion bytes of digital data is 
being generated each day [11].  One key responsibility of 
this subsystem of the classroom is to not only make 
information available conveniently and comprehensively, but 
also act as a filter to noise in the environment.  The 
collaboration subsystem is responsible for engaging diverse 
learners into social interplay, playing a critical role in 
knowledge sharing and transfer. Learner collaboration 
ensures that diversified learning of the cohort is more than 
the sum of each learner’s learning. The assessment 
subsystem lends a safe environment in which learners could 
test ideas and validate knowledge.  The assimilation 
subsystem enables learners to combine and synthesize the 
ideas shared in the classroom into internal knowledge 
through reflection process. The application subsystem is 
designed to ensure that the theory-to-practice gap is 
minimized. The context-rich, fit-to-purpose body of 
knowledge developed in collaboration between educators 
and practitioners helps shorten the link between learning and 
application. An engagement of diverse learners in the 
technology-enabled classroom provides a rich learning 
experience that strengthens social bonds.  A culture of 
respect, trust, friendship, and cohesion in learning teams 
ensures long-term advantages for the learners as well as for 
their workplace sponsors.  
 
A. Effectiveness of the extant online classroom features 
Reading and intelligent search. The reading and 
intelligent search function is designed to facilitate a 
scanning of the environment—internal and external--for 
learning sources [12]. With an exponential growth in the 
volume of unstructured data in shape of images, videos, 
tweets, posts, and emails, this function is required to make 
information easily and expansively available and sift 
through the clatter associated with and around the sources. 
 
The classroom deployed the portable document format 
(PDF) for text books.  The PDF format is independent of 
application software, hardware, and operating systems. 
Journal articles, recorded video streams, and internet-based 
content was furnished via web pages.  Both formats are 
designed provide accessibility across a range of devices 
from laptops to phones and tablets. In addition to the 
reading material in electronic format, learners could 
purchase physical text books to gain a traditional immersive 
reading experience.  Emails and chat facilities in the 
classroom were used for exchange of content, such as 
faculty feedback and learner-to-learner communications. 
Learners received certain text-based instructional lectures or 
recorded audio and/or video content delivered on CD-ROMs 
or DVDs. 
 
The participants primarily used laptops and tablets in 
their work and personal environment.  Based on their 
existing device usage model, a majority of the participants 
felt satisfied with the accessibility of reading formats 
provided for by the current classroom. Access to online 
library was highly appreciated.  A participant noted the 
University’s e-library had the potential to be “one of the best 
resources in the world.”  Participants felt that online reading 
worked out just as well for them as physical books.  A great 
benefit of the electronic format is that learners could 
purchase only the chapters they found useful. 
 
Collaboration.  The collaboration function is designed in 
recognition of the social nature of learning.  Effective 
collaboration requires emphasis on the learners’ ability to 
share, analyze, create, and assimilate knowledge.  It reflects 
a desire to address the andragogical needs to encourage the 
interplay of tacit and explicit knowledge in the classroom 
[7]. 
 
The classroom was designed as a flexible e-learning 
platform with capabilities for course management. It enabled 
information sharing among a network of learners through 
location- and time-independent asynchronous interactions. 
The collaboration tools embedded into the platform included 
threaded discussions, chat rooms, learning team rooms, 
private rooms, email, and mailing lists. The classroom 
afforded learners the freedom to supplement capabilities of 
videoconferencing and telephone conversations to further 
coordinate learning activities.      
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Participants found the asynchronous classroom to work 
effectively in fostering more meaningful interactions among 
the learners themselves as well as between them and the 
faculty. 
Participants 
noted 
that 
their 
asynchronous 
interactions were much more involved than those in a 
traditional, synchronous environment.  Given the temporal 
flexibility, participants were prone to carefully and deeply 
researching their answers to discussion questions before 
posting them to the classroom.  As learning tends to arise in 
the context of relationship with others, the result of 
individual thoughtfulness was an enriched interaction with 
other participants. The time to research answers also helped 
participants exercise greater discipline with such things as 
recording references and citations, helping enhance the 
overall quality of the learning experience.     
 
Assessment. Assessments are essential to making sure 
that learning has taken place as intended. It is a process of 
comparing actual results against expected results and 
ascertaining differences. In a traditional classroom, the 
visual and verbal feedback is readily available from 
learners, but in an online classroom, physical cues are 
unavailable.  Therefore, implementing special assessment 
mechanisms becomes essential in an online classroom. For 
this study, participants were asked about assessment in a 
broad context of interaction in the classroom, writing 
assignments, and formal and informal tests.  
 
The classroom was designed to help the learners 
demonstrate personal accountability and the ability to work 
independently as well as in learning teams.  When learners 
failed to make a certain number of postings within a 
specified time, the built-in checks in the platform helped 
keep track and the learners risked being dropped. Learners 
were required to submit substantive answers to a set of 
discussion questions and encouraged to interact in 
meaningful ways under the watchful eyes of the faculty 
member. The course grade took into account the 
participation level and quality of individual contributions as 
well as learning team work. In some courses, the classroom 
included Assessment and Learning in Knowledge Spaces 
(ALEKS), a Web-based, artificially intelligent assessment 
and learning system to assess the knowledge of the learner. 
 
Participants found individual and team essay papers to be 
beneficial when they were relevant and had some 
applicability to their day-to-day business. Although 
participants found writing papers—particularly, in APA 
format--a bit challenging, they saw it as a necessary evil to 
get and demonstrate a comprehensive view of the learning 
material. Some participants also found the tests administered 
in class to be beneficial in validation of acquired knowledge.          
 
Assimilation.  Assimilation of knowledge takes place 
through the process of learning-by-doing [13].  In a 
classroom, assimilation is accomplished by bringing learners 
cooperatively and competitively to work on projects that not 
only encompass required lessons, but also appeal to learner 
interests.  Projects are a connection between planning and 
doing, and working on them affords learners the 
opportunities for both personal and professional growth by 
boosting their participation, exposing any defensiveness, 
encouraging constructive action, and motivation to reduce 
theory-to-practice gap. 
 
The classroom was designed to encourage learners to 
assimilate knowledge through projects.  A certain percentage 
of the course grade was earned by learners by completing 
projects with other members of their learning team.  The 
classroom also gave the the learners the ability to leverage 
the differences among themselves to optimize the collective 
learning experience.   
 
Participants consistently pointed out the organizing 
structures they put into place to work effectively on team-
based projects.  Some used Microsoft Excel to break down 
the execution of course assignments and document the 
delegation of tasks, while others used Evernote as a tool for 
capturing notes to assist with work assignments.  Notes were 
taken during team meetings and published for easy access 
via email. While the projects in the classroom were not 
complex enough to warrant the use of formal project 
management tools, it appeared that learners were able to 
improvise with existing tools to get their project work done.  
Participants remarked having regularly scheduled meetings, 
use of agenda in team meetings, and publication of minutes 
that also included the division of responsibilities among team 
members. Project work helped the learners exercise and 
demonstrate trust and accountability. 
 
Application.  For the knowledge of the learners to be 
relevant, it can and must be applied. The concepts learned 
over the study period should, in some positive way, inform 
the learners’ work in the day-to-day. Eventually, it is 
application of the methods to the design and operation of 
management systems and business processes that enables the 
learners to deliver the greatest value to stakeholders. 
 
The classroom took a strategic, holistic, and tailored 
approach to learning.  Based on an appraisal of the talent 
needs, 
the 
program 
curriculum 
was 
appropriately 
contextualized.  Some of the courses in the program were fit 
to purpose and the accredited body of knowledge was 
covered along with an integration of industry- or company-
related readings, simulations, and projects.  The central 
objective of the cohort program was make courseware 
aligned to learners’ careers and business, so as to enhance 
work-related skills, career progression, and impact on 
personal and professional growth. 
 
Participants shared examples of knowledge gained in the 
utilization of productivity tools, such as WebEx Social.  
Some participants expressed how their participation had 
given them a different and broader perspective on business 
not only through knowledge gained in the coursework, but 
also through the social interaction with other learners in the 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

project work, where everyone’s knowledge was socialized to 
accomplish course assignments. Participants particularly 
valued the cross-disciplinary and cross-cultural social 
interactions, as part of their learning experience. A 
participant noted, “I am more productive in using my time 
and focusing my energy in important tasks.  I also think 
more critically.”  Multiple participants noted not only 
thinking more critically about business and managerial 
related issues, but also their tendency for a more thoughtful 
and reflective approach in their interactions with other 
employees. A participant conveyed, “I am thinking much 
‘deeper’ and more thoughtfully on just about every topic…I 
am absolutely more measured in my responses, do more 
research on things I am working on, and believe the quality 
of my work has improved because of this Cohort.”  Another 
idea expressed by several participants was about the time it 
took them to their acquired knowledge.  Using the Human 
Resource Management (HRM) course as an example, one 
participant said, “I have used the content from HRM most 
significantly.  The overall recruiting, selection, and 
celebration of diversity I used [immediately]… as I have 
been adding headcount.”  
 
Relationality. 
 
If 
business 
is 
a 
function 
of 
interconnectivity 
and 
interdependence, 
the 
seeds 
of 
borderless collaboration must be sown continuously [14]. 
Since learning is social, classrooms are the best venue for 
formation of solid and lasting relationships.  The spread of 
globalism will continue to require business to break down 
silos and necessitate employees to form global alliances to be 
able to deliver to growing expectations of investors and 
customers [15].   
 
Using online modality, the extant classroom provided a 
capability 
to 
assemble 
spatially-, 
functionally-, 
and 
culturally-diverse learners. The social nature of the platform 
along with the interactive structure of the course enabled 
employees to share, debate, and synthesize diverse ideas. 
The focus on team projects was directed to encouraging 
learners to engage in collaboration.  
 
Participants discussed how personal and professional 
bonds being formed among the learners during the program.  
More importantly, the participants felt that their relationships 
extended beyond the program.  Participants specifically 
noted how they expected their relationships to continue to 
grow on the strength of mutual trust.  One of the participants 
said, “The relationships are very close and our level of trust 
is very high.” Participants shared job openings with one 
another across business functions. Such sharing could serve 
the company in growing general management capability by 
developing cross-disciplinary leaders.  In addition to 
socialization within the work-team construct—in service of 
project-based deliverables—the participants also reached out 
to one another to leverage the domain expertise of other team 
members. Technology is inclusive of personalities.  Whether 
one is an extrovert or an introvert, there is a way to engage in 
conversation.  Age barrier, which could be an issue when 
individuals work in person, is blurred in the online 
environment. 
 
B. Obstacles presented by extant classroom features 
Reading and intelligent search.  Participants noted that 
while the access to reading content was satisfactory on their 
laptops, they faced significant difficulties accessing the files 
on mobile devices, such as phones and tablets.  A participant 
noted a paradox that a great feature of online classroom is its 
accessibility over spare time; however, when reading 
material requires a laptop to access, it defeats the purpose of 
using spare time, when a laptop is not normally unavailable. 
The richness of the online library was noted, but issues with 
organization of data and search capability were flagged.  
Without proper organization of data and absent an effective 
user interface, access to library was noted to be difficulty and 
time consuming.  The PDF-based text books were password 
protected for copyright reasons. Participants found password 
authentication to be a major hurdle as they tried to access 
reading material across different devices. Specifically, a 
tablet version of PDF reader did not even permit the 
authentication mechanism, which ended up becoming a 
source of frustration for learners.  Further, neither the PDF-
based text books nor the web pages allowed learners to take 
notes in the margin and highlight reference content.   
 
Collaboration.  Participants had to resort to external 
applications, tools, content, and services, such as WebEx, 
Skype, FlashMeeting, Telepresence, and/or email to 
coordinate certain learning activities. Missing in the current 
platform, these tools helped built camaraderie, foster deeper 
understanding, and promote teamwork. Participants missed 
live lectures in the asynchronous classroom, and, with it, the 
benefit of learning from a trustworthy source, asking 
questions, and receiving real-time responses. Participants 
noted missing a sense of urgency in the asynchronous 
classroom.  For instance, responses from faculty member to 
urgent questions were delayed. The assignments were found 
to be vaguely written, and participants found it difficult to 
align their expectations with the faculty over online 
conversations. A part of the difficulty was attributed to the 
short duration of the course and timing of interactions that do 
not always keep pace with the assignment timelines.  
 
Assessment.  Participants found open-book, multiple-
choice tests to be of little value, as these types of tests 
became an exercise in finding the right answers rather than 
learning the material. To that end, one participant 
summarized group sentiment saying, “Quite honestly, the 
final exam/assessment provided little to no value…it 
bec[ame] a 'check box' and simply finding the answers in the 
text is just time consuming rather than learning.” While some 
participants found essays to be helpful in reinforcing 
learning, others did not find much value in them.  Effort 
needs to be made to require only as many essays from 
learners as productive to learning, otherwise they can be 
perceived as forced chores rather than a valuable exploration 
of the subject matter content. The assessment of essays is a 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

subjective exercise, so, based on the faculty load, there could 
be a large degree of bias in feedback.   
 
Assimilation.  Participants expressed dissatisfaction with 
the project-related tools available in the classroom.  As a 
result, participants resorted to external applications, tools, 
content, and services, such as WebEx, Skype, FlashMeeting, 
Telepresence, and/or email to coordinate project efforts. 
These tools were deemed essential for successful project 
collaboration and, hence, for knowledge assimilation. Ill-
conceived project assignments not relevant to interests of the 
participants were judged wasteful.   
 
Application.  Participants noted that time constraints 
imposed by course load prevented them from more 
systematically applying their knowledge.  While the 
contextualization of program proved to have the capacity to 
enrich learners’ understanding, critical thinking, and 
productivity impact, the benefit was limited by each course 
being contextualized on its own.  Instead, if each learner 
came into the program with one significant problem to solve 
in his or her organization or business unit, and then was 
allowed to figure out solutions progressively through each 
course in the program in collaboration with other learners 
and the practitioner faculty, the learner’s benefit could be 
more significant and holistic. 
 
Relationality.  Certain esoteric courses like human 
knowledge and philosophy are more difficult to integrate in 
the online modality.  Because the online classroom relies on 
the intrinsic motivation of learners, there is a risk that 
learners needing a more personal interface could fall through 
the cracks.  Further, online classroom has not evolved 
enough to accommodate the needs of learners with certain 
disabilities. 
 
C. Strategies for the improvement of classroom  
Reading and intelligent search.  Participant feedback 
suggested that the reading and intelligent search feature 
could be improved by: 1) providing generous technical 
support for learners using reading tools to ensure effective 
usage across the gamut of prevailing devices, 2) creating a 
copyright mechanism for electronic content to work 
uniformly and efficiently across devices, 3) developing 
device-independent and portable reading formats that enable 
learners to highlight reference points and make notes in the 
margin with the ability for the learners to port the notes 
across their devices, 4) deploying cloud to store reading files, 
so that learners working on devices without local storage (for 
example, phones) could access files, 5) integrating 
immersive reading with features, such as explanatory videos 
and audios clips and maps into the reading files to enrich the 
learner experience, 6) inserting text-reader programs and 
word-prediction software to empower learners with learning 
disabilities, 7) integrating intelligent search to enable 
filtering through noise on the Web and large databases and 
provide access to assistance, communities, and expertise. 
 
Collaboration.  Participant feedback suggested that the 
collaboration feature could be improved by: 1) incorporating 
on-demand collaboration, online meeting, web conferencing, 
and video conferencing capabilities, such as WebEx, Skype, 
FlashMeeting, and Telepresence into the learning platform, 
2) integrating the ability for learners to start their own blogs 
in their areas of interest and engage other learners to build 
social knowledge networks through collaborative tagging 
and folksonomies, 3) providing generous technical support 
and training for learners and faculty using the platform 
across a gamut of prevailing devices, 4) combining some 
face-to-face (blended) classroom time with the asynchronous 
activities to balance out the learning process for both learners 
and faculty, 5) addressing learning preferences of all age 
groups, namely Boomers, Gen X, Gen Y, etc. via 
collaborative approaches and social networks.     
 
Assessment.  Participant feedback suggested that the 
assessment feature could be improved by: 1) increasing 
deployment of artificially intelligent assessment and learning 
tools across courses to assess the learners’ before-and-after 
knowledge of subject matter, 2) taking advantage of 
technologies (for example, podcasts, wikis, blogs) to help 
learners demonstrate their acquired knowledge, 3) instituting 
writing labs and plagiarism checkers to facilitate writing 
skills and ensure academic honesty, 4) requiring projects, 
simulations, and essays that are contextualized in workplace 
skills, 5) engaging with business to ensure that work-related 
skills are enhanced to achieve specific objectives and 6) 
eliminate assessments that are perfunctory in the learning 
process, adding little value beyond preserving institutional 
dogma. 
 
Assimilation.  Participant feedback suggested that the 
assimilation feature could be improved by: 1) promoting 
functional, spatial, and cultural diversity within learning 
teams to optimize interplay and assimilation of knowledge, 
2) 
incorporating 
on-demand 
collaboration, 
web 
conferencing, and video conferencing capabilities into the 
learning platform, 3) designing multiplayer simulations and 
games to engage members of the team in a safe, social 
experience, 4) creating fit-to-purpose projects that learners 
could work with through their entire course of study instead 
of having a set of dissimilar, per-course projects, 5) 
encouraging the use of blogs, wikis, and rich site summaries 
(RSS) to fast and wide sharing of information not only 
across the learning teams, but also across the learners’ 
organizations, 6) providing generous training to learners on 
pod/vodcasting to share audio and video recordings with 
others.  
 
Application.  Participant feedback suggested that the 
application feature could be improved by: 1) including 
program-level customizations, where possible, and where 
those are not possible, tailored individual courses to shorten 
the link between knowledge and application, 2) working out 
licensing deals to open access to multimedia content from 
the massively open online course (MOOC) sources, such as 
Coursera, Udacity, MIT, Stanford, and Yale, as applicable 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[16], 3) deploying new adaptive learning technologies to 
lower costs and improve learning outcomes by more 
effectively linking knowledge to application. 
 
Relationality.  Participant feedback suggested that the 
relationality feature could be improved by: 1) integrating 
blended programs, where technology-mediated activities are 
complemented with face to face methods, 2) addressing 
learning preferences via collaborative approaches and social 
networks, so that learners can succeed, regardless of 
demographic factors or level of proficiency with technology, 
3) including features and accommodations to support the 
needs of those with learning disabilities. 
 
III. 
CLASSROOM OF THE FUTURE 
“The future ain’t what it used to be,” Yogi Berra said 
[17].  The increasing complexity of the world may limit our 
ability to model and predict [17], but the only way to be 
prepared for the future is through investments in constant 
learning. Interdependence and interconnectivity define the 
future of business and society. Investments in learning are 
necessary, and involvement of community is essential.  
Based on strategies gleaned from participants in this study, 
Figure 1 illustrates the model of the classroom of the future 
encompassing the recommended features for reading and 
intelligent search, collaboration, assessment, assimilation, 
application, and relationality. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The classroom of the future 
The realization of the classroom without boundaries will 
necessitate deployment of advanced social and collaborative 
technologies, active participation of business in learning, a 
constructive remodeling of academia for the future, and 
shared responsibilities on part of the content provider 
community.  Reference [19] argues that traditional 
classrooms are a fragile system.  Only if they are imbued 
with a real-life essence do they stand a chance to evolve into 
antifragile bodies that can withstand changes and emerge 
stronger.  Figure 2 binds these players/forces into a common 
platform.   
 
Three types of institutions will cover all of higher 
education in the future: traditional schools (public and 
private universities), nontraditional schools (private for-
profit and not-for-profit universities), and free MOOCs 
(Udacity, Coursera, edX, etc.).  The degree to which these 
institutions succeed will depend on the extent to which they 
are willing, able, and ready to create academic alliances to 
meet the needs of learners and ensure that the challenges 
facing businesses are addressed through relevant, context-
rich learning solutions.   
 
 
Figure 2.  Components for realization of classroom without boundaries 
Further, alliances among the institutions of higher 
learning and publishers and copyright holders will be 
essential to ensure that content could be readily and instantly 
made available to learners across the gamut of end-user 
devices (phones, tablets, laptops, and hybrids).  Content 
publishers would have to evolve open yet profitable business 
models that enable integration of as much rich, multimedia 
content into the classroom as possible [18]. The role of 
hardware and software technologists will be to ensure that 
educational devices are not only affordable, but also support 
the needs of dispersed learners.  Only through a purposeful 
deployment of collaborative, social, intelligent search, 
artificial intelligence (AI) software/applications, and cloud 
technologies can a personalization of adult learning, 
promotion of social attachment among learners, and enabling 
of borderless collaboration be enabled.  Finally, it will be up 
to learners and professors to help the evolution of the 
technology-enabled, context-rich classroom by constantly 
lending their voice. 
 
The great mystic Jalaluddin Rumi described learning 
attainment through a sublime parable.  A grocer has an 
abundant supply of sugar in his store, but the amount that can 
be doled out depends on the capacity of the shopper’s bag.  
Sugar is the metaphor for learning, and the bag is the 
metaphor for degree of learning.  There are vast sources of 
learning available to hungry learners, but the amount that can 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

be delivered to them depends on the capacity and 
effectiveness of our classrooms. 
SUMMARY 
The purpose of this study was to explore the features of 
the technology-enabled, context-rich classroom for adult 
learners.  Three objectives were accomplished with this 
study.  The first objective was to investigate the specific 
features of the classroom supporting social collaboration, 
fostering communal connection, and tailoring academic 
experiences to learner preferences as well as real-world 
context.  The second objective was to identify extant 
obstacles to creation of an effectual classroom for adult 
learners.  The third objective was to delineate approaches to 
surmount the obstacles, recognized and anticipated. The 
findings of this research were based on the lived experiences 
of seven adult learners engaged in a cohort-based, online 
degree program.  The model of the classroom of the future 
was proposed.  The results should prove valuable to scholars 
and practitioners in developing an effective classroom of the 
future that purposefully applies technology and context to 
personalize adult learning, fosters social attachment, and 
promotes collaboration. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Thank you to our study participants.  Without their help, 
this research would not have been possible.  It is our hope 
that the outcome of this work will be beneficial to them and 
to those who follow them. Cheryl Miller and Deepika Jain 
not only read the paper and provided insightful comments, 
but also played an important role in the implementation of 
the cohort program.  We owe a debt of gratitude to many 
individuals at Apollo Group, Cisco Systems, and outside for 
their small and large contributions.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] F. L. Nietzsche (1954/1976). The portable Nietzsche (W. Kaufman, 
Trans.). New York, NY: Penguin Books. 
[2] P. F. Drucker (1994). The theory of business, Harvard Business 
Review, September/October 1994, pp. 95-104. 
[3] T. L. Friedman (2007).  The world is flat: A brief history of the 
twenty-first century.  New York, NY: Picador.  
[4] M. S. Knowles, E. F. Holton, and R. A. Swanson (1998). The adult 
learner: The definitive classic in adult education and human resource 
development.  Burlington, MA: Elsevier. 
[5] J. D. McGinnis (2000). Time and time again: A study of Aristotle and 
Ibn Sina's temporal theories (Doctoral Dissertation, University of 
Pennsylvania). UMI Proquest Digital Dissertations. Retrieved 
October 31, 2012, from http://proquest.umi.com. 
[6] M. Polanyi (1967). The Tacit Dimension, New York: Anchor books. 
[7] I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi (1995). The knowledge-creating 
company. New York: Oxford University, 1995. 
[8] E. Wenger (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning and 
identity, Cambridge University Press. 
[9] J. Westfall (2006). The impact of structure on explicit knowledge 
recall: The conclusion. KMPro Journal, v. 3, 2. 
[10] M. A. Chatti, R. Klamma, M. Jarke, and A. Naeve (2012). The Web 
2.0 driven SECI model based learning process.  Retrieved October, 
31, 2012, from kmr.nada.kth.se/papers/TEL/CKJN_ICALT07.pdf. 
[11] N. Silver (2012).  The signal and the noise: Why so many predictions 
fail—but some don’t.  New York, NY: The Penguin Press. 
[12] D. R. Schwandt and M. J. Marquardt (1999). Organizational learning: 
From world-class theories to global best practices.  Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC Press LLC. 
[13] D. Pyzdek and P. Keller (2006).  The six sigma handbook.  New 
York, NY: McGraw Hill. 
[14] K. Ferrazzi and T. Raz (2005).  Never eat alone: And other secrets to 
success, one relationship at a time.  New York, NY: Doubleday. 
[15] M. Goldsmith, C. Greenberg, A. Robertson, and M. Hu-Chan (2003).  
Global leadership: The next generation.  Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Education, Inc. 
[16] A. Ripley (2012).  College is dead.  Long live college. Time, Vol. 
180, No. 18. 
[17] N. N. Taleb (2010).  The black swan: The impact of the highly 
improbable. New York, NY: Random House, Inc. 
[18] L. S. Bacow, W. G. Bowen, K. M. Guthrie, K. A. Lack, and P. Long 
(2012). Barrier to adoption of online learning systems in the U.S. 
higher 
education. 
 
Retrieved 
October 
31, 
2012, 
from 
http://www.sr.ithaka.org/research-publications/barriers-adoption-
online-learning-systems-us-higher-education.  
[19] N. N. Taleb (2012). Antifragile: Things that gain from disorder. New 
York, NY: Random House. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

