Time-Effective Logistics of Project-Based Course Electronic Instrumentation 
Samuel Kosolapov 
Department of Electronics 
ORT Braude Academic college of Engineering 
Karmiel 21982, Israel 
e-mail: ksamuel@braude.ac.il 
 
 
Abstract—Historically, 
the 
classic 
course 
Electronic 
Instrumentation was based on analog electronics - analog 
sensors, actuators, and amplifiers - and was taught in most 
colleges and universities as the theoretical course. The 
appearance of inexpensive micro-controllers revolutionized the 
usage of sensors and actuators; hence, our days Electronic 
Instrumentation can be taught as "a classic course in the 
modern envelope": by using as analog as digital elements, plus 
by using special programming techniques. In order to make 
the content of the course closer to modern industry design 
techniques, most of the assignments were made project-based. 
It is clear that checking and grading a large number of project-
based assignments is time-consuming. To make this process 
time-effective for the educator, a set of rules and procedures 
were formulated. This article describes the time-effective 
logistics which were used during the 7 years to teach this 
course, as in "regular time", as in "COVID19 time" by using 
real electronic components, and by using TinkerCad 
simulations.  
Keywords-project-based learning; time-effective logistics; 
electronic instrumentation; TINKERCAD. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Starting from the 80s, electronic analog systems were 
gradually replaced by digital systems containing “the wonder 
chip Micro-processor” [1] [2]. Large control panels equipped 
with analog voltmeters, ammeters, and mechanical switches 
were gradually replaced by compact digital systems with 
visual display units. Programming of the Micro-processors 
has become an important part of electronic engineering 
education.  
In the past, the classic course Electronic Instrumentation 
was based on analog electronics - analog sensors, actuators, 
and amplifiers. Hence, in the majority of universities and 
colleges, this course was taught as a theoretical course – 
mostly, due to the high cost of the real-life systems utilized 
then in the industry. The appearance of inexpensive 
microcontrollers revolutionized the usage of sensors and 
actuators, hence our days Electronic Instrumentation can be 
taught as "a classic course in the modern envelope": by using 
as analog as digital elements, plus using special 
programming techniques. 
Many educators in the field of electronic instrumentation 
have emphasized that practical training is an essential part of 
the learning process. In most of the following steps: 
"conceive, experiment, design, build, test, improve" – 
practical aspects are critical for understanding the items 
learned [3]. Leading educational institutions like MIT [4] 
and others incorporate into their curricula of electrical 
engineering a substantial amount of 'hands on' lab skills, by 
using real electronics components and basic electronic 
equipment.  
Alternatively, a number of educators have experimented 
with online training technologies. Those attempts have 
become vital because of COVID19 situation. The current 
situation in education, which is still seriously dependent on 
the epidemiological situation, makes educators look for new 
ways and specific platforms as a means of implementing 
their educational programs [5]. It was necessary to provide a 
way to carry out electronic experiments and assignments, as 
in a real laboratory, as in a student’s home. An interesting 
option was to use the online TinkerCad platform for 
implementing at least some elements of the Electronics 
Laboratory activities [6].  
An additional idea was to lease to each pair of students a 
kit containing real electronic components so that students 
would be able to execute assignments at their homes – by 
using the kit and PC. Some elements of this idea were partly 
described in [7]. This article describes additional details and 
new elements introduced in the recent years. 
Section II describes “Elements of the Course” – such as 
lectures, exercises, non-obligatory “Class Micro Works”, 
homeworks and MicroProjects including details: how they 
were provided in “regular times” and in “COVID19” time. 
Section III describes implementation details of “Logistics of 
Homeworks and Micro Projects”. Those details are provided 
in two sub-sections: sub-section “A” – named “Homeworks: 
Electronic Projects executed by using real components and 
by using TinkerCad simulations” and in the sub-section “B” 
- named “Micro-Projects: description of existing designs and 
TinkerCad simulations”. Important part of any “time-
effective” logistics of that kind is time-effective grading. 
Details are described in Section IV named “Time-Effective 
logistics of reports checking and grading policies”. Section 
“V” shortly summarize results of student’ pools (partly 
published in the previous publications) and provides some 
ideas to be weighted for the implementation in the future. 
II. 
ELEMENTS OF THE COURSE 
Course Electronic Instrumentation in the new format was 
provided at the Department of Electronics of ORT Braude 
Academic College of engineering every semester starting 
from 2015. Elements of the course are: 13 two-hour frontal 
in campus lectures, 13 one-hour in campus exercises, three 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

homeworks, two Micro Projects, and 10 non-obligatory “in 
Class Micro Works” (CMW, - provided during exercise 
hours). Homeworks and Micro Projects are executed by pair 
of students at their homes by using specially prepared kits (to 
be 
described 
later). 
In 
the 
process 
of 
practical 
implementation of homework, students compiled reports by 
using specially designed PowerPoint templates and sent them 
by Gmail. To make the evaluation and grading of these 
reports time effective for the educator, special format was 
developed. The main ideas of this format (albeit for the 
course “Image Processing”) were described in [8]. After two 
Micro Projects were executed by pair of students, students 
sent compiled PowerPoint reports to the lecturer for 
preliminary evaluation. After corrections, students presented 
their Micro Projects in class. Micro-exams were individual 
assignments solved by students on paper. During three 
semesters starting from March of 2020 to August of 2021, 
this course was provided under COVID19 restrictions by 
using online tools: ZOOM, TinkerCad, and Gmail. 
Specifically: lectures were provided by using remote ZOOM 
sessions, and assignments were executed by using TinkerCad 
simulations instead of using real components. Starting from 
October 2021, the course is provided in a hybrid way: 
lectures are provided at the campus, but with ZOOM “on”, 
so that students have a choice: to visit the campus, or listen 
to the lectures by ZOOM from outside the campus. 
Homework and Micro Projects are executed by using the 
kits, but in some situations, students are asked to provide 
simulations by using TinkerCad and/or MultiSim simulation 
applications. Grading policies are described at Section IV. 
III. 
LOGISTICS OF HOMEWORKS AND MICRO-PROJECTS 
In the subsection “A” logistics of homeworks is 
described, whereas logistics of Micro-Projects is described 
in the subsection “B” is described.    
A. Homeworks:Electronic Projects executed by using real 
components and by using TinkerCad simulations  
At the beginning of the semester, pairs of students get 
from the lecturer a specially prepared kit. Specifically, in the 
frames of the course Electronic Instrumentation, students get: 
an Arduino UNO R3 board (see item 1 on Figure 1), a small-
size breadboard (marked as 2 on Figure 1), a shield with a 
small breadboard (marked as 3 on Figure 1), a short USB 
cable, set of wires, and a plastic box (marked as 4, 5 and 6 on 
Figure 1) and a 37-sensor box (marked as 7). 
Electronic modules (sensors and actuators) inside the 
“37- sensor box" are voltage compatible with the Arduino 
UNO R3 board. Some modules were extracted from the box 
– for example, the laser module – in order to prevent possible 
eye injury in case of reckless usage.  
Figure 2 presents simplify flowchart of the steps 
expected to be executed by educator and by pair of students 
in the frames of the described logistics. In the frames of 
homework assignments, students were asked to design, 
assemble, and test a simple electronic system containing a 
number of sensors and actuators that are controlled by the 
Arduino board. Additionally, students were asked to create a 
program (sketch) for the Arduino board according to the 
description provided by the educator. It is important to 
mention, that homework assignments were executed by 
students at their homes, and thus, the educator could not see 
how the required design and assembly steps were executed. 
Hence, students were asked to document the assembly of the 
system by adding a set of photos to the PowerPoint report. 
Figure 3 presents exemplary photos taken from the typical 
student’s report. By exploring those photos, an educator can 
in a number of seconds validate if students properly put the 
modules 
on 
the 
breadboard, 
properly 
executed 
interconnections on the breadboard by using colored wires, 
and properly connected pins of the Arduino board. 
Additionally, students were asked to fill a number of tables 
in which they specified all the connections by using special 
codes and specify colors of wires. It is clear that any 
discrepancy with the connections specified in the tables and 
on the photos will be immediately revealed by the educator, 
hence the requirement to add photos of the assembly steps 
and the requirement to fill the connections tables is important 
in the frames of the selected logistics. Yet, additionally, 
every pair of students were asked to physically demonstrate 
the operation of their system in the class and answer some 
questions concerning the report and system operation. 
As it was mentioned above, during three semesters 
starting from March of 2020 to August of 2021, this course 
was provided under COVID19 restrictions. During those 
semesters, the distribution of real electronic components 
became at least problematic, but working in pairs with real 
components became impossible. The possible solution was 
to use online TinkerCad simulations. An important feature of 
this simulation is that it is a free cloud service, so that no 
installation is needed. However, when COVID19 restrictions 
were pronounced, it was not immediately apparent that this 
specific TinkerCad cloud service could be used in the frames 
of this specific course. Fortunately, in less than 3 days after 
the pronouncement of COVID19 restrictions it was proved 
that only minor changes in the requirements for the 
homework assignments were required.  Figure 4 presents 
screenshots of the TinkerCad screens. The left screenshot 
demonstrates an exemplary modules layout on the 
breadboard as it was prepared by the lecturer. This 
screenshot was given to the students as a slide in order to 
demonstrate to the students that Homework 01 can be 
executed by using TinkerCad simulation. During the exercise 
provided by ZOOM, the lecturer provided a live 
demonstration of the system operation in full accordance 
with the description. However, the code of the program 
(sketch) was not revealed to the students. So, students were 
asked to do with TinkerCad simulation actually the same 
steps as with real components: to position modules and to 
connect them by wires, but, instead of real photos of real 
components, screenshots of the simulation screens were 
used. The right part of the Figure 4 presents the layout of the 
system as prepared by some pair of students. Again, the 
educator, by exploring the link to the student’s simulation, 
can very quickly validate that all the blocks were properly 
connected by color wires. The parts of the student’s report 
describing the code and testing the system were nearly the 
same as in the case of real components, so that grading of the 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

report by using a specially prepared list of requirements was 
fast and simple. Additionally, students were asked to 
demonstrate operation of the system during exercises by 
using the “share screen” feature of ZOOM. It is clear that if 
some pair of students had "copied" photos and "code" from 
the report of another pair of students, this would be 
immediately revealed. During 7 years, such "illegal copying" 
was revealed less than 10 times. 
B. Micro-Projects: description of existing designs and 
TinkerCad simulations 
In the frames of the course, students were asked to 
prepare two Micro-Projects. It is clear that students have 
limited time to implement full-scale projects containing both 
theoretical part and implementation of some system with real 
components. Hence, the name used for this assignment is 
Micro-Project.  
The first micro project was about different types of 
motors (6V DC, Servo, Stepper, and Brushless). Each pair of 
students prepared a PowerPoint presentation about a specific 
type of motor, about a specific type of electronic controller 
and, present it in the class (in the case of “regular” semester) 
or by ZOOM (in the case of “COVID19” semester). In these 
presentations, students were asked to explain the physical 
principles of the specific motor operation and explain how 
this motor can be controlled electronically by presenting the 
exemplary circuit needed to control this motor from a 
microcontroller.  
The second Micro Project was about creating an 
Automatic Measurement System (AMS). Each pair of 
students was asked to develop a different type of AMS: an 
AMS for measuring DC voltage in the different voltage 
ranges, an AMS for measuring AC voltages in the different 
voltage ranges, etc. Students were asked to prepare the 
electric circuit of the AMS, provide relevant calculations, 
and prepare a TinkerCad simulation (including the analog 
part, Arduino UNO R3 board, and Arduino sketch). In this 
case, each pair of students was asked to send a PowerPoint 
presentation and link to the TinkerCad simulation. 
IV. 
TIME-EFFECTIVE LOGISTICS OF REPORTS CHECKING 
AND GRADING POLICIES 
Considering the limited number of kits, and the typical 
size of electronic laboratory, the number of students in this 
course was limited to 24, that is, by 12 pairs of students. It is 
clear, that checking 12*(3+2) reports is a time-consuming 
job. Hence, significant efforts were made to develop time-
effective logistics (a set of formal rules) describing how 
exactly students must prepare and send their assignments. 
Our days it is obvious for most educators that reports must 
be sent electronically (and not collected physically as reports 
printed on paper). A number of pedagogic systems (like 
MOODLE) exist for collecting students' assignments. 
However, most elements of this logistics were developed 
nearly 15 years before [9]. Then the logistics were based on 
using Gmail cloud services. During the years, this service 
was proved as simple and reliable. Hence, there were no 
serious reasons to change usage of Gmail cloud services as a 
proper tool to send and store student’ reports and PowerPoint 
presentations. It is known that some educational institutions 
strictly forbid using of Gmail and other Google services. In 
that case, alternative e-mailing or messaging services can be 
used, while those services have searchable subject field and 
support attachments, so that using Gmail is not a critical 
element of the described logistics. A simple, but really time-
saving element of this logistics is the naming rule of the 
assignment materials. The same “name” was used as the 
Gmail subject, the name of the attached PowerPoint 
presentation, and the name of the attached zip file 
(containing code). This name can be described as a set of 
tokens divided by the delimiter “-“. In the course Electronic 
Instrumentation this name was:  
“ABCD-EFGH-X-YYYY-MM-DD”  
ABCD stands for the last four digits of the ID of the first 
student. EFGH stands for the last four digits of the ID of the 
second student. The obvious rule needed to prevent 
ambiguity was that ABCD < EFGH.  X – describes a type of 
assignment – HW01, HW02, and HW03 – for the 
homeworks 01, 02, and 03, and P1Z and P2Z for the Micro 
Project 1 and Micro Project 2, where Z is a number of 
assignment (typically in the range {1..6}, so that every 
assignment was typically executed and presented by two 
pairs of students. YYYY is a year, MM is a month, and DD 
is the day on which the assignment was sent. This naming 
rule enables a very fast and simple search for the specific 
report, for all the reports of a specific group, for all the 
assignments of a specific type, etc. Figure 5 presents 
exemplary screenshots of the lecturer's Gmail. On the left 
screenshot of Figure 5, an exemplary result of search for “all 
assignments of the specific pair of students” by using their 
short ID token “1576-7618” is shown.  Two items 
emphasized by BOLD exploits a known feature of Gmail: 
signaling to the educator that this specific mail was not 
opened yet, and, thus, this specific report was not graded yet. 
On the right part of Figure 5, an exemplary result of search 
for “all students that have sent reports for the homework 01” 
is shown. In this case, search was executed by using token “-
HW01-“. 
It is important, that when one student sends the 
assignment to the lecturer, he/she is asked to send a CC to 
the email of the second student. This simple rule effectively 
prevents the non-pleasant claim “lost report”. In the case of a 
problem, students were asked to send a screenshot of the 
relevant email page as solid proof that the requested report 
was sent on the specific date. Actually, during 15, years 
fewer than 5 claims of “lost report” were raised and none of 
them was found to be valid after simple search together with 
students. 
In order to provide fast, equal, and fare grading, Excel 
templates were prepared. Figure 6 presents an Excel template 
for grading homework 01 in the "COVID19 semester". Rows 
of the template contain an exact copy of the requirements as 
they are specified in the description of homework 01. Every 
row has a special code (for example, HW01.11). Students 
were requested to type this code in the title of the relevant 
slide of the PowerPoint presentation. This simple numbering 
makes grading extremely simple and clear both for the 
educator and for the students. It is important, that 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

requirements to be executed are written in a short but 
unambiguous fashion. For example, the requirement in the 
row HW01.13 on the left part of Figure 6 is “Fill Table 3 of 
the wire’ connections”. It takes some time and efforts for the 
students to properly fill this table. They cannot use the work 
of other students because every pair of students uses a 
different layout of the modules, and then the connections of 
wires must be different. While executing and documenting 
this sub-task takes some time for the students, the time that 
the educator needs to check if this specific requirement was 
executed as required is very short – less than one minute. In 
order to make grading even faster, it is recommended to use 
a PC with two monitors (or a PC with a wide monitor). The 
first monitor is used to present the Excel grading template. 
On the second monitor, the educator opens the PowerPoint 
presentation of the specific pair of students and compares the 
content of the slide labeled as, say, HW01.11, with the 
requirement. Then, by using the maximal grade for this item 
(specified on the next right column), the educator updates the 
grade for the specific pair of students. In case it is necessary, 
educator adds comments to the relevant cell, so that students 
can see why the grade was reduced.  Typically, on the 
rightmost cell of this row, typical students’ errors are listed, 
and for every “typical error” a simple number is assigned. In 
that case, it is enough to use this number in the comment - 
that is: much less for the educator to type. It is important, 
that this procedure makes grading more fair – “the same 
grade for the same error”.  The final grade of each pair of 
students for the specific report is automatically summarized 
in the row marked as “total”. The template presented at 
Figure 6 contains “non-final” grades. It can be seen that 
some pairs of students have already sent PowerPoint 
presentation, but their simulation did not work as expected. 
In that case, students were asked to demonstrate their 
simulation and answer the educator’s questions. The grading 
policy was that for the homework 01 students were permitted 
to correct their presentation. (Maximum two times). As for 
homework 02 and 03, only one version of the Report and 
simulation were permitted.   
Figure 7 presents an Excel template for grading Micro 
Project 1. The basic structure of this template is the same. 
While homeworks were the same for all pairs of students, 
Micro Projects were different for different pairs of students. 
Considering that in this specific semester six different types 
of motors were used, typically two pair of students had the 
same assignment. Again, significant efforts were made to 
formulate the requirements in a short but unambiguous 
fashion. For example, row “P1V.13” (V stands for the 
project number) clearly states that photos of two 
commercially available motors must contain explanations of 
the pins of those motors. Again, the grading policy in this 
assignment was to enable three versions of the PowerPoint 
presentation. It is clear, that in that case most of the student’s 
pairs arrived to the maximal grade. The goal of this “trick” 
was that to force students to understand the level of 
requirements 
of 
the 
nearly 
industrial-grade 
report. 
Obviously, only one version of the Micro Project 2 
presentation was permitted.  The final grade was calculated 
by Excel according to the self-explanatory formula:     
A=0.05*HW1+0.1*HW2+015*HW3+0.3*MP1+0.4*MP2; 
Final Grade = G = MAX ( 0.2*CMW + 0.8*A , A ) ; 
Where CMW stands for the grade of non-obligatory “Class 
Micro Works”.  ”.   
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK  
During 10 years, different variants of this time-effective 
logistics for the different electronic engineering courses were 
tested.  Some results were published before in [7] [8] [9] and 
reported at a number of international conferences. In the 
semesters when student’ pools were provided, grades 
provided by students for this course were in the range 
{4.23...4.94} (by using 1-5 scale) and was in most cases by 
0.5 higher that mean department’ courses grade. In the 
written comments, most of the students’ remarks were 
positive, and, median grade for this course in most of the 
semesters was 5.0. 
Currently, management and processing of all the Emails 
are executed manually, mainly by exploiting email search 
utilities. Manual management and grading of the student's 
reports (by using grading templates) was found simple and 
time-effective, as for the students, as for the educators. While 
the course is provided for a group of students of limited size 
(say, up to 24 students), automatization of the above 
management by creating dedicated software scripts or by 
creating special software, does not look as important 
improvement of the logistics. However, for the large groups, 
such automation may be found instrumental.     
An additional automation option is to include elements of 
the discussed logistics as an additional module to any 
available ELM. Specifically, in the ORT Braude Academic 
College of Engineering, a number of ELM were tested. 
Currently, MOODLE system is used by most of the college 
lectures. However, in its current implementation, using 
MOODLE was found as less suited for the goals of this 
specific course than the proposed Gmail-based logistics. 
It is assumed, that by analyzing the results of the last 
student pools, more conclusions will be drawn, and some 
modifications in the logistics will be provided. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] R. Gopalakrishnan, “Electronic Instrumentation for Control”, 
IETE Journal of Research, vol. 27, issue 2, pp 53-60, 1981. 
[2] O. Pandey, “Electronics Instruments”, chapter in the book 
“Electronis Engineerings”, Springer, 2022. 
[3] D. R. Ramos and F. Alonso-Fernandez, “A practical 
Electgronic 
Instrumentational 
course 
for 
engineering 
students” IEEE EDUCON Education Engineering 2010 – The 
Future of Global Learning Engineering Education, April 14-
16, 2010, Madrid, SPAIN, pp. 1181 – 1188.  
[4] G. Hom, “Hands-On Introduction to Electrical Engineering 
Lab 
Skills”. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from  
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses. 2008-01. [retrieved: 05, 2022]. 
[5] D. Luchaninov,  R. Bazhenov, V. Sabirova, M. Mamyrova, Z. 
Zholdosheva, “Online training of students of applied physics 
in the field of circuitry”, ICMSIT-II 2021 pp 1-6.  
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[6] F. Jacob, A. Alberto and P. Guimaraes, “Use of Tinkercad 
platform for Teaching Electronics Subject in Post-Secondary 
Technical Courses”, TEEM21, October 2021 pp. 543-547, 
Available 
from 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3486011.3486517 
[retrieved: 05, 2022]. 
[7] S. Kosolapov and N. Sabag, “Logistics of Electronic Home-
Project-Based Course", International Journal of Information 
and Education Technology”, vol. 9 no. 6, pp. 445-448. 2019 
[8] S. Kosolapov “Time-Effective Logistics of ZOOM-Based 
Image Processing Laboratory”,  ENGEDU2021, Athens, 
Greece, pp.  2-10, 2021. 
[9] S. Kosolapov and N. Sabag, “Time-Effective Logistics of 
Electronically Signed Laboratory Results Reporting”. 2009 
UB-NE ASEE Conference. Bridgeport, CT, USA, April 3-4, 
pp. 2-8, 2009. 
  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  A list of electronic components that were provided to the students for the work at their homes. 
 
Figure 2.  Simplified flowchart of the exemplary homework roadmap. 
Left: actions of the educator. Right: actions of pair of students 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Homework 01 as impmenented by pair of students by using real electronic components.: Left: A photo of the system with four modules 
positioned on the breadboard. Center: a photo of the system with colored wires added. Right: photo as proof that the system works as required.  
 
  
Figure 4.  Homework 01 impmenented as a TinkerCad simulation .Left: Exemplary layout of components as proposed by lecturer. Right: layout of 
components as created by pair of students  
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Screenshots of the lecturer's Gmail. Left: Results of search for all assignments of the pair of students by using the short ID token  “1576-7618”.  
Marked as Bold : works that have not been checked and graded yet. Right: Search of all reports of the homework 01 by using token “-HW01-“ 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
 
Figure 6.  Excel template for grading homework 01. 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Excel template for grading Micro Project 1. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

