Follow-Up on a Numerical Methods Course Using m-learning and Proposal for an
Evolution to Research Based Learning
Francisco Delgado
Physics and Mathematics Department
Tecnológico de Monterrey, campus Estado de México
Atizapán, Estado de México, México
e-mail: fdelgado@itesm.mx
Abstract— Education is changing deeper than at any other
time with the constant improvement of information and
communication technologies. Particularly, the last five years
have brought a fast inclusion of mobile technologies in
education at all educational levels. This work presents a
modern vision for a numerical methods course for engineers
integrating mobile applications
into
a
blended
learning
strategy. It currently combines class, Web and mobile activities
to reinforce and to develop the basic knowledge proposed in
the curricula. A five years follow-up is developed to evaluate its
performance. Outcomes suggest moving the design into pure
online learning to introduce new improvements in the course
goals. The improvements are realized by the inclusion of a
research-based learning component. The proposed approach
could
become
a differentiated and flexible scheme of
instruction powered by mobile applications, but introducing a
new version based on project-oriented learning.
Keywords-m-learning;
b-learning;
math; course
design;
assessment.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, several educative tendencies are identified
with the acquisition of technological skills as part of a
successful professional life. Today, new generations have
based their learning expectative on some kind of technology.
Prensky [1] states that today’s students are native speakers of
the digital language of computers, video games and the
Internet. Instead, people born before, digital immigrants,
have a limited dominion of these technologies. It sets a
natural division among these generations. Technology is
related to a more accessible and cheaper education. Today,
the low quality perception of education based on technology
is decreasing, while increasingly it is being considered more
engaged and personalized [2].
Currently, mobile technology is the real option to be
connected with the world and the information. In 2013,
mobile technologies became the main media to reach the
Internet [3]. Consequently, it is evolving into a creative
medium where education can reach effectively the people. In
terms of sensory stimulation and learning styles being
privileged [7], several authors have stated deep relations
between the general history of distance learning and the
chronology of the generations involved [4][5][6]. Johnson et
al. [8] described the impressive short time of adoption of
mobile technologies, including in education. Today, many
apps and tools allow the development of educational
products directly; the perspective is open to educative
innovation based on technology. Members of university
faculty have been reluctant to adopt educational technology,
but this situation is changing very fast.
Numerical methods course is mandatory in engineering
programs. This discipline has evolved in the last decades,
together with information technologies. It has changed its
traditional teaching with the spread of computer systems and
their implementation in the universities. Therefore, the
specific course presented in this paper has transitioned from
a numerical analysis course into a computer simulation
course
in only ten years.
It includes
the
computer
visualization of technical and scientific problems to boost the
research abilities
[9]:
curriculum
integration, use of
technology, and development of higher level skills. In this
evolution, several technologies have been used to state its
mobile management and to carry out a mobile learning
approach [10].
The aim of this paper is to report the advancement of
technology in the numerical methods course in the last five
years while the mobile revolution was developed. A detailed
analysis of the online evaluation is given together with the
usage analytics of the current resources included. The results
suggest alternative and flexible instruction schemes for the
basic skills acquisition. This flexibility proposes the next
step in the evolution course as an open online course still
combined with face-to-face sessions to conduct challenge
integrated problems under an open research scheme. Section
II describes the mobile learning strategy using activities
delivered through several media and tools. Section III
analyses the efficiency of online evaluation predicting the
basic skill development based on the usage of these
activities. Section IV discusses the potential design to evolve
the course into a Small Private Online Research (SPOR)
supported by mobile learning and a series of research
problems to be solved in class. Finally, Section V includes
the conclusions and the future work.
II.
COURSE DESIGN AND MOBILE DEVELOPMENT
A.
Historical course description
Requirements for engineering education are based on the
technological advancement, imposing the adoption of new
technologies. The numerical methods course depicted here
has evolved this way. Ten years ago, it sparsely contained a
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

limited use of Fortran or C++ as a programming language, a
limited time of programming practice, and applied problems
were rarely included. Since then, the use of technology has
increased significantly: Mathematica [11], Python [12] for
programming and visualization, as well as Blackboard [13]
to deliver digital course materials and online activities.
Those technologies boosted the Problem Based Learning
(PBL) and Project Oriented Learning (POL) [14][15]
strategies in the course, reducing the gap between academic
and professional engineering [9]. It was the course stage in
2008, before mobile and blended learning were introduced.
B.
M-learning transitions and current design
In 2011, the author was involved in an institutional effort
to develop and promote the use of mobile technologies in all
higher education faculties [16]. Then, after Blackboard,
leaner technologies were used to replace this tool with tailor-
made tools such as Winksite [17], Weebly [18], Googledrive
[19], Jotform [20], Wolfram Alpha [21], Socrative [22] and
Classmarker [23]. Another key element was a public You
Tube channel for the course, including screencasts for each
topic in the course. Digital programming codes were
included and then followed by the students at their own pace.
Surprisingly, most of the users became informal users in
other universities and countries, gathering almost one
hundred 
thousand 
accesses 
in 
three 
years. 
These
technologies allow to deliver the media resources and the
online activities directly on mobile devices dealing with
some weaknesses in the curricula and carrying out periodic
computer quizzes in class or online. In 2008, an e-book was
prepared for the course. It began to be distributed on
Amazon and i-store as a new mobile version in 2014.
Finally, in the newest version of the site, the programming
component of the whole course can be followed online,
theme by theme, through sixty screencasts.
Despite some of last developments required necessarily
the use of laptops in the beginning (in particular for PDF
documents and Mathematica files involving homework,
resources, etc.), in the current time, the technology evolution
has generated PDF mobile viewers and the development of
Wolfram Cloud (deployed in the version 10.0 of
Mathematica), allowing a complete transition into mobile
management using cellular phones or tablets, the final target
for which began to be prepared some years ago.
Figure 1 depicts the course evolution into m-learning in
terms of the technology added, spaces and management. All
of them were deployed to set the schedule of online
activities, delivery, and feedback. It includes evaluation with
online quizzes and exams, which substitute some of the in-
class evaluations. Other elements and activities give the
assessment in programing and numerical implementations.
Despite the fact that these activities were primarily
introduced to provide support in some weak learning areas,
they grew to become naturally integrated on an official
mobile site (Figure 2). Inclusively, some of them, as
assessment or evaluation have replaced some face-to-face
practices with good performance [10]. Under this blended
scenario, the impact of the online activities should be
evaluated in order to determine if they are a strong
replacement of some traditional elements in the learning
process.
Figure 1.
Five years of m-learning implementations in the numerical
methods course in terms of tools, activities and resources.
III.
EFFECTIVENESS OF MOBILE RESOURCES
The numerical methods course evolution in the last ten
years
introduced
technology in the classroom as a
mandatory policy [10]. Due to this improvement, students
are expected to be more skilled. It has required additional
support to face-to-face instruction
to scaffold
the
programming practice. In addition, several years ago, the
inclusion of integrated scenarios in PBL and activities based
on POL promoted the curriculum integration, seeking a
more 
professional 
practice 
to 
develop 
engineering
competencies [24]. Unfortunately, two last improvements
have a time conflict in the course with respect to the
necessary coverage of the contents.  For these reasons, the
mobile revolution began providing resources to address such
conflict [9]. Today, the course is fully reached and covered
by mobile devices (an achievement of the last five years), so
a concrete assessment about their increasing intervention in
terms of basic knowledge assurance is in order. This
evaluation could suggest moving the basic coverage of
theory into online instruction, the centre of attention of this
work. This action could free time in the face-to-face
sessions to solve integrated and complex problems related to
the basic contents, in particular, short engineering and
science
research 
problems
requiring 
analysis 
and
visualization.
A.
Research objectives
When the online activities were gaining terrain, including
evaluation, the following question arose: could m-learning
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

materials replace parts of the face-to-face instruction? There
are sufficient structured materials for that: repositories, class
videos, programs, theoretical class lessons in slides, mobile
management, and continuous online evaluation. Most of
them are open to the students to improve their performance
in the course. But, what is the interest to substitute the face-
to-face instruction by a mobile one?
Figure 2.
Views of numerical methods course site: (a) Section resource
site, and (b) Evaluation section.
In numerical methods, the application of knowledge to
challenge open problems is a more valuable educative task
than just to learn the basics. Despite this, the first stage is
normally reached when the second one is effectively done.
Not all the numerical methods in the course are significant
for all disciplines (and normally in the current professional
practice some specialized software is used to solve attained
problems). Thus, a combined structure including knowledge
of numerical methods, programming and applications is
finally more representative in terms of skill development.
The main research question in this work is about the current
mobile elements showing effectiveness in the teaching task
of basic knowledge to address the face-to-face sessions into
challenge problems solving.
A mobile implementation requires a deeper analysis of
elements included and, in particular, from the evaluation
conducted there. Currently, there are not sufficient criteria
and specific analytics introduced in the mobile site to
evaluate that. Despite this, there are historical usage analytics
and quantitative information about for the online evaluation
to get an introspective evaluation of those resources. Thus,
the research objectives in this work have been settled as: a)
to compare the effectiveness of online evaluation versus in-
class evaluation, and b) to analyse the actual usage data to
inquire the assigned value to the resources.
B.
Effectiveness of online evaluation
On the course site, formative and summative evaluations
are carried out with Socrative and Classmarker tools. It
includes the access and the delivery of those evaluations
through the forms developed in Jotform and integrated with
Googledrive to submit the associated Mathematica files. In
the last two years of the period considered in this work,
partial evaluations have substituted the in-class evaluation.
The final evaluation continues to be an in-class exam. This
aspect is linked to the first research objective.
To address the corresponding analysis, the grades for the
students in the
last
two
years
(2014-2015)
will be
considered. The results are presented in Figure 3 and the
methodology is as follows. The ratio I/T between the
averages of individual online work and online teamwork is
considered for each student (it helps to discriminate the case
when bad performance students obtain good teamwork
grades). Then, I/T is related to the average of online
evaluations in Socrative and/or Classmarker, but grouping
students in three classes as a function of their final total
grade (on a 100 point scale) and then deployed in Figure 3:
a) less than 70, the students failing the course (black), b)
between 70 and 85, the average students (red), and c) more
than 85, the good performance students (green). Figure 3
includes three elliptic shades showing the mean and
standard deviation for each axis parameter in each group.
The horizontal dotted line marks the institutional limit to
fail the evaluation. For the students with good performance,
this graph exhibits a deep consistency between online
individual work and teamwork together with a clear
consistency in the online evaluations and the final grade.
Figure 3.
Analysis of effectiveness in the online evaluation.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

For the students who failed, the dispersion is wider and
the promotion is only barely predicted by the online
evaluation, suggesting to keep the final in-class exam as a
differentiating element.
C.
Analysis of usage statistics
As was stated by [10], the mobile technology was first
used to scaffold the potential learning weaknesses in the
course. The repositories (simulations, programming codes,
projects and applied complex problems) are constructed to
follow the face-to-face sessions and the e-book content.
Particularly, screencasts in the YouTube channel
are
integrated on the site as part of a three stages based learning
methodology: a) online notes and lectures (in slides), b)
screencasts, and c) downloadable Mathematica materials (as
support to each screencast). They were primarily used to
replace the face-to-face instruction for the students missing
the session with a minimum of teacher tutoring. In addition,
the daily class notes are downloadable files in another
section. Finally, individual work and teamwork normally are
online activities where a Mathematica file should be
submitted. Class announcements and scheduled activities
are published on the site. The blog contains questions,
answers, and discussions about the course topics. The
second research question can be addressed through the
access analytics introduced in the last resources. They
record the formal and informal students accesses (identified
as the overseas students in the analytics) to each site section,
revealing the demand on the open access resources.
Figure 4.
A utility index based on the percentage of visualization time
versus Demand for each screencast on the mobile site.
The methodology to analyse this question was split into
two parts. The first one is represented in Figure 4, where the
average fraction of visualization (the part of the screencast
effectively viewed) for all accesses is represented on the
horizontal axis as a measure of the resource utility (1 means
the best utility and 0 the worst), while the radius of each dot
represents the relative percentage average with respect to the
total accesses. Thus, the non-linear equations screencast is
highly useful and strongly reviewed by a great number of
students. While, for instance, the Jacobi method screencast is
a resource highly reached by the students, it appears it is of
little use because only a small part is effectively reviewed.
The second part of the analysis is based on the usage of the
different sections on the mobile site as a blended support to
the face-to-face instruction for the formal students, as well as
online resources for the informal ones. Data are shown in
Table I for the 2014 users (near of 2000 accesses), where
percentages were calculated for their own group. It reflects
that the resources are valuable for both groups, as expected.
Statistics for formal users show the Resources section as the
most requested, while Resources and Daily notes sections are
the most requested by informal students.
TABLE I.
ACCESS STATISTICS FOR FORMAL AND INFORMAL STUDENTS
BASED ON THEIR OWN GROUP
Sections
Access percentage analytics for
numerical methods site (2014)
Formal students
Informal students
Resources
51%
53%
Evaluation
13%
1%
Homework
18%
2%
Daily notes
9%
37%
Announcements
6%
0%
Blog
3%
4%
D.
Discussion
Summarizing the previous analysis, it suggests the
online evaluations can substitute the whole basic knowledge
evaluation, opening a wider horizon of flexibility based on a
selective substitution of the traditional face-to-face sessions
by the mobile learning resources (notes, screencasts and
support files). The methodology
discriminates which
screencasts are being effectively used and which should be
improved. Statistics suggest the importance given to these
resources; nevertheless a deeper monitoring is still needed
with more precise and linked analytics.
Comparison
between the two current communities (formal and informal)
measures how the resources are valuable inclusively for the
non-enrolled students.
Last outcomes are pretended to be taken as a support to
use the mobile resources as a genuine space of online
instruction to make room for a different learning approach
oriented to solve open research and curriculum integrated
projects. The new approach should address the course goals,
taking care of the effectiveness of online learning strategy
for the basic contents, still in the course basements.
IV.
SMALL PRIVATE ONLINE RESEARCH APPROACH
Some years ago, the inclusion of complex integrated
problems began in the course. Then, the development of the
ability to solve applied and contextual problems (settled on
engineering sciences) was shown in terms of deepness and
knowledge usability (more than in grades improvement) [9].
This experience has been barely included, due to the limited
time. Currently, the mobile scaffolding for the basic
knowledge acquisition (materialized in the last years as
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

concrete resources) opens an approach based on short
research projects. The current section depicts this briefly.
A.
Curriculum integrated education
More than fifteen years ago, the author was involved as
a teacher in a curriculum integrated educative program in
engineering. There, students had developed lifetime skills in
research [14]. This practice has been carried out in other
scenarios as single courses applying curriculum integration.
The numerical methods course has been settled as this kind
of courses due to its position in the curricula (after math and
sciences courses and together with the beginning of
engineering sciences courses in all engineering programs)
[9][10]. Philosophy of curriculum integration matches
research problems as a central goal in a course or group of
courses. They normally should be solved with a multi-
approach discipline based on the past, current and future
curricula. This approach requires being considered as the
main guideline in the course while basic knowledge
apprehension becomes a subsidiary activity. Thus, mobile
scaffolding can work a subjacent learning support to this
implementation, if the previous conditions are fulfilled.
Some pitfalls should be prevented [14]: a) the absence of
basic knowledge spaces being included to clarify contents;
b) the omission of a modified evaluation to include this kind
of new skill development; and c) the absence of flexibility
to fulfil a basic knowledge evaluation agenda.
B.
The SPOR approach
As was stated before, the explicit development of
technical skills related to numerical methods could be based
on the use of mobile technology as scaffolding to substitute
the face-to-face instruction for the basic contents. It frees
most of the class time to introduce the open scientific or
engineering problems solving based on research. This
approach is referred to as Small Private Online Research
(SPOR) due to the fact that the main contents are covered
online, but the emphasis is on the research conducted in the
face-to-face sections in a controlled size group. In it, a
curriculum integrated approach should conduct the learning
goals (instead of the dominion of basic knowledge),
warranting a personalized evaluation of performance.
Due to the diversity of engineering programs attended in
the course (industrial, mechanical, electrical, chemical and
biotechnological), SPOR approach will require several
parallel contextual problems based on the interest area of the
students. The learning of basic knowledge rests on the
online activities, requiring a deep effectivity of the mobile
resources, including
the
associated
evaluation.
This
orientation requires to restructure the current mobile site
into a more concrete modular scheme, including resources
and evaluation on each main topic in the current syllabus.
This structure prepares and evaluates each student at a
minimum allowed performance. The evaluation should be
completed considering the contextual problems assigned in
the course (individually or in teams). Results in the present
work suggest widely this new step in the course evolution is
affordable, but it requires the inclusion of more precise
analytics and an effective evaluation to measure the learning
outcomes at the basic knowledge level. Clearly, if students
work in teams on the contextual problems, a differentiated
evaluation should be required.
Currently, a semester deployment of this approach is
running. There, a repetitive evaluation of basic knowledge
in the course is applied together with a skill evaluation
through the net of research projects. A complete mobile
coverage of contents is developed through
detailed
screencasts and maker-based activities. Online evaluation of
the basic contents of each course unit is applied up to three
times at the own pace of each student to let him/her
improve. Most of the face-to-face sessions are oriented to
present, develop and work on open research problems based
on scientific visualization.
V.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Numerical methods courses have been evolving in the
last decades by their natural approach to technology.
Currently, the numerical methods course presented here is
being developed and improved by sharing and discussing
initiatives with colleagues in the faculty (who already have
adopted the use of the computer lab and developed similar
mobile resources). Faculty is prepared with a stronger
training in new technologies to introduce blended learning
scenarios. The potential developers of SPOR approach
shares the interest to adopt the online-based instruction for
the basic knowledge to then adopt the open research
scenarios to guide the covering of contents.
For the numerical methods course depicted, the proposed
improvement means not only to design a set of contextual
research problems, but also a directed group of activities
through several tools and channels covering the proposed
learning objectives and supporting the individual monitoring
of each student. The outcomes in the current work present a
preliminary design of a mobile site with five years of mobile
development. It includes elements working in the online
education arena, but now being used under a different
blended strategy. The analysis has shown that they can work
under a pure online orientation in a controlled scheme
introducing more specific analytics to assess their
performance in the learning process. This change will free
the face-to-face sessions to set the SPOR approach, a course
version aligned with STEM initiatives [25].
Future work in the last direction should prepare more
robust blended strategies linked with a net of parallel
research problems covering the different interests for
engineering students enrolled in the course. For the faculty, it
is
an opportunity to move
the
learning impact into
professional standards. The innovation proposed should
change the teacher position into a more professional role. For
the student, a self-directed performance is expected. In this
trend, it shows an approximation to the new education trends
supported by technology being required in the world.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Support given to conduct this project and research work
through NOVUS initiative for innovations in education is
acknowledged to Tecnológico de Monterrey.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Prensky, “Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants”, On the
horizont, 9 (5), 2001, pp. 1-6.
[2]
L. Johnson, S. Adams, and K. Haywood, The NMC Horizon
Report: 2011 K-12 Edition. Austin: The New Media
Consortium, 2011.
[3]
L. Johnson, R. Smith, H. Willis, A. Levine, and K. Haywood.
The 2011 Horizon Report. Austin: The New Media
Consortium, 2011.
[4]
F. Jardines, “Historical development of distance education”,
Innovaciones de Negocios 6 (2), 2009, pp. 225 -236.
[5]
L. Gray, N. Thomas, and L. Lewis, Teachers’ Use of
Educational 
Technology 
in 
U.S. 
Washington, 
U.S.
Department of Education, 2010. Available from: http://nces.
ed.gov/pubs2010/2010040.pdf 2016.01.01
[6]
R. Hobbes, Hobbes' Internet Timeline, 2013. Available from:
http://www.zakon.org/robert/internet/timeline/ 2016.01.01
[7]
Internet World Stats, Usage and Population Statistics, Internet
World Stats, 2014. Available from: http:// www.internet
worldstats.com/stats.htm 2016.01.01
[8]
L. Johnson, S. Adams and K. Haywood, The NMC Horizon
Report: 2011 K-12 Edition. Austin: The New Media
Consortium, 2011.
[9]
F. Delgado, and S. Martínez, “Curricular changes generated
by the use of technology in the numerical methods teaching”,
XXXVIII
ANFEI Conference Proceedings.
Querétaro:
ANFEI, 2011.
[10] F. Delgado, “A numerical methods course based on b-
learning: integrated learning design and follow up”,
International Journal of Mobile and Blended Learning, 5 (1),
2013.
[11] Wolfram Research, Mathematica site, 2016. Available from:
http://www.wolfram.com/mathematica 2016.01.01
[12] Python, 
Python 
site, 
2016. 
Available 
from:
http://www.python.org 2016.01.01
[13] Blackboard, Blackboard site, 2016. Available from: http://
www.blackboard.com 2016.01.01
[14] F. Delgado, “Problem Based-Learning in Sophomore and
Freshmen Engineering Students: A Six Year Follow-Up,” 4th
Conference of European Research in Mathematics Education
electronic proceedings, Barcelona: CRM, 2005.
[15] F. Delgado, “Designing PBL scenarios for a course with
integrated curriculum, teamwork environment and use of
technology”, 10th International Conference of Mathematical
Education electronic proceedings, Monterrey: UANL, 2008.
[16] F. Delgado, “Teacher actualization in educative technologies
and mobile learning: an institutional development program”,
Revista de Formación e Innovación Educativa Universitaria, 7
(4), 2004, pp. 211-226.
[17] Winksite, Winksite site, 2016. Available from:
http://
winksite.com 2016.01.01
[18] Weebly, Weebly Webpage, 2016. Available from: http://
www.weebly.com 2016.01.01
[19] Google, Googledrive site, 2016. Available from: https://
www.google.com/drive/ 2016.01.01
[20] Jotform, Jotform site, 2016. Available from: http://
www.jotform.com/  2016.01.01
[21] Wolfram Research, Wolfram Alpha site, 2016. Available
from: http://m.wolframalpha.com 2016.01.01
[22] Socrative, 
Socrative 
site, 
2016. 
Available 
from:
http://www.socrative.com 2016.01.01
[23] Classmarker, Classmarker Webpage, 2016. Available from:
http://www.classmarker.com  2016.01.01
[24] ETA, Engineering competences model, Employment and
Training Administration
of
United States.
Washington,
Department of Labor, 2015.
[25] H. 
Gonzalez 
and 
J. 
Kuenzi, 
Science, 
Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) Education: A Primer.
Congressional Research Service Report, 2012. Available
from: http://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R42642.pdf 2016.01.01
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

