An Empirical Study on the Ludic and Narrative Components in Mobile Game-
Based Learning 
Alfredo Imbellone, Brunella Botte, Carlo Maria Medaglia 
Digital Administration and Social Innovation Center - DASIC 
Link Campus University 
Rome, Italy 
a.imbellone@unilink.it, b.botte@unilink.it, c.medaglia@unilink.it 
 
 
Abstract— The paper presents the results of an empirical study 
conducted on a mobile game-based learning kit, composed by 
30 serious games, developed in the framework of an European 
project on mobile learning for corporate training, titled 
“InTouch”. The study analyzes the role of the interest of the 
goal, the fun of the gameplay, and the realism of the game 
narration in determining the willingness to play again, as 
expressed by a sample of 54 users. In the light of the debate 
between ludic and narrative approach to games, the study can 
be interpreted as an empirical evidence of the simultaneous, 
and yet independent, important role of both the ludic and 
narrative component of a serious game. The fun of the 
gameplay showed to a have a very important role in predicting 
the willingness to play again, with a robust direct effect, and 
significantly contributing to the indirect effect of the interest of 
the goal. The realism of the game narration exhibited a lower, 
even though significant, level of influence on the willingness to 
play again, contributing only in a direct form, and with a 
smaller amount compared to the level of fun. The interest of 
the goal has a significant direct influence on the willingness to 
play again, that can be enhanced by the fun of the gameplay, 
while it did not show to be significantly modified by the realism 
of the game narration. 
Keywords - Mobile Game-Based Learning; Corporate 
Training; Serious Games; Ludology; Narratology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Mobile game-based learning (mGBL) is an educational 
trend that is gaining more and more in popularity. Its main 
advantages 
are 
considered 
mobility 
and 
portability, 
flexibility, accessibility, and informality [1]. Thanks to 
mGBL, didactic contents are made available anytime and 
anywhere, and learning is linked to activities in the outside 
world environment [2][3]. Serious games for mobile devices 
can teach soft skills that support self-efficacy, self-directed 
learning and reflection upon performance [4][5]. 
In 2012, at the end of a two-year European Project, a kit 
of 30 pedagogical serious games for smartphones and tablets 
was developed and tested with a sample of Small and 
medium-sized enterprises’ (SME) employees from the seven 
countries participating the project (Italy, England, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Austria, Lithuania, Bulgaria). 
The analysis of the kit of serious games for mobile 
devices is here referred to a subject of debate about games, 
concerning the relationship between narrative and game 
design, namely between ludology and narratology [6]. 
In short, the narratological position considers games as 
novel forms of narrative that must therefore be studied using 
theories of narrative. Ludologists, on the other hand, state 
that games are essentially formal, contrary to narratives that 
are basically interpretative [7]. Games according to 
narratologists are closely related to narrative and stories: 
even thought basically made of rules, they mainly tell stories, 
contain narrative elements, and show narrative structural 
sequences [8]. Ludologists think that the study of games 
should concern the analysis of the abstract and formal 
systems they describe, that is game structure, rules, 
interactivity and gameplay. These are the elements that give 
immersion and the feel of real experience of a game and are 
more important than optional narrative elements [9]. 
Other hybrid approaches emerged trying to conciliate and 
comprehend both points of view. Ryan proposed to 
incorporate narratology inside ludology, since it deals with 
the construction of stories that is similar to the game 
mechanics [10]. Aarseth, although considered a radical 
ludologist, stated that games and narrative significantly 
overlap [11]. Lindley unified in a heuristic triangular space 
ludology, narratology, and simulation, describing the 
relationships between gameplay and narrative as a 
competition determining ludic interaction on one side, and 
narrative patterns perception on the other side [12]. Jenkins 
proposed a middle-ground position, talking about games as 
“spaces” with narrative possibility enriching gameplay [13]. 
The present study aims at giving an empirical 
contribution 
to 
the 
debate 
among 
ludologists 
and 
narratologists, referring to it as an interpreting key for the 
causal relationships among the interest for the goal and the 
willingness to play again, as mediated by the fun of the 
gameplay, and the realism of the game narration. Even if 
ludology and narratology are complex and multidimensional 
concepts, in fact, the fun of the gameplay and the realism of 
the game narration can be considered, at least partially, two 
components of these constructs, and their causal role within a 
serious game can shed light on the juxtaposition between 
ludology and narratology. 
Points of interest of the present study can be considered: 
(1) the fact that it adds empirical data and analysis to a field 
that has been mainly developed on theoretical basis, (2) the 
focus on serious games for mobile devices that represent an 
expanding sector [14]. In particular, the considered mobile 
serious games are very short in duration (few minutes to 
complete each game) and are playable through a touch-
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

screen interface using only one finger. That is to say, they 
are games the users can play in short casual bursts of time, 
anywhere and at any time, at work or at home, or even on the 
way to/from work/home [15]. It has been considered relevant 
to transfer the ludology/narratology debate, usually referred 
to more structured games, to this kind of games. 
This paper will give a description of the project whose 
main objectives were the development and testing of the 
serious games kit (Section 2). Scope and hypothesis of the 
present study will then be illustrated (Section 3). Methods 
and results of the empirical analysis will be reported, 
illustrating the statistical work that has been done and what it 
produced (Sections 4 and 5). The paper will end with a 
conclusion and future work section, explaining how the 
results of the present study can be interpreted in the light of 
the ludology/narratology debate, the limits of the present 
study, and how a further deepening of these issues can be 
addressed. 
II. 
THE INTOUCH PROJECT 
The “Labour Market InTouch: new non-routine skills via 
mobile game-based learning project”, in short InTouch, 
aimed to define an innovative approach enabling new 
generations of workers to develop ten non-routine skills: 
Communication; Planning; Conflict management; Openness 
to change; Decision making; Teamwork; Flexibility; 
Strategic thinking; Initiative; Learning and improvement. 
All serious games were designed according to the same 
scheme, made of an opening scenario (frame 1), a problem-
based situation presenting the aim of the game (frame 2), 
three interactive frames (frames 3, 4, 5) where players are 
asked to choose among different options, and the last frame 
(frame 6) showing the closing scenario, the score, and giving 
feedback to the player. The narrative within the games is 
developed giving a short background story in the opening 
scenario, then it is influenced by user’s action in the central 
frames, and ends up with the closing scenario. The central 
frames are developed according to the following types of 
interaction: 
• 
Branching story: the story develops in different 
ways according to the choices made by the player and the 
final feedback and evaluation are the result of the 
combination of the choices. 
• 
Interactive map: the user can choose three 
characters to talk to. Basing on the obtained clues, the player 
can choose one of the three available alternatives. Evaluation 
is based on the final decision and on the choice of the 
characters. 
• 
Multiple choice: the user has to help the main 
character with three different decisions in a limited time 
frame. In the first decision point only three out of the five 
listed options are correct, in the second one only two, and in 
the third one only one. The final score and the feedback 
depend on how many correct answers the user chooses. 
• 
Quiz: the player has to try to quickly answer three 
related questions, getting immediate feedback on the answer 
to each question and a summary at the end of game. 
Evaluation is based on a combination of the number of 
correct answers with the time taken to answer. 
• 
Task simulation: the player has to prioritize three 
tasks in order to achieve a goal. Each task is associated with 
a question to be answered. The score is determined from the 
number of correct answers and from the order the user chose 
to prioritize the tasks. 
The contents of the games were studied to be relevant to 
the learner in an enjoyable and interesting way. An effort 
was made to connect contents to learners’ work experiences. 
Each game scenario is set in a working context well known 
to the SME’s employees, with characters archetypes 
designed on real SME’s employees. By playing the games 
users discover the problems and possible solutions in a real 
life environment. The games take place in situations and 
contexts characteristic of day-to-day activities, namely 
within a small company titled “InTouch”. Games scenarios 
were obtained adapting situational cases referred to the ten 
non-routine skills to the “InTouch” company, composed by 
characters that were described in terms of their company 
role, personal information, a narrative short bio, and some 
other charming details such as star sign and hobbies. The 
characters of the games were further developed and updated 
in a dynamic narrative way through Facebook. This social 
media storytelling reported elements of the characters’ lives, 
funny events from their past, additional information about 
their relationships, hobbies and photographic illustrations 
showing something weird about them. InTouch games, 
although short and simple, have thus a solid narrative 
structure in order to engage players, make them recognize 
narrative patterns referred to their work activities, and give 
them the right balance between fantasy and real working 
context situations. 
In the development of the InTouch games attention was 
also paid to the ludic aspects. Even though challenges are not 
that complex, InTouch game design tried to respect 
requirements for the games to be relevant, explorative, 
emotive and engaging. Attention was paid to speed, level of 
difficulty, timing and range of feedback. Challenges of 
mastery and comprehension were inserted into games, 
together with strategy, so games become real living puzzles, 
with a perceived risk of failure to prevent boredom. Game 
mechanics were also made pleasant to create a positive 
climate which is ideal when it comes to increase retention 
and recall. An entertaining gameplay was achieved through 
the use of funny graphics, novelty of the interactions, 
surprise and humour in dialogues and scenarios. 
III. 
SCOPE AND HYPOTESES 
A summative evaluation was conducted measuring a set 
of game variables on a sample of players. For the scope of 
the present study the four game variables of interest are: (a) 
the players’ willingness to play again, (b) the interest of the 
goal, (c) the fun of the gameplay, and (d) the realism of the 
game narration. 
The interest of the goal is considered a primary element. 
It can be found starting from the beginning of the game, 
when the player faces the game scenario and mission. It is 
then interesting to observe how the further development of 
the game in terms of fun and narration can influence the 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

causal relationship between the interest of the goal and the 
willingness to play again. 
The present study explores the degree to which the data 
fit different nested causal models. In the “complete” model 
(with less degrees of freedom), indicated as Model A (Figure 
1), the relationship between the interest of the goal and the 
willingness to play again is partially mediated both by the 
fun of the gameplay and by the realism of the game 
narration. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Graphical scheme of the causal Model A. 
The fun of the gameplay and the realism of the game 
narration are hypothesized to positively influence the 
willingness to play again (paths 4 and 5). These hypotheses 
are based on the consideration that both the fun of the 
gameplay and the realism of the game narration are 
significant 
elements 
in 
determining 
the 
degree 
of 
satisfaction. It is also hypothesized that the interest of the 
goal positively influences the willingness to play again (path 
3), since the engagement for the game mission can be 
considered as a natural predictor of the degree of satisfaction. 
Some constraints of the complete model will then be 
released, suppressing one or more causal paths, to obtain all 
the other nested models. In this way, the partial mediation of 
the fun of the gameplay and of the realism of the game 
narration will be substituted by their full mediation or by the 
lack of mediation. The complete Model A will thus be 
confronted with the following alternative, theoretically 
possible models to assess relative fit compared to: 
• 
Model B, where there is not mediation of the fun of 
the gameplay, path 1 is suppressed; 
• 
Model C, where there is not mediation of the realism 
of the game narration, path 2 is suppressed; 
• 
Model D, where there is not mediation either of the 
fun of the gameplay or of the realism of the game 
narration, paths 1 and 2 are suppressed; 
• 
Model E, where there is full mediation both of the 
fun of the gameplay and of the realism of the game 
narration, path 3 is suppressed; 
• 
Model F, where there is full mediation of the fun of 
the gameplay and there is not mediation of the 
realism of the game narration, paths 2 and 3 are 
suppressed; 
• 
Model G, where there is not mediation of the fun of 
the gameplay and there is full mediation of the 
realism of the game narration, paths 1 and 3 are 
suppressed.  
Table 1 summarizes which causal paths, indicated with 
numbers of Figure 1, are present for each model. 
TABLE I.  
CAUSAL PATHS OF TESTED MODELS 
 
Path 1 
Path 2 
Path 3 
Path 4 
Path 5 
Model A 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
Model B 
NO 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
Model C 
YES 
NO 
YES 
YES 
YES 
Model D 
NO 
NO 
YES 
YES 
YES 
Model E 
YES 
YES 
NO 
YES 
YES 
Model F 
YES 
NO 
NO 
YES 
YES 
Model G 
NO 
YES 
NO 
YES 
YES 
The comparison of nested models wants to establish if 
the hypothesized influence of the interest of the goal on the 
willingness to play again is better explained by partial 
mediation, full mediation, or no mediation at all of the other 
two considered variables (the fun of the gameplay and the 
realism of the game narration). 
IV. 
METHODS 
This section contains an illustration of the methodology 
that has been adopted in the present study: a description of 
the sample; the research procedure; the instruments and the 
statistical analyses that were adopted. 
A. Participants 
The target sample consisted of 54 workers of different 
SMEs (N = 9) from the seven countries participating in the 
project and operating in different business sectors (ICT, 
business support, education/training, etc.). The SMEs were 
selected on the basis of their willingness to participate in the 
study. Work positions were: 28 managers and 26 employees. 
In total 30 were males (56%) and 24 were females (44%). 
The mean age was 41.94 years (SD = 9.70). 
B. Procedure 
To test the developed kit of 30 mobile serious games the 
project partners held dedicated events (Learning Labs) in the 
seven countries participating in the project. During each 
Learning Lab a structured questionnaire was proposed to 
participants after the completion of the games. Participation 
to Learning Labs and questionnaire compilation were 
obtained through an informed consent procedure asking for 
active consent from participants. Questionnaires took 
approximately 30 minutes to complete. Project staff 
members introduced the questionnaires, giving instructions 
about their compilation, explaining that they were voluntary 
and responses were anonymous and confidential. Project 
staff members were at the workers’ disposal during the 
questionnaires ’  administration to answer questions and 
give explanations. All participants to different Learning Labs 
responded to the same questionnaire packet. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

C. Measures 
• 
Demographics. An Identifying Information Form was 
used to collect demographic information: age, gender, 
working role. 
• 
Game variables. An articulated grading grid was 
proposed to participants, after the completion of the 
games, asking them to express on a 10 point Likert scale 
their like about ten variables: the willingness to play 
again, the game duration, the game interface (graphics, 
colors, etc.), the fun of the gameplay, the quality of the 
instructions, the adequacy of the level of difficulty, the 
interest of the goal, the learning/educative content, the 
quality of the feedbacks, and the realism of the game 
narration. The present study is taking in consideration 
only four variables, namely, (a) the willingness to play 
again (“Would you like to play again?”), (b) the fun of 
the gameplay (“How fun was your interaction with the 
game mechanics?”), (c) the interest of the goal (“How 
interesting was the goal proposed by the game?”), and 
(d) the realism of the game narration (“If compared to 
your experience, how realistic was the narrative of the 
game about the ‘InTouch’ company?”). 
 
D. Data Analysis 
1) Preliminary Analysis 
As a preliminary analysis, skewness and kurtosis of all 
game variables were checked. Overall, all variables showed 
to conform to the normal distribution. 
2) Correlation 
As a first step the correlation matrix of all the variables 
measured by the questionnaire was calculated. 
3) Path Analysis 
All path models involving the aforementioned four 
variables (Fun of the gameplay, Realism of the game 
narration, Interest of the goal, Willingness to play again) 
were analyzed with LISREL, using maximum likelihood 
estimation procedures [16]. 
For each tested model χ2 is reported, as an absolute fit 
index (good fit between zero value and two times the degrees 
of freedom). Three more fit indexes were also reported: the 
non-normed fit index (NNFI); the comparative fit index 
(CFI); and the root mean square error of approximation 
(RMSEA). Higher CFI and NNFI values (in the range from 
0.97 to 1.00 for a good fit) and lower RMSEA values (in the 
range from 0.00 to 0.05 for a good fit) are assumed to 
evaluate model fit [17]. 
The Coefficient of determination (R-square) is reported, 
giving the percentage of variance of the willingness to play 
again explained by each model, to estimate the completeness 
of the considered set of predictors. 
4) Comparison of Nested Causal Models 
To establish which type of mediation (partial, full, or 
non-significant) was exercised by the fun of the gameplay 
and by the realism of the game narration, the comparison of 
the fit of alternative nested models was conducted analyzing 
for each pair of models the differences of the χ2 values 
(indicated with ∆χ2) between the less parsimonious model 
(i.e., the one with less degrees of freedom, in our case the 
complete Model A) and the more parsimonious one (i.e., in 
turn: Models B, C, D, E, F, and G). The significance of ∆χ2 
has successively been established looking at the p-value 
corresponding to the χ2 distribution for a number of degrees 
of freedom given by the difference of degrees of freedom of 
the more parsimonious models and the complete one. 
Choosing a cut-off of p = 0.01, if the ∆χ2 between two nested 
models is significant (p < 0.01), this implies that the 
complete model explains the data better; if there is no 
significant difference between two nested models (p > 0.01), 
this implies that the more parsimonious model explains the 
data equally well compared to the complete model, and must 
be preferred for its simplicity. 
V. 
RESULTS 
This section contains the numerical results obtained for 
the previously illustrated data analysis: correlation, path 
analysis, and comparison of nested causal models. 
Table 2 reports correlation coefficients of (a) the 
willingness to play again, (b) the fun of the gameplay, (c) the 
interest of the goal, and (d) the realism of the game narration. 
The level of significance (p-value) is indicated in the table 
footnote. 
TABLE II.  
CORRELATION MATRIX 
Variable 
Willingness 
to play 
again 
Fun of 
the 
gameplay 
Interest 
of the 
goal 
Realism 
of the 
game 
narration 
Willingness 
to play 
again 
1.00 
0.89* 
0.60* 
0.21 
Fun of the 
gameplay 
0.89* 
1.00 
0.35* 
-0.12 
Interest of 
the goal 
0.60* 
0.35* 
1.00 
0.19 
Realism of 
the game 
narration 
0.21 
-0.12 
0.19 
1.00 
b. 
*p < 0.05. 
Table 3 reports the results of the path analysis for the 
seven tested models with the levels of significance of the 
causal paths (p-values) indicated in the table footnote. 
TABLE III.  
PATH ANALYSIS COEFFICIENTS 
 
Path 1 
Path 2 
Path 3 
Path 4 
Path 5 
Model A 
0.35** 
0.19 
0.26* 
0.83* 
0.26* 
Model B 
-- 
0.26 
0.26* 
0.83* 
0.26* 
Model C 
0.39** 
-- 
0.26* 
0.83* 
0.26* 
Model D 
-- 
-- 
0.26* 
0.83* 
0.26* 
Model E 
0.35** 
0.19 
-- 
0.93* 
0.32* 
Model F 
0.39** 
-- 
-- 
0.93* 
0.32* 
Model G 
-- 
0.26 
-- 
0.93* 
0.32* 
c. 
* p < 0.01; ** p < 0.05. 
Table 4 reports the results of the comparison of the fit of 
the seven tested models, with the level of significance of the 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

difference between complete and nested models indicated in 
the table footnote.  
TABLE IV.  
COMPARISON OF THE FIT OF ALTERNATIVE NESTED 
MODELS 
Model 
χ2 
NNFI 
CFI 
RMSEA 
R2 
df 
 
A 
0.00 
1.00 
1.00 
0.00 
0.95 
1 
 
Alternative nested models 
 
∆χ2 
B 
6.49 
0.91 
0.97 
0.21 
0.94 
2 
6.49 
C 
1.91 
1.00 
1.00 
0.00 
0.95 
2 
1.91* 
D 
9.39 
0.91 
0.96 
0.20 
0.94 
3 
9.39 
E 
27.79 
0.31 
0.77 
0.50 
0.89 
2 
27.79 
F 
28.85 
0.53 
0.77 
0.41 
0.89 
3 
28.85 
G 
31.09 
0.47 
0.73 
0.42 
0.89 
3 
31.09 
d. 
 *p > 0.01; R2 = coefficient of determination; df = degrees of freedom. 
Looking at the results of the comparison of the nested 
models, Model C explains the data equally well compared to 
the complete Model A (p > 0.01) and must be preferred, 
being more parsimonious. 
For the selected Model C the effects of the three 
predicting variables (Interest for the goal, Fun of the 
gameplay, Realism of the game narration) on the Willingness 
to play again were calculated and are reported in Table 5, 
with the level of significance (p-values) indicated in the table 
footnote. 
TABLE V.  
EFFECTS ON THE WILLINGNESS TO PLAY AGAIN  
(MODEL C) 
Variable 
Total 
effect 
Direct 
effect 
Indirect 
effect 
Fun of the gameplay 
0.83* 
0.83* 
-- 
Interest of the goal 
0.58* 
0.26* 
0.32** 
Realism of the game 
narration 
0.26* 
0.26* 
-- 
e. 
* p < 0.01; ** p < 0.05 
Both the fun of the gameplay and the realism of the game 
narration have significant direct effects on the will to play 
again (path 4 = 0.83; path 5 = 0.26); the interest of the goal 
has a significant total effect on the willingness to play again, 
obtained as the sum of a direct effect (path 3 = 0.26) and an 
indirect effect (path 1 . path 4 = 0.32) through the mediation 
of the fun of the gameplay. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
For all the tested models, the R-square values of the 
willingness to play resulted to be very high (about 90% of 
the variance explained). This can be seen as an overall 
confirmation of the right choice of the models’ variables and 
their causal arrangement. 
As hypothesized, both the fun of the gameplay and the 
realism of the game narration resulted to significantly 
influence the willingness to play again for all the models. 
Causal paths 4 and 5, in fact, are significant across all tested 
models. In particular the influence of the fun of the gameplay 
resulted to be more robust, with values of path 4 above 0.80, 
while the influence of the realism of the game narration, 
even though significant, was less pronounced, with values of 
path 5 around 0.30. 
Furthermore, the fun of the gameplay resulted to 
significantly mediate the relationship between the interest of 
the goal and the willingness to play again. On the contrary, 
no significant mediation emerged for the realism of the game 
narration, insomuch as the causal Model C, where path 2 is 
suppressed, was preferred. As a whole, the relationship 
between the interest of the goal and the willingness to play 
again is partially mediated by the fun of the gameplay, and 
non-significantly mediated by the realism of the game 
narration. 
Interpreting the fun of the gameplay as a ludic indicator, 
and the realism of the game narration as a narrative indicator, 
these results can be referred to the ludology/narratology 
debate. The results of the present study seem to corroborate a 
point of view that takes in consideration both positions, even 
though assigning ludology an higher relevance. This sort of 
reconciliation of the two different positions, however, is not 
gained through an assimilation of the realism of the game 
narration to the fun of the gameplay. As reported in Table 2, 
in fact, their correlation coefficient is non-significant (and 
slightly negative), indicating their substantial independence 
(or even slight juxtaposition). The fun of the gameplay and 
the realism of the game narration must therefore be 
considered as separately, and differently, contributing to 
determine the success of a learning game. The results of the 
present study seem to mostly corroborate Jenkins’ proposal 
of “game space”, whose structure facilitates narrative 
experience [13]. In this sense, the interest of the goal can be 
interpreted as a feature of the “game space” that can enhance 
the degree of satisfaction of the players, determining their 
retention in a direct way, and indirectly, thanks to its 
contribution to the fun of the gameplay. 
The association of the fun of the gameplay and the 
realism of the game narration with the ludic and the narrative 
components of a serious games, however, is exposed to 
criticism of being both partial and spurious. While the 
significance of the results of the present paper is robustly 
consistent with the measured variables, it must be recognized 
that different types of narrative can be developed within a 
serious game, not limited to realistic ones. Having 
considered the realism of the narration is certainly only a 
partial representation of the narrative of a serious game. At 
the same time, fun in a serious narrative game can derive not 
only from the act of playing, but also from other components 
like the fact to learn something interesting or to take part in 
an engaging story. The fun of the gameplay can thus be 
referred not only, or at least not exclusively, to the ludic 
aspects of a serious game. To have a more comprehensive 
insight of the ludic and narrative dynamics within a serious 
games, a larger number of indicators should be analyzed and 
validated as referred to the ludic and to the narrative 
constructs. 
The present work suggests to further deepen the study of 
the role of the fun of the gameplay as an important 
determinant of the effectiveness/engagement of serious 
games, analyzing different causal paths and relations 
between fun itself and other variables. A wider sample group 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

and more specific analysis tools must be adopted to go 
beyond the limits of the present study. It must be underlined, 
in fact, the small analyzed sample size (n = 54) and the weak 
reliability of the measuring instrument. Instead of a generic 
self-developed questionnaire, with one item for each 
variable, a validated instrument should be adopted, mapping 
multiple items to variables through factorization. 
Some of the limits of the present study are going to be 
addressed thanks to a Transfer of Innovation project, funded 
by European Commission, named InTouch-ICT, for the 
period 2013-2015. The InTouch-ICT Project is adapting 
previous project results to suit the learning needs of business 
professionals of ICT SMEs in Turkey, re-designing the 
existing m-learning kit to fit the requirements of Turkish ICT 
SMEs, and upgrading it with the most recent findings, both 
technological and methodological, in the field of mobile 
game-based learning. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The InTouch Project was a Leonardo da Vinci 
Multilateral projects for Development of Innovation Program 
funded by the European Commission. InTouch success was 
due to the support and commitment of all partners: Centre for 
Flexible Learning - CFL, municipality of Soderhamn 
(Sweden); Faculty of Economics and Management, Kaunas 
University of Technology (Lithuania); Exemplas Holdings 
Limited (United Kingdom); Centro per le Applicazioni della 
Televisione e delle Tecniche di Istruzione a Distanza - 
CATTID, University of Rome "La Sapienza" (Italy); CIBC 
Artois Ternois (France); Evolaris next level GmbH (Austria); 
Centro Italiano per l'Apprendimento Permanente - CIAPE 
(Italy); Bulgarian Development Agency (Bulgaria); The 
Swiss Federation for Adult Learning - SVEB (Swiss). 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Sharples, “Mobile learning: research, practice and 
challenges,” Distance Education in China, vol. 3, Issue 5, pp. 
5-11, March 2013. 
[2] D. Charsky, “From edutainment to serious games: A change 
in the use of game characteristics,” Games and Culture: A 
Journal of Interactive Media, vol. 5, Issue 2, pp.177-198, 
April 2010. 
[3] C. Girard, J. Ecalle, and A. Magnan, “Serious games as new 
educational tools: How effective are they? A meta-analysis of 
recent studies,” Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, vol. 
29, Issue 3, pp.207-219, June 2013. 
[4] S. de Freitas and H. Routledge, “Designing leadership and 
soft skills in educational games: The e-leadership and soft 
skills educational games design model (ELESS),” British 
Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 44, Issue 6, pp. 951-
968, November 2013. 
[5] P. Wouters, C.van Nimwegen, H. van Oostendorp, and E. D. 
van der Spek, “A meta-analysis of the cognitive and 
motivational effects of serious games,” Journal of Educational 
Psychology, vol. 105, Issue 2, pp.249-265, May 2013. 
[6] A. Amory, “Game object model version II: a theoretical 
framework for educational game development,” Education 
Tech Research Dev, vol. 55, Issue 1, pp. 51–77, February 
2007. 
[7] J. Juul, “Games telling stories? A brief note on games and 
narratives,” Game studies: The International Journal of 
Computer Game research, vol. 1, Issue 1, July 2001.  
[8] G. Frasca, “Simulation versus Narrative: introduction to 
ludology,” in The video game theory reader, M. J. P. Wolf 
and B. Perron, Eds. New York: Routledge, pp. 221-236, 2003.  
[9] A. McManus and A. H. Feinstein, “Narratology and ludology: 
competing 
paradigms 
or 
complementary 
theories 
in 
simulation,” Developments in Business Simulation and 
Experiential Learning, vol. 33, pp. 363-372, 2006. 
[10] M. L. Ryan, “Beyond Myth and Metaphor: The Case of 
Narrative in Digital Media,” Game studies: The International 
Journal of Computer Game research, vol. 1, Issue 1, July 
2001. 
[11] E. J. Aarseth, Cybertext. Perspectives on Ergodic Literature. 
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997. 
[12] C. A. Lindley, “Ludic Engagement and Immersion as a 
Generic Paradigm for Human-Computer Interaction Design” 
The Third International Conference on Entertainment 
Computing (ICEC 2004), Sept. 2004, pp. 3-13, ISBN: 978-3-
540-22947-6 
[13] H. Jenkins, “Game design as narrative architecture,” in First 
person: New media as story, performance, and game, N. 
Wardrip-Fruin and P. Harrigan, Eds. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT, 
pp. 118-130, 2004. 
[14] T. M. Connolly, E. A. Boyle, E. MacArthur, T. Hainey, and J. 
M. Boyle, “A systematic literature review of the empirical 
evidence on computer games and serious games,” Computers 
& Education, vol. 59, Issue 2, pp. 661–686, September 2012. 
[15] J. Froschauer, J. Zweng, D. Merkl, M. Arends, D. Goldfarb, 
and M. Weingartner, “ARTournament: A Mobile Casual 
Game to Explore Art History,” Proc. 12th IEEE International 
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT 
2012), IEEE Press, Jul. 2012, pp. 80-84, ISBN: 978-1-4673-
1642-2 
[16] K. G. Joreskog, D. Sorbom, LISREL 8.8 for Windows 
[Computer software]. Skokie, IL: Scientific Software 
International, Inc., 2006. 
[17] K. Schermelleh-Engel, H. Moosbrugger, and H. Muller, 
“Evaluating the Fit of Structural Equation Models: Tests of 
Significance and Descriptive Goodness-of-Fit Measures,” 
Methods of Psychological Research-Online, vol. 8, Issue 2, 
pp. 23-74, 2003. 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

