Development and Evaluation of a Blended Learning Course 
Jan M. Nautaa,b, Jo Platenkampb, Marike Hettingaa 
a ICT-Innovations in Healthcare, Windesheim University of Applied Sciences, Zwolle, The Netherlands 
b Computer Science Department (HBO-ICT), Windesheim University of Applied Sciences, Zwolle, The Netherlands  
e-mail: {jm.nauta, jm.platenkamp, m.hettinga}@windesheim.nl  
 
Abstract—In a pilot project, a blended-learning course 
“Research and Development” was developed. This course is 
taught according to the flipped classroom principle. To develop 
the course, the ADDIE-model (Analysis, Design, Development, 
Implementation, and Evaluation) was used. During the 
evaluation phase, we wanted to learn how satisfied students 
were with the newly developed course. More specifically, 
student satisfaction regarding the digital material, the lessons 
in the classroom, and the course as a whole, was studied. 
During the penultimate lecture, twelve students completed a 
questionnaire. During the last lecture a focus group meeting 
was conducted. In the case of the questionnaire, the 
respondents agreed, on average, mostly with the positive 
statements or they answered neutrally. We can conclude that 
the respondents were reasonably positive about the course. The 
teaching method was not unfamiliar to the students. However, 
they felt a need for a better digital infrastructure, more variety 
in teaching methods and a more directive teaching style.  
Keywords-blended 
learning; 
hybrid 
learning; 
flipped 
classroom; research and development 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Over the last decade, the educational concept of Blended 
Learning has drawn considerable attention in the educational 
literature [1][2]. In 2015, a number of pilot projects were 
carried out at Windesheim University of Applied Sciences in 
the Netherlands, to integrate this concept into Windesheim’s 
curricula and to gain further experience with it. In one of the 
pilot projects, a blended-learning course “Research and 
Development” was developed. This course is taught 
according to the flipped classroom principle [3][4].  
Due to the fact that both concepts, blended learning and 
flipping the classroom, are relatively new at Windesheim, the 
teaching staff involved wished to gain insight in the learner’s 
satisfaction with the newly developed course. As part of this 
course, a survey was carried out and a focus group meeting 
was conducted to learn more about the students’ experiences. 
The work presented here is therefore initially intended as an 
effort by the faculty to evaluate its work in order to improve 
its educational skills, as well as the developed learning 
material. However, the lessons learned may be more widely 
applicable. 
In Section II this paper first goes into the development of 
the course. After that, the evaluation method and results are 
presented in Sections III and IV, respectively. Finally, in 
Section V, conclusions are drawn, along with a number of 
lessons learned. 
 
II. 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE COURSE RESEARCH AND 
DEVELOPMENT 
To develop the course Research and Development, the 
ADDIE-model was used [5]. This well-known model 
comprises five phases: Analysis, Design, Development, 
Implementation and Evaluation, hence its name.  
In the first phase, a needs analysis, a target audience 
analysis as well as a task and topic analysis was carried out. 
This elective course aims at third and fourth year students 
who have already followed one of Windesheim’s Computer 
Science programs. During the course, they train the 
necessary skills by carrying out a small project of their own 
choice. The course takes approximately 84 hours of study.  
The students are expected to carry out their research 
projects outside the classroom. Moreover, they are supposed 
to acquire the necessary knowledge by studying the e-
learning material, prepared for this course, independently. 
This creates an opportunity to talk in class about the progress 
and results of the student’s projects including specific topics 
such as an evaluation of the (Internet) sources found by the 
student groups. Based on these ideas, the design phase 
yielded an overview of the assignments which should be 
carried out outside the classroom and an overview of the 
necessary e-learning content to support these assignments. 
Moreover, a detailed plan was made for the lessons.  
During the development phase, the online educational 
resources and face-to-face lessons were prepared, including 
17 instructional videos (1.5 hours in total) to which existing 
material, such as YouTube videos, were added. The e-
learning component, available through the institution’s 
virtual 
learning 
environment, 
was 
developed 
using 
eXeLearning [6]. The virtual learning environment contained 
a forum to exchange ideas and information.  
The first employment of the course took place in Autumn 
2015, with 20 students attending, working together in teams 
of between two and five students. 
III. 
EVALUATION METHOD 
During the evaluation phase, we wanted to learn how 
satisfied students were with the newly developed course and 
to gain further insight in the advantages and disadvantages of 
the applied concepts. More specifically, student satisfaction 
regarding the digital material, the lessons in the classroom, 
and the course as a whole, was studied [7][8][9].  
During 
the 
penultimate 
lecture, 
twelve 
students 
completed a questionnaire with 39 Likert items, using a 5-
point scale, and one open question. Each Likert item 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

contained a (positive) statement, the response options were: 
disagree much / disagree / neutral / agree / agree much.  
To gain insight in the first point of interest, student 
satisfaction regarding the digital material, nine questions 
were asked about the form of the digital learning material 
such as the instructional videos and the assignments. 
Moreover, two questions were asked about the user 
friendliness of the realized e-learning component and the 
forum. Finally, six questions were added concerning the 
clarity of the digital material. 
To learn more about the second point of interest, the 
students’ opinions about the lessons in class, ten questions 
were asked about the form of the meetings in class. For 
instance, the opinion of the respondents about student 
presentations and receiving feedback in class was asked 
together with their opinion about organizational matters such 
as the timeliness of course information. Lastly, three 
questions were added concerning the interaction in class 
between students and lecturers and between students and 
their fellow students.   
Finally, the students were asked to answer questions 
about the course as a whole. Three questions concerned the 
organization of the student teams. The teams had a certain 
freedom of choice regarding the way they presented their 
results (e.g., with a report, a paper, or a presentation). The 
questionnaire contained two questions about this subject. 
Three questions were added about the relationship between 
the sessions in the classroom and homework assignments. 
Lastly, students were asked whether they would prefer this 
way of teaching for other courses as well. They could also 
add comments if desired.  
 During the final lecture a focus group meeting was 
conducted in which notable results from the questionnaire 
were discussed in depth. Observations noted by faculty 
members during the lectures completed the collected results. 
IV. 
EVALUATION RESULTS 
The results of the questionnaire are collected in Table I. 
Twelve students filled in the questionnaire but not every 
student answered each question. On average, 89% of the 
questions were answered. The percentages in the table may 
not always sum up to 100% due to rounding off errors.  
Table I shows that students often agreed with the 
statements, or they chose the neutral option. Mostly they did 
not disagree much, with three exceptions. The focus group 
meeting further clarified the results of the questionnaire.  
Apart from comments on the overlap between the 
available videos, students were satisfied with the available 
learning content. Nevertheless remarks were made about the 
digital infrastructure. For example, students regretted the fact 
that videos could not be downloaded from the institute’s 
media portal. A number of websites was embedded in the 
digital material. However, students preferred links to these 
websites. The percentages for user friendliness in Table 1 
reflect these results. Moreover, the available forum was 
considered superfluous. Some students preferred alternatives, 
such as Dropbox.  
 
 
TABLE I.  
QUESTIONNAIRE RESULTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Respondents are satisfied with: 
Disagree much (%) 
Disagree (%) 
Neutral (%) 
Agree (%) 
Agree much (%) 
Form of study material 
0 
6 
36 
52 
6 
User friendliness of digital material 
5 
14 
38 
38 
5 
Clarity of digital material 
0 
0 
36 
53 
11 
Form of meetings in class 
1 
10 
13 
65 
12 
Interaction in class 
0 
6 
18 
73 
3 
Organization of student teams 
8 
6 
33 
47 
6 
Freedom regarding products 
0 
8 
13 
50 
29 
Relation work in class / assignments 
0 
3 
21 
76 
0 
Preferred for other courses  
0 
18 
45 
36 
0 
 
Students welcomed the opportunity to present their work 
and to receive feedback in class. They considered attending 
presentations of their fellow students as less meaningful 
because the discussions in class were not always beneficial 
for their own work. Assignments in class were also not 
favorable because of lack of depth due to the short time 
available in class. Students would prefer to discuss more 
examples of excellent or poor research projects.  
Sometimes it appeared to be difficult for students to 
organize necessary team meetings due to scheduling 
problems. A number of students, for instance, had 
internships at the same time as they were following the 
course Research and Development. Generally, they were 
reasonably satisfied with the course, but they would 
appreciate suggestions and instructions regarding planning 
and papers. The students would rather favour a mix of the 
flipped-classroom model with a more traditional teaching 
style. In contrast to our expectation they appeared to be 
rather familiar with the applied teaching methods. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND LESSONS LEARNED 
In this paper we treated the development of a blended 
course together with an evaluation in which the teaching 
staff studied student satisfaction regarding the digital 
material, the lessons in the classroom, and the course as a 
whole. 
 From the results, we may conclude that the respondents 
were reasonably positive about the course. However, they 
felt a need for a better digital infrastructure, more variety in 
teaching methods and a more directive teaching style. The 
teaching method was not unfamiliar to the students. 
The evaluation presented in this paper has its limitations. 
Although all the students who took part in the first 
deployment of the course were invited to fill in the 
questionnaire, eventually only 12 of the 20 students took part 
in the evaluation. This number is too limited to draw general 
conclusions. Moreover, the staff developing the course also 
taught and evaluated the course. Therefore, some biases may 
have influenced the results.  
Despite these limitations a number of lessons learned 
may be identified. We acquired experience in developing a 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

blended-learning course. We experienced the value of a 
model such as the ADDIE-model for creating instructional 
materials. We also benefitted from Richard Mayer’s 
guidelines for developing e-learning materials [10]. Finally, 
we experienced the (extra) amount of time necessary to 
develop these materials, which can be substantial.  
Teaching the course, we learned that the quality of the 
digital infrastructure is a key factor for students. User 
friendliness, reliability and the possibility to download 
materials (for use off line, for instance in public transport) 
are important factors. The flipped classroom principle was 
applied strictly: students were expected to acquire all the 
necessary knowledge outside the classroom. During 
discussions in class and while grading the student products 
the impression arose that not every student was sufficiently 
acquainted with the theory. Therefore, a mix of the 
traditional knowledge transfer together with training, 
exchanging experiences and providing feedback in class may 
prove beneficial.  
In our evaluation we focused on learner’s satisfaction, 
which corresponds to the first level (Reaction) of 
Kirkpatrick’s Four-Level Model [11]. An obvious next step 
would be to evaluate the increase in knowledge and skills, 
corresponding 
to 
the 
second 
level 
(Learning) 
of 
Kirkpatrick’s model. Future work may therefore focus on the 
role blended learning plays in acquiring knowledge and skills 
which are relevant in the course Research and Development.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank Elles Gyaltsen-Lohuis who advised us on the 
design of the questionnaire, and Judith Wright for valuable 
comments on a draft of this paper.  
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Motteram, "'Blended' education and the transformation of 
teachers: a long‐term case study in postgraduate UK Higher 
Education," British Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 
37, 2006, pp. 17-30. 
[2] A. Alammary, J. Sheard, and A. Carbone, "Blended learning 
in higher education: Three different design approaches," 
Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 30, 
2014, pp. 440-454. 
[3] S. C. Kong, "Developing information literacy and critical 
thinking skills through domain knowledge learning in digital 
classrooms: An experience of practicing flipped classroom 
strategy," Computers & Education, vol. 78, 2014, pp. 160-
173. 
[4] P. Desai and M. Vijayalakshmi, "Flipped Classroom: An 
Efficient Pedagogical Tool to Teach a Course for Final Year 
Computer Science and Engineering Graduate Students," 
Journal of Engineering Education Transformations, 2015, pp. 
306-310. 
[5] M. Molenda, "In search of the elusive ADDIE model," 
Performance improvement, vol. 42, 2003, pp. 34-37. 
[6] "The new eXeLearning," Available: http://exelearning.net [17 
March 2016]. 
[7] Y.-S. Wang, "Assessment of learner satisfaction with 
asynchronous electronic learning systems," Information & 
Management, vol. 41, 2003, pp. 75-86. 
[8] M. T. Cole, D. J. Shelley, and L. B. Swartz, "Online 
instruction, e-learning, and student satisfaction: A three year 
study," The International Review of Research in Open and 
Distributed Learning, vol. 15, 2014, pp. 111-131. 
[9] E. Anagnostopoulou, I. Mavroidis, Y. Giossos, and M. 
Koutsouba, "Student satisfaction in the context of a 
postgraduate programme of the Hellenic Open University," 
Turkish Online Journal of Distance Education, vol. 16, 2015, 
pp. 40-55. 
[10] R. C. Clark and R. E. Mayer, E-learning and the science of 
instruction: Proven guidelines for consumers and designers of 
multimedia learning: John Wiley & Sons, 2011. 
[11] D. L. Galloway, "Evaluating distance delivery and e ‐
learning; is Kirkpatrick's model relevant?," Performance 
Improvement, vol. 44, 2005, pp. 21-27. 
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

