Fostering Communities of Practice: Insights from an Online Educational Robotics 
Professional Development Pilot 
 
 
Lauren Harter and Jason McKenna 
VEX Robotics 
Pittsburgh, USA 
Email: LH@vex.com 
 
 
Abstract—Educational robotics is an effective tool for 
teaching and learning an interdisciplinary STEM 
curriculum. Yet, traditional teacher education programs 
often do not cover engineering and technology as part of 
the 
curriculum—most 
often 
excluding 
robotics 
entirely—leaving 
teachers 
underprepared 
for 
the 
application of educational robotics in the classroom. To 
help close this gap, an online professional development 
program was developed and piloted for robots and 
curriculum spanning from kindergarten through high 
school. Preliminary results from qualitative observations 
and quantitative survey data indicate that this pilot 
program helped teachers increase interest, self-efficacy, 
robotics and coding knowledge, and develop a sense of 
community. Future directions and research based on the 
results of this professional development pilot are 
discussed. 
Keywords-educational 
robotics; 
professional 
development; teaching and learning; community of 
practice. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics 
(STEM) education has become a focus in educational 
research as well as government agencies setting national 
agendas in the United States. The National Science 
Foundation [1] stated that the acquisition of STEM 
knowledge and skills will be a necessity for participation in a 
global economy and therefore everyone should have access 
to high quality STEM education. The National Science and 
Technology Council’s Committee on STEM Education [2] 
put forth a federal strategy for STEM learning that highlights 
the need for truly interdisciplinary solutions for learning and 
skill 
acquisition, 
using 
real-world 
applications, 
and 
combining skills such as critical thinking and problem 
solving with communication and collaboration. Educational 
robotics that combines robotic construction with computer 
science 
has 
become 
an 
effective 
tool 
to 
deliver 
interdisciplinary learning that includes both STEM topics, as 
well as valuable 21st century skills. A meta-analysis of 
research concluded that educational robotics increases 
student learning across STEM topics [3]. Researchers 
studying a range of student ages identified that robotics 
helped increase student attitudes and positive perceptions of 
STEM subjects [4][5][6]. When introduced to young 
students, educational robotics fosters critical thinking and 
problem-solving skills as well as positive attitudes towards 
STEM subjects [7][8][9], while robotics for high school 
students supports college preparedness and technical career 
skills [10][11][12].  
Yet, for all the benefits of educational robotics in the 
classroom, the inclusion of robotics instruction for formal 
teacher education is still lacking. Most teacher education 
programs focus on individual disciplines such as science and 
math, which leads to teachers being underprepared for 
incorporating engineering and technology [13]. Teachers 
who are not formally trained in interdisciplinary STEM feel 
less confident in those areas and have difficulty making 
connections 
across 
disciplines 
[14][15]. 
However, 
introducing robotics during teacher pre-service education 
increased teacher self-efficacy, content knowledge, and 
computational thinking skills [16].  
Teacher preparedness for teaching educational robotics 
can also be achieved through continued professional 
development as an alternative to pre-service education, 
which can be slow to change. In the span of K–12 education, 
there are many different contexts in which educational 
robotics might be applied and the teachers responsible for 
incorporating it into the classroom likely have equally varied 
backgrounds. Professional development programming could 
become not only an educational supplement for teachers, but 
a way to develop a community of practice across a diverse 
group of teachers. Lave and Wenger [17] describe a 
community of practice as members with shared interests 
gathering, sharing research and insights to further skills and 
knowledge, and forming a collective practice in that domain.  
The CoP Framework, as described by Smith et al. [20], 
focuses on three areas: the domain, the community, and the 
practice. The domain is the distinguishing factor of the group 
of people. This is the area of knowledge that gives the group 
its identity. The community is a gathering of people with 
similar ideas or interests (the domain). These individuals 
learn and grow as they interact with each other. The practice 
is engaging with others in the group around the similar topics 
that constitute the domain. For this paper, the domain is the 
area of robotics education that brings the community of 
teachers together. The practice is engaging in this 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

asynchronous flipped classroom course in order to engage 
with educational robotics and grow their knowledge and 
experiences together. 
Research on virtual robots during the COVID-19 
pandemic identified that teachers reached out to virtual 
communities to problem-solve, suggesting communities of 
practice may become a more commonplace solution for 
teachers seeking support for educational robotics [18].  
This study describes an online professional development 
pilot program for educational robotics. The goal was to 
create a structured series of synchronous learning sessions 
where teachers from anywhere could join to both develop 
their knowledge of robotics and computer science as well as 
interact with other educators using the same robotics. To 
evaluate the merits of this professional development pilot, 
participants were asked to participate in a pre- and post-
survey that included topics of interest, self-efficacy, robotics 
and coding knowledge, and community of practice. These 
topics replicate research by Jaipal-Jamani and Angeli, [16] 
who used similar survey instruments with a group of 21 
preservice teachers. While some questions were adjusted for 
this context, the goal was to identify if similar positive 
findings 
could 
be 
identified 
through 
professional 
development.  
This paper will be outlined by the following: in Section 
II, the methods for how the courses were run and data was 
collected will be explained. In Section III, the results of the 
VEX 123 and VEX IQ courses will be outlined. The paper 
will then be concluded in Section IV with a summary of 
findings, potential limitations of the study, and possible 
future research. 
II. 
METHODS 
As this online professional development pilot was the 
first of its kind, great care was taken in the design of the 
materials and delivery with the hope of providing as much 
benefit to the participating teachers as possible. The courses 
were designed using VEX Robotics. VEX Robotics is a 
company that focuses on educational and competition 
robotics. Their educational penetration offers formal, as well 
as informal, curricular solutions from pre-kindergarten to 
collegiate. One course was planned for each level of robot 
available (VEX 123, GO, EXP, IQ) but each course was 
designed in an identical fashion. The most productive 
method of delivering instruction is a flipped blended model. 
In this model, the instruction is delivered out of the 
classroom via technology, and the instructor engages the 
students in activities and feedback during class to enhance 
understanding. According to Margulieux et al. [19], this is 
the only model that improved learning outcomes of all 
surveyed in a meta-analysis. Teachers in the class were 
assigned content and activities to complete asynchronously 
between class sessions and the live class sessions were 
focused on sharing work, asking questions, providing 
feedback, and building teacher-to-teacher peer relationships. 
To develop the curriculum for the sessions, a backwards 
design was utilized. Clear, measurable learning objectives 
were created for each week’s class and content was then 
curated for each objective. Teachers were provided with a 
structured syllabus that outlined each week’s work, including 
the learning objectives, list of asynchronous lessons to 
complete, and the activities to complete prior to class. Lastly, 
at the end of the course, teachers were asked to create an 
implementation plan for how they would use educational 
robotics in their specific context. The goal of this assignment 
was to use all the previous lessons and apply them to a 
practical project that would help teachers translate what they 
had learned into their classroom.  
Synchronous class time was designed to provide teachers 
with useful feedback, given the material and activities 
completed outside of class. When possible, class time was 
spent having teachers share what they created outside of 
class with their peers, providing feedback on work teachers 
did, answering specific questions, fostering teacher-to-
teacher sharing and feedback. While a community of practice 
cannot be forced, it can be encouraged by bringing together 
teachers around a shared domain and providing opportunities 
for them to learn, build relationships, and share knowledge. 
Not only were teachers collaborating in the face-to-face 
synchronous sessions, but they were also encouraged, and 
asked as part of the weekly requirements, to post in a 
professional learning community called VEX Professional 
Development Plus (PD+). Posting on this collaborative 
platform was intentionally built into the syllabus and course 
requirements to allow teachers to learn and grow together to 
further build the community of practice. 
Teachers were asked to complete a pre-survey prior to 
the first session and again at the end of the course. The 
survey included instruments like those used by Jaipal-Jamani 
and Angeli [16] on teacher interest in STEM, robotics self-
efficacy, robotics and coding knowledge, and a new 
instrument on community of practice. Sessions were 
recorded and qualitative observations were recorded by the 
professional development leads.  
For each of four courses run, the professional 
development lead made observations of the synchronous 
class sessions on themes of self-efficacy, persistence, content 
knowledge acquisition, and community of practice. Class 
recordings were also used (with permission) to review 
conversations on these themes. This qualitative data gives 
additional insight into the performance of this educational 
robotics professional development pilot, especially when 
considered in conjunction with the survey results. There 
were 11 teachers participating across all four courses, and 
two courses are described in depth here. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
A. VEX 123 Course 
The VEX 123 robot and curriculum is intended for 
grades K–2, so the participants were early elementary school 
teachers. These teachers did not express any concern about 
using 123 in their classrooms. They all commented that the 
product was easy to use, and the resources provided by VEX 
(STEM Labs, Activities, VEX Library) were all very helpful. 
Most of the questions in the class revolved around how to get 
more out of 123 with their students. For example, how can I 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

use 123 in more classes, how can I get more time for STEM 
and Computer Science, how can I work with more teachers? 
The class shared many strategies to address these issues, so 
the teachers did feel more confident about those things at the 
end of class.   
Concerning 
content 
knowledge, 
the 
participants 
demonstrated increased knowledge in the concept of coding 
as a playground, meaning that coding should be a fun and 
expressive medium for students. Coding should not be just 
viewed as workforce development. The participants also 
demonstrated increased knowledge in pedagogy, specifically, 
the perils of utilizing unguided constructivism. A great deal 
of time was spent discussing the philosophical underpinnings 
of the curriculum. The teachers felt that this was empowering 
for them to create their own curriculum for their students.  
It was consistently emphasized during class that the class 
belonged to the teachers, and they could take the class into 
any direction that was most helpful for them. This helped to 
foster a sense of ownership for the participants. Teachers 
used the professional learning community site to share their 
weekly assignments. By the end of the course, the teachers 
were not only communicating on that community forum, but 
on twitter as well.  
B. VEX IQ Course 
The IQ robot and curriculum is designed primarily for 
middle school students, so the teachers in this course were 
grades six through eight. Experience levels differed between 
teachers. There were some teachers who were unfamiliar 
with IQ but had experience with 123, GO, or even V5. For 
those who did not have experience IQ, they were unsure if 
they were going to be able to build and code a BaseBot, for 
example, if they had only done 123 or GO. Once they 
followed the build instructions for the BaseBot and then 
dragged in one [Drive for] block to get the robot moving, 
they could see that the barrier of entry was not as high and 
did feel more confident about building and coding. 
Participants not only increased knowledge about building 
and coding, but about the curriculum as well. Most 
participants did not know how to get started with IQ. They 
were unaware of the STEM Labs or how the curriculum was 
designed. The biggest challenge to overcome was explaining 
how this could look and run in a classroom setting, since the 
STEM Labs are designed to be competition focused. 
Throughout the course, participants were encouraged not 
only to ask questions in the community, but also to share 
ideas they are currently using in their classroom, as well as 
images of this implementation. Teachers who had less 
experience gave feedback that they found it extremely 
helpful to be able to visualize how certain aspects of IQ were 
being implemented in a classroom. Posts from the 
professional learning community forum were shared during 
class in order to emphasize how useful it can be to not only 
talk to the VEX Experts, but also to other educators. Many 
participants realized they were from the same state or close 
by and noted to either visit each other’s schools or 
collaborate outside of class. It was also nice to see that some 
educators in the class had experience, while others did not, 
and those that did shared how they use IQ in their class, 
either through stories, images, or videos. This helped the 
participants who did not have experience yet with IQ.  
C. Teacher Surveys. 
The surveys were voluntary, and ten teachers completed 
the pre-survey instruments. However, only four teachers also 
completed the post-survey, limiting the comparison to a very 
small number of participants. Even though there were four 
courses, only four teachers from the 123 and IQ courses 
completed the post-survey, so those are the two highlighted 
courses in this paper. As a pilot, this data is still meaningful 
to review, especially in conjunction with the observations 
from the courses. The Likert scale responses were re-coded 
to numeric values in order to calculate a mean score for each 
instrument.  
The results in Table 1 show increased total mean scores 
for each of the instruments used. Participants indicated small 
increases in interest in STEM subjects. The robotics self-
efficacy instrument provided a scale from 0 to 100, and all 
respondents reported an increase of at least 10 points on that 
scale. Robotics and coding knowledge only saw a small 
increase. Follow up investigation on this instrument may be 
warranted to determine if participants truly did not feel they 
increased their knowledge, or if the Likert scale options 
limited the expression of their self-assessment. The increased 
mean results for the community of practice instrument were 
also a promising result that aligned with the qualitative data 
from the courses. It is noted that participant 1 is the only 
teacher to have a small mean decrease in CoP. This could be 
a mistake in filling out the post-survey, or intentional. One of 
the CoP questions was, “When it comes to teaching with 
educational robotics, I feel that I have colleagues and friends 
with similar interests.” This individual may have felt after 
learning more about robotics in the course, that their 
colleagues and friends do not have similar interests in 
robotics, and therefore gave this question a slightly lower 
rating. Overall, even though it is not clear as to why 
participant 1 lowered their average score on CoP during the 
post-survey, out of the four teachers who participated 
(including participant 1), the CoP total mean increased from 
3.94 to 4.38. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
While the small number of responses to both the pre- and 
post-survey limit the conclusions that can be drawn, the 
results do provide positive indications that this online 
professional development program could help teachers in 
meaningful ways. The observations from the online classes 
and survey results both show increases in teacher interest, 
self-efficacy, knowledge, and sense of community. This 
online professional development pilot also provided 
meaningful lessons in the design of the courses. The flipped-
blended format worked very well to engage educators and 
focus class time on what the teachers wanted to cover. This 
format also increased the amount of teacher-to-teacher 
interaction during the online synchronous classes. However, 
one lesson learned was that teachers may be teaching with 
multiple different robots and therefore wanted to attend 
multiple courses, which was limited by their concurrent 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

timings. Another lesson learned was to offer the surveys in 
such a way as to maximize response rates for both the pre-
survey and post-survey. Furthermore, a closer inspection of 
the robotics coding and knowledge question format may be 
warranted to ensure teachers have response options that 
allow them to adequately reflect their self-assessed 
knowledge.  
The community of practice theme is especially encouraging 
from these results. Future research that follows the continued 
interactions of teachers beyond the professional development 
course could help to evaluate if the sense of community 
fostered in this program continues to develop over time.  
Teachers who use educational robotics in the classroom 
to teach an integrated STEM curriculum likely have a wide 
range of prior experience and education specifically in this 
area. Providing teachers with support through continued 
professional development can help overcome the lack of  
 
TABLE I.  
MEAN SCORES FOR ROBOTICS SURVEY INSTRUMENTS.
Participant 
Interest 
Robotics Self-
Efficacy 
Robotics & Coding 
Knowledge 
Community of 
Practice (CoP) 
 
Pre 
Post 
Pre 
Post 
Pre 
Post 
Pre 
Post 
#1 
5 
5 
62.5 
82.5 
4 
4 
5 
4.25 
#2 
4.35 
4.65 
77.5 
87.5 
4 
4 
3.75 
4 
#3 
4.5 
4.95 
60 
72.5 
4 
4 
3.5 
4.5 
#4 
4.1 
4.95 
90 
100 
4 
5 
3.5 
4.75 
Total Mean 
4.49 
4.89 
72.5 
85.63 
4 
4.25 
3.94 
4.38 
robotics and STEM education in formal teacher education 
programs and meet teachers right where they are. Online 
professional development is a promising solution not only 
for the flexibility of content delivery and format, but also to 
bring together teachers from different locations and learning 
contexts. Facilitating a community of practice that can 
continue to support teachers long after the conclusion of the 
professional development course is a valuable outcome for 
the program. Even though again, the sample size for the pilot 
was small, the experiences and successes of teachers using 
educational robotics in the classroom should be shared 
broadly to benefit the applied pedagogy and implementation 
of STEM curriculum for teachers and students alike. There 
are many online courses using a flipped classroom model 
currently in the field of education, but many of those courses 
are not using robotics. Even if the sample size could be 
unreliable to come to any firm conclusions, sharing 
experiences and observations about the courses in general 
can benefit the field simply by example. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
National Science Board, “Revisiting the STEM workforce: A 
companion to science and engineering indicators,” National Science 
Foundation, 
2015, 
http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2015/nsb201510/nsb201510.pdf [retrieved: 
May 2022].  
[2] 
National Science and Technology Council’s Committee on STEM 
Education, “Charting a Course for Success: America’s Strategy for 
STEM Education,” National Science and Technology Council, pp. 1-
35, 2018, http://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp [retrieved: May 2022]. 
[3] 
F. B. V. Benitti, “Exploring the educational potential of robotics in 
schools: a systematic review,” Computers and Education, vol. 58, no. 
3, pp. 978-988, 2012, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2011.10.006 
[retrieved: May 2022]. 
[4] 
G. Nugent, B. Barker, N. Grandgenett, and V. I. Adamchuk, “Impact 
of robotics and geospatial technology interventions on youth STEM 
learning and attitudes,” Journal of  Research and Technology in 
Education, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 1-40, 2010. 
[5] 
M. Robinson, “Robotics-driven activities: can they improve middle 
school science learning,” Bull Sci Technol Soc, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 73- 
84, 2005. 
[6] 
C. Rogers and M. D. Portsmore, “Bringing engineering to elementary 
school,” Journal of STEM Education, vol. 5, no. 3-4, pp. 17-28, 2004. 
[7] 
K.A. Renninger and S. Hidi, “Revisiting the conceptualization, 
measurement, and generation of interest,” Educational Psychologist, 
vol. 
46, 
no. 
3, 
pp. 
168–184, 
2011, 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2011.587723 
[retrieved: 
May 
2022].  
[8] 
A. Wigfield and J. Cambria, “Students’ achievement values, goal 
orientations, and interest: Definitions, development, and relations to 
achievement outcomes,” Developmental Review, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 
1–35, 2010, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dr.2009.12.001 [retrieved: May 
2022]. 
[9] 
R. H. Tai, C. Q. Liu, A. V. Maltese, and X. Fan, “Planning early for 
careers in science,” Science, vol. 312, no. 5777, pp. 1143–1144, 
2006, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1128690 [retrieved: May 2022]. 
[10] N. J. Boakes, “Engaging diverse youth in experiential STEM 
learning: A university and high school district partnership,”  
International Online Journal of Education and Teaching (IOJET), vol. 
6, 
no. 
2, 
pp. 
245-258, 
2019,  
http://iojet.org/index.php/IOJET/article/view/505 
[retrieved: 
May 
2022]. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[11] S. Ziaeefard, M. H. Miller, M. Rastgaar, and N. Mahmoudian,  “Co-
robotics hands-on activities: A gateway to engineering design and 
STEM learning,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 97, pp. 
40–50, 2017, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2017.07.013 [retrieved: 
May 2022]. 
[12] K. N. Vela, R. M. Pedersen, and M. N. Baucum, M. N., “Improving 
perceptions 
of 
STEM 
careers 
through 
informal 
learning 
environments,” Journal of Research in Innovative Teaching and 
Learning, 
vol. 
13, 
no. 
1, 
pp. 
103–113, 
2020, 
https://doi.org/10.1108/JRIT-12-2019-0078 [retrieved: May 2022]. 
[13] D. Epstein and R. T. Miller, “Slow off the Mark: Elementary School 
Teachers and the Crisis in Science, Technology, Engineering, and 
Math Education,” Center for American Progress, pp. 1–21, 2011, 
https://www.americanprogress.org/article/slow-off-the-mark/ 
[retrieved: May 2022]. 
[14] L. S. Nadelson, J. Callahan, P. Pyke, A. Hay, M. Dance, and J. 
Pfiester, “Teacher STEM perception and preparation: Inquiry-based 
stem professional development for elementary teachers,” Journal of 
Educational Research, vol. 106, no. 2, pp. 157–168, 2013, 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00220671.2012.667014 
[retrieved: 
May 
2022]. 
[15] T. R. Kelley and J. G. Knowles, J. G., “A Conceptual Framework for 
Integrated STEM Education,” International Journal of STEM 
Education, 
vol. 
3, 
no. 
11, 
pp. 
1-11, 
2016, 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40594-016-0046-z [retrieved: May 2022]. 
[16] K. Jaipal-Jamani and C. Angeli, C, “Effect of Robotics on Elementary 
Preservice 
Teachers’ 
Self-Efficacy, 
Science 
Learning, 
and 
Computational Thinking,” Journal of Science Education and 
Technology, 
vol. 
26, 
no. 
2, 
pp. 
175-192, 
 
2017, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10956-016-9663-z [retrieved: May 2022]. 
[17] J. Lave and E. Wenger, “Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral 
Participation,” 
Cambridge 
University 
Press, 
1991, 
https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511815355 [retrieved: May 2022]. 
[18] L. Harter, J. McKenna, and R. Van Campenhout, “Insights from 
Teaching with a Virtual Robotic Solution During the Pandemic: A 
Mixed-Methods Inquiry,” Proceedings of Society for Information 
Technology & Teacher Education International Conference, pp. 
1659-1669, 2022, https://www.learntechlib.org/primary/p/220964/  
[retrieved: May 2022]. 
[19] L. E. Margulieux, W. M. McCracken, and R. Catrambone, “Mixing 
in-class and online learning: Content meta-analysis of outcomes for 
hybrid, 
blended, 
and 
flipped 
courses,” 
Computer-Supported 
Collaborative Learning Conference (CSCL), vol. 1, pp. 220–227, 
2015. 
[20] S. U. Smith, S. Hayes, and P. Shea. "A Critical Review of the Use of 
Wenger's Community of Practice (CoP) Theoretical Framework in 
Online and Blended Learning Research, 2000-2014." Online 
learning 21.1 (2017): 209-237. 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

