Developing a Computer Ethics Course for Online Learners 
Cynthia Y. Lester 
Office of STEM Initiatives 
Georgia Perimeter College 
Decatur, Georgia, USA 
cynthia.lester@gpc.edu 
 
Abstract – Online learning is still a very contentious topic 
throughout the halls of academia.  Advocates state that 
students who complete online courses learn as much as those in 
a face-to-face environment; earn equivalent grades; and, are 
equally satisfied. However, other researchers note that online 
students are less likely to complete their courses thereby 
negating the positive impact.  Yet, online education is 
continuing its upward growth and in higher education, new 
degree programs and courses are being added on a regular 
basis.  The Babson Survey Group reported that in 2011, online 
course enrollment hit an all-time high with more than 6.1 
million students.  The reported also stated that approximately 
thirty-one percent of all higher education students now take at 
least one course online.  With the cost of education rising and 
employers looking for students with more depth in the subject 
area, there remains a debate regarding how to best deliver the 
educational experience to students.  The aim of this paper is to 
present the development and results of a pilot study involving 
an online computer ethics course at a two-year institution.  The 
paper positions the course within the context of the college’s 
computer science curriculum, describes the rationale for 
course development and presents the next steps toward making 
the course a requirement for computer science majors.  
 
Keywords – computer ethics; learning content management 
system; online learning; undergraduate computer science 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The United States Department of Commerce, Economics 
and Statistics Administration in its July 2011 report stated 
that science, technology, engineering, and mathematics 
(STEM) occupations are projected to grow by 17.0 percent 
between 2008 and 2018, compared to 9.8 percent growth for 
non-STEM occupations [1].  Additionally, STEM workers 
command higher wages, earning 26 percent more than their 
non-STEM counterparts.  Moreover, STEM degree holders 
enjoy higher salaries, regardless of whether they are 
working in STEM or not [1]. By 2018, the bulk of STEM 
jobs will be in Computing (71%) followed by traditional 
Engineering (16%), Physical Sciences (7%), Life Sciences 
(4%) and Mathematics (2%) [2]. These statistics provide an 
impetus for more students to choose STEM areas as fields of 
study; however, the number of students choosing STEM 
disciplines, inclusive of computer science is steadily 
decreasing. 
According to The New York Times’ Christopher Drew, 
studies note that approximately 40 percent of students who 
choose to purse a STEM area either switch their major in 
college or do not graduate at all [3].  This statistic, as stated 
by Drew, is twice the combined attrition rate of all other 
majors [3].  A great deal of research has been conducted on 
the reasons as to why students choose not to study STEM. It 
has been suggested that societal stereotypes, environmental 
and cultural factors, a lack of visible role models, different 
interests and experiences, and academic un-preparedness are 
some of the reasons [4] – [7].  While these reasons are well-
documented, more research is now being conducted on what 
happens to students during the first two years of college 
which deters them from pursing their goals of becoming a 
scientist, engineer, mathematician or computer scientist. 
One article posits that there has been a dramatic shift in 
the way in which students learn [8].  It suggests that most 
high school classes are small in nature allowing a teacher to 
work with approximately thirty students at any given time.  
This stands in stark contrast of the large lecture halls 
consisting of 200 students that a new college student might 
face. In this type of environment, most professors cannot 
offer individual attention to all students enrolled in the 
course, often leaving some students to teach themselves, 
which in high school they have not learned how to do [9].  
Therefore, the paradigm of how to best offer course content 
to students and especially STEM majors is continuously 
being studied. 
In the report entitled Distance Education at Degree 
Granting Postsecondary Institutions 2000-2001, from the 
National Center on Education Statistics, noted that during 
the 2000-2001 academic year, 56 percent (2,320) of all 2-
year 
and 
4-year 
Title 
IV-eligible, 
degree-granting 
institutions offered distance education courses for any level 
or audience.  Moreover, there were an estimated 3,077,000 
students enrolled in all distance education courses offered 
by 2-year and 4-year institutions during the 2000-2001 
academic year [10]. Since that report, it has been noted that 
online course enrollment in the United States hit an all-time 
high in 2010 with more than 6.1 million students and 
according to the report from the Babson Survey Group, this 
number will only increase [11].  The report also stated that 
approximately thirty-one percent of higher education 
students now take at least one course online and that 
academic leaders believe that students are satisfied with this 
type of content delivery method [11].   
This paper focuses on the development of an online 
course in computer ethics for a two-year institution.  The 
paper describes the reason for course development and 
presents the next steps toward making the course a 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

requirement for computer science majors. Also presented 
are results from the pilot offering of the course.  The paper 
is organized into the following sections.  Section II provides 
the rationale for the course which introduces the Complete 
College plan.  Sections III and IV introduce the course and 
the pilot study.  Sections V and VI present the results and 
discussion from the pilot study. Section VII presents next 
steps and concluding thoughts. 
II. COMPLETE COLLEGE PLAN 
A. Complete College America 
In response to the concern that the U.S. is lagging behind 
other countries in its production of college-degree holders, 
Complete College America emerged in 2009 as a national 
non-profit organization whose mission is to work with states 
to increase the number of Americans with career certificates 
or college degrees [12]. Since its inception, 34 states, 
including the District of Columbia have become Alliance 
members and are now participating in working to 
significantly increase the number of students who are 
successfully completing college. 
To become a member of the Alliance, the state’s 
governor in partnership with its colleges and universities 
pledge and work together to meet the mission of Complete 
College America [12]. More specifically, when a state 
becomes an Alliance member it makes college completion a 
top priority and commits to do the following [12]: 
• Set completion goals 
• Collect and report common measures of progress  
• Develop action plans and move key policy levers 
B. Complete College Georgia 
The state, Georgia, in which the course was developed 
and piloted is an Alliance member and has adopted the 
mission of Complete College America. Georgia notes that in 
order to improve its economy that another 27% of its 
citizens must join the already 34% of the states’ population 
who currently hold an associate’s degree or higher [12].  To 
meet this goal, not only must the colleges and universities 
enroll more students, but they must retain the ones presently 
enrolled and remove barriers that impact student success.  
To improve low completion rates, colleges and technical 
schools have committed to [13]: 
• Build and sustain effective teaching 
• Explore and expand the use of effective models 
• Promote and increase distance education 
• Focus on adult and military outreach 
• Implement STEM initiatives 
 
C. Georgia Perimeter College 
Georgia Perimeter College (GPC) is a two-year 
institution located in the Atlanta-metro area, part of the 33-
member schools of the University System of Georgia 
(USG). GPC offers Associate degrees in Arts, Sciences and 
Applied Sciences [14]. GPC typically hosts the largest 
freshman and sophomore enrollments in Georgia, making it 
the top producer of transfer students to 4-year institutions 
within the state. It has five campus locations and services 
approximately 22,000 students. Roughly 10 percent of the 
student body takes all their classes online [14]. The number 
of students choosing one of the STEM disciplines is roughly 
10 percent [15].  
To help meet the goals of Complete College Georgia, the 
Academic 
Advisory 
Committee 
on 
the 
Computing 
Disciplines (AACCD) determined that two-year institutions 
needed to offer at least one additional computer science 
course that could be transferred to a 4-year institution in 
order to make transferring students more competitive and 
that would give students additional depth in the discipline. 
The AACCD is an advisory committee of the Board of 
Regents (BOR) of the USG. Advisory committees are 
formed around the courses of the core curriculum, and the 
degrees and major offered by BOR institutions. As part of 
their responsibilities, the advisory committees study the 
curricula and programs of instruction in the discipline or 
disciplines within the purview of the committee; make 
reports and recommendations concerning the improvement 
of 
instruction 
and 
the 
curriculum; 
and, 
make 
recommendations to the Academic Affairs System Office 
concerning new programs proposed by USG institutions 
[17].   
In response to the charge from the AACCD, the GPC’s 
computer 
science 
curriculum 
committee 
proactively 
engaged in selecting an additional course that: 1) is required 
by transferring institutions and can easily be transferred; 2) 
provides students with additional depth in the discipline; 
and, 3) can be taught by existing faculty.  A survey of 
surrounding 4-year institutions was conducted and it was 
determined that a course in computer ethics would meet the 
criteria.  Also in the survey, it was determined that computer 
ethics could be offered as early as the second year for 
students, unlike make of the other computer science courses, 
thereby making it a viable option for a 2-year institution.  
Moreover, it was a course that could be offered online to a 
large population of students that a traditional face-to-face 
course may not be able to do in its initial offering. 
III. COURSE DEVELOPMENT 
A. Course Description 
CSCI 2900-099 - Ethical and Social Issues in Computing, is 
a three hour course dedicated to the study of social, ethical, 
and legal effects of computing on society and its users.  
Ethical concepts, professional codes of ethics, and the 
influence of computing on individuals, organizations, and 
the global economy will be addressed.  Students will utilize 
critical thinking and problem solving skills to analyze and 
debate case studies on topics some of which include 
privacy; intellectual property; computer crimes; system 
failures and implications; and, the impact of technology on 
society [18].  
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Prerequisites for the course are sophomore standing and 
CSCI 1301- Principles of Computer Science I with a “C” or 
better, or permission of the Instructor and Department Chair. 
It was decided that CSCI 1301 would be the course 
prerequisite because it emphasizes structured, top-down 
development and testing of computer programs. At the 
conclusion of the course, students would be able to utilize 
critical thinking and analytical skills to successfully analyze, 
develop and implement programs in a modern programming 
language.  
The course utilized the College’s Desire 2 Learn (D2L) 
learning management system as its online portal.  This 
allowed the instructor to disseminate information, engage 
students in discussions and perform student assessments. 
B. Topics Covered 
The topics covered in the CSCI 2900-099 include [18]: 
• 
Basic concepts and historical overview of computer 
ethics 
• 
Introduction to issues and themes in ethical 
computing 
o 
Privacy 
o 
Freedom of Speech 
o 
Intellectual Property 
o 
Computer and Network Crime 
o 
Evaluating and Controlling Technology 
o 
Error, Failures and Risks 
• 
Professional ethics and responsibilities 
C. Learning Outcomes 
By the end of the course, a student should be able to [l8]: 
1. Explain 
and 
evaluate 
the 
ramifications 
of 
technological advances brought by the advent of 
the computer on individuals, organizations and 
society 
2. Identify ethical and legal issues related to computer 
use 
3. Develop 
solutions 
based 
on 
the 
computer 
professional code of ethics 
4. Effectively and succinctly communicate through 
speech, writing, and presentation the themes of the 
course  
D. Student Assessments 
Since this was designed to be a sophomore level course, 
it was decided that student assessments would include the 
following: debate presentations, class participation, one 
programming assignment, a term paper, two exams and one 
final exam.  
IV. PILOT STUDY 
A. Participants 
The course was designed for and utilized by students 
who have chosen computer science as a major.  During the 
pilot study, summer 2014, the course enrollment was 
twenty-two students with nineteen students completing the 
course.  Participants ranged in age from 20 to 48 years with 
the median age being 28. All students had sophomore 
standing and had completed the prerequisite of CSCI 1301.  
Students also self-reported that they either had full-time or 
part-time jobs, which was one of the reasons for enrolling in 
an online course.  
B. Class Participation 
Class participation accounted for 2 percent of the total 
course grade.  Each week on the discussion board the 
instructor would post a question related to the course topic 
and it was expected that students would submit a posted 
response to the question and debate presentation prepared by 
classmates. The discussion board was designed for students 
to express their opinions, ideas about the material presented, 
to ask questions and answer the questions of fellow 
classmates. As part of the post, students were also expected 
to provide: 
• 
A brief summary of the topic 
• 
The presentation that best describes your position 
on the topic (provide the reason why) 
• 
Point(s) from the presentation(s) with which you 
either agreed or disagreed 
C. Class Debates 
One goal of the course is to help students identify ethical 
and legal issues related to computer use so that they can 
develop solutions based on the computer professional code 
of ethics.  Therefore, five case scenarios were assigned on 
various course-related topics and students were expected to 
present arguments and solutions.   
The guidelines for class debates on case scenarios stated 
that each student would be assigned a part of the topic and 
was expected to prepare a presentation that would be posted 
by the assigned due date.  Based on the student’s assigned 
part, each was required do the following on which they 
would also be assessed: 
• 
Analyze the situation. 
• 
Discuss how the use of this technology impacts 
your given role. 
• 
Use analogies and similar cases where possible. 
• 
Identify possible risks or consequences.  
• 
Present your opinion of the situation (even if it 
differs from your given role). 
The presentation should be no less than ten (10) minutes 
and no more than fifteen (15) minutes. The debate 
presentation counted for ten percent of the total course 
grade. The presentation should include at least three (3) 
references from which the information was gathered.  
Students were encouraged to be creative with technology 
beyond the use of PowerPoint to promote interaction and 
advanced technology use. Students were assessed on their 
use of technology, style and delivery of the content. Sample 
topics for class debates are presented in Table 1. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

TABLE 1. DEBATE OVERVIEW 
Debate 
Course Topic 
Debate Topic 
#1 
Privacy 
Surveillance and Expectation of 
Privacy: Google Street View 
# 2 
Intellectual  
Property 
The Fight for the TV Airways: 
Aereo Technology 
#3 
Crime 
Identity Theft and Credit Card 
Fraud: The Target Corp. Scandal 
#4 
Evaluating and 
Controlling Technology 
Electronic commerce: 
Amazon.com 
#5 
Errors, Failures  
and Risks 
The Health Care Industry’s use of 
Technology and Therac-25 
D. Programming Assignment 
The programming assignment which counted for five 
percent of the total course grade was designed to engage 
students’ critical thinking and problem solving skills while 
also focusing on the course content of ethics.  Consequently, 
it was decided to utilize content students were introduced to 
in the required course, CSCI 1300 – Introduction to 
Computer Science.  This breadth-first course introduces 
students to a variety of topics with one being information 
security inclusive of a brief overview of encryption 
algorithms.  Using this introduction, it was decided that 
students would implement a version of the shift cipher.  The 
task was to work with any character on the keyboard, allow 
the user to determine the shift, make some changes to the 
input, then display the new code on the screen. Students 
were given a shift algorithm and asked to develop the 
program using either C++ or Java.  Students were told that 
the assignment makes use of basic elements that they 
learned in CSCI 1300 and CSCI 1301 which included, but 
not limited to: 
• 
Input/output statements 
• 
Arithmetic operators 
• 
Assignment statements 
• 
Relational and logical operators 
• 
Control structures 
• 
Data structures 
E. Term Paper 
To allow students to develop a better understanding of 
the field, the opportunity to research current topics related to 
ethical issues in computing and to also foster better writing 
skills, a term paper was assigned.  The task was to choose 
and watch one of the instructor-selected Twilight Zone 
episodes.  The episodes are based on an ethical/societal 
computing issue discussed during the course.  Students were 
informed that the term paper should summarize the topic 
that is being presented; then use supporting references to 
analyze, evaluate, interpret and summarize the information 
they have uncovered.  The episodes that were chosen from 
which the students could select were: I Sing the Body 
Electric, The Old Man in the Cave and The Brain Center at 
Mr. Whipples.  Students could watch the episodes for free 
on hulu.com for free. The term paper accounted for eight 
percent of the total course grade. 
F. Exams 
There were two online exams given.  Each consisted of 
twenty-eight questions that were either true/false or multiple 
choice. Additionally, there were two essay questions.  
Students were given two hours to complete each exam from 
the time they started until the time they ended.  They were 
also informed that they would only have one attempt per 
question.  The final exam followed the same pattern as the 
two course exams; however, there were additional essay 
questions.  Additionally, students were required by the 
institution to come to one of the campuses to take the final 
exam. The final counted for twenty-five percent of the total 
course grade and the course exams accounted for fifty 
percent of the total course grade.  These percentages are 
determined by the computer science curriculum committee 
and are required for all computer sciences courses taught. 
V. RESULTS 
This section presents the results of student assessments, 
as well as an anonymous online survey that students were 
asked to complete at the end of the course. 
A. Student Performance 
In a face-to-face course, class participation is often noted 
by student interaction and class involvement.  However, in 
an online course, class participation is a little harder to 
gauge which is why posting to the discussion board was 
utilized.  To ascertain if students understood the required 
reading material as well as viewed their classmates’ 
presentation, the instructor monitored the discussion posts.  
Figure 1 shows the number of students participating in the 
posts.  Figure 2 shows the number of students participating 
by discussion post.   
 
 
Figure 1. Students participating in posts 
 
 
Figure 2. Students participating by post 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Figure 3 shows the results of student performance on the 
class debates and term paper. 
 
 
Figure 3. Average score on selected assignments 
B. Student Survey 
An online anonymous survey consisting of ten questions 
was created to get a better understanding of students’ 
perception of the newly created online course.  Presented are 
some of the results from the ten questions that the students 
were asked to complete. 
Figure 4 shows the results of the students’ perception on 
the ease of participating in class through using the 
discussion board. 
 
 
Figure 4. Participation using discussion forum 
 
Figure 5 presents the results on students’ perception on 
the ease of researching and writing the term paper. 
 
 
Figure 5. Researching and writing term paper 
 
Figure 6 presents the results when students were asked 
in comparison to other computer science courses about the 
amount of time they spent on the newly developed online 
course. 
 
Figure 6. Time compared to other CS courses 
 
Figure 7 presents the results when students were asked if 
they enrolled in the course again the type of delivery mode 
they would choose. 
 
 
Figure 7. Delivery method 
 
The next section provides an overview of the results 
presented, followed by concluding thoughts. 
VI. DISCUSSION 
The results revealed that students participated in the 
discussion posts on a regular basis and utilized them as a 
way to establish their contribution to the course just as if 
they were in a face-to-face class.  The results also revealed 
that the two assignments that one does not typically find in a 
computer science course, class debates and a term paper, 
were well-received by students which resulted in high 
passing scores on both assignments.   
The anonymous online survey results revealed that 
students thought that the course was well-developed, that 
the amount of work was appropriate, and that the time they 
spent was comparable to other computer science courses 
that they had previously taken; hence the responses shown 
in figures 5 and 6. This led the instructor to believe that the 
thoughtfulness in which the course was designed was 
comparable to courses that had been previously designed 
and taught face-to-face.  However, one unexpected result 
was the response to the question related to deliver mode.  
Students were asked if they had to enroll in the course again, 
which delivery method they most likely choose.  The results 
revealed that only twenty percent would choose the online 
method again.  The author finds this result to be one for 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

future investigation because when polled, fifty percent of 
the class stated that they had taken the majority of the 
courses online because they enjoyed the flexibility of online 
learning. Moreover, many of the students self-reported that 
they either had full-time or part-time jobs, which was one of 
the reasons for enrolling in an online course. Therefore, the 
author thought that a larger percentage of the students would 
agree again to take the course online. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
In summary, the purpose of this paper was to describe 
the development of an online computer ethics course and 
present the results from a pilot study of its initial offering.  
The paper described the uniqueness of offering the course at 
the two-year college level, which is not typically done.  
Additionally, the paper described how material was 
conveyed in an online learning environment. 
  Future work includes making this course a requirement 
for computer science majors.  This includes preparing and 
presenting a proposal for the college curriculum committee.  
Once approved, the proposal is presented to the Faculty 
Senate, and after review and approval, forwarded to the 
President for review and approval.  However, prior to 
moving forward with requiring this course for computer 
science majors, some challenges must be addressed. 
The first challenge noted by the author was the use of 
D2L and its compatibility with some of the software that the 
students used.  Many of the students used open source 
software to complete their debate presentations.  This 
software was not compatible with D2L often yielding no 
sound or picture, thereby making it difficult for the 
instructor to grade and for peers to adequately view the 
presentation. Another challenge was communication.  Since 
this was the author’s first time teaching an online course, the 
traditional method of office hours was not an option.  While 
the author did establish “virtual” office hours, because of 
students’ varying work schedules, many did not attend and 
instead attempted to communicate with the instructor 
outside of “normal working” hours.  The author is 
rethinking the concept of office hours for the next course 
offering.  It is anticipated that the course will again be 
offered in summer 2015. 
In closing, as online learning continues to grow, so does 
the debate on how best to offer online learners a rich 
educational experience.  By looking carefully at the course 
offering, the subject content and thoughtfulness in 
preparation of course material, we may find our answer and 
the answer of how to increase the number of students 
choosing a STEM discipline as a major. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Langdon, G. McKittrick, D. Beede, B. Khan and M.Doms. 
“STEM: Good Jobs and for the Future,” 2011. U.S. 
Department 
of 
Commerce, 
Economics 
and 
Statistics 
Administration. 
http://www.esa.doc.gov/sites/default/files/ 
reports/documents/stemfinalyjuly14_1.pdf. 
[Retrieved: 
October, 2014]. 
[2] R. Munce and E. Fraser, 2012. “Where are the STEM 
Students? What are their Career Interests? Where are the 
STEM Jobs?”  https://www.stemconnector.org/sites/ default/ 
files/store/STEM-Students-STEM-Jobs-Executive 
Summary.pdf. [Retrieved: October, 2104] 
[3] C. Drew, 2011. “Why Science Majors Change Their Minds 
(It’s 
Just 
So 
Darn 
Hard).” 
 
New 
York 
Times.  
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/11/06/education/edlife/why-
science-majors-change-their-mind-its-just-so-darn-
hard.html?pagewanted=all [Retrieved: October, 2014]. 
[4] J. Cooper and K.D. Weaver, 2003. Gender and Computers.  
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
[5] C. Y. Lester. (2005). The Influence of Vicarious Learning on 
Computer 
Self-efficacy 
and 
Computing 
Performance. 
Doctoral Dissertation (UMI No. 6133310). 
[6] E.D. Bunderson and M.E. Christensen, “An analysis of 
retention problems for female students in university computer 
science program.”  Journal of Research and Computing in 
Education vol. 28 no. 1: 1995. pp. 1 – 18. 
[7] S. Clegg and D. Trayhurn, “Gender and computing: Not the 
same old problem.”  British Educational Research Journal vol. 
26, no. 1, 2000. pp. 75-90. 
[8] M. Minsker, “Statistics Show a Decrease in STEM Majors- 
But Why?” Nextgen Journal. 2011. http://nextgenjournal. 
com/2011/11/statistics-show-a-decrease-in-stem-majors/ 
[Retrieved: October, 2014]. 
[9] R.J. Coffin and P.D. MacIntyre, “Motivational influences on 
computer-related affective states.” Computer in Human 
Behavior vol. 15, 1999, pp. 549 – 569. 
[10] National Center for Education Statistics. Distance Education 
at Degree-Granting Postsecondary Institutions. 2000-2001. 
http://nces.ed.gov/surveys/peqis/publications/2003017/. 
[Retrieved: October, 2014]. 
[11] Babson Group, 2011.  New Study: Over 6 million students 
study on line.  http://www.babson.edu/News-Events/babson-
news/Pages/111109OnLineLearningStudy.aspx 
[Retrieved: 
October, 2014]. 
[12] Complete College America. http://www.completecollege.org/ 
index.html [Retrieved: October, 2014] 
[13] Complete College Georgia: Georgia’s Higher Education 
Completion 
Plan, 
2011. 
http://www.usg.edu/educational 
_access/documents/GaHigherEducationCompletionPlan2012.
pdf [Retrieved: October, 2014].  
[14] The University System of Georgia, 2012. http://www 
.usg.edu/. [Retrieved: December 2012]. 
[15] C. Lester, 2012. Georgia Perimeter College STEM Annual 
Report Form 2011-2012.  Report submitted to the USG 
STEM Initiatives II Office. 
[16] Georgia 
Perimeter 
College 
Fact 
Book 
2011-2012. 
http://depts.gpc.edu/~gpcoirp/fact_book/FB%202011-
Final.pdf. [Retrieved: November 2013]. 
[17] www.usg.edu/.../committee_docs/documents/Academic_Advi
sory_Committees_Operating_Procedures.pdf - 2013-10-02 
[Retrieved: October, 2014] 
[18] C. Lester, 2014. CSCI 2900-099- Ethical and Social Issues in 
Computing. Course Syllabus. Summer 2014. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

