Promoting Interactive Learning Using 5G Networks and Synchronous Immersive 
Contents: the DI5CIS Project 
 
Flavio Manganello 
Institute for Educational Technology 
National Research Council 
Genoa, Italy 
E-mail: manganello@itd.cnr.it 
Chiara Fante 
Institute for Educational Technology 
National Research Council 
Genoa, Italy 
E-mail: chiara.fante@itd.cnr.it 
Fabrizio Ravicchio 
Institute for Educational Technology 
National Research Council 
Genoa, Italy 
E-mail: fabrizio.ravicchio@itd.cnr.it 
Giannangelo Boccuzzi  
Hypex 
Monopoli, Italy 
E-mail: a.boccuzzi@hypex.video
Riccardo Boccuzzi 
Hypex 
Monopoli, Italy 
E-mail: r.boccuzzi@hypex.video 
Cinzia Campanella 
Vodafone Italia 
Milan, Italy 
E-mail: Cinzia.Campanella@vodafone.com
Giuseppe Gammariello 
Capgemini Engineering 
Rome, Italy 
E-mail: giuseppe.gammariello@capgemini.com 
Paolo Quaranta 
Prodea Group 
Turin, Italy 
E-mail: paolo.quaranta@prodeagroup.com
 
 
 
Abstract— The DI5CIS project seeks to address the challenges 
faced by multimedia learning designers in providing advanced 
interactive mobile content that requires massive data streams 
and low latency. To achieve this, the project aims to explore 
the potential of 5G networks in enabling mobile enjoyment of 
highly sophisticated audiovisual content created through a 
gamified interactivity production methodology applied to live-
action film material. The project will enact this experiential 
format in two use cases, related to the teaching of STEM 
disciplines. The impacts of 5G infrastructure on the technical 
mobile enjoyment of content, such as fluidity and audiovisual 
quality, will be investigated, as well as the effects on specific 
indicators such as engagement, motivation and learning 
outcomes in the educational context. By improving the quality 
of experience and learning, the DI5CIS project is highly 
relevant for e-learning and mobile learning challenging 
innovative educational and technical aspects. 
Keywords-Digital Game-Based Learning; Gamification; 
Digital Storytelling; Interactive Narrative Learning; 5G. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The project “Interactive Learning in 5G: Synchronous 
Immersive Contents” (Didattica Interattiva in 5G: Contenuti 
Immersivi Sincroni, DI5CIS) aims to explore innovative 
ways of using interactive visual content centered on narrative 
and video-ludic mechanics and created through an innovative 
methodology and technology. The 5G architecture is a 
decisive enabling factor for the realization of highly 
immersive educational content for mobile devices, opening 
up interesting possibilities for the use of Digital Game Based 
Learning (DGBL) [1] and Digital Storytelling (DST) [2]. 
The DI5CIS project, funded by the Ministry of Enterprises 
and Made in Italy (MIMIT) under the “Progetto 5G 
audiovisivo (2022)” grant, involves five partners: PRODEA 
Group, HYPEX, Capgemini engineering, Vodafone Italia, 
and the Institute for Educational Technology of the Italian 
National Research Council (CNR-ITD). 
This poster first presents the two main objectives of the 
project (Section II). Then the four main pillars on which the 
project is based on are detailed (Section III). Furthermore, 
the process to realize the educational digital artefacts 
(Section IV) and to test them in real educational settings 
(Section V) is presented briefly. Finally, Sections VI 
highlights some relevant preliminary considerations for the 
implementation of the project. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

II. 
PROJECT OBJECTIVES 
The DI5CIS project exploits the 5G architecture [3] to 
produce edutainment content based on pioneering interaction 
patterns covered by an industrial patent, capable of enabling 
real-time interactive cooperation within the experience 
between multiple users. In this perspective, DI5CIS aims at 
pursuing the following two objectives: a) research and 
identify use cases that utilize real-time interaction and co-
operation between multiple users, merging technological 
advancement with the impacts of cooperative learning; b) 
measure the related impact on the Quality of Experience 
within the use cases thus investigated. In this direction, the 
project makes use of high-level assets: structural, such as 
Multi-Access Edge Computing provided by Vodafone Italia 
and Capgemini Engineering; patenting, both process and 
method, for the creation of interactive and branched live-
action video content, provided by HYPEX (with the support 
of 
PRODEA 
Group 
for 
video 
production); 
and 
methodological-scientific as well of educational technology 
research, provided by CNR-ITD. 
III. 
THE FOUR PILLARS OF THE PROJECT 
At the macro level (Pillar 1), the DI5CIS project shows an 
interpenetration between the game and the narrative 
dimension, aimed at motivating and engaging students [4]. 
Then, the disciplinary dimension (Pillar 2) is translated into 
the development of interactive multimedia content for 
learning physics and chemistry, based on the fundamental 
elements of the STEM approach [5]. Furthermore, it is 
possible to find development choices (Pillar 3), defined by 
the grammars of the multimedia products, and the user’s 
possibility of interacting by elements coherent with the 
content of the scene they are viewing. This element leads to 
the technological layer (Pillar 4), that is the integration of 
different elements to provide a true immersive experience: 
from devices integrated sensors to the 5G network 
infrastructure. More in depth the uninterrupted flow of the 
story and a user-narrative interaction reinforce its sense of 
presence in the plot [6].  
IV. 
ARTEFACT DEVELOPMENT PROCESS 
The development of the artefacts tends to harmonize the 
learning approach with the technical development choices, 
supported by the technological infrastructure described. The 
combination of the disciplinary, the playful, the narrative and 
the interactive elements supports the student’s learning 
activities based on the multimedia artefact exploration. The 
realization of this ‘common thread’ is possible thanks to the 
involvement of teachers (in a perspective of Stakeholder 
Engagement) in the design and development phases of the 
products and the creation of an action-research group in 
which all the actors are involved. Two artefacts will be 
implemented in the educational case study: PhysiGame, 
dealing with Physics’ topics (i.e., state functions, equations 
of state, first and second laws of thermodynamics, etc…), 
and ChemiGame, about Chemistry’s topics (i.e., phase 
transition, latent heat, thermal expansion, etc…).  
 
 
Figure 1. Moke-up of a user-story interaction within DI5CIS artifact. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTATION 
The artefacts will be initially tested within three 
classrooms, 4th grade of high school, in co-located situated 
learning activities [7], in which students will use the artefacts 
as a learning activity. The experimentation goal will be to 
understand how the interactive and playful artifacts are used 
and what are their effects on learning. engagement, 
behaviour and motivation. These elements will also be read 
in the light of the students’ profiles, to understand to what 
extent personal characteristics can have a moderating effect 
on the previously mentioned dimensions. To detect the 
elements useful for the research, tools such as standardized 
tests and observation grids, as well as a user behavior tracker 
integrated within the interactive stories, will be used. 
VI. 
PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS 
The process of developing interactive and engaging 
stories is complex and requires coordination between 
teachers and the development team. Modern technologies 
such as 5G and mobile devices offer new opportunities to 
create immersive experiences with learner-narration and peer 
interaction, which can advance learning of STEM disciplines 
through DGBL and DST. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Prensky, Digital game-based learning, Columbus:  
McGraw-Hill Education. 2001. 
[2] J. Lambert, Digital storytelling: Capturing lives, creating 
community 4th ed., New York, NY: Routledge, 2013 
[3] L. Xingqin and N. Lee, 5G and Beyond: Fundamentals and 
Standards. Cham: Springer International Publishing AG, 
2021. 
[4] S. Göbel, A. de Carvalho Rodrigues, F. Mehm, and R. 
Steinmetz, “Narrative game-based learning objects for story-
based digital educational games”. The 1st International Open 
Workshop on Intelligent Personalization and Adaptation in 
Digital Educational Games, Oct. 2009, pp 43-53. 
[5] OECD , PISA 2018 Assessment and Analytical Framework, 
Paris: PISA, OECD Publishing, 2019 
[6] B. G. Witmer, and M. J. Singer, “Measuring presence in 
virtual environments: A presence questionnaire,” Presence, 
vol 7.3, pp 225-240, Jun. 1998. 
[7] B. K., Litts, G. W., Smith, D. J., Gagnon, J. Martin, and J. 
Mathews, “Situated Learning and Mobile Technologies: 
Connecting Theory to Design” The Ninth Annual Games, 
Learning, 
Society 
Conference, 
2013, 
pp 
210-21.
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

