Reading Behaviors of Japanese Learners 
Based on Logs Recorded by Users of Digital Books 
 
Teiko Nakano 
Shobi University 
Saitama, Japan 
email: t-nakano@b.shobi-u.ac.jp 
Teruko Harada 
EF International Language Center 
Tokyo, Japan 
email: terukoharada@r7.dion.ne.jp
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, the reading behaviors of Japanese 
learners in the upper intermediate level were analyzed 
according to reading time, amount of reading, dictionary use, 
the results of pre- and post-vocabulary tests, and the results of 
a quiz about the book that the learners read. Data on reading 
time, amount of reading, and dictionary use were collected 
from the learners’ reading logs recorded on BookLooper, an 
application for viewing digital books. Results show that the 
learners who had read more understood the contents better 
and read faster than those who had read less. Furthermore, 
learners appeared to learn vocabulary incidentally in a 
virtuous circle of reading; once they enter that circle, they need 
to read books that are appropriate to their vocabulary level. 
Keywords-extensive reading; reading behaviors; virtuous 
circle; good reader; incidental vocabulary learning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Extensive reading is an approach of second language 
learning that improves language ability in a pleasurable way 
[1][2]. In particular, extensive reading using graded readers, 
where learners can repeatedly encounter unknown words, 
has an effect on learners in which they learn vocabulary 
incidentally [3]-[6]. Incidental vocabulary learning happens 
when words are learned by way of guessing because of 
repeated exposure to them in context while reading. In the 
process where unknown words become known words, there 
is a stage where learners recognize they have seen a word 
even though they do not know its meaning [7]. 
Day and Bamford [8] suggested that extensive reading 
can be included in a second language curriculum as an 
extracurricular activity. If the learners can learn the target 
language through extensive reading as an extracurricular 
activity without teachers’ support; and if there is an on-line 
system that substitutes for the teacher, the learners who study 
Japanese as a second language by themselves can enjoy 
extensive reading on-line and evaluate and improve their 
language skills. The authors of this paper have developed 
Japanese graded readers with their colleagues [9] based on 
extensive reading and graded readers in English [6][10], and 
a support system for Japanese extensive reading [11] to 
benefit learners who cannot have the support of a teacher. 
A. Good Readers 
Extensive reading is a good approach for building 
vocabulary knowledge; however, as Coady [7] mentioned, 
learners are not able to continue reading and learn new 
vocabulary when they lack the basic vocabulary required to 
continue reading books. Nuttall [12] called this a vicious 
circle. That is, learners who find themselves in this circle 
read slowly, do not feel enjoyment, and do not read more. 
On the other hand, learners become good readers when they 
are in a virtuous circle, wherein they understand the content 
better, they enjoy reading, they read faster, and they read 
more [12]. Good readers can read quickly and better 
understand content, and then they read more [12]. 
B. Behavior during Extensive Reading 
In contrast to intensive reading, which teachers use as a 
part of instruction in a general classroom, extensive reading 
can be done at anytime and anywhere with books that 
learners choose. However, many of the studies on the 
effectiveness of extensive reading investigate reading records, 
comments about books, and questionnaires conducted in a 
classroom [13]-[15]. 
In a study on behavior during extensive reading using eye 
camera, Kumada and Suzuki [16] observed the eye 
movement of participants while they did extensive reading 
and found they fixed their eyes on words more often and 
longer towards the end of the experiments. In addition, 
Kumada [17] reported on the way readers’ attention changed 
from words to content by analyzing protocol data using the 
think-aloud method. In these investigations, learners read 
books that were given to them by teachers during class time. 
Nakano [11] evaluated the support system for Japanese 
extensive reading and found the system was useful for  
independent learners to engage in extensive reading by 
choosing books by themselves. From the post questionnaire, 
the researcher reported the participants of the study evaluated 
a page called the “Personal Page” on the system positively, 
because on this page they could confirm by their reading logs 
what books they had read and how quickly they had read 
them [11]. The study also showed that those who read more 
and faster were from the group of participants whose 
Japanese proficiency level was higher [11]. However, the 
researcher did not find a relationship between reading speed 
and motivation. Are these participants who read more and 
faster good readers in Nuttall’s [12] terms? What are the 
characteristics of their reading behavior? Reading behavior 
data could suggest ways of supporting learners to become 
good readers. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

C. Study Questions 
To find out how the learners of Japanese behave during 
extensive reading outside the classroom without a teacher’s 
assistance, this study used a BookLooper to record learners’ 
reading logs. BookLooper is an application for viewing 
digital teaching materials. Ogata et al. [18] revealed common 
learning behavior of the first-year university students whose 
grades went up by analyzing the amount of reading recorded 
on BookLooper and the time of day when they read. With 
this system, it is also possible to record other reading 
behavior such as the way that students open books, turn 
pages, turn back to previous pages, take notes, mark 
unknown words, and close books.  
Therefore, this study examines the following questions: 
1. 
Is there a difference in reading speed between learners 
who read more and learners who read less? 
2. 
How do learners who read faster and understand 
content better behave, and how do learners who do not 
read faster and do not understand content better 
behave? 
In Section II, the purpose and method of this study will be 
explained. Then, in Section III, the results will be discussed. 
In Section IV, the study will be concluded. In Section V, the 
study’s limitations and further work will be discussed. 
II. 
PURPOSE AND METHOD 
Here, we will introduce the purpose and the participants 
and then, explain the methodology of the study and the 
reading materials, vocabulary tests, questionnaires, and 
quizzes used. Lastly, we will show the reading logs. 
A. Purpose 
The purpose of this paper is to describe the behavior of 
good readers and to know the way good readers read in a 
virtuous circle by analyzing reading logs recorded by 
Japanese learners in the upper intermediate level. 
B. Participants 
Six international students (three male and three female) 
at three Japanese universities independently participated in 
this study. Their home countries included China (3), 
Vietnam (2), and Malaysia (1). As for the first language of 
the participants, four participants spoke languages that use 
Chinese characters, while two spoke languages that do not. 
Their Japanese learning experience ranged from 8 months to 
30 months (average 23 months). To ascertain participants’ 
Japanese abilities, they were asked to declare their recent 
Japanese proficiency levels, if they had taken a proficiency  
TABLE I.  
JAPANESE PROFICIENCY OF PARTICIPANTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
test on Japanese language. In order to assess their present 
level of Japanese vocabulary, the vocabulary section of a 
Japanese 
Language 
Proficiency 
Test 
(JLPT) 
was 
administered by the authors of this paper. The results are 
shown in Table I. The scores were calculated so that a 
perfect score would be 100. 
 
C. Method 
Participants were required to read reading materials in 
the three holiday weeks from December 2016 to January 
2017. They were then required to answer questions about the 
book and complete a questionnaire about the reading after 
they had finished reading each book. Pre- and post- 
vocabulary tests and questionnaires were conducted within a 
week before and after the reading. Data collection methods 
are shown in the following sections. 
D. Reading Materials 
As reading materials, a collection of Japanese graded 
readers [9], which is divided into eight levels from level A to 
H (beginner to upper intermediate levels), was used. They 
are written in Japanese using hiragana, katakana and kanji, 
but all the kanji words have hiragana written beside them to 
help learners read smoothly. Participants chose the specific 
titles on their own and read them on their own devices using 
BookLooper which provides reading materials in PDF. Since 
the titles the learners chose varied according to their interest, 
and one title read by all the participants was “Bocchan,” this 
study investigates its reading logs. “Bocchan” is an E level 
reader (intermediate), and consists of 31,000 letters and 128 
pages on PDF. PDF pages are fixed and do not reflow like E-
Books. This means the contents of a page do not vary 
depending on the device used by a participant. While the 
length of English text is counted by words, the length of 
Japanese text is counted by the number of letters. 
E. Pre- and Post-Vocabulary Test 
To investigate whether participants had learned words 
used in books through reading, a vocabulary test on the 
collection of the present graded readers was prepared 
according to the below-mentioned procedure and conducted 
as pre- and post-vocabulary tests. In order to ensure that 
participants who do not use kanji in their first language were 
not at a disadvantage, all the test items were written without 
using kanji. 
1. 
Depending on the word frequency in “Bocchan”, low-
frequency words, medium-frequency words, and high-
frequency words were defined as being used 2-3, 4-9, 
and more than 10 times, respectively. Thirteen words 
(five low-frequency words, two medium-frequency 
words, and six high-frequency words) were chosen as 
test item words. 
2. 
Ten dummy words that were not used in the book used 
in this study including “Bocchan” were chosen from the 
vocabulary list developed for writing graded readers [9]. 
Participants were asked to answer according to the 
following choices. 
[a] This is the first time I have seen this word. 
ID 
First Language 
JLPT 
Vocabulary 
1 
Chinese 
N2 
73 
2 
Chinese 
- 
61 
3 
Vietnamese 
N2 
80 
4 
Chinese 
N2 
86 
5 
Chinese 
- 
59 
6 
Vietnamese 
N2 
64 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[b] I have seen this word before, but I do not know its 
meaning. 
[c] I know the meaning of this word. 
Referring to Coady [7], Grabe and Stroller [19], and 
Paribakht and Wesche [20], participants were asked to write 
the meaning in their first language when they chose [c]. To 
judge whether the meanings from [c] were correct, one of the 
authors and a translator whose first language was the same as 
that of the participant compared the answer to the previously 
prepared translation made by the translator. 
F. Pre- and Post-Questionnaire 
A questionnaire was administered before and after the 
research. In the pre-questionnaire, participants were asked 
about the following: self-assessment of their reading ability, 
difficulties in reading, interest in reading graded readers 
preferred language to read in (Japanese or one’s first 
language), average reading amount in a month, and devices 
they usually use for reading digital books. Also, both in 
Japanese and their first language, they were asked whether 
they like to read and the genre of books they read. In the 
post-questionnaire, participants were asked which devices 
they had used to read in this study, their preference between 
paper and digital when reading, the effects of graded readers, 
and a comparison between graded readers and authentic 
books: (see Appendices A and B for complete versions). 
G. Quizzes 
To ascertain participants’ understanding of the content, 
they were asked to answer five questions on each title using 
an online system [21]. Each question had four choices for 
answers and was used to gauge their reading comprehension. 
The system displays correct answers and the rate of correct 
answers after participants submit their answers. 
H. Reading Logs 
The following logs left by participants were collected by 
BookLooper. 
1. 
Date and time of using specific functions: open (to 
open PDF file), close (to close PDF file), preview (to 
go back to a previous page), and next (to go on to the 
next page). 
2. 
Words marked on BookLooper as “unknown words” 
and as “words looked up in a dictionary” 
3. 
Comments inserted by participants when reading the 
book. 
III. 
RESULTS 
First, we will show the reading logs recorded by the 
participants and the number of new words they learned 
through reading. Then, we will discuss the relationship 
between Nuttall’s circle and the behaviors of the 
participants. Lastly, we will discuss how the unknown 
words were learned. 
A. Reading Logs 
Table II shows the results of the reading logs. “ID” refers 
to each participant. “Page” means the number of the last  
TABLE II.  
READING LOG 
I
D 
Pag
e 
Op
en 
Prev
iew 
Unkn
own 
Dicti
onary 
Tim
e 
Time/
Page 
Vari
ance 
Not
e 
1 
128 
91 
142 
35 
11 
285 
2.2 
4.8 
15 
2 
128 
46 
21 
9 
0 
263 
2.1 
3.3 
0 
3 
128 
73 
55 
6 
0 
229 
1.8 
1.6 
0 
4 
128 
6 
47 
1 
0 
233 
1.8 
2.4 
2 
5 
23 
18 
12 
1 
0 
92 
4.0 
16.3 
0 
6 
27 
20 
29 
0 
1 
49 
1.8 
4.5 
2 
TABLE III.  
RESULTS OF PRE- AND POST-VOCABULARY TEST 
I
D 
Quiz 
Words actually used (13) 
Dummy words (10) 
1-1 
1-0 
0-1 
0-0 
1-1 
1-0 
0-1 
0-0 
1 
80 
1  
0 
2 
10 
0  
0 
0 
10 
2 
60 
0 
0 
5 
8 
0  
0 
0 
10 
3 
80 
4 
1 
1 
7 
0  
1 
0 
9 
4 
80 
5 
0 
2 
6 
0  
0 
0 
10 
5 
- 
1 
1 
0 
11 
0  
0 
0 
10 
6 
40 
3 
0 
2 
8 
2  
0 
0 
8 
Total 
14  
2  
12  
50  
2  
2  
0  
57  
continuous page the participants read. “Open” shows the 
number of times that participants opened books on their 
devices. “Preview” refers to the number of times that 
participants went back to the previous page. When the 
number of “Open” and “Preview” is higher, it means that the 
participant more frequently interrupted reading. “Unknown 
words” refers to the number of words that participants 
marked as unknown. “Dictionary” shows the number of 
words that participants marked as words that they looked up 
in a dictionary. As Day and Bamford [8] encouraged 
students not to use the dictionary while reading, the authors 
of this paper also encouraged participants not to use a 
dictionary unless they found it difficult to understand the 
passage without knowing the meaning of a certain word. 
“Time” refers to the total number of minutes spent on 
reading. “Time/Page” refers to how many minutes it took a 
student to read one page on average. “Variance” refers to 
how far a set of numbers are spread out from their average 
value. A high number tells us that a reader read at widely 
different speeds. For example, if we look at three participants, 
ID3, ID4, and ID6, we can see that their average reading 
speed was 1.8 minutes per page each. However, ID3 and ID6 
varied widely in the span of time it took them to read 
different pages. “Variance” can show us what “Time/Page” 
cannot show us. Perhaps, ID6 became distracted while 
reading and this may explain why he/she gave up reading 
after 27 pages. It can be noted that participants who met 
many “Unknown” words and often used a “Dictionary” took 
more time than those who did not. Participants tended to 
need more time to read a page in the early part of a book 
compared to later pages. Participants most likely were not 
accustomed to BookLooper and did not have the background 
knowledge needed for the book in the first half. “Note” 
shows the frequency that participants inserted comments 
such as “it is interesting,” “I was impressed,” and “I do not 
understand” while reading. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

B. Number of Words Learned 
Table III shows the results of pre- and post-vocabulary 
tests. “1” means that the answer for [c] was correct, and “0” 
means that the answer for [c] was incorrect. “0” also appears 
when answers were [a] or [b]. For example, “1-1” shows that 
participants answered correctly on both the pre- and post-
vocabulary tests. In comparison between the words that were 
actually used and the dummy words, the answer set of “1-1” 
was found more in words that were actually used. It was to 
be expected that words that the participants already knew 
were used in the books, because the books were chosen 
based on their appropriateness to the vocabulary level of the 
participants. “1-0” shows that participants answered 
correctly before reading, and answered incorrectly after 
reading. There were two such results in this category, both in 
words that were actually used and in dummy words. “0-1” 
shows that participants answered incorrectly before reading, 
and correctly after reading. There were twelve such results in 
words that were actually used, as opposed to 0 in dummy 
words. This indicates that the participants learned the 
meaning of those words through reading. 
C. Virtuous and Vicious Circle of Reading 
When dividing participants into good readers (in the 
virtuous circle) and weak readers (in the vicious circle) 
based on Nuttall’s [12] theory, ID1, ID3, and ID4 were 
considered to be good readers and ID5 and ID6 were 
considered to be weak readers. In addition, we found ID2 to 
be a reader “on the way to being a good reader.” 
The average reading time spent per page for the four 
participants (ID1, ID2, ID3, and ID4) who finished reading 
“Bocchan” was around 2 minutes (Table II). From the 
results shown in Table III, they understood 80% of the 
content, with the exception of ID2. 
ID4 received the highest vocabulary score, 86, in Table I, 
and gave the highest number of known words (with an 
answer set of “1-1”), five, words that were actually used, as 
shown in Table III. Because the number for “Open” is lower, 
it can be inferred that ID4 concentrated while reading. ID4 
also left the comments, “It was interesting,” and, “It was 
sad.” That is, ID4 had already become a good reader in the 
virtuous circle because ID4 knew many words, understood 
well, enjoyed reading, and read at a fast pace. 
ID1 and ID3, who finished reading with an appropriate 
reading rate, were also good readers. It can be inferred that 
ID1 took more reading time than average because she went 
back to the previous page and marked many items with 
“Unknown” and “Dictionary.” It is likely that the variance 
of ID1 was greater because the time spent on the page where 
marks were left tended to be longer. ID1 enjoyed the 
reading, leaving many comments such as “It was 
interesting,” “I could laugh,” and “I was impressed.” 
In contrast to these participants, ID2 lacked necessary 
vocabulary, receiving 61, the lowest vocabulary score in 
Table I. ID2’s comprehension was slightly lower than other 
participants’ because he received a grade of 60 in questions 
about the book. He opened 46 times, went back to a 
previous page 21 times, and didn’t use dictionary. However, 
ID2 received a mark of 5 in “0-1” in words actually used in 
Table III, which was the highest. These results suggest that 
ID2 read by guessing the meaning of unknown words from 
context without going back to the previous page. Nuttall 
[12] said that any factor out of speed, enjoyment, and 
comprehension could provide the key to move students out 
of the vicious circle and into the virtuous one. ID2 read with 
appropriate speed and learned unknown words by guessing 
from their context. ID2’s behavior shows the process of “on 
the way to being a good reader.” 
On the other hand, ID5 and ID6, who did not finish the 
reading, were considered as being in the vicious circle. 
These two participants answered “my reading ability is not 
good” in the pre-questionnaire. ID5 spent 4 minutes per 
page, which was the longest. ID5 received a vocabulary 
score of 59; it is likely that she encountered many unknown 
words while reading. However, she marked only one word 
as “Unknown,” because she had read only 23 pages. ID5 
answered “I prefer paper” to the question “How did you feel 
about the digital book compared to a paper book?” 
ID6 took 1.8 minutes to read a page, which was short. 
The vocabulary score of ID6 was 64, and she read 27 pages. 
ID6 never marked “Unknown” and left the comment “I do 
not understand well” on page 4. Although ID6 had slightly 
more vocabulary than ID2, either she was not accustomed to 
reading on digital books or did not enjoy reading the book. 
ID6 answered the questions about the book although she 
had not finished it. 
D. How the Unknown Words were Learned 
To better understand the behavior of a participant who 
learned words during reading, the words marked on the 
BookLooper among the items of the vocabulary test are 
shown in Table IV, which shows ID1’s results. The 
frequency of each word in the book is shown in parenthesis. 
ID1 marked “Dictionary” on “shukuchoku (night duty)” and 
“batta (a grasshopper)” and “Unknown” on “kinodoku 
(sorry).” In the pre-vocabulary test, ID1 answered [b: I have 
seen this word before, but I do not know its meaning] to 
“shukuchoku,” however, he looked it up in a dictionary and 
answered correctly in the post-vocabulary test. For “batta” 
and “kinodoku,” ID1 answered [a:  This is the first time I 
have seen this word]. However, ID1 did not look them up in 
a dictionary, and answered [b] in the post-vocabulary test. It 
can be inferred that he guessed the meaning of the word 
because the illustration of “batta” was in the book. To 
“kinodoku,” ID1 provided the words in his first language, “I 
am sorry, excuse me” in Japanese. Although the answer was 
judged to be incorrect through the discussion between one of 
the authors and the translator, it seems that she guessed a  
TABLE IV.  
RESULTS OF PRE- AND POST-VOCABULARY TEST:   
WORDS WITH MARKS IN THE READING LOG 
ID 
shukuchoku (22) 
batta (12) 
kinodoku (8) 
pre 
post 
pre 
post 
pre 
post 
1 
b 
1 
a 
b 
a 
0 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

similar meaning from the context. Although participants who 
got many “0-0” scores in Table III are considered to not have 
learned the words through reading, there may be cases 
similar to ID1, who had guessed a similar (but not exact) 
meaning from context. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this study, participants who finished reading are 
defined as “learners who read more pages” and participants 
who did not finish reading are defined as “learners who read 
fewer pages.” In this section, first, we will discuss study 
question 1 and study question 2. Then, based on the 
behavior of ID2, we will discuss who was on the way to 
being a good reader, ways to support learners as they move 
into the virtuous circle. 
A. Amount Read and Reading Rate 
In comparison between the learners who read more and 
the learners who read less, the former took 2.0 minutes to 
read a page while the latter took 2.9 minutes. It can thus be 
said that learners who read more take less time to read than 
do learners who read less. That is, learners who read more 
read faster. 
B. Reading Behaviors Shown in the Amount and Rate of 
Reading 
Using the results of questions about books as ways to 
measure comprehension, it can be said that learners who 
read more, who gave 75% correct answers on average, 
understood the content. This, combined with the results of 
question 1, shows that “learners who can read faster and 
understand contents” read more. In that case, how did the 
readers who read slowly, and gave up reading after 20% of 
the book, understand the contents? The comprehension level 
of ID5 is unknown, because she did not answer the 
questions about the book. On the other hand, ID6 answered 
the questions about the book, and showed a 40% 
comprehension rate, and, in addition, learned words from 
the book. However, it may be that a lack of understanding 
caused her to stop reading because she left the comment “I 
do not understand well.” Therefore, it can be said that 
“learners who cannot read faster and do not understand the 
content” read less. 
C. Shift to a Good Reader 
Among “learners who could read faster and understand 
the content,” ID2 had a lower vocabulary level than the 
other learners, who had already become good readers (ID1, 
ID3, and ID4). Therefore, ID2’s comprehension was slightly 
lower than that of the others. However, the number of words 
that he had learned through reading was the highest among 
participants. This shows that the level of reading material 
was appropriate for ID2. ID2 read with appropriate speed 
and learned the meaning of words incidentally by guessing 
meaning from the context. It has been said that more than 
95% of words in the text should be known by readers in 
order for them to learn the meaning of unknown words by 
guessing from context [6][22][23]. The lack of vocabulary is 
considered to be the reason that ID5 and ID6 could not 
finish the reading. These results show that there are two 
categories among the learners who finished reading: learners 
who have already become good readers and those who are 
on their way to becoming good readers. 
These results suggest that incidental vocabulary learning 
occurs for learners in the process of getting into the virtuous 
circle. At the same time, to enter the virtuous circle, learners 
need to read a book that is appropriate for their vocabulary 
level. In order to support learners as they move toward the 
virtuous circle to becoming good readers, providing a tool 
that can judge learners’ vocabulary level is necessary in 
order to know the appropriate level of graded readers for 
them to start reading. 
V. 
LIMITATIONS AND FURTHER WORK 
In this study, to describe the reading behavior of 
Japanese learners outside the classroom, logs on digital 
books recorded by participants were analyzed. From the 
results, the behavior of learners both in the virtuous circle 
and in the vicious circle, as defined by Nuttall [12], could be 
seen. In addition, the reading behavior of the learners with a 
lower vocabulary level, who continued reading by guessing 
the meanings of unknown words from context, shows that 
the process of moving into the virtuous circle can include 
incidental vocabulary learning. However, the results of this 
study cannot be generalized because of the small number of 
participants. Furthermore, participants’ Japanese ability was 
assessed on the basis of vocabulary alone, but not in general. 
To improve the support system for Japanese extensive 
reading, a larger-scale study with more participants is 
needed to reveal the details of the virtuous circle of reading 
and the effect of vocabulary learning through extensive 
reading. This can be done by collecting more data from 
participants and giving a general assessment of their 
Japanese ability. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Number 18K00694. 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. S. P. Nation, Teaching ESL/EFL reading and writing. New 
York, NY: Routledge, 2009. 
[2] S. D. Krashen, “Does free voluntary reading lead to academic 
language?,”Journal of intensive English studies, 11, pp. 1-18, 
1997. 
[3] K. Mikami and T. Harada, “Exploring the possibility of 
incidental vocabulary acquisition through extensive reading: 
From results based on extensive reading and vocabulary tests 
of Japanese graded readers,” Japan Foundation Nihongo 
Kyoiku Kiyo, 7, pp. 7-21,  2011. 
[4] R. Waring, “Why extensive reading should be an 
indispensable part of all language program?” The Language 
Teacher, 30 (7), pp. 44-47, 2006. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[5] M. Pigada and N. Schmitt, “Vocabulary acquisition from 
extensive reading: A case study’” Reading in a Foreign 
Language, 18 (1), pp. 1-28, 2006. 
[6] I. S. P. Nation, Learning vocabulary in another language. 
Cambridge University Press, 2001. 
[7] J. Coady, L2 vocabulary acquisition through extensive 
reading. In J. Coady and T. Huckin (Eds.), Second language 
vocabulary acquisition (pp. 225-237). Cambridge University 
Press, 1997. 
[8] R. R. Day and J. Bamford, Extensive reading in the second 
language classroom. Cambridge University Press, 1998. 
[9] B. Reynolds, T. Harada, M. Yamagata, and T. Miyazaki, 
“Towards a framework for Japanese graded readers: Initial 
research findings,” Papers of the Japanese Langaugae 
Teaching Association in honor of Professor Fumiko Koide, 11, 
pp. 23-40, 2003. 
[10] I. S. P. Nation, Teaching and learning vocabulary. Rowley, 
MA: Newbury House, 1990. 
[11] T. Nakano, “Development of a support system for Japanese 
extensive reading: An evaluation of the system by learners,” 
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, 10 
(3&4), pp. 423-433, 2017. 
[12] C. Nuttall, Teaching reading skills in a foreign language. 
Oxford, UK: Macmillan, 2005. 
[13] M. Awano, K. Kawamoto, and M. Matsuda, Nihongo kyoshi 
no tameno tadoku nyumon. Tokyo, JAPAN: Ask, 2012. 
[14] S. Matsui, K. Mikami, and Y. Kanayama, “A report on 
extensive reading in the basic and intermediate Japanese 
classes,” The Research Center for Japanese Language 
Education International Christian University annual bulletin, 
9, pp. 47-60, 2012. 
[15] R. Ninomiya and M. Kawakami, “Effects of extensive reading 
on JSL learners’ motivation,” Journal of Global Education 
Hitotsubashi University, 3, pp. 53-65,  2012. 
[16] M. Kumada and M. Suzuki, “The effectiveness of extensive 
reading on learners at the intermediate level of Japanese,” 
Bulletin of Japanese Language Center for Internatinal 
Students Tokyo University of Foreign Studies, 39, pp. 31-48, 
2013. 
[17] M. Kumada, “Practice of extensive reading: Change in 
reading identified by talks,” Bulletin of Japanese Language 
Center for Internatinal Students Tokyo University of Foreign 
Studies, 42, pp. 111-122, 2016. 
[18] H. Ogata, C. Yin, M. Oi, F. Okubo, A. Shimada, K. Kojima 
and M. Yamada, “Analyses of learning behavior of active 
learners using logs of digital teaching materials,” Bulletin of 
KIKAN Education Kyushu University, 2, pp. 48-60,  2016. 
[19] W. Grabe and F. L. Stoller, “Reading and vocabulary 
development in a sedond languag: A case stydy. In J. Coady 
and T. Huckin (Eds.), Second language vocabulary 
acquisition (pp. 98-122). Cambridge University Press, 1997. 
[20] T. S. Paribakht and M. Wesche, “Vocabulary enhancement 
activities and reading for meaning in second language 
vocabulary acquisition,” In J. Coady and T. Huckin (Eds.), 
Second language vocabulary acquisition (pp.174-200). 
Cambridge University Press, 1997. 
[21] T. Nakano, “Introduction of blended type extensive reading 
lessons using electronic reading materials,” Shobi Journal of 
Policy Studies, 17, pp. 137-144, 2013. 
[22] B. Laufer, “What percentage of text-lexis is essential for 
comprehension?,” In C. Lauren and M. Nordman (Eds.), 
Special language: From humans thinking to thinking 
machines (pp.316-323). Cleavedon, UK: Multilingual Matters, 
1989. 
[23] B. Laufer, “The lexical plight in second language reading: 
Words you don’t know, words you think you know, and 
words you can’t guess,” In J. Coady and T. Huckin (Eds.), 
Second 
language 
vocabulary 
acquisition 
(pp.20-34). 
Cambridge University Press, 1997. 
APPENDIX A 
Pre-Questionnaire 
1. How would you describe your reading comprehension 
level? Why do you think that? 
a) Very good 
b) Good 
c) Fair 
d) Not good 
e) Bad 
2. What is difficult for you when you read in Japanese? 
(you can choose more than two) 
a) Unknown words 
b) Pronunciation of kanji 
c) Grammar 
d) Other (please write in detail.) 
3. Would you like to read graded readers? 
a) Would very much like to read 
b) Would like to read 
c) Yes and no 
d) Have no interest 
4. Do you like to read? Please answer regarding both 
Japanese and your first language. 
a) Yes 
b) No 
c) I do not mind 
5. What genre do you read? Please answer regarding both 
Japanese and your first language (you can choose more 
than two) 
a) Newspaper 
b) Novels 
c) Magazine 
d) Manga 
e) Other (please write in detail) 
6. Which language do you read in the most? 
a) Japanese 
b) Your first language 
c) Almost the same 
7. How many books do you read in a month on average? 
Please answer regarding both Japanese and your first 
language. 
a) 0 
b) 1-2 
c) 3-4 
d) 5-6 
e) 7-9 
f) more than 10 
8. Which devices do you use when you read a digital 
book? 
a) Tablet 
b) Smartphone 
c) PC 
d) Other 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

APPENDIX B 
Post-Questionnaire 
1. 
Which devices did you use to read digital books? (you 
can choose more than two) 
a)  Tablet 
b)  Smartphone 
c)  PC 
d)  Other 
2. 
Do you prefer paper books or digital books and why? 
Please choose one from A, B, or C. Please write why 
you chose A, B, or C. 
a) Paper books 
b) Digital books 
c) I do not care 
3. 
Do you think that graded readers will be effective in 
improving your reading comprehension, if you 
continue extensive reading? 
a) It really helps to improve my reading ability. 
b) It helps to improve my reading ability a little bit. 
c) My reading ability will not change. 
d) Other (Please write a comment) 
4. If you answered a) or b) in 3, what do you think the 
effect of ER is? (you can choose more than two) 
a) Extensive reading helps me to learn words. 
b) Extensive reading helps me to learn how to read 
kanji. 
c) Extensive reading helps me to understand contents 
without a dictionary. 
d) Other (please write a comment.) 
5. Could you read graded readers with the same ease as 
stories written in your first language? 
a) I could read graded readers with the same ease as 
stories written in my first language. 
b) I could read graded readers more easily than stories 
written in my first language. 
c) I read graded readers with more difficulty than 
stories written in my first language. 
d) Other (please write a comment) 
6. Do you prefer graded readers or general books written 
for native Japanese people? Please explain. 
a) Graded readers 
b) Books written for native Japanese people 
c) I do not care 
d) Other (please write a comment) 
 
 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

