A Learning Engineering Ethical Framework: Keeping the Learner Centered  
Rachel Van Campenhout
Duquesne University 
Pittsburgh, USA 
Email: vancampenhoutr@duq.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Learning engineering is a learner-centered practice. 
Its multidisciplinary approach is part of what makes learning 
engineering such a versatile and valuable tool for designing 
learning in a wide range of contexts. This paper proposes that 
the learner-centered component is critical to the heart of 
learning engineering and is what shifts this practice from a 
productive method for developing learning environments to an 
ethical practice. The learner-centered position of learning 
engineering will be characterized, the ethical practices outlined, 
and an ethical framework described. The learning engineering 
ethical 
practice 
provides 
professional 
purpose 
to 
the 
practitioner and maintains the learner as the heart of the design 
and development process. 
Keywords—learning engineering; learning engineering process, 
ethical voice, professional purpose, ethics, ethical framework. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
As an emerging discipline, learning engineering is “a 
process and practice that applies the learning sciences using 
human-centered engineering design methodologies and data-
informed decision making to support learners and their 
development” [4]. Learning engineering draws from many 
disciplines with a goal of supporting learners [3], which makes 
learning engineering a useful practice in many contexts—
from developing courses at higher education institutes, to 
creating a technology-integrated curriculum in K-12 
environments, to developing online learning technology for 
private companies [2]. The practice of learning engineering is 
the same in each case and is also supported by the Learning 
Engineering Process (LEP) [5]. The LEP, as shown in Figure 
1, is a structured development process that helps a learning 
engineer (or learning engineering team [1]), move through the 
context and problem to be solved, identification of the team to 
solve it, design and instrumentation cycles, implementation of 
the solution, data analysis and results, and iterative 
improvement cycles [5].  
 
Figure 1.  
The Learning Engineering Process [5]  
What does learner-centered mean? Learner-centered 
design is a common practice where the design process is 
centered on the learner’s needs [3]. The designer considers 
what the goal is for the learner and determines how to best 
help that learner achieve said goal. Like the LEP, learner-
centered design is context agnostic and is applicable in any 
setting. However, in the learning engineering context, there 
are additional requirements placed on the learning engineer in 
the design and development of learner-centered solutions. The 
consultation and application of research in the design and 
development of the solution is a key step at the start of the 
LEP, and this research-based approach ensures that the 
decisions being made on behalf of the learner are proven to be 
beneficial for them [9]. The LEP also has a series of steps that 
act as natural reflection points for the learning engineer (or 
team) to assess how the solution is operating for the learner 
[9]. For example, the design and instrumentation phase may 
have many improvement cycles as the learning engineer stops 
to reflect on how that design functions for the learner, and 
identifies potential problems or improvements. The learning 
engineer approaches this task by attempting to see as the 
learner would. The implementation of the solution is also a 
key moment for the learning engineer to help prepare learners 
to use the solution to as intended. The real-world use of the 
solution is as important as the intention of the design, so 
proper instruction for the learner during implementation is 
another moment for the learning engineer to keep the learner 
in the center of the LEP. The data analysis and iterative 
improvement is focused on how to improve the solution for 
the learner, maintaining the learner as the center of the 
process. 
II. 
LEARNING ENGINEERING AND ETHICS 
There are many moments in the LEP when the learning 
engineer is able to “center” the learner in the practice, but how 
does this become an ethical practice? Learning engineering as 
a practice is working to create something or solve a problem 
for the learner, and therefore, is in service to the learner. This 
service to the learner provides the learning engineer with a 
professional purpose, and this in turn helps the learning 
engineer develop and use an ethical voice during the LEP [9]. 
The ethical voice helps practitioners understand why they 
practice in addition to how they practice [6]. By maintaining 
a higher order professional purpose and using an ethical voice, 
professionals can hold themselves and their organizations to 
higher standards, above and beyond contractual or economic 
obligations [6]. The learning engineer becomes an advocate 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-873-0
eLmL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

for the learner by using this ethical voice to ensure the 
learner’s best interests are maintained during complex 
development processes.  
This learning engineering ethical voice, used in service to 
the learner, helps to conceptualize the learner as real, complex 
human beings. This might seem strange, because what else 
would the learner be? But it is not hard to develop something 
for the learner and yet that learner has become an abstraction 
or generality [8]. This abstraction is especially easy to do 
when the learner is not an immediate stakeholder in designing 
and developing the learning engineering solution [8] [9]. 
Using this ethical voice—derived from a purpose in service to 
the learner—the learning engineer can imagine the learner as 
a complex person during the LEP. Imagining the solution 
through the eyes of the learner is a method of ethical practice 
that helps maintain the learner in a situational context: where 
are they, who are they, how are they learning, with what are 
they learning, what is their motivation, etc.  
By using this ethical voice, the learning engineer engages 
in a dialogic ethic [9]. The communication between the 
learning engineer and the learner, even when not present [8], 
is a form of dialogic ethics as the learning engineer strives to 
maintain the learner as a participant in the LEP. The ethical 
voice is also used in dialogic ethics by communicating with 
team members and stakeholders in the development cycle 
itself [8]. The LEP itself has several points in which the team 
can pause to evaluate the solution, and these reflection points 
are natural places for this dialogic ethic to be exercised [9].  
Learning engineering provides the practitioner with an 
ethical approach to the discipline in both professional purpose 
and process, as shown in the framework of Figure 2 [9]. As a 
learner-centered discipline, the learning engineer has a 
professional purpose in service to the learner, and this helps to 
develop an ethical voice. This ethical voice is used to engage 
in a dialogic ethic with and for the learner and team during the 
LEP. This learning engineering ethical practice brings this 
practitioner group into the educational community that 
engages in an “ethic of caring” [7]. 
 
                  
Figure 2. The Learning Engineering Ethical Framework [9] 
This ethical framework is beneficial for both the learning 
engineer and the learner. By understanding their professional 
purpose, the learning engineer gains agency through use of an 
ethical voice. They can use this ethical voice to maintain focus 
on the learner during the LEP, even when confronted with 
challenges from other team members or stakeholders. The 
student benefits by receiving a learning solution genuinely 
created with their best interests at its center. The LEP becomes 
an ethical tool for the learning engineer that is used to maintain 
the learner as the center of the process—from initial research 
to design to implementation and iteration.  
III. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Learning engineering will continue to grow as a discipline 
and be applied in increasingly varied contexts. By actively 
engaging in this ethical framework, the learning engineer can 
maintain an authentic learner-centered practice. As learning 
engineers and teams apply the Learning Engineering Process 
in increasingly complex and diverse ways, attention must be 
paid to how the learner stays centered in the practice. This 
learner-centered ethical framework simultaneously serves 
both the practitioners and learners—enabling the learning 
engineer to use their ethical voice and tools in service of the 
learner.  
Future work on ethics in learning engineering should focus 
on gathering case studies on how practitioners use ethics in 
diverse contexts to continue to iterate on the framework. 
Future work should also discuss how to cultivate this ethical 
approach in practice, so as to include learning engineers and 
teams in the educational community of ethical caring. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Goodell, A. Kessler, D. Kurzweil, and J. Koldner, 
“Competencies of Learning Engineering Teams and Team 
Members.” In IEEE ICICLE Proceedings of the 2019 
Conference on Learning Engineering, Arlington, VA. 
[2] J. Goodell, M. Lee, and J. Lis, “What we discovered at the roots 
of learning engineering.” In IEEE ICICLE Proceedings of the 
2019 Conference on Learning Engineering, Arlington, VA. 
[3] J. Goodell, and K. P. Thai, “A Learning Engineering Model for 
Learner-Centered Adaptive Systems.” In: Stephanidis et al. 
(eds) Adaptive Instructional Systems. HCII 2020. LNCS, vol 
12425, pp. 557–573, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
60128-7  
[4] IEEE ICICLE, “What is Learning Engineering?” Retrieved 
01/11/2021 from: https://sagroups.ieee.org/icicle/  
[5] A. Kessler, and Design SIG colleagues. “Learning Engineering 
Process 
Strong 
Person,” 
Retrieved 
01/11/2021 
from 
https://sagroups.ieee.org/icicle/learning-engineering-process/  
[6] H. Lin, “The ethics of instructional technology: issues and 
coping strategies experienced by professional technologists in 
design and training situations in higher education,” 
Educational Technology Research and Development, vol. 
55(5), pp. 411–437, 2007. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-006-
9029-y  
[7] N. Noddings, “An ethic of caring and its implications for 
instructional arrangements,” American Journal of Education, 
vol. 96(2), pp. 215–230 1988. https://doi.org/10.1086/443894  
[8] M. J. Salvo, “Ethics of Engagement: User-Centered Design and 
Rhetorical Methodology,” In Technical Communication 
Quarterly, 
vol. 
10(3), 
pp. 
273–290, 
2001. 
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15427625tcq1003_3  
[9] R. Van Campenhout, “Learning engineering as an ethical 
framework: A case study of adaptive courseware.” In: R. 
Sottilare, J. Schwarz (eds) Adaptive Instructional Systems. 
HCII 2021
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-873-0
eLmL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

