Blue-QTI: A Mobile Learning System Using Bluetooth and IMS QTI Specification 
 
Luis A. Álvarez-González, Erick Araya, Ricardo Nuñez, and Fabiola Cárdenas 
Grupo de Investigación en Tecnología de Aprendizaje  
Universidad Austral de Chile 
Valdivia, Chile 
lalvarez@uach.cl, earaya@uach.cl, rnunez.navarrete@gmail.com, fabiolacardenas@uach.cl 
 
 
 
Abstract—The paper shows the development of a system; 
called ―Blue-QTI‖; it uses low cost mobiles phones with 
Bluetooth and J2ME. The system allows questions and 
answers under IMS–QTI specification, to do that, the 
AquRate authoring tools is used. The lecturer installs the 
software Blue-QTI in his/her laptop and the students, in the 
classroom, using mobile phones to interact with the lecturer. 
Only simple interactions are implemented, because limited 
phones are used. The interactive learning is the pedagogical 
approach used to develop this tool. Three workshops with 
lecturers and students were used to test the tool. 
Keywords-Mobile–learning; 
Interactive 
learning;  
Bluetooth; IMS-QTI. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
According to Alfred Bork, “the psychologists agree that 
the best feedback is that which comes immediately after the 
event” [2]. So, to increase interactivity in the classroom, it 
seems appropriate to include questions and quick answers. 
However, in a classic verbal scheme, to ask a question to 
several students takes a few minutes, because for reasons of 
clarity it should be answered in sequence. If we change the 
scenario to a system of questions and answers in written 
form, the teacher takes several minutes to evaluate the 
answers. This is the reason why the inclusion of mobile 
devices equipped with wireless communication (m-
learning), would help provide the desired level of 
interactivity. This way, the results to the questions, 
designed to obtain short answers can be answered quickly 
and personally by the students (each with a mobile device), 
can be seen immediately by the teacher. If this is added the 
fact that most mobile devices have the Bluetooth 
technology then an opportunity to incorporate interactive 
learning in the classroom appears, with a common personal 
device (mobile phone). The solution to do that is to have a 
mobile learning system based on Bluetooth to be used in a 
classroom [9][10].  
Some others applications are: 
 Eduinnova software [11]. It is based on  Wi-Fi 
communication for PocketPC and ClassmatePC, 
which uses a PDA to gather real time information 
about the performance of different groups of 
students. This information is displayed graphically. 
 Interwrite [3] - A global company that develops 
solutions for interactive learning in different 
educational levels. The company has developed 
software that supports multiple devices through 
wireless 
communication. The 
device 
type 
is 
selected according to the number of students. This 
application works on Windows XP SP2, Windows 
Vista SP1 and Mac OS X 10.4.1 or higher. The 
software associated is the InterwriteResponse [5]. 
 Promethean [7] - Company of interactive learning 
technologies. The 
software 
performs 
wireless 
communication with devices using a USB device 
called ActivHub connected to a computer or laptop, 
and works with Windows, MAC OS and Ubuntu 
Linux. 
The previous applications are based on proprietary 
specifications. And even more, the use of standards in 
educational software has not been sufficiently considered in 
the development of software for mobile devices, which adds 
value to the development of a solution that includes this 
options. 
The solution presented in this paper considers the IMS-
QTI specification; the software is developed using J2ME 
and Bluetooth technology. 
 
A. The IMS-QTI specification 
 The IMS-QTI is one of the IMS Global Consortium 
standards for developing software in the field of learning 
technologies. IMS-QTI specification [4] describes a 
structure to represent questions or items (assessment item), 
manages assessments or complete reviews (assessment test) 
and reports the results. IMS-QTI presents a model that 
defines the main components that make up the evaluation 
process and provides a content format for storing the 
questions independently of the system architecture or 
authoring tool used to create them. For the interconnection 
between systems through IMS-QTI, it is recommended the 
use of XML.  In this case of IMS-QTI, the term "question" 
is replaced by "interaction". An interaction allows the 
teacher to specify the tool that the student will have to build 
a response with. Because there are multiple types of 
63
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

questions, there are many types of interactions, some of 
which are explained below. 
1)  Simple Interactions: These kinds of interactions are 
based on the selection of an option or multiple 
options.  Some of the interactions in this category are 
“choiceInteraction”, 
“orderInteraction”, 
“associateInter-
action”,  “matchInteraction”. 
2) 
 Text Interactions: These kinds of interactions allow 
answers in text. Some of the interactions in this category are 
“inlineChoiceInteraction”, “textEntryInteraction”, 
“extendedTextInteraction”. 
3)  Graphic Interactions: Graphic interactions have an 
image as the main element to be used as the background of 
the statement, and on which all actions performed allow the 
user to build a response. Some of the interactions in this 
category are “hotspotInteraction”, “selectPointInteraction”, 
“graphicOrderInteraction”. 
To implement the questions according to the IMS-QTI 
specification, the AquRate1 authoring tool is used [1]. 
B. The J2ME Platform 
J2ME is a collection of technologies and specifications 
that can be combined to build a Java runtime environment 
to meet specific requirements of a device or particular 
market [6]. For the proposed solution, the configuration 
CLDC (Connected Limited Device Configuration) is used. 
This configuration is for memory-limited devices, low-
processing capacity and limited graphics capabilities, such 
as mobile phones. In addition to this configuration, the 
profile MIDP is required. The specification MIDP (Mobile 
Information Device Profile) was created to work with 
devices with small screens and batteries. With it, you can 
use programs called "MIDlets" to define the user interface. 
Also, in the option packages available on J2ME, there is a 
set of standards application programmer interfaces (API) 
for various technologies such as Bluetooth. 
C. The Bluetooth Technology 
The three major wireless communication standards are 
the infrared (IrDA), Bluetooth and WLAN (Wireless Local 
Area Network), also known as IEEE 802.11, and its 
variants. Both 802.11b and Bluetooth connections operate 
in the frequency band of 2.4 GHz., but they target different 
markets. The 802.11 technology consumes substantially 
more power than Bluetooth and is more common to see it 
implemented in laptop and smartphones with large capacity.  
On the other hand, there are Java APIs to implement 
Bluetooth technologies, including the API offered by J2ME 
to implement it in mobile phones. 
The Bluetooth operates normally in the radio frequency 
spectrum of 2.4 GHz. If Bluetooth enabled devices are in a 
distance supported by the specification (between 1 and 100 
                                                                 
1 http://aqurate.kingston.ac.uk/ 
meters), a PAN network (Personal Area Network) is 
formed. In order to make connections via Bluetooth, the 
mobile device must have an API. In this case, the API used 
is the JSR-82. It is used mainly for high-level programming 
Bluetooth devices. 
II. 
THE PROTOTYPE 
The prototype allows to ask questions, under IMS-QTI 
Version 2.1 specification, using the authoring tool AquRate 
over Bluetooth technology, it includes a server computer 
used by the teacher and mobile phones used by students, 
The prototype was called Blue-QTI, the name was 
originated from the combination of Bluetooth and IMS-
QTI.  
The tools used for development are open source or free 
distribution. Thus, the development cost is very low. The 
criteria for selecting the tools were: 
 
Quality 
of 
IDE 
(Integrated 
Development 
Environment): Appropriate code editor with syntax 
highlighting, possibility of RAD (Rapid Application 
Development) and the customization option to add new 
services such as compiling various programming 
languages. 
 
Cross-platform: it required that the written code is 
portable between Windows and Linux directly. 
 
Appropriate GUI: graphical user interfaces usable and 
friendly to meet the functions arising from the 
requirements capture process. For this, libraries are 
also needed with visual components such as menus, 
dialog boxes, buttons, text boxes and drop down boxes 
at least. 
To design the prototype, UML was used. Figure 1 
shows the use case related to the client application and 
Figure 2 illustrates a use case of the server application. 
  
Figure 1. Use Case Diagram Client Application. 
Three roles were defined to access the system, 
identifiable by a user authentication process.  
Considering this, the overall architecture of the system 
is shown in Figure 3 which consists of three basic 
components: 
Client. Resident application on a mobile device that 
gives students the opportunity to answer questions sent 
from the server application and send text messages to the 
server. The device must have Bluetooth and Java support. 
64
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

The protocol available is piconet that allows eight 
connections, so only seven mobiles phone can be used. 
 
Figure 2. Use Case Diagram Server Application.  
Server. Managed application by a teacher which 
manages the sending of questions to mobile devices of 
students, according to the IMS-QTI specification. The 
computer or laptop where you run the application must have 
Bluetooth connectivity. 
Bluetooth communications channel. It is the wireless 
technology used to make the connection and data 
transmission between server and mobile clients. Its 
implementation is developed in Java. 
CLIENT 1
SERVER 
(1)
BLUETOOTH
XML
CLIENT 2 CLIENT 3 CLIENT 4
CLIENT 5 CLIENT 6 CLIENT 7
 
Figure 3. General System Architecture Blue-QTI. 
The components and tools used correspond to two 
separate entities that communicate with each other, 
corresponding to the client application and server 
application. The relationship between these components is 
shown in Figure 4.  
Presentation Layer : J2ME
Communication 
Layer : Bluecove 2.1.0
SERVER
CLIENT
Presentation 
Layer : MIDLET J2ME 3.0
Communication 
Layer : Marge 0.5
Presentation Layer : Adobe Air 1.5.2
Remoting: Merapi 0.1.8
Business Layer : Java 1.6.0_15
Data Storage : SQLite
Communication 
Layer : Marge 0.5
 
Figure 4. Layers diagram of software components of the system Blue-QTI. 
The Server application consists of two executables 
compiled using the Adobe AIR and Java languages. It 
interacts to send and receive questions quickly and safely to 
the student’s mobile devices, under IMS-QTI specification. 
The Client application side is a MIDlet written using the 
J2ME platform capable of receiving the IMS-QTI questions 
from the server. The MIDlet sends the answer on the same 
Bluetooth channel. Text messages are an extra functionality 
that is deployed in the application server. The database 
model that implements the Data Storage was built after the 
consolidation of requirements and use cases, which 
identified all the concepts involved at the Blue-QTI system. 
Basically, the database was built to handle the management 
of students, courses and teachers. This is shown in Figure 5. 
course
PK
course_code
 
course_name
student
PK
id_student
 
firstname
 
lastname
 
email
student_course
PK,FK1
id_student
PK,FK2
course_code
user
PK
username
 
password
 
profile
user_course
PK,FK1
username
PK,FK2
course_code
 
Figure 5. Blue-QTI data model. 
65
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

The tables “user”, “course” and “student”, representing 
the users or educational entities, courses and students, 
respectively. Table “user_course” is an intermediate table, 
to assign users to courses and allow them access. Finally, 
the table “student_course” is a link between students and 
courses.  
 
Figure 6. Screenshot associated to the use case “Send Question” 
The Blue-QTI system is to ask questions under IMS-QTI 
specification, so the use case “Send Question” is the most 
important artifact. The teacher selects a question from an 
XML file; previously created by AquRate authoring tool; 
and then sends it to the students whose mobile phones are 
connected to the computer server. The use case describes 
the interface and functionality associated with the system. 
 Figure 6 illustrates the use case "Send Question". 
III. 
SYSTEM REALIZATION 
The development of the system was conducted in three 
stages: the first one was related to the server (database and 
AquRate for interactions under IMS-QTI specification), the 
second one with the client and the third one aimed at 
optimizing the client code using the obfuscation technique, 
so it can be used in mobile phones with low memory 
capacity [8]. 
 
Figure 7. Screenshot showing the students associated to a course. 
Figure 7 shows the presence of students connected to 
the system Blue-QTI. In the “Status” column, the red icon 
means that the student is disconnected and the green icon 
indicates that the student is connected. The “Id” column is 
the identification number of each student given by the 
teacher. The “Questions” section (see Figure 6) is where the 
teacher sends questions and also can see the results to the 
question in graphical way (see Figure 8). The “Interactive 
Board” section shows the chatting between students. The 
“Course Administration” section is where the administrator 
can administrate the course which means add, modify or 
delete teachers, students or courses and also assign students 
to a course. 
 
Figure 8. Screenshot showing with the graphical result of a question. 
Figure 9 shows photos of the client application running 
in a mobile phone. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Client application photos. 
Only seven mobile phones can be used at once, because 
the piconet only allows eight devices and one of them must 
be the teacher's laptop. To increment the number of mobiles 
phones it is necessary a scatternet. However, a scatternet 
requires special devices. 
66
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
A mobile learning system to ask questions under the 
IMS-QTI Version 2.1 specification was developed using 
J2ME and Bluetooth. Three workshops were carried on 
with students and teachers to test the Blue-QTI system, the 
teachers had the server installed in their laptop and the 
students had the client installed in their mobile phones. 
These workshops were intended to test the Blue-QTI 
prototype from the technical point of view and also its 
usability. More specifically, these workshops were aimed to 
answer some questions e.g. how difficult it is for teachers 
and students to use the prototype?, what happens when a 
student turns off his/her mobile phone? or what happens 
when several students try to answer one question several 
times?, etc. Low cost mobile phones were used in this 
experiment. Only seven mobiles phones were used in each 
workshop because the piconet protocol which is the 
protocol used by Bluetooth can only handle eight 
connections. All tools used were either open sourced or 
free. 
For future work is necessary to implement the scatternet 
in order to increase the number of connections. The number 
of connections will depend on the topology of the scatternet 
network. It is also necessary to improve the Blue-QTI 
system to allow other interactions of the IMS-QTI 
specification. 
From the learning point of view is necessary to build 
pedagogical experiments to implement interactive learning 
based on the concepts of learning designs in order to test 
the system in the real world.  
V. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors wish to thank the Research and 
Development Office of the Universidad Austral de Chile 
through project No. S-2007-15 entitled Learning Designs 
and Classroom Management, project DID S-2007-02 
entitled Algebra Learning Units using ICT. Additional 
wishes to acknowledge the valuable comments of all 
members of the Research Group on Learning Technologies 
(www.gita.cl) 
VI. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Alsop G., Annesley J., Cai Z., Campos A., Colbert M., and Orwell J. 
(2008).  “AQuRate Final Report. JISC Capital Programme”. 
Available 
in  
http://www.jisc.ac.uk/media/documents/programmes/elearningcapital
/aquratefinalreport.pdf. [last access: 14.10.2010] 
[2] Bork, A. (1980). “Interactive Learning”. In R. Taylor (Ed.), The 
computer in school: Tutor, tool, tutee pp. 53-66. New York: Teachers 
College 
Press. 
Available 
in 
http://www.citejournal.org/vol2/iss4/seminal/CITEBorkSeminal1.pdf. 
[last access: 14.10.2010] 
[3] Educational Technology Center-Davis School District, 
Farmington, Utah (2008).”Interwrite Workspace”. Available in 
http://www.columbiaschools.org/technology4u/documents/IW
Handout.pdf. [last access: 14.10.2010] 
[4]  IMS Global Learning Consortium. (2006). “IMS Question and Test 
Interoperability, Assessment Test, Section and Item Information 
Model Version 2.1 Public Draft. revision 2”. Available in 
http://www.imsglobal.org/question. [last access: 14.10.2010] 
[5] Information Technology Services Ithaca College. “Interwrite 
Response–Understanding  Classes and Lessons. A Quick 
Guide to complete before you begin using Response in the 
classroom”. 
Available 
in 
http://www.ithaca.edu/its/quickguides/pdfs/response_understa
nding_classes_and_lessons.pdf. [last access: 14.10.2010]. 
[6] Java Sun.  “Java ME Platform Overview”. Available in 
http://java.sun.com/javame/technology/index.jsp. 
[last 
access: 
14.10.2010] 
[7] Marzano Research Laboratory (2009). “Preliminary Report. 
Evaluation 
Study 
of 
the 
Effects 
of 
Promethean 
ActivClassroom on Student Achievement”. Available in 
http://www.prometheanworld.com/upload/pdf/Preliminary_Re
port_on_ActivClassroom.pdf. [last access:14.10.2010]. 
[8] Mihailescu P., Lee H., and Shepherdson J. (2005).  “Optimisation 
Techniques for J2ME based Mobile Applications”.  Proceedings of 
the 
5th 
WSEAS Int. Conf. on Applied Informatics and 
Communications, Malta, September 15-17, 2005 pp. 181-186. 
Available 
in 
http://www.wseas.us/e-
library/conferences/2005malta/papers/499-339.pdf. [last access: 
14.10.2010] 
[9] Yanhui, Z., Wu, L., and Yingzi, F. (2007). “A Mobile Learning 
System Based on Bluetooth”. Third International Conference 
on Natural Computation ( ICNC 2007), vol.5, no. pp.768-771, 24-27 
Aug. 2007. 
[10] Zhang Y., Zhang S., Vuong S., and Malik K. (2006). “Mobile 
learning with bluetooth-based E-learning system”. Proceedings of the 
2006 international conference on Wireless communications and 
mobile computing. Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, pp. 951 – 
956. ISBN:1-59593-306-9 
[11] Zurita, G. Nussbaum, M. (2004). “Computer supported collaborative 
learning using wirelessly interconnected handheld computers”. 
Computers & Education, v.42 n.3, pp. 289-314, April 2004. 
 
 
 
 
67
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

