Preparing Higher Education Tutors for Delivering Online Courses	  
 
Stephen White 
School of Human & Health Sciences 
The University of Huddersfield 
Huddersfield, UK 
stephen.white@hud.ac.uk 
Sue Folley, Steven Williams, Jessica Allen 
Computing & Library Services 
The University of Huddersfield 
Huddersfield, UK 
s.folley@hud.ac.uk  
 
 
Abstract—This paper identifies that academic staff need to be 
suitably prepared to deliver wholly online courses, and outlines 
the steps taken towards achieving this, at one Higher Education 
institution in the UK. E-learning, whether partially (blended) 
or wholly online, is not simply about the technology, but also 
requires an understanding of the pedagogical considerations, 
and the skills that are needed, to effectively facilitate them. 
Through the use of a formal questionnaire, and collation of 
informal comments made on a social network, evaluation is 
made of a staff development course designed specifically to 
promote effective facilitation of high quality online courses. 
The results determined that the course is fit for purpose and 
achieves its aims. Future cohorts are already over-subscribed 
as a result of positive commentary by participants.  Further 
developments will be made, based upon constructive feedback 
by participants. Whilst possibly not unique, this course 
demonstrates action being taken in an educational institution to 
recognise that effective online delivery requires specific 
knowledge and skills that are different from those used in the 
traditional classroom. 
Keywords – staff development; distance learning; facilitating 
online delivery; higher education. 
I. 
BACKGROUND 
The way that education is delivered is constantly 
evolving, albeit at varying pace. Learners are now immersed 
in a digital world, with information and multimedia 
entertainment available at their fingertips. With technology 
becoming integrated into daily living, its involvement in the 
way we learn is unavoidable [1]. 
Yet despite its inevitability, ‘e-learning’ for want of a 
better phrase, cannot happen without due consideration [2]; 
it comes with both technical and pedagogical considerations 
which many academics are not conversant with [3], and poor 
implementation by well-intentioned individuals can be 
blamed for much of the bad press associated with digital 
innovation. But this is no different to traditional delivery 
methods, where a badly presented subject is not well 
received by the learners. Unfortunately it is all too easy to 
blame the technology, and learners’ are then reluctant to 
undertake what they fear will be similar experiences in the 
future. 
This can be addressed by ensuring that course 
development and delivery is carried out by academics with 
the relevant skills and knowledge, by querying their ‘digital 
literacy’; “those capabilities which fit an individual for 
living, learning and working in a digital society” [4]. The 
abilities of staff involved in education supported by 
technology, is a specific consideration for Higher Education 
in the UK, as a precept in the 2010 QAA Codes of Practice, 
where it states that “Staff who provide support to learners on 
FDL [Flexible and Distributed Learning] programmes have 
appropriate skills, and receive appropriate training and 
development” [5]. This is clarified further in the superseding 
Quality Code document [6] when considering the 
appointment, support, and continuing development of staff: 
 
“Individual staff members are able to access appropriate 
and timely support to develop inclusive forms of learning, 
teaching 
and 
assessment 
which 
are 
supported 
by 
technology.” (p.14)  
 
“Higher education providers also recognise the 
importance of digital literacy for staff and make available 
suitable development opportunities.” (p.15) 
 
To address this, the University of Huddersfield has taken 
a strategic approach to digital literacies, with the Enabling 
Strand ‘Professional Development of Colleagues’ within its 
Teaching and Learning Strategy 2013-2018 [7], stating 
‘TD3: Achievement of relevant level of digital literacy 
skills’. This is to be determined through evaluation against 
pre-determined Standards during the annual appraisal 
process. 
These criteria take the form of a Grid of Digital 
Literacies for Staff (DLS), which identify specific skills and 
knowledge that are set within four ascending levels of 
ability. The lower levels focus primarily on the use of the 
institution’s VLE (Blackboard™) to promote “100% use of 
Virtual Learning Environment”, which is a Foundation 
indicator within the afore-mentioned Teaching and Learning 
Strategy. There is then progression within the Grid, with 
advancement implied through increased, varied use of 
technology, both within and external to the VLE, with 
appropriate evidence of personal/professional development 
activities to underpin their introduction.  
Specific attention is paid within the DLS Grid to learning 
modules delivered ‘wholly online’. Additional benchmark 
statements are identified for both delivery and course design, 
and demonstration of achievement can be through 
completion of specific modules on the University’s MSc 
Multimedia and eLearning course (or equivalent), or a claim 
for Accreditation of Prior Experiential Learning (APEL). A 
third alternative, but only for wholly online delivery, is the 
Facilitating Online staff development course discussed in 
this paper. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

This paper will begin in Section 2 by outlining the 
structure of the course, identifying the framework it is 
adapted from, and the regular weekly pattern adopted within 
it. Following a description of the methodology in Section 3, 
the data collected from a formal questionnaire and an 
informal social network is discussed in Section 4. 
Limitations of the study are then identified in Section 5, 
followed by Section 6, the conclusions, which also outline 
future work to be carried out in this area. 
II. 
COURSE OUTLINE 
The Facilitating Online staff development course runs 
over a five-week period introducing participants to the 
approaches of online facilitation and the various tools and 
technologies, which can support this. The emphasis was on 
the practical skills rather than theoretical understanding, 
with a particular focus on how to achieve social interaction 
and engagement from the participants, rather than examining 
theoretical models. Participants were asked to dedicate five 
hours per week to the course and participate in a number of 
practical and collaborative tasks that emphasise the skills 
required of an online facilitator and the support that they will 
need to provide to their students in the future. The course 
was designed for participants from a variety of academic 
disciplines and with differing technical capabilities to share 
experiences and evaluate different approaches. One of the 
key objectives of the course was to give the participants the 
perspective of being on online student, as often the online 
tutors do not have that personal experience to draw on [8]. 
The course was adapted from a Facilitating Online 
course devised by Carr et al [9] from the Centre for 
Educational Technology, University of Cape Town, created 
with a Creative Commons Share Alike licence for adaptation 
and reuse. It is loosely based around the Salmon 5-step 
model [10], consisting of a series of five stages that 
participant’s progress through when using communication 
tools in an online course. The content and tasks described in 
the original course were substantially modified to bring them 
up to date, to make the course more appropriate to our 
context. Each week represented a different stage: 
• 
Week one: Accessing - was about getting 
comfortable with the learning environment and aims and 
objectives of the course. It was also an introduction to some 
of the course tools we would be using and to each other, so 
involved setting up a profile and introducing themselves to 
each other to start making connections and building social 
presence and trust. 
• 
Week two: Participating – was about exploring 
the different types of participant who may engage in an 
online space and to start thinking about how a facilitator 
would manage these participants and build community. We 
also asked the participants to reflect on what type of 
participant they were in this course. 
• 
Week three: Facilitating – was about developing 
online facilitating techniques and comparing face-to-face 
facilitation strategies to those that can be used online. 
• 
Week four: Applying – was about applying the 
skills learned so far on the course to produce a design for an 
online activity that can be facilitated, sharing that with the 
group and providing feedback to others. The idea of building 
trust between tutors and participant and between participants 
was explored. 
• 
Week five: Evaluating – was about evaluating 
both the participant’s skills in facilitating online and the 
course as a whole and reflecting on their personal 
development plans for the future. The participants also 
evaluated another participant’s activity design in a peer 
review process. 
The course was mainly set within the institutional VLE 
Blackboard™ and the tools included discussion forums, 
group and individual blogs, group wikis, and quizzes. A 
social network was also set up using Yammer™ for 
discussion, sharing of information/resources, and for taking 
part in some of the tasks, which also promoted social 
learning amongst the participants. A weekly synchronous 
webinar using Adobe Connect™ was also used, mainly as a 
discussion space where interaction and engagement by 
participants was encouraged.  
The structure of the course was identical each week to 
model good practice to the participants and establish a 
pattern of expected participation, so each week consisted of 
the following areas of content: 
 
• 
An introductory video from one of the course 
facilitators to introduce the week’s topics and activities 
and to demonstrate to participants the importance of the 
human element and online students feeling connected to 
the tutor, which Shin [11] labelled as ‘transactional 
presence’. 
• 
Pre-reading for the week’s topics, which included a 
mixture of journal articles, blog posts, videos, websites etc., 
to take up to two hours to engage with. Supplementary 
reading and resources were also provided each week, that 
were 
optional 
for 
anyone 
who 
wanted 
further 
recommended reading. 
• 
A short task taking no more than 30 minutes, often 
a more light-hearted task to ease the participants into the 
week’s activities. 
• 
A longer task doing something more substantial 
like contributing to a group wiki, which would take 
participants about an hour. 
• 
The weekly webinar, held each Thursday but at 
different times each week to accommodate different 
working/teaching schedules. This also took an hour. This 
was recorded for anyone who was unable to attend the 
webinar in person, so that they could catch up later. 
• 
Reflection in their personal blogs on the learning 
that week based on the reading, tasks and webinar, this 
was expected to take around 30 minutes for each person. 
 
We provided motivation, to both engage with and 
complete the course, in three specific ways.  
Firstly we issued praises on Yammer™ for various 
achievements. All participants who completed all the 
activities for each week would get a praise, and in addition 
the praises could be earned for a few extra activities like 
being the first to post on a discussion forum or for posting 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

up an interesting resource for the others. We also gave out 
praise for anyone attending the webinar in person to 
encourage synchronous participation. Each week we had a 
leader board showing who had the most praised for that 
particular week and overall. This received mixed reaction 
(see later) but it did allow staff to evaluate the ideas of 
earning badges and leader boards as possible motivators for 
their own students.  
Secondly, we mapped the learning outcomes of this 
course onto a Digital Literacy Framework (mentioned in the 
introduction) and identified that successful completion of the 
course, followed by the actual implementation and 
evaluation of their ‘project’, served as sufficient evidence of 
achieving the wholly online delivery section of the 
Framework.  
Finally, the tutors encouraged engagement in the course 
by having a significant presence at the beginning of the 
course, frequently posting to the Yammer™ network, 
commenting on discussion board posts, wikis and blog 
posts; this was reduced as the course progressed. This active 
facilitation also served as a demonstration of good practice 
to the participants, showing the importance of tutor presence 
in the early stages of a course, to promote discourse and 
encourage 
communication, 
until 
such 
time 
as 
the 
participants have gotten to the point of ‘self sufficiency’ in 
terms of having a communicating community. There is, 
however, a fine line between the facilitator having a strong 
presence in order to promote communication, and creating a 
sense of dependency that stifles communication not 
involving them. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
This research has been carried out to determine the 
effectiveness of the Facilitating Online staff development 
course in meeting its aims. The first cohort ran in March 
2014 with a cohort size of 11.  These participants were all 
members of academic staff from across the University, (5 
out of the 7 Academic Schools were represented). There 
were 8 females and 3 males in the cohort. Formal evaluation 
data was collected via an anonymous survey from within the 
Blackboard™ VLE as part of the course evaluation and 
review process. In addition, the informal unsolicited 
qualitative comments made by the participants within the 
social network Yammer™, were collated and analysed.  All 
data was anonymised, categorised and summarised and no 
individual can be identified from any qualitative comments 
included. The participants all gave written permission for 
their data to be included in the study. Ethical clearance was 
also obtained from the School’s Research Ethics Panel 
(SREP), to conduct and report on the study. 
IV. 
RESULTS & DISCUSSION 
A. Course Administration and Induction 
All (100%) of the participants  (n=11) found the 
administration and induction process satisfactory. This 
included both institutional course instructions from the staff 
development department, and a welcome email from the 
course team. 
Qualitative comments provided in the questionnaire 
supported these findings, indicating the process was ‘clear 
and straightforward’. In addition, constructive suggestions 
were made for there to be a pre-reading list made available 
ahead of the course, and also a pre-course checklist of what 
will be needed. 
One respondent commented that their own practice 
would be influenced by their experiences of the course, as 
they could now see a problem with the way they had 
previously been inducting online students. 
When asked how they would best describe the 
organisation and management of the course, using a 4-part 
Likert scale ranging from ‘poor’ to ‘excellent’, all 
participants except one chose the latter; with the exception 
suggesting it ‘requires slight improvement’.  This same 
pattern of responses occurred when the participants were 
asked how they would describe the facilitation of the course. 
B. Course Navigation / Structure 
In general, positive feedback was received on the 
navigation of the course. The navigation restrictions inherent 
within BlackBoard™, particularly difficulties encountered 
when trying to return to an area of content, were criticised 
by respondents, but the fact that this is built into the VLE 
and could not be altered, was also identified by them. 
The participants welcomed the structured plan for each 
week that was repeated throughout the course, because the 
consistency ‘prevented confusion’, became ‘comfortable’, 
and ‘helped speed up the process of understanding’. 
The delayed release of content using the Mark Review 
tool, which involves self-identification of having completed 
each stage, was well received, as it emphasised the need to 
complete the content in a specific sequence. The use of 
Learning Modules, another BlackBoard™ resource, also 
emphasised this sequential approach to the content, and 
surprisingly, this tool was something that none of the 
participants were previously aware of, despite having 
experience of using the VLE as tutors. 
The resources provided at the start of each week received 
positive feedback, with the introductory ‘talking head’ video 
for each session, featuring the course tutors, helping to 
‘humanise’ the activities. 
One area that the participants felt may require reviewing, is 
the individual project development and evaluation activities, 
as these felt a little rushed. This is something the course 
team will consider, but any change has to recognise that the 
participants need the personal development of the earlier 
weeks before moving on to design their own online activity. 
C. Interaction 
Contact from the course team via email and the social 
network, were identified in the questionnaire as the methods 
that most encouraged interaction by participants (identified 
by 73% of respondents respectively), see Figure 1. The 
immediate intimation would be that this is due to their 
‘invasive’ nature with notifications appearing on desktop 
and mobile devices. However, Yammer posts from peers 
were not considered as much of an encouragement as posts 
from the course team (55% compared to 73%), and emails 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

from the tools on the VLE, instigated through a subscription 
process, that indicated activity had taken place, were even 
less valued (36%). This could indicate that the participants 
were filtering the notifications and allocating different levels 
of importance to them, or possible never even switched them 
on; this may be because they did not want them or just never 
worked out how.  
Asynchronous content on the VLE, such as the videos 
and the leader board, were not as likely to encourage 
interaction (45% and 36% respectively), with the praise 
system on Yammer similarly appealing to some, but not 
others (45%) 
D. Course Resources 
The participants were provided with an array of 
resources to assist them with the course, and some were 
better received than others; see Figure 2. 
A screencast on how to navigate the BlackBoard™ space 
was generally found to be useful (64%), even though the 
participants all had experience in using the VLE themselves 
as tutors. Yet the screencasts on how to use some of the 
tools used on the course, (blogs, wikis, discussion boards, 
Yammer™ and Adobe Connect™), were, in the main, found 
less useful (18-28%), despite many of the participants using 
these tools for the first time.  
Indeed, it appears that resources that facilitated the 
participants’ navigation around the course area within the 
VLE, were considered overall to be the most useful, whether 
these were presented as a screencast, a Videoscribe™ video, 
or through the use of shortcut links. 
Apart from the screencast, resources associated with the 
webinar were also found to be useful by the majority of the 
participants, in terms of both pre-session setup checking, and 
for post-session reviewing of the videos. 
When asked to comment further, one participant 
suggested the introduction of a light-hearted ‘fooling around 
with tools’ session at the start, may help with familiarisation 
and to test equipment functionality. It was also thought that 
the help area might have benefited from being highlighted 
more, as some participants ignored it, assuming it was 
generic BlackBoard™ help. 
 
Figure 1. Distribution of the communication tools that encouraged interaction with the course 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
Email from the 
course team 
Email from tools 
subscribed to 
Yammer posts from 
course team 
Yammer posts from 
participants 
Weekly intro 
videos 
Leaderboard 
Praises on Yammer 
Percentage of participants 
Figure 2. Distribution of the resources and tools used within the course delivery, that were found useful to the participants 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
The videoscribe intro video 
The course navigation screencast 
Quick tool links 
Resources in the Further Reading folders 
How to use blogs screencast 
How to use wikis screencast 
How to use discussion boards screencast 
How to use Yammer screencast 
How to use UniConnect screencast 
UniConnect test session 
Recordings of webinars AS WELL as attending 
Glossary of terms 
Percentage of participants 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

The range of resources, from academic papers to more 
informal 
‘bite-size’ 
multimedia 
content, 
was 
well 
appreciated, however some participants acknowledged on 
the social network that they could have made better use of 
the pre-reading, generally due to time limitations they 
themselves had placed on this activity, that were less than 
the indicated two hours. Others, however, commented that 
they found this resource to be a ‘welcome distraction’, 
providing them with a reason to be reading, rather than 
dealing with emails and other daily tasks. It’s worth noting 
that the participants continued to use the term ‘reading’, 
despite the pre-reading resources comprising a range of 
media, including audio and video. 
E. Time Management 
The 
participants 
generally 
acknowledged 
in 
the 
questionnaire that the timescales employed within the course 
were correct for the expected workload, or thereabouts, with 
55% identifying it as ‘exactly what was needed’, and a 
further 36% finding it was ‘almost enough’, but they would 
have preferred more. Only one participant felt that the time 
allocated to tasks was ‘nowhere near enough’, and this 
would appear to be specific to their own learning needs. 
When asked to comment further on the time allocated for 
tasks, several participants acknowledged that they felt 
pressured to complete within the timescales, but at the same 
time accepted that if the course was longer they may not 
have subscribed to it, and increasing the course length may 
still 
not 
resolve 
the 
perceived 
problem, 
due 
to 
procrastination. Many participants stated that they had 
started the course under-estimating the time that would be 
needed, despite it being made very clear to them in the 
induction and pre-course materials. 
One participant suggested making the course ‘week’ 
from Friday to Thursday, rather than starting on Monday, as 
this would allow the weekend to be used more by those who 
chose to do so. 
Many of the participants used the social network to 
regularly apologise for their tardiness (despite it usually not 
being apparent until flagged in this way), which in turn 
caused discussion about having greater appreciation of the 
pressures faced by their own students.  
F. Online Communication 
One of the early tasks on the course was for participants 
to introduce themselves on the Yammer™ network, and to 
include their reasons for taking the course. This identified 
that the cohort consisted of tutors simply wanting to develop 
their understanding in advance of any developments, as well 
as those who were already involved in the delivery of online 
courses. 
When asked in the questionnaire about the efficiency of 
the course tools and activities in encouraging their 
participation, the majority of respondents (73%) rated them 
as ‘excellent’. The remainder suggested they ‘required slight 
improvement’, but without further qualitative commentary it 
is difficult to determine exactly what they intended by this 
response, as almost every activity the participants carry out 
requires some form of interaction/reaction. It may be that it 
is the peer-to-peer element that they felt needed further 
development? 
On the social network it was interesting to note that 
several of the participants, with experience in using online 
communication tools, felt able to admit that they had 
previously given little thought to the concept that there 
might be different types of online participant; indeed several 
suggested they had believed it to simply be a case of ‘active’ 
or ‘inactive’. As a result, their own practice would now 
change, to reflect this new understanding. 
Other less-experienced participants generally defined 
themselves as ‘lurkers’, and as this trend became apparent it 
promoted discussion by the participants themselves on this 
classification, and its relationship to confidence/competency 
levels. These discussions raised awareness of this subject 
and will inevitably be beneficial in the participants’ own 
practice. 
The participants provided very positive reviews about 
the weekly webinars, which provided regular synchronous 
contact with the participants. Comments in the questionnaire 
such as ‘proved invaluable’, ‘very helpful’, ‘extremely 
useful’, ‘an excellent way to finish one week and re-enthuse 
us to start the next‘, ‘it made the group bond together’ and ‘I 
felt part of a community’, all indicate that this was an 
important part of the course structure. After each week’s live 
webinar, the participants also used the social network to 
provide unsolicited positive commentary on the experience, 
remarking on the relaxed yet informative nature of them. 
Also, those participants who had previously facilitated their 
own webinars made a point of highlighting particular 
practices from the sessions, that they now intended to use 
themselves.  
Indeed, for some, the positivity around the webinars led 
to negative comments in the questionnaire, where attendance 
had not always been possible for them: ‘there was only one 
which I could not attend and I was really disappointed and 
actually felt quite out of the loop’, and ‘I found the recorded 
versions good… but frustrating because it was passive’. 
One participant was unable to attend any of the webinars 
due to work commitments on Thursdays. As a result they 
suggested, on the social network, that the course team 
should identify in advance when the majority of participants 
will be available to attend the webinars; but they also 
acknowledged that this will inevitably still result in some 
people missing out.  
Participants also commented on how the weekly 
webinars helped keep them focused on the course, with both 
the live sessions and the recorded videos of the webinars, 
assisting with this. 
G. Benefits from the Course 
When asked what they found particularly useful about the 
course, some of the participants acknowledged that they 
couldn't single out one particular thing, and that all of it was 
of use. Others identified the webinars and group activities as 
being useful, with individual participants finding benefit 
from the pre-reading, the telephone tutorial, from peer 
feedback, tutor support, and the fact that the participation 
was compulsory (even though the latter was not something 
the course team could enforce). It is worth noting that within 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

the responses provided by the participants, there is no 
obvious preference identified for either synchronous or 
asynchronous activities. 
The high standard of the course and the support provided 
by the course team was praised by participants, both in the 
questionnaire and on Yammer™, which is to be expected as 
the course tutors are trying to be exemplars of the genre – 
teaching effective online facilitating through online 
facilitation. Informal comments on the social network 
indicated that areas of good practice built into the course had 
been acknowledged by the participants, with the need for 
scaffolding, signposting, and regular interaction all being 
particularly highlighted, as well as realisation that up to 
now, some of the expectations that had been placed on their 
own students had been too high, in terms of tasks and 
timescales. One participant’s comment particularly indicates 
this point: ‘the course has shown me how a DL [distance 
learning] course should be set up’. 
In addition, all participants identified that they felt they 
had achieved the course objectives. 
H. Course Enhancement 
When asked if they would leave anything out of the 
course, the participants’ responses were very clear, that 
nothing should be removed. 
When asked if they would include anything else in the 
course, the participants provided some very constructive 
suggestions. A ‘warm up week’ was one idea, but this would 
of course then extend the course to 6 weeks. Providing 
examples of what other universities are doing in this field 
was another suggestion, which may be something that could 
be added to the pre-reading for one of the weeks. 
Despite the screencasts being rated low when asked if 
they had been useful, some participants asked for further 
screencasts to be provided, featuring some of the analytical 
tools 
available 
in 
BlackBoard™, 
which 
had 
been 
demonstrated during the webinars. The intimation was, that 
these would particularly be useful as post-course resources, 
rather then during it. 
Other requests focused on specific elements of the course 
that the participants considered examples of good practice, 
that they wished to utilise, such as tutor control within the 
wikis, the Learning Module and Task Review resources in 
BlackBoard™, and the icebreaker games and music that 
were used at the beginning of the webinars. 
One participant suggested that rather than adding to this 
course, that maybe an advanced course was needed to 
further develop participants’ skills and knowledge. 
V. 
LIMITATIONS 
This is a small-scale study and the data was drawn from 
a specific course with a limited number of participants. The 
study may have been influenced by factors specific to the 
student groups, which are not immediately evident from the 
findings. Also, experiences external to the course content 
and delivery may have contributed to the outcomes and 
opinions.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper has described the development and evaluation 
of a staff development course for higher education tutors, to 
promote effective delivery of online courses. Whilst 
recognising that such courses may inevitably already exist in 
other institutions, this course was specifically aimed at 
promoting good practice within this University, to raise 
awareness of the ways in which online delivery differs from 
the traditional face-to-face classroom, to reinforce that it is 
not simply a case of transferring practices from the latter to 
the former. 
The course is based upon an established framework, 
which was then brought up-to-date and made relevant to the 
current digital environment. Scaffolding is provided through 
a repetitive weekly structure, that utilises the same tools that 
the participants have available to use in their own courses. 
This is supported with an obvious online ‘tutor’ presence in 
all of the communication tools used, and regular timetabled 
live interactions.  
The evaluation indicates that the course is successful in 
achieving its aim, with participants, who are experienced 
academic tutors, acknowledging their raised awareness and 
new knowledge, of what is required in presenting their 
courses wholly online. As a result, for many participants 
their existing practice is to be reviewed, with further 
consideration given to the tutor’s role, and the student 
experience.  
This paper includes the evaluations of one cohort, but at 
the time of writing another cohort is due to conclude, with a 
further two already planned. There has been very little 
official promotion or marketing of the course; instead, word 
of mouth and positive commentary by participants has 
resulted in significant numbers signing up for the course. 
The constructive feedback provided by the participants in 
their evaluations will inform future work that is to be carried 
out, in developing the course further. 
One example of this, is that the next course will run from 
Friday to Thursday, with this change to the ‘course week’ 
providing the opportunity for participants to make greater 
use of the weekend, if they choose to, which may reduce 
some of the time-related pressures previously identified. 
The significant importance that participants placed upon 
attendance at the webinars, and the negativity it caused when 
this was not possible, has also been noted. Whilst it is 
accepted that the day of the week on which these are held 
should not change, in the future the induction process will 
include calendar invites being sent for all of the webinars; 
the timing of the events will then be amended/confirmed to 
promote the maximum attendance for each specific cohort.  
Future cohorts will also continue to evaluate the course, 
which will provide further data upon which to gauge how 
successful any changes are, and to determine whether an 
‘advanced’ course really is required, as was suggested in this 
evaluation. 
 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

REFERENCES 
[1] P. A. Ertmer, and A. T. Ottenbreit-Leftwich, “Teacher 
technology change: how knowledge, confidence, beliefs, and 
culture intersect”. Journal of Research on Technology in 
Education, vol. 42(3), 2010, pp. 255-284.  
[2] G. Salmon, and P. Wright, “Transforming Future Teaching 
through ‘Carpe Diem’ Learning Design”. Education Sciences, 
vol. 4(1), 2014, pp. 52-63. 
[3] J. Gregory, and G. Salmon, “Professional Development for 
Online University Teaching”. Distance Education, vol. 34(3), 
2013, pp. 256-270. 
[4] JISC. Developing digital literacies. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.jiscinfonet.ac.uk/infokits/digital-literacies/ 
Retrieved 20 December 2014. 
[5] QAA, “Code of practice for the assurance of academic quality 
and standards in higher education: Collaborative provision and 
flexible and distributed learning (including e-learning)”. The 
Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education, UK, 2010. 
[6] QAA, “Chapter B3: Learning and teaching. Part B: Assuring 
and enhancing academic quality. UK Quality Code for Higher 
Education”. The Quality Assurance Agency for Higher 
Education, UK, 2012.  
[7] University of Huddersfield. Teaching and learning strategy 
2013-2018. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.hud.ac.uk/tali/about/ Retrieved: 20 December 
2014. 
[8] C. A. McQuiggan, “Faculty Development for Online Teaching 
as a Catalyst for Change”. Journal of Asynchronous Learning 
Networks, vol. 16(2), 2012, pp. 27-71.  
[9] T. Carr, S. Jaffer, and J. Smuts. Facilitating online: A course 
leader’s 
guide. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.cet.uct.ac.za/FacilitatingOnline 
Retrieved: 
20 
December 2014. 
[10] G. Salmon, E-moderating: the key to teaching and learning 
online, London: Kogan Page, 2000. 
[11] N. Shin, “Beyond Interaction: the relational construct of 
'Transactional Presence'”. Open Learning: The Journal of 
Open and Distance Learning, vol. 17(2), 2002, pp. 121-137.
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

