 Development of a Support System for Japanese Extensive Reading: 
Supporting learners’ autonomous learning outside the classroom 
 
Teiko Nakano 
Shobi University 
Saitama, Japan 
email: t-nakano@b.shobi-u.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—This paper reports on the investigation of a support 
system for Japanese extensive reading. This system was 
developed for Japanese learners outside the classroom to learn 
Japanese through e-learning by reading digital books with 
autonomy. From the results of the questionnaire and the amount 
of reading by participants, it was found that video clips and a 
comment board are useful functions for self-study. Additionally, 
the findings suggest that, unless there are no discussions among 
learners, reading communities are useful in that learners are 
made aware of other learners’ presence. 
Keywords-online library; Japanese graded readers; reading 
community. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Extensive reading (ER) is part of an approach for teaching 
English to speakers of other languages to build vocabulary and 
develop reading comprehension [1] [2] [3]. The development 
of graded readers (GRs) has a long history, and a large number 
of GRs have been published. Extensive reading has not been 
a common approach in education programs because it is time 
consuming and qualitatively different compared with existing 
reading courses that are typically offered; however, through 
the development of a module that can hold students 
accountable for their reading [4], ER outside the classroom 
has been made possible. 
There has been a gradual increase in the number of 
Japanese GRs, and digital books of Japanese GRs have been 
prepared. Considering that most learners of foreign languages 
are studying outside the countries where the target language is 
used, an online library of GRs is useful for providing learning 
materials. Online systems have the most benefit for learners 
who learn autonomously outside the classroom. Currently, 
there is no system of Japanese ER which is available to 
independent learners outside the classroom. This study 
designs and develops a support system for Japanese ER on the 
basis that an online GR library is appropriate for autonomous 
learning [5], where learners select their reason or way of 
learning.  
It is recognized that, despite limitations, Video-Based 
Learning represents an effective learning method that replace 
teacher-led learning approaches [6]. In this study, video clips 
and a comment board were used in the self-ER support system 
as a preliminary study. Based on the results of a post-
questionnaire and the amount of reading, the usefulness of the 
self-ER support system is discussed. Moreover, this study  
 
Figure 1.  Schematic of a Support System for ER 
discusses the potential of post-reading activities for learners 
who study independently through a reading community on 
Facebook (FB), where learners discuss books with each other. 
This paper aimed to address the following questions:  
(1) Can the video clips replace teachers? 
(2) As an indicator of the presence of other learners, is a 
comment board useful for encouraging reading? 
(3) Is an ER FB group that discusses books useful for 
encouraging reading? 
In section II, we will discuss the design of this system. 
Then, in section III, we will look at the methodology of this 
study. In section IV, we will examine how useful this system 
was based on the results of a post questionnaire and amount 
of reading. In section V, we will conclude this study. 
II. 
A SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR AUTONOMOUS LEARNING 
Fig. 1 shows a schematic of the support system for ER, 
which has two purposes and functions. First, the system 
supports blended ER lessons (blended-ER support system), 
which are designed for teachers who provide such lessons. 
Second, it is a support system for learners who study by 
themselves (self-ER support system). This system was 
designed to facilitate learning outside the classroom, and 
provides an online library of Japanese GRs such that learners 
can select their method and reason for learning. The common 
functions between the two systems are libraries and quizzes. 
In the blended-ER support system, the teacher explains ER, 
how to read GRs, and how to use the eERlab. The teacher can 
also provide post-reading activities, such as initiating 
Introduction to
SAKURA
ID
Password
Library (SAKURA)
Evaluation of
SAKURA
eERlab
Progress
What ER is
How to read GR
Video clips
How to use eERlab
Quiz about video clips
Complete perfectly
ID
Password
Teacher
Blended ER lessons
Self-study
What ER is
How to read GR
How to use eERlab
QuizAnswer
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

discussions about the readings. A blended ER lesson using the 
blended-ER support system was implemented, and the 
availability of the system was confirmed [7][8][9]. 
In contrast, the self-ER support system was designed for 
learners who learn independently through the system, without 
teachers. In this system, video clips are used in place of the 
teacher’s explanation so that learners can learn the same 
lessons as those in the blended-ER support system. 
Additionally, a comment board, on which learners write their 
impressions about books, was added to the eERlab to ensure 
that learners were aware of the presence of other learners. It is 
expected that knowing other learners’ progress would 
promote reading among learners visiting the comment board 
[10]. 
III. 
METHODS 
First, I will introduce the participants and then, explain 
the methodology of the study. Lastly, I will show the post 
questionnaire. 
A. Participants 
Ten international students (5 Chinese, 5 Korean) at a 
Japanese language school participated in this study. To 
understand participants’ needs and abilities, the Simple 
Performance-Oriented Test (SPOT), a vocabulary assessment, 
and pre-questionnaire were administered. SPOT was used to 
assess grammar [11]. A Japanese language proficiency test 
was used to assess vocabulary. 
The pre-questionnaire asked about the length of time spent 
learning Japanese, whether the respondent has devices for 
reading digital books, whether he or she uses social 
networking services (SNS), and whether he or she would join 
the ER FB group. The participants’ average period of learning 
Japanese was 1 year and 8 months, with the shortest being 4 
months, and the longest 3 years and 3 months. The results of 
the pre-questionnaire indicate that all the participants had 
devices for reading digital books and used SNS. Five (4 
Chinese, 1 Korean) of 10 participants reported that they would 
join the ER FB group. Those 5 participants were asked about 
the kind of SNS used, device used, frequency of use per week, 
with whom they communicated and the language used. Four 
of the 5 participants used FB. Four of the 5 participants used 
smartphones to access SNS. Four participants used SNS every 
day and the other participant used SNS 2–3 days per week. 
Participants used SNS mostly with “friends in their country”, 
followed by “family” and “friends in Japan”. That is, 
participants mainly used SNS to communicate with others 
living in their home countries and used their first language. 
Four participants used both their first language and Japanese, 
and 1 participant used only their first language. 
B. e-Extensive Reading Lab 
Fig. 2 shows a schematic of the self-ER support system. 
“Video clips” are used to teach “what ER is,” “how to read 
GR” and “how to use eERlab”. The time required to watch 
each video clip is 3, 2, and 5 min, respectively. “The quiz 
about the video clips” was prepared for participants to check 
their understandings of the video clips. 
 
Figure 2.  Schematic of a Self-ER Support System 
The “Library” contains SAKURA which is a small 
collection of Japanese GRs divided into eight levels from A, 
beginner to H, higher middle level [12]. “Introduction to 
SAKURA” provides information on each title, such as a brief 
introduction, number of letters, and vocabulary level. 
On the “Quiz” page, participants were required to answer 
some questions about the book that they had read. Participants 
were asked five questions with four choices each to gauge 
their reading comprehension. Additionally, participants were 
required to complete a questionnaire. Therein, they evaluated 
the length, difficulty, and contents of the reading, and were 
asked to report the hours spent reading and the frequency of 
dictionary usage using a five-point Likert scale. The final part 
of the “Quiz” page featured a comment board, on which 
participants could write their impressions about a given story. 
The data on the amount of reading were displayed in the 
“Progress” page, and the answers to the questionnaire and the 
participants’ comments were displayed on the “Evaluation of 
SAKURA” page, along with the participants’ IDs. 
The procedures were as follows: 
(1) The participants watch the video clips. After they 
complete the quiz section about the video clips perfectly, 
they log into eERlab using their user IDs and passwords. 
Nicknames are used as IDs. 
(2) Participants read books from the library on their 
devices. Participants are required to read from the lower 
level of SAKURA. eERlab was used for 3 weeks. 
(3) Participants answer questions about the story that they 
read, and complete a questionnaire to evaluate the book. 
They are then asked to enter their comment about the story. 
C. ER Discussion Group on Facebook 
The experimenter created a private group on FB and 
invited participants who opted to join the ER FB group on the 
pre-questionnaire. The members of the ER FB group were not 
classmates. Participants used their real names on FB. 
(1) The experimenter writes questions about each title on 
FB.  
(2) After completing the relevant reading, participants in 
the ER FB group are required to post their answers to the 
questions on the FB group wall. 
Introduction 
to SAKURA
ID
Password
Library (SAKURA)
Evaluation 
of SAKURA
eERlab
Progress
What ER is
Video clips
How to use eERLab
Quiz about video clips
Complete perfectly
How to read GR
QuizAnswer
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

(3) Participants of ER FB group are also required to 
comment on other participants’ answers and comments.  
D. Post-Questionnaire 
In the post-questionnaire, participants were asked: 
(1) How much did you understand the explanations of the 
video clips? What are the strengths of the video clips and 
what needs to be improved? How many times did you take 
the quiz about the video clips until you achieved a perfect 
score? 
(2) How do you rate eERlab and the difficulty of the 
quizzes? 
(3) Please give your reason if you did not write a 
comment on the comment board. 
(4) Please state why you did or did not find the 
“Progress” and “evaluation on eERlab” sites useful. 
(5) Please evaluate the ER FB group. What are the 
strengths of the ER FB group and what points need to be 
improved? Please state the reason if you did not write a 
comment on the ER FB group page. 
(6) Please give your reason if you did not comment on 
other participants’ posts on FB. 
Questions (5) and (6) were intended only for members of 
the ER FB group. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
First, we discuss the functions of the self-ER support 
system. Then, we examine the effect of the ER FB group. 
Lastly, we discuss the usability and effect of this system on 
users’ Japanese proficiency. 
A. Availability of the Video Clips 
To the question, how much did you understand the 
explanations of the video clips, 80% of participants answered 
“understood very well”. Among the strengths of the video 
clips, participants reported that the activities were: “easy 
because [they] just imitated the video clip;” “explained 
plainly;” and that “the speed of speaking was appropriate.” 
The points needing improvement were: “the speaking volume 
was low” and “the explanation was long.” The average 
number of times needed to complete the quiz about the video 
clips to achieve a perfect score was 1.2 times. This result 
shows that the video clips could replace teachers’ explanations.  
B. Availability of a Comment Board 
Four of the 10 participants in this study posted their 
impressions of the readings to the comment board. 
Participants who did not post their comments gave the 
following reasons: “I am not good at writing,” “I did not have 
anything to post,” “I did not have time to write comment,” “I 
did not notice the space for posting comments on the site,” and 
“it was troublesome.” However, regarding the function of 
displaying their comments on the comment board, 80% of 
participants reported that they found this useful. For the reason, 
six participants answered, “I thought it would be interesting to 
read other participants’ comments,” and two participants 
answered, “I thought that I should do the reading when I saw 
that other participants had already done so.” Participants who 
answered that “it [the comment board] was not useful” gave 
the following reasons: “I was not affected by other 
participants’ opinions” and “it was stressful.” 
It is predicted that participants who had not yet completed 
the reading were motivated to read by observing other 
participants’ progress. A reading community outside the 
classroom in which learners can know that other learners are 
also reading may be effective in motivating learners who have 
not yet read the book to begin reading. 
C. Effect of ER Facebook Group 
Three participants (2 Chinese, 1 Korean) in the ER FB 
group posted their responses to the discussion questions, 
which the experimenter had posted on FB. However, there 
was no discussion because the participants did not comment 
on one another’s posts. Although all FB comments were 
marked “seen by everyone,” no participants used FB’s “Like” 
function on their peers’ comments. 
In the post-questionnaire, participants who posted 
comments on FB answered that the comment function “allows 
participants to exchange ideas” as a positive point of having 
an ER FB group. For points needing improvement, they 
answered, “Using FB for discussion was good, but it was not 
useful in this experiment. The rules for commenting should be 
less rigid.”; and “The more members, the better the discussion.” 
In addition, participants stated that “the effect of [having a] 
FB group depends on whether each member is active or not.”  
A participant who did not write a comment on FB, but 
wrote comments on the comment board stated the following 
in an interview, “I could write on the comment board, but I 
could not write on FB. I could not [express] my real feelings 
in Japanese.” Another participant who did not write on the 
comment board or on FB selected “interesting” in post-
questionnaire question about the ER FB group, giving the 
reason, “I was able to learn the other participants’ opinions.” 
Although 
there 
was 
no 
discussion, 
participants’ 
impressions about the ER FB group were positive. 
D. Effect of Other Learners’ Presence on ER 
Table I shows the effect of the ER FB group on the posted 
comments. “Vocabulary” and “grammar” show average 
scores. “Amount of reading” shows the average number of 
titles that participants had read. “Quiz” shows the average rate 
of correct answers to the questions about each story. 
“Comment” and “FB” show the number of participants who 
posted their comments on the comment board and on FB, 
respectively. There was no significant difference in Japanese 
proficiency between the participants who joined the group and 
those who did not. In addition, the difference in quiz scores 
was not large. However, “Amount of reading” among those 
who joined the group was almost double that of those who did 
not. Furthermore, the rate of participants who posted their 
comments on the comment board among those who joined the 
group was higher than that of those who did not. Three of the 
four participants who posted their comments on the comment 
board had joined the group. 
Table II shows the relationship between the amount of 
reading and comment posting. Participants are divided into 
upper or lower groups depending on the amount read. The five  
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

TABLE I.  
EFFECT OF ER FB GROUP PARTICIPATION ON POSTED 
COMMENTS 
ER FB 
group 
Vocab 
gram
mar 
Quiz 
Amount of 
reading 
Comment 
board 
FB 
Joined 
77 
83 
90 
7.8 
3 
3 
Did not  
83 
80 
85 
4.0 
1 
  
TABLE II.  
COMMENT POSTING AND AMOUNT OF READING 
  
Amount of reading 
Comment board 
ER FB group 
Upper 
10.4 
4 / 4 
3 / 3 
Lower 
1.4 
0 / 4 
0 / 3 
TABLE III.  
JAPANESE PROFICIENCY AND ER 
 
participants in the upper group read 10.4 books on average, 
and the five participants in the lower group read 1.4 books on 
average. All the participants who posted their comments on 
the comment board and the ER FB group wall belonged to the 
upper group. This result suggests that the presence of a 
reading community encourages participants to read books. 
The amount of reading among members of the ER FB 
group was higher than that among those nonmembers. 
Although there was no discussion, participants were made 
aware of the other learners’ presence. However, it was 
suggested that membership in the ER FB group is an 
important indicator of participation in FB discussions. The 
effect of ER FB group membership on FB commenting and 
the effect of the comment board of the self-ER support system 
were almost the same in that they encouraged learners to read 
by making them aware of the other learners’ presence. These 
results indicate that an ER FB group is not necessary, but that 
a comment board is useful in the self-ER support system. 
E. Japanese Proficiency and ER 
Table III shows the relationship between participants’ 
Japanese proficiency and ER. As for the amount of reading, 
the lower groups in both vocabulary and grammar read more 
on average than upper groups. According to the logs of the 
self-ER support system, the time required to read in the upper 
group was shorter than that in the lower group. However, the 
results show that participants in the upper group who could 
read faster than those in the lower group did not always read 
more than those in lower group. Two of the three participants 
who read more than 13 books belonged to the lower groups of 
both vocabulary and grammar. However, three participants 
who read only one book belonged to the upper groups of 
vocabulary or grammar. In the post-questionnaire, these 
participants stated, “if I was given something that was 
appropriate to my level, I would have read;” “I did not know 
my level when I started;” “it was boring because there were 
same words appeared too many times in the texts.” According 
to these results, implementing a vocabulary level test that 
judges the appropriate level of SAKURA for learners to start 
reading is necessary. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
To develop an environment where independent learners 
outside the classroom can learn autonomously, we confirmed 
the usefulness of video clips and a comment board as 
functions of the self-ER support system. We also found that a 
comment board and FB group were effective in making 
independent learners aware of the presence of other learners. 
Further work is needed to improve the current system and 
to develop an environment where learners can learn through 
Japanese GRs independently. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Number 15k02650. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. D. Krashen, “Some new evidence for an old hypothesis,” 
Paper presented at the Georgetown Round Table for 
Lanuguage and Linguistics. April, 1992. 
[2] P. Nation, “The language learning benefits of extensive 
reading,” The Language Teacher. 21, 5, pp. 13-16, 1997. 
[3] R. R. Day and J. Bamford, “Extensive reading in the second 
language classroom,” Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1998. 
[4] T. Robb and M. Kano, “Effective extensive reading outside the 
classroom: A large-scale experiment,” Reading in a Foreign 
Language, vol. 25, No. 2, pp. 234–247, Octover 2013. 
[5] N. Aoki, ”Examining Definitions of Learner Autonomy,” 
Handai Nihongo Kenkyu 10, pp.129-148, Mar. 1998. [Online]. 
Available from: http://hdl.handle.net/11094/8114. [retrieved: 
January 2017] 
[6] M. A. Chatti, M. Marinov, O. Sabov, R. Laksono, Z. Sofyan, 
A. M. F. Yousef, and U. Schroeder, “Video annotation and 
analytics in CourseMapper”, Smart Learning Environments 
3(1), 10, 2016. 
[7] T. Nakano, Introduction of extensive reading using electronic 
teaching materials, Shobi University Sogoseisaku Ronshu 17, 
pp.137–144, 2013. 
[8] T. Nakano, “Implementing Extensive Reading in Japanese as 
L2 Environment: A Case Using Facebook to Build a Reading 
Community”, Proceedings of The Third World Conference on 
Extensive Reading, Chap. 8, pp. 69-78. [Online]. Sept. 2015, 
Available from: http://erfoundation.org/wordpress/ [retrieved: 
January 2017] 
[9] T. Nakano, “Extensive Reading for Second Language Learners 
of Japanese in Higher Education: Graded Readers and Beyond”, 
The Reading Matrix, Vol.16, No. 1, pp. 119-132. [Online]. 
Available from: http://readingmatrix.com/ [retrieved: January 
2017] 
[10] N. Kuga, T. Nakano, Y. Cong, J. Jung, and S. Mayekawa, “A 
Study 
of 
Social 
Facilitation 
Effect 
on 
e-Learning”, 
Proceedings of e-Learn 2006, 1659-1664, 2006. 
[11] N. Kobayashi, “SPOT: Measuring Japanese language ability,” 
The 31th annual meeting of the Behaviormetric Society of Japan, 
110–113, 2003. 
[12] B. Reynolds, T. Harada, M. Yamagata, and T. Miyazaki, 
“Towards a framework for Japanese graded readers: Initial 
research findings,” Papers of the Japanese Language Teaching 
Association in honor of Professor Fumiko KOIDE, Vol.11, 
pp.23–40, 2003.
 
Vocab 
Grammar 
Amount of 
reading 
Quiz 
Vocab 
Upper 
89 
85 
5.2 
96 
Lower 
71 
77 
6.6 
79 
Grammar 
Upper 
84 
90 
5.6 
85 
Lower 
76 
73 
6.2 
90 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

