EFL in Openness: A Project Based Language Learning with MOOCs and Online 
International Exchange 
 
Yayoi Anzai 
Kyushu University,  
Innovation Center for Educational Resource (ICER),  
Fukuoka, Japan 
email: anzai.yayoi.450@m.kyushu-u.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— Open education has been getting much attention in 
various educational fields, and the language education is not an 
exception. It is a movement to enhance opportunities for 
learning, which empowered by the current technological 
revolution. In particular, the web has been employed in 
English as a foreign language (EFL) education to change a 
traditional classroom, and has created a community in which 
students are able to actively participate in, exchange ideas, and 
collaborate.  By introducing two case studies, project based 
language learning with MOOCs and online international 
exchange, this paper explores new possibilities in Open 
learning and advocates the active use of ICT to foster English 
language learning. 
Keywords-English education; MOOCs; distance education; 
international exchange. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
Open education is a movement that expands educational 
opportunities. It relates to both methods and ideology. From 
the elite to minority, men to women, to education-
benefitting areas to remote areas lacking access, it aims to 
expand opportunities for learning. There has been continued 
debate and trial and error amongst EFL teachers as to how 
best to remove the borders of the classroom, and approach 
English education from a global point of view that is also 
authentic. Due to development in Web technologies, it has 
become possible for learning to occur on a global scale, 
allowing for collaboration and sharing of knowledge and 
bringing about great changes in classroom structure [1]. The 
purpose of this paper is to report EFL instructional designs 
with open learning, and explores its potentiality. 
Open Education’s history can be classified into three 
generations, the first being about 40 years ago in Britain’s 
Open University, which was introduced in print, radio, and 
television, the second being the impact of the Web (1.0 and 
2.0) on the exchange of information across the world, and 
finally the Open Education of the 21st century- that is, the 
rise of the Open Educational Resources movement [2]. We 
can consider MOOCs to be a part of this. Bonk defines 
Open Education as something that anyone at any place and 
any time can undertake [3]. For example, Japanese students 
in Tokyo are able to listen to a lecture by a professor in the 
US in real time, using the internet. With variety of learning 
designs such as mobile learning and collaborative learning, 
Bonk outlines 10 main learning trends in education, 
describing them as ‘openers’ of education.  The instruction 
in this paper was designed using one or more of these 
openers.   
In Section 1, this study introduces how MOOCs can be 
integrated in a regular EFL classroom.  In Section 2, the 
study introduces International exchange via ICT. These are 
the examples of EFL instructional designs which expanded 
opportunities for learning getting over the limitation of time 
and space.  Realizing authentic language learning in global 
perspective without spending much money is a novel part of 
these EFL instructional designs.  
 
II. 
CASE STUDIES 
 
This section introduces two case studies, Project based 
language learning with MOOCs, and International exchange  
with ICT.  
2.1.  Project based language learning with MOOCs 
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) have its roots in 
a lecture delivered by Athabasca University’s George 
Siemens and Canada’s National Research Council’s Stephen 
Downes’s in 2008 titled ‘Connectivism and Connective 
Knowledge’ [4]. Now many of America’s leading 
universities 
like 
Stanford 
and 
Harvard 
have 
been 
participating in MOOCs’ platforms like Coursera and edX, 
and 
a 
dynamic 
Web 
technology-based 
educational 
environment enables students to participate in an online 
community synchronously or asynchronously. There is 
interaction between the instructor and the students, and 
among the students [5].  
It is thought that one of the best ways to improve one’s 
English is to study abroad, however that is not a realistic path 
for everyone to take. Furthermore, while texts like current 
affairs, essays, and stories are being used as teaching 
materials in textbooks, there are not many textbooks that deal 
with lectures from foreign universities. Subsequently, there 
has not been much exploration into how effective that 
material is for English education. So, this paper investigated 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

the potential of the EFL instructional design with MOOCs as 
English teaching materials.  
A pilot study was conducted in the first semester of 2013 
at a Japanese university using a CALL. Their majors were 
International Economics and Politics. According to the 
results of a survey administered to the students, over 90% 
were unaware of MOOCs, so they were first introduced what 
MOOCs were. To help deepen the students’ understanding, a 
statistics course offered by Princeton University through the 
popular platform Coursera was introduced, together with a 
discussion of Bonk’s ‘Instructional Ideas and Technology 
Tools for Online Success’ that was delivered to an audience 
of over 4000 people in May 2012, and his articles about 
MOOCs [6][7]. The students were then split into groups of 
3-4 people to complete the ‘One Week Group Project’. They 
were asked to participate in a course of their choice for a 
minimum of one week, analyze the MOOC, and create a 20 
minute presentation on their findings as it is seen Fig. 1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Structure of the EFL instruction 
 
As a result, the students recognized usefulness of 
MOOCs to enhance English proficiency. This is reflected in 
responses to the question “Was MOOCs beneficial to 
improving your grasp of English?” as shown in Fig. 2 which 
details results of a survey conducted post-experiment. 
Positive responses were recorded across the board. 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
strongly agree
neutral
strongly disagree
 
Figure 2.  “Do you think MOOCs will enhance English proficiency?” 
  
More concretely, firstly, there seems to be potential as 
preparation for study abroad. Since MOOCs broadcasts 
lectures from different universities, it is possible to use them 
to get used to American lecture styles, identify important 
vocabulary, practice reasoning, note-taking, and so on. 
Secondly, thanks to the learning communities around 
MOOCs, 
classes 
can 
move 
beyond 
being 
passive 
experiences to ones where students can provide their output. 
Students were surprisingly active in posting questions in an 
online community. The Internet, as a platform to get one’s 
voice out into the world, would be good for improving one’s 
courage and confidence in using English. It is important to 
consider that being able to get one’s voice out online is vital 
for today’s increasingly global society. Thirdly, students 
were not found to have technical issues with the introduction 
of MOOCs. The lesson was conducted in the CALL 
classroom, so the students, as “digital natives” [9] of the 
modern world who had been using computers and the 
Internet since birth, were already used to e-learning, which 
may have been a reason for the lack of stress. Fourthly, the 
students did not seem to experience any major language 
difficulties while participating in their MOOC. This may 
have been due to the fact that this class was targeted at 
students with intermediate to advanced English ability, and 
the subjects chosen in the MOOCs were easily understood 
subjects like music, health, and food. In addition, the lectures 
delivered were fairly visual. Fifth, it was observed that the 
final One Week Group Project presentations promoted 
critical thinking. As opposed to just reporting their findings 
in their presentations, some students had moved beyond that 
to evaluate the course structure and the pros and cons of 
learning with MOOCs. As such, this educational activity was 
a means to get the students to integrate their learning and 
think critically. This study’s results unveiled the possibilities 
of MOOCs for English learning. MOOCs promises to be a 
new, appealing type of English study, in addition to stories, 
essays, news, songs etc.  
 
2.2 International Exchange with ICT 
A case study in using Web technologies for international 
exchange will be introduced in this section. In this class, 
Japanese and American university students conducted 
international exchange via writing. On the Japanese side, 
warm up activities were performed during the first semester 
of 2013. The aim of this class was to experience using 
English, a global language, as a communication tool. Our 
partner was the University of Kansas’s English as a Second 
Language (ESL) class, consisting of students from China, 
South Korea, South-East Asia and the Middle East. Together, 
the classes jointly aimed to conduct an asynchronous 
international 
exchange, 
and 
utilize 
English 
as 
a 
communication tool.  
Voicethread was the chosen tool for this exchange. The 
students from the University of Kansas’s ESL class 
introduced the cities they would like to visit, and the 
Japanese students made comments and asked questions in 
English, to which the University of Kansas students 
responded. Fig. 3 is a screenshot from the international 
exchange. The students at the University of Kansas posted 
pictures of their favorite places together with their 
descriptions. Fig. 4 illustrates examples of this interaction. 
“Hi, I am A. I’m going to tell you about my hometown. My 
home town is a famous place in Saudi Arabia...” This student 
introduced his hometown, to which the Japanese student 
replied, “Hi, I am B from Japan. I have a friend from Saudi 
Arabia, so I want to visit there someday...” They read and 
responded with their own impressions. 
 
Introduction to MOOCs and Open education 
One month project 
Presentation  
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
Figure 3.  Greetings of an American and Japanese EFL instructors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  An example of the students’ writing 
 
English educators that employ ICT often desire 
international exchange as a means of crafting an authentic 
experience. Nowadays, there are many tools like Skype that 
can facilitate this. The Web tool used in this case is not 
complex either, being very simple to operate and requiring 
little set up before being able to be used in a class. Also in 
this type of international exchange, the difference in time 
zones are an issue, but the asynchronous style of contact 
meant that collaborative work was still able to be achieved. 
Both sides of the exchange could feel the presence of the 
other as they communicated. Due to concerns over student 
privacy, the students used icons instead of actual photos to 
represent themselves. That said, there is a gap between 
knowing that using English on the Web would allow one to 
communicate with people around the world, and actually 
being able to communicate with people around the world on 
the Web–in other words, having the awareness about 
something vs. actually experiencing something. Beyond 
studying English, it is also important to experience what it 
means to communicate in English. 
 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
 
These two case studies illustrate how ICT expanded 
opportunities for authentic English language learning. By 
using MOOCs, EFL learners can get access to quality 
educational contents as well as having interactions with 
learners around the globe.  The same hold true for the 
International exchange.  This interaction among learners is 
the strong characteristic of language learning with current 
technologies.  
Taking into account second-languages and spoken 
foreign languages, it is estimated that 1.4-1.5 billion people 
in the world are English speakers [8]. In addition, the number 
of people who use English on the Internet are thought to be 
even higher, highlighting the importance of being able to 
communicate in the language. The English educators of 
today now face a world where technology they would not 
have dreamed of as a child is available, and they are aiming 
for a more authentic classroom experience by introducing 
technology into the classroom. As is seen, the incorporation 
of ICT in English education in universities has the possibility 
to traverse the boundaries of time and physical distance 
created by the walls of the traditional classroom, and allow 
participation, interaction, and collaboration in a global 
community. We can open the English classroom to the world 
with computers and mobile technologies. How this is 
incorporated into each English class will depend on the aims 
and curriculum design of each individual class, as well as 
creativity of the EFL teachers. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
This study was partly supported by a Grant-in-Aid for 
Scientific 
Research 
(C), 
JSPS 
KAKENHI 
Number  
26350332 from April 2014-March 2017 with representative 
researcher: Dr.Yayoi Anzai. 
  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Y. Anzai, “Digital trends among Japanese university 
students: Podcasting and wikis as tools for learning,” In 
C. J. Bonk, M. M. Lee, and T. Reynolds, (eds.), A 
Special Passage Through Asia E-Learning Chesapeake, 
VA: AACE, pp. 547-552, 2009. 
[2] A. Kanwar, and V. Balaji, Three generation of open 
education: future implications.  Paper presented at World 
Innovation Summit for Education, Doha, Qatar. 
Available from  
http://dspace.col.org/bitstream/handle/11599/1223/2010_ 
Kanwar_Three_Generations_Transcript.pdf?sequence=1
&isAllowed=y 2017.02.04 
[3]  C. Bonk, The World is open. San Francisco: Jossy-Bass, 
2009. 
[4] S. Downes, Free learning, 2011.  Retrieved from  
http://www.downes.ca/files/books/FreeLearning.pdf 
2017.02.03. 
[5] Y. Anzai, What about MOOCs for language education? 
In Proceedings of World Conference on E-Learning in 
Corporate, 
Government, 
Healthcare, 
and 
Higher 
Education 2013, Chesapeake, VA: AACE, pp. 557-561, 
2013. 
[6] C. Bonk, Want some MOOC with your TV dinner?  
Available from  
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

http://www.evolllution.com/distance_online_learning/wa
nt-some-mooc-with-your-tv-dinner-part-1/ 2017.02.03 
[7] C. Bonk, (2013).  Want some MOOC with your TV 
dinner? Available from  
http://www.evolllution.com/opinions/want-some-mooc- 
with-your-tv-dinner-part-2/  2017.02.03 
[8] M. Prensky, Digital natives, Digital immigrants, 2001. 
Available from  
http://www.marcprensky.com/writing/Prensky%20- 
%20Digital%20Natives,%20Digital%20Immigrants%20- 
%20Part1.pdf 2017.02.03.  
[9] D. Crystal, D., English worldwide, In Hogg, R., and 
Denison, D. (eds.) A history of the English language, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 420-439,  
   2006. 
 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

