A Pathway to Inquiry-Based Teaching:
Digital Knowledge Transfer from Natural History Museums to School Classrooms
*Bogner, Franz X. & **Sotiriou, S.
*University of Bayreuth
Centre of Math & Science Education (Z-MNU)
95447 Bayreuth, GERMANY
email: franz.bogner@uni-bayreuth.de
**Ellinogermaniki Agogi
Research & Development Department
Pallini, Athens, GRECCE
email: sotitiou@ea.gr
Abstract— The objective of the three-year European project
(acronym: PATHWAY) with its 25 partner organizations is to
set the pathway toward a standard-based approach to teaching
science by inquiry. The project focuses on (i) supporting the
adoption of inquiry teaching by demonstrating ways to reduce
the constrains presented by teachers and school organizations,
(ii) demonstrating and disseminating methods and exemplary
cases of both effective introduction of inquiry to science
classrooms and professional development programs, as well as
(iii) delivering a guideline set for the educational community to
further explore and exploit the unique benefits of the proposed
approach in science teaching. In this way, the project team
aims
to
facilitate
the
development
of
communities
of
practitioners of inquiry that will enable teachers to learn from
each other. Out of about 50 selected Best Practice examples
within the Pathway project, one specific approach labeled
Natural Europe is linking museums and school classrooms, and
thus harvesting the potential of digital libraries in natural
history museums as a very attractive option. An impressive
abundance of high quality digital contents still remains largely
unexploited due to a number of barriers, such as: the lack of
interconnection and interoperability, the lack of centralized
access
as
well
as
the
inefficiency
of
current
content
organization and the metadata used. First empirical evidence
supports this pathway to bridge the gap between formal and
informal education by specifically using the proposed digital
bridge.
Keywords-E-leaning;
inquiry-based
learning;
inquiry-based
teaching; teaching practice; teacher education; professional
development,; classroom teaching; informal learning.
I.
INTODUCTION: THE PATHWAY PROJECT DESIGN
Our study approach aims to contribute to a quality
improvement of science teaching. Three main axes are sup-
posed to facilitate the uptake of Inquiry-Based Science
Education (IBSE): It a) proposes a standard-based approach
to teaching science by inquiry that outlines instructional
models that will help teachers to organize effectively their
instruction, b) deploys a series of methods to motivate
teachers to adopt inquiry based techniques and activities in
their classrooms and c) offers access to a unique collection of
open educational resources and teaching practices (linked
with the science curricula) that have proven their efficiency
and efficacy in promoting inquiry based education and that
are expanding the limitations of classroom instruction. All
stakeholders
(teachers,
teachers’
trainers,
curriculum
developers, policy-makers) are supposed to examine their
individual practices in the light of the best performing
approaches that set the standards on what can be achieved
and provide them with a unique tool to bring about
improvements in their everyday practice [2]. A close
collaboration with teachers may develop a set of support
services which help teachers to implement the necessary
changes, to develop the diagnostics and intervention skills
necessary to best plan and then diffuse innovation in their
own contexts. An effective training approach provides the
starting point for equipping teachers with the competences
they need to act successfully as change agents, developing a
language/terminology necessary to describe the dynamics of
change processes, and making them able to recognize
different forms of resistance and addressing it in their own
context.
Most discussions of teaching science by inquiry begin
with the assumption that inquiry is a teaching strategy.
Science teachers ask, "Should I use full or partial inquiries?
Should the approach be guided by the teacher or left to the
student?" Introducing a Standard-Based approach views the
situation differently and may overcome this dilemma: Such
a perspective begins with the educational outcomes and then
identifies the best strategies to achieve the outcome. In
developing examples, a clear understanding of the realities of
standards, schools, science teachers, and students is needed.
Science teachers must teach the basics of subjects. The
science curriculum content for physical, chemical, life, earth
and space sciences, provides teachers with an excellent set of
fundamental
understandings
that
could
form
their
educational outcomes. After identifying the educational
results,
teachers
must
consider
the
effective
teaching
strategies and recognize that we have a considerable research
base for the concepts that students hold about basic science.
We also have some comprehension of the processes and
strategies required to bring about conceptual change [1, 4, 8,
11-14]. The teaching strategies include a series of laboratory
experiences that may help students to confront current
concepts and reconstruct them so they align with basic
scientific
concepts
and
principles
of
the
educational
curricula. For teaching science by inquiry, a variety of
educators have described methods compatible with such a
standard-based approach to teaching science by inquiry (for
instance,
going
back
to
[16]).
By
using
individual
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

investigations
when
learning
about
new
issues,
first
opportunities may arise for students to develop abilities
necessary to do scientific inquiry.
For teaching science concepts, a the use of technology
may encourage to improve investigations and commu-
nications,
the
formulation
and
revision
of
scientific
explanations and models by use of logic and evidence, and
the communication and defense of a scientific argument.
Another example is the use of the idea that reading authentic
scientific texts is considered as inquiry by itself [15, 18-20],
and especially those that are adapted to the students'
cognitive abilities [6]. A second educational outcome,
closely
aligned
with
learning
subjects,
is
developing
competencies necessary to do scientific inquiry. Laboratories
provide many opportunities to strengthen them as well as
computer-based
learning
environments
that
simulate
authentic scientific research (e.g., [9]). Science teachers
could indeed base the activity on content, such as motions
and forces, energy in the earth's system, or the molecular
basis of heredity, but they could make several of the
fundamental
competencies
the
explicit
outcomes
of
instruction.
Over
time,
students
would
have
ample
opportunities to develop all of them. This approach to
teaching science by inquiry overlaps and complements the
science teacher's effort to cultivate an understanding of
science concepts. The teacher structures the series of inquiry
activities and provides varying levels of direct guidance. A
further result also sharpens competencies necessary for
scientific inquiry; but now students have opportunities to
conduct a full inquiry, which they think of, design, complete,
and report. They experience all of the fundamental abilities
in
a
scientific
inquiry
appropriate
to
their
stage
of
sophistication and current understanding of science. The
science teacher's role is to guide and coach [24]. The classic
examples of this range from the organization of a science fair
or a science contest to guiding of a whole inquiry project
performed by the students.
Finally, we come to the aspect of teaching science by
inquiry that is most frequently overlooked, namely, devel-
oping understandings about scientific inquiry [1, 2]. On the
face of it, this seems like an educational outcome that would
be easy to accomplish once the science teacher has decided
to instruct by means of an activity or laboratory and has
gained an understanding of inquiry. Numerous ways are
available of having students identify, compare, synthesize,
and reflect on their various experiences founded in inquiry.
Case studies from the history of science provide insights
about
the
processes
of
scientific
inquiry.
Developing
students' understanding of scientific inquiry is a long-term
process. Questions of time, energy, reading difficulties, risks,
expenses, and the burden of the subject should not be
rationalizations for avoiding teaching science by inquiry.
Nurturing the abilities of inquiry is consistent with other
stated goals for science teaching, for example, critical
thinking; and it complements other school subjects, among
them problem solving
in mathematics and
design in
technology. Understanding science as inquiry is a basic
component of the history and nature of science itself.
II.
OBJECTIVES: ESSENTIAL FEATURES OF INQUIRY
To
begin
shifting
toward
a
more
inquiry-oriented
classroom, we highlight five essential features: (i) Learners
engage in scientifically oriented questions. (ii) Learners give
priority to evidence in responding to inquiry questions. (iii)
Learners
formulate
explanations
from
evidence.
(iv)
Learners connect explanations to scientific knowledge. (v)
Learners communicate and justify explanations.
(i)
Learners
Engage
in
Scientifically
Oriented
Questions
Scientifically oriented questions centre on objects in the
natural world; they connect to the science concepts described
in the school curriculum. They are questions that lend
themselves to gathering and using data to develop individual
explanations for scientific phenomena. Scientists recognize
two
primary
kinds
of
scientific
questions.
Existence
questions probe origins and include many "why" questions:
Why do objects fall toward Earth? Why do humans have
chambered hearts? Although many “why”-questions cannot
be addressed by science, there are causal and functional
questions, which probe mechanisms and include most of the
"how"-questions: How does sunlight help plants grow?
Students often ask “why”-questions. In the context of school
science, many of these questions can be changed into “how”
questions and thus lend themselves to scientific inquiry.
Such
change
narrows
and
sharpens
the
inquiry
and
contributes to being scientific. In the classroom, a question
robust and fruitful enough to drive an inquiry generates a
need to stimulating additional questions of how and why a
phenomenon occurs. The initial question may originate from
the learner. The teacher plays a critical role in guiding the
identification of questions. Fruitful inquiries evolve from
questions that are meaningful and relevant to students, but
they also must be answerable by student observations and the
scientific know-ledge they obtain from reliable sources. The
knowledge and procedures students use to answer the
questions must be accessible and manageable, as well as
appropriate to the students' developmental level.
(ii)
Learners Give Priority to Evidence in Responding
to Inquiry Questions
Science distinguishes itself from other ways of knowing
through the use of empirical evidence as the basis for
explanations about how the natural world works. Scientists
concentrate on getting accurate data from observations of
phenomena. They use their senses and instruments, such as
microscopes, to enhance their senses; and instruments that
measure characteristics that humans cannot sense, such as
magnetic fields. In some instances, scientists can control
conditions to obtain their evidence; in other instances, they
cannot control the conditions since control would distort the
phenomena, so they gather data over a wide range of
naturally occur-ring conditions and over a long enough
period of time so that they can infer what the influence of
different factors might be. The accuracy of the evidence
gathered is verified by checking measurements, repeating the
observations, or gathering different kinds of data related to
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

the same phenomena. The evidence is subject to questioning
and further investigation. In their classroom inquiries,
students use evidence to develop explanations for scientific
phenomena.
They
observe
plants
and
animals,
or
individually measurements of temperature, distance, and
carefully record them.
(iii) Learners Formulate Explanations from Evidence
Although similar to the previous feature, this aspect of
inquiry emphasizes the path from evidence to explanation,
rather than the criteria for and characteristics of the evidence.
Scientific explanations are based on reason. They provide
causes for effects and establish relationships based on
evidence and logical argument. They must be consistent with
experimental and observational evidence about nature. They
respect rules of evidence, are open to criticism, and require
the use of various cognitive processes generally associated
with
science—
for
example,
classification,
analysis,
inference, and prediction—and general processes such as
critical reasoning and logic. So explanations go beyond
current knowledge and propose new understanding. For
science, this means building on the existing knowledge base.
For students, this means building new ideas on their
individual
current
understandings.
In
both
cases,
the
proposed result is new knowledge. For example, students
may use observational and other evidence to propose an
explanation for the phases of the moon, for why plants die
under certain conditions and thrive in others, and for the
relationship of diet to health.
(iv) Learners Connect Explanations to Scientific Knowledge
Evaluation, and possible elimination or revision of
explanations, is one feature that distinguishes scientific in-
quiry
from
other
forms
of
inquiry
and
subsequent
explanations. One can ask questions such as: "Does the evi-
dence
support
the proposed
explanation?", "Does
the
explanation adequately answer the questions?", "Are there
any apparent biases or flaws in the reasoning connecting
evidence and explanation?", and "Can other reasonable
explanations be derived from the evidence?" Alternative
explanations may be reviewed as students engage in
dialogues, compare results, or check their results with those
proposed by the teacher or instructional materials. An
essential component of this characteristic is ensuring that
students make the connection between their results and
scientific
knowledge
appropriate
in
their
level
of
development [21, 22]. That is, student explanations should
ultimately be consistent with currently accepted scientific
knowledge.
(v) Learners Communicate and Justify Explanations
Scientists communicate their explanations in such a way
that their results can be reproduced. This requires clear
articulation of the question, procedures, evidence, and
proposed
explanation
and
a
review
of
alternative
explanations. It supports a further skeptical review and the
opportunity for other scientists to use the explanation to go
on
to
new
questions.
Having
students
share
their
explanations
provides
others
the
opportunity
to
ask
questions, examine evidence, identify faulty reasoning, point
out statements that go beyond the evidence, and suggest
alternative explanations. Sharing explanations can bring into
question or fortify the connections students have made
among the evidence, existing scientific knowledge, and their
proposed explanations. As a result, students can resolve
contradictions and solidify an empirically based argument.
III.
RATIONALE & RESULTS: NATURAL EUROPE AS A
SELECTED BEST PRACTICE
Numerous Best Practices gather under the Inquiry-Based
umbrella,
originating
from
school
settings
or
from
collaboration initiatives or from connecting the gap between
formal and informal settings [3]. The latter is presented
example in more detail. Hereby, engagements of hands-on
physical
activities
with
virtual
educational
ones
are
combined
to support a student’s understanding. Main
activities concentrate on designing stimulating lesson plans
following an existing syllabus and adapting as many
individual needs as possible. Those lesson plans are based on
a museum visit (physically or virtually) and they are
supposed to engage students’ hands-on activities leading to
realistic experiences directly connected to a classroom-taught
lesson.
For a selection of appropriate Best Practices (BP), a
template is needed to allocate “success stories”. Thus, ten
principles are labeled: (1.) BP should aim systematically to
develop and sustain learners’ curiosity about the world,
enjoyment of scientific activity and understanding of how
natural phenomena can be explained. (2.) BP have to focus
on all learners, both those who may later become scientists
or technologists or take up occupations requiring some
scientific knowledge and those who may not do so. (3.) BP
must
have
multiple
goals
aiming
to
develop:
(i)
understanding of a set of big ideas in science which include
ideas of science and ideas about science, (ii) scientific
capabilities concerned with gathering and using evidence,
(iii) scientific attitudes. (4.) The implementation of the BP
should be a clear progression towards the goals of science
education, indicating the ideas that need to be achieved at
various points, based on careful analysis of concepts and on
current research and understanding of how learning takes
place. (5.) The themes of the BP should result from study of
topics of interest to students and relevance in their lives. (6.)
BP should reflect a view of scientific knowledge and scien-
tific inquiry that is explicit and in line with current scientific
and educational thinking. (7.) BP
should deepen the
individual understanding of scientific ideas as well as
contributing to others, such as fostering attitudes and
capabilities.
(8.)
The
initial
training
and
professional
development of teachers should be consistent with the
teaching and learning methods required to achieve the goals
set out in Principle 3. (9.) Assessment needs to provide an
integral part of the BP. The formative assessment of
students’ learning and the summative assessment of their
progress must apply to all goals. (10.) Finally, BP may
promote cooperation among teachers and engagement within
a community which even may include the involvement of
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

scientists which otherwise would be out of reach for the
group such as school students.
The proposed aims are threefold: Firstly, it’s the increase
of student involvement into the educational process as their
role is regarded as most significant. Teachers just act as
facilitators while students see their activities follow their
individual educational needs. Secondly, it’s the connection
of formal and informal learning in real-world and digital
environments); this approach allows students to enjoy an
educational
experience
tailored
to
individual
needs,
preferences and expectations, again under the guidance of
the teacher. Thirdly, it’s providing fascinating opportunities
for interaction with natural history (for both, physically and
digitally).
Since museums exhibits just because of its
originality,
authenticity grabs
a student’s
interest
and
curiosity, the door to a self-sufficient learning more easily
opens up [5]. Digital and physical museum objects, thus,
enhance interests towards natural science [7, 8].
First empirical data interestingly point to a cautious
optimism: Although the numbers of up to now involved
participants just allow first conclusions merely on a case
study level, however, 27 participants significantly learned by
following the above described procedures (while 11 control
participants did not). These first empirical numbers just
begin to support our expectations compared to the already
existing solutions but cannot yet substantiate a final prove.
After completing our data collection (which is expected with
both projects’ ending after 2013 and which surely will easily
outnumber case study levels), deeper conclusions will be
drawn from an expectedly much broader data basis of so
many partner institutions contributing.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is funded by two European projects: Natural
Europe (FP7 CIP ICT PSP 2010-250579) and Pathway (FP7-
2010-266624).
REFERENCES
[1]
Berkheimer, G.D., Anderson, C.W., & Spees, S.T. (1988).
Using Conceptual
Change Research
To
Reason
About
Curriculum, Institute for Research on Teaching Michigan
State University.
[2]
Bogner, F.X. & Sotiriou, S. (2005). The Pathway to High
Quality Science Teaching, EPINOIA, Athens.
[3]
Bogner, F.X. & Sotirou, S. (2011). A special section on
technology-enhanced science education. Advanced Science
Letters (ASL), 4, 3301-3303.
[4]
Bybee, R. W. (2000). Teaching science as inquiry. In van Zee,
E. H. (Ed.), Inquiring into Inquiry Learning and Teaching
Science (pp. 20–46). Washington, DC: AAAS.
[5]
Conradty,
C.
&
Bogner,
F.X.
(2011).
Computer-aided
Learning: unguided versus guided instruction. Advanced
Science Letters (ASL), 4, 3310-3316.
[6]
Falk, H., Brill, G. & Yarden, A. (2008). Teaching a
biotechnology
curriculum
based
on
adapted
primary
literature. International Journal of Science Education, 30/14,
1841-1866.
[7]
Gargalakos, M; Gialouri, E; Lazoudis, A; Sotiriou, S., &
Bogner, F.X. (2011). Assessing the Impact of Technology-
Enhanced Field Trips in Science Centers and Museums.
Advanced Science Letters (ASL), 4, 3332-3342.
[8]
Gazzetti, B. J., Snyder, T.E., Glass, G.V., & Gamas, W.S.
(1993).
Promoting
conceptual
change
in
science:
A
comparative meta-analysis of instructional interventions from
science education. Reading Research Quarterly, 28/2, 117-
158
[9]
Gelbart, H., Brill, G., & Yarden, A. (2008). The impact of a
web-based research simulation in bioinformatics on students'
understanding of genetics, Research in Science Education,
39/5, 725-751.
[10] Gialouri, E., Uzunoglou, M., Gargalakos, M., Sotiriou, S., &
Bogner, F.X. (2011) Teaching Real-Life Science in the Lab of
Tomorrow. Advanced Science Letters (ASL), 4, 3317-3323.
[11] Hewson, P.W. & Hewson, M.A. (1984). The role of
conceptual conflict in conceptual change and the design of
science instruction. Journal of Instructional Science, 13, 1-13.
[12] King, A. (1994). Guiding knowledge construction in the
classroom: Effects of teaching children how to question and
how to explain. American Educational Research Journal,
31/2, 338-368
[13] Lott, G.W. (1983). The effect of inquiry teaching and
advanced organizers upon student outcomes in science
education.
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 20/5,
434-438.
[14] Loucks-Horsley, S., Love, N., Stiles, K.E., Mundry, S., &
Hewson, P.W. (2003) Designing Professional Development
for Teachers of Science and Mathematics. Corwin Press.
[15] Norris, S. P. & Phillips, L. M. (2008). Reading as inquiry. In
Grandy,
R.
E.
(Ed.),
Teaching
Scientific
Inquiry:
Recommendations for Research and Implementation (pp. 233-
262). Rotterdam, NL: Sense Publishers.
[16] Novak, A. 1963. Scientific inquiry in the laboratory. The
American Biology Teacher 342-346.
[17] Rocard, M., Csermely, P., Jorde, D., Lenzen, D., Walberg-
Henriksson, H., & Hemmo, V. (2007). Science Education
now: A renewed pedagogy for the future of Europe.
Luxembourg.
[18] Scharfenberg, F-J. & Bogner, F.X. (2008). A category-based
video-analysis of students’ activities in an out-of-school
hands-on gene technology lesson. International Journal of
Science Education, 30(4), 451-467.
[19] Scharfenberg, F.-J. & Bogner, F.X. (2011): A new two-step
approach for hands-on teaching of gene technology: Effects
on students' activities during experimentation in an outreach
gene technology lab. Research in Science Education, 41(4),
505-523.
[20] Scharfenberg, F.-J. & Bogner, F.X. (2012). Teaching gene
technology in an outreach lab: Students' assigned cognitive
load
clusters
and
the
clusters'
relationships
to
learner
characteristics,
laboratory
variables,
and
cognitive
achievement. Research in Science Education (in press).
[21] Shulman, L.S. (1986). Paradigms and research programs in
the study of teaching: a contemporary prespective. In
M.C.Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook or research on teaching, p.3-
36, New York, MacMillan.
[22] Shulman, L.S. (1986). Knowledge and teaching: Foundations
of the new reform. Harward Educational Review, 57/1, 1-22.
[23] Tzikopoulos, A., Sotiriou, S., Liefländer, A.. & Bogner, F.X.
(2011). METASCHOOL: Training Teachers in the Use of
Educational Portals, Advanced Science Letters (ASL), (4),
3375-3381 (2011)
[24] Zion, M & Zlezak, M. (2005). It takes two to tango: In
dynamic inquiry, the self-directed student acts in association
with the facilitating teacher. Teaching and Teacher Education,
21, 875-894.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

