Virtual Reality Using Stereoscopic Vision for Teaching/Learning of 
Descriptive Geometry 
Karla Bastos Guedes 
Geometry Department 
University Federal Fluminense 
Niterói, Brazil 
karlaguedes@vm.uff.br 
 
Marcelle de Sá Guimarães 
Engineering Department, PURO 
University Federal Fluminense 
Rio das Ostras, Brazil 
marcelle@ic.uff.br 
 
José Geraldo Méxas 
Applied Mathematics Department 
University Federal Fluminense 
Niterói, Brazil 
jose.mexas@gmail.com 
 
 
 
Abstract — This paper addresses one of the main difficulties 
observed in some theoretical courses of spatial geometry, 
which refers to the requirement of 
abstract spatial 
visualization skills. The study also shows the demand for 
computer graphic resources to support teaching and learning 
of these disciplines. Finally, it is submitted to a virtual system, 
animated, by using stereoscopic anaglyph vision, covering the 
basic contents of Descriptive Geometry. This system has 
already been developed and implemented. 
Keywords-computer graphics; descriptive geometry; virtual 
reality; spatial stereoscopic  visualization 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The major developments in computing and electronics 
bring the opportunity to apply new technological resources 
for teaching/learning courses in graphics. Therefore, we can 
find in the related literature some studies that have been 
developed in search for computational solutions within the 
teaching subjects such as Descriptive Geometry (DG), 
Technical Drawing, etc.. 
Valente and Santos [1] proposed an intelligent computing 
environment, 
accessed 
via 
Internet, 
which 
operates 
according to the profile of each student. The system presents 
a database of exercises that must be registered by teachers. 
The virtual environment has not been tested yet. 
In [2], Harris presents a proposal to restructure the 
Drawing Technique discipline. It involves the use of 
graphical applications on-line in support of teaching. The 
first results reveal a greater motivation among students that 
uses the new system. 
Also, we found studies that indicate the potential for 
stereoscopic computer graphic systems for the development 
of spatial visualization skills [3] and virtual reality 
techniques have to be employed. It is suggested to use a 
stereoscopic display system using polarized projections, 
where students would attend classes using passive polarized 
glasses. However, the system was not implemented. 
Another work of the area has a graphical tutorial system, 
available on the Internet for teaching Descriptive Geometry. 
The system consists of written content, accompanied by 
illustrative animations. The system, however, is not intended 
for use in classroom, and does not explore stereoscopic 
capabilities or real-time interactivity [4]. In a more recent 
study, the author has been making use of augmented reality 
techniques for visualizing and learning of conical surfaces 
[5]. 
The Descriptive Geometry software [6], developed at the 
University of Lisboa, can be freely downloaded from the 
website. The program is interactive and has offices in both 
epure and space representation. The system interface is 
somewhat overwhelmed by too much information windows 
and not very suitable for beginning students. 
Since the program AEIOU Geometria Descritiva [7] has 
many graphics and a clear and friendly interface, it is a 
commercial software. 
We observed that the most articles published in technical 
and scientific events in the area are still at the level of 
academic research and is not therefore available for use. On 
the other hand, we find some commercial products available, 
though expensive and not always perfectly suited to our 
educational needs. 
Therefore, this paper seeks to fill this gap by developing 
a system using virtual reality techniques, able to support 
teachers and pupils learning Descriptive Geometry. 
Section II presents Descriptive Geometry basic concepts 
and the problem of spatial visualization disability; Section III 
proposes the use of virtual reality with stereoscope vision 
applied for teaching/learning of Descriptive Geometry; 
Section IV shows the VirtualGD system, which has been 
developed and implemented in an undergraduate educational 
institution in Brazil; Section V presents an assessment of the 
VirtualGD system and Section VI the conclusion and 
proposes to future work. 
II. 
DESCRIPTIVE GEOMETRY  
It is the branch of geometry that intends to represent 
spatial figures in a plane, so that, in this plane all problems 
relating to these figures can be solved. 
It was created in the late eighteenth century by the french 
mathematician Gaspard Monge [8]. 
A. Basic Concepts 
Descriptive Geometry is an early discipline, especially 
for engineering and architecture courses. It addresses to the 
representation and solution of problems involving spatial 
mathematical entities such as points, lines, planes, 
polyhedrons, etc., through its cylindrical orthogonal 
projections in two planes, perpendicular to each other, in 
which one is rotated over the other, with the aid of plane 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

geometry properties, as shown in Figure 1. The figure 
obtained after this revolution is called Epure. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Revolution of the vertical plane on the horizontal plane – Epure. 
The distance from one point to the horizontal plane is 
called quota. The quota coordinate is conventionally 
represented in Epure by the distance from the vertical point 
projection to the intersection planes line. 
The distance from one point to the vertical plane is called 
afastament. This coordinate is represented in Epure by the 
distance from the horizontal point projection to the  
intersection planes line, according to Figure 2. 
 
            
Figure 2.  Afastament and cota’s point located in first dihedral. Spatial 
representation and Epure. 
The Geometry studies the projections of objects that can 
be located  in any of the four  dihedral. In terms of technical 
design, the Brazilian Association of Technical Standards 
(ABNT) admits representations in both first and third, being 
the first dihedral representation the most used one. 
B. The spatial visualization problem 
Disciplines involving planar representations (views, 
perspectives and projections) are an essential part of courses 
like engineering, architecture, industrial design, etc. Much of 
the work of these professionals involves the design of 
objects, from small parts to large buildings, which need to be 
represented and analyzed in the paper or computer screen. 
The need for representation of such projects in two 
dimensional media is what makes these essential disciplines, 
arising also the importance of Descriptive Geometry, as a 
suitable tool manipulation of these representations. 
The Descriptive Geometry is given in general by lecture, 
using the blackboard, where the teacher makes the designs 
that are copied by students with the help of specific 
traditional materials (ruler, set squares, compass, real 
models, etc.). However, with this practice, it has been 
observed that a large number of students have serious 
difficulties in relation to spatial visualization ability, and this 
is one of the main factors for failure in learning this 
discipline. 
References [9], [10] points to the reduced workload, the 
lack of a prior contact with the basic concepts of the 
discipline and the use of traditional teaching techniques are 
some of the factors that contribute to worsen this situation. 
The non-development of spatial reasoning during the school 
results in students, newcomers to undergraduate courses with 
recognized difficulties to understand the concepts treated in 
disciplines like Descriptive Geometry and Technical 
Drawing. Allied to this factor, there is a lack of alternative 
learning resources that can minimize these difficulties and 
support the mental abstraction processes necessary for the 
development of spatial visualization skills. The real models 
are most often used to facilitate three dimensional 
understanding. 
Thus, we see the need to seek the use of modern 
techniques that can minimize this problem. In recent years, 
the use of visualization techniques related to computer 
graphics is becoming more frequent, so that we can find such 
applications being developed in several knowledge areas. 
Within this context, this project proposes the creation of 
a virtual environment involving computational techniques 
such as computer graphics, virtual reality, multimedia, 
animations, etc., which can be used in Descriptive Geometry 
courses, aiming to improve the students spatial visualization 
ability and give teachers a new approach to teach the 
discipline. The system can be used both by the teacher, as a 
tool to support classroom, and by the students individually, 
as a way to strengthen the contents studied. The proposed 
virtual environment will be seen by students through 
stereoscopic vision glasses, aiming the better assimilation of 
the graphical space involved. 
III. 
VIRTUAL REALITY 
Virtual reality comes to computer use to bring a new 
paradigm for interfacing with the man. In this paradigm, 
human beings will no longer be in front of the monitor, but 
rather feel it in the interface. In this sense, we can define 
virtual reality, in a simplified manner, as the most advanced 
human-computer interface yet available [11]. 
A. A virtual environment applied  to teaching/learning of 
Descriptive Geometry 
A 
virtual 
environment 
is 
a 
three-dimensional, 
multisensory, computer generated, which reacts in real time 
to user activities. User interaction with the virtual 
environment of the devices is done through multi-sensory 
input and output. Input devices are responsible for capturing 
the user actions and feed the system with this information. 
The output devices will return the user with sensations in the 
environment, due to their actions, updated in real time [12]. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

The modeling of virtual environments can be made using 
languages such as VRML (Virtual Reality Modeling 
Language) [13] and its successor X3D [14], and other 
languages, as well as through authoring tools such as 
Blender [15], or 3DSMax [16], among others, which offer 
greater details abstraction of development.  
In recent years, the use of modern virtual reality 
technologies has been very promisingly disseminated in the 
technical and scientific field. We can find applications 
successfully developed in several areas like education, 
training, entertainment and medical sciences, among others. 
Also in the field of teaching graphic disciplines and 
engineering activities, virtual reality is gradually gaining 
more space, especially with regard to the potential of this 
tool for the development of spatial visualization skills and 
the implementation of virtual labs to support engineering 
activities [17]-[20], which motivated us to evaluate the 
possibility of using this technology as a tool to support the 
teaching/learning of Descriptive Geometry.  
Some computational techniques such as multimedia, 
animation and hypertext have been studied and/or 
implemented [5], [9] and [21] as a way to support the 
learning of this discipline. The authors have been 
investigating the use of virtual reality, and only the non-
immersive techniques with flat-screen were explored. 
However, virtual reality using stereoscopic viewing seems to 
be the most suitable for improving the spatial visualization 
ability of Descriptive Geometry students. 
B. Stereoscope vision using anaglyphic glasses 
The design of stereoscopic vision or an object depth 
occurs when we draw the projections corresponding to the 
two eyes, left (L) and right (R) as shown in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Horizontal plane projections of the P and Q points, according 
the positions of the left eye (L) and right eye (R). 
On P point we have the P1 and P2 projections 
corresponding to the left and right eye respectively. Notice 
that the distance between the projections on the horizontal 
plane is proportional to the height of the point. Thus, P being 
at a greater height than Q is farthest from its projections 
which Q projections. So, the perpendicular line projection in 
a horizontal plane results in two intersecting lines as shown 
in Figure 4.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Line projections in a horizontal plane according to positions of 
the left eye (L) and right eye (R). 
To view in stereo the P point, we must separate the left 
eye (L) projection of the right eye (R) projection. To achieve 
this, we use glasses called anaglyphic, performing a color 
filtering, in which the left lens filters out red light leaving 
only blue light and the right lens filters blue light leaving 
only red light. So we use the left eye image in blue and right 
eye image in red. Taking the glasses with the left lens red 
and blue lens right, we must first calibrate the color of paint 
so that the left eye does not see the red color (R) and the 
right eye does not see the blue color (B). 
Thus, we can first draw the figure corresponding to the 
right eye, red (R) and performing a shearing operation, 
determine the second figure in blue (B), corresponding to the 
left eye. In the case of drawing stereoscopic projections of a 
(P) point on the horizontal and vertical planes, the result is 
shown in Figure 5. Red (R) is shown the right eye image and 
blue (B) the left eye image. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Stereoscopic drawing of (P) point projections on the horizontal 
and vertical planes. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
Figure 6.  Images of the (P) point projections on the horizontal and 
vertical planes seen through the left lens (B) and right lens (R) of 
anaglyphic glasses. 
The stereoscopic vision is a natural characteristic of the 
human visual system, which allows us to see in three 
dimensions and to perceive the depth of the scenes. 
C. Technologies for stereoscope vision  
In order to obtain a stereo computed image, we must 
generate two images of the same object from a little different 
view points, and present them separately to each eye, as 
described above. There are several ways to achieve this 
effect, with different interfaces [22]: 
 
 
Anaglyphic glasses (passive glasses) – Anaglyphic 
stereoscopy is the oldest technique of images 
separation. The viewing, in this research, initially, 
will be done with the use of anaglyphic glasses for 
being less costly and easier to implement. The 
disciplines of Descriptive Geometry are been 
offered, usually, for groups with large audience, 
which would not make the use of stereoscopic 
projection system expensive and complex.  
 
Shutter glasses (active glasses) – Use electronic 
shutters made of liquid crystal. The computer 
quickly and alternately generates two images on the 
monitor, one for each eye. The glasses, in 
syncronism with the monitor, plug alternately light 
that reaches each eye, so that, each eye sees only its 
image. 
. 
 
Figure 7.  Shutter glasses. 
 
Polarized glasses (passive glasses) - The technique 
is widely used in three dimensional movies. The 
glasses are formed by two polarized lens, so that, the 
images from each eye are sent through polarized 
light emitted by two different projectors, one for 
each lens. 
 
Helmet (active glasses) - To generate two separate 
images for each eye, two small monitors, each with 
their images, are attached to the helmet. In this type 
of underwater equipment, the user does not need to 
look at the computer screen because the monitor is 
on the helmet. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Virtual reality helmet 
 
Lenticular display (without glasses) - The figure is 
covered with small curved lenses and the lenticular 
effect allows the viewing of images slightly 
different, depending on the angle of observation. 
IV. 
THE VIRTUALGD SYSTEM 
The system which is being developed and implemented 
entitled VirtualGD [20], [21] consists of modules (files) that 
are independent, each one covering a specific issue. It 
intends to cover all the course content. Each lesson, the 
teacher would have the modules that suits it. The modules 
are all interactive, responding to user requests in real time. 
The concepts are illustrated graphically and animated 
through three-dimensional representations. The subjects can 
be manipulated, providing their better view from different 
angles. 
The VirtualGD was developed in the X3D standard, 
maintened by WEB3D Consortium (2009). The system is 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

displayed in the Browser, with the FluxPlayer plug-in that 
comes with Fluxstudio, with the operating system Windows. 
The system will be manipulated by the teacher, projected 
onto a white screen and seen by students by using 
stereoscopic vision glasses, in classroom or manipulated by 
the student, on the screen of any computer, such as support 
classes. A stereoscopic system will contribute to obtain more 
realistic representations, providing greater clarity about the 
scene depth and position of objects in space. Thus, we are 
encouraging the power of visualization and spatial reasoning 
of the student, and facilitating the assimilation of relations 
between the mathematical entities involved. 
The following is a small illustration of the module 
"profile lines" of VirtualGD system. The initial scenario of 
this module presents the horizontal and vertical planes of 
projection, and a menu designed with the kinds of the lines. 
If the user selects, for example, "intersecting lines", it 
appears in the space and the "project" button is provided in 
accordance with Figure 9. 
 
 
Figure 9.  VirtualGD: Spatial representation of the intersecting profile 
lines. 
The user can freely manipulate these projection planes to 
better understand the position of these lines in space, as 
shown in Figure10. 
 
 
Figure 10.  VirtualGD: Study object manipulated by the user. 
Selecting the "project" button, the horizontal and vertical 
projections of the lines are presented in accordance with 
Figure 11 and the system provides the "Revolution" button. 
 
 
Figure 11.  VirtualGD: Horizontal and vertical projections of the lines 
(A)(B) and (C)(D). 
By choosing "Revolution", the system start an animation 
that illustrates the revolution of the profile plane in the 
vertical plane, as shown in Figure 12, and provide the 
“Epura” button.  
 
 
Figure 12.  Revolution of the profile plane on the vertical plane. 
By choosing "Epura", the system becomes an animation 
that illustrates the revolution of the horizontal plane or the 
process of obtaining Epure, as shown in Figure 13. 
 
 
Figure 13.  Revolution of the horizontal plane on the vertical plane to 
obtain the “Epure”. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

The system is in its developmental stage and has  
implemented the modules "projections and the point study", 
"special positions lines", "lines and planes intersections", 
"special positions planes and lines contained in these planes", 
"profile lines", "rotation", "revolution" and "change of plane". 
V. 
ASSESSMENT 
The VirtualGD was experienced in a Geometry 
Descriptive class composed of 40 students of Production 
Engineering at our university. All contents were presented by 
the teacher in the classroom, with the support of VirtualGD 
system, which was designed in flat screen, inside the 
classroom. The VirtualGD was also made available for 
students to use it outside the classroom. The evaluation 
criterion was based on scores in the first test performed by the 
students, since the VirtualGD in its current version only covers 
this stage to the course content. These scores were compared 
with the students’ first test of the previous year which did not 
work with VirtualGD, and was called “control group”. 
A. Results 
Of the 40 students in the class that used VirtualGD, 33 
performed the first test. Of the 40 enrolled in the class above, 
the control group, only 19 performed the first test. That high 
level of abstention observed already seems to reflect the greater 
difficult presented by this group, which did not used the 
VirtualGD, and the consequent fear of failure in the evaluation. 
Table 1 shows the scores, in ascending order, of the 
students’ first test in each class, in addition to the arithmetic 
averages of the classes. 
 
TABLE I – STUDENTS FIRST TEST SCORES AND CLASS 
ARITHMETIC AVERAGE. 
Students 
Classes 
VirtualGD 
Control 
1 
0.5 
0 
2 
0.5 
0 
3 
0.5 
0 
4 
1 
0 
5 
1 
0 
6 
1.5 
0 
7 
1.5 
0.7 
8 
2.5 
0.7 
9 
4 
0.8 
10 
4 
0.9 
11 
4 
2.5 
12 
4 
2.5 
13 
4.5 
2.8 
14 
5 
3.2 
15 
5 
5.7 
16 
5.5 
6 
17 
6 
6.8 
18 
6 
7 
19 
6 
8.5 
20 
6 
- 
21 
6.2 
- 
22 
6.3 
- 
23 
6.5 
- 
24 
7 
- 
25 
7 
- 
26 
7.2 
- 
27 
7.2 
- 
28 
7.5 
- 
29 
7.5 
- 
30 
7.5 
- 
31 
8 
- 
32 
9 
- 
33 
9.5 
- 
Average 
5.01 
2.53 
 
In Table 1, it is observed that the average of the control 
group was significantly lower (approximately 50%) to the 
average obtained by the class that used the VirtualGD.  
The frequency distribution graph is shown in Figure 14. 
It shows the percentual of students in each class who took 
scores at intervals ranging from zero to two, two to four, four 
to six, six to eight and eight to ten. 
 
 
Figure 14.  Frequency distribution of students by scores intervals. 
According to Figure 14 more than half of the control 
group (52.63%) received score equal to or less than two in 
the first test. As for the class that used the VirtualGD system, 
the more frequently result (42.4%) was observed at the score 
interval between six and eight.  
Figure 15 shows the cumulative frequency distribution 
for the two classes, considering the same scores intervals. 
 
 
Figure 15.  Cumulative frequency distribution of students by scores 
intervals. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

According to Figure 15, 74% of the control group was 
scored below 4.0 compared with 24% for the class that used 
the VirtualGD. Considering that at the university the student 
has to take a final average equal to or greater than 6.0 (six 
point zero) to be approved in the course, Figure 15 shows 
that 52% of the class that used VirtualGD managed to stay 
above this level compared with 21% for the control group. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE  WORK 
This paper presented the VirtualGD, a virtual reality 
system designed to support the teaching and the learning of 
Descriptive Geometry. The product includes various contents 
of this discipline, all dealt with three dimensional graphics, 
interactive, equipped with animations and using stereoscopic 
anaglyphics vision  to support the mental abstraction process 
of  students spatial visualization.  
Initially, the finished modules have been tested by 
students and teachers in regular classes of Descriptive 
Geometry of an undergraduate educational institution in 
Brazil. Preliminary results were quite satisfactory, as the 
students were able to understand the concepts presented in 
the system, assimilated the best spatial positioning of entities 
involved, and were able to answer questions by filling gaps 
left by the theoretical explanation in the classroom, since 
they could watch the modules at home.  The tutors and 
teachers, in turn, felt comfortable with the use of modules, 
which were considered friendly and intuitive. The results 
suggest that VirtualGD was able to contribute to students’ 
performance because their test scores increased significantly 
with the use of the system. 
The next steps involve the complementation of this work 
with the development of new modules (covering all course 
contend), the implementation of the proposed system with 
stereoscopic vision in all modules and increment the statistic 
study about the best results in teaching/learning of 
Descriptive Geometry using this new approach. 
The future propose is to extend this stereoscopic vision 
system to other disciplines which involves spatial visualization 
like Geometries in general and Molecular Chemistry. 
The VirtualGD will be available via Internet. The already 
implemented modules can be seen on YouTube [23]. Thus, 
the program can be used not only by teachers but also by 
students and tutors in extracurricular schedules for further 
review of the contents seen in classroom. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Valente, V. C. P. N. and Santos, E. T. (2004) “Ambiente 
Computacional 
para 
Apoio 
ao 
Aprendizado 
de 
Geometria 
Descritiva”, Congresso Nacional de Hipermídia para Aprendizagem, 
Florianópolis. 
[2] Harris, A. L. N. C. (2006) “Aplicações e Resultados Iniciais de uma 
nova Didática de Ensino para a Disciplina de Desenho Técnico no 
Curso de Engenharia Civil da FEC – UNICAMP”, 5º Encontro 
Regional de Expressão Gráfica”, Salvador. 
[3] Seabra, R. D. and Santos, E. T. (2005) “Análise de Requisitos de uma 
ferramenta 3D para desenvolvimento da Cognição Espacial”, 17º. 
Simpósio Nacional de Geometria e Desenho Técnico, Recife. 
[4] Lima, A. J. R.; Haguenauer, C. J.; Lima, L. G. R.; Cunha, G. G.; 
(2007) ”Espaço GD – Uma Experiência Semipresencial de Ensino de 
Geometria Descritiva”, GRAPHICA, Curitiba.  
[5] Lima, A. J. R. and Haguenauer, C. J. (2007) “Visualização das seções 
cônicas da Geometria Descritivas através de Realidade Aumentada”, 
Exhibit and Products Demo no IX Symposium on Virtual and 
Augmented Reality, Petrópolis. 
[6] Teodoro, V. and Clérigo F.; Software “GD”-Descriptive Geometry, 
developed 
in 
Nova 
Lisboa 
University. 
http://www.edumatec.mat.ufrgs.br/softwares/soft_geometria.php, 
view in Dec/2011. 
[7] Morgado, F.; Unuversidade Agostinho Neto,  Portugal Software 
“AEIOU Geometria Descritiva” – Ensino de Geometria Descritiva 
Assistido 
por 
Computador 
http://www.estv.ipv.pt/paginaspessoais/fmorgado/aeiougd/default.htm
, view in Sep/2011.  
[8] Pinheiro, V.A. “Noções de Geometria Descritiva” vol. 1, 2 e 3, 
Editora LTC. 
[9] Jacques, J. J.; Azevedo, G. Z.; Aymone, J. L. F.; Teixeira, F. G. 
(2001) “Nova Abordagem para o Ensino de Geometria Descritiva 
Básica”, COBENGE.  
[10] Brus, C.; Zhao L.; Jessop J. (2004) “Visual-Spatial Ability in First-
Year Engineering Students: A Useful Retention Variable?” 
Proceedings of the American Society for Engineering Education 
Annual Conference and Exposition, Portland, Oregon,. 
[11] Burdea, G. C.; Coiffet, P., (2003) Virtual Reality Technology, J. 
Wiley & Sons Inc. 
[12] Alcaniz, M.; Lozano, J. A.; Rey, B., (2004) “Technological 
Background About VR”, Cybertherapy - Internet and Virtual Reality 
as Assessment and Rehabilitation Tools for Clinical Psychology and 
Neuroscience, Riva Ed.: Amsterdam.. 
[13]  [VRML97,2008] “The Virtual Reality Modeling Language”, 
http://www.web3d.org/x3d/specifications/vrml/ISO-IEC-14772-
VRML97/, view in Dec/2011. 
[14] [Web3d,2008]WEB3D CONSORTIUM, “X3D Documentation”, 
http://www.web3d.org/x3d/, view in Dec/2011. 
[15] Brito, A., (2006) Blender 3D: Guia do Usuário, Ed. Novatec, São 
Paulo.  
[16] 3DSMax, (2008) AUTODESK, www.autodesk.com/3dsmax,view in 
Dec/2011. 
[17] Hamza-Lup, F. G.; Goeser,  P. T.; Johnson, W.; Thompson, T.; 
Railean, E. ; Popovici, D. M.; (2009) “Interactive 3D Web-Based 
Environments for On-line Learning, Case Studies, Technologies and 
Challengs”, International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid and On-Line 
Learning, pp. 13-18, Cancun, Feb 1-7.  
[18] Goeser, P. T.; Johnson, W. M.; Hamza-Lup, F. G.; Schaefer, D. 
(2011) “VIEW; a Virtual  Interactive Web-based Learning 
Environment for Engineering”, IEEE Adnances in Engineering 
Education Journal, Special Issue on Research on e-Learning in 
Engineering Education, vol. 2(3).  
[19] Karwet, M. A.; “A Virtual Engineering Laboratory Course”; 
http://www.jhu.edu/virtlab/virtlab.html, view in Nov/2011. 
[20] Guimarães, M. S.; Guedes, K. B.; Silva, I.O.; Seixas, S. M.; Silva, H. 
G. A., (2008) “Realidade Virtual no Apoio ao Ensino de Geometria 
Descritiva”, X Symposium on Virtual and Augmented Reality, pp. 
296-299, João Pessoa. 
[21] Guimarães, M. S.; Guedes, K. B.; Silva, I.O.; Stutz, B.; Seixas, S. M., 
(2009) “Realidade Virtual no Ensino de Engenharia: O Sistema 
VirtualGD”, XXX Congresso Íbero-Latino-Americano de Métodos 
Computacionais em Engenharia, Armação de Búzios. 
[22] Siscoutto, R.A. et al.; (2004) “Estereoscopia - Realidade Virtual: 
Conceitos e Tendências” – Livro do Pré-Simpósio SVR 2004, pp. 
179-201, Ed. Mania de Livro, São Paulo. 
[23] http://youtu.be/RHr70Q-0MFk; 
http://youtu.be/qXIP8flWz00; 
http://youtu.be/OJ1qRUxc9pg;              http://youtu.be/Cjj78I0Y1Hs ; 
http://youtu.be/eER4nfY8FPA, 
view 
in 
Dec/2011.
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

