Faculty Perceptions of “The Project”: An Advanced Faculty Professional 
Development for Online Course Building 
Joe Terantino, Vanessa Slinger-Friedman, Griselda Thomas, Chris Randall, Phillip J. Aust, Tamara Powell 
Kennesaw State University 
Kennesaw, United States of America 
{jteranti, vslinger, gthomas2, crandal2, paust, tpowel25}@kennesaw.edu 
 
 
Abstract—This article reports on a research study that focused 
on 
faculty 
perceptions 
of 
an 
advanced 
professional 
development workshop (called “The Project”) in relation to 
designing and teaching online courses at the university level. 
The findings of the study, gleaned from an end-of-course 
survey, revealed that the faculty members perceived a focus on 
advanced technology users favorably and deemed it would 
contribute to developing future online courses.  
Keywords-e-learning; faculty perceptions; online course 
building; online learning; professional development 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Online education has grown considerably in the past 10 
years as demonstrated by the fact that the proportion of 
students taking at least one online course has increased from 
fewer than one in ten in 2002 to almost one third in 2010 [1], 
[2]. Along with this growth in demand for online courses has 
come increasing pressure from administration in institutions 
of higher education for faculty to provide more and more 
online course offerings [3]. These factors have also 
generated a demand for more faculty training related to 
building and teaching online courses [4], [5], which is the 
focus of the study presented here. The distinguishing factor 
of this study is that it evaluates the implementation of an 
advanced faculty professional development program for 
online course building. Furthermore, advanced is used to 
refer to the faculty members who have been trained in online 
course development and teaching, are experienced online 
course builders, and who have taught online courses 
previously. 
This paper documents the effectiveness of the program 
based on the perceptions of the faculty participants as 
determined by their responses to an end-of-program survey. 
The paper begins with a review of the literature associated 
with advanced professional development for online course 
building and its role in developing online courses and 
programs. Then, the design of the advanced faculty 
professional development program for online course building 
is detailed, along with the research method that was used for 
this study. Next, the results of the program evaluation and a 
discussion of the faculty perceptions are provided. Finally, 
the article concludes with broader implications of this 
research through a discussion of how the results from the 
program evaluation will enable course instructors to optimize 
instructional design to improve the professional development 
program in future iterations of “The Project.” 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Studies confirm a substantial increase in the availability 
of online courses and programs in recent years [1], [2] and 
research related to online course development continues to 
be consistent with the creation, implementation, and 
facilitation of training for faculty new to online teaching. The 
motivation behind this line of research is the increasing 
requests for online course offerings and programs from 
students and therefore the increasing pressure for institutions 
to provide more online course offerings. Consequently, 
research about the effectiveness of online training models is 
also more in line with the needs of students [1], [6], [7] and 
the concerns of faculty new to online teaching with little or 
no mention of advanced faculty who develop online courses 
[8], [9], [10], [11]. 
Furthermore, there is a considerable amount of research 
that examines the effectiveness of the transfer of learning 
(TAM) models and the ease of use among faculty when 
training for online teaching [9], [12]. For example, Agarwal 
and Prasad [12] describe how training affects the 
participants’ perceptions of usefulness for the technology, 
and that people more highly educated or trained with the use 
of technology are more likely to adopt technology for 
teaching. More directly related to this study, Gegenfurtner, 
Veermans, Festner, and Gruber [13] found that the way the 
person perceives training may impact the decision to apply 
knowledge gained from the training. In an analysis of current 
and effective training strategies for preparing faculty to teach 
online Lackey concluded that online “preparation strategies 
should include both technical and pedagogical training” [14]. 
Professional development for online instructors, in both 
online and face-to-face formats, can create effective informal 
learning whereby participants in the training collaborate, 
share, discuss and reflect on different technologies, 
pedagogies and practices [15]. In this way, participants 
construct knowledge and transfer learning with each other. It 
is anticipated that this experience would be heightened and 
even more beneficial in an advanced faculty online 
professional development program where the participants 
already have online training and online teaching experience. 
However, researchers have not yet investigated such 
perceptions 
of 
implementing 
an 
advanced 
faculty 
professional development program, as addressed by this 
study. The specific research questions addressed in this 
article are the following: 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

1. How do faculty perceive the effectiveness of an 
advanced 
professional 
development 
workshop 
designed for online course building? 
2. What changes do faculty recommend making to the 
advanced 
professional 
development 
workshop 
designed for online course building? 
III. 
METHODS 
This inquiry-based research focused directly on faculty 
perceptions of advanced online teacher training. To answer 
the research questions a 15-item questionnaire (see Appendix 
A) was administered electronically to the 10 faculty 
participants. The questionnaire was designed to determine 
whether the participants deemed the faculty development as 
valuable. Furthermore, the survey was designed with the 
Technology Acceptance Model in mind to ascertain whether 
the participants planned to use information and tools 
presented in the project. It was created and delivered via 
SurveyMonkey, a cloud-based application for surveys, which 
made the questionnaire more accessible. Subsequently, all 
participants completed the questionnaire, which was 
designed primarily to gauge the participants’ perceptions of 
having participated in and completing the professional 
development course. The analysis of the survey responses 
targeted the participants’ satisfaction or dissatisfaction with 
the course and its specific components. This focus was 
adopted to gather information in an effort to answer the 
research questions and to refine the course for future use.  
It should be noted that the relatively small sample size of 
this research (N=10) limits the generalizability of the 
findings. Therefore, the presentation of faculty perceptions 
regarding the advanced faculty workshop for online course 
building should be considered in context and only applied to 
other contexts of comparable nature. To bolster the 
generalizability of these findings, larger samples should be 
studied over longer periods of time. Self-reported data, like 
that gathered in this research, comes with a bias of judging 
your own work. “The Project” 
To address the increasing demand for online and hybrid 
courses at the university under investigation and the need to 
provide faculty with the skills and incentive to develop these 
online and hybrid courses, the advanced professional 
development workshop, known as "The Project," was created 
to provide faculty within the college who are already 
teaching online with advanced tools and pedagogy to 
develop future online courses. For the first iteration of "The 
Project" online modules were created and run by online 
coordinators, designated faculty within each academic 
department in the college who act as a liaison between 
department faculty and the Office of Distance Education 
(ODE) in the college. The online coordinators also served as 
the first participants for the project. The group consists of 
five females and five males; one full professor, four associate 
professors, three assistant professors, and two lecturers. 
Collectively, the group had an average of 6.3 years of online 
teaching experience and 10 years of technology-enhanced 
teaching experience. Additionally, all members had at least 
one year as an online coordinator.  
Online coordinators are given a small stipend for taking 
on the responsibility of supporting distance education in 
online, hybrid, and traditional classroom settings within their 
department. This support can include department level 
training for instructional technology and one-on-one sessions 
to brainstorm and trouble shoot distance learning issues with 
full-time and part-time faculty. With the guidelines that it 
should pertain to best practices and sharing knowledge 
and expertise relating to online learning, and that it should 
contain 30 minutes to one hour worth of content on their 
topic along with an interactive activity, the online 
coordinators were given freedom to select their own 
module topics. Additionally, each module designer was 
expected to monitor his or her own module during the week 
that 
it 
was 
active and 
to 
provide 
feedback 
to 
participants. The eleven modules created and presented are 
depicted in Table I.  
TABLE I.  
OVERVIEW OF LEARNING MODULES INCLUDED IN “THE 
PROJECT” 
Learning Modules 
Module 1: Latest Research Into Successful Online Learning 
Module 2: Best Practices in Mobile Learning  
Module 3: Faculty Presence in Online Courses 
Module 4: Get Your Students’ Heads INTO the Clouds: Cloud 
Computing 
Module 5: Strong and Effective Types of Feedback 
Module 6: Taking the Long View: How Online Learning Has 
Changed at the University 
Module 7: Lessons Learned: Five Tips I Would Share with New 
Online Coordinators 
Module 8: Creative Assignments in the Online Classroom: The 
Virtual Classroom 
Module 9: Learner-Content Interaction in Online Courses 
Module 10: Real Online Programs at the University 
Module 11: Social Media in Online Teaching 
 
“The Project”, being a completely online professional 
development workshop, was hosted on the learning 
management system Desire2Learn. Each participant was 
expected to log in each week to access the module contents  
and participate in the activities, completing the module in 
one week.  There were no incentives for the online 
coordinators to participate in "The Project" other than it 
was expected as a part of their position. Most modules 
contained voiceover PowerPoint presentations for content 
delivery, although two modules used a PowerPoint 
presentation with more detailed notes. Modules dealt with 
contemporary pedagogy and technology related to online 
teaching, including cloud computing, the use of social media, 
the edupunk movement, teaching on mobile devices, and 
showing user-content interaction with simulations using 
ArcGIS. Every module started with module objectives and 
some modules had supplemental or required readings. All 
modules had a discussion board where participants were 
asked to reflect and interact through answering one or two 
directed questions relating to the material covered. 
Frequently, participants were asked to relate their own 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

experiences and methods of achieving a particular goal, such 
as establishing instructor presence in an online course. This 
participation sometimes involved asking participants to share 
samples from their own courses. Some modules used drag 
and drop exercises and self-assessment quizzes to verify 
content comprehension and retention. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The following sections delineate the results from this 
study as they relate to the research questions. More 
specifically, the results are presented in order of the survey 
items. With regard to question one, a small majority (60%) 
of the participants who completed the questionnaire (N=10) 
expressed some apprehension about the purpose of and time 
commitment associated with “The Project” at the outset, and  
none expressed “excitement” about their participation .  
Despite this initial trepidation, the participants reported a 
noticeable increase in enthusiasm for the training after 
completing the project. Only 50% responded that they were 
either “enthusiastic” or “somewhat enthusiastic” before 
training and 90% responded similarly after completion.  The 
increase in interest was further reinforced by qualitative 
responses like, “Once I started seeing the very interesting 
contributions, I thought it was brilliant,” “I think there are 
some potential benefits of completing this course,” and “I see 
potential for this, but it needs refinement.” 
Although all of the participants (100%) reported being 
satisfied with the online delivery of the training, consistent 
themes in the qualitative feedback provided across questions 
focused on the potential benefits of this training and the need 
for content revision. Most of the participants reported that 
this training with modifications would effectively serve our 
experienced faculty who desired additional professional 
development. Several participants commented on a need for 
additional technology modules. Another concern focused on 
the overall lack of consistency across the modules, which 
was likely a product of having individuals develop content 
without restrictive guidelines about what they should include 
prior to initial launch. 
Recognizing, perhaps, that “The Project” is being 
developed for delivery to experienced faculty who have 
previously developed and delivered online and/or hybrid 
courses, 
participants 
identified 
the 
“Pedagogy/Online 
Teaching” modules as most helpful. Several also responded 
either quantitatively or qualitatively that the modules specific 
to the university and the role of online coordinators were the 
least helpful of those offered.  
Across several open-ended questions, #5 and #8-12, 
additional feedback was collected about revising the existing 
modules to improving content in “The Project.” Qualitative 
comments centered on the duration of the training, a need for 
more consistency in both content and facilitation across 
modules, and the addition of more content focused on 
technology. Notably, a majority of participants reported a 
willingness to offer more than just constructive feedback 
about their experience; 80% of the respondent indicated that, 
if asked, they would create another module for the “The 
Project”. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Based on faculty responses to a 15-item questionnaire, 
three findings emerged from the study’s results. These 
findings include the following key points: First, participants 
generally reported enthusiasm concerning their professional 
development experience in “The Project.” Second, most 
participants identified pedagogy as the more important topic 
covered in “The Project.” And third, “The Project” 
functioned as a knowledge and skill benchmark for its 
participants. A more detailed explanation of each finding 
follows. 
A. Enthusiasm for Professional Development 
Whereas more than half of “The Project” participants did 
not understand the program’s purpose up front or feel they 
had time for it, most participants reported enthusiasm or 
some enthusiasm for “The Project” at its completion. Several 
of the open-ended responses, many of which are summarized 
previously, substantiate this conclusion. This observation fits 
with the findings of Baldwin and Magjuka [16] in that it 
confirms the importance of thoroughly explaining a training 
program 
to 
faculty 
members 
well 
before 
training 
commences. In short, participants are routinely more willing 
to participate in any type of training program if a program’s 
initiator has taken steps to clarify the purpose of the training. 
We attribute some of the enthusiasm for “The Project” upon 
its completion to the presence of what Bolt [15] refers to as 
“informal learning” which occurred when participants shared 
their preexisting knowledge and online teaching experiences 
with each other. By sharing their “very interesting 
contributions” (per a comment on the survey) relating to 
online teaching, participants created an online community of 
learning and practice. In effect, with this advanced 
professional development course the transfer of knowledge 
from participant to participant became equally, or even more, 
important than the transfer of knowledge from course 
facilitator to participants. In line with previous research [17],  
[18], [19], this finding demonstrates that structured learning 
programs – whether facilitated by a designated professional 
trainer or co-facilitated by participating trainees – are a 
constructive means to influence the development of one’s 
advanced online instructor abilities.  
B. Pedagogy and Professional Development 
A second finding of this research is that the participants 
of “The Project” distinguished pedagogy as the most 
important topic in the program for furthering one’s online 
teaching abilities. Indeed, 60% of participants noted that of 
the 11 modules in the program, covering four online 
education topic areas (i.e., Online Coordinator duties, 
technology today, trends in online education, and pedagogy 
for online teaching), the topic deemed most valuable to the 
program was pedagogy for online teaching. Ninety percent 
of participants believed they were improved online teachers 
based on their “The Project” experience, especially due to 
content that emphasized pedagogy. These comments 
substantiated this finding: (I liked) “hearing about pedagogy 
and theory related to teaching online!” and (I liked) “lots of 
details about online pedagogy.” This second finding fits with 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Stephenson’s [20] perennial work on online education that 
emphasizes the importance of pedagogy to online 
instruction. This finding also supports the significance of the 
growing body of pedagogical theories being taught in 
training programs for online instruction and being referenced 
and tested in social scientific research (e.g., Technology 
Acceptance Model [12] and Theory of Action [17]). 
Specifically, the Technology Acceptance Model suggests 
that the perceived usefulness and ease of use of the 
technology will increase the users’ acceptance of the tool.  
As a cautionary note concerning this finding, it is not 
clear whether participants distinguished pedagogy as most 
important in “The Project” because the topic is associated 
with a broader call for increased emphasis on pedagogy at 
the university-level or because the increased time demands 
for teaching online (e.g., mastering new and evolving 
technologies) takes away from time that might otherwise be 
spent incorporating pedagogical principles in teaching; either 
way, “The Project” results establish that instructors who 
already teach online recognize the need for pedagogy as they 
continue to develop as online instructors. These results lead 
us to concur with Lackey’s [14] previously stated view about 
the importance of including both techniques and pedagogy in 
online training strategies.  
C. Self-Assessment and Professional Development 
In addition to the first two findings, results of this 
research produced an unanticipated third finding. “The 
Project” functioned as an online teaching knowledge and 
skills benchmark for its participants. In terms of 
background, participants qualified for “The Project” because 
they already had experience teaching online and serving as 
online coordinators for their departments. In particular, the 
mean amount of online teaching experience for the online 
coordinators was six years. As inconsequential as this 
amount of experience may seem, knowledge of online 
teaching appeared to function as a mitigating factor 
influencing participants as they processed content during the 
program and evaluated content at its end (e.g., actively 
comparing and contrasting modules). Their feedback was 
evident in the program’s evaluation at its conclusion. As one 
participant noted, “(I) absolutely (find this information 
valuable), if the content is improved.” While another 
participant offered, “I thought some of the modules were 
good, while others were not especially applicable. There is 
definite need for improvement.” In brief, “The Project” 
seemed to tap into a collective knowledge of online learning 
that helped differentiate high-developmental modules from 
low-developmental ones. This emphasis on cognition is 
significant in that it acts as a predicator of learning transfer 
[9].  
By the same token, participants also acknowledged the 
importance of continued skill development as part of their 
experience in “The Project.” As Burke and Hutchins [9] as 
well as Gegaenfurtner, Veermans, Festner, and Gruber [13] 
note, emphasis on skill development is an important 
component of any effective instructor development 
program, especially for one focused on online teaching. 
Several responses support attention to online skills training: 
(a) “There needs to be more consistency in the quality of 
modules.” (b) (In the future) “build into this project various 
course assignments that relate to the required deliverable” 
(e.g., a new course)…(that) require(s) faculty to critique and 
provide feedback on the posts or work of their colleagues.” 
(c) “Facilitator(s) must model what we should be doing in 
the classes.” In sum, “The Project” served as a meaningful 
knowledge and skills assessment for its participants as they 
worked to enhance their online teaching abilities. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The favorable results demonstrate that “The Project” 
yielded a basic structure from which an advanced faculty 
development program could be built. There are tangible 
benefits to be derived from the informal learning that comes 
with an advanced and experienced online faculty community 
of learning and practice. There are also several practical 
implications to consider. First, through participant feedback, 
the ODE learned that participants believed the pedagogical 
components of “The Project” to be the most valuable. 
Second, participants desired more technological teaching 
tools in the training, and third, participants believed that the 
online coordinator-specific modules were the least valuable.  
TABLE II.  
OVERVIEW OF LEARNING MODULES INCLUDING PLANNED 
MODIFICATIONS FOR “THE PROJECT” 
Category of 
 Module 
Name of module  
Pedagogy/ 
Online Teaching 
Latest Research Into Successful Online Learning;  
“Faculty Presence” in Online Courses; Strong and 
Effective Types of Feedback; Learner – Content 
Interaction in Online Courses; Work Smarter, Not 
Harder*; Improving Retention in Online Courses* 
 
 
Trends 
Best Practices in Mobile Learning; Get Your 
Students’ Heads INTO the Clouds: Cloud 
Computing; Creative Assignments in the Online 
Classroom: The Virtual Museum; The Use of 
Social Media in Online Teaching 
Technology 
Panopto*; SoftChalk*; VoiceThread*; Tiki Toki*; 
Doceri* 
*Content was added for a future iteration of “The Project” 
 
As can be seen in Table II, coordinator-specific modules 
were removed for the advanced training version of “The 
Project”, and five additional modules were added for specific 
technologies. In addition, two modules on pedagogy were 
added: “Work Smarter, Not Harder” with timesaving tips for 
online teachers and “Improving Retention in Online, Hybrid, 
and F2F Courses” with research-based strategies and 
templates for improving course retention. Future iterations of 
“The Project” will be offered as a skills update workshop in 
which the participants choose and complete 9 of 12 available 
modules.  
As noted in the introduction, this study provided a unique 
opportunity to examine faculty participants’ perceptions of 
an advanced faculty development for online course building. 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Although the findings of this research yield positive results, 
several areas merit future research. First, similar research 
should 
include 
the 
perspectives 
of 
non-researcher 
participants and draw from a larger sample size.  Second, 
researchers should evaluate the transference of technology 
skills as a result of completing the workshop. Last, future 
research should examine the impact such workshops may 
have on student learning. Such future research will provide a 
fuller picture of how the advanced faculty development 
workshops impacts faculty teaching and students’ learning. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank Kennesaw State University’s College of 
Humanities and Social Sciences Office of the Dean, and the 
CHSS Office of Distance Education for travel funding.  
REFERENCES 
[1] I.E. Allen, J. Seaman, D. Lederman, and S. Jaschik, 
“Conflicted: Faculty and online education,” A joint project of 
the Babson Survey Research Group and Inside Higher Ed, 
2012, 
pp.1-48. 
Available 
from 
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED535214.pdf 
[retrieved: 
January, 2014] 
[2] I.E. Allen, and J. Seaman, “Class differences: Online 
education in the United States,  2010,” The Sloan Consortium, 
2010, 
pp. 
1-30. 
Available 
from 
http://sloanconsortium.org/publications/survey/class_differen
ces. [retrieved: January, 2014] 
[3] C. Carlson, P. Aust, J. McNeill, T. Powell, and L. Witt, 
“Which technology do I use to teach online: New media and 
communication course instruction,” The Journal of Online 
Learning and Teaching, vol. 8(4), 2012, pp. 334-347, 
available 
from 
http://jolt.merlot.org/vol8no4/carlson)1212.htm. 
[retrieved: 
January, 2014] 
[4] L.M. Lane, “An open, online class to prepare faculty to teach 
online, Journal of Educators Online, vol. 10(1), 2013, 
available 
from 
http://www.thejeo.com/Archives/Volume10Number1/Lane.pd
f. [retrieved: January, 2014] 
[5] M. Northcote, D. Reynaud, and P. Beamish, “Teaching the 
lecturers: Academic staff learning about online teaching,” US-
China Education Review, vol. A(4), 2012, pp. 384-393. 
[6] E.T. Jones, J.R. Lindner, T.H. Murphy, and K.E. Dooley,  
“Faculty philosophical position toward distance education: 
Competency, value, and educational technology support,” The 
Journal of Distance Learning Administration, vol. 5(1), 2002, 
available 
from 
http://www.westga.edu/~distance/ojdla/spring51/jones51.htm. 
[retrieved: January, 2014] 
[7] B. Means, Y. Toyama, R. Murphy, M. Bakia, and K. Jones,. 
Evaluation of evidence-based practices in online learning: A 
meta-analysis and review of online learning studies. (Contract  
No. ED-04-CO-0040) Washington, D.C: U.S. Department of 
Education, 2010, pp. 1-66. 
[8] A. Barker, “Faculty development for teaching online:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Educational and technological issues,” Faculty Development 
for Teaching Online, vol. 34(6), 2003, pp. 273-278. 
[9] L.A. Burke and H.M. Hutchins, “Training transfer: An 
integrative literature review,” Human Resource Development 
Review, 2007, pp. 264-297.  
[10] S. Gold, “A constructivist approach to online training for 
online 
teachers,” 
Journal 
of 
Asynchronous 
Learning 
Networks, vol. 5(1), 2001, pp. 35- 57. 
[11] J. Terantino and E. Agbehonou, “Comparing faculty 
perceptions of an online development course: Addressing 
faculty needs for online teaching,” Online Journal of Distance 
Learning Administration, vol. 15(2), 2012, available from 
http://www.westga.edu/~distance/ojdla/summer152/terantino_
agbehonou152.html. [retrieved: January, 2014] 
[12] R. Agarwal and J. Prasad, “Are individual diffferences 
germane 
to 
the 
acceptance 
of 
new 
information 
technologies?,” Decision Sciences, vol. 30(2), 1999, pp. 361-
391. 
Available 
from 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-
5915.1999.tb01614.x [retrieved: January, 2014] 
[13] A. Gegenfurtner, K. Veermans, D. Festner,  and H. Gruber, 
“Integrative literature review: Motivation to transfer training: 
An 
integrative 
literature 
review,” 
Human 
Resource 
Development Review, vol. 8, 2009, pp. 403-423. Available 
from http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1534484309335970 [retrieved: 
January, 2014] 
[14] K. Lackey, “Faculty development: An analysis of current and 
effective training strategies for preparing faculty to teach 
online,” Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration, 
vol. 
16(2), 
2013, 
available 
from 
http://www.westga.edu/~distance/ojdla/winter144/lackey144.
html. [retrieved: January, 2014] 
[15] S. Bolt, “Professional development: Then and now,” 
International Association for Development of the Information 
Society, 
2012 
pp. 
287-290. 
Available 
from 
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED542831.pdf. 
[retrieved: 
January, 2014] 
[16] T. Baldwin and R. J. Magjuka, “Organizational training and 
signals of importance: Linking pretraining perceptions to 
intentions 
to 
transfer," Human 
Resource 
Development 
Quarterly, 
vol. 
2(1), 
1991, 
pp. 
25-36. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hrdq.3920020106 
[retrieved: 
January, 2014] 
[17] F. Davis, R. Bagozzi and P.R. Warshaw, “User acceptance of 
computer technology: A comparison of two theoretical 
models,” Management Science, vol. 35(8), 1989, pp. 982-
1003. Available from http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.35.8.982 
[retrieved: January, 2014] 
[18] S. Davis and R. P. Bostrom, “Training end users: An 
experimental investigation of the roles of the computer 
interface and training methods,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 17(1), 
1993, 
pp. 
61-85.  
Available 
from 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/249510 [retrieved: January, 2014] 
[19] E. K. Maritim, “The distance learning mode of training 
teachers in Kenya: Challenges, prospects, and suggested 
policy framework,” Open Learning, vol. 24(3), 2009, pp. 241-
254. 
Available 
from 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02680510903202100 
[retrieved: 
January, 2014] 
[20] J. Stephenson, Teaching & learning online: Pedagogies for 
new technologies. Sterling, VA: Stylus Publishing, Inc., 2001. 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

APPENDIX A: SURVEY ITEMS 
Question 1: What were your thoughts when you were first introduced to the idea of “The Project”? 
o 
I didn’t really understand it 
o 
I felt like I didn’t have time for it 
o 
I thought it was interesting 
o 
I was excited 
Question 2: Before "The Project" began, please rate your enthusiasm for it. 
o 
Not enthusiastic 
o 
Somewhat enthusiastic 
o 
Neutral 
o 
Enthusiastic 
o 
Very enthusiastic 
Question 3: After completing "The Project," how enthusiastic are you about the experience? 
o 
Not enthusiastic 
o 
Somewhat enthusiastic 
o 
Neutral 
o 
Enthusiastic 
o 
Very enthusiastic 
Question 4: Do you believe that this workshop, with a few modifications to make content more specific to online faculty, will effectively serve faculty who 
have completed the "Build a Web Course" Workshop and desire more professional development? 
o 
No 
o 
Somewhat  
o 
Can’t say/don’t know 
o 
Yes 
Question 5: Do you like the fact that it was all online? 
o 
Yes 
o 
No 
o 
Don’t know 
o 
Other 
Question 6: What category of modules was most helpful to you? 
o 
None 
o 
Pedagogy/Online Teaching 
o 
Trends 
o 
Technology 
o 
KSU/Online Coordinator Specific 
o 
Other 
Question 7: What category of modules was least helpful to you? 
o 
None 
o 
Pedagogy/Online Teaching 
o 
Trends 
o 
Technology 
o 
KSU/Online Coordinator Specific 
o 
Other 
Question 8: After completing "The Project," do you believe that you are a better online teacher? 
o 
Yes 
o 
No 
Question 9: After completing "The Project," do you feel that you are a better online coordinator? 
o 
Yes 
o 
No 
Question 10: What did you like least about “The Project”? 
Question 11: What did you like most about “The Project”? 
Question 12: What changes would you make to better serve your faculty who enroll in “The Project” pilot in fall? 
Question 13: If asked, would you participate in creating another module for a similar endeavor such as "The Project"? 
o 
Yes 
o 
No 
Question 14: How much should faculty be paid to complete “The Project” in a semester (not creating modules, just attending/participating)? 
Question 15: What else would you like to share? 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

