Persuasive Technologies for Efficient Adaptable Self-Education
Kids Smart Mobile School Project
Saad Abdessettar
École de Technologie Supérieure (ÉTS)
Montreal, Canada
e-mail: saad.abdessettar.1@etsmtl.ca
Richard Hotte
Dept.: LICEF research center at Téluq University
Montreal, Canada
e-mail: richard.hotte@teluq.ca
Mickaël Gardoni
École de Technologie Supérieure (ÉTS) / INSA
Montreal, Canada / Strasbourg, France
e-mail: mickael.gardoni@etsmtl.ca
Bessam Abdulrazak,
University of Sherbrooke
Sherbrooke, Canada
e-mail: bessam.abdulrazak@usherbrooke.ca
Abstract—Persuasive Technologies could revolutionize the way
education is delivered. It could enable serving kids who would
probably never have the chance to even see a school. Millions
of children still do not have access to school or teachers,
especially in poor and developing countries. Thus, our research
project aims at offering a persuasive mobile self-learning
system that can be an alternative to standard school. We
present in this paper the (KSMS) project. We focus on our
vision of embedding persuasive technologies to enhance kids’
education quality and efficiency, in a self-learning context.
Keywords-Persuasive
technology,
Persuasive
learning,
Mobile learning, Pupil Perseverance, Pupil Motivation, Pupil
Engagement
I.
INTRODUCTION
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT)
have changed our way of performing tasks in diverse
domains such as economy, health, and higher education.
This change affects even the way we live [1]. Still, the
effectiveness of the ICT is not maximal due to the lack of
efficient Human Machine Interaction (HMI) design. Several
studies have emerged in the persuasive technologies science
to address limitations of the HMI design. These studies
resulted in numerous findings, constructs, methods and
models, addressing problems related to persuasion and
behavior or attitude changes. Persuasive technologies have a
potential to revolutionize the Education [2-6]. Thus, we
target in our Kids Smart Mobile School (KSMS) project, in
collaboration with our industrial partner DATAWIND Inc.
[36], to propose a low-cost solution for school access
problems using mobile and persuasive technologies. The
first target population of KSMS is the rural area in India.
In the rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
II, we discuss the background of our research and our
research project context. In Section III, we define our
research question and originality. Section IV presents a
summarized
review
of
research
studies
and
findings
addressing the two main issues related to education (i.e.,
motivation and engagement) in primary and secondary
school. Next, I Section V, we present an overview of
relevant works in persuasive technologies for education, and
then conclude the paper with a summarizing synthesis and a
discussion of future perspectives.
II.
BACKGROUND
Adapting and using ICT for education is a current
problem, particularly in developing countries. In Africa, for
example, there have been numerous initiatives that target
ICT for education. The list includes: use of tablets in
colleges in Niger as a tool/medium for education, use of
mobile phones in continuing training of primary teachers in
Madagascar, etc. Unfortunately, there are still children in
the world without access to school (primary and secondary).
This situation is due to various reasons such as economy,
social behavior, family structure, geographic condition,
racial discrimination, and gender disparity [7]. Ardt et al. [7]
highlight that gender disparities are critical in Bangladesh.
They discussed that three million children between six and
ten years (5% of children age of primary school) have never
attended school. Ardt et al. [7] conclude that this situation is
because those children are poor, from remote rural areas,
without homes or, even from minority tribes. Kim et al. and
Kim, P.H. [8, 9] discussed similar situations among
indigenous of South America, seasonal or itinerant workers.
They indicate that, among the underserved population in
Latin America, a large number of the indigenous children
are the poorest ones who hardly have access to formal
school. Similarly, Achoka et al.[10] conclude that the failure
in the access of young Kenyan children to primary
education is due to poverty, inequality in gender and
regional disparities.
Nowadays, around 124 million children and teenagers,
between the ages of 6 and 15 years, have either never started
school or have dropped out, according to UNESCO Institute
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

of Statistics (UIS) [11]. The UIS discusses in a recent report
that the main problem is (directly or indirectly) the lack of
school access in rural and/or urban regions [11]. The UIS
report also concludes that we can no longer rely only on
‘usual’ strategies based on more teachers, classrooms and
textbooks. Thus, our KSMS project is an attempt to provide
innovative education approaches. KSMS was defined in
partnership
between
LICEF
research
center
and
his
industrial partner DATAWIND.
In the next section, we
present a relevant state of the art of research studies related
to the KSMS project.
III.
RELEVANT WORKS
There exist a number of relevant research studies that
focus on technological learning system to compensate the
absence of school or teacher.
Kam et al. [12] studied
designing E-Learning Games for Rural Children in India.
Kam et al. project’s challenge was to design e-learning
games that are both educational and pleasurable for their
target learners. These children have limited familiarity with
technology. Kam et al. [12] proposed the “receptive-
practice-activation cycle” to be used as the conceptual
model for designs. Another challenge was to design a
balanced solution between fun and self-learning for rural
children. Thus, those challenges gave high consideration to
local environment and contextual information of the target
learners.
EuroPLOT is another relevant project to compensate for
the absence of school or teacher [13]. The project’s team has
developed Persuasive Learning and Technologies (PLOTs)
and has evaluated them in four real-world case studies. The
project covers different teaching scenarios of university
education, adult learning in industry, informal learning at a
museum,
literature
studies,
and
language
learning.
EuroPLOT explores to what extent persuasive learning
objects and technologies could militate (simulate and
alleviate) the functions of a persuasive teacher. The
framework was designed based on Fogg‘s definition of
CAPTOLOGY [14], and integrated the RAMP model
(Relatedness, Autonomy, Mastery and Purpose) proposed
by Marczewski [15] to enable engagement in the learning
process. The learning diffusion strategies adopted in the
EUROPLOT had diverse challenges. Indeed, the researchers
and designers involved in the project had the challenge to
deliver the teacher with the text, but at the same time to
invest this teacher presence in the text with stronger
persuasive power for learning.
Similar projects aiming at diffusing learning throughout
technology and gaming environment have been undertaken.
Plass et al. [16] present a research study that aims at
designing a game (i.e., FactorReactor) to help practicing and
automating arithmetic skills. The goal is to increase
arithmetic fluency in middle-school-age students. Plass et al.
argue that competitiveness increases in-game learning,
whereas collaboration decreases performance during the
experimental play session. They discuss that competition
and collaboration elicit greater situational interest and
enjoyment, and invoke a stronger mastery goal orientation.
They
conclude
that,
collaboration
results
in
stronger
intention and motivation to play the game again and to
recommend it to others.
Similarly, Lerkkanen et al. [17] examined the extent to
which
teaching
practices
observed
in
kindergarten
classrooms
predict
children’s
interest
in
reading
and
mathematics. They conclude that girls are more motivated
than boys in reading. On the other hand, boys perform better
than girls in tasks involving number sequences. Lerkkanen
et al. [17] argue that for the observed teaching practices, the
more child-centered and the less teacher-directed they are,
the higher reading motivation is among children. Similarly,
Hirvonen et al. [18] examined the developmental dynamics
of task-avoidant behavior and math performance from
kindergarten to Grade 4. They studied math performance
and
task-avoidant
behavior
development
in
tandem.
Hirvonen et al. [18] argue that an increase in task-avoidant
behavior
is
related
to
less
improvement
in
math
performance, and high initial level of task-avoidant behavior
predicted less improvement and slower improvement in
math later on.
To conclude, there is yet no research study that focuses
on a technological learning system to compensate for the
absence of school or teacher. Few existing studies focus on
either
complementing
existing
learning
provided
by
standard schools, or on bringing new alternative learning
(distant or hybrid) that always include teacher or tutor
interaction with final learners. In the next section, we
present our research project and research question, and then
discuss our vision of persuasive technologies in KSMS.
IV.
KSMS PROJECT
KSMS’s main goal is to create a learning system on
mobile devices that will be adapted for individual self-
learning. KSMS project targets particularly children in
developing countries without access to teachers or school.
Three main objectives are defined for KSMS project:
I.
To provide autonomous learning for part of the
elementary and/or secondary curriculum, with content
definition and learning strategies adapted to a mobile
device apps environment.
II.
To design an educational game application based on
serious game architecture to support learning contents.
III.
To integrate persuasive design and HCI multimodal
interaction design in the learning process. The main
goal is to make the system more adaptive and more
context-aware. This will allow guiding and impacting
the learner’s behavior, by helping him/her to control
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

his/her own learning and to be continuously motivated
to learn.
In this paper, we mainly focus on the third objective.
More precisely, we intend to answer the following research
questions:
(i)
How
persuasive
technologies
can
help
stimulate pupil motivation and perseverance? (ii) At what
extent should the targeted system consider contextual
persuasion in order to ensure a learner centered strategy and
an efficient self-determined education?
The KSMS project originality comes from the fact that
the system is fully automated and will represent a unique
source of learning for the target population. In other words,
the final system will not be a complement to an existing
learning
system,
such
as
school,
classroom,
learning
resource or teacher. Instead, KSMS aims at providing all
those components in an integrated architecture that can
ensure the efficiency and the effectiveness of learning for
the target population that is supposed to have limited or no
access to teacher or school.
The third objective of KSMS project, which is the focus
of this paper, is expected to compensate the absence of the
school and the teacher. By persuasive learning, we refer to
learning that is designed using persuasive technologies to
impact the learner’s engagement and ability to control his
own learning. KSMS project is designed to integrate
persuasive system design models and methods with the
latest
findings
in
education
science
field
related
to
engagement and perseverance. Thus, the target solution is
designed considering the autonomous fact of the learning
provided, and also the challenge to ensure an equivalent
quality of learning to Indian government standard as defined
by the Central Board of Secondary Education in its
international version.
We discuss next some definitions of motivation, its
classes, and what factors can help to monitor and manage
motivation and engagement in learning.
V.
LEARNING MOTIVATION
Motivation refers to “the choices people make as to what
experiences or goals they will approach or avoid, and the
degree of effort they will exert in that respect” [19].
Motivation
is
viewed
as
highly
unpredictable
and
changeable, being subject to divers influences [20]. In
education, there is a consensus that motivational messages
impact student motivation level and have a positive
influence on their class performance
The term “Motivation to learn” is defined by Marshall,
H. [21] as the meaningfulness, value, and benefits of
academic tasks to the learner regardless of whether or not
they are intrinsically interesting. According to Brophy, J.
[22], motivation to learn is a competence acquired through
general experience, but stimulated most directly through
modeling,
communication
of
expectations,
and
direct
instruction or socialization by significant others (especially
parents and teachers).
Motivation can be Intrinsic or extrinsic. Extrinsic
motivation is doing or not doing something because of
external
benefits
or
consequences
(i.e.,
reward
or
punishment) [23]. An “Extrinsically” motivated student
performs "in order to” obtain rewards or avoid punishments
external to the activity itself," such as grades, stickers, or
teacher approval [24]. They also perform because of
pressure, reward, incentive, among other external reasons
[25].
Intrinsic motivation is basically self-motivation [26].
This internal motivation involves values [27] and is
frequently linked with achievement [28]. A student who is
“Intrinsically” motivated undertakes an activity "for its own
sake, for the enjoyment it provides, the learning it permits,
or the feelings of accomplishment it evokes" [29].
Condry, J. et al. [30] discuss that, when students were
confronted with complex intellectual tasks, those with an
intrinsic orientation used more logical information-gathering
and decision-making strategies than did students who were
extrinsically oriented. Students with an intrinsic orientation
also tend to prefer tasks that are moderately challenging,
whereas extrinsically oriented students gravitate toward
tasks that are low in degree of difficulty. Extrinsically
oriented students are inclined to put forth the minimal
amount of effort necessary to get the maximal reward [24].
Numerous researches have been undertaken in order to
monitor and manage student motivation. Keller, J.M. [31]
Introduced the ARCS model as a method for improving the
motivational appeal of instructional materials and is based
on four dimensions of motivation. These dimensions were
derived from a synthesis of research on human motivation
and are known as ARCS: Attention (A), Relevance (R),
Confidence (C), and Satisfaction (S). ARCS model focuses
on using motivational messages that are intended to enhance
faculty-student interaction, which leads to enhancing student
motivation [32]. Ciampa, K. [24] argues that the list of
elements that make an activity both intrinsically and
extrinsically motivating for a learner include: challenge,
curiosity (cognitive & sensitive), control, cooperation,
competition and recognition.
Moreover, Bobis, J., et al. [33] propose a model for
mathematics instruction to enhance student motivation and
engagement. Part of their research questions were:
What
teaching strategies might motivate middle-grades students to
engage more in mathematics?
Bobis et al.
proposed an
upgraded
version
of
Martin,
A.’s
motivation
wheel
framework [34], by conceptualizing the wheel into adaptive,
impeding, and maladaptive dimensions. Their framework
allows educators to identify a set of common factors. Those
factors underpin in particular student’s motivation and
engagement. The motivation wheel also allows to identify
what aspects need to be targeted for intervention. From
another
perspective,
Fogg
[14]
introduced
principal
motivators for designing behavior change in the Fogg
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Behavior Model (FBM): (1) Pleasure vs. Pain, (2) Hope vs.
Fear, and (3) Social Acceptance vs. Rejection.
After discussing motivation in this section, we present
next relevant research studies to KSMS and persuasive
education.
VI.
PERSUASIVE TECHNOLOGIES FOR EDUCATION
We argue that persuasive technologies and persuasive
design can be efficiently integrated in self-learning systems.
We
believe
that
persuasive
technologies
have
to
be
considered in all aspects of the target learning system.
Therefore, we propose to integrate persuasive design and
persuasive technologies in a framework of three layers.
Following is a description of the framework and the
guidelines we adopted on each layer (Figure 1):
1) Learning Structure: in this layer we consider the ease
of use for the KSMS proposed system, as well as the ease of
registration and subscription to all proposed pedagogical
activities. We also take into consideration the impact of
celebration, and the success/failure perception to ensure an
efficient motivating roadmap for the proposed learning
progress structure. Thus, the learning progress will be
designed to consider small achievable goals. To those goals,
specific behaviors are defined as target behavior for the
persuasive strategies or component to integrate or include in
the solution. The challenge is then to guide and help the
final user – the learner, to continuously feel successful by
achieving a sequence of small goals that lead to the defined
target one.
2) Learning Medium & Infrastructure: at this layer, we
are adapting the learning scenario, content and medium to
learner
context
information
gathered
throughout
used
devices. The main design driver at this layer is ensuring
reduction and facilitating the interaction with KSMS. In this
layer, we integrate the ARCS model to ensure user
engagement in using the KSMS learning system, and also in
keeping focused on the learning goals to progress in his/her
learning. We also enhance the context awareness in order to
propose content and learning scenarios that match more the
real world of the learner. Some technical constraints and
limitations make the social learning difficult to occur. In
fact, the bandwidth is limited in the provided mobile
network using 2G technology. We adapted the solution to
use data collected by devices to create virtual classroom or
learning groups that are formed by neighbor users. We
believe that throughout those learning groups we can
stimulate social learning and provide the learner to interact
with peers and even act as a teacher when helping other.
3) Learning Content & Scenarios: at this layer, we
propose an integration of persuasive technologies in the
content and in the way the learner will receive the content.
Our analysis of the content leads us to consider target
learning skills as target behaviors. Thus, the main goal is to
make the final user (in our case, the learner) exercise those
target behavior according to their needed frequency. A high
consideration is given to the learner context and to the real
world learning mapping opportunities, in order to make the
KSMS’s learning experience more relevant and then more
efficient. In fact, the Geographical Positioning System
(GPS)’s data is for instance, a great source of context
understanding. We propose to use the GPS data to retrieve
information about the environment (sunny, raining, culture,
known products, etc.), and then map it in the content so we
can give examples of raining vocabulary when it is raining,
for example. Other sensors and technologies are considered,
especially the Bluetooth and ad-hoc Wi-Fi, to stimulate
social learning even when there is no Internet connection.
Moreover, when a kid is well performing in a task, he will
be prompted to share his knowledge with neighbor kids
having problems to perform that task. In this way, the intent
will be not only stimulating the teacher role (and by the way
this is a way to replace the ordinary teacher), but we also
give the first well performing pupil to identify and control
his own learning.
We base our persuasive design mainly on FBM. We
consider different classes of behaviors regarding the three
layers. To build strategies for bringing the learner to target
behavior, we monitor his ability, motivation and trigger.
This principle is applied either for behaviors related to the
use of KSMS, to the learning engagement and perseverance
or to the target skills defined in the target curriculum. We
then use Behavior Wizard methodology to implement the
persuasion strategy [35], by defining the behavior state
transition and mapping it to the proposed grid. Fogg, B. and
Hreha, J. [35] proposed fifteen cells in his BehaviorWizard:
five columns for behaviors types (New behavior, Familiar
behavior, increasing behavior, decreasing behavior and stop
behavior), and 3 rows for behavior frequency (DOT: one
time, SNAP: period of time, PATH: from now on). We use
the BehaviorWizard
to design the transition path of
behaviors after breaking them down into a combination of
small and more specific ones.
In this section, we presented an overview of the
persuasive design integration to KSMS persuasive learning
system. A synthesis of guidelines and fundamentals adopted
in designing persuasive technologies that will be embedded
in the target mobile learning system KSMS.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
ICT
and
persuasive
technologies
can
contribute
significantly to resolve the school’s access problem. We
presented throughout this paper our vision on delivering
education to where there is no access to school and teachers,
taking advantage of persuasive technologies. This activity is
part of the KSMS project presented in the paper. We also
discussed the persuasive design framework and guidelines
we adopted for KSMS. We are working on tuning the
framework and finalizing the implementation of the defined
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

solution before evaluating the results with the industrial
partner in real settings. DATAWIND has partnered with the
Indian government, as well as other countries, to begin
providing its low-cost tablets to an estimated number of 220
million kids, especially those suffering from a school access
problem.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
KSMS project was funded jointly by MITACS-CANADA and
DATAWIND Inc. throughout a partnership with LICEF research
center.
REFERENCES
[1]
Fogg, B.J., Persuasive technology: using computers to
change
what
we
think
and
do.
Ubiquity,
2002.
2002(December): pp. 2.
[2]
Behringer, R. and Øhrstrøm, P., Persuasive Design in
Teaching
and
Learning.
International
Journal
of
Conceptual Structures and Smart Applications, 2013. 1(2):
pp. 1-5.
[3]
Gram-Hansen, S.B., D. 3.3 PLOT Persuasive Learning
Design Framework: Persuasive Learning Designs. 2012.
[4]
Winther-Nielsen,
N.,
PLOTLearner’s
Persuasive
Achievement: Force, Flow and Context in Technology for
Language Learning from the Hebrew Bible. HIPHIL
Novum, 2014. 1(2): pp. 78-94.
[5]
Nakajima, T. and Lehdonvirta, V., Designing motivation
using persuasive ambient mirrors. Personal and Ubiquitous
Computing, 2013. 17(1): pp. 107-126.
[6]
Lucero, A., et al., Persuasive technologies in education:
Improving motivation to read and write for children.
Lecture notes in computer science, 2006: pp. 142.
[7]
Ardt, K., et al., Report on primary education in bangladesh:
Challenges
and
successes.
Bangladesh
Bureau
of
Education
Information
and
Statistics
(BANBEIS)/Bangladesh Ministry of Women and Children
Affairs (MWCA), 2005.
[8]
Kim, P., Miranda, T. and Olaciregui, C., Pocket school:
Exploring mobile technology as a sustainable literacy
education option for underserved indigenous children in
Latin
America.
International
Journal
of
Educational
Development, 2008. 28(4): pp. 435-445.
[9]
Kim, P.H., Action research approach on mobile learning
design
for
the
underserved.
Educational
Technology
Research and Development, 2009. 57(3): pp. 415-435.
[10]
Achoka, J.S.K., Odebero Sephen O., Naiyo Julius K., and
Mualuko N., Access to basic education in Kenya : inherent
concerns. Educational Research and Reviews, 2007. 2(10):
pp. 275-284.
[11]
UIS, U.a., A growing number of children and adolescents
are out of school as aid fails to meet the mark. POLICY
PAPER 22 / FACT SHEET 31, 2015. :
http://www.uis.unesco.org/Education/Documents/oosci-
global-report-en.pdf. (last accessed March 2016)
[12]
Kam, M., et al. Designing e-learning games for rural
children in India: a format for balancing learning with fun.
in Proceedings of the 7th ACM conference on Designing
interactive systems. 2008. ACM.
[13]
Behringer,
R.
and
Sinclair,
G.,
IWEPLET
2013
Proceedings. EuroPLOT Retrieved December, 2013. 8: pp.
2013.
[14]
Fogg, B.J. A behavior model for persuasive design. in
Proceedings
of
the
4th
international
Conference
on
Persuasive Technology. 2009. ACM.
[15]
Marczewski, A., The Intrinsic Motivation RAMP. 2013.
[16]
Plass, J.L., et al., The impact of individual, competitive,
and collaborative mathematics game play on learning,
performance,
and
motivation. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 2013. 105(4): pp. 1050.
[17]
Lerkkanen, M.-K., et al., The role of teaching practices in
the development of children’s interest in reading and
mathematics in kindergarten. Contemporary Educational
Psychology, 2012. 37(4): pp. 266-279.
[18]
Hirvonen, R., et al., The developmental dynamics of task-
avoidant behavior and math performance in kindergarten
and
elementary
school.
Learning
and
Individual
Differences, 2012. 22(6): pp. 715-723.
[19]
Keller, J.M., The use of the ARCS model of motivation in
teacher training. Aspects of educational technology, 1984.
17: pp. 140-145.
[20]
Keller, J.M. and Kopp, T.W., An application of the ARCS
Model of Motivational Design. 1987.
[21]
Marshall, H., Motivational strategies of three fifth-grade
teachers. The Elementary School Journal, 1987.
[22]
Brophy, J., Socializing students' motivation to learn.
Advances in motivation and achievement, 1987. 5: pp.
181-210.
[23]
Ryan, R.M. and Deci, E.L., Self‐regulation and the
problem of human autonomy: does psychology need
choice,
self‐determination,
and
will?
Journal
of
personality, 2006. 74(6): pp. 1557-1586.
[24]
Ciampa, K., Learning in a mobile age: an investigation of
student
motivation.
Journal
of
Computer
Assisted
Learning, 2014. 30(1): pp. 82-96.
[25]
Konheim-Kalkstein, Y.L. and Van den Broek, P., The
effect of incentives on cognitive processing of text.
Discourse Processes, 2008. 45(2): pp. 180-194.
[26]
Deci, E.L., et al., Motivation and education: The self-
determination perspective. Educational psychologist, 1991.
26(3-4): pp. 325-346.
[27]
Sanacore, J., Turning reluctant learners into inspired
learners. The Clearing House: A Journal of Educational
Strategies, Issues and Ideas, 2008. 82(1): pp. 40-44.
[28]
Spittle, M., K. Jackson, and Casey, M., Applying self-
determination theory to understand the motivation for
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

becoming a physical education teacher. Teaching and
Teacher Education, 2009. 25(1): pp. 190-197.
[29]
Lepper, M.R., Motivational considerations in the study of
instruction. Cognition and instruction, 1988. 5(4): pp. 289-
309.
[30]
Condry, J. and Chambers, J., Intrinsic Motivation and the
Process of Learning. In the Hidden Costs of Reward,
edited by MR Lepper and D. Greene. 61-84. 1978,
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
[31]
Keller, J.M., Using the ARCS motivational process in
computer‐based instruction and distance education. New
directions for teaching and learning, 1999. 1999(78): pp.
37-47.
[32]
Robb, C.A. and Sutton, J., The Importance of Social
Presence and Motivation in Distance Learning. Journal of
Technology, Management & Applied Engineering, 2014.
31(1-3): pp. 1-10.
[33]
Bobis, J., et al., A model for mathematics instruction to
enhance student motivation and engagement. Motivation
and disposition: pathways to learning mathematics, 73rd
yearbook.
Reston:
National
Council
of
Teachers
of
Mathematics (NCTM), 2011.
[34]
Martin,
A.,
Building
classroom
success:
Eliminating
academic fear and failure. 2010: A&C Black.
[35]
Fogg, B. and Hreha, J., Behavior wizard: a method for
matching target behaviors with solutions, in Persuasive
technology. 2010, Springer. pp. 117-131.
[36]
www.Datawind.com (last accessed April 2016)
Figure 1.
Implementing persuasive technologies in KSMS
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

