 
 
Using an Expert System to Automatically Map the Learning Profile of Individuals 
 
John E. Yannakoudakis               
Irene E. Yannakoudakis 
Research & Development Department 
Computer Academy 
Kifissia, Athens, Greece 
jyan@computeracademy.gr 
Helen Yannakoudakis 
Computer Laboratory 
University of Cambridge 
JJ Thomson Ave, Cambridge  
United Kingdom 
Helen.Yannakoudakis@cl.cam.ac.uk 
Giorgos Papadourakis 
Department of Informatics Engineering 
Head οf the Career Office 
Technological Educational Institute 
Heraklion, Crete, Greece 
papadour@cs.teicrete.gr
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a new integrated, web-based 
system for assessing the learning aptitudes, the learning styles, 
and the potential of the brain hemispheres of individuals. 
Specially designed psychometric questionnaires are adopted 
and a new battery of tests – that is, a combination of factors – 
is proposed. The analysis of the factors is carried out by the 
Ariston expert system shell, and statistical data is presented 
regarding the reliability–validity of the system. 
Keywords–learning 
styles; 
aptitudes; 
personality; 
psychometric testing; expert systems 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The higher education environment presents several 
challenges for students who are frequently faced with the 
task of taking decisions that affect directly their academic 
progress, and ultimately their career prospects. For 
successful academic decisions, a student must consider 
carefully several different matters, investigate all possible 
alternatives (e.g., the electives), think analytically, and 
above all, apply logic of the form “What-if…”. The 
environment itself poses several demands regarding 
learning, while frequently the students are disappointed 
because it becomes rather difficult for them to understand 
the reasons they cannot master certain concepts, and 
generally why they fail. 
One of the most demanding tasks is that of acquiring 
new knowledge while mastering new concepts and solving 
problems. This process raises several issues related to the 
duration of learning, the degree to which the student can 
actually master new concepts, and of course the degree to 
which the student is content and happy with the progress 
made [1]. 
In order to study alternative modes of learning, we 
frequently theorise on the way people a) understand things, 
b) acquire experience, and c) realise the world around them 
[2]. In all cases, we have to distinguish between “Learning 
that…”, which is related to knowledge itself, and “Learning 
how…”, which is related to knowledge through practical 
experience, or platforms and modes of learning. In both 
cases, learning is influenced by well-defined categories of 
factors, including the following: 
a) 
The degree to which the personality of the person – 
measured on the Holland scale [3] – matches with the 
academic 
course–subjects 
being 
studied, 
and 
ultimately the career planned. The personality is 
analysed under six types: Realistic, Investigative, 
Artistic, Social, Enterprising, Convention. The scores 
of these types are compared and matched with the 
requirements (scores) of professions from a large 
database. 
b) 
The learning styles of the person (e.g., auditory, 
visual, kinaesthetic, etc.) [4]. 
c) 
The way the teacher / professor treats the individual, 
and generally the way the course material is 
presented to the learner [5]. 
d) 
The background knowledge of the learner, given that 
a person can learn practically, independently of 
academic environments. 
The research results and findings we see in the literature 
[4][5][6] cover partially and in isolation aspects of the 
problem of learning, discussing individual factors without 
offering an integrated approach that will help a student 
discover the actual causes of problems with learning and 
then take remedy action. Also, most of the tests and 
questionnaires available are based on the so called “norms”, 
whereby the measurements of a person are compared with 
those from a selected sample, underestimating the person’s 
standards and potential. In other words, we claim that the 
use of only the norm scores is not adequate, and can 
sometimes do injustice to those learners with special talents 
and personality traits that are on the borderlines of the 
norms. Besides, there isn’t any tool available for use by the 
students themselves who need to know: a) the reasons of 
their poor academic performance, and b) ways and modes of 
studying that can improve their rate of learning. 
This paper addresses this issue, and proposes a web-
based system that adopts a complete set of psychometric 
factors that measure: a) the learning aptitudes and 
difficulties, b) the learning styles, and c) the potential of 
learning of the brain hemispheres of an individual. Besides, 
the web-based system [7] provides a universal centralised 
database that enables the dynamic assessment of all 
students–newcomers being tested. Evidently, a desk-top 
application cannot provide universal, dynamic norms. The 
learning profile is created without any human intervention, 
offering in effect a “map” with detailed measurements 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
regarding learning factors. Although we refer to “Students”, 
our research results are equally applicable to everyone, 
regardless of whether they are students or working adults. 
The academic–school environment is often the setting 
where the learning disabilities of a person first become 
apparent. We usually notice problems in one or more of the 
following basic areas: Mathematics, Language, Cognitive 
development, Short- and Long-term Memory, Attention, 
Concentration, Organization, and Fine Motor Skills, where a 
difficulty is otherwise known as dyspraxia or kinaesthetic. 
Generally speaking, a person with learning difficulties faces 
problems in a) identifying, b) collecting, c) organizing, d) 
manipulating, and e) acting on verbal or non-verbal 
information. These problem areas are directly related to the 
learning aptitudes of an individual and must therefore be 
translated to their equivalent psychometric factors, as we 
explain later. 
Evidently [1][2], a person learns and gains knowledge or 
skill through action, study, schooling, experience, education, 
training, and generally, by processing data and information 
selected by their basic senses (sight, smell, taste, touch, and 
hearing). A learning difficulty, regardless of its cause or 
nature, does not indicate subnormal intelligence, but rather a 
learning environment that is not suitable for the person 
under investigation. This means that individuals must be 
compensated for, with special tutoring and a learning 
environment that is in congruence with their personality 
traits. Our aim here is to discover how a person learns best, 
that is, the modes under which the person gains maximum 
knowledge or skill. The modes we adopted following 
extensive investigations on their reliability are: a) Auditory, 
utilising the sound, b) Visual, utilising vision, c) Linguistic, 
utilising the written word, d) Kinaesthetic, utilising 
movement, touching, e) Interpersonal, utilising interpersonal 
relationships, and f) Intrapersonal, showing a preference to 
study alone and to think independently. 
Finally, we cannot ignore the physiology of the human 
brain with its two hemispheres, each one specialising in 
specific functions and services, utilising its own sensors and 
information processors. It appears that each hemisphere 
prefers to deal with certain activities and cerebral functions, 
performing the best it can. We adopted well-formed items 
that measure the “laterality”, that is, the degree to which a 
hemisphere is developed in relation to the other – in other 
words, the potential of each hemisphere. This enables us to 
gain insight on whether a person learns best using top-down 
or bottom-up techniques [5][6]. 
Through 
specially 
designed 
and 
normalised 
psychometric questionnaires, we have managed to diagnose 
inherent and acquired traits of learning, with the ultimate 
objective to help the learner adopt effective modes and 
means of learning, that is, to learn how to learn. At the same 
time, the findings help the teacher adopt the best approaches 
to impart new knowledge. 
For 
practical 
applications, 
experimentation 
and 
measurement of the reliability–validity of our approach, we 
used the Ariston shell [8], which is an expert system for 
multifactorial analysis of psychometric data. The knowledge 
contained in the expert database is classified by age, sex, 
nationality, 
academic 
departments, 
occupations 
and 
specializations, aptitudes, abilities, and several other 
psychometric data regarding thousands of young people and 
working adults. We selected and tested 7 factors with 49 
items for learning aptitudes–difficulties, 6 factors with 76 
items for learning styles, 2 factors with 21 items for both 
brain hemispheres, and 4 factors with special algorithms that 
measure the degree of sincerity in the answers of the person 
being tested, computing an overall truth score. One of the 
reasons these 4 factors are not included in the report is that 
they are not really useful to the teacher. They are used by 
the expert system to measure the various levels of sincerely 
in the answers and take appropriate action (e.g., to 
recommend re-sit of the test). 
This paper presents research work carried out during the 
last two years. Section II begins with the assessment of 
learning aptitudes–difficulties, Section III continues with 
learning styles, and Section IV analyses the potential of 
brain hemispheres. Section V presents an overview of a 
real-example profile, and Section VI concludes with 
evaluation results regarding the reliability–validity of our 
battery, and directions for future research. 
II. 
LEARNING APTITUDES–DIFFICULTIES 
Our approach adopts state-of-the-art theory for testing 
cognitive abilities using spatial and diagrammatic reasoning, 
beyond the Cattell-Horn-Carroll theory of cognitive abilities 
[9] and the Wechsler scales [10], which evolve around the 
traditional 
approach 
that 
includes 
language 
and 
mathematical knowledge. Our approach utilises those 
realms of thought where the person appears to have learning 
difficulties and problems in assimilating new information 
beyond previous experience and reasoning [11]. By 
assessing the ability to quickly understand and assimilate 
new information, we can predict how responsive to 
education and training the person will be. 
Well-established approaches to item design were 
adopted in order to assess specific areas of learning. The 
questionnaires consist of items that require the recognition 
of patterns and similarities between shapes and figures, the 
inference of rules from given sequences (e.g., diagrams, 
symbols, etc.), the application of rules to new situations, and 
reasoning from given data and information. Figure 1 
presents a typical question where the learner is expected to 
select the shape from the second row that is assembled from 
the partial images of the first row. 
The Factors Tested and Adopted 
The factors we have tested and adopted were first 
introduced by Yannakoudakis [11], and are independent of 
attainment. They can also be used to provide an indication 
of intellectual potential. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
 
Figure 1.  Learning aptitudes: Example item. 
1) Matching concepts: This factor assesses aptitude to 
match elements, look for common attributes amongst given 
sets, and identify similarities. A high score implies that the 
person is in a position to spot identical elements, avoid “re-
invention of the wheel”, match similar concepts, and recall 
successfully from memory as and when necessary.  
2) Composing concepts: This factor investigates aptitude 
to analyse incorrectly-ordered or isolated elements of 
knowledge, put these in the correct order, identify common 
attributes, and synthesise supersets of concepts or objects. A 
high score implies that the person is in a position to examine 
elements of knowledge (individually, as well as in union), 
evaluate these, and synthesise new hyper-sets of elements or 
objects.  
3) Understanding intersection: This factor assesses 
aptitude to compare sets of elements and identify those 
elements that form the intersection between them (i.e., the 
elements that are common among the given sets). A high 
score implies that the person is in a position to detect 
overlap amongst concepts, isolate common elements, count 
elements with common attributes, and ignore non-
homogeneous elements.  
4) Reconstructing concepts: This factor assesses aptitude 
to analyse incomplete data and information, in order to 
reconstruct objects and concepts. A high score implies that 
the person is in a position to utilise partial knowledge and 
come to logical conclusions, integrate knowledge, fill gaps, 
reconstruct mutilated objects or concepts, and guess 
correctly.  
5) Understanding rules: This factor assesses aptitude to 
detect the rules and regulations that govern the formation of 
logical sequences that bind objects or concepts together. A 
high score implies that the person is in a position to analyse 
the data given and identify logical structures and 
“if…then…else…” constructs, forecast the next step 
successfully, apply the rules to new situations, and come to 
logical conclusions using a stochastic approach to 
reasoning.  
6) Understanding subsets: This factor assesses aptitude 
to compare sets of elements given, and identify subsets. A 
high score implies that the person is in a position to 
compare sets on the basis of their cardinality and features, 
count homogeneous elements, identify narrow terms, 
separate narrow terms from broad terms, and generally 
understand well the concept of “A is included in B”. 
7) Identifying analogies: This factor assesses aptitude to 
analyse a given state of objects or concepts, and determine 
whether there is an analogy between them. A high score 
implies that the person is in a position to identify and 
process analogies, explain how we can go from one concept 
to another, process functions, and generally compare and 
contrast elements of the information available.  
An overall high score indicates that the learner has the 
ability to grasp new ideas and assimilate new information, 
has responsiveness to training, and a high level of natural 
ability. A low score indicates that the learner has difficulty 
in grasping new ideas, and needs more time to solve 
problems consisting of unfamiliar concepts, new procedures 
or tasks.  
 
Figure 2.  A real example with learning aptitudes, where “S” represents 
the score, and “Factor” the factor tested. 
Figure 2 presents a real example. Here, we can see the 
results of an individual that experiences serious problems 
with analogies and subsets. The teacher can then take action 
to help the person improve low-score factors by giving 
appropriate exercises and realistic examples that cover each 
domain of knowledge. 
III. 
LEARNING STYLES 
The aim here is to investigate the distribution of well-
established learning styles, that is, modes under which the 
person gains knowledge or skill. Each mode is related to a 
corresponding type of emotional intelligence [4], which 
affects directly the rate of learning of a person. Note that 
some learning styles remain stable throughout the life of a 
person (Auditory, Visual, Linguistic), while others can 
change 
with 
time 
(Kinaesthetic, 
Interpersonal, 
Intrapersonal). In any case, the longer a person is left with a 
learning disability, the more difficult it becomes to train 
them to alternative methods of knowledge acquisition. 
Moreover, the longer a person remains under an unsuitable 
learning environment, the slower his rate of learning will be, 
even after special tutoring [2][4]. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
The Factors Tested and Adopted 
1) Auditory: This type assesses ability to learn by 
utilising auditory information, including lectures, speeches, 
tape recordings, etc. Auditory learners like singing, 
whistling, making rhythmic sounds by tapping their fingers 
or legs, playing musical instruments, and listening to music. 
They are also good at distinguishing sounds and rhythms in 
music, remembering melodies, and listening with their 
“inner ear”. Their rate of learning increases when speaking 
rhythmically or turning speech into lyrics. 
2) Visual: This type assesses ability to learn utilising 
visual information, including images, diagrams, drawings, 
transparencies, moving pictures, etc. Visual learners like 
modelling, drawing, painting, imagining, dreaming, making 
notes, and building things. They are good at imagining, 
finding their way, reading maps, and remembering things 
from images. They are motivated by visiting art galleries, 
museums, cinemas and theatres. Finally, they express 
themselves through drawings, paintings and constructions 
generally. 
3) Linguistic: This type assesses ability to learn utilising 
linguistic data and information, including the written word, 
relationships between concepts, summarisation of texts, 
conclusions from texts, etc. Linguistic learners like talking, 
reading, writing, spelling, listening to and telling stories, 
playing word games, and having conversations. They are 
good at remembering names, places, dates and everyday 
things. They are motivated by visits to libraries, meeting 
writers, and the experience of words in theatre and music. 
Finally, they express themselves through discussions, 
interviews, and the written word generally.  
4) Kinaesthetic: This type assesses ability to learn 
utilising 
kinaesthetic 
information, 
including 
touch, 
movement, personal experience, experimentation, etc. It 
also assesses ability for scientific exploration by various 
means and instruments. Kinaesthetic learners like moving, 
running, jumping, constructing, gesturing, dancing, and 
touching things. They are good at sports, dancing, acting, 
and making things with their hands. Finally, they express 
themselves through their body, action, repetition, and 
making things with their hands. 
5) Interpersonal: This type assesses ability to learn 
through interpersonal relationships, socialisation, exchange 
of ideas, parties, etc. Interpersonal learners like testing 
themselves and their thoughts in relation to others, having 
many friends, and being part of a community. They are 
good at organising and playing a leading role, mediating 
between people, and playing the role of a referee. They are 
motivated by taking part in social meetings, parties, 
festivals, and artistic events. In general, they express 
themselves by participating in social groups.  
6) Intrapersonal: This type assesses ability to learn in 
isolation, including studying alone, thinking and acting 
independently. Intrapersonal learners prefer to retrieve 
information from their own sources, having total control of 
the learning environment, selecting the books that suit them, 
concentrating on the subject they choose at a time, and so 
on. They like setting their own goals, dreaming, planning 
and relaxing. They are good at working alone at their own 
pace, they are persistent, and they follow their intuition. 
They need diaries and planning, keeping notes, but above 
all, they need privacy while studying. Finally, they express 
themselves through uniqueness and authenticity. 
Figure 3 presents a real example of a learner who 
experiences problems when studying alone, and is also not 
keen to learn by reading books and notes. Instead, this 
particular person learns effectively by talking to others, 
having others commenting on their solutions, and so on. 
This person also learns best through kinaesthetic processes.  
 
Figure 3.  A real example with learning styles, where “S” represents the 
score, and “Factor” the factor tested. 
An example question is presented below: 
Which of the following would you readily choose? 
1. To act as a referee for a match 
2. To act as a score keeper for a match 
IV. 
POTENTIAL OF BRAIN HEMISPHERES 
The left hemisphere is specialised in the linear 
processing of data and information, and in the analysis of 
data, placing emphasis on the detection of the constituent 
parts rather than the whole. For example, an individual with 
a developed left hemisphere first notices the details in a 
picture and then the whole. Thus, the individual recognises 
the partial objects of a puzzle first, and then proceeds to the 
synthesis of the picture. The individual therefore learns 
more easily in a classroom where knowledge is 
communicated beginning from the detail and ending with 
the general. The left hemisphere controls the logical and the 
rational way of thinking, and has an aptitude for linguistics, 
academic research and science. Left-hemisphere learners are 
methodical, use rules and axioms, and tend to complete the 
project they are working on before they engage in 
something else [5][6]. 
The fields that the left hemisphere prefers are: Future, 
Logic, Syllogism, Methodology, Analysis, Research, 
Intellectuality, Language, Scientific Thought, Mathematics, 
and Conscious Thought.  
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
The right hemisphere is specialised in the simultaneous 
processing of data and information, in composing 
information, and prefers the whole, rather than the 
constituent parts. For example, individuals with a developed 
right hemisphere first analyse the image as a whole, and 
afterwards pay attention to the details. Thus, they delineate 
the whole image of a puzzle, and then they proceed to the 
synthesis of its constituent parts. Right hemisphere learners 
acquire knowledge more easily after they have been 
informed about the subject of a lecture or have read a 
summary. Therefore, they are prepared having formed the 
necessary educational framework, which in turn is enriched 
by the knowledge and the details that follow. These 
individuals are capable of beginning an activity before 
completing another one; they conduct two actions 
simultaneously, leaving some projects unfinished, and as a 
result, they are forced to make the same effort twice, 
consuming precious resources and energy. Moreover, they 
have an aptitude for analysing space, demonstrate a creative 
way of thinking, prefer artistic activities, have intuition, and 
like mysticism and rituals. 
The fields that the right hemisphere prefers are: Past, 
Intuition, Unconscious Thought, Creativity, Synthesis, 
Analysis of Space, Instinctive Side, Imagination, Sensuality, 
Music, Arts, and Practical Intelligence. 
 
Figure 4.  A real example with brain hemispheres. 
Figure 4 presents the results of a real example, showing 
that this individual learns best when knowledge is presented 
in a top-down manner, that is, from the whole to the detail. 
An example question is presented below: 
What would you readily select? 
1. To do something with mathematics 
2. Uncertain 
3. To do something with language 
V. 
OVERVIEW OF A PROFILE 
For the reader to have an overview of a profile, we 
present some further statistics, all related to the same 
individual we have used in all the examples throughout this 
paper. We also explain the concept “probability of errors” in 
the answers given. 
While answering the questions, the person may be 
distracted due to several reasons or events that cannot be 
predicted – noise, systematic error, psychological state, and 
so on – resulting to answers that do not necessarily represent 
his/her personality. The same can happen when the person 
answers randomly or inconsistently. In other words, direct 
or indirect distraction of individuals during the test can lead 
to incorrect classification of their learning factors. In this 
context, the probability of errors is considered to be a 
complementary measure to the truth scores. 
In order to calculate the probability of errors, on the 
basis of the aforementioned, we make a hypothesis test and 
utilise the theory of stochastic processes [12]. Subsequently, 
we take the category of errors into consideration, in order to 
make corrections to the measures of the corresponding 
factors and, therefore, increase the validity and reliability of 
the conclusions reached by the expert system. The statistics 
that follow present a clear picture of the scores, while Table 
I shows the source and the equivalent Sten scores (scale 1–
10), as well as the norms derived from our sample of over 
500 cases, where N is interpreted as “Norrnal”, L as “Low”, 
H as “High”, and VL as “Very Low”. 
Mean: 70.37 
Variance: 796.51 
Standard deviation: 28.22 
Mean absolute deviation: 22.15 
Coefficient of variation: 0.401 
Overall truth score: 7 Sten 
Probability of errors in answers: 0 
Duration – Learning aptitudes: Shorter than usual 
Duration – Learning styles: Normal 
Duration – Hemispheres: Normal 
TABLE I.  
SOURCE AND NORMALISED SCORES 
Factor 
Score 
Sten 
Norm 
Right hemisphere 
66 
5 
N 
Left hemisphere 
34 
4 
L 
Interpersonal style 
91 
7 
H 
Visual style 
82 
6 
H 
Auditory style 
73 
6 
N 
Kinaesthetic style 
73 
6 
N 
Linguistic style 
45 
4 
N 
Intrapersonal style 
1 
2 
VL 
Matching concepts 
100 
7 
N 
Constructing concepts 
100 
7 
H 
Understanding intersections 
100 
7 
H 
Reconstructing concepts 
86 
6 
N 
Understanding rules 
86 
6 
H 
Understanding subsets 
57 
5 
N 
Understanding analogies 
43 
4 
L 
VI. 
RELIABILITY–VALIDITY AND CONCLUSIONS 
The learning difficulties are often (but not always) 
highlighted when we detect disparities between the 
intelligence of a person (in whatever way you define this) 
and the academic–school performance. This does not mean 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
that people with learning disabilities have low intelligence. 
In fact, they have average or above average intelligence, but 
their academic performance, as measured by standardised 
tests, is below what we would expect of people with the 
same age, intelligence, and academic grades (performance). 
Therefore, a person with low academic grades may be a 
person with learning disabilities (in terms of the factors 
presented here), rather than a person with low intelligence. 
Note that the battery of tests proposed here aims at 
analysing the inherent learning traits of a person, whereas 
the Wechsler scales [10] aim at analysing the intelligence of 
a person and the degree to which this affects learning. 
Some difficulties will disappear with maturity, but some 
will not. The longer we allow wrong, or inefficient 
intellectual or physical tasks to continue (e.g., misspelling, 
incorrect use of a tool, handwriting grip, etc.), the harder 
they become to correct, because repetition of actions or 
reactions produces, if not always an inclination, at least an 
aptitude to act or react in the same manner and thus the 
habit. Also, if learning difficulties are left too long, some 
persons begin to display avoidance behaviour because they 
are not experiencing success. 
In order to evaluate our battery, we studied the academic 
progress of 200 University students, and correlated their 
grades with the measurements from the battery presented 
here. The mean age of the participants was 18.9 years 
(SD = 4.1), of which 42% were males and 58% were 
females. We also administered equivalent tests from the 
Computer Academy Psychometric Series (CAPS) [7], in 
parallel with the battery presented here, and then carried out 
detailed statistical analyses, a subset of which is presented 
here due to space limitations. 
TABLE II.  
RELIABILITY CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS 
Factor 
Parallel Test 
r 
Right hemisphere 
Holland scale Artistic 
0.72 
Left hemisphere 
Holland scale Investigative 
0.73 
Interpersonal style 
Holland scale Social 
0.91 
Visual style 
Diagrammatic 
0.92 
Auditory style 
Music while studying 
0.79 
Kinaesthetic style 
Holland scale Artistic 
0.74 
Linguistic style 
Language (overall) 
0.89 
Intrapersonal style 
Holland scale Realistic 
0.79 
Matching concepts 
Language 1 
0.88 
Reconstructing concepts 
Language 2 
0.80 
Constructing concepts 
Language 3 
0.79 
Understanding intersections 
Numerical 1 
0.91 
Understanding rules 
Logic 
0.85 
Understanding subsets 
Numerical 2 
0.92 
Understanding analogies 
Analogies 
0.87 
Table II shows the factors of our battery, the equivalent 
tests used, and the Pearson product-moment correlation 
coefficient (r), which is very high in most factors, 
particularly with Interpersonal style, Visual style, Linguistic 
style, Matching concepts, Intersections, Subsets, and 
Analogies. Another interesting finding is that the correlation 
coefficient between the overall grade of students and the 
overall grade from the battery is 0.86, further supporting the 
reliability–validity of our approach. 
Evidently, our approach can map the learning profile of 
individuals with a high degree of accuracy, since most 
coefficients are significantly higher than the minimum 
requirement of 0.7. We intend to continue the research by 
collecting and analysing profiles of students from different 
Universities, faculties and departments. Our next step will 
also aim at answering clearly the fundamental question: 
“Now that I know my profile, what can I actually do to 
improve my rate of learning?”. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Professor Emmanuel J. 
Yannakoudakis (Athens University of Economics & 
Business, Department of Informatics) for his most valuable 
assistance, and for giving us full access to the expert system 
shell and his psychometrics database. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. B. Merriam, R. S. Caffarella, and L. M. Baumgartner, 
Learning in Adulthood: A Comprehensive Guide, John Wiley, 
2007. 
[2] P. Ramsden, Learning to Teach in Higher Education, London: 
Routledge, 1992. 
[3] J. L. Holland, Making career choices: A theory of personality 
types and work environments, Englewood Cliffs, Prentice-
Hall, 1999. 
Article in a journal: 
[4] W. James and D. Gardner, “Learning styles: Implications for 
distance learning”, New Directions for Adult and Continuing 
Education 
67, 
Autumn 
(Fall) 
1995, 
pp. 
19–31  
doi: 10.1002/ace.36719956705. 
Article in a journal: 
[5] R. Zhang, “Cerebral Hemispheres and Learning: A Study of 
the Correlation between Brain Dominations and Learning 
Styles”, International Journal of Scientific & Engineering 
Research Volume 2, Issue 12, December 2011, pp. 1–6. 
[6] P. 
Honey 
and 
A. 
Mumford, 
The 
Learning 
Styles 
Questionnaire, 80-item version, Maidenhead, UK, Peter 
Honey Publications, 2006. 
[7] Computer Academy, www.aristontest.com, (2013) [retrieved: 
January, 2014]. 
Article in a conference proceedings: 
[8] E. Foudoulaki and D. Tolis, “An expert system for vocational 
guidance”, Proc. Career EU 2010, University of Cyprus, 
Limassol, May 2010, pp. 121–130. 
[9] D. P. Flanagan (Ed) and P. L. Harrison (Ed), Contemporary 
Intellectual Assessment: Theories, Tests, and Issues, New 
York, NY, US: Guilford Press, xvii, 2005, pp. 136–182. 
[10] G. Frank, The Wechsler Enterprise: An Assessment of the 
Development, Structure, and Use of the Wechsler Tests of 
Intelligence, Oxford: Pergamon, 1983. 
Article in a conference proceedings: 
[11] E. J. Yannakoudakis, “An expert system for the analysis of 
learning aptitudes and dificulties”, (in Greek), i-Teacher.gr, 
2nd Issue, January 2011, pp. 1–9 , ISSN: 1792-4146. 
[12] D. R. Cox and H. D. Miller, The theory of stochastic 
processes, Chapman & Hall/CRC, 1996. 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

