Mitigating the STEM Crisis through Enhanced Online Learning 
Cynthia Y. Lester 
Office of STEM Initiatives 
Georgia Perimeter College 
Decatur, Georgia, USA 
cynthia.lester@gpc.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract – According to the U.S. Department of Commerce, 
Economics, and Statistics Administration, in 2010 7.5 million 
people were employed in science, technology, engineering, and 
mathematics (STEM) jobs and accounted for 5.5 percent of the 
workforce. The report also stated that these occupations are 
projected to grow at a rate of 17.0 percent outpacing non-
STEM jobs which are projected to grow only 9.8 percent. 
However in 2012, despite there being nearly 14 million 
unemployed people in the U.S., American companies could still 
not find workers skilled enough in math and technology to fill 
an estimated 3 million permanent job openings.  The lack of 
trained skilled STEM workers has often been called the STEM 
Crisis.  There are many researched reasons some argue that if 
there really is a STEM Crisis, why it exists.  However, much of 
the traditional reasons, while still very valid have given way to 
reports that academic unpreparedness and lack of STEM 
literacy may be in part the cause for the shortage of STEM 
workers who possess a broad range of competencies and 
experiences. The response to this challenge has become the 
focus 
of 
many 
states, 
encouraging 
partnerships 
and 
collaborations between colleges/universities, K-12 schools, and 
public and private sectors. The aim of this paper is to present 
an effort to abate the STEM crisis through restructuring 
content delivery in an introductory computer science course 
taught a two-year institution.  The paper presents the context 
in which the work is framed, the course design and delivery of 
the enhanced online learning experience, results from the 
study, limitations and future work. 
 
Keywords – Complete College America; enhanced online 
learning experience; learning content management system; 
STEM; undergraduate computer science education 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
According to the U.S. Department of Commerce, 
Economics, and Statistics Administration, in 2010 7.5 
million people were employed in science, technology, 
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) jobs and accounted 
for 5.5 percent of the workforce [1]. The report also stated 
that these occupations are projected to grow at a rate of 17.0 
percent outpacing non-STEM jobs which are projected to 
grow only 9.8 percent [1].  The report further stated some of 
the characteristics of the STEM workforce which include 
that they earn on average 26 percent more than their non-
STEM counterparts; more than two-thirds have at least a 
college degree; and, that they are less likely to experience 
joblessness when compared to their non-STEM counterparts 
[1].  Moreover, for women entering into STEM careers, they 
are likely to earn 33 percent more than women in other 
occupations [1].  Consequently, these statistics paint an 
advantageous portrait of why more students should choose 
STEM disciplines in college and why so much emphasis has 
been placed on STEM education.  However, a common 
theme at the U.S. News & World Report STEM Solutions 
2012 Leadership Summit in Dallas, Texas, was that despite 
there being nearly 14 million unemployed people in the 
United States, American companies could not find workers 
skilled enough in math and technology to fill an estimated 3 
million permanent job openings [2].  The lack of trained 
skilled STEM workers has often been termed as the STEM 
Crisis. 
The STEM crisis can be likened to the software crisis of 
the late 1960s and 1970s, in which software had to “catch 
up” to its more complex and powerful machines, thereby 
making informal software development no longer feasible.  
As a result, software engineering brought formal processes, 
methodologies and accountable to improve the quality of 
software being developed.  Similarly, in the case of the 
STEM Crisis, formal processes are being developed and 
implemented to improve the quality of students/workers 
being trained for and entering into STEM-related careers.  
However, just as the answers to solving the software crisis 
was complex, understanding why the STEM Crisis exists 
and how to mitigate it is as well. 
There are numerous researched reasons as to why some 
argue that there are not enough skilled STEM workers. For 
example, according to The New York Times’ Christopher 
Drew, studies note that approximately 40 percent of students 
who choose to pursue a STEM area either switch their major 
in college or do not graduate at all [3].  This statistic, as 
stated by Drew, is twice the combined attrition rate of all 
other majors [3].  While others suggest that societal 
stereotypes, environmental and cultural factors, a lack of 
visible role models, different interests and experiences, are 
some of the reasons that students do not choose STEM [4]-
[7].   
Yet, according to the National Math and Science 
Initiative, a public-private partnership led by private donors 
and U.S. corporations, it is the declining number of students 
who are prepared to take rigorous college courses in science 
and math and who are trained for careers in those fields that 
has fueled the STEM Crisis [8].  ACT, Inc. reported that in 
2011, 45 percent of U.S. high school graduates were ready 
for college-level math while only 30 percent were ready for 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

college-level science [9].  Consequently, for the U.S. to 
regain its competitive edge states are developing and 
implementing strategies to improve college-readiness 
especially in areas that depend on science and mathematics 
skill sets.  Moreover, states are also investigating ways in 
which to improve access and student success once students 
enter the halls of academia. This paper focuses on one 
strategy to improve student success by restructuring content 
delivery through and enhanced online learning experience 
introduced in a traditionally taught introductory computer 
science course taught at a two-year institution. 
The paper is organized into the following sections.  
Section II introduces the Complete College plan, an 
initiative undertaken by states to increase the number of 
students completing and earning college degrees or 
certificates and in specific areas that will help strengthen the 
U.S. economic prowess.  Sections III and IV introduce the 
environment in which the study was conducted and present 
the enhanced online learning experience.  Sections V and VI 
present the results and discussion from the study.  While 
Section VII presents limitations, challenges, future work and 
concluding thoughts. 
 
II. 
THE COMPLETE COLLEGE PLAN 
A. Complete College America 
In response to the concern that the U.S. is lagging 
behind other countries in its production of college-degree 
holders, Complete College America emerged in 2009 as a 
national non-profit organization whose mission is to work 
with states to increase the number of Americans with career 
certificates or college degrees [10]. Since its inception, 34 
states, including the District of Columbia have become 
Alliance members and are now participating in working to 
significantly increase the number of students who are 
successfully completing college. 
To become a member of the Alliance, the state’s 
governor in partnership with its colleges and universities 
pledge and work together to meet the Mission of Complete 
College America [10]. More specifically, when a state 
becomes an Alliance member it makes college completion a 
top priority and commits to do the following [10]: 
• 
Set completion goals 
• 
Collect and report common measures of progress  
• 
Develop action plans and move key policy levers 
B. Complete College Georgia 
The state of Georgia is an Alliance member and has 
adopted the Mission of Complete College America, which 
includes that by the year 2020, 61 percent of young adults 
will hold a college certificate or degree.  Georgia also notes 
that in order to improve the state’s economy that another 
27% of Georgians must join the already 34% of the states’ 
population who currently hold an associate’s degree or 
higher [11].  To meet this goal, not only must the colleges 
and universities in Georgia enroll more students, but they 
must retain the ones currently enrolled and remove barriers 
that impact student success.   
In Georgia there are two public systems, the University 
System of Georgia (USG) and the Technical College 
System of Georgia (TSG).  In 2011, leadership from the two 
systems met along with state leadership and representatives 
from the business community to receive a charge from the 
Governor on ways to change the higher education funding 
formulas to incentivize degree completion [12].  The result 
was an Articulation Agreement between the USG and the 
TSG. The Articulation Agreement proposed to: 
• 
Create 
new 
forms 
of 
collaboration 
and 
accountability among organizations responsible for 
or reliant on higher education 
• 
Continue to work with the Georgia Department of 
Education to increase the number of college-ready 
students graduating from high school 
• 
Reevaluate and envision anew the performance of 
completion-related aspects of higher education 
More 
specifically, 
approaches 
to 
improve 
low 
completion rates included [11]: 
• 
Building and sustaining effective teaching 
• 
Exploring and expanding the use of effective 
models 
• 
Distance education 
• 
Adult and military outreach 
• 
Implementation of STEM initiatives 
 
C. Georgia Perimeter College 
Georgia Perimeter College (GPC) is a two-year 
institution located in the Atlanta-metro area, part of the 35-
member schools of the USG. GPC offers Associate degrees 
in Arts, Sciences and Applied Sciences [13]. 
GPC typically hosts the largest freshman and sophomore 
enrollments in Georgia, making it the top producer of 
transfer students to 4-year institutions within the state of 
Georgia. It has five campus locations and services 
approximately 23,000 students. The number of students 
choosing one of the STEM disciplines is roughly 10 percent 
[14]. The average age of the student population is 
approximately 26 years old and 59 percent of the students 
are enrolled as part-time students, meaning that they take 
less than 12 credit hours during the semester [15].  Further, 
roughly 10 percent of the students take all their classes 
online [15].  
In response to Complete College Georgia, GPC created 
the Office of STEM Initiatives. The mission of the Georgia 
Perimeter College Office of STEM Initiatives is to promote 
student access and to improve student success in the STEM 
disciplines. The goals of the office are to: 
• 
Increase the success rate of students in STEM 
“gatekeeping” courses 
• 
Provide educational opportunities and support for 
students choosing STEM disciplines as a major 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

• 
Deepen student and faculty engagement in college-
wide STEM activities 
• 
Support, connect and strengthen collaborations to 
advance STEM preparation for P-20 students and 
faculty 
• 
Develop and support exemplary practices and 
policies in STEM education at the 2-year college 
level 
To encourage faculty members to engage in activities 
that improve student success in STEM-related areas, the 
Office of STEM Initiatives developed the STEM Faculty 
Mini-Grant Program.  The goal of the GPC STEM Faculty 
Mini-Grant Program is to support faculty who engage in 
innovative research-based projects that: 
• 
Restructure current instruction delivery models 
• 
Develop new models for building and sustaining 
effective teaching 
• 
Impact student learning and performance through 
enhanced learning experiences 
The next section describes the author’s activities 
developed to meet the goal of increasing the success rate of 
students in STEM “gatekeeping” courses with a specific 
emphasis on CSCI 1300 – Introduction to Computer 
Science.  CSCI 1300 is the first course for students 
interested in pursuing a computer science career and 
normally has a high attrition rate. 
 
III. 
INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER SCIENCE 
A. Course Description 
CSCI 1300 – Introduction to Computer Science is 
designed to provide students with an overview of selected 
major areas of current computing technology, organization 
and use. Prerequisites are exit or exemption from all 
Learning Support, English as a Second Language (ESL) 
requirement and successful completion of College Algebra 
[16]. For computer science majors, the course is a 
prerequisite for successive courses within the program of 
study.  For other majors, the course meets the requirements 
of the common core in the area of science, mathematics and 
technology from which students must choose. 
B. Topics Covered 
Since the course is a commonly taught course, all 
students are presented with the following topics [16]: 
• 
The history and vocabulary of computers 
• 
Problem-solving, 
algorithms 
and 
algorithm 
efficiency 
• 
Data representation and storage 
• 
Computer hardware and software concepts 
• 
Computer networks and information security 
• 
Programming concepts and problem-solving 
• 
Application software and Databases 
• 
Social and ethical issues 
C. Learning Outcomes 
The learning outcomes are designed by the course 
curriculum committee.  It was decided that by the end of the 
course, a student should be able to [16]: 
• 
Discuss the history of computing. 
• 
State the methods by which data is represented and 
stored in a computer’s memory.   
• 
Recognize 
and 
understand 
the 
fundamental 
hardware components of a computer system.  
• 
Recognize 
and 
understand 
the 
fundamental 
software components.  
• 
Understand the concepts of current communication 
technologies. 
• 
Understand basic networking and information 
security. 
• 
Recognize and understand social and ethical issues 
involved in computer use.  
• 
Analyze a basic real world problem and solve it 
with a computer program. 
• 
Understand 
and 
write 
algorithms 
using 
fundamental computing concepts.  
 
IV. 
ENHANCED ONLINE LEARNING EXPERIENCE 
A. Participants 
As previously stated the course is designed for and 
utilized by students who have chosen one of the STEM 
disciplines as a major. At GPC, the STEM majors are 
Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science, Engineering, 
Geology, Mathematics and Physics.  During the fall 2013 
semester, 28 students enrolled in the course; however, seven 
of the students withdrew prior to the midpoint of the 
semester and therefore the number of participants in the 
study is 21.  Of the 21 students, the majority was computer 
science majors, 53 percent, followed by 33 percent 
engineering majors, 5 percent physics majors and an 
additional 10 percent had not declared a major in one of the 
STEM areas.  Moreover, the class consisted mostly of 
sophomore students, 62 percent.  The average age of the 
students was 25 and the class was comprised of 90 percent 
male and 10 percent female.  All students were associated 
with a “home” campus, meaning that none were identified 
as online students. 
B. Procedure 
Researchers note that there has been a dramatic shift in 
the way in which students learn [17]. Technology supported 
learning provides students with an opportunity to view 
online situations and examples that help to aid the learning 
process. Additionally, technology supported learning has 
been shown to be beneficial to students who are visual 
learners rather than auditory learning [18]. It has been noted 
that students process visual information 600,000 times faster 
than text, and visual aids can improve learning by 400% 
[19]. However from a delivery perspective, technology 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

supported learning provides a semi-permanent resource 
which allows students to re-visit the clips, thereby 
increasing the potential to develop greater understanding of 
the material.   
Consequently, it was decided that the PowerPoint slides 
that the author typically used in class, would be modified to 
include an enhanced online learning experience.  The slides 
were revised to include voice narration on the lecture topic, 
narrated problems usually solved in class and educational 
videos. Students were encouraged to view the lectures prior 
to coming to class.  Unlike the traditionally taught modules 
where the lecture slides were covered in class as part of the 
class period, the material developed for the enhanced online 
learning experience was to be viewed out of class so that the 
class period could be utilized for answering questions and 
working practice problems. 
Both the traditionally created lecture slides and the 
enhanced online lecture material were posted in the 
Colleges’ Learning Management System, Desire2Learn 
(called iCollege by GPC). The author chose to post the 
material in iCollege because all enrolled students have 
access to it and it has features that allowed the instructor to 
gather statistics on who viewed the slides and for how long. 
It was decided that the programming concepts and 
problem-solving module would be best suited for the 
enhanced online learning experience. The author chose this 
module because it was the implementation of the theoretical 
concepts learned earlier in the sixteen week semester.  
Moreover, the author thought that the students would 
benefit more from the hands-on experience and practical 
application associated with the module as compared to 
previous topics.  Table 1 presents the order in which the 
modules were presented and the associated assessment. 
 
TABLE 1. CONTENT DELIVERY 
Week 
Module Topic and Number 
Assignment 
Number 
1 
1- Introduction to Course and 
History of Computing 
1 
2 
2 - Representing Algorithms  
2 
3 
3- Attributes of Algorithms  
3 
4 
In Class Exam #1 
5 
4 - Binary Numbering System 
4 
6 
Boolean logic and gates 
7 
5 - Components of a 
computer system 
5 
8 
6 - Basic networking 
6 
9 
In Class Exam #2 
10 
7- Programming Concepts 
7 
11 
Programming Concepts 
12 
Programming Concepts 
13 
In Class Exam #3 
14 
Application Software 
 
15 
Ethical Issues 
 
16 
Final Exam 
V. 
RESULTS 
 
To determine the effectiveness of the enhanced online 
learning experience, the following data were collected: 
• 
Average viewing time spent on all lectures 
• 
Number of viewers per module 
• 
Student performance on assignments  
• 
Student performance on exams 
• 
Results from a student survey 
 
A. iCollege Results 
The results revealed that on average, students spent 
approximately 24 minutes and 54 seconds reviewing the 
lectures posted in iCollege.  There were between two and 
six lectures created per module.  This number varied 
depending on the complexity of the topic. Figure 1 presents 
an overview of the viewing time spent per module. 
 
 
Figure 1. Average time spent per module 
 
The results also revealed that of the 21 students who 
completed the course, the number of viewers per module 
was roughly 18.  Figure 2 shows the average number of 
viewers per module. 
 
 
Figure 2. Average number of viewers per module 
B. Student Assessments  
The author also wanted to assess the impact of the 
enhanced online learning module on student performance.  
After the completion of a module, an assignment was given.   
Figure 3 shows the results of student performance according 
0:00:00
0:14:24
0:28:48
0:43:12
#1 #2 #3 #4 #5 #6 #7
Time Spent 
Module Number 
0
5
10
15
20
25
#1 #2 #3 #4 #5 #6 #7
Average Number of 
Viewers 
Module Number 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

to the module. Module #7 is the enhanced online learning 
experience. 
 
 
Figure 3. Average Score per Assignment 
 
Figure 4 shows the results of student performance on the 
three exams administered, with the only content for exam #3 
being that taken from the enhanced online learning module. 
 
 
Figure 4. Average Score per Exam 
C. Student Survey 
Lastly, a brief survey was distributed to the students 
after the completion of the enhanced online learning 
module.  The purpose of the survey was to get a better 
understanding of students’ perception on the inclusion of 
future enhanced learning modules in the course.  Figure 5 
presents the results. 
 
 
Figure 5. Desired Number of Enhanced Online Lectures 
 
Additionally, the author had previously proposed a 
hybrid course based on the flipped classroom model.  As 
part of the survey, the author also asked if students would 
consider enrolling in a hybrid course for CSCI 1300.  Figure 
6 presents the results. 
 
Figure 6. Hybrid Course Results 
 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
 
The results revealed that students spent on average 35 
minutes and 50 seconds on the enhanced online learning 
module which is roughly 12 minutes and 47 seconds more 
than the average time spent of 23 minutes and 3 seconds, 
viewing the traditionally created lectures posted in iCollege. 
While this is not a substantial difference, it is consistent 
with what the author anticipated, which was that students 
would spend more time viewing the enhanced online 
learning module because the material covered would not be 
face-to-face as with the other modules.  Furthermore, this 
result shows that although it has been reported that on 
average students’ attention span is around 8 to 10 minutes 
long during a traditional long [20] , students will engage in 
enhanced online lectures for a longer period of time. 
However, it was surprising to the author that the average 
time spent viewing the enhanced online learning module 
was not higher.  But because this module was the 
implementation of module #2, algorithmic development, 
which had the second highest recorded viewing time, the 
author believes that the students felt more comfortable with 
learning the syntax of C++ because many of theoretical 
concepts had been previously covered (i.e., selection 
statements, looping, and evaluation of expressions).   
The student performance data on the assignments also 
showed no substantial difference between the face-to-face 
modules taught and the enhanced online learning module.  
However, the exams scores show a remarkable difference 
and indicate an increase of knowledge from exam #1 to 
exam #3.  When asked, students indicated that they felt 
more comfortable and better prepared to take exam #3 as 
compared to exams #1 and #2.  However, the author 
considers the result from this data inconclusive, because 
there are many variables that may have impacted student 
performance which include, the technology supported 
learning of the enhanced online modules as well as students’ 
self-efficacy. 
Lastly, the student survey revealed that while some 
students wanted to include enhanced online lectures as part 
of their learning experience, others did not.  This result can 
also be seen in the response to the question on whether 
students would want to take CSCI 1300 as a hybrid course.  
Fifty-three percent of the students stated that they would not 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Assign#1
Assign#2
Assign#3
Assign#4
Assign#5
Assign#6
Assign #7
Average Score 
Assignment 
55
60
65
70
75
Exam#1
Exam#2
Exam #3
Average Score 
Exam 
0
5
10
Number of 
Students 
Number of Lectures 
47% 
53% 
Yes
No
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

take the course as a hybrid offering, while forty-seven 
percent stated that they would. The author finds this result to 
be one for future investigation as hybrid courses offer both 
the face-to-face component blended with the flexibility of 
online learning.  Moreover, because 59 percent of GPC 
students are enrolled part-time and roughly 10 percent of the 
student population takes all their classes online, the author 
anticipated that an overwhelming number of students would 
enroll in a hybrid computer science course. Yet when asked, 
students expressed concern of “having to learn this difficult 
material on their own” and they also wanted a traditional 
environment because “this is my major and I want to be 
prepared.”  
VII. 
CONCLUSION 
 
The aim of this paper was to present the results from a 
study that investigated the restructuring of content delivery 
in an introductory computer science course to include an 
enhanced online learning experience.  The results revealed 
there was no significant difference in viewing preference or 
student performance, which leads the author to question the 
impact and effectiveness of the enhanced online learning 
module. The study further revealed that when students were 
asked if additional enhanced online learning modules should 
be included as a part of the course, the responses were 
mixed.  Students’ concerns of “learning difficult material on 
their own” and not “feeling prepared” are validated in 
studies like those conducted by the Community College 
Research Center at Teachers College, Columbia University, 
of students enrolled in Washington State Community and 
Technical Colleges.  The study found that the students 
enrolled in online classes were more likely to perform 
poorly and also less likely to complete their degrees and/or 
transfer to a 4-year institution [21].    
However, there are some limitations to the study which 
impact the author’s findings.  The author notes that the use 
of PowerPoint, even with the enhancements made may have 
reduced the effectiveness of content delivery.  Another 
limitation of the study is the point of introduction of the 
enhanced online learning module into the course.  The 
restructured content delivery experience was introduced 
after the midpoint of the semester which may have 
influenced students’ performance. For future work the 
author proposes to mix the delivery of content among 
modules, instead of between modules.  Lastly, for future 
work, the author intends to introduce as a compliment to the 
learning experience, student-developed enhanced online 
lectures to investigate their impact on lecture viewing and 
performance. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] D. Langdon, G. McKittrick, D. Beede, B. Khan and M.Doms. 
STEM: Good Jobs and for the Future.  2011. U.S. Department 
of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration. 
http://www.esa.doc.gov/sites/default/files/reports/documents/s
temfinalyjuly14_1.pdf.  [Retrieved: January, 2014]. 
[2] M. Price.  Pushing Students Toward STEM.  2012. Science. 
http://sciencecareers.sciencemag.org/career_magazine/previo
us_issues/articles/2012_07_06/caredit.a1200076. 
[Retrieved 
October, 2103]. 
[3] C. Drew. (2011). Why Science Majors Change Their Minds 
(It’s 
Just 
So 
Darn 
Hard). 
 
New 
York 
Times.  
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/11/06/education/edlife/why-
science-majors-change-their-mind-its-just-so-darn-
hard.html?pagewanted=all [Retrieved: January, 2014]. 
[4] J. Cooper and K.D. Weaver. Gender and Computers.  New 
Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2003. 
[5] C. Y. Lester. “The Influence of Vicarious Learning on 
Computer Self-efficacy and Computing Performance.” Ph.D. 
Dissertation (UMI No. 6133310). 2005. 
[6] E.D. Bunderson and M.E. Christensen. “An analysis of 
retention problems for female students in university computer 
science program.”  Journal of Research and Computing in 
Education vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 1 – 18, 1995. 
[7] S. Clegg and D. Trayhurn.  “Gender and computing: Not the 
same old problem.”  British Educational Research Journal 
vol. 26, no. 1, pp.75-90, 2000. 
[8] The STEM Crisis (2103). National Math + Science Initiative. 
http://nms.org/Education/TheSTEMCrisis.aspx 
[Retrieved 
October, 2013]. 
[9] The Condition of College and Career Readiness 2011.  ACT, 
Inc. 
http://www.act.org/research/policymakers/cccr11/ 
readiness.html [Retrieved: November, 2013]. 
[10] Complete College America. http://www.completecollege.org/ 
index.html [Retrieved: November, 2103] 
[11] Complete College Georgia: Georgia’s Higher Education 
Completion Plan (2011). http://www.usg.edu/educational 
_access/documents/GaHigherEducationCompletionPlan2012.
pdf [Retrieved: January, 2014].  
[12] State of Georgia Higher Education Funding Commission 
Report to Governor Deal, December 12, 2012 
http://gov.georgia.gov/sites/gov.georgia.gov/files/related_files
/press_release/Recommendations%20of%20the%20Higher%2
0Education%20Funding%20Commission.pdf. 
[Retrieved: 
September, 2013]. 
[13] The University System of Georgia.  (2012). http://www 
.usg.edu/. [Retrieved: December, 2013]. 
[14] C. Lester. (2012). Georgia Perimeter College STEM Annual 
Report Form 2011-2012.  Report submitted to the USG 
STEM Initiatives II Office. 
[15] Georgia 
Perimeter 
College 
Fact 
Book 
2011-2012. 
http://depts.gpc.edu/~gpcoirp/fact_book/FB%202011-
Final.pdf. [Retrieved: November, 2013]. 
[16] GPC Teaching Guide, CSCI 1300 – Introduction to Computer 
Science. 2012. 
[17] M. Freeman and J. Capper. “Obstacles and opportunities for 
technology innovation in business teaching and learning.”  
International Journal of Management Education vol. 1, no. 1, 
pp. 37-47, 2000. 
[18] M. 
Guhlin. 
(2004). 
Creating 
video 
lesson 
plans.  
http://www.techlearning.com/features/0039/creating-video-
lesson-plans/42255. [Retrieved: January, 2014].  
[19] M. 
Minsker. 
Nextgen 
Journal. 
(2011). 
http://nextgenjournal.com/2011/11/statistics-show-a-decrease-
in-stem-majors/ [Retrieved: January, 2014]. 
[20] J. Liebman. (1987). “Promote Active Learning During 
Lecture.” 
ORMS 
Online 
Edition. 
http://www.orms-
today.org/orms-12-96/education.html. [Retrieved November, 
2013]. 
[21] D. Xu and S.S. Jaggars. “Online and Hybrid Course 
Enrollment and Performance in Washington State Community 
and Technical Colleges.” Community College Resource 
Center, Teachers College, Columbia University. Mar. 2011. 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

