A Systematic Literature Review of Design Thinking in Education in Korean 
Publications 
 
Cheng Fei 
Smart Learning Institute, 
Beijing Normal University 
        Beijing, P.R.China 
e-mail: feicheng@bnu.edu.cn 
 
 
Boulus Shehata  
Smart Learning Institute, 
Beijing Normal University  
Beijing, P.R.China 
e-mail: boulus.shehata@qq.com 
 
 
Ronghuai Huang  
Smart Learning Institute, 
Beijing Normal University  
Beijing, P.R.China 
e-mail: huangrh@bnu.edu.cn
Abstract— Design Thinking (DT) has the potential to enhance 
products, services, and processes as a human-centered approach 
and has been recently used in education. While most of the 
literature on design thinking is dominated by English-published 
papers, and has a ‘Western’ perspective, it does not identify the 
state of research in other cultures. This systematic review 
addresses research on DT in education published in the Korean 
language due to its long history and considerable experience. It 
aims to identify the key trends, challenges, and future directions 
of DT in education as presented in peer-reviewed articles 
published between 2013 and 2022 in Korean journals. The study 
highlights the importance of cultural considerations, such as the 
self-concept and sociocultural background, in designing 
solutions that serve the community. The findings are useful for 
multicultural design centers, research institutes, and enterprises 
that are involved with the exploration of cultural characteristics 
related to DT for better intercultural human communication. 
Keywords-Design Thinking; Education; Korean publications; 
Systematic literature review. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The origins of Design Thinking (DT) can be traced back to 
the late 1960s when design began to be seen as a scientific 
approach to problem-solving [1]. The term DT was first 
introduced in 1969 in the American book "Artificial Science" 
"Design is a way of Thinking". And its diffusion began in 
2000 when SAP, a German software company, started to 
strongly support research. Since then, its meaning has 
expanded to include management's ability to lead innovation 
by effectively solving the company's current and difficult 
problems [2]. DT utilizes both analytical and intuitive 
thinking and is a process of divergence and integration, 
analysis, and consolidation through inspiration, conception, 
and execution [3]. It is a good choice for problem-solving in 
many fields because it allows for multiple perspectives on 
complex problems during execution [4]. Thus, DT can be 
redefined as a human-centered, higher-order thinking skill 
based on experimentation and a positive attitude that strives 
to imagine, collaborate, exchange different opinions, and 
restructure cognitive processes to find the best solutions to 
difficult and complex real-world problems faced by 
individuals and organizations. In teaching and learning, the 
strengths of DT lie in engaging learners, enhancing their 
understanding of content, facilitating learning by creating 
opportunities for application through tasks, and developing 
not only conceptual understanding but also functional and 
practical aspects through repeated practice. Koh et al. present 
a comprehensive conceptualization and application of design 
thinking in teaching and learning [5]. They present old and 
new concepts, as well as critical perspectives related to three 
major design theorists, namely Herbert Simon, Donald Schön, 
and Nigel Cross. In addition, in design thinking classes, 
teacher intervention is minimized and learners engage in 
team project activities under their own direction, which 
naturally develops self-directed learning skills as well as 
communication and collaboration skills. The process of DT 
involves intuition, analysis, analogy, and reasoning, enabling 
learners to solve creative problems, and through this 
problem-solving experience, learners gain a sense of purpose 
and take ownership of the project [6]. Based on the results of 
previous research on design thinking in teaching and learning, 
design thinking has been used as a pedagogical approach to 
foster creativity, which is important for sustainable 
development goals. With the extensive publication on DT 
education, Panke [7] provided a systematic literature review 
of case studies, reports, theoretical reflections, and several 
scholarly works to draw perspectives, opportunities, and 
challenges [7]. Her summary of previous literature reviews 
highlights the broad amount of studies that has been 
published and analyzed. Meinel and Leifer [8] stated that 
“with a deep belief that design must be rooted in people, 
culture and human values, ERGO believes in the power of 
Design Thinking in bringing innovation to one of the most 
culturally sensitive regions in the world.” For example, 
Traifeh et al. [9] reported the early adoption of design 
thinking in Arabic-speaking countries, based on an analysis 
of Twitter data, which revealed differences in the rank order 
of countries tweeting about design thinking in Arabic and 
English. Based on the design education process, Chen [10] 
helped teachers to use the design thinking approach as a 
strategy for innovative change teaching and learning by 
integrating design literacy and disciplinary literacy as 
cultivation goals and instructing students to use the design 
thinking approach to complete practical activities in a diverse 
and pervasive curriculum, demonstrating that the design 
thinking approach to teaching and learning can promote the 
development of students' innovative abilities.  
Most literature reviews of DT Education focus on English 
published papers [11] [12] [13] and are from a ‘Western’ 
perspective. To the best of our knowledge, there is no 
systematic literature review that covered DT research in 
Korean language. Therefore, this paper presents a systematic 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

literature review of top Korean journals for their trends in 
research on DT education, the processes and models of DT, 
the challenges of DT education and future research 
recommendations. Furthermore, with the rise of globalization, 
it is important to uncover non-Western cultural diversity and 
bring it to light, especially when it comes to art and design 
[14] [15] [16]. For instance, Kim M. [15]writes about non-
Western perspectives on human communication, which 
involves cultural variations in self-concept and the 
sociocultural ground for the self. Collinge et al. [14] further 
explore this field by discovering the quality of life assessment 
in non-Western cultures. Ito et al. [16] provided a systematic 
review of non-Western and cross-cultural/national leisure 
research. This inspired us to find out if different cultures have 
different design thinking approaches. Therefore, this paper 
presents a systematic literature review to answer these 
questions:  
RQ1. What is the trend of Design Thinking in education in 
terms of publication year, research methods, target groups and 
subjects/domains involved in Korean publications? 
RQ2. What are the processes of Design Thinking in 
education according to Korean publications? 
RQ3. What are the challenges for Design Thinking in 
education and future research directions according to Korean 
publications? 
This study is divided into six sections where the 
introduction is in Section 1, methodology is in Section 2, 
findings 
and 
discussion 
is 
in 
Section 
3, 
future 
recommendations is in Section 4, conclusion is in Section 5 
and references is in Section 6. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
This study synthesizes quantitative and qualitative studies 
to review DT education according to Korean publications. 
Since the reporting of systematic reviews can be prone to 
being biased, and the interpretation of results is inclined to be 
subjective [17], Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic 
Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines will be 
followed to produce this systematic review [18]. The flow 
chart in Figure 1 shows the process of selecting studies for this 
review. 
A. Searching the databases 
The first step of the review was by one of the authors to 
search the Web of Science database using the strings "design 
thinking (topic)" and "education (topic)," while limiting the 
search results to the Korea Citation Index (KCI) database. KCI 
is a Korean citation index released by the National Research 
Foundation of Korea (NRF) in 2008 and is also known as the 
Korean core journal indexing system. The KCI database on 
Web of Science provides access to more than 1.4 million 
articles from more than 2,500 multidisciplinary journals 
covered by the Korea Journal Database and contains 
bibliographic information on scholarly literature published in 
Korean language. The data for this study included scholarly 
research published before December 31, 2022, the date when 
the literature was searched in the database, with a total of 2858 
relevant articles by over 200 authors from 1999 to 2022. 
 
 
Figure 1.  PRISMA chart for study identification and selection process 
B. Selecting the studies  
966 records were identified, and after initial screening, the 
author identified 177 records and 789 records were excluded 
because they were not relevant to the focus of the study. After 
re-screening of abstracts, 127 records were identified, of 
which 50 were excluded because they were duplicate papers, 
brief reports, non-academic articles, book reviews, not in 
English or Korean, or they were not accessible online. 
III. 
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION 
In this section, we present the findings according to each 
research question.  
RQ1. What is the trend of Design Thinking in education 
in terms of publication year, research methods, target 
groups and subjects/domains involved in Korean 
publications? 
In terms of publication year in Korean journals, there was a 
rise of published research on DT education from 2018 to 2019 
as can be seen in Figure 2. Much of this rise covers studies on 
the topic of Maker Education (ME). This may be explained by 
the fact that the Korean government announced its ME policy 
in 2017 and 2018 [19]. It is also evident that design thinking 
is actively used as a pedagogical approach to develop future 
talent in various educational institutions including universities 
and companies. The number of DT research related to 
teaching and learning has steadily increased since 2016 and 
exploded in 2020, showing a blossoming academic journal, 
reflecting the interest in DT among various alternatives in the 
era of the fourth industrial revolution, when educational 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

institutions, including universities, are thinking about how to 
develop and improve the core competencies that future talents 
should have through teaching methods. increased. The 
number of research subjects is dominated by the curriculum, 
while the number of research topics is dominated by the 
curriculum or curriculum development. Therefore, there is a 
need to recognize the importance of teachers as facilitators in 
design thinking pedagogy and to study it in more depth. 
 
Figure 2.  Distribution of DT education in Korean publications based on 
publication year 
Figure 3 shows research methods used in the reviewed 
papers. The majority of the studies conducted Qualitative 
(30%) or Quantitative (28%) research. We also notice several 
theoretical studies (24%), review papers (7%) and articles 
using the Delphi method (2%). One study applied a meta-
analysis [20] to calculate the overall Effect Size and ES for 
different variables of ME. Through the analysis, it was found 
that the most frequently mentioned tool for collecting data was 
observation, followed by interviews and survey. Due to the 
DT ‘artistic’ nature, we observe that a large portion of studies 
did not conduct experiments, except for a few. DT research in 
the field of teaching and learning published in Korean journals 
tends to focus on programs, with learners coming second. 
Among learners, a large number of studies were conducted on 
university students, while a similar proportion of studies were 
conducted on on-campus programs and off-campus programs. 
This is consistent with Kim's study that most DT research in 
design and the arts is about introducing concepts and 
applications, while most educational research using DT is 
about developing and applying curriculum in offline learning 
environments. This is also in line with the findings of Kim 
[21], who analyzed 85 design-related liberal arts courses 
offered as liberal arts programs at the top 33 universities in 
Korea from 2017 to 2019 and found that 25% of them were 
related to DT. Research on teaching DT in Korea is most often 
related to development, followed by validation of 
effectiveness. The most common topics were program 
development, curriculum development, and model and 
process development, suggesting that the use of design 
thinking in teaching and learning is widely present in all areas 
of the university, not just in the major disciplines. As for 
effectiveness validation research, we find that the most active 
are classroom effectiveness topics based on curriculum 
development and utilization. We can see that there is a trend 
to quickly diagnose and complement the actual effectiveness 
of the developed DT programs by validating their 
effectiveness, not just their development. Therefore, there is a 
need for more research on the educational effectiveness of 
collaborative activities through DT. In addition, in-depth 
theoretical research should be conducted to balance the 
development of DT research related to teaching and learning 
and to complete the construction of DT scholarship. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Distribution of DT education in Korean publications based on 
research methods  
Findings also reveal target groups used in the DT education 
research (see Figure 4). In order not to present a fairly long 
list, only the top 5 groups are presented. The majority of 
studies involved college students (n = 53) followed by primary 
school students (n = 16), teachers (n = 15), secondary school 
(n = 13), secondary school (n = 13) and K-12 (n = 12). The 
findings show that DT can be applied in several college majors, 
such as robotics [22], engineering [23], medicine [24], nursing 
[25], entrepreneurship[26], and several others. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Distribution of DT education in Korean publications based on 
target group in the research 
As can be seen in Table 1, DT education research within 
Korean journals covered several subjects ranging from 
general domains, such as multidisciplinary (n = 30) or teacher 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Delphi Method
2%
Meta-analysis
1%
Mixed 
Methods
8%
Qualitative
30%
Quantitative
28%
Review
7%
Theoretical
24%
53
16
15
13
8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
College Students
Primary school
Teachers
Secondary school
K-12
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

preparation (n = 24), to specific domains, such as in Maker 
Education (n = 14), STE(A)M subjects (n = 9), 
entrepreneurship (n = 9), or even dance programs (n = 1). In 
multidisciplinary domains, studies looked at how DT can 
develop 21st-century skills, such as creativity [6] or creative 
problem-solving [27]. In teacher preparation, studies looked 
at generic courses for pre-service or in-service teachers to 
design thinking for different purposes, such as with early 
childhood [28], with students’ anxiety and resilience [29] or 
with teaching mathematics [30]. DT education in specific 
subjects seems to offer valuable findings. For instance, in 
STE(A)M education, Lee and Tae [31] exploded the effects 
related to DT on primary school students’ problem-solving 
and interest in mathematics and science. In entrepreneurship, 
Jung and Kim [32] presented how DT can influence K-12 
students’ entrepreneurship skills. In languages, Bae [33] made 
action research for teachers to apply DT in improving early 
childhood language learning. Arts and Kim [21] suggested a 
framework for ceramics education. In addition, the active 
research variables related to DT in Korean education are 
design thinking literacy, step-by-step learning experiences in 
DT, DT-based teaching methods, DT-based team projects, 
and DT-based creative education curriculum. The dependent 
variables are mostly learner-related variables that can be 
subdivided into learning, competence, and affect. The 
learning category includes variables such as motivation, 
classroom satisfaction, and academic performance; the 
competency category includes problem-solving skills, 
articulation skills, self-directed learning skills, career 
development skills, creativity, collaboration, and teamwork 
efficiency. This is consistent with the findings of Hong, Ji-
Myung, who found that a curriculum using DT helped to 
strengthen preschool teachers' emotional intelligence and 
creative personality, and Lee, Soo-Jin, and Yoon, Ok-Han 
[34], who found that a DT curriculum was meaningful for 
improving empathic problem-solving skills related to creative 
thinking and emotional intelligence. This confirms that the use 
of DT courses or programs has a direct impact on the 
development and improvement of various factors related to 
learners' learning, abilities, and emotions. Therefore, design 
thinking research on teaching and learning needs to focus 
more on the instructor. By its very nature, DT often 
implemented in the form of PBL(Project-Based Learning), 
focuses on the learner rather than the instructor. This does not 
mean that the role of the instructor is diminished, but rather 
that the role of the facilitator is increased, i.e., facilitating team 
projects and encouraging learner participation. In other words, 
the instructor in a DT classroom is an instructor who needs to 
develop learners' understanding of the concepts and processes 
of DT, a project manager who needs to coordinate and support 
the successful completion of each team's project, and a 
facilitator who helps learners learn to learn on their own 
through the process of experiencing a series of activities. 
Despite the important role of the instructor as a facilitator of 
DT, existing DT research on teaching and learning is biased 
toward the learner and the program. There is a need for more 
research on instructors in DT classrooms, including the 
competencies of DT instructors who value the learner 
experience, the achievements of DT instructors and learners, 
and the application and effectiveness of DT instructors and 
programs. 
TABLE I.  
FREQUENCIES OF DT EDUCATION IN KOREAN 
PUBLICATIONS BASED ON SUBJECT/DOMAIN 
Subject/domain 
Frequency  
Multidisciplinary 
30 
Teacher Preparation  
24 
Maker Education 
14 
Psychology-related 
10 
STE(A)M Education 
9 
Technology 
9 
Entrepreneurship 
8 
Science  
5 
Language 
3 
Arts (Music, Dance) 
5 
Environmental Issues 
2 
Medicine 
2 
Engineering 
1 
Management  
1 
Research Skills 
1 
N/A 
3 
Total 
127 
 
RQ2. What are the processes of Design Thinking in 
education according to Korean publications? 
There are several DT processes/stages/phases/models, 
ranging from 3 to 9 process, as can be seen in Table 2. Three-
step processes was seen in business or economics related 
programs [35]. Four-step processes was common with Maker 
Education that involves ‘Tinkering – Making – Sharing – 
Improving’ [36], or ‘Word – Image – Prototype – Role playing’ 
[37] which can be applied to objects of various backgrounds 
and can be used by extending basic models according to their 
field. Five-step processes was the most common DT models, 
specially the ‘Empathize – Define – Ideate – Prototype – Test’ 
model, with multidisciplinary, teacher education and 
STE(A)M education fields. Six-step processes are basically an 
extension of the five-step process by adding an extra stage, 
such as evaluation [38] or sharing [39] after testing the design. 
Seven, Eight, and Nine-step processes are further complex 
extensions of the five-step process. Studies that used longer 
processes were few. This is in accordance with Grönman and 
Lindfors [40] as they emphasized that DT process models are 
varied in their steps and has an iterative process. Therefore, it 
has four main phase categories, i.e., “empathy and user focus, 
problem, framing and defining, creating ideas and 
visualization, and experimentation and iteration". Thus, we 
can see that the influence of DT in the teaching field is slightly 
weaker in academia compared to other teaching methods, 
because it originated in the corporate world, where companies 
wanted to have an innovative organizational culture, improve 
their human resource capabilities, and develop new product 
development processes, such that the DT implementation 
process originated from the development of entrepreneurship. 
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in DT and 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

active research on DT in teaching, but most of the research has 
focused on practical research on the development, use, and 
validation of solutions. In order for DT to be considered a 
distinct pedagogical approach and not just a team project class 
or problem-solving class, it is necessary to continue to conduct 
research using a variety of research methods. In addition, in 
order for the study of design thinking to have balance and 
academic depth, it is necessary to actively pursue research that 
builds theory through in-depth reflection and exploration, 
including not only practical research but also theoretical and 
philosophical discussions. 
TABLE II.  
TYPES OF DT PROCESSES IN EDUCATION RESEARCH 
WITHIN KOREAN PUBLICATIONS 
 
RQ3. What are the challenges for Design Thinking in 
education and future research directions according to 
Korean publications? 
The findings revealed several challenges when it comes to 
DT in Education, which is mainly related to cultural traits, 
specifically the Confucian-heritage culture. Several studies 
pointed out that the Confucian-heritage culture is more 
assessment-driven, showing more reverence to authority, with 
less emphasis on higher order thinking, such as critical and 
creative thinking [41]. Affected by this culture, students may 
fear exhibiting different opinions or solutions that don’t 
necessarily follow the norms [41], particularly in liberal arts 
[42]. In this sense, a common challenge to DT education in 
Korean culture is the complex design activities that demand 
higher order thinking. In such situations, the design process 
can be intimidating, and teachers may not be trained to ease 
an open and safe space for students to fully express their 
opinions without fear. This leads to another challenge, where 
DT leads to superficial embracing of form-centered designs, 
rather than human-centered design solutions. This may be a 
reason behind why some critics of DT mistakenly attribute the 
failure to use DT to the method itself, when it is the DT 
teaching and learning approaches. Other common challenges 
of incorporating design thinking into education with a focus 
on cultural aspects include the following: 
1. Lack of cultural sensitivity: DT approaches may 
not be culturally sensitive, causing resistance and 
difficulties 
in 
implementation 
among 
diverse 
communities [43]. 
2. Resistance to cultural change: Incorporating 
cultural dimensions into DT may represent a departure 
from traditional approaches to education and may be 
met with resistance from educators and students who 
are accustomed to the status quo [44]. 
3. Inconsistent application across cultural contexts: 
DT may not be consistently applied across different 
cultural contexts, due to variations in cultural values, 
norms, and beliefs [45]. 
4. Limited cultural resources: Implementing DT in 
education in a culturally sensitive manner may require 
additional resources, such as specialized training on 
cultural competency and culturally responsive teaching 
[46]. 
5. Assessment and evaluation across cultural 
contexts: Assessing and evaluating the effectiveness of 
DT in diverse cultural contexts can be challenging, as 
cultural variations may impact DT outcomes [47]. 
6. Integration with existing curricula in a culturally 
responsive manner: Integrating DT into existing 
curricula in a culturally sensitive manner can be 
challenging, as it may require rethinking traditional 
teaching and learning approaches to be more culturally 
responsive [48]. 
Future direction of DT Education as highlighted in the 
reviewed papers point to the importance of establishing an 
educational ‘learning community’ to provide an open platform 
for teachers and project experts to exchange and discuss. This 
would facilitate the exchange of open and creative teaching 
and learning practices in the process of using design thinking. 
At the same time, it would offer students to reflect on their 
designs to promote their own culture, instead ‘imitating’ other 
cultures imported by the media (such as Hollywood). This can 
also uncover new approaches to design thinking, based on the 
Confucian culture within the Korean context. For instance, 
DT education can consider using Korean-inspired designs 
from the Hangul (Alphabet), Hansik (Food), Hanok 
(Traditional Housing), Hanbok (Clothing), and Hanguk-
Eumak (Music). Another common highlight from the 
reviewed papers was the integration between schools and 
enterprises to set medium- and long-term educational projects, 
rather than short-term seminars or experimental- projects. 
This will provide an opportunity to conduct an in-depth, 
longitudinal study exploring the intrinsic motivations and 
interactions of the participants, which will enrich the industry-
academia collaboration. In addition to this, there is a need to 
explore the importance and educational effectiveness of 
collaboration through pedagogical research in DT. In modern 
society, where there are increasingly complex problems that 
are not well defined, DT places a strong emphasis on 
unlocking the power of collective intelligence through 
collaboration. DT is a pedagogical approach that looks to 
leverage the strengths of teams by combining individual 
excellence with a collaborative attitude. Although there is 
some prior research on design thinking and team effectiveness, 
team collaboration effectiveness, and collegiality, there is a 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

dearth of research on improving competencies through 
collaborative activities in DT team projects. Therefore, in 
addition to improving individual creativity and problem-
solving skills, more research should be conducted on 
developing empathy, collaborative problem-solving, and 
collaborative creativity through design thinking. 
IV. 
FUTURE RECOMMENDATIONS 
We conducted a systematic review on Korean published 
studies to explore trends, research methods, target groups and 
subjects/domains, as well as processes, challenges, and future 
research directions on DT Education. The reviewed papers 
reveal a lack of research on designs inspired from the Asian 
culture, such as Korea. According to the review findings, we 
suggest for future research to address the following 
recommendations: 
• The role of cultural variations in self-concept and 
sociocultural background in DT:  
a. 
Understanding cultural differences in self-
concept and identity. 
b. 
The influence of cultural values and norms on 
DT approaches. 
c. 
The impact of sociocultural background on 
DT outcomes. 
Cultural dimensions play a significant role in shaping the 
design of solutions that serve a particular community. An 
understanding of cultural variations in self-concept and 
sociocultural background can inform DT approaches to better 
serve the needs of diverse communities. 
• The limited focus on DT from non-Western perspectives:  
a. 
The dominance of Western perspectives in 
DT literature. 
b. 
The need for more research on DT from 
diverse cultural dimensions. 
c. 
The potential benefits of incorporating 
diverse cultural perspectives in DT education. 
Most of the literature on DT has a Western perspective, and 
there is a need for more research on DT from other cultural 
dimensions, such as Arab, Chinese, Japanese, and Korean. 
• The importance of considering cultural dimensions in 
DT education:  
a. 
Enhancing the effectiveness of DT in serving 
diverse communities. 
b. 
Improving intercultural communication in DT. 
c. 
Encouraging the development of culturally 
responsive DT approaches. 
Incorporating cultural dimensions into DT education can 
enhance the effectiveness of DT in serving diverse 
communities 
and 
improve 
intercultural 
human 
communication. 
• The 
need 
for 
further 
exploration 
of 
cultural 
characteristics related to DT:  
a. 
Uncovering variations in design approaches 
in different cultural contexts. 
b. 
Improving 
our 
understanding 
of 
the 
relationship between culture and DT. 
c. 
Encouraging the development of culturally 
sensitive DT practices. 
Further exploration of cultural characteristics related to DT 
can uncover variations in design approaches in education, 
which will be crucial for understanding the relationship 
between culture and DT. 
According to the review findings, we suggest to explore 
more DT educational approaches in atypical disciplines such 
as science, environmental studies, medicine, or management. 
Moreover, future research can utilize longer processes in 
different subjects/domains and conduct in-depth interviews or 
experimental research approaches to explore how these extra 
steps have an influence on design-thinking competence. 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This study covered that there a great attention to Design 
Thinking (DT) education, especially with the increasing use 
of educational technology platforms and tools such as the 
metaverse and robots. Though several literature reviews were 
made on DT education, the attention is mainly focused on the 
published studies in English. This study conducted a 
systematic review on DT research in education published in 
Korean language to explore trends, research methods, target 
groups and subjects/domains, as well as processes, challenges, 
and future research directions on DT Education. The reviewed 
papers reveal a lack of research on designs inspired from the 
Asian culture. We ask, how can design thinking in education 
uncover and teach characteristics of the Korean culture, such 
as Hangul (Alphabet), Hanok (Traditional Housing), Hanbok 
(Clothing), and many more elements rooted in the society? It 
is recommended that the research community explore cultural 
characteristics related to design thinking. This would uncover 
variations in design approaches in education that is vital for 
intercultural human communication. Systematic reviews can 
be made on publications from other languages as well, such as 
in Arabic or Chinese. In addition to this, we also suggest that 
the use of DT in teaching and learning needs to be widely used 
and studied as a curriculum for adults through continuing 
education institutions. Previous research has focused on 
university courses, such as developing DT programs for 
university 
course 
management 
and 
validating 
the 
effectiveness of classes for university students. In Asia, which 
has entered a rapidly aging society, the importance of 
establishing an appropriate lifelong learning system for adults 
and developing effective programs cannot be overemphasized. 
Therefore, DT should be applied not only to university 
students but also to adults in general, and design thinking 
research on teaching and learning should continue not only for 
university disciplines but also for adults in general. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Ahn, Youngsik (2021). Reflections on Design Thinking: 
Focusing on the processes of concept formation and meaning 
expansion. Research in Learner-Centered Instruction, 21(24), 
647-665. 
[2] 
Kelly, T. and Littman, J. (2001). The art of innovation, 
Lesoons in creativity from IDEOP, America’s leading design 
firm. New York.  
[3] 
Tim Brown (2009). Focus on design, book, Youngsa Kim, 
Seoul. 
[4] 
Roger, S. Pressman. and Bruce, R. Maxim. (2020) Software 
engineering: a practitioners approach. New York: McGraw-
Hill Education. 
[5] 
Koh, J. H. L., Chai, C. S., Wong, B., and Hong, H. Y. 
(2015). Design thinking for education: Conceptions and 
applications in teaching and learning. Springer. 
[6] 
Choi, H., and Park, J. (2014). Developing the design process 
in education to improve creativity based on design 
thinking. Journal of Digital Design, 14(4), 677-686 
[7] 
Panke, S. (2019). Design thinking in education: Perspectives, 
opportunities and challenges. Open Education Studies, 1(1), 
281-306. 
[8] 
Meinel, C., and Leifer, L. (2012). Design thinking research 
(pp. 1-11). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
[9] 
Traifeh, H., Bin Tareaf, R., Abou Refaie, R., Meinel, C., and 
Von Thienen, J. (2021). How Did Design Thinking Develop 
in the Arab World? Findings from Twitter Analysis. Journal 
of Design Thinking, 2(2). 
[10] Chen, P., Huang, R. H. (2021) Exploring the paths and 
strategies of design education: a new perspective on the 
cultivation of innovative talents. 3(335),18-24. 
[11] Razzouk, R., & Shute, V. (2012). What is design thinking and 
why is it important?. Review of educational research, 82(3), 
330-348. 
[12] Lor, R. (2017). Design thinking in education: A critical review 
of literature. 
[13] McLaughlin, J. E., Wolcott, M. D., Hubbard, D., Umstead, K., 
& Rider, T. R. (2019). A qualitative review of the design 
thinking framework in health professions education. BMC 
Medical Education, 19, 98.  
[14] Collinge, A., Rüdell, K., & Bhui, K. (2002). Quality of life 
assessment in non-Western cultures. International Review of 
Psychiatry, 14(3), 212-218. 
[15] Kim, M. S. (2002). Non-Western perspectives on human 
communication: Implications for theory and practice. Sage. 
[16] Ito, E., Walker, G. J., & Liang, H. (2014). A systematic review 
of 
non-Western 
and 
cross-cultural/national 
leisure 
research. Journal of Leisure Research, 46(2), 226-239. 
[17] Sinha, M. K., & Montori, V. M. (2006). Reporting bias and 
other biases affecting systematic reviews and meta-analyses: 
a 
methodological 
commentary. Expert 
review 
of 
pharmacoeconomics & outcomes research, 6(5), 603–611. 
https://doi.org/10.1586/14737167.6.5.603 
[18] Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., Altman, D. G., Prisma 
Group. (2010). Preferred reporting items for systematic 
reviews and meta‐analyses: The PRISMA statement. 
International Journal of Surgery (london, England), 8(5), 
336–341.  
[19] Lee, Dongkuk & Kwon, Hyuksoo. (2022). Keyword analysis 
of the mass media’s news articles on maker education in South 
Korea. International Journal of Technology and Design 
Education. 32. 10.1007/s10798-020-09615-9. 
[20] Lee, D. K. (2019). A meta-analysis of the effects in maker 
education. The Journal of Educational Information and 
Media, 25(3), 577-600. 
[21] Kim, Y. Y. (2021). Suggestion for creative idea frame of 
ceramic 
collaboration 
education 
through 
design 
thinking. 한국과학예술융합학회, 39(3), 69-75. 
[22] Lim, D., & Ahn, J. (2019). A Case Study: Designeer 
Education Program and Application of Capstone Design-
Focusing on Design Thinking Process of a Robot Vacuum 
Cleaner. Journal of Engineering Education Research, 22(2), 
61-70. 
[23] Kim, Y. A., & Han, Y. S. (2016). An Analysis of the Design 
Activities in Appropriate Technology based Engineering 
Design in order to utilize the Concept of Design 
Thinking. Journal of Engineering Education Research, 19(5), 
25-34 
[24] Yoo, J. Y. (2020). The effect of medical service design 
thinking teaching-learning on empathic problem solving 
ability: Convergence analysis of structured and unstructured 
data. Journal of Digital Convergence, 18(6), 311-321. 
[25] Kim, J. S. (2020). The effect of design thinking-based nursing 
learning program in students. 
[26] Kim, Hyun-Min (2015) Design Entrepreneurship in Visual 
Communication Design Education. Journal of Basic Design 
& Art. 
[27] Young-Jae, J. (2021). Development of Design Thinking Class 
Program Applying Creative Problem Solving (CPS) in 
College Classes. Jounal of Fisheries and Marine Sciences 
Education, 33(5), 1153-1171. 
[28] Lee,  Jongman (2020) Case study of ‘Subject Logic and 
Essay’ class based on Design Thinking: Focused on critical 
thinking and creative attitude of pre-service early childhood 
teacher. Journal of Learner-Centered Curriculum and 
Instruction 
[29] Seong, G. B. (2019). The effects of problem-based activities 
with the design thinking process on teaching anxiety, 
resilience, and creative problem-solving competence of pre-
service English teachers. The Journal of Foreign Studies, 47, 
41-80. 
[30] Lee, J., & Kim, H. (2020). Analysis of pre-service 
mathematics teachers' experience on design thinking based 
teaching 
practicum. Communications 
of 
Mathematical 
Education, 34(3), 235-256. 
[31] Lee, E., & Tae, J. (2017). The effect of STEAM program 
based on design thinking on primary school pupil's 
convergent 
problem 
solving 
& 
interest 
in 
math-
science. Journal of Curriculum Integration, 11(1), 143-162. 
[32] Jung, H. J., & Kim, C. O. (2018). A Study on the 
Entrepreneurship Education Framework for Youth based on 
Design Thinking. Journal of the Korean Entrepreneurship 
Socieity, 13(1), 176-200. 
[33] Bae, J. H. (2021). Action Research to Improve the Curriculum 
for Early Childhood Language Education Based on Design 
Thinking for Prospective Kindergarten Teachers. The Journal 
of the Korea Contents Association, 21(12), 119-131. 
[34] Yoon, Okhan (2017). A Study of the Instructional Systems 
Design Model for STEAM Education- Focus on Design 
Thinking. Korean Journal of General Education, 11(2), 
443~474. 
[35] Choi, W. (2015). The holistic startup business model 
development by lean startup and design thinking: startup 
methodology and education program development for 
designers in the creative economy. Hongik University. 
[36] Lee, S., Kim, T., Kim, J., Kang, S., & Yoon, J. (2019). The 
effect of a design thinking-based maker education program on 
the creative problem solving ability of elementary school 
students. Journal of The Korean Association of Information 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Education, 23(1), 73-84. 
[37] Park, hyeyoung, & Nagan. (2020). ‘공예 대중화’를 위한 
메이커 교육 프로세스 연구-디자인 씽킹 방법론 
(WIPR) 
과 
전문가 
인터뷰를 
통하여. 한국디자인문화학회지, 26(2), 185-196. 
[38] Kim, Kyoungeun & Min Seonghye (2020) Preschool 
Teacher’s Perception of Design Thinking. Journal of Learner-
Centered Curriculum and Instruction 
[39] Lee, Yeong-Chan (2021) Exploring the Direction to Apply 
Design Thinking to Invention Education in Practical Arts 
Subject of Elementary School. [초등학교 실과의 발명교육 
영역에서 디자인씽킹 적용 방향 탐색] The Journal of 
Korean Practical Arts Education. 
[40] Grönman, S., & Lindfors, E. (2021). The process models of 
design thinking: A literature review and consideration from 
the 
perspective 
of 
craft, 
design 
and 
technology 
education. Techne serien-Forskning i slöjdpedagogik och 
slöjdvetenskap, 28(2), 110-118. 
[41] Stankov, L. (2010). Unforgiving Confucian culture: A 
breeding ground for high academic achievement, test anxiety 
and self-doubt?. Learning and Individual Differences, 20(6), 
555-563. 
[42] Cheng, B., & Zhang, D. (2020). Cultivating citizens with 
Confucian cosmopolitanism: Defining the purpose of liberal 
arts education in the Asian context. Frontiers of Education in 
China, 15(4), 564-587. 
[43] Sungae Kim(2019). Effects of Robotics Education Program 
based on the Design Thinking Process on the Creativity for 
Engineering College Students in the field of IT. 
[44] Park, Suhong(2021). Development of Entrepreneurship 
Education Model Based on Design Thinking for Community 
Value Realization. 
[45] Kwon, Young-kook(2017). A Study on Combined Education 
for Design Thinking - Focusing on Stanford D. School 
Curriculum. 
[46] Dohyun Lee(2015).The Suggestion of Design Thinking 
Process and its Feasibility Study for Fostering Group 
Creativity of Elementary-Secondary School Students in 
Science Education. 
[47] Kristen Koeun Nam(2022). An Educational Program of 
Design Thinking class for Creative Problem Solving- Focused 
on the practical project of multidisciplinary curriculum. 
[48] 
Yoon Hye Jean (2013). Creative Thinking and 
Convergence Education for Innovative Design. 
 
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

