Fingers and Toes: A Hidden BioMetric Story 
Rachel M. Stange 
Lord Fairfax Community College 
Middletown, VA, USA 
Email: rms25145@email.vccs.edu 
 
Abstract— The work presented in this paper has two main 
objectives. The first objective was to determine if fully related 
siblings have similar fingerprints due to genetics. The data 
showed that only one sibling set had less than 40% similarity. 
The right index finger of all sets had a median of 40%, even 
within one set of siblings that had only a 20% match on the right 
thumb. The mode for the left index fingers was 40% with twelve 
of the fifteen sibling sets being at that level. The majority of the 
sets were at 33% or higher, yet two sets had no matching major 
classifications and the mode for ridge classifications was 80%. 
Arches were the least found major classification and loops were 
the most popular major classification. The hypothesis was that 
fully related siblings would have similar fingerprints. The 
results support the hypothesis even though the fingerprints may 
have slight differences within some classifications, all sibling sets 
having at least an 80% similarity. The second objective was to 
determine if fully related siblings have similar toeprints. The 
data from toeprint collections showed that most of the sibling 
sets ridge classifications being 80% similar and three of them 
90% similar. While the similarity of the ridge classifications did 
not vary much, the similarity of the major classifications varied. 
Keywords- Fingerprints;  Toeprints; Biometrics; Security; 
Science. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Fingerprints are a biometric mark of everything a human 
has touched and where they have been. Fingerprint tracking 
has been documented from the Chinese Qin Dynasty to 
modern society.  There currently is no common fingerprint 
point requirement between countries, but the more point 
matches, the stronger the match. Fingerprints have basic 
patterns and more detailed patterns that allow for good 
evidence of a match. Just as fingerprints are unique to a 
person, so are toeprints. There are three basic patterns of 
fingerprints known as arches, loops, and whorls [5]. The more 
detailed items of fingerprints are forks, double forks, triple 
forks, delta, dot, bridge, hook, eye, short ridge, and ending 
ridge [8]. It can be inferred that toeprints are classified using 
the same classifications as fingerprints because they have 
similar characteristics [3]. Trying to classify toeprints and 
footprints to identify crime victims and to help catch criminals 
is not new. Moorthy and Sulaiman [18] attempted to help 
solve crime in Malaysia by collecting footprints of over 400 
adults and found various features of the toes. When they 
compared them against findings of those in Indians, they 
found that the morphological length of toes were different due 
to nationality and genetic makeup [18]. 
In Section 2, a brief history of fingerprints and toeprints 
and background for understanding fingerprints and toeprints 
is given. In Section 3, the data for the fingerprint and toeprint 
research is presented and explained. In Section 4, a summary 
of research and possibilities of future research are given. 
II. 
HISTORY 
Before Christ (BC) the Chinese Qin Dynasty recorded 
details of using handprints as a way to find burglars and Han 
Dynasty records show clay seals showing fingerprint ridge 
impressions [24]. Von Minden also indicates evidence of 
fingerprinting in the 14th century Persian book Jaamehol-
Tawarikh by Khajeh Rashiduddin Fazlollah Hamadani, that 
there is evidence of the Dr. Nehemiah Grew publishing 
details of friction ridge skin observations in the Royal Society 
of London paper in 1684, Govard Bidloo writing a book in 
1685 about papillary ridges, and Marcello Malpighi at the 
University of Bologna’s work with ridge, spirals, and loops 
in 1686 [24].  French criminologist Alphonse Bertillon 
created an eleven point measurement system known as 
anthropometrics [11]. The anthropometry system failed when 
two people were found to have the same eleven 
measurements in the Will and William West Leavenworth 
Prison case [11]. This sparked several scientists to start 
looking for improved ways to identify people by their 
fingerprints. The following timeline shows the movement 
from the judicial failure of anthropometrics to modern 
fingerprinting [9][11]-[13][23]-[24]: 
 
 
1893-Scotland Yard adds fingerprints to Bertillon  
 
1901-Fingerprints replace anthropometrics ID 
 
1902-New York, USA fingerprints used for work 
ID 
 
1905-U.S. Military starts using fingerprints 
 
1918- Locard confirmed 12 point differences  
 
1971-Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) has 
over 200 million fingerprints stored 
 
1974-United Kingdom created a fingerprint 
society 
 
1977-Certified Latent Print Examiners test 
created 
 
2012-Interpol’s repository includes 190 countries 
 
2014-U.S. Automated Fingerprint Identification 
System (AFIS) systems has over 120 million  
fingerprint records 
 
2014-Unique Identification Authority of India 
(UIAI) has over 560 million biometrics stored 
 
The classification system that is used today evolved from 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

a method developed by Sir Edward Henry who was in 
collaboration with Sir Francis Galton, Sir William Hershel, 
and Dr. Henry Faulds [11]. 
Fingerprints contain DNA and substances that are on the 
finger. Recently, researchers have been working on the best 
way to obtain and analyze DNA from latent fingerprints with 
the goal of provide another source of gathering DNA samples 
for criminal investigations [6]. Also, other researchers are 
looking at the traces of non-DNA substances left in 
fingerprints to find more information that may be used in 
criminal investigations [1]. Most of the research on non-DNA 
substances in fingerprints is focused on drug testing [1]. 
In history, toeprints have served a significant purpose. 
There was an article in the Fingerprint and Identification 
Magazine from March 1953 titled The Case of the Great Toe 
Print. The police found a toeprint on a safe that was stolen 
during a robbery and the guilty verdict was based on the 
toeprint alone [21]. In 2010, police identified Colton Harris-
Moore as the barefoot bandit through his toeprints [20]. 
Additionally, another example would be when coroners in 
Japan decided to use footprints to identify the deceased of an 
earthquake [2]. Beall also reported that this method could be 
used to identify patients with dementia [2]. Despite the 
advantages of using toeprints for identification purposes, it 
should be noted that a ghost image or shadow may appear 
two-dimensional within latent prints [4]. This phenomenon 
has implications for the collection and interpretation and thus 
for the comparison made between unknown and known 
footprints in the criminal justice system [4]. 
A. Patterns 
Fingerprints have several characteristics which are 
categorized into two main categories. The first category 
focuses on basic patterns and the second category focuses on 
the more detailed items within the basic patterns. There are 
three basic patterns known as (1) arches, (2) loops, and (3) 
whorls. Arches are the least common of the basic patterns [5]. 
The pattern of an arch can be identified because the ridges 
enter on one side and exit on the other side.  About 5% of 
people have arch type fingerprints [17]. Loops are the most 
common type of print [5] and in this pattern some of the 
ridges enter and exit on the same side of the finger.  
“Approximately 65% of all fingerprints are loops” [17]. 
Whorls are the third pattern and these ridges create a circular 
pattern. According to the Education Bureau of Hong Kong, 
approximately 34% of people exhibit this as their basic 
fingerprint pattern [8].  
The more detailed items are forks, double forks, triple 
forks, delta, dot, bridge, hook, eye, short ridge, and ending 
ridge [8]. As explained by the Education Bureau of Hong 
Kong, a fork is similar to when one is driving and comes to a 
dead end in the road that forces one to make a decision about 
going left or right [8]. A double fork is when the fingerprint 
line branches off to the left or right and then immediately 
makes another left or right branch. A triple fork is when 
someone’s fingerprint comes to the intersection, but instead of 
just turning right or left, the line can also go straight [8].  The 
delta is also known as bifurcation and sometimes people have 
two deltas which is known as a double bifurcation [5]. A dot 
characteristic allows a person to have a single dot or multiple 
dots anywhere in their fingerprint [8]. A small ridge 
connecting two large ridges is known as a fingerprint bridge. 
Spurs known as hooks, look like a crochet hook and the hook 
varies in different depths [5]. An eye is also known as an 
enclosure or a lake and is basically the same as an eyeball. 
Short ridges are also known as islands, because the ridge lines 
are small and do not connect to any other ridge [5]. The last 
detail is the ending ridge, which is where the print ridge lines 
end and do not make a full ridge [8]. The same fingerprint 
patterns also apply to toeprints. 
B. Types 
The four types of fingerprinting methods are plastic, 
visible, latent, and inked. According to Gaensslen et al. [11], 
plastic fingerprints are generally “three-dimensional and 
found in soft material”, while visible fingerprints are generally 
left in fluids, such as paint or blood, and latent fingerprints are 
invisible to the human eye, but are made visible by dusting or 
spraying chemicals on the print. Ink fingerprints are the older 
style, where fingers are rolled in ink and printed on a paper 
card. An example of a plastic fingerprint would be your print 
left in putty and an example of a visible fingerprint would be 
when you stick your hand on wet paint and leave your hand 
print on the wall. Another example of a visible fingerprint is 
when someone puts their hand on a non-fogged window, the 
next morning fog shows the persons handprint. 
     There are two primary ways to obtain latent prints: (1) 
powered-dusting and (2) chemical spray [11]. The multi-
colored powders are cheaper and commonly used in 
conjunction with lifting tape and specially designed brushes.  
The most common chemicals used are iodine fuming, silver 
nitrate, ninhydrin, and super glue [11]. Lipid components and 
porous surfaces respond well to using iodine, while ninhydrin 
reacts with amino acids and also works well on porous 
surfaces [11]. “Silver nitrate has been an established agent for 
the detection of latent fingerprints for some 120 years, and it 
was one of the few reagents suitable for use on porous surfaces 
until ninhydrin was introduced in forensics. The method is 
based on the reaction of silver ions with chlorides in the 
fingerprints, which are visualized in brown, violet or black” 
[15]. By heating the super glue, an interaction occurs on the 
print residue displaying a visible fingerprint impression [11]. 
The same fingerprint types also apply to toeprints.  
C.  Analyzing 
One way to compare and analyze fingerprints is to follow 
the five steps below [8]:  
1. Identify the basic patterns (loop, arch, whorls) of a 
fingerprint 
2. Identify ridgeline details 
3. Compare fingerprint measurements point by point to 
another fingerprint 
4. Determine if capture print matches prior stored print 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

5. Obtain second person or software program to 
confirm findings 
Using a computer software program to analyze fingerprints 
is much faster and easier as manual fingerprint comparison 
generally requires the use of a magnifying glass. During the 
comparison, the examiner must record their findings, 
generally in a digital database that can be searched later. 
These stored analyses are helpful in biometric security, 
identifying amnesia victims, criminal identification, and 
identifying unknown deceased [19]. As the USA National 
Forensic Science Technology Center and Bureau of Justice 
Assistance points out, most criminal justice cases use 
computerized systems to conduct the analysis for matches. 
The match is determined by a programed algorithm. Certified 
print examiners then manually review the listed matches and 
make the final determination [19]. “Fingerprint examiners 
use a method called ACE-V. That stands for analysis, 
comparison, evaluation, and verification. Below is an 
explanation of each section of ACE-V” [19].  
Analysis is the process of determining if the print is good 
enough to use for a comparison. If the print is found not to be 
suitable for comparison, it is because it was not of good 
quality or did not have enough visual features; at this point, 
the print is reported as not suitable. If the print passes 
inspection, the print tolerance level (the amount of variation 
that will be accepted) is determined [19]. “The analysis may 
also uncover physical features such as recurves, deltas, 
creases, and scars that help indicate where to begin the 
comparison” [19]. Comparisons occur when prints from 
known persons and people of interest are looked at side-by-
side comparing minutiae characteristics and locations to 
determine if they match. “Known prints are often collected 
from persons of interest, victims, others present at the scene 
or through a search of one or more fingerprint databases such 
as the FBI’s Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification 
System” [19]. “Evaluation is where the examiner ultimately 
decides if the prints are from the same source (identification 
or individualization), different sources (exclusion) or is 
inconclusive. Inconclusive results may be due to poor quality 
samples, lack of comparable areas, or insufficient number of 
corresponding or dissimilar features to be certain” [19]. 
Verification is when someone else does the analysis, 
compares, and evaluates the prints themselves to either 
support or disagree with the conclusions of the first 
fingerprint 
examiner. 
The 
second 
examiner 
might 
additionally verify the suitability of determinations made by 
the first examiner in the analysis phase [19]. 
According to the USA National Forensic Science 
Technology Center and Bureau of Justice Assistance, there are 
four possible results of fingerprint analysis. These results are 
“(1) the fingerprint was made by (identified) a known source 
(suspect, victim, etc.), (2) the fingerprint was not made by a 
known source, (3) the fingerprint cannot be identified or 
excluded to a known source, (4) the fingerprint is of no value 
to compare to a known source” [19]. 
D. Measurements 
Fingerprints are measured by points.  A system has been 
created that uses different spots on the fingerprint to compare 
the similarities. The different spots are called points. There 
are approximately fifty points per fingerprint. The minimum 
requirement is different for every country. The United States 
has no minimum requirement of points that you must have to 
match a print, however the more you have the better in a court 
of law. The United Kingdom requires that you to have a 
minimum of sixteen points to be a match [10]. Australia 
requires you to have at least a minimum of twelve points to 
be a match [10]. Just like Australia, Germany requires a 
minimum of twelve points for it to be a match [7]. France 
requires you to have a minimum of seventeen points for it to 
be a match [7]. The US court system and the government does 
not require you to have a certain amount to have a case, but 
they prefer that you have at least a minimum of nine points 
that are a match. At the time of this research, there are no 
requirements for toes, unless used as finger replacements.  
E. Heredity 
A person’s fingerprints are formed approximately during 
the seventh month of fetus development, and the finger ridges 
do not change unless a person gets a bruise, cut, or scar on 
the fingertip [14]. According to Bhangu [3], the pressure on 
the toes from the amniotic fluid and the fetus’ movement in 
the womb affects the resulting toeprints at birth. There are 
prior studies that show a correlation of ridge count, width, 
separation, and depth among identical twins, while others 
show that some parent fingerprint traits are shared with their 
children [14]. While fingerprinting children under the age of 
two can be difficult, research has shown there are similarities 
between family members [22]. “There is an inheritable 
quality to fingerprints. Pattern types are often genetically 
inherited, but the individual details that make a fingerprint 
unique are not” [16].  
III. 
RESEARCH 
A. Fingerprint Analysis 
For this part of the research, there were fifteen sibling sets, 
or thirty participants, who were fingerprinted. The 
participants’ fingerprints were analyzed for the major 
classifications and five specific ridge classifications. Then, 
fingerprints of siblings were compared and similarities 
determined. 
The data for this part of the research showed that when 
comparing all three of the major classes and the five ridge 
classes on the four fingers tested, all the sibling sets had at 
least 80% similarity, as seen in Figure 1. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
Figure 1. Overall Similarity of Fully Related Siblings Fingerprints 
The majority of siblings had at least 33% similarity in the 
major classes, as seen in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. Major Classification Similarity of Fully Related Siblings 
Fingerprints 
Also, the data showed that the right index finger of all sets 
had a median of 40%, even with Set 7 that had only a 20% 
match. The right thumb of all sets had a median of 60%, even 
with Set 8 that had only a 20% match. The left thumb for all 
sets had a mode of 40%, even with five sets having a 20% 
match and one set having no similarity in the left thumb. The 
left index finger for all sets had a mode of 40% with ten of 
the fifteen sibling sets being at that level.  
The individual finger similarities were calculated by taking 
all found major and ridge classifications and dividing them 
by all eight possible classifications.  The overall percentage 
of similarity was determined by adding all found matched 
classifications divided by all possible classifications for all 
fingers.  Major class similarities were further evaluated by 
looking for similarities of whorls, arches, and loops on 
matching fingers. The majority of the sets were at 33% or 
higher, yet two sets had no matching major classifications. 
This percentage was determined by taking the number of 
found matches divided by the total possible classifications. 
When looking at total ridge similarities, the mode was 80%.  
The data showed the left thumb was less of a match then 
the right thumb of siblings. The same was shown to be true 
on the right and left index fingers. When looking at individual 
classifications the data showed five sets did not have forks, 
four sets had double forks, and only one set had a triple fork. 
There were ten sets that did not have matching short ridges 
and fourteen sets did not have matching ending ridges. The 
matches were determined by each sibling within a set having 
the classification, most sets had at least one sibling who had 
some type of ridge. Arches were the least found major 
classification and loops were the most popular major 
classification. One set of siblings was compared to another 
because that set consisted of a male parent and a male uncle. 
The findings were supportive of the prior research showing 
genetic effects on fingerprints, in that there was an 85% 
similarity with the parent and a 70% similarity with the uncle. 
Two sets of siblings also had one female grandparent within 
another sibling set. When the sibling sets were compared with 
their grandparent’s prints, they found to have a 74% match.  
Upon evaluating the quality of the fingerprint cards, it 
could be seen that the sibling sets that included participants 
between the ages of two and five years were not as clear which 
made it harder to determine classification. The participants 
over the age of 45 also presented issues because they 
contained more fingerprint damage, such as scars and burn 
spots. One sibling set had a participant that had a fresh cut 
which caused a thick solid line to appear across the 
fingerprint. The younger participant’s prints were darker due 
to the struggle between researcher and participant to roll the 
finger properly in ink and on the card. The older participants 
were found to have the lightest prints most likely from the 
researcher being more concerned about hurting them during 
the fingerprinting process in comparison to other participants. 
B. Toeprint Analysis 
Confounding variables in this portion of the research were  
 
Cuts, scrapes, and/or callus on toes 
 
Lotions and/or oils used on feet prior to printing 
 
Flexibility of research participants 
 
Length of participant’s toes 
 
Medical conditions of participants 
 For this part of the research, there were ten sibling sets, or 
twenty participants, who were toeprinted. The participants’ 
toeprints were analyzed for the major classifications and five 
specific ridge classifications. Then, toeprints of siblings were 
compared and similarities determined. 
The average ridge classification similarity was 83%. The 
average right big toe similarity was 88%. The average left big 
toe similarity was 78%. The right big toe similarity is the 
number of ridge classifications similar on the siblings right 
big toe. The left big toe similarity is the number of ridge 
classifications similar on the siblings left big toes. The 
average major classification similarity was 55%. 
One set of siblings was compared to another because that 
set consisted of a female parent and a female aunt. While the 
researcher was unable to find prior research on the genetic 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

effect of toeprints, the data of this research shows that 
genetics do play a role in toeprint formation. This is similar 
to the findings of prior research showing genetic effects on 
fingerprints [16]. This research showed that there was an 85% 
similarity with the parent and a 70% similarity with the aunt. 
Two sets of siblings also had one female grandparent within 
another sibling set. When the sibling sets were compared with 
their grandparent’s prints, there was a 74% match. 
The 
similarity 
of 
ridge 
classifications, 
major 
classifications, the right big toe, and the left big toe in related 
siblings is graphed in Figure 3.  
 
Figure 3. Similarity of Related Siblings Toeprints of Different Ages 
and Ethnic Backgrounds 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Based on the findings of this research, the hypothesis that 
fingerprints of siblings are similar overall even though they 
may have slight differences within some classifications with 
all sibling sets having at least an 80% match. This supports 
the prior research findings from Jain et al. [14] which states 
that while everyone has a unique fingerprint, siblings do have 
similarities based on genetics during fetus development. One 
set of siblings had a participant who was conceived using in-
vitro fertilization and one who was not. The fingerprint 
results may have shown different results if all five fingers 
were evaluated instead of just the thumbs and index fingers. 
This was not done due to time restrictions placed on the 
researcher by the project due date and when the research 
received Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval. The 
researcher also learned how hard it was to actually find full 
siblings; it appeared that a large majority of siblings around 
the researcher were actually step or half siblings. It was 
interesting to the researcher to also see the high interest level 
of the participants to understand more about fingerprints and 
the reading process. The researcher now understands why the 
criminal justice system is unable to set a specific number of 
matches to confirm a print obtained during a crime. Future 
fingerprint research is to evaluate all five fingers on each 
hand for each sibling, to use a digital inking device, and to 
allow more time for evaluation, fingerprinting all the parents 
of the siblings, and looking at other biometric prints such as 
the ear. This additional data may lead to more details of the 
human biometric system. 
The data from the toeprint portion of this research showed 
that when comparing the three major classes that five sibling 
sets had a 100% similarity and four sibling sets had 
absolutely no similarity. Three sibling sets had an overall 
ridge classification similarity of 90%, which was 10% higher 
than all other sibling sets. There was no correlation between 
major class similarity level and the ridge classification 
similarity level.  All sibling sets had at least an 80% or higher 
similarity for ridge classification on the right big toe. This 
varied from the left big toe ridge classification comparison, 
which showed two sibling sets had only a 60% match. 
Additionally, only one 100% match was found on the left big 
toe, but four 100% matches were found on the right big toe. 
The most common percentage was 80% for both the right and 
left big toes. Major class similarities were further evaluated 
by looking for similarities of whorls, arches, and loops on 
matching toes. Half of the sets were at or below 50% and the 
other half were perfectly matched at 100%. This percentage 
was determined by taking the number of found matches 
divided by the total possible classifications. When looking at 
total ridge classification similarities, the mode was 80%. The 
data showed the left toe was less of a match than the right toe 
of siblings. When looking at individual ridge classifications 
the data showed that both participants in the set had forks, 
seven sets had double forks, and no set had a triple fork. All 
ten sets had ending ridges and only two sets had both 
participants having short ridges. The matches were 
determined by each sibling within a set having the 
classification; most sets had at least one sibling who had 
some type of ridge. Whorls were the least found major 
classification and loops were the most popular major 
classification.   
Comparing the manual and computer analysis there is a 
slight to major difference. The cause of the difference is that 
manual analysis considered only certain classifications (three 
major and five ridge classifications) and the computer looked 
at all possible major and ridge classifications for fingerprints. 
The five ridge details in the manual analysis were forks, 
double forks, triple forks, short ridge, and ending ridge. The 
ridge details looked at in the computer analysis are fork, 
double fork, triple fork, delta, dot, bifurcation, double 
bifurcation, opposed bifurcation, lake, short ridge, and 
ending ridge. Upon evaluating the quality of the toeprint 
cards, it could be seen that the sibling sets that included 
participants under the age of twelve were not as clear, which 
made it harder to determine classification. The participants 
over the age of 45 also presented issues because they 
contained more toeprint damage, such as scars and calluses. 
Younger participant’s prints were darker and older 
participant’s prints were lighter. 
In conclusion, the toeprint findings show that the 
hypothesis that toeprints of siblings are similar overall even 
though they may have slight differences within some 
classifications with all sibling sets having at least an 80% 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Set 1Set 2Set 3Set 4Set 5Set 6Set 7Set 8Set 9Set 10
Percentage of Similarity
Sibling Sets
Similarity Of Related Siblings 
Toeprints
Ridge Classifications
Major Classifications
Right Big Toe
Left Big Toe
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

match in the ridge classifications. This supports the prior 
research findings for fingerprints done by Langenburg [16], 
which stated  that while everyone has a unique print, siblings 
do have similarities based on genetics and differences from 
fetus development. Future research in the area of toeprints 
include creating a toeprint database and looking at toeprints 
as an indicator of medical conditions.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I would like to thank Mrs. Barbara Agregaard for her 
support during the fingerprint portion of the research project 
and Dr. Melissa Stange for her support during the toeprint 
portion of the research. To my participants, thank you for 
being willing to participate and hope you enjoyed learning 
more about your family biometrics.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Bailey, “The Hidden Data in Your Fingerprints,” Scientific 
American, 
2018. 
Retrieved 
November 
2020 
from 
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/the-hidden-data-
in-your-fingerprints/. 
[2] A. Beall, “Forget fingerprints, FOOTPRINTS can help identify 
bodies: Experts reveal everyone has unique ridges and grooves 
on their feet,” MailOnline, 2016. Retrieved November 2020 
from 
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-
3496636/Forget- fingerprints-FOOTPRINTS- help- identify-
bodies- Scans-reveal- unique-ridges- grooves-feet.html. 
[3] A. Bhangu, “Are the prints on our toes identical to our 
fingerprints,” 
2012. 
Retrieved 
November 
2020 
from 
https://www.howitworksdaily.com/are-the-prints-on-our-toes-
identical-to-our-fingerprints/. 
[4] J. G. Burrow, “Ghosting of Images in Barefoot Exemplar Prints 
Collection: Issues for Analyses,” Journal of Forensic 
Identification, vol. 65, no. 5, pp. 884-900, 2015. 
[5] Center for Technology in Teaching and Learning Rice 
University, "CSI: Web Adventures," Forensics, 2014. 
Retreived November 2020 from http://forensics.rice.edu. 
[6] T. Dawson Cruz, M. E. Hytinen, A. M. McClain, A. M. Miller, 
and A.D. Solomon, “An Optimized DNA Analysis Workflow 
for the Sampling, Extraction, and Concentration of DNA 
obtained from Archived Latent Fingerprints,” Journal of 
Forensic Sciences, vol. 63, pp. 47-57, 2018, doi: 10.1111/1556-
4029.13504. 
[7] Department of Justice and Federal Bureau of Investigation, 
“Fingerprint Identification,” 2010. Retrieved November 2020 
from 
http://www.slideshare.net/guest8cbcb02/fingerprint-
identification. 
[8] Education Bureau of Hong Kong, “Forensic Science,” 2010. 
Retrieved 
November 
2020 
from 
http://resources.edb.gov.hk/gifted/ForensicSci/Files/L2/4_Les
son2_worksheets.doc. 
[9] “The Fingerprint Society,” Fingerprint Society Website, 2013. 
Retrieved November 2020 from www.fingerprintsociety.com. 
[10] Fun Trivia, “Fun Trivia: F: Forensic Science,” 2013. Retrieved 
November 
2020 
from 
http://www.funtrivia.com/en/subtopics/Fingerprints-
170308.html. 
[11] R. E. Gaensslen, H. Howard, and H. Lee, “Introduction to 
Forensic Science and Criminalistics,” New York: McGraw-
Hill, 2017. 
[12] International Association for Identification, “International 
Association for Identification,” 2014. Retrieved November 
2020 from http://www.theiai.org/. 
[13] Interpol, “Forensics,” 2008. Retrieved November 2020 from 
http://www.interpol.int/INTERPOL-expertise/Forensics. 
[14] A. K. Jain, S. Prabhakar, and S. Pankanti, “On the similarity of 
identical twin fingerprints,” The Journal of  Pattern 
Recognition, 
vol. 
35, 
pp. 
2653-2663, 
2002, 
doi:10.1016/S0031-3203(01)00218-7. 
[15] A. Kriminol, “Detection of latent fingerprints by the use of 
silver nitrate,” PubMed, vol. 227, pp. 111-123, 2011. Retrieved 
November 
2020 
from 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21661253. 
[16] G. Langenburg, “Are one’s fingerprints similar to those of his 
or her parents in any discernable way?,” Scientific American, 
2005. 
Retrieved 
November 
2020 
from 
http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/are-ones-
fingerprints-sim/. 
[17] J. S. McCann, “A Family Fingerprint Project,” Identification 
News, pp. 7-10, 1975. Retrieved November 2020 from 
http://onin.com/fp/family_fingerprints.pdf. 
[18] T. N. Moorthy and S. F. B. Sulaiman, “Individualizing 
characteristics of footprints in Malaysian Malays for person 
identification from a forensic perspective,” Egyptian Journal of 
Forensic Sciences, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 13-22, 2015. 
[19] National Forensic Science Technology Center and Bureau of 
Justice Assistance, “A Simplified Guide To Fingerprint 
Analysis,” 
n.d. 
Retreived 
November 
2020 
from 
http://www.crime-scene-
investigator.net/SimplifiedGuideFingerprints.pdf. 
[20] B. Palmer, “And This Little Piggy Went to Jail,” Slate, 2010. 
Retrieved 
November 
2020 
from 
http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/explainer/20
10/07/and_this_little_piggy_went_to_jail.html. 
[21] C. Parker, “The Case of the Great Toe Print,” 2008. Retrieved 
November 
2020 
from 
http://clpex.com/phpBB/viewtopic.php?f=2&amp;t=878. 
[22] G. Shahan, “Heredity in Fingerprints,” Identification News, 
vol. XX, no. 4, pp. 9-25, 1970. Retrieved November 2020 from 
http://onin.com/fp/fp_heredity.pdf. 
[23] Unique Identification Authority of India, “Fingerprints,” 2014. 
Retrieved November 2020 from http://uidai.gov.in/. 
[24] D. L. von Minden, “The History of Fingerprints,” 2014. 
Retrieved 
November 
2020 
from 
http://onin.com/fp/fphistory.html. 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

