Designing and Implementing a Lightboard Learning Experience for Instructors 
Through the Learning Engineering Process 
 
Lauren Totino & Aaron Kessler 
Residential Education, MIT Open Learning 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge, MA, USA 
Email: ltotino@mit.edu 
 
 
Abstract—The 
Residential 
Education 
team 
at 
the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) followed the 
learning engineering process to design and implement a 
learning experience for instructors that prepares them to 
create videos for students using the Lightboard lecture capture 
system. The content of the online module was designed to 
emphasize evidence-based instructional practices, primarily 
through video examples of instructors experienced in using 
Lightboard demonstrating these best practices. A critical 
component of the learning engineering process is iteration, and 
the team navigated two major iterations to the implementation 
of the learning experience. This paper details each iteration 
highlighting 
the 
specific 
design 
decisions 
and 
design 
justifications, and forwards the practice of tracking such work 
throughout 
the 
implementation. 
Design 
decision 
and 
justification tracking is a practice that can help a team ensure 
an implementation remains learner-centered and backed by 
evidence from the learning sciences, while taking into account 
other factors in the implementation context such as constraints 
of the technology, timeline, and institutional resources. The 
paper concludes by underscoring the practical implications of 
tracking design decisions and justifications for a team 
following the learning engineering process to implement 
effective instructor learning experiences. 
Keywords—learning engineering; learning experience design; 
design process; instructor training; higher education 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the summer of 2020, the Residential Education team at 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology followed the 
learning engineering process [5] [7] to design and implement 
a learning experience in the form of an online module for 
instructors that aimed to support their efforts in creating 
Lightboard videos. Lightboard videos are a form of lecture 
capture where instructors write on a lighted glass pane facing 
a camera [1]. Making explicit the underlying assumption of 
how this work supports the community of practitioners, it is 
assumed that impacting student learning begins with 
instructor preparedness to effectively utilize the Lightboard 
technology based on pedagogical actions grounded in the 
learning sciences [6]. Given this, the goal for this specific 
learning experience was to make instructors aware of best 
practices backed by evidence from the learning sciences and 
exemplified in authentic demonstrations of these practices 
enacted by colleagues from across the institution. 
The design team engaged in several key learning 
engineering practices to achieve this goal, including cycles 
of creation, implementation, and investigation [4]. This paper 
will focus on the implementation part of this process, 
specifically key design decisions that were made as the 
implementation context changed over the course of a year 
and a half and resulted in two major iterations. The initial 
design challenge was to create a learning experience to 
address the need for instructors to be supported in 
Lightboard technology in the context of COVID-19 
emergency remote instruction, where the pedagogical 
affordances of Lightboard videos could help address 
teaching and learning challenges of the time. This 
implementation context then changed as the institution 
adopted a new learning management system, Canvas. This 
led to a key pivot in the approach, and the second design 
challenge of adapting the learning experience to Canvas so 
that it increased awareness of and lowered instructors’ 
barrier to entry to the learning experience. 
Ensuring that the reworked learning experience remained 
learner-centered and effective for instructors was the central 
focus of the second iteration of design. To help navigate 
these evolving implementation conditions, the practice of 
tracking design decisions and justifying them by citing 
institutional constraints and affordances (e.g., technology, 
resources, timeline) along with heuristics and principles 
extracted from the learning sciences were used. Furthermore, 
this approach enabled iteration of the online module by 
keeping in focus the principles that underlie creating an 
effective learning experience while also addressing changes 
to the implementation context. 
This paper describes the Lightboard technology and the 
existing research on Lightboard pedagogy that influenced the 
design of the learning experience (and remained constant 
across iterations) in Section 2. Framed by the learning 
engineering process, Sections 3 and 4 discuss the practice of 
design decision and justification tracking in the context of 
the implementation across both iterations of the work. 
Finally, potentials for the next iteration of the online module 
and a recap of the practical implications of tracking design 
decisions and justifications for a team following the learning 
engineering process to implement learning experiences are 
discussed in Section 5.   
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

II. 
BACKGROUND: LIGHTBOARD TECHNOLOGY AND 
PEDAGOGICAL UNDERPINNINGS OF LIGHTBOARD 
INSTRUCTION 
A. Lightboard Technology 
Creating Lightboard videos involves both hardware and 
software. The Lightboard itself is a large panel of glass with 
LED lights around the edges, which causes the markers to 
fluoresce on the board. A camera captures the instructor and 
their writing through the glass. The result is luminous writing 
floating in front of the instructor, who faces the camera while 
writing/drawing and interacting with the material on the 
board. Through video capture software, the video is mirror-
imaged to correct left-right reversal of the visuals. At the 
institution, the Lightboard, video and audio capture system, 
and video workstation are housed in a studio on campus. The 
goal of the learning experience is to prepare instructors to 
walk into the studio for the first time and produce a 
Lightboard video that utilizes established pedagogical 
approaches that maximize the effectiveness of content 
delivery.  
B. Lightboard Pedagogy  
While instructional approaches associated with the use of 
Lightboard 
videos 
are 
not 
particularly 
new, 
the 
understanding of best practices associated with creating 
videos continues to evolve [2] [6] [11]. Despite this evolving 
understanding, many Lightboard users are mostly unaware of 
the theoretical and practical underpinnings of effective 
instruction with a Lightboard. To address this, the learning 
experience (where instructors are the learners) and the 
content within the experience (to teach instructors how 
students learn effectively through Lightboard videos) pull 
from research that has been done on the impact of 
Lightboard videos on learning, using the frameworks of 
Cognitive Load Theory, Cognitive Theory of Multimedia 
(CTML), and Social Learning Theory [8].  
Much of the research about the effectiveness of 
Lightboard is associated with the fact that Lightboard 
leverages the natural mode of lecturing at a board (a primary 
instructional approach) with the key difference—and 
affordance—being that the instructor is facing the audience 
while presenting the written and visual content. In this way, 
Lightboard facilitates teaching as a “dialogue with students,” 
where students get an unobstructed view of the instructor and 
can detect contextual and non-verbal communication cues 
that are missed when the instructor’s back is to the audience. 
This engagement, via greater visual connection with the 
instructor (i.e., as posed by Social Agency Theory) [10] 
combined with the affordances of learning through video 
(i.e., as posed by CTML) [9], informs a set of Lightboard 
best practices and behaviors. Focusing on these practices is a 
crucial way to support and encourage instructors to enact 
effective strategies on camera. 
The technical and pedagogical considerations for creating 
Lightboard videos described above heavily influenced the 
design decisions in the first iteration of the learning 
experience and comprise the content that was kept at the 
forefront during the second iteration as the implementation 
context changed. Understanding these key technical and 
pedagogical underpinnings allowed the team to be well-
started to track design decisions and justifications throughout 
the learning engineering process for this learning experience 
implementation.  
 
III. 
FIRST ITERATION: MITX PLATFORM, SUMMER 2020 
A. Implementation Context 
The three subsections below describe key contextual 
factors about the learners (instructors), the timing of creating 
the learning experience, and resources available for 
designing and building the online module, all of which 
influenced baseline design decisions for the work.  
1) Learners: The target learner population consisted of 
MIT faculty, instructors, teaching assistants, and other 
course 
team 
members 
(collectively 
referenced 
as 
“instructors” moving forward in the paper) who are 
interested in using Lightboard technology as a way to teach 
sections of content for their courses. Some instructors may 
have an understanding of instructional best practices 
associated with Lightboard, but most users are unaware of 
the theoretical and practical approaches that underlie these 
practices. While the majority of existing instructors who 
have utilized the Lightboard since it became available in 
2016 were primarily from STEM disciplines (physics, 
mechanical engineering, chemistry, etc.), the learning 
experience was designed to be inclusive of any instructor 
from any department who may want to use the Lightboard.  
2) Timing: Given a Lightboard video’s multimedia 
format and emphasis on the social presence of the instructor 
in the video, there was increased interest among instructors 
in using Lightboard during the period of emergency online 
instruction caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Supporting 
instructors with this via an online module was a primary 
reason the learning experience was created. Although the 
immediacy of this need drove some decisions, the reality 
was that the module needed to exist beyond the emergency 
situation and the content had to remain broadly applicable 
and 
amenable 
to 
future 
use 
beyond 
its 
initial 
implementation. Other initial design decisions were 
influenced by this context, including ones aimed at 
addressing the teaching and learning challenges presented 
by the period of emergency remote instruction. For 
example, it was conveyed through the content that 
Lightboard videos do not have to be perfectly “polished” 
and that producing videos where instructors present 
authentically and naturally as though giving a live lecture 
would more closely resemble the in-person teaching that 
students value but that was lost during remote instruction. 
3) Resources: The learning experience was built on the 
residential instantiation of MITx, a Massive Open Online 
Course (MOOC) platform based on Open edX. The various 
technical affordances and constraints of this platform 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

influenced the implementation context and shaped many of 
the design decisions (discussed more in Section 3 B below). 
For example, the way content could be contained and 
structured on a given page of the platform influenced how 
video clips were woven with text. Another major resource 
was access to the insights and experiences of a Lightboard 
“power user,” a lecturer in physics who has used the 
technology frequently since 2016. Following a human-
centered approach within the learning engineering process 
[4], the interview with this key stakeholder elicited 
insightful dos and don’ts of creating videos, how to use the 
studio equipment, and other tips that were valuable in 
shaping the language of the content. Additionally, the 
design team was not able to access the Lightboard studio in 
person at this time due to pandemic-related restrictions on 
campus, which limited the ability to include robust images 
and videos of the studio to accompany content pertaining to 
the workflow of creating a video in the studio. 
B. Design Decisions and Justifications 
During the design process, the team maintained a design 
decision tracker in Excel with references to design principles 
and heuristics backed by the learning sciences to help guide 
the creation of content, media to deliver the content, 
sequencing, and interactivity in the course. This tracking 
system was also used to note contextual and technological 
constraints to the project, which justified certain specific 
decisions that were made. Examples of design decisions that 
were tracked are included in Table 1.  
TABLE 1. EXCERPT FROM DESIGN DECISION TRACKER 
Design Decision 
Justification 
To illustrate Lightboard best 
practices, leverage existing 
videos featuring faculty in favor 
of recreating videos, because it 
is more authentic, engaging, and 
fosters motivation if the faculty 
“see themselves” in a variety of 
video examples. 
Based on principle of learning: 
Learners are more likely to be 
motivated if they feel capable, 
know when and who in the world 
carries out such tasks, and have 
resources that someone in the real 
world engaging in that task would 
have [3].  
The organization/flow of the 
learning experience content will 
be linear: intro → technical 
specs & process → best 
practices & pedagogies → use 
cases → additional resources 
Based on technical constraint: It’s 
challenging to weave content, as 
MITx is naturally set up to have a 
linear approach to content delivery. 
Weaving can mean making 
links/jumps to other sections, 
which should be avoided for a 
course like this as long term 
maintenance of such links will 
become impossible. 
 
Some design decisions were based on research from the 
learning sciences, such as the first item in Table 1. The team 
wanted to include video clips of someone exemplifying the 
recommended Lightboard instructional best practices (as 
informed by the theoretical frameworks discussed in Section 
2 B above) through their on-camera behavior. Ultimately it 
was decided to use clips from existing Lightboard videos 
created by instructors who had been early adopters of 
Lightboard. Informed by design principles related to learner 
engagement and motivation [3], it was decided that 
instructors seeing their peers demonstrate Lightboard best 
practices would make for a more impactful learning 
experience than alternative approaches, like having members 
of the design team create these videos.  
Other design decisions were based on constraints in the 
implementation context. As an example, the second item in 
Table 1 points to limitations with what could be done with 
the MITx platform. The platform lends itself to learners 
working through materials linearly. While this addressed the 
goal of creating a learning experience that instructors could 
work through, there was the additional goal of instructors 
being able to go back to the content at any point to reference 
or refresh on certain tips that would help them while they 
were creating videos in the studio. It was decided to keep the 
content in a linear fashion which led to the subsequent 
decision to create a one-page Quick Start Guide. This was 
meant as an additional just-in-time resource that was 
associated with the online module but gave instructors the 
ability to save or print it out with important reminders from 
the learning experience. 
C. Design Results in the Implementation 
The first iteration of the learning experience, in MITx, 
was made available to instructors in August 2020. It is 
important to note that access to the Lightboard studio at that 
time was extremely limited due to the pandemic. This 
resulted in very few new users being able to engage in the 
Lightboard onboarding process involving this learning 
experience in the first month or so of implementation. 
However, the learning experience was released to a 
preliminary group of testers from the team, which produced 
qualitative feedback that was used to inform updates to the 
design decisions that had been tracked. Given that 
implementation is not limited to a full release or full-scale 
implementation of a product or solution [4], this “mini” 
implementation still produced data that led to another round 
of improvements to the design [7]. 
The team monitored Lightboard studio usage and 
planned to continue iterating on the learning experience 
based on any feedback from the first batch of instructor 
users. These plans were given a new direction when it was 
decided the module would move platforms from MITx to 
Canvas, the learning management system adopted around 
this time. A key influence in this decision was the absence of 
data (null results) from the initial MITx implementation 
around instructor usage. The lack of users, and as a result 
usable data, indicated a need to pivot to a platform that 
would lead to increased engagement and a more reliable data 
stream about that engagement.  
 
IV. 
SECOND ITERATION: CANVAS PLATFORM, FALL 2021 
A. Implementation Context 
In the fall of 2021, the Lightboard learning experience 
was transitioned from the MITx platform to the Canvas. This 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

constituted a major change in the implementation context, 
which resulted in updates to previous choices as well as new 
design decisions. The three subsections below describe 
changes to the key contextual factors discussed in Section 3 
A above (learners, timing, resources), and how design 
decisions were iteratively updated based on these influences. 
1) Learners: The online module on Canvas was equally 
available to instructors as it had been on MITx, open to any 
instructor who self-selected to take it. The major change for 
the learning experience would be how instructors accessed 
the online module. Adapting it to a new learning 
management system increased awareness of and lowered the 
barrier to the learning experience because instructors were 
already using Canvas for their course sites and therefore did 
not have to sign up for a different platform (i.e., MITx). 
Additionally, since the online module became located 
within a “Canvas Resources for Instructors” public Canvas 
site rather than its own standalone course, instructors could 
also encounter it as an option while browsing other Canvas 
resources. 
2) Timing: While both major iterations of the learning 
experience were due to changes in instructional conditions, 
the second iteration was specifically due to the rollout of 
Canvas rather than changes resulting from a global 
pandemic. This meant new opportunities to update and 
improve the online module’s content. In addition to 
revisiting the design decisions that had been tracked in the 
first iteration—to ensure key decisions were maintained 
during platform transition—there was also the opportunity 
to revisit and address feedback from testing of the first 
iteration that had been deferred. For example, content 
pertaining to the technical workflow of creating a video in 
the Lightboard studio was improved with photos and video 
from the real studio as well as more robust explanation of 
steps. This was possible because the team was able to access 
the studio on campus this time around and walk through the 
process, making for more authentic and accurate content 
compared to the first iteration of the learning experience. 
Relocating all content onto another platform also allowed 
for the opportunity to make other edits to improve the 
learning experience, like being able to easily link to and 
cross-reference 
related 
resources 
that 
were 
already 
maintained elsewhere on the Canvas resources site. 
3) Resources: As stated above, the Lightboard learning 
experience transitioned from being a standalone course on 
MITx to becoming a module on an existing “Canvas 
Resources for Instructors” Canvas site. Working to fit the 
learning experience within the existing site while still 
functioning as a “course” resulted in revisiting design 
decisions pertaining to how the content would be outlined 
and organized. The goal of the learning experience itself 
remained aimed at preparing instructors to create Lightboard 
videos in effective and pedagogically-sound ways, but now 
the connection between Lightboard videos and Canvas as 
the instructors’ learning management system had to be made 
more explicit (i.e., Lightboard is one option in a suite of 
tools, anchored by Canvas, available to help instructors 
improve and innovate their teaching using available 
technology). 
B. Design Decisions and Justifications 
A key practice in transitioning the Lightboard learning 
experience to a new implementation context was revisiting 
and updating the design decision and justification tracker 
started for the first iteration of the module. The details 
recorded in this tracking system facilitated further decision 
making about where to improve the design and what aspects 
integral to the goal of the learning experience to maintain 
during the platform transition. Part of this systematic 
approach to tracking design decisions included certain 
decisions being flagged as priorities to revisit, giving the 
team strategic entry points to the next round of iteration 
without rehashing every decision on the tracker. Overall, 8 of 
the 19 core decisions (just under half) tracked during the 
design of the first iteration were revisited and improved for 
the second iteration.  
One such prioritized redesign decision was including 
video 
clips 
of 
instructors 
demonstrating 
effective 
instructional behaviors behind the Lightboard—a key part of 
the learning experience with a solid justification cited for 
why this was an approach to delivering content (see Table 1 
above). As such, this was not a decision that was going to 
change during the transition to Canvas. However, the 
transition afforded the opportunity to revisit which video 
clips had been chosen and to switch out some of those 
original clips with videos that even more effectively 
demonstrated the content or represented more of a variety in 
disciplines and instructors using Lightboard. For example, a 
video was added of an instructor who had not previously 
been featured using the Lightboard during a live Zoom 
session, which also represented a use case not previously 
highlighted in the module.  
The sequential organization of the content also comprised 
a key part of the learning experience, but the initial 
justification for this decision (see Table 1 above) was 
revisited because MITx was no longer the platform imposing 
technical limitations on the design. The Modules feature of 
Canvas lends more flexibility to structure the content as both 
a linear course for learners to work through as well as a 
resource where instructors can go for materials on a more ad-
hoc basis. This resulted in a revision to the original design 
decision, including adding more outline/table of contents 
pages and jump links to facilitate instructors navigating to 
specific content they may need at any given moment.  
C. Design Results in the Implementation 
As previously noted, the transition of the Lightboard 
learning experience from MITx to Canvas entailed the 
content now being nested within an existing site for 
instructors that provides resources about Canvas and other 
tools for teaching and learning. It would now serve the dual 
purpose of informing instructors how to make effective 
Lightboard videos and demonstrating and modeling Canvas 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

features and functionality by way of delivering that 
Lightboard content. The latter of these addressed the need for 
instructors to experience the more advanced capabilities of 
Canvas. For example, all video clips were embedded in 
Canvas pages via Panopto, the main video platform 
integrated with Canvas that instructors were encouraged to 
use. Similarly, the few reflection questions throughout the 
module, originally built using MITx’s specific question type 
functionality, were now built using functionality specific to 
Canvas (i.e., ungraded surveys).  
While data about how instructors have engaged with the 
learning experience on Canvas is still pending, this latest 
implementation sufficiently accounts for the new platform’s 
affordances and constraints while continuing to honor the 
well-justified design decisions made during the first iteration 
of the learning experience.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Working through iterations in the design of a learning 
experience is a hallmark of the learning engineering process. 
For the Residential Education team at MIT, two major 
iterations of a Lightboard learning experience for instructors 
occurred when the implementation context changed from one 
platform to another. Further iterations to the learning 
experience as it currently exists on Canvas are anticipated, 
particularly when Canvas releases new or updated features, 
so technological affordances and constraints will continue to 
shape future iterations. Additionally, with Canvas’s data 
stream, the collection and analysis of data about instructor 
engagement will drive future iterations. This data exploration 
will likely serve as the next entry point into strategically 
revisiting prior design decisions and tracking new design 
decisions for the third iteration.  
For practitioners and teams doing similar design work, it 
is critical to consider how design decision and justification 
tracking is a learning engineering practice that can ensure an 
implementation remains learner-centered and backed by 
evidence from the learning sciences while still addressing 
contextual factors. Such a practice directly affects the 
implementation being worked on and affords the flexibility 
to navigate changes to that implementation or context should 
they arise (through tracking). It also allows the design team 
to examine what worked and what hasn’t worked (through 
revisiting), referring back to why a design element was 
implemented in the first place (through justifications), and 
iterating while keeping learners’ needs at the forefront 
(through strategically flagging entry points into the next 
iteration). While these specific approaches to the practice of 
design decision tracking may vary depending on a team’s 
context and goals, the Lightboard learning experience case 
demonstrates how design decision and justification tracking 
across implementations ultimately helps support instructors 
in learning to use technology.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank James R. Cain for providing technical support 
with the Lightboard and access to the studio at MIT. We also 
thank the Residential Education team at MIT Open Learning 
for supporting this work. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. A. Birdwell and M. Peshkin, “Capturing Technical Lectures 
on Lightboard,” The American Society for Engineering 
Education Annual Conference & Exposition (ASEE), Seattle, 
WA, Jun. 2015, pp. 26.325.1-26.325.9,  ISSN: 2153-5965, 
ISBN: 978-0-692-50180-1 
[2] F. M. Fung, “Adopting lightboard for a chemistry flipped 
classroom to improve technology enhanced videos for better 
learner engagement,” J.Chem.Educ, vol. 94(7), pp. 956-959, 
Jun. 2017. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.7b00004 
[3] J. Goodell and A. Kessler. The Science of Remote Learning, 
2020. Open Resource Published under CC. Retrieved Apr. 
2022 
from 
https://openlearning.mit.edu/mit-
faculty/residential-digital-innovations/science-remotelearning 
[4] J. Goodell and J. Kolodner (Ed.). Learning Engineering 
Toolkit: Evidence-Based Practices from the Learning 
Sciences, Instructional Design, and Beyond. New York: 
Routledge. (Forthcoming). 
[5] A. Kessler and Design SIG colleagues. Learning Engineering 
Process Strong Person, 2020. Retrieved Apr. 2022 from 
https://sagroups.ieee.org/icicle/learning-engineering-process/ 
[6] A. Kessler and J. R. Cain, “Understanding the Development 
of Instructors’ Lightboard Capacity Over Time,” paper 
presented as a Poster at the Annual Meeting of the American 
Education Research Association (AERA), San Francisco, CA, 
Apr. 2020. 
[7] A. Kessler and L. Totino. Operationalizing the Learning 
Engineering Process to Create an Online Training: An 
Example from MIT Open Learning, 2020. Open Resource 
Published 
under 
CC. 
Retrieved 
Apr. 
2022 
from 
https://openlearning.mit.edu/mit-faculty/residential-
digitalinnovations/operationalizing-learning-engineering-
process-online 
[8] M. Lubrick, G. Zhou, and J. Zhang, “Is the Future Bright? 
The Potential of Lightboard Videos for Student Achievement 
and Engagement in Learning,” EURASIA Journal of 
Mathematics, Science and Technology Education, vol. 15(8), 
em1735, Apr. 2019. https://doi.org/10.29333/ejmste/108437  
[9] R. Mayer. Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning. In R. 
Mayer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia 
Learning (Cambridge Handbooks in Psychology, pp. 31-48). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (2005). 
[10] R. Mayer. Principles Based on Social Cues in Multimedia 
Learning: Personalization, Voice, Image, and Embodiment 
Principles. In R. Mayer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of 
Multimedia Learning (Cambridge Handbooks in Psychology, 
pp. 345-368). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 
(2014).  
[11] A. T. Stull, L. Fiorella, M. J. Gainer, and R. E. Mayer, “Using 
transparent whiteboards to boost learning from online STEM 
lectures,” Computers & Education, vol. 120, pp. 146-159, 
May 2018. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2018.02.005
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

