Training Oriented Mobile Device to Learn Software Architecture 
 
Mostadi Sanae 
Ecole Supérieure d’Informatique Appliquée à la Gestion 
ESIAG, UPEC University 
Créteil, France 
mostadis@miage.u-pec.fr 
Mourlin Fabrice 
Algorithmic, Complexity and Logic Laboratory  
LACL, UPEC University 
Créteil, France 
fabrice.mourlin@u-pec.fr
 
Abstract—Teaching new technologies has two facets. A first 
facet is the pleasure to discover new concepts with beginners. 
The second facet is the difficulty to create the right training for 
students who will apply this knowledge through an internship 
by the end of the training. Since January 2013, our challenge 
has been to prepare a new training about nomadic device and 
Android programming. Our training is structured as a 
master's degree in our UPEC University (Paris). This 
document presents both aspects of this master degree: the 
construction of the training and the perception of teaching 
activities by the students. We observe that the use of a tablet or 
a smart phone during the lessons is not enough. Pragmatic 
approach is limited even if it is a help for the participation of 
students, and a motivation for teachers and students in a 
computer science context where it is crucial to explore new 
domains. Learning with device provides a more practical 
teaching. But its use has to be completed by knowledge 
validation with it. Because devices take place into teaching 
approach, the whole process of teaching has to evolve into a 
more interactive exchange between teachers and students. 
Keywords-mobile 
device; 
distributed 
system; 
software 
architecture; teaching mobility. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Software systems become more and more complex and 
now new devices have to be taken into account. Smart 
phones and tablets bring a new software facet: the mobility. 
A more accurate word would be nomadism [1], because, it 
allows users to exploit software applications during a 
movement between two locations. Mobile devices [2] can 
further be defined as having the ability to receive and/or 
transmit voice, text, data, messages and/or Internet usage 
without a cable connection. Also new application domains 
can be sketched. For instance, the use of mobile devices 
allows photograph and record public information and  
transfer data easily with a timestamp. 
These new features involve new difficulties, and the need 
of training appears more and more essential. Previous 
example introduces the need to store data locally to a device, 
they need to exchange data over the network. Also, it appears 
today that a tablet or a smart phone does not support the 
same kind of software [3][4]. A database server cannot be 
installed on such device, neither a mail server. Also, 
applications on mobile devices are often client application of 
remote services which are implemented on more traditional 
servers. The important concept is the available binding for 
the exchange. 
This highlights that mobile devices provide a plethora of 
possibilities for sensitive information to be accidentally 
leaked into the public. It includes local data, pictures, text 
messages, phone numbers, permissions, and more. Again, 
the need of security management seems to be crucial. 
Mobile technology is now being used in classrooms. 
Also, it seems natural to offer basic to advanced instructional 
mobile technology training for students. It appears clearly 
that mobile technology encourages creativity and hands-on 
learning with features not found in any other educational 
tool, on a device that students really want to use. From this, 
we have created a series of lessons around mobile 
technologies. The first year allows us to have the first results 
presented in this document. 
We present our work as follows. A first section is about 
the training creation process and how we have built a 
training oriented device (TOD). The next section is on the 
role of the mobile device during the courses: its impact on 
the teaching and also on the work of the students. Next, we 
detail our results during the academic year and the process of 
internship selection. Finally, we propose a new objective for 
the next academic year and the consequence on our teaching 
approach. 
II. 
TRAINING CREATION PROCESS 
Mobile devices are becoming increasingly valuable 
within the computer science teacher community for both 
training and concrete applications [5]. So, our teaching team 
was ready to use tablets for presentation. Each teacher had 
bought his own portable tool and appreciated his own choice 
because of its instant feedback, its large selection of 
applications or the wire free teaching. Our approach to 
creating computer training required to choose a material to 
support all the teachings. Next, we present our criteria and 
how they were validated. 
A. Material selection 
Creating training with mobile device does not always 
mean eLearning. In our context, this creation for display on 
mobile devices involves handling different mobile platforms, 
designing appropriate content and adapting existing content 
for different classes of devices. Also, a kind of tablet should 
be selected before the start of the academic year (September 
in France). A family of criteria was enumerated by the 
teachers. There was reliability, an enjoyable interface, the 
energy efficiency, a camera, remote monitoring, and so on. 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

We classified these criteria into three classes: the criteria 
required by the teachings, the criteria required for students, 
the criteria required by the Institute [6].  
1) The criteria required by the teachings: tablets are 
highly portable, touch screen, Internet enabled, handheld 
computers. These basic features are common to a set of 
material, but additional features are required for our 
teachings. First, the wireless network course requires that 
the equipment has the capacity for Bluetooth, WIFI, but also 
connections between other USB type (version 2). 
Next, Android programming course requires to install a 
version greater than 4.2 because the graphical user interface 
toolkit is richer and bugs were fixed. In particular, drawing 
is optimized for layers, clipping and certain shapes. 
Next, the system course presents the management of sensor, 
camera and Near Field Communication (NFC) hardware 
interface. 
2) Tablets vary in the way they organize the screen 
layout. The 4:3 aspects are more suited to being used in 
portrait mode and this is why the home buttons are 
positioned for that orientation of use. The 10’ category is a 
good size device. Teachers should also consider using larger 
devices where possible, especially if they are using 
classroom management software and have a lot of 
information on their screens at any one time. 
3) The criteria required for students: during the 
academic year, the students have to prepare presentations 
where the mobile device is important. To make it easy to 
show content on an external display, the device has to 
provide a special ability to render the content of a screen 
according to the characteristics of the targeted display. 
Moreover, the students need to exchange data between 
tablets or between a tablet and other Bluetooth devices. 
Also, the Bluetooth stack implementation version is as 
important as the Java Application Programming Interface 
(API). Each student has to develop Java applications and it 
could be suitable to have a rapid access to all need sensors 
through a Java API. 
4) The 
criteria 
required 
by 
the 
Institute: The 
management of devices is not trivial in an academic 
institute. Especially, when problems occur, such as a 
breakdown, a process of repairing has to be subscribed 
before. Also, it is interesting to have only one kind of tablet 
for all the students of the master degree. Moreover, the 
tablet was given to a student for the duration of the school 
year and students are asked to pledge in writing. So, 
everyone 
should 
be 
responsible 
for 
his 
actions. 
The budget was also one of our primary concerns and the 
Android option was preferred because the prices are also 
affordable, even if the number of tablets was more than 
twenty. Google education packages are another feature 
which supports the choice of such kind of tablet where 
teaching applications are available. 
B. Training plan construction 
At the beginning, our training goal was to provide 
training to master students on the mobile device. The trainees 
will learn skills on the programming and management 
aspects of mobile devices and how to set and run the 
applications.  
1) The objectives of the training: we wanted to train our 
students on a new skill (mobile programming) and to refresh 
them on things which they already knew such as distributed 
architecture. After the master degree, our students will have 
to easily find mobile application development jobs Jobs for 
mobile application developers are at an all-time high and 
continue to show no sign of slowing down. This means that 
we defined courses adapted to the market. We will be going 
to assess if the training has met its objectives, whether the 
internships are success and students have future first jobs. 
2) People who are going to train: The trainees are new 
students, which means they will be learning a whole new 
skill set. They come from other universities and some of 
them come from other countries where training organization 
respects other rules. Because students have to work 
together, they also have to learn how to work in project 
mode. This means developing responsible and autonomous 
learners. The teachers are frustrated by their unmotivated 
students. But what they may not know is how important the 
connection is between student motivation and self-
determination. Mobile programming is considered in a 
positive manner by new students. Their mobile smart phone 
or tablet is the mirror of what they are. Also, they consider 
as an identification, the knowledge of the mobile device. 
This is their connection point of social networks, also the 
motivation is deep. 
3) Material suitable for the trainings:the iteration of our 
criteria helps us to select Android devices from several 
constructors. We did three kinds of tests: 
a) Robustness: this is the degree to which a device 
operates correctly in the presence of exceptional inputs or 
stressful environmental conditions [7]. We have run a set of 
applications which need to use the WIFI connection or 
Bluetooth protocols. We have used external device: Secure 
Digital (SD) Card and USB connections, the impact of multi 
connections on the efficiency. Finally, we have validated the 
multi touch screen and its behavior depending on the size, 
the precision [8]. 
b) Technical capacity : Benchmarking applications are 
useful for measuring the performance of mobile devices and 
comparing the scores with similar devices. We have defined 
three benchmarking applications for Android devices that 
we used to see how the device measures up [9][10]. They 
test the performance of processors, graphics systems, Web 
browsing, and more. 
 
Quadrant Standard Edition (QSE) tests CPU, I/O, 
and 3D graphics. After running through the tests, we 
have been required to submit the score to the 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

company's servers in order to see the results. The bar  
chart shows our overall score and compares it with 
other devices. 
 
Linpack is a benchmark that's been used to measure 
the CPU performance of some of the world's fastest 
computers. We have used the same benchmark to 
test all Android tablets. The final score is given in 
Million Floating Point Operations Per Second 
(MFLOPS) and is a quick and simple test of the 
device's performance. 
 
Vellamo measures the Web browsing performance 
of Android devices in 4 categories--rendering, 
javascript, user experience, and networking. It also 
checks the ability to request and to respond to 
servers. 
All the applications mentioned above are free from the 
Android Market. 
c) Simplicity: 
Tablets 
now 
provide 
continuing 
advances in our search for simplicity of use. They have to 
allow developers to create simple ways to do things. We 
have checked the automatic plug and play through USB 
connection. But the control is also on the recognition into 
applications. For instance, developers use Eclipse integrated 
development environment (IDE) for programming and 
debugging. For tablets it is necessary to restart the platform 
server, for  others it was automatic. 
4) The kind of training: There are many factors when 
choosing a course of study or training. We have the 
traditional training style where the focus is on the teacher 
and the training session is very much content-driven. In this 
style, we say that the learning  depends on a teacher. The 
use of mobile device involves the introduction a new 
facilitator style of learning that is focused on the learner. 
This style is process-driven and the learning takes place 
independently, without the teacher. A key to motivating 
students is helping them to see that, indeed they can take 
responsibility for their own learning. So, a part of each 
lesson is letting students work together with other students 
to meet learning goals. Also, we have defined three learning 
mode: 
 
Traditional learning mode: this corresponds to the 
first part of each lesson. 
 
Facilitative learning mode: the second part of the 
lesson where students have a responsibility to apply 
what they have previously learned. This mode also 
applies during project option where students work in 
group. 
 
Programmatic learning mode: the last part of the 
academic year is a six month internship. The 
students are in a more concrete context where their 
skill can be validated by results. 
5) The schedule over the year: The academic year is 
divided in half. The first half has mainly courses and the 
start of the project option. The second half contains an 
important place in the project option and ends with the 
internship. We have scheduled the first part of the year as 
follows: 
 
Project management course 
 
Methodology and functional specifications writing 
 
Architecture and drafting of technical specifications.  
 
Web architecture for nomadism, 
 
Performance evaluation, 
 
Change management, 
 
Computer science law, 
 
Databases for mobile device, 
 
System and network programming for mobile, 
 
Programming for mobile phone and tablet, 
 
Mobile networks and wireless networks, 
 
First part of project option, 
The second part of the academic year is divided as follows: 
 
Software engineering, 
 
Business simulation, 
 
Design patterns for web applications, 
 
Mobile architecture for cloud, 
 
Security policy, 
 
Performance and quality of service, 
 
Last part of project option  
 
Internship thesis, 
The scheduling of the course is to adapt best to the project 
option. Traditional teachings stop in April. Then, the 
internship begins; in parallel, the project option continues. 
At the end of June, students have to validate their project 
option. The defense of internship leads to a probation report 
and an oral presentation in early September. 
6) Transforming the plan into actions: 
When the training plan was built, the next actions were 
the construction of the list of concerns per lesson. This is 
done by the person responsible for training. The aim is to 
validate that: 
 
There is no overlap between training. 
 
The number of lessons is enough for the list of 
concerns. 
The next actions were the construction of the activities 
per lesson. Because concern is presented to the student 
during the first part of the lesson, then they have to practice. 
So, pragmatic activity has to be prepared with the material 
(mobile device). This allows the teacher to measure useful 
time to realize this activity and the material constraints 
which are required. 
C. Validation plan 
In the evaluation phase, we will determine if the students 
obtained the knowledge, skills, or attitudes we identified as 
the goal during the analysis phase. Using the information we 
will obtain during the evaluation phase, we will make 
additional changes to the design, development, and delivery 
of the training program the next academic year we offer it to 
students. The assessment validation provides assessors with 
an opportunity to:  
 
Evaluate the technical quality of the training and 
assessment tools being used, 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
Develop some benchmark performances,  
 
Discuss issues of concern about the training delivery 
and assessment process, 
 
Suggest 
improvements 
for 
training 
delivery 
processes and assessment tool design. 
The validation plan is the process of determining that our 
requirements are the correct requirements and that they form 
a complete set of initial requirements. This will have 
consequences on the next student selection. 
III. 
DEVICE IMPACT INTO TRAININGS 
The technology constantly changes; if we incorporate 
technology in our master degree, it is imperative for us and 
our students to be current. 
A. Tablet role into lesson 
A student is unlikely to master new technology on his 
own accord. For this reason, we have incorporated mobile 
technology training in the classroom. Also, we have included 
mobile software applications to help facilitate or organize the 
work's tasks. First, tablet is the support for the course called 
“Programming for mobile phone and tablet”. This means that 
developments are realized on the laptop and experimentation 
is done on the tablets. This course provides an overview of 
the most common programming environments for mobile 
phones and students learn how to program on mobile 
devices. The teacher can validate that experimentations are 
really done. By small examples and hand-on sessions, 
students are able to create their own applications. Besides the 
general overview, focus is on networking issues with mobile 
devices. Besides simple client/server examples, also peer to 
peer networks are discussed by the teacher. 
The course called “Web architecture for nomadism” is 
built to explain how mobile devices running Android can be 
incorporated in Web architectures. The web is evolving very 
fast to provide the same functionality to web-apps that 
standard desktop applications have. Students have to develop 
Web activities using standard web technologies as much as 
possible on their own mobile device. For example, a case of 
study is to take a picture from the device camera, and that is 
possible with web standards. Then, the mobile application 
uploads the image onto a web server by the use of 
Representational State Transfer (REST) service. 
Other experimentations are done in the course called 
“Databases for mobile device”. Mobile databases, like sqlite 
are popular because mobile devices have become need based 
and common. One key aspect of these database systems is 
their ability to deal with disconnection. We experiment 
Extensible Markup Language (XML) graph database on the 
tablet. Through a lesson, the teacher explains when the 
device is not protected properly all the data stored in the 
device are exposed to outsiders. So, security for the database 
that resides on the mobile device is crucial for organizations. 
Also security concerns are introduced by the end of the 
course. 
During the course entitled “Mobile networks and wireless 
networks”, protocol exchanges are studied. Also, students 
have to understand how a mobile device communicates with 
other devices even if it is moving from one location to 
another one. The teacher explains network physical layer 
communications; those advanced electromagnetic lessons 
give the scientific foundation for wireless communications. 
Then, physical exchanges of data are filtered by the use of 
packet analyzer. Practical experiments show that negotiation 
algorithm can be set between two devices or more in a local 
area. 
B. Tablet role into project option 
The project option is a teaching which consists of 
lectures, meetings and labs: each module provides 36 hours 
of lectures and meetings, supported by labs and directed 
further study. There are eight taught modules. Their names 
belong to the list of courses given in the previous section), 
four per semester. From the end of the exam period, students 
will be fully engaged in their summer project, which is 
equivalent to another four modules. 
1) Presentation of the project option: 
For the projects, students have the opportunity to engage 
with: Software Architecture, Complex Networks, Workflow, 
Business Process and the Internet of Things. They have 
access to licensed software tools, e.g., Fuse Enterprise 
Service Bus (ESB), Tao ORB, and access to commercial 
network operating systems. 
The project is based on the realization of a distributed 
project where clients run on mobile devices. This year, the 
topic of the project is to achieve an application for a 
telecommunication operator offering its customers access to 
fixed telephone networks, mobile phone, and Internet (data, 
image, voices). This telecommunications company operates 
nationwide through the operation of a full infrastructure: 
antennas, splitters, hubs, routers, controllers, etc. It also sells 
or provides to its customer terminal equipment (mobile and 
fixed phones, box) [see Fig. 1]. It also has monitoring 
centers, which allows him to oversee all activity on these 
networks and to intervene in case of failure or degradation of 
service as well as many administrative and technical 
departments to ensure all of the services offered to its clients. 
The company might be interested in the proposed student 
project solution if it has the required physical infrastructure, 
but lacks software coupled with the enterprise information 
system. The purpose of this project is to create a modern 
information system for such use. The potential customer has 
the following objectives: 
• Positioning as a major player in the Cloud 
• Converging data from different networks are integrating 
the new mobility 
• Access the Cloud in multichannel 
• Integrating B-to-B offering a solution tailored to the 
needs of each 
• Ensure the customers the validity of the software 
solutions through the use of a dynamic environment and 
equipped simulation. 
2) Project functionalities 
The project offers subscribers an online portal. As a 
mobile operator, it offers its customers a mobile application 
that allows direct access to the functions of the portal, except 
access to Webmail. One example is consultation mobile 
account access to invoices. The operator hopes that this 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

application remains dedicated to mobile devices. This 
application must be downloaded from the online portal or 
from the Android store. 
The operator offers online storage space in the cloud. 
This space is available to subscribers. Subscribers can access 
their cloud from its private online space, but also on their 
mobile or tablet. The operator aware that the Web universe 
differs from mobility wishes clearly separate both activities. 
With this application, a subscriber can store and share 
content with other subscribers for free. It can also offer 
content for download on the user’s unsubscribed Internet. 
Cloud operator is available to non-subscribers via a paid 
subscription. The subscriber also has the ability to 
automatically find his bills in the Cloud. This space is read-
only, of course. 
The operator already has a specialist in the development 
of access site to the cloud, but the cloud architecture remains 
to be built. The operator wants to ensure its clients 24/7 
access to its data. It communicates on the guarantee of non 
corrupt and automatically backed up data [12] [13]. 
The operator can add to its offering software (PC / Mac / 
Linux) and can automatically synchronize a local folder with 
the cloud. It complements this offering with an Android app 
with the same functionality. It adds the ability to synchronize 
the contacts directory and calendar. 
Finally, the operator wishes to develop a business to 
business service offering its Cloud as a service on demand. 
The operator has understood that companies can, in turn, 
develop mobile applications that can access the Cloud. 
Because access is made by applications and not by users 
behind a graphical user interface (GUI) online or mobile, it 
must be controlled. The operator would like to propose a 
solution built on a scale of subscriptions: 10,000 hits per day 
for € 50 per month, 100,000 hits per day for € 80 per month, 
€ 0.02 extra access. In order to better control access, the 
operator provides free tools for the development of third 
party applications. 
 
Figure 1.  Material architecture of the student project. 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
 
As shown in Figure 1, SGW (Serving Gateway) 
equipment is intended for packet routing between the 
eNodeB and a data network such as IP network. PDN GW 
(Packet Data Network Gateway) meanwhile it provides the 
direct interface between the Long Term Evolution  (LTE) 
network (4G) and the Internet network or Session Initiation 
Protocol SIP-based networks. 
3)  Software architecture 
Most cut into thirds architectures based on service-
oriented backend. These services are masked by the GUI, 
intermediary services, and online applications. However, 
these services often have business logic. Access to these 
services Backend is made possible through the common 
protocols used in the world of Web: Simple Object Access 
Protocol (SOAP), REST, etc. [11]. 
Computer Internet or PC (Mac / Linux) differs from 
mobile computing. The screen size, connectivity, energy 
saving drives, software to provide dedicated mobile terminal 
applications. When an application is available online, it is 
also via a special mobile browser. Airworthiness becomes 
smaller by the nature of the mobile terminal. That's why 
publishers often offer a dedicated application. The case is the 
same for PC applications (Mac / Linux). 
The realization of the project is based on object 
implementation using software architectures known models 
(design patterns, model-view-controller (MVC), DAO, 
Singleton, Decorator, etc.). The implementations permit to 
decouple application components to make the technical 
aspects of modular software. Each program must be 
delivered manageable. Or it can be configured itself (through 
its menus, loading options) or through programs (or 
applications) Administration (configuration).  
C. Tablet role in student life 
The use of a tablet in school as extra-school is perceived 
by students as an asset. It is a way to communicate on social 
networks. It also offers the opportunity to better prepare their 
future jobs. 
In addition, students use mainly for doing all kinds of 
searches: cinema, show, address, they use it mainly to check 
their e-mails. Finally, they use it mainly to watch the video 
and / or listen to music. Some video tutorials are directly 
related to the project option. 
IV. 
RESULTS OF OUR TEACHING APPROACH 
If the touch pads do not replace completely the 
computers, they enrich the teaching strategies used by 
teachers and the learning of their students, with shades 
depending 
on 
the 
levels 
and 
objectives. 
Rapid 
implementation, autonomy, lightness, ease of use, mobility is 
known qualities to change the organization and use of digital 
technology in the classroom. The tablet provides the 
flexibility of the duration and frequency of sessions. The 
tablet is on the table, next to the book, the book and the kit 
can be used at any time for a consultation exercise, a 
recording, a work of individual or collective research, even 
for an activity short. It is one tool among others and fits 
naturally in a conventional teaching session. 
This type of tool allows the student to  alternate easily 
between individual work and group work. Individual work 
produced by the student or by a group of students on a tablet 
is projected on the board and is subject to analysis, 
discussion 
and 
collective 
changes. 
Trade 
shares, 
confrontations, conjectures, many processes that facilitate or 
strongly boost the development activity and student 
participation. The tablet is the complement of digital 
interactive whiteboard in digital class. It helps to make a 
coherent and enhances its effectiveness. 
In addition, there are a variety of educational activities 
related to the specific contributions of the tablet. The multi- 
sensory aspect makes it a more suitable tool computer to 
pupils with special educational needs. It allows renewed in 
disciplines related to the interaction creativity. It changes the 
status of the writing of the book. 
The tablet allows the students to associate reading and 
writing facilitated by circulating between consultation, 
comments and exchanges, but also to play with the image 
and sound - especially for repeat presentation. It facilitates 
access to multiple resources such as numerous works (simply 
stored and maintained on the machine or made available 
from specialized servers). The recording and playback 
feature makes the tablet a little language laboratory. Cameras 
and cameras are used in many occasions (during oral 
expression) to produce reports meeting work. Mobility also 
opens uses far impossible to consider. It fundamentally 
changes the attitude and student learning strategy in 
computer science courses and other disciplines. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
After a first quarterly study, we are convinced of the 
value of our teaching approach. We have shown in this paper 
that the contribution of the tablet is the undeniable 
motivation of the students but also their investment at work. 
This is seen especially for the project option which uses the 
tablet in multiple ways. Finally, the satisfaction of having a 
specific tool for their training, provide students a motivation 
of success. We mentioned in our feedback, the role of tablets 
in the preparation of presentations, analysis workshops.  
We intend to continue our approach by exploiting further 
use beyond tablet. In fact, all teachers do not have sufficient 
supplies to meet the demands of students. Also, for the next 
school year, we would to set up dedicated software for the 
exchange student teachers, based on a multi-channel 
communication medium. We are currently in the process of 
defining needs and we are looking forward to prepare for the 
2014 school year. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. RL. Lieffers, A. V. Vivienne, and M. H. Rhona. "Use of 
Mobile Device Applications in Canadian Dietetic Practice." 
Canadian Journal of Dietetic Practice and Research 75.1 
2014, pp. 41-47. 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[2] C. Yin, B. David, and R. Chalon. “ Use your mobile 
computing devices to learn-Contextual mobile learning 
system design and case studies.” Computer Science and 
Information Technology, IEEE, 2009. pp. 440-444. 
[3] Y. M. Juntao. “Enterprise J2ME: developing mobile Java 
applications. Prentice Hall Professional”, 2004. 
[4] Ed. Burnette, Hello, “Android: introducing Google's mobile 
development platform. Pragmatic Bookshelf”, 2009. 
[5] Wasserman, Tony. "Software engineering issues for mobile 
application development." FoSER 2010 , 2010 . 
[6] D. L. Kirkpatrick and J. D. Kirkpatrick, “Evaluating training 
programs: The four levels.” Barrett-Koehler Publishers. 2006 
[7] M. Silberman. “Active training: A handbook of techniques, 
designs, case examples and tips." San Francisco: Pfeiffer, 
John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 2006 
[8] Z. Micskei, et al. "Robustness Testing Techniques and Tools." 
Resilience Assessment and Evaluation of Computing 
Systems. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012. pp. 323-339. 
[9] P. Koopman, D. Kobey and D. John. "Interface Robustness 
Testing: Experience and Lessons Learned from the Ballista 
Project." Dependability Benchmarking for Computer Systems 
72, 2008, pp. 201. 
[10] R. L. Linn, E. L. Baker and S. B. Dunbar. “Complex, 
performance-based assessment: Expectations and validation 
criteria.” Educational Researcher, 20(8), 1991, pp. 15–21.  
[11] L. Richardson and S. Ruby. “Restful Web Services.” O’Reilly 
Media, Inc, May 2007. 
[12] F. Kuhn, N. Lynch and R. Oshman. “Distributed computation 
in dynamic networks.” the 42nd ACM symposium on Theory 
of computing. ACM, 2010. pp. 513-522. 
[13] R. Allen and D. Garlan, “A formal approach to software 
architectures,” in Proceedings of IFIP’92 Elsevier Science 
Publishers B.V., September 1992. 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

