Simulating Forces 
Learning Through Touch, Virtual Laboratories 
 
Felix G. Hamza-Lup, Faith-Anne L. Kocadag 
Department of Computer Science and Information Technology 
Armstrong Atlantic State University 
Savannah, Georgia  
e-mail: felix.hamza-lup@armstrong.edu, fk4687@stu.armstrong.edu 
 
 
Abstract— With the expansion of e-learning course curricula 
and the affordability of haptic devices, at-home virtual 
laboratories are emerging as an increasingly viable option for 
e-learners. We outline three novel haptic simulations for the 
introductory physics concepts of friction, the Coriolis Effect, 
and Precession. These simulations provide force feedback 
through one or more Novint Falcon devices, allowing students 
to "feel" the forces at work in a controlled learning 
environment. This multimodal approach to education (beyond 
the audiovisual) may lead to increased interest and immersion 
for e-learners and appeal to the kinesthetic learners who may 
struggle in a traditional e-learning course setting. 
Keywords-Haptic simulations; e-Learning 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
     E-Learning has exploded in popularity in recent years, 
and for good reason. Both online and brick-and-mortar 
institutions offer an increasing variety of courses on the web 
to students from around the world. While the convenience 
of an e-learning course is difficult to beat, instructors may 
struggle to retain students, keep them engaged, or know 
whether their students are fully grasping the material. 
Furthermore, many courses do not always translate 
effectively into existing Edtech (Education Technology) 
platforms [1, 2]. 
     As virtual classrooms proliferate, the tools of trade 
continue to develop in tandem. Multimodal interactions are 
especially important, and these novel and multidimensional 
approaches have been proven to increase user engagement, 
interaction, and mastery of concept [3–6]. While these 
virtual classrooms do not replace traditional face-to-face 
teaching models, they can augment these models and may 
prove invaluable to e-learning course curricula. 
     Haptics in computing refers to the addition of force 
feedback to the user through commercially available 
hardware. Through this technology, users may engage their 
senses beyond their visual perceptions alone, allowing for a 
more intuitive understanding of complex or abstract 
concepts. Haptics in virtual laboratories are particularly 
effective 
when touch is required for the correct 
comprehension of physical phenomena, variation of 
frequencies, medical procedures, engineering, virtual 
museums, etc. [4].  
     We provide an overview of three haptic-based virtual 
simulators that can be merged into existing Edtech systems 
like Vista or MOODLE. These simulators take advantage of 
the open source H3D API, creating three dimensional 
audiovisuals coupled with a tactile (haptic), interface. The 
three simulations outlined in Section 2 augment the teaching 
of Introductory Physics Concepts of: friction, the Coriolis 
Effect, and torque-induced precession [7]. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
A. E-Learning and Virtual Laboratories 
     While the majority of e-learning programs are merely 
video, chat, and discussion board based, it is easy to see the 
prudence of elevating to a standard that may nurture and 
stimulate students’ curiosity and aptitudes. Creating an 
authentic learning experience has long been a concern of e-
learning course providers, and many experts agree that such 
an environment requires community, “experimentation and 
action” [8]. 
     Haptic, or kinesthetic, learners are those who prefer a 
more active approach to course materials [9]. Vincent and 
Ross estimate that these kinesthetic learners make up 
approximately 17% of the population [10]. The integration 
of virtual laboratories into online Edtech platforms creates 
environments where e-learners may both self-teach and 
collaborate with others to maximize their learning potential 
[5].  
     Brown, et al [11], argue that how a person perceives an 
activity is dependent on their environments and tools. Thus 
the implementation of haptics in e-learning may improve 
experiments where the representation of material properties 
and experimentally relevant forces are of the utmost 
importance [4]. Dudulean et al found that haptic feedback, 
through a low cost and relatively small device, increased the 
effectiveness of an interaction, resulting in students 
spending more time exploring the virtual objects, and 
increased 
motivation, 
interest, 
critical 
thinking 
development, and problem solving [12]. While most haptic 
simulations 
were 
designed 
to 
augment 
traditional 
classrooms, Schaf, et al [6] went one step further to 
integrate their deriveSERVER (providing remote access to a 
virtual reality environment and also a real experiment) with 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
Figure 1. Friction Simulation: Screen shot of simulation. 
 
Figure 2. Friction Simulation: Force magnitudes represented as arrows, as 
the user pushes the block up. The dot on the topmost image near the block 
represents the position of the haptic pointer. 
 
a collaborative MOODLE interface for their engineering 
workspaces. 
The ideal collaborative learning environment for 
engineering education, according to Pereira et al [5], 
includes: a shared workspace for educational media and a 
theoretical material module (common to virtual learning 
environments), an immersive 3D social interface (like 
SecondLife), content adaptation to user feedback, integration 
of virtual labs or experiments, intelligent tutoring systems, 
teamwork and collaboration support, augmented sense 
immersion (beyond just sight, hearing, and touch), and 
serious game concepts – the use of game-like solutions that 
capture attention and educate as they entertain [5]. While no 
such system yet exists, the continued incorporation of haptic 
technology into existing e-learning courseware may be a 
great step toward providing distance learners an education 
more on par to that of students at traditional brick-and-
mortar institutions. 
B. Haptics APIs: H3D 
     SenseGraphics’ H3D API is an open source, cross 
platform development toolkit for creating visuo-haptic scene 
graphs [13]. It is released under the GNU GPL license with 
commercial licensing options. The high level interfaces of 
the API are X3D (another open source format) and Python. 
While X3D provides the 3D graphics vocabulary, Python 
describes the application’s user interface behavior [14]. 
Most importantly, H3D allows for rapid prototyping and 
supports a wide range of haptic devices. 
III. 
CASE STUDIES 
     The three physics demos outlined herein were developed 
with the intention of augmenting the introductory (calculus-
based) physics curricula at Armstrong Atlantic State 
University in Savannah, Georgia. While the simulations 
have not yet been implemented into an online e-learning 
system, expansion into that realm would be an immediate 
future extension. 
     Each of the case studies below employed one or more 
Novint Falcon devices. This device, classified as a game 
controller, was chosen because of its robustness, relatively 
small working volume, commercial availability, and 
increasing affordability. Currently, one can purchase one 
such device (with the standard features) on the Novint 
website for the same price as a HD web cam [15]. 
A. Concept: Friction 
     The Friction demo, detailed in [7], provides a carefully 
controlled environment where students can perceive the 
effects of static friction, kinetic friction, slope inclination 
(and gravity by extension), mass, and user-generated forces 
on the movement of a block on an inclined plane. While the 
virtual environment is 3D, the block movement on the 
inclined plane is restricted to one dimension to facilitate 
user control. The three dimensionality of the simulation 
ultimately comes into play through manipulation of the 
rotating disk at the bottom, center (Figure 1) that allows the 
user to rotate the scene to view it at different angles. 
Students were given instructions on how to interact with 
a block on an inclined plane. A static frictional force acted 
on the block to impede its movement, while a kinetic 
frictional force acted on the block as it moved. Users 
attempted to move the block via the haptic pointer. In 
addition to the haptic force feedback from the Novint Falcon 
hardware, resulting force directions and magnitudes were 
displayed visually through three dimensional arrows while a 
heads-up display stated the explicit magnitude values, as 
illustrated in Figure 2. 
An evaluative pre-test of the 86 participants showed that 
most students had only a rudimentary knowledge of static 
and kinetic friction, with the average score being 36.7% 
(random chance would yield a score of 19.7%).  
After the pre-test, the students attended a 50-minute 
conventional lecture about static and kinetic friction. The 
lecture was followed by a post-test, and students were split 
into two groups with equivalent post-test results. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
Figure 3. Average Test Scores For Haptic vs. Traditional Lab Groups [7] 
  
 
Figure 4. Coriolis Simulation: Ball and Glider Simulations 
 
Figure 6. Gyroscope Simulation: Screen Shot 
Figure 5. Coriolis Quiz Score Comparisons 
After the division into groups, group A performed lab 
experiments using the visuo-haptic simulator while students 
in group B performed similar experiments in a traditional 
laboratory setup. Afterward a final test was administered, test 
score normalized gains were calculated as 
 
(Test 3 – Test 2) / (100 – Test 2). 
 (1) 
 
Figure 3 illustrates the efficacy of the haptic simulation 
over traditional teaching methods regarding frictional force 
concepts. The normalized gain of group A was 0.182, while 
the gain was slightly negative for group B at -0.011. Not 
only were average test scores higher among the student users 
of the simulation, but overall student curiosity and attention 
measured in an attitude survey were superior to those who 
had not used the setup. 
B. Concept: The Coriolis Effect 
     The Coriolis effect is one of the more complex concepts 
to convey to introductory students. It is a phantom force that 
appears to alter the path of an object in juxtaposition of 
another spinning frame of reference. A plane flying south 
from the North Pole would appear to be deflected to the 
right (or westward) because of the Coriolis effect. 
     The Coriolis application attempts to illustrate the 
concepts of this perceived force through a simple simulation 
where the user attempts to push a ball into a goal (using the 
Novint Falcon haptic device) within a spinning frame of 
reference. While the background of the simulation spins, 
users feel a deflecting force (representing the Coriolis 
effect) parallel to the direction of rotation. Users are forced 
to compensate for this force to score a goal (as illustrated in 
Figure 4). 
     In contrast, users may appreciate the change in “feel” 
without the Coriolis effect - second simulation. The second 
simulation implements a glider (instead of a ball) that is not 
affected by the surface friction of the ground, thus 
mimicking a static (non-rotating) frame of reference. 
     24 undergraduate students taking Principles of Physics I 
at Armstrong Atlantic State University were divided into 
four groups of six students. GPAs between groups were 
similar. All groups were given supplemental reading 
material and a video on the Coriolis effect. Group 2 
participated in a visual simulation with no haptic feedback. 
Group 3 participated in a visuo-haptic simulation involving 
force feedback. Group 4  was given a tutorial on the use of 
the haptic devices, then participated in a visuo-haptic 
simulation with force feedback. All groups were quizzed 
and given subjective assessment questionnaires at the end. 
     As shown in Figure 5, the groups that participated in the 
visuo-haptic simulation showed a 15% advantage in quiz 
scores over the groups only given reading material and a 
video. The group that participated in a simulation without 
haptic feedback only showed a 10% increase in quiz scores. 
A tutorial on the haptic hardware prior to the simulations 
did not affect quiz scores, proving either the tutorial 
ineffective or unnecessary. Both test scores and students' 
subjective assessments reflected the positive benefits of the 
simulation, including increased student engagement and 
grasp of abstract concepts [16]. 
C. Concept: Precession 
Torque-induced precession refers to the wobble that 
occurs when a spinning object’s axis of rotation shifts in 
orientation because of an applied torque, or rotational force. 
Precession is often observed in spinning tops and 
gyroscopes. Precession, and its relationship to angular 
velocity and angular momentum, is an important abstract 
concept that is not always immediately understood, 
especially by kinesthetic learners. The Gyroscope application  
provides force feedback through an interactive gyroscope 
that tilts as it spins (Figure 6,7).  
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
Figure 7. Gyroscope Simulation: Device Setup 
     This simulation utilizes two Novint Falcon devices, 
one for each of the user's hands, pointed toward each other. 
The devices are engaged simultaneously, allowing the user to 
feel the tilt of the gyroscope handles as the wheel spins. 
Users can adjust angular velocity, wheel weight, and handle 
length to experience the resulting precession changes. 
The application is currently under assessment and if 
successful, it may become an integral part of our 
introductory physics Touchable Virtual Laboratories.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In the early days of e-learning, costs and lack of 
sophistication in online courses were prohibitive. The 
lowering of hardware prices, dramatic improvement of 
internet bandwidth and reliability, and increased savviness of 
online educators in their course designs suggest that the 
popularity of e-learning programs can only grow. While 
conventional institutions of higher education are not 
expected to fall by the wayside, they must improve content 
and knowledge delivery to keep up with the new demands in 
the informational age. As much as many e-learning 
instructors are "motivated by a strong conviction that the 
work they are doing is important to students who need 
flexible access to education", they are still "clearly meeting a 
need" [17]. For e-learning courseware to truly compete with 
the traditional brick-and-mortar programs, measures must be 
taken by institutions to impart a more immersive, engaging 
experience on their students. 
Just as the pedagogy of physics was advanced 
dramatically by the introduction of computers as visual 
learning devices, the tactile activities envisioned in a haptic-
enabled laboratory promises similar benefits, especially for 
kinesthetic learners and for students with disabilities [18]. 
The three applications outlined in this paper are just 
examples of the plethora of content a virtual haptic enhanced 
laboratory can provide. These virtual labs stimulate multiple 
user senses, and may prove invaluable additions to existing 
e-learning systems, improving their information distribution 
capacity, user engagement, and users' learning efficiency. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Mensch, S. "Issues in offering numeric based courses in an 
online environment," Journal of Instructional Pedagogies, vol. 
3, 2010. 
[2] Illinois Online Network, "Weaknesses of online learning," 
access 
date: 
October 
16, 
2012 
from 
site: 
www.ion.uillinois.edu/resources/tutorials/overview/weaknese
s.asp. 
[3] van Reimersdahl, T., Bley, F., Kuhlen, T., and Bischof, C. 
"Haptic rendering techniques for the interactive exploration of 
CFD datasets in virtual environments," Proc. of the Workshop 
on Virtual Environments 2003 (EGVE '03), ACM, New York, 
NY, USA, pp. 241-246. DOI=10.1145/769953. 769981 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/769953.769981. 
[4] Machado L., Pereira T., Costa T., Restivo M and Moraes R. 
“Improving interaction in remote laboratories using haptic 
devices,” 
Proc. 
International 
Conference 
on 
Remote 
Engineering and Virtual Instrumentation (REV2007), June 
2007, Porto, Portugal, 2007. 
[5] Paladini, S. and Schaf, F. "Control and automation 
engineering education: Combining physical, remote and 
virtual labs," Systems, Signals and Devices (SSD), 2012 9th 
International Multi-Conference, March 20-12, 2012, pp. 1-10. 
[6] Schaf, F., Muller, D., Bruns, F., Pereira, C., and Erbe, H. 
"Collaborative learning and engineering workspaces," Annual 
Reviews in Control, Volume 33, Issue 2, December 2009, pp. 
246-252, ISSN 1367-5788, 10.1016/ j.arcontrol.2009.05.002. 
[7] Hamza-Lup, F. and Baird, W. “Feel the static and kinetic 
friction,” EuroHaptics 2012, Part I, LNCS 7282, 12–15 June, 
Tampere, Finland, pp. 181-192. 
[8] Lombardi, M. "Authentic learning for the 21st century: An 
overview," ELI Paper 1: 2007, accessed October 5, 2012 from 
site: net.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/eli3009.pdf. 
[9] Howell, D. "Elements of effective e-learning: Three design 
methods to minimize side effects of online courses," College 
Teaching, vol. 49, no. 3, Summer 2001, Taylor & Francis, 
Ltd: Oxfordshire, pp. 87-90. 
[10] Vincent, A. and Ross, D. "Learning style awareness: A basis 
for developing teaching and learning strategies," Journal of 
Research on Technology in Education, 2001,vol.  33, no. 5. 
[11] Btown, J., Collins, A., and Duguid, A. "Situated Cognition 
and the Culture of Learning," access date: December 23, 2012 
http://www.exploratorium.edu/ifi/resources/museumeducation
/situated.html. 
[12] Dudulean, C. and StareŃu, I. "3D interaction techniques in 
virtual reality applications for engineering education," Proc. 
of the 6th International Conference on Virtual Learning 
(ICVL 2011),  pp. 380-385. 
[13] SenseGraphics, "H3DAPI," access date: October 6, 2012 from 
site: 
www.sensegraphics.com/datasheet/H3DAPI_datasheet.pdf. 
[14] SenseGraphics, "H3D API manual: For version 2.1," access 
date: 
October 
6, 
2012 
from 
site: 
www.h3dapi.org/uploads/api/H3DAPI_2.1/docs/H3D%20API
%20Manual.pdf. 
[15] Novint: "Novint Falcon game controller bundles," access 
date: 
October 
16, 
2012 
from 
site: 
www.novint.com/index.php/store/novint-falcon-game-
controller-bundles/1. 
[16] Hamza-Lup, F. and Page, B. “Haptics-augmented physics 
simulation: Coriolis effect,” Proc of 7th International 
Conference on Virtual Learning (ICVL 2012), November 2-3, 
Brasov, Romania, 2012. 
[17] Mayadas, A., Bourne, J., and Bacsich, P. "Online 
education0020today," Science, AAAS, Washington, DC, 
USA, vol. 323, no. 85, January 2, 2009, pp. 85-89. DOI: 
10.1126/science.1168874 
[18] Coffield, F., Moseley, D., Hall, E., and Ecclestone, K.. 
Learning styles and pedagogy in post-16 learning: A 
systematic and critical review. London: Learning and Skills 
Research Centre, 2011. 
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

