Architectural Design of an Adaptive,
Structure-Aware Intelligent Tutoring System
Sebastian Kucharski
Chair of Distributed and Networked Systems
Faculty of Computer Science
Dresden University of Technology, Germany
email: sebastian.kucharski@tu-dresden.de
Tommy Kubica
Chair of Distributed and Networked Systems
Faculty of Computer Science
Dresden University of Technology, Germany
email: tommy.kubica@tu-dresden.de
Iris Braun
Chair of Distributed and Networked Systems
Faculty of Computer Science
Dresden University of Technology, Germany
email: iris.braun@tu-dresden.de
Abstract—Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) for Learning
Management Systems (LMS) combine the benefits of user-
centered learning and the provisioning of easy-to-use learning
content in one place. They typically have two major drawbacks.
First, they are LMS-specific (i.e., not adaptive). Thus, many
LMS do not include an ITS because existing solutions cannot be
reused. Second, they lack in a didactically usable representation
of the structure of the learning content (i.e., they are not
structure-aware). Therefore, the learner may get lost during the
provision of assistance. Overcoming both of these drawbacks
at once is a desirable objective, because it allows the learner
to take advantage of personalized learning in diverse LMS
while accessing a large amount of available learning content.
In addition, it allows an ITS to use cross-plattform analytics
(CPA) to improve assistance. The main challenge in achieving
this objective is dealing with the heterogeneous approaches to
structuring learning content used by different LMS. For this
purpose, an adaptive, structure-aware ITS is proposed that can
work with diverse LMS by using a generic data structure that
can represent and process the required learning knowledge data
in a system-independent way. The focus of this paper is to outline
the architecture of this system.
Keywords-personalized
learning;
technology-enhanced
learning; learning analytics; educational data mining.
I. INTRODUCTION
The
purpose
of
integrating
Intelligent
Tutoring
Sys-
tems (ITS) [3] into Learning Management Systems (LMS) is to
combine LMS-specific advantages (e.g., easy-to-use provision
of a large amount of learning content in one place [2]) and
ITS-specific benefits (e.g., adaptation of learning content to the
user’s needs [5]). There are typically two major drawbacks to
combining ITS and LMS.
1) The ITS are designed for a specific LMS only (i.e.,
they are not adaptive) such as the one developed for
Moodle [13].
2) The LMS lack in a didactically usable (e.g., graphical)
representation of the learning content structure that can
be controlled by the ITS (i.e., they are not structure-
aware) [14].
The former causes that neither implemented didactic con-
cepts can be reused nor derived user assistance profiles can be
considered in different LMS [5]. The latter can result in the
user not being able to follow the assistance that is related to
the structure of the learning content, and subsequently getting
lost in the learning space during the guiding process [7]. This
is due to the fact that ITS are intended to guide the learner
through the learning content, while LMS are mainly designed
for self-employed learning. To bring the two together, the ITS
must be coupled with the content structure of the LMS in a
way that is comprehensible to the user.
Related work addressing these two drawbacks and the
corresponding research challenges is summarized in Section
II. In Section III, an adaptive, structure-aware ITS is proposed
that overcomes both drawbacks at once.
II. RELATED WORK
Previous work on ITS adaptation has been primarily con-
cerned with adapting these systems to the learner [12], and
rarely with adapting these systems to different learning envi-
ronments in which they might be integrated. Thus, the ITS
developed so far are usually independent systems [11] that
cannot make use of the large amount of learning data that is
available in the established LMS.
The research that has been done to integrate intelligent tu-
toring mechanisms into learning environments [1], has mainly
focused on developing learning-environment-specific systems
that are limited to working with environment-specific data. To
overcome this limitation, Mangaroska et al. investigated how
learning data from different e-learning systems combined in a
learning ecosystem can be represented and processed system-
independently [9]. For this purpose, the authors proposed a
cross-platform architecture [10] that includes three e-learning
systems from which learner-generated data is collected. This
data is converted into the unified Visualized Education NTNU
System Object Notation (VSON) and processed by a visualiza-
tion dashboard. The main focus of this research is the generic
integration of learning-analytics in e-learning systems and the
investigation of what cross-platform analytics (CPA) means for
learning design research [8]. As far as known, it has not been
investigated how an ITS integrated into an LMS can make use
of the collected data, while the purpose of the proposed system
is to provide didactically traceable assistance functionalities
based on this data in a system-independent way. Thus, the
focus of this research is on how to generically provide as-
sistance functionalities and the corresponding system-specific
assistance components of the ITS LMS independently.
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

How to integrate ITS functionalities into arbitrary LMS was
investigated by Palomino et al. [4, 6]. For this purpose, a sys-
tem was developed that is LMS-independent by using a generic
data structure for the learning content and that enables learning
sequences piecewise conditional on the learner’s performance
measured by grades [5]. A prototype editor for defining these
sequences has been implemented in Moodle. As far as known,
there has been no investigation of the possibility of creating
or generating a structured visualization of the learning content
from the generic data structure. Furthermore, although the
data structure is system-independent, the ITS parameterization
component (i.e., the path specification editor) and the ITS
assistance component (i.e., the learning sequence mechanism)
are currently dependent on Moodle. The focus of this research
is therefore on what kind of assistance can be provided system-
independently and how the corresponding components can be
built and automatically provided for diverse LMS.
III. ADAPTIVE, STRUCTURE-AWARE ITS
Overcoming the two drawbacks mentioned in Section I is
particularly challenging due to the heterogeneous approaches
to structuring learning content used by different LMS. For this
purpose, a structure-aware ITS is proposed that can be used for
diverse LMS by the utilization of a generic, LMS-independent
learning knowledge data model. As shown in Figure 1, this
system includes two assistance components that have to be
integrated into the considered LMS and that are described in
Section III-A and III-B. Both of these components can be
provided automatically in order to make the ITS as system-
independent and thus as adaptive as possible. The data that
is required for the generation and dynamic parameterization
of these components is stored in a generic data structure
presented in Section III-C. This data is retrieved from the
diverse LMS using a thin adaptation layer which is described
in Section III-D.
A. Knowledge Graph Editor
The first assistance component, called the knowledge graph,
is a graphical representation that visualizes the learning con-
tent. It is embedded in the knowledge graph editor which is
integrated with the considered LMS. The editor can be used
in two different modes. One is intended to support the learner
and is called read-only mode. The other one is intended to
support the configuration of the ITS by the teacher and is
called the editing mode. In the read-only mode the knowledge
graph editor can support the learner in the following ways.
1) It provides an overview of the learning content, it’s
structure and the learner’s progress.
2) It offers the ability to graphically navigate within the
content, including the convenient selection of learning
content suggestions.
In the editing mode, the knowledge graph can be used by the
teacher to parameterize the assistance process for the following
purposes.
1) The specification of the metadata for the learning content
Fig. 1. Conceptual architecture of the proposed adaptive, structure-aware ITS.
2) The definition of the content-related dependencies be-
tween the learning content
B. Chatbot
The second component for providing assistance is a chatbot.
It is integrated into the considered LMS and provides typical
ITS functionalities such as suggesting learning content. This
component is controlled by the ITS backbone, which processes
the data from the generic data model (see Section III-C). The
ITS backbone is also coupled to the knowledge graph editor,
so that it can influence the content representation. This means
that it can cause the representation to be restructured according
to the learning content suggestions accepted by the learner, or
it can cause the adaptation of the representation to the learner’s
state of knowledge.
C. Generic Data Model
With regard to the intended assistance functionalities, the
presented components require two types of data, the so-called
learning knowledge data. First, information about what con-
tent the learner is studying and how this content is structured is
required for the composition of the knowledge graph. Second,
information about the learner’s interaction with the system is
needed to adapt the knowledge graph to the learner’s progress
and to determine appropriate assistance mechanisms.
Since the learning knowledge data must be system-
independent, a generic learning knowledge data model is
proposed that is used for two different purposes. On the one
hand, it is responsible for the system-independent provision
of data for the algorithms that determine which assistance
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

processes are required and when. On the other hand, it is used
for the automatic provision of the ITS components that are
integrated into the LMS under consideration. This is necessary
to ensure that the ITS is as system-independent and therefore
as adaptive as possible.
D. Data Retriever Adapter
The information stored in the generic learning knowledge
data model is queried by a thin adaptation layer, which is
responsible for the coupling between the adaptive ITS and
the considered LMS. This layer is implemented by a learning
knowledge data retriever adapter. In order to minimize depen-
dencies on the LMS, and because the adapter must be system-
specific, it encapsulates no more functionality than retrieving
the required data.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
To overcome two major drawbacks of current ITS for LMS,
the architectural design of an adaptive, structure-aware ITS
was presented. This system provides assistance using a chatbot
and a graphical representation of the learning content structure.
The data required for the respective assistance scenarios is
retrieved through a thin adaptation layer and stored and pro-
cessed in a generic, LMS-independent data model. Although
the adaptation layer has to be system-specific, it encapsulates
no more functionality than the plain data retrieval and is
therefore easy to implement for an appropriate LMS. The
actual ITS functionality is implemented system-independently,
depending on the data that can be delivered by the LMS-
specific adaptation layers. In addition to the parameterization
of the assistance components, the data from this model is also
used for the automatic provision of these components.
In summary, using the ITS with the proposed architecture,
the learning content of diverse LMS can be adapted to the
user’s needs. The approach will be evaluated in terms of appli-
cability and effectiveness considering a subset of appropriate
state-of-the-art LMS.
REFERENCES
[1]
N. S. Aldahwan and N. I. Alsaeed, “Use of artificial
intelligent in learning management system (lms): A
systematic literature review,” International Journal of
Computer Applications, vol. 175, no. 13, pp. 16–26,
2020.
[2]
V. M. Bradley, “Learning management system (lms) use
with online instruction,” International Journal of Tech-
nology in Education (IJTE), vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 68–92,
2021.
[3]
J. R. Carbonell, “Ai in cai: An artificial-intelligence ap-
proach to computer-assisted instruction,” IEEE transac-
tions on man-machine systems, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 190–
202, 1970.
[4]
P. Giuffra, E. Cecilia, and R. A. Silveira, “A multi-agent
system model to integrate virtual learning environments
and intelligent tutoring systems,” 2013.
[5]
C. E. Giuffra Palomino, R. Azambuja Silveira, and
M. K. Nakayama, “An intelligent lms model based on
intelligent tutoring systems,” in International Confer-
ence on Intelligent Tutoring Systems, Springer, 2014,
pp. 567–574.
[6]
C. E. Giuffra. P, R. A. Silveira, and M. K. Nakayama,
“An intelligent tutoring systems integrated with learn-
ing management systems,” in Highlights on Practical
Applications of Agents and Multi-Agent Systems: In-
ternational Workshops of PAAMS 2013, Salamanca,
Spain, May 22-24, 2013. Proceedings 11, Springer,
2013, pp. 316–327.
[7]
R. Krauße and H. K¨orndle, “Tee-the electronic ex-
ercise,” Marktplatz Internet: Von e-Learning bis e-
Payment, 13. Leipziger Informatik-Tage (LIT 2005),
2005.
[8]
K. Mangaroska and M. Giannakos, “Learning analyt-
ics for learning design: A systematic literature review
of analytics-driven design to enhance learning,” IEEE
Transactions on Learning Technologies, vol. 12, no. 4,
pp. 516–534, 2018.
[9]
K. Mangaroska, B. Vesin, and M. Giannakos, “Cross-
platform analytics: A step towards personalization and
adaptation in education,” in Proceedings of the 9th inter-
national conference on learning analytics & knowledge,
2019, pp. 71–75.
[10]
K. Mangaroska, B. Vesin, V. Kostakos, P. Brusilovsky,
and M. N. Giannakos, “Architecting analytics across
multiple e-learning systems to enhance learning design,”
IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, vol. 14,
no. 2, pp. 173–188, 2021.
[11]
E.
Mousavinasab,
N.
Zarifsanaiey,
S.
R.
Niakan
Kalhori, M. Rakhshan, L. Keikha, and M. Ghazi Saeedi,
“Intelligent tutoring systems: A systematic review of
characteristics, applications, and evaluation methods,”
Interactive Learning Environments, vol. 29, no. 1,
pp. 142–163, 2021.
[12]
J. Paladines and J. Ram´ırez, “A systematic literature
review of intelligent tutoring systems with dialogue in
natural language,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 164 246–
164 267, 2020.
[13]
V. M. Ramesh, N. Rao, and C. Ramanathan, “Imple-
mentation of an intelligent tutoring system using moo-
dle,” in 2015 IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference
(FIE), IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–9.
[14]
G. R¨oßling et al., “Enhancing learning management
systems to better support computer science education,”
ACM SIGCSE Bulletin, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 142–166,
2008.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

