Smart Science Laboratory for Improving Learning Interest 
 
Jong Weon Lee, Kyung Jin Han 
Dept. Digital Contents 
Sejong University 
Seoul, Korea 
jwlee@sejong.ac.kr, kjinn.han@gmail.com 
Eun Kyoung Choi1, Kyung Soon Baek2, Yoon Jang3 
Dept. Cartoon Animation1,2,  
Dept. of Computer Engineering3 
Sejong University 
Seoul, Korea 
ekchoi@sejong.ac.kr1, yubin6566@naver.com2, 
jangy@sejong.ac.kr3
 
 
Abstract—We propose a smart science laboratory in this paper. 
There is a lack of scientific experiment and investigation in 
science education for elementary, middle and high school 
students in Korea. Teachers solely focus on transmitting 
knowledge and there is a lack of laboratory apparatuses for 
rapidly 
developing 
science 
areas. 
Because 
of 
these 
shortcomings, students lose interest in science as they progress 
through the education system. The smart science laboratory 
consists of virtual and remote laboratories, a local data 
collection procedure and hybrid visualization to overcome this 
problem. We hope we can increase students’ interest and 
satisfaction in science using the smart science laboratory that 
can support and supplement science education in schools today. 
Keywords-virtual laboratory; remote laboratory; science 
education; simulation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Traditional instructions such as lectures and teacher 
demonstrating an experiment in front of a class do not 
encourage students to think and to solve given problems. 
Researches show that there are advantages when students 
conduct investigations themselves for the purpose of science 
inquiry compared to traditional instructions [1, 2]. 
Investigations provide students with opportunities to interact 
directly with the material world, collect data, and learn 
scientific theories [3]. Hands-on physical investigations 
typically fill this need. Korean government tried to build up-
to-date physical laboratories for several years. Due to the fact 
that science and technology evolves so quickly, it is difficult 
to constantly build up-to-date laboratories that can keep up 
with the current state of science and technology for all 
elementary, middle and high school students.  
Virtual laboratories have been developed to replace or 
supplement physical laboratories. The concept of virtual 
laboratories implies the replacement of real measurements 
with simulation [4]. Virtual laboratories have been compared 
with physical laboratories and demonstrated that they can 
achieve similar objectives to physical ones. The research in 
[5] demonstrated that virtual laboratories can replace 
physical ones for acquiring conceptual knowledge. Many 
research studies have also shown the advantages of virtual, 
interactive 
exploration 
of 
unobservable 
phenomena 
compared with physical ones. Students can experiment 
unobservable phenomena, such as chemical reactions and 
electricity, using a virtual laboratory [6, 7]. Students can vary 
the properties of rays to examine the unobservable light 
behavior in OptiLab [8]. The National Aeronautics and 
Space 
Administration 
(NASA) 
Education 
provides 
professional materials and educational materials about 
astronomy, weather, geology and ocean through genuine 
multimedia content and simulations that a user can modify 
variables [9]. 
For some experiments it is still difficult to replace 
physical laboratories with virtual ones. It is necessary to 
manipulate real equipments in the experiments. Many 
researchers have developed remote laboratories to overcome 
the limitation of virtual laboratories. Students can access real 
equipments and collect real data through remote laboratories 
[10-12]. iLAB is remote laboratory. It started from the 
research at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 
with the goal of controlling professional scientific 
equipments in graduate school [13].  
Many useful virtual and remote laboratories have been 
developed and provided students with science inquiry 
learning. Many specialized research institutes such as NASA 
and MIT have developed educational content that provides 
laboratory and scientific investigation experiments utilizing 
computing technologies. Korean students can obtain useful 
information from that content but they could decrease the 
interest in the content and its intuitiveness. The data covered 
in these virtual and remote laboratories are not from Korea 
but from foreign countries. These virtual and remote 
laboratories target specific topics and meet the goal of the 
education system in which those laboratories are developed. 
It is necessary to develop the virtual laboratory that can be 
adapted to the Korean science education system. 
The goal of a proposed research is to develop a smart 
science laboratory that can supplement physical laboratories 
that are vital facilities in Korean science education and also 
foster advanced science education and reinvigorate science 
education. The desired effect of this is to boost interest and 
increase satisfaction among students in science education. 
The developed smart science laboratory has three 
characteristics. 
1) Combine virtual and remote laboratories 
2) Provide students with a way to collect local data 
3) Provide a hybrid visualization that combines simulations 
and videos 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

In Section 2, the proposed smart science laboratory is 
described. Section 3 describes content developed for the 
smart science laboratory for the experiments and its results. 
Finally the conclusion is provided in Section 4. 
II. 
PROPOSED METHOD 
The proposed smart science laboratory combines virtual 
and remote laboratories to capitalize on the merits of each 
approach. When the scientific inquiry requires to modify 
model characteristics, such as time scale, or to observe not 
easily observable phenomena, such as the birth of typhoon, a 
virtual laboratory is applied. A remote laboratory is used if a 
real procedure or experiment result is helpful to students. 
A. Virtual Science Laboratory 
The proposed virtual science laboratory consists of three 
procedures: a local data collecting procedure, a visualization 
procedure on web and app environment, and an interaction 
procedure suitable for elementary, middle and high school 
students.  
Mainly, public data are used in the proposed virtual 
laboratory. Public data of natural phenomena, such as 
changes in the contour of autumnal leaves in Korea, were 
used to create the corresponding simulation. We also added 
ways to collect data related to the simulation, such as photos 
of autumn leaves in local areas with location information, 
using students’ mobile devices. The system compares public 
data and students’ local data. If two types of data are 
matched, the system uses the result to verify the simulation 
results. If students’ data are not a match with the public data, 
then the system suggests possible causes for the differences. 
The smart mobile device is also used to collect data, such as 
information on food additives, that are not available to the 
public yet. The system uses image processing techniques that 
allow students to easily collect data. For now, students can 
only capture images of food packaging with their smart 
mobile devices that makes it unnecessary to manually type 
the name of the additives into a mobile device or a website. 
The 
visualization 
procedure 
utilizes 
the 
hybrid 
visualization approach that shows users the simulation result 
of the collected data and pre-created videos selectively 
depending on the goal of the learning. When users need to 
experiment with various conditions, simulations with given 
variables are created and shown to users. When the reality of 
the experiment is more important than the direct 
manipulation of the experiment, we show pre-created videos 
to users. The interaction was developed to meet the features 
of elementary, middle and high school students. For 
elementary school students, a simpler user interaction 
method was provided. 
B. Remote Science Laboratory 
Students can attend the scientific experiments and 
examine the results remotely using the smart remote science 
laboratory when they cannot be on site. To achieve this goal, 
we developed the system so that users can change samples 
and alter variables in the scientific experiment using the 
LabVIEW [14] program. The remote experiment done by a 
user is recorded and stored in a database. The system also 
provides ways to request the scientific experiments when it is 
difficult or dangerous for novice users to involve the 
experiments directly. Students can view live or recorded 
videos of the experiments being conducted by an expert. We 
provide this passive approach to increase the diversity of the 
scientific experiments. Students can view any experiment 
done by other students through recorded videos. Students can 
plan their new experiments after viewing the recorded 
experiments. 
III. 
EXPERIMENT 
We asked 100 teachers from elementary, middle and high 
school using a questionnaire on what type of content would 
be suitable for the proposed smart science laboratory. 
Teachers considered the following three experiments useful 
for their students.  
1) Experiments that cannot be observed visually 
2) Experiments in the area of physics, earth science and other 
related areas 
3) Experiments with real data and relevant to people’s lives  
Based on these survey results we created two types of 
content, which involve typhoons and food additives, for the 
virtual laboratory. A spectroscope and high-speed camera 
were selected as the equipment for the remote science 
laboratory. 
The typhoon simulation consisted of the birth of a 
typhoon, the direction of typhoons and typhoon forecasting. 
The process of how a typhoon is created was simulated and 
shown to students. Students can simulate different typhoons 
by modifying water temperatures and the originating 
locations of a typhoon. Students can also simulate the 
direction of a typhoon by adjusting temperatures, the 
originating position and positions of North Pacific High and 
Jet Stream around Korea (Figure 1). The typhoon 
simulations created by one student were recorded and shared 
with other students. Students are also able to predict the 
direction of well-known typhoons with the supplied 
information. The system could provide users with the partial 
position of typhoons and users can predict the position of the 
typhoon on the following day and compare the estimation 
with the actual position of the typhoon. 
 
 
Figure 1 Simulating the route of a typhoon 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

The food additive simulation consisted of searching food 
additives, simulating effects of additives and a food additive 
diary. Students can search additives for the specific food 
products by entering the name and barcode of the food 
product on the website. The system will search for additives 
included in the food from the database and display the 
additives to users. When the additives of a target food are not 
found in the database, the system will ask users if they wish 
to add the additive to the database. The numbers of additives 
collected by each student and each school are recorded and 
shown to all students. The school that adds the most 
additives to the database receives a special prize. This may 
increase engagement with students in the process of 
collecting additives of new food product. These data will be 
useful to other users because food additive database has not 
been opened to public yet. If the student has a smart mobile 
device, he/she can capture images of the name and the 
barcode of the food using the camera on a mobile device. 
The image processing procedure will detect the name of the 
food from the captured images.  
In food additive simulation, students can select a food 
additive and its amount then the food additive simulation 
part presents the simulation result to students. Students can 
simulate with various settings of the experiments to 
understand the changes caused by them. Figure 2 shows how 
food with/without food preservatives changed over time. 
Students can modify time variable and watch the simulation 
results of food with/without preservatives. The comparison 
videos are also provided to students to provide more realistic 
experimental results for the selected food additives. This 
hybrid visualization could improve students’ understanding 
of food additives. My food additive diary records amounts 
and types of food additives users ate on each day. To use my 
food additive diary, students only need to capture images of 
the cover of food packaging instead of typing food additives 
using a keyboard. We applied image processing techniques 
so food additives can be automatically collected from the 
image captured by students. 
 
 
Figure 2 Simulating the effect of food additive 
 
The LabView program was used to change the samples 
of the spectroscope experiments and to modify the spectral 
region and degree of precision of the experiments through 
the app and website in the spectroscope remote science 
laboratory. The results of the experiments were stored in the 
database and users can monitor the experiment procedure 
through live videos. It is a time-consuming procedure to find 
the optimal lab setting for capturing data with a high-speed 
camera. This also made it difficult to view the experiment in 
live view and to modify variables in the experiment. For the 
high-speed camera remote science laboratory, we developed 
an online procedure to requesting an experiment. When it is 
possible to capture the experiment with the high-speed 
camera, the procedure is recorded and edited so students can 
view the procedure and results online. The recorded 
procedures and results are stored and shared with other 
students.  
The resulting content was exhibited in 2014 World IT 
Show in Korea from Oct. 20th to Oct. 23rd. Users provide 
positive feedbacks about the developed content. Figure 3 
shows an elementary student with his mother experimented 
with the food additive content. He captured the image of the 
cookie packing using the camera attached to a smart mobile 
device and viewed the food additives included in the cookie. 
 
 
Figure 3 An elementary student using food additive content in the show 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The goal of the proposed research is to develop a smart 
science laboratory that helps students gain experience in a 
lab environment to undertake scientific investigation. So far, 
the basic platform and sample content has been developed. 
The sample content was tested by ordinary people at the 
2014 World IT Show in Korea and received favorable 
feedback. However, we have not yet tested the platform and 
content on students. We will select six schools to test the 
platform and content after developing more content. The 
resulting user test will be used to modify the platform and its 
content so students in many schools can use the smart 
science laboratory. Through the smart science laboratory, we 
hope to foster interest in science among students so that more 
students will be willing to enter the field of science. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the ICT R&D Program of 
MSIP[10114-14-1016, Building and demonstrating the 
‘Smart Science-Lab’ to cultivate talent] and the Creative 
Vitamin Project. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

REFERENCES 
[1] D. D. Minner, A. J. Levy, and J. Century, “Inquiry-based 
science instruction-what is it and does it matter? Results from 
a research synthesis years 1984 to 2002,” J. Res. Sci. Teach. 
vol. 47, pp. 474-496, 2010. 
[2] M. C. Linn, H.-S. Lee, R. Tinker, F. Husic, and J. L. Chiu, 
“Teaching and assessing knowledge integration in science,” 
Science vol. 313, pp. 1049-1050, 2006. 
[3] Natioanl 
Research 
Council, 
“America’s 
Lab 
Report: 
Investigations in High School Science,” National Academies 
Press, Washington, DC, 2005. [Online]. Available from: 
www.nap.edu/openbook.php?isbn=0309096715 
[4] B. Popovic, N. Popovic, D. Mijic, S. Stankovski, and G. 
Ostojic, “Remote control of laboratory equipment for basic 
electronics courses: A LabView-based implementation,” 
Comp. App. Eng. Edu. vol 21, pp. E110-E120, 2013. 
[5] D. Klahr, L. M. Triona, and C. Williams, “Hands on what? 
The relative effectiveness of physical versus virtual materials 
in an engineering design project by middle school children,” J. 
Res, Sci. Teach. vol. 44, pp. 183-203, 2007. 
[6] T. Jaakkola, S. Nurmi, and K. Veermans, “A comparison of 
students’ conceptual understanding of electric circuits in 
simulation only and simulation-based contexts,” J. Res. Sci. 
Teach. vol. 48, pp. 71-93, 2011. 
[7] Z. H. Zhang and M. C. Linn, “Can generating representations 
enhance learning with dynamic visualizations?,” J. Res. Sci. 
Teach. vol. 48, pp. 1177-1198, 2011. 
[8] T. De Jong, M. C. Linn, and Z. C. Zacharia, “Physical and 
virtual laboratories in science and engineering education,” 
Science, vol. 340, pp. 305-308, 2013 
[9] NASA Education, [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.nasa.gov/offices/education/about/#.VEoAmvmsU
sY 
[10] D. Hercog, B. Gergic, S. Uran, and K. Jezernik, “A DSP-
based remote control laboratory,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron, 
vol. 54, pp. 3057-3068, 2007. 
[11] M. Naumovic and D. Zivanovic, “Remote experiments in 
control engineering education laboratory,” Int. J. Online Eng. 
vol. 4, pp. 48-53, 2008. 
[12] M. Cooper, “Remote laboratories in teaching and learning-
Issues impinging on widespread adoption in science and 
engineering education,” Int. J. Online Eng. vol. 1, pp. 1-7, 
2005. 
[13] iLab, [Online]. Available from: 
http://icampus.mit.edu/projects/ilabs/ 
[14] LabView,[Online]. Available from:  
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LabVIEW 
 
 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

