Assessing eLearning for Taking up Social Challenges
A Fitness Online Course for Senior Citizens
Agathe Merceron, Ilona Buchem, Jörn Kreutel
Department Computer Science and Media
Beuth University of Applied Sciences
Berlin, Germany
e-mail:{merceron,buchen,kreutel}@beuth-hochschule.de
Marten Haesner, Anika Steinert
Geriatrics research group, Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin
Berlin, Germany
e-mail:{marten.haesner,anika.steinert}@charité.de
Abstract—In this paper, we investigate whether a novel kind
of online course on fitness designed to take into account
specificities
of
elderly
people
and
integrating
wearable
trackers can motivate senior citizens to exercise more in a
sound way and help improve their physical condition. The
design principles of the online course including content,
gamification elements and wearable fitness trackers are
described, as well as a first evaluation with 20 participants.
The results of the analysis of the users’ interactions are
promising.
Keywords- healthy ageing; senior citizens; online course;
wearable activity tracker; gamification.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In many western countries, the population is ageing.
This fact poses several challenges to the society. One of
these challenges is to keep senior citizens in good health as
long as possible. It is known that social interaction and
sufficient physical activity have a positive influence on
health. For example, the longitudinal creativity and ageing
study by Cohen et al. [1] revealed positive effect of
community-based interventions on improved ratings of
physical health, reduced medication use, improved social
interactions and less loneliness, and even fewer health
problems compared to the control group. Further research
[2][3] shows that even 30 minutes of daily moderate-
intensity physical activity may significantly reduce the risk
of chronic diseases. Recent research also suggests that
digital technologies can be used with benefits with elderly
people when they are properly designed, as shown by
Ijsselsteijn et al. [4]. The work by Assad et al. [5] reports
that well-designed games have a positive influence on
Parkinson’s disease patients. Furthermore, the proportion
of senior citizens who use digital technologies has been
growing worldwide. Duplàa et al. [6] report that from 1208
persons aged 55 or more declaring playing games in
Canada about half of them answered that they also play
digital games. The study by Ledger and McCaffrey [7]
shows that the percentage of persons tracking fitness data
through a smartphone has grown rapidly during the last
two years.
The aim of the fMOOC (fitness Massive Open Online
Course) project is to assess the use of e-learning and mobile
devices to take up the social challenge of healthy ageing.
More specifically, its aim is to develop an online course on
fitness that integrates wearable activity trackers for senior
citizens in such a way that these two aspects, social
interaction and enhanced physical activity, are addressed.
This kind of approach is novel; an online-course targeting
senior citizens and integrating wearable activity trackers has
not been realized so far. The targeted learners are older
citizens who have some familiarity with information
technology and are in relatively good health, though they
might have some minor impairment, but who could improve
their physical condition by doing more exercises and
moving more daily. As exposed in Buchem et al. [8], the
conceptual design of the fMOOC course includes digital
content on weekly physical exercises and the integration of
wearable activity trackers connected to the course to help
seniors engage in physical activities. The conceptual design
includes also forums for sharing and commenting, and for
community-based exercises to enhance social engagement
and a sense of belonging together of senior participants.
Community-based
exercises
should
allow for
various
learning and physical training scenarios, such as a group-
walk for participants living in the same neighbourhood.
After the walk, participants should be able to synchronize
their wearable devices, so as to store the number of steps
recorded by the system. Therefore, the course has to be
accessible from mobile devices, such as smartphones.
Furthermore, inspired by the work of Ijsselsteijn et al. [4]
gamification elements are also part of the conceptual design
to support and foster user engagement, as argued by
Buchem et al. [9]. Gamification is the use of elements
normally found in games like rewards or badges in another
context like here in a learning context. In the spirit of agile
development and following principles exposed Martinez-
Maldonado et al. [10] to support learners better, specific
user requirements were designed with potential senior users
aged 65+ and tested iteratively. The online course has been
tested with 20 senior participants.
This contribution presents the online course and its
implementation in section II. The context of the evaluation
is given in section III, which is followed by the analysis of
the users’ digital interactions in section IV. Section V
concludes with discussion and future works.
II.
THE ONLINE COURSE
Essentially, the online course provides to participants
physical training for four weeks, communication forums,
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Figure 1. The user interface – left: after log in; middle-left: weekly training plan; middle-right: training-exercise; right: badges.
as well as an overview of their achievements. Participants
are expected to wear an activity tracker that counts the
steps they walk, presently the tracker Vivofit from Garmin
[11].
The instructional design of fMOOC combines elements
of Online learning with elements of gamification and
principles of seamless learning. The fMOOC architecture
integrates wearables, mobile and learning technologies to
capture and share fitness data and learning/training content
with other senior learners. The fMOOC can be accessed
via the “fMOOC App” using a laptop, a tablet or a mobile
phone phone
phone. The fMOOC software includes a
gamification service to incorporate rewards and playful
elements in the course, including badges and battles, as
argued by Buchem et al. [8][9]. The user interface has been
designed to take into account specificities of older people,
which includes among others simple vocabulary, short
texts, big buttons and fonts, as exposed by Kurniawan and
Zaphiris[12]. We first explain the course as a learner sees
it, and then describe how the system has been implemented
A.
Learner View
Fig. 1 left shows the screen that a learner sees right
after logging in. At the top right of the screen, the help
button (Hilfe) gives a hotline number where to call in case
of problems. Below, the number of steps a learner is
expected to walk daily is reminded, 5000 steps (5000
Schritte) and the number of steps already walked in the
current day (Schrittzahl von heute:) is shown. The button
synchronize your steps (Schritte synchronisieren) reminds
participants to synchronize their tracker, so that the
fMOOC system pulls their data from the Garmin host. For
synchronization, a mobile application of the provider of the
wearable activity tracker has to be installed on the
smartphone and needs to run in the background. A user has
to hold his/her tracker near enough to his/her smartphone
and press the “synchronize” button. The transmission is
automatic,
but
can
last
a
few
seconds.
When
the
transmission is successful, the number of steps walked in
the current day is almost immediately updated in the
fMOOC system and displayed on the start view. The
button show battle (Wettbewerb anzeigen) is to show the
current status of the battle; this gamification element will
be explained below. The three buttons at the bottom are
always visible except when a user is in the process of
completing a training day. The home button (Startseite)
allows the user to come back to this view anytime. The
button Training gives access to the training plans, while the
button Achievements (Erfolge) allows the user to check
her/his achievements.
The physical training has been developed according
to medical recommendations as exposed in [13]. In
particular, training begins with a warming up exercise and
finishes with a cool down exercise. Further, endurance,
strength and flexibility exercises are mixed properly. Each
week is made up of three training days and four rest days
(Erholungstag), as participants should not over-exercise;
the interface shows a “–“ in front of each day which is not
completed. Fig. 1 middle-left shows an overview of the
training plan at the beginning of a week. A learner can
complete the training days in the order he/she wants. The
intensity of the exercises vary as to fit 3 levels of fitness.
Each exercise is explained with a sequence of 2-3 photos
or a video of 1-2 minutes, and 1-2 lines of instructions. The
user interface follows known principles of web navigation,
see for instance [14], to guide users through the different
exercises till the training is finished, then to make users
rate the training and finally comment it. Participants can
complete the training at their own pace. After completing
the last exercise, they touch the finish button. At that point,
the system records that this training has been performed
with a timestamp. The next screen invites participants to
rate how s/he feels and how s/he liked the training. The
next screen invites participants to write a feedback on the
training, to read / answer messages of others and to give
“likes” to feedbacks of others.
To
support
engagement
and
motivation,
the
instructional design integrates gamification elements in the
form of badges and battles. Participants can earn four kinds
of badges, and in each category they can earn four badges:
A “training” badge can be earned at the end of each
week if participants have accomplished a perfect training,
doing every single training day of the week and leaving a
rest
day
between
two
consecutive
training
days.
Contrasting with the “step” badge below, there is no partial
reward. A “step” badge, to encourage movement every
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

day, can be earned at the end of each week as well. A step
badge comes in three colors: bronze, silver and gold. A
bronze badge is earned if the learner has walked at least
5000 steps 5 days of the week, a silver badge for at least
5000 steps 6 days and the gold badge for at least 5000
steps each single day of the week. The four “comment”
badges can be earned any time as soon as a learner has
written enough messages in some discussion thread (each
training day has its own thread). The first badge goes with
2 messages written, the second with 4, the third with 6 and
the last badge with 8 messages written. Similarly, four
“like” badges can be earned anytime as soon as a
participant has received enough likes from others on
his/her messages. The first badge goes with 3 likes, the
second with 6, the third with 9 and the last with 12.
Battles have been designed as a group competition,
presently between female and male users, based on the
number of steps walked by the whole group. As soon as
some user has synchronized her/his tracker, the status of
the battle is updated too. Participants can check their
achievements anytime. The design follows the principle
“overview first, details on demand” of Schneiderman [15].
With the show steps button (Schritte anzeigen) a user can
see how many steps s/he has walked during the current
day, or during the current week or since the beginning of
the course by touching the corresponding button for these
details. With the show battle button (Wettbewerb anzeigen)
users can check which group currently leads. Fig. 1 right
shows 4 badges: perfect training (Perfektes Training), steps
(Schritte), posts (Kommentare) and like (Gefällt mir). By
pressing the corresponding look (Anschauen) button, the
four badges of that category are shown. The background
colour indicates for each badge whether the user has
already earned it or not, or whether the badge is in
progress. By pressing an individual badge, learners can get
details: how much they still need to do to earn that badge.
B.
Implementation
The fMOOC course has been implemented as a Web
application in responsive design using the platform Moodle
as backend to store the content (training days) and to
provide the forums, see Fig. 2 for the overall architecture.
Figure 2. Architecture of the fMOOC System.
As already mentioned, the design of the user interface
has adopted an agile methodology, testing most of the
elements with senior users before implementation. In order
to allow for a potentially “massive” opening of the fMOOC
system beyond the scope of the user group envisaged in the
pilot study, the user interface was developed as a mobile
web application based on recent HTML5 standards [16]. It
can be run on any browser installed on a reasonably
modern smartphone regardless of whether it uses Android,
iOS or Windows as an operating system. As for the
backend components of the system, the application is
currently deployed on a single server, but the overall
architecture
was designed
according to
the stateless
paradigm of a RESTful architecture [17], which provides a
solid basis for scalability.
As for the tracking service provider, the current version
of the fMOOC system has only been integrated with the
service of Garmin so far, which had been selected at the
beginning of the project given the usability requirements of
the user group. An agreement with Garmin allowed access
to its backend service infrastructure through a specific
connector. As structure and access to data collected by
fitness
trackers
has
not
been
subject
to
industry
standardisation so far, commercial activity trackers and
services are relatively “closed” system infrastructures, and
providers differ with respect to how access may be realised
by third party systems like fMOOC. For this reason, the
fMOOC system has been designed as independent of any
particular tracking provider, where different providers can
be integrated by implementing a backend-side connector to
the particular tracking service. Hence, also with regard to
the tracking service, openness of the fMOOC system has
principally been foreseen.
III.
CONTEXT OF THE EVALUATION
The evaluation has been conducted in a blended
learning approach consisting of two face-to-face meetings
separated by the four weeks online course. Twenty
volunteers not possessing any wearable activity tracker
have been recruited, 10 men and 10 women aged 62 to 75.
During the first face-to-face meeting, participants were
introduced to the whole course. They received a properly
installed smartphone and an activity tracker each. Learners
were introduced to smartphones, had a chance to try the
course,
the
activity
tracker
and
the
synchronization
procedure. Their fitness level was determined so that they
would receive the proper level of exercises, and their
physical condition recorded. This included, among others,
measuring balance ability, strength, the distance they can
walk in 6 minutes and the percentage of body fat. During
the second face-to-face meeting, the physical condition of
the users has been recorded again. Further, participants
filled anonymously a questionnaire regarding their overall
experience with the course.
IV.
ANALYSIS OF THE DIGITAL USER INTERACTIONS
The usage of the interface has been analyzed using the
piwik web analytics tool [18]. First, we analyse logging in
the App and synchronisation, then the physical activities
through training and steps badges and the rating of the
trainings, then the social activity through the comment and
like badges and finally how often users have consulted
their achievements.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

A.
Logging in the Web App and Synchronisation
A learner eager to complete all physical activities of the
course should log in at least once every day to synchronize
the activity tracker, and possibly more on a training day.
Table I shows how often users have logged in the App and
how often they have touched the synchronize button during
the 4 weeks. The large standard deviations indicate that
users differ greatly; a closer look at the data gives two
outliers:
one
with
90
log
in
and
one
with
702
synchronisation actions. An inspection of the weekly data
shows that two users out of the 20 gave up after two weeks,
which means nobody gave up right at the beginning of the
course. The high number of synchronize interactions
compared with log in might indicate some problem when
synchronizing the activity tracker. This is confirmed when
inspecting the sequential actions of individual visitors’ log
files: quite often the synchronize button is pressed twice in
a row, or alternate with the help button.
TABLE I.
LOGGING IN THE WEBAPP AND SYNCHRONISATION
average
std
Log in
44
21
Synchronization
129
152.12
The help button has been pressed 100 times during the
4 weeks, 40 times during the first 3 days and 62 times
during the first week. The hotline has been called 32 times
by 16 users, including the numerous calls by one user for
whom some setting needed to be redone. These interactions
indicate some usability issues with the synchronisation of
the activity tracker, which made users feel insecure in the
first week of the course.
B.
Physical Activity
The badges earned in the category “training” and
“steps” assess whether participants have accomplished the
training properly and included enough movement in their
daily life.
Figure 3. Number of learners who earned a “training” badge; the x-
axis shows the weeks.
The histogram Fig. 3 shows that the majority of the
users have earned a “training” badge each week. Taking
into account that 2 users abandoned after 2 weeks, 68.4%
of the “training” badges have been earned. Most of the
users rated the training after completing it, thus following
the design adopted for the interface. In total, 201 ratings
were given for each of the two questions: “how do you feel
after training” and “how did you like the training?”.
Ratings were mostly positive: 69.15% of the wellbeing-
ratings was “great” and 64.7% of the liking-ratings was 3
or 4, see Fig. 4.
Figure 4. Liking rating given: 4 is the best, 0 the worst.
Figure 5. Number of learners who earned “step” badges.
Taking the training days perspective and counting how
many stars each training has received, one cannot notice
any training that stands out as particularly excellent or bad:
the average goes from 2.44 till 3.4 for the liking-rating, and
from 1.64 to 1.72 for the wellbeing-rating (scale 2, best, to
0, worst).
The majority of the users have earned a “step” badge
each week, which results in 89.5% of the badges earned,
when taking into account that two users abandoned after
week 2 and aggregating all colors. The flat curve of Fig. 5
shows that each week three participants did not achieve
5000 steps on at least five days. These figures include the
two participants who abandoned. Aggregating training and
step badges shows that 19 participants earned a training
badge or a step badge or both in the first week.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

C.
Social Interactions
The course has been designed to encourage social
interactions
by
prompting
feedback
in
the
form
of
comments and likes after the completion of each training.
Figure 6. Number of learners who earned “comment” badges.
Figure 7. From left: number of read and written messages and number of
likes given.
Fig. 6 shows that every user has written in some
discussion thread, as 20 badges for writing at least two
comments have been earned; the numbers on the horizontal
axis: 2, 4, 6 and 8, are the numbers of comments a learner
has to write to earn the corresponding badge. All together
76.25% of the “comment” badges have been earned. Fig. 6
shows also that only 11 participants have written 8
comments or more, which suggests that participants differ
in their social interactions. This is confirmed by the box
plots of Fig. 7 that show the number of times users have
touched the read button to read a message, the write button
to send a message, and the number of times they have
given a like to a message. One finds again well known
behaviors also observed Cobo et al. [19] or Merceron [20]
in online courses: participants read more than they write,
and a few outliers write more than the majority. Users have
not given many “likes”. As a consequence, less learners
have earned “like” badges resulting in only 21.25% of the
“like” badges being earned.
D.
Consulting Achievements
The
systemic
gamification
design
has
been
implemented through two main elements: badges and a
battle. How often have users looked at the current state of
the battle or at their badges? Here too, behaviors vary
greatly. With a median of 60, battle is the gamification
element which has been the most consulted. These high
figures are confirmed when analyzing the views that are
accessed right after the start view of the app: the battle
view has the highest proportion of moves, followed by the
training view, where users can start their training, followed
by the achievement view, where users can look at the
badges they have earned, see Fig. 1 left. Remarkably, this
pattern stays stable in each of the four training weeks.
The medians for consulting the badges lie around 10
with a peak of 17 (Training) and a depression of 6 (Steps).
This indicates that 50% of the users have consulted their
badges about 2 times a week on average. These figures
suggest that participants have been interested in playing the
game of the battle. They have appreciated the other badges,
but might not have been eager to collect them.
V.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The analysis of the digital interactions has shown that
users could log in, synchronize and use the fMOOC App
during the four weeks. The two users who abandoned gave
the following explanation: one found the training exercises
too laborious, and the other lost interest. Therefore, one
can conclude that the online course on a smartphone is
easy to use. This has been confirmed by the interview of
the second face-to-face meeting: the majority rated the App
as easy to use. The synchronization procedure has posed
some problems, as the analysis of the interaction data has
shown. It has been confirmed by the calls received on the
hot line: the worries mainly concerned synchronization. A
better feedback in the App in case of an unsuccessful
pulling of the data is necessary. However, one should also
notice that after the first week users have learned to adjust.
Most of the users have learned to train properly and to
include a minimum of 5000 steps in their daily life, as they
have earned the corresponding badges. Inspecting the daily
number of steps, one notices big differences between
learners. This suggests replacing the common goal of 5000
steps by a personalized goal to be adapted each week.
The training proposed in the course is effective. Indeed,
the physical condition check during the two face-to-face
meetings has shown that all users who completed the
course
improved
their
physical
condition
and
the
improvement was statistically significant as shown by
Steinert et al. [21]. Further, users reported that they felt
fitter after the course.
The gamification elements have been introduced to
support motivation and engagement of users. Users have
consulted their achievements regularly, though they have
consulted the battle most. During the second face-to-face
meeting,
participants
confirmed
that
the
battle
was
exciting, and indicated a moderate interest in the other
badges, their main interest being to complete the physical
activities.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Summarizing, the analysis of the interaction data
enriched with the answers of the users during the second
face-to-face meeting and the pre- and posttests concerning
physical condition shows that the fitness online course
provides an enjoyable user experience, that participants
have learned how to exercise more in a sound manner and
that the health-related goal is met, as participants who
completed the course have an improved physical condition.
A future work is to run this course massively and
openly. This slightly changes the targeted population, as
participants will be expected to have their own activity
tracker but not necessarily a smartphone, as the course can
run on a personal computer. A digital introduction and
physical condition check will be needed, to replace the two
face-to-face meetings of the evaluation. An enhancement
that is highly desirable is to develop connectors for other
tracking providers, in order not to be limited to wearable
activity trackers from Garmin. Though there is no technical
difficulty to implement this enhancement, since the present
system architecture has been designed to allow for it, the
realization might be tedious because there is no standard.
Further,
with
an
increased
number
of
learners,
the
conditions to earn comments and like badges need to be
revised.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank F. Dubois, E. Manthey, C. Guder, J.
Fuhrmann, A. Lebedeva for their contribution to the
realization of the fMOOC system, and the participants of
the evaluation. The German Federal Ministry of Education
and Research supports the fMOOC project (16SV7100).
REFERENCES
[1]
G. D. Cohen et al. “The impact of professionally conducted
cultural programs on the physical health, mental health, and
social functioning of older adults”, Gerontologist, 46, pp.
726–734, 2006.
[2]
C. Lister, J. West, B. Cannon, T. Sax and D. Brodegard,
“Just a fad? Gamification in health and fitness apps.” Journal
of Medical Internet Research Serious Games, vol. 2 (2):e9
Aug. 2014, doi: 10.2196/games.3413.
[3]
EU Physical Activity Guidelines, “Recommended Policy
Actions in Support of Health-Enhancing Physical Activity”,
EU
Working
Group
Sport
&
Health,
2008,
URL:
http://ec.europa.eu/sport/library/policy_documents/eu-
physical-activity-guidelines-2008_en.pdf
retrieved:
03,
2016.
[4]
W. Ijsselsteijn, HH. Nap, Y. de Kort and K. Poels, “Digital
Game design for Elderly Users”, Proceedings of the 2007
Conference of Future Play, Future Play’07. ACM, Nov.
2007, pp. 17-22, doi:10.1145/1328202.1328206.
[5]
O. Assad et al. “Motion-Based Games for Parkinson's
Disease Patients“, Proceedings oft he 10th International
Conference
on
Entertainment
Computing
ICEC
2011
(Vancouver, Canada, October 5-8) LNCS 6972, Springer
Verlag, Oct. 2011, pp. 47-58.
[6]
E. Duplàa, E. Taiwo, D. Kaufman, L. Sauvé and L. Renaud,
“digital games as TEL Systems for Canadian seniors: what
uses, what benefits?” (“Des jeux numériques comme EIAH
pour les ainés canadiens : quels usages et quels bénéfices
?”),
Proceedings
of
the
7th
Conference
sur
les
environnements
Informatiques
pour
l’Apprentissage
Humain, EIAH’2015, June 2015, pp. 246-257. ISBN: 978-2-
9552774-0-9
[7]
D. Ledger and D. McCaffrey, “Inside Wearables How the
Science of Human Behavior Change Offers the Secret to
Long-Term Engagement”, Endeavour Partners LLC, 2014,
http://endeavourpartners.net/assets/Endeavour-Partners-
Wearables-White-Paper-20141.pdf retrieved: 03, 2016.
[8]
I. Buchem, A. Merceron, J. Kreutel, M. Haesner and A.
Steinert, “Designing for User Engagement in Wearable
Enhanced Learning for Health Ageing”, Proceedings of the
iLRN (immersive Learning Research Network) Conference
2015, IOS Press, July 2015, pp. 314-324.
[9]
I. Buchem, A. Merceron, J. Kreutel, M. Haesner and A.
Steinert, “Gamification Designs in Wearable Enhanced
Learning for Health Ageing”, Proceedings of the IMLC
(immersive Learning Research Network) Conference 2015,
IEEE, Nov. 2015, pp. 9-15, doi: 10.1109/IMCTL.2015.7359545
[10] R. Martinez-Maldonado et al. “The LATUX Workflow:
Designing and Deploying Awareness Tools in Technology-
Enabled Learning“, Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference
on
Learning
Analytics
and
Knowledge
(LAK15),
ACM,
March
2015,
pp.
1-10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2723576.2723583
[11] Garmin Vivofit http://sites.garmin.com/en-US/vivo/vivofit
retrieved: 03, 2016.
[12] S. Kurniawan and P. Zaphiris, „Research-Derived Web
Design
Guidelines for
Older
People“, Proceedings of
Seventh International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on
Computers and Accessibility 2005 (ASSETS’ 05), pp.129–
135.
[13] K. Hottenrott and G. Neumann, „Science of training: a guide
in 14 lessons“ („Trainingswissenschaft: Ein Lehrbuch in 14
Lektionen“), Auflage: 1., Auflage. Ed. Meyer & Meyer
Sport, Germany, 2010.
[14] M. Pearrow, “Web Site Usability Handbook”, Internet
Series, Thomson, 2006.
[15] B. Scheiderman, “The Eyes Have It: A Task by Data Type
Taxonomy for Information Visualizations”, Proceedings of
the 1996 Symposium on Visual Languages VL’96, IEEE
Press, Sept. 1996, pp. 336 – 343.
[16] World Wide Web Consortium, “HTML5 – A vocabulary and
associated
APIs
for
HTML
and
XHTML”,
W3C
Recommendation,
2014,
http://www.w3.org/TR/html5/
retrieved: 03, 2016.
[17] R. T. Fielding, “Architectural styles and the design of
network-based software architectures”, Doctoral dissertation,
University of California, Irvine, 2000.
[18] Piwik. http://piwik.org/ retrieved: 03, 2016.
[19] G. Cobo et al. “Using agglomerative hierarchical clustering
to model learner participation profiles in online discussion
forums”, Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on
Learning Analytics and Knowledge. (LAK12), ACM, May
2012,
pp.
248-251.
DOI=http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2330601.2330660.
[20] A. Merceron, “Connecting Analysis of Speech Acts and
Performance Analysis – An Initial Study”, Proceedings of
the Workshops at the LAK14 Conference, Workshop 3:
Computational
Approaches
to
Connecting
Levels
of
Analysis in Networked Learning Communities, co-located
with 4th International Conference on Learning Analytics and
Knowledge (LAK14), March 2014, pp. 24-28. ISSN 1613-00
[21] A. Steinert, I. Buchem, A. Merceron, J. Kreutel and M.
Haesner “A novel fitness system for older adults, combining
a fitness tracker with gamification elements – the pilot study
fMOOC@Home.
Submitted.
2016.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

