Developing, Understanding and Evaluating Augmented Reality Framework for 
Universities in Saudi Arabia  
 
Muteeb Saad Alahmari 
Curtin Business School 
School of Information Systems 
 Perth, Australia 
M.alahmari4@postgrad.curtin.edu.au 
 
 
Abstract— Technology has introduced new tools such as 
Augmented Reality (AR), the application of which may 
improve learning outcomes. AR is the integration of digital 
information with the user environment in real time. Despite 
the fact that technologies have been implemented in Saudi 
Arabia’s education sector, several issues exist that are 
associated with the traditional methods of teaching and 
learning 
i.e. students’ lack 
of 
motivation 
concerning 
independent learning, collaborative learning, and skills-
acquisition, which are a part of the current pedagogy. To 
resolve the problems associated with traditional teaching and 
learning methods, the Augmented Reality approach will be 
examined and assessed in Saudi Arabia’s higher education 
sector, through the development of a new AR model. This 
research aims to develop, understand and evaluate the AR 
framework in order to determine the factors ( e.g., willingness, 
perception, motivation, and acceptance) that will have the most 
influence on AR adoption especially regarding students’ 
learning outcomes in Saudi Arabia. A set of recommendations 
will be suggested for the adoption of AR in Saudi Arabia’s 
higher education sector. This study will employ a mixed-
methods research design (Explanatory Sequential Design), 
whereby the data will be collected using both quantitative 
(online survey) and qualitative methods (semi-structured 
interviews).  
Keywords-Augmented Reality; Higher Education; Saudi Univer-
sity; Integration. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Schuemie [4] described Human-Computer Interaction 
(HCI) as a discipline that is concerned with designing, eval-
uating and implementing interactive computing systems for 
the use of individuals. User experiences such as satisfaction, 
motivation, attention, and emotion are essential in HCI to 
improve the efficiency of these technologies. The effective-
ness of new technologies, such as Augmented Reality, has 
inspired the higher education sector to utilize them for 
teaching and learning [5]. In the area of learning, the in-
creased learning demands and enhanced learning outcomes 
have given rise to many issues in university curricula. Con-
sequently, it has now become more challenging to adhere to 
traditional methods of teaching and learning. Hence, with 
the increased role of computers in day-to-day activities, it is 
expected that several computer systems will be integrated 
into the learning environment. Technological innovations 
such as AR and Virtual Reality (VR) have a potential use in 
education. Integrating AR technology into the classroom 
needs to be evaluated in order to determine its effectiveness 
for learners. AR technology has become a well-known re-
search topic, and has been widely explored and used in 
many settings including training and education. Thus, in this 
study, AR will be examined and assessed in the context of 
Saudi Arabia’s higher education sector, through the devel-
opment of a new model of AR. 
This paper has been organized according to the follow-
ing sections. In Section II, AR and VR are discussed and 
compared. Section III explains AR technology. Section IV 
reviews the extant literature on the use and effectiveness of 
AR in education. This is followed in Section V by a detailed 
description of the Saudi education system.  The research 
methods and research question are presented in Section VI. 
In Section VII, an initial AR framework and the research 
outcomes are identified based on the literature review. Sec-
tion VIII discusses future work and concludes the paper. 
II. 
VR AND AR 
VR is defined by McLellan [6] as “a class of computer-
controlled multisensory communication technologies that 
allow more intuitive interactions with data and involve hu-
man senses in new ways.” (p.461). McGlashan and Axling 
[7] elucidated that VR is a graphical two- or three-
dimensional interface that enables the communication be-
tween the user and computer, while AR is the next step after 
VR. Azuma et al. [8] defined AR as a system that enhances 
the real world with artificial objects by means of computer-
generated sensory input such as graphics, video sound, or a 
Global Positioning System (GPS) data. Azuma [9] identified 
three advantages of an AR system: it mixes real and virtual; 
it is interactive in the real world; and it registers in 3-D.  
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Total immersion is provided in the VR environment 
while AR integrates the information in the user’s existing 
view. Figure 1 depicts Milgram and Kishino’s [3] represen-
tation of the real world and virtual world objects combined 
in a simple display. 
In order to process the scene, the VR system presents an 
entirely artificial environment; whereas, AR processes the 
information from different resources and superimposes it 
onto the users’ environment [5].  Nevertheless, Di Serio et 
al. [10] reported that involvement, navigation, and interac-
tion are features that AR and VR have in common.  
III.
AR TECHNOLOGY
There are two main AR software application types, both 
of which have recently become available to educators: (a) a 
marker-based or vision-based AR and (b) a markerless or 
location-based AR.  The marker-based AR presents the vir-
tual object and digital media (i.e., text, 3D models, graphics, 
video, and audio) to the users when they point a camera at a 
visual marker (e.g., 2D target, Quick Response code (QR)). 
The markerless AR uses the user’s location, like GPS, and 
then the application integrates the virtual content with an 
exact location on or within the users’ real environment. The 
marker-based AR type will be addressed in this research. 
A. Marker-based AR System process
This process uses a software application to recognize im-
ages, such as a QR or a physical object, then generates the 
augmented virtual content, and enhances this information 
onto the recognized object (see Figures 2 and 3).  
Mainly, an AR system captures the real world or images, 
analyzes them and compares them with features identified 
by the designer and displays the results to the end user. 
B. AR displays
AR displays can be categorized into three types based on
their position between the viewer and the real environment: 
Head-Worn Displays (HWD), handheld displays, and Pro-
jection displays. HWD is worn on the head, allowing imag-
es to be displayed in front of users’ eyes. Projection dis-
plays are used to direct chosen virtual information to the 
real objects to be augmented. Handheld is a flat-panel Liq-
uid Crystal Display (LCD) that some AR systems use by 
connecting a camera to run a video see-through-based aug-
mentation. The handheld display is used as a magnifying 
glass or a window that shows the real objects with an AR 
overlay. Zhou et al. [11] suggested “Handheld displays are a 
good alternative to Head Mounted Display (HMD) and 
Head-Mounted Projective Display (HMPD) systems for AR 
applications, particularly because they are minimally intru-
sive, socially acceptable, readily available and highly mo-
bile”(p.198).  
IV.
AR IN EDUCATION
In the literature, AR has been acknowledged as an effec-
tive technological tool that assists students to understand a 
range of science-based domains, such as environmental sci-
ence [12]. The study has shown that AR has a strong posi-
tive emotional impact on the student. Moreover, a study on 
the use of AR has produced significant results and encour-
aged researchers to investigate its use in the field of educa-
tion [13]. The result indicated that no studies have investi-
gated the “educational” field (teacher training). A study by 
Bujak et al. [14] which compared AR with traditional com-
puter devices inside and outside a mathematics classroom 
suggested that AR as a collaborative learning tool will better 
motivate students to learn.  AR allows learners to interact 
with virtual objects in the real world. Combining the educa-
tional content with AR technology builds new automated 
applications to enhance the effectiveness of learning and 
teaching. Bujak et al. [14] discussed how AR allows stu-
dents to interact naturally, which can improve learning by 
attaching data to objects and locations in the students’ sur-
roundings. Another study by Kamarainen et al. [15] as-
sessed the use of AR technology as a means of facilitating 
students’ understanding and interpretation when measuring 
water quality. Results indicated that AR allows students to 
interact in real time and that leads to improvement in inter-
pretation flexibility. However, the use of AR in education 
has limitations. According to Bacca et al. [13], common 
limitations of applying AR in education are the students’ 
attitudes and the difficulty of using AR applications. Hsiao 
et al. [12] reported that students need to pay much more 
attention when using AR for the first time. Environment 
constraints, such as inadequate infrastructure and lack of 
AR equipment, are common obstacles that educators need to 
be aware of when integrating AR and VR into education. 
Therefore, accessibility and usability factors are important 
issues that need to be considered in future work [10]. Addi-
 
Figure 1. Simplified representation of a "virtuality continuum" [3] 
Figure 2. The concept of AR- based  [2] 
Figure 3. AR Marker-based AR architecture [1] 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

tionally, Dunleavy and Dede [16] found that cognitive over-
load, culture, and type of institute are important issues that 
play significant roles in the adoption of AR in education. 
A. Effectiveness of AR regarding students’ learning 
outcomes 
Many studies have reported the different effects that 
these technologies have on students' learning outcomes. A 
study by Wojciechowski and Cellary [17] showed that AR 
technology improves students’ motivation to learn.  Bacca 
et al. [13] hypothesized that AR is an effective learning tool 
owing to its combination of actual world and virtual world 
objects. Its superimposition of information and its enabling 
of the visualization, exploration, manipulation and interac-
tion with objects within computer-generated surroundings 
allow learning to take place at the learner’s own pace. Find-
ings have confirmed that AR produces positive learning 
outcomes for students in the faculties of medicine and sci-
ence [8] [18]. In addition, AR provides enjoyment that sig-
nificantly influences students’ intention to use this technol-
ogy in the future. Furthermore, Jou and Wang [19] found 
that teaching approaches, such as AR, have the most effect 
on students’ motivation to learn. From the psychological 
perspective, Bujak et al. [14] identified the psychological 
factors that enhance a learning environment that uses AR: 
students are able to interact naturally, and this can lead to an 
increase in the transparency of the interface between stu-
dents and educational content. Additionally, Bujak et al. 
concluded that the AR environment could enhance learning 
by attaching data to objects and locations in the students' 
surroundings. Akçayır and Akçayır [20] demonstrated that 
most of the advantages of AR in educational settings relate 
to students' learning outcomes associated with motivation, 
attitude, and learning achievement. 
B. Influence of students ‘characteristics with AR 
technology. 
According to Cheng and Tsai [2], few studies have taken 
into account the students’ characteristics when students are 
engaged with AR in science education [21][23].  In the 
Squire and Jan [22] study,  students were divided into three 
groups according to their age. Older students were found to 
be more interactive during AR game tasks, whereas younger 
students rejected the researchers’ hypothesis regarding the 
AR game task. Albrecht et al. [24] investigated the emotional 
and cognitive impact that AR technology could have on stu-
dents' learning process compared with the impact of tradi-
tional methods. The results showed that there was a signifi-
cant decrease in student fatigue and a slight increase in stu-
dent drive.  However, despite the scant support from various 
researchers for the effectiveness of AR, other researchers 
have stressed its significance in the learning field  classroom 
environment or as an evaluation tool [14][25][26] the class-
room environment, or as an evaluation tool. Researchers 
Ausburn and Ausburn [27] highlighted that there are a few 
studies that explore and explain the effect of AR regarding 
theoretical perspectives and models. Several studies [28] 
[30] also argued that more research on AR is needed to in-
vestigate the emotional, social and cognitive dimensions of 
human experience in the virtual world rather than just tech-
nical issues.  Cheng and Tsai [2] suggested, “more research 
is required to explore learning experience (e.g., motivation or 
cognitive load) and learner characteristics (e.g., spatial abil-
ity or perceived presence) involved in AR” (p.449). Various 
factors such as emotional, social, and personal beliefs, prior 
knowledge, and cognition have been mentioned in the litera-
ture as important issues that need to be examined to deter-
mine their influence on student learning outcomes when 
teaching methods have included technology compared with 
traditional methods. 
V. 
SAUDI EDUCATION SYSTEM  
The process of teaching and learning in the Saudi 
education system is still lacking vital elements such as 
enhancing students’ personal skills and motivation by 
encouraging critical thinking, self-learning, and engagement 
[31]. The current approaches to learning and teaching in 
Saudi Arabia’s higher education sector were reviewed by 
Alnassar and Dow [32]. They noted the following major 
challenges: a lack of motivation to develop and improve the 
teaching methods; the current curriculum does not 
sufficiently encourage students’ critical thinking, self-
learning, and problem-solving skills; the lack of adequate 
teacher training for faculty members. Furthermore, [33] 
stated that the higher education system in Saudi Arabia 
encounters difficulties in meeting outcome quality in relation 
to work needs. Saudi universities are trying to confront these 
challenges by developing a contemporary curriculum and 
advanced technological teaching facilities [34]. Despite the 
learning and teaching issues in the Saudi education system, 
there are some reasons for optimism. Studies are 
continuously being conducted by the Ministry of High 
Education in Saudi Arabia in order to develop an adequate e-
learning infrastructure. Alrasheed et al. [35] reported that in 
developing countries, such as Saudi Arabia, many 
universities and schools depend on traditional teaching 
methods and ignore alternative and more effective methods, 
such as the use of technology in the classroom. 
Consequently, Saudi Arabia allocated a large budget to 
support the growth of the education sector and introduce new 
education programs [36]. One of the largest projects for the 
redevelopment of the education sector in SA is the King 
Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST). 
The aim of this project is to redevelop and improve the 
learning environments by integrating a digital environment 
and technologies into the classroom. The Ministry of 
Education has established twenty-seven technical centers to 
develop 
teaching 
methods 
and 
improve 
teachers' 
performance in class [37]. The Saudi Arabian government is 
working hard to reform the education sector in line with 
sophisticated market needs.   
A. Integration of technologies in education in Saudi 
Arabia  
The integration of technologies in universities is rapidly 
increasing to simplify the delivery of education. Therefore, 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

to enhance student learning, a large number of studies have 
focused on finding better technological solutions that are 
compatible with pedagogy [39][40]. Collaborative e-learning 
is one of the popular pedagogical technologies that were 
integrated into Saudi Universities to improve education. Al 
Saif [41] indicated that collaborative e-learning plays a 
significant role in increasing the number of students 
enrolling at universities. Smart Tablet technology was 
introduced in Saudi Arabia’s education sector to investigate 
its potential benefits and enhance student learning outcomes 
by increasing the level of engagement in the learning process 
[42]. Also, several studies [43][44] examined the acceptance 
by students in Saudi Arabia of mobile learning in higher 
education. The results revealed that more than 65 percent of 
students are using online learning services and more than 62 
percent are learning via electronic resources daily. Also, 
smartphones, iPads, and Tablets were the preferred learning 
devices of the majority of students.  However, some studies 
[37] [42] [45] [46] identified several limitations: delay of the
integration 
or 
rather 
the 
implementation 
of 
these
technologies in SA education institutions; the lack of an
adequate infrastructure; and the culture and personal beliefs,
which have a significant impact on the utilization of
technology in classrooms. Nowadays, new innovative
technologies such as AR and VR introduce individuals to a
new way of interacting with the world in three dimensions
and two dimensions. Universities need to adjust and develop
new methods of teaching and learning. In this study, these
innovative technologies are introduced into the education
system in Saudi Arabia’s universities with consideration
given to the aforementioned limitations.
B. Learning Technologies in SA
A study by Abou-Elhamd et al. [47] examined the
adoption of VR in medical education in Saudi Arabia. 
Students used the Voxel-Man TempoSurg simulator to learn 
about the anatomy of the temporal bone in three dimensions. 
They found that teachers and students consider the virtual 
environment to be a powerful learning tool. Another learning 
technology used in SA higher education is virtual Avatar to 
represent a female tutor in online learning [48]. The Avatar 
technology was used to resolve the issue of a gender-
segregated society in online learning. Based on that study, 
virtual Avatar is considered as a good learning technology 
for both male and female students. Nevertheless, certain 
limitations can prevent the adoption of these technologies in 
SA education; these include technical problems and the 
acceptance by students of a virtual teacher. However, all the 
previously mentioned studies have noted that the use of VR 
has several serious limitations associated with training, time, 
resources, technical problems, and personal beliefs. These 
studies would have been more useful if they had focused on 
suggesting a framework for adopting these kinds of 
technologies in SA education, and determining the effects of 
student characteristics on student learning outcomes when 
using VR technology.  
VI.
RESEARCH METHODS AND RESEARCH QUESTION
The rapid development of technologies has created
difficulties in understanding Information Technology (IT) 
practices, impacts, usage, and capabilities. IT has become an 
integral part of individuals’ lives and has evolved rapidly. 
Therefore, Information Systems (IS) researchers often face 
challenges in identifying sufficient findings and theories that 
provide essential insights into a phenomenon of interest. 
Consequently, a mixed-methods design can be employed as 
a powerful mechanism to help IS researchers to deal with 
such situations [49]. Given the research purpose and problem 
statement, this study will adopt a case study approach using  
mixed-methods research design (Explanatory Sequential 
Design) wherebythe data will be collected by both 
quantitative (online survey) and qualitative methods (SS 
interviews), analyzed separately, and then merged in one 
study [50] [51]. 
This research approach has been selected because a 
general understanding of the research problem can be 
provided by the quantitative data and their subsequent 
analysis. The statistical results will then be further refined 
and explained by eliciting participants’ views through 
interviews (qualitative phase) [52] [54]. Since 2011, most 
AR studies have used the mixed-methods approach [55] 
which involves the collection of both quantitative and 
qualitative data [56][58] to achieve the research objective(s).  
The purpose of using a sequential mixed-methods 
approach is to provide a comprehensive picture of a 
phenomenon by using qualitative data results to deliver a 
rich explanation of quantitative data and analysis [49][59]. In 
this study, the mixed-methods approach is used to provide an 
in-depth understanding of the potential use of AR technology 
in education, and to unearth more factors. The research 
philosophy in this study is pragmatism, taking an abductive 
approach to explore the use of AR in education and then 
generate a conceptual framework [60]. Pragmatism has been 
suggested for IS researchers and recommended by mixed 
methodologists as one of the preferred paradigms for 
modifying the use of mixed-methods research [49].  
Therefore, this study will take a mixed-methods (abduction) 
approach that is both qualitative (based on deduction) and 
quantitative (based on induction) in order to examine the use 
of, and users’ attitudes toward, new technology learning 
methods in Saudi Arabia’s universities. This research aims to 
identify the new factors that must be considered when devel-
oping AR for Saudi Arabia. 
Firstly, quantitative data will be gathered in order to 
understand students', teachers’, and learning department 
staff’s reactions to the AR teaching method, and to develop a 
set of new factors from the survey[49]. In other words, 
survey data will be used to determine the factors influencing 
the effectiveness of AR as a learning tool. In the the next 
phase, the qualitative method will be used to explore the 
quantitative results from the survey in more depth to gain 
more 
insights, 
reasons, 
deeper 
understanding, 
and 
explanation of these constructed factors.  
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

A. The participants
The study population will comprise students, teachers
(academics) and e-learning department staff from three 
publicly-funded universities in Saudi Arabia. These 
universities are an appropriate choice as this study will focus 
on the introduction of AR technology in the tertiary 
education sphere. 
B. Quantitative online survey
In this study, quantitative data will be used to measure
attitude, 
AR 
pedagogical 
contribution, 
willingness, 
acceptance, ICT infrastructure, sociocultural factor, etc. and 
to identify the factors for the proposed framework. Accord-
ingly, an online survey via Qualtrics will be conducted by 
sending a hyperlink to the all participants (students, teachers 
(academics), and learning department staff).  
This study will use the Statistical Package of Social Sci-
ences IBM SPSS Statistics (version 24) for data analysis 
and conduct exploratory factor analysis (EFA) for statistical 
testing of the data collected from the questionnaire in order 
to identify factors. EFA is commonly used in the domains of 
psychology and education [61].  
C. Qualitative Interviewing
The quantitative data collected via an online survey will
be supported/supplemented by qualitative data gathered dur-
ing face-to-face interviews. The researcher will use semi-
structured, face-to face-interviews with a selected number of 
subjects to collect the data necessary to achieve the research 
objective and to support the data obtained from the online 
survey results. The selection of potential interviewees will be 
based on their knowledge of AR. People who are highly 
familiar with AR will be able to provide the researcher with 
rich information and various perspectives on the use of AR 
in education. The aim of the interviews is to answer the 
‘why’ questions and to better explain the findings derived 
from quantitative data and analysis, and unearth additional 
factors. 
The qualitative data gathered from the interviews will be 
analyzed using general qualitative analysis techniques, such 
as Nvivo software (version 11). 
VII.
RESEARCH OUTCOMES
Several studies [2] [14] [62] [66] have attempted to 
show that AR will improve student learning outcomes; 
however, no study to date has appropriately identified the 
effect on learning outcomes of the individual’s characteris-
tics, such as emotional, personal, social, and cognitive influ-
ences in combination with the technology. After comparing 
these studies, some of the factors were found to be missing 
in some models, and none would be appropriate for higher 
education in SA. According to limitations and suggestions 
offered by related studies [37] [42,] [45] [46] [48] personal 
and social factors have a significant influence on the utiliza-
tion of technology in the context of higher education in 
Saudi Arabia. Compared with other developing regions, this 
country has solid roots in religious and tribal histories da-
ting back to the eighteenth century. Moreover, Saudi Arabia 
is one of the most traditional of the Muslim countries, espe-
cially regarding the status of women [67]. The religious and 
cultural restrictions in Saudi Arabian society cannot counte-
nance gender-desegregation [68]. Alturise and Alojaiman 
[69] indicated that “the strict application of Islamic law has
led to its education system being segregated according to
gender, which has far-reaching implications for the educa-
tional environment which puts it at odds with the open-
access culture practiced in many other countries” (p.46).
Therefore, the adoption of technology by Saudi Arabia pre-
sents a significant cultural challenge to the development of
its learning system.
Moreover, cognitive and emotional considerations were 
identified as important factors that must be dealt with when 
integrating AR [2] [14] [24] [55] [70] [71].  
To the best of this researcher’s knowledge, none of the 
studies reviewed thus far has addressed all of these dimen-
sions comprehensively. Hence, this study will attempt to 
address the gap in the literature of theoretical frameworks 
for using AR in learning by including these dimensions: 
emotional factors (EF), personal factors (PS), social factors 
(SF), and cognitive factors (CF).  
A. AR initial Framework
Figure 4 demonstrates the conceptual framework that in-
cludes all these factors. The conceptual framework classifies 
the relevant factors in AR learning system development and 
acceptance in SA.  Based on Gregor [72] theory taxonomy, 
this theoretical framework is related to theory for an expla-
nation of the phenomena and provides a deeper understand-
ing of why and what a relation between constructs.  
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

The gray arrows indicate the factors’ relationships that 
were derived from the literature review (INTERACT mod-
el) [73], while the blue arrows (the influence of SF on other 
factors) will be tested in this research via the mixed-
methods approach. Until recently, no study has been con-
ducted on the use of AR in Saudi Arabian universities. The 
initial model will be examined and assessed by several 
stakeholders in Saudi universities. 
B. Social factor (SC)
Culture can influence what is learned and how it is
learned [74]. From a social perspective, culture is what a 
society or community share in terms of attitudes, values, 
and beliefs. Learning and teaching styles differ across cul-
tures and need to be understood. Furthermore, the context of 
the institutions plays a role in the use of technology. 
Windschitl and Sahl [75] stated that “The ways in which 
those teachers eventually integrated computers into class-
room instruction were powerfully mediated by their interre-
lated belief systems about learners in their school, about 
what constituted ‘good teaching’ in the context of the insti-
tutional culture, and about the role of technology in stu-
dents’ lives” (p.165). Therefore, a different learning ap-
proach, such as a new technology can also be influenced by 
cultures and beliefs.  
C. Personal Factor (PF)
Personal characteristics such as gender, age, and level of
education can influence the attitude toward using technolo-
gy for educational purposes [76]. Hence, the successful 
adoption and integration of technology into teaching will be 
influenced by the personal characteristics of potential users 
[77]. Consequently, these factors will be considered in the 
AR learning environment, particularly in this research. Fur-
thermore, case studies conducted by Hayes et al. [78] who 
investigated students’ experience of presence in a mixed 
reality environment, found that perceived presence may 
impact on learning outcomes. 
D. Emotion Factor (EF)
The learning process in higher education can be affected
by emotion. Motivated students can confidently demonstrate 
their level of knowledge. Emotion plays a significant role in 
both teacher and learner behaviours and in learner motiva-
tion and self-esteem [79]. Several studies [80][81] have 
concluded that the positive impact of a virtual learning envi-
ronment on emotions would improve students’ cognitive 
processes and performance. According to the findings of 
previous studies [82] [84], in order to integrate cognitive 
and affective processes, emotional design research is need-
ed.  
E. Cognitive factor (CF)
The thinking processes of students can be supported,
guided, and extended when computer technology is in-
volved in the learning process [85]. However, technology 
may pose additional processing demands and increase stu-
dents’ cognitive load which prevents them from learning [2] 
[86]. Kalyuga and Liu [87] suggested that the cognitive 
characteristics of learners should be considered in order to 
guarantee the instructional effectiveness of any technologi-
cal innovation; otherwise, students will become frustrated. 
Moreover, the level of students’ prior knowledge can influ-
ence student learning outcomes in virtual learning and this 
should be considered in AR learning. Cai et al. [88] indicat-
ed that “With sufficient prior knowledge, whether we use 
abstract objects in teaching causes no impact on learning; 
this suggests that the influence of a technological innovation 
must be closely correlated with the students’ prior 
knowledge”.  
F. Technological Infrastructure
In order to develop, deliver, monitor, test, control or
support information technology services in universities, 
certain hardware, software, networks, facilities, etc. are re-
quired to operate and manage an information technology 
environment. Technology infrastructure is a complex issue 
and universities’ decision-makers need to realize the im-
portance of technology infrastructure as a means of improv-
ing teaching and enhancing learning outcomes. Altameem 
[89] stated that some of the universities in SA still have a
weak infrastructure, which makes people reluctant to use the
available services and systems.
G. Human-Computer Interaction (HCI)
HCI is the study of interactions between computers and
people and is an interdisciplinary field comprising computer 
science, engineering, and ergonomics; its human side in-
cludes psychology, physiology, sociology and cognitive 
Figure 4. Augmented Reality Framework for Universities in Saudi Arabia 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

sciences [90]. According to [91], the purpose of HCI is to 
design a system that is aligned with users’ needs and re-
quirements.  
H. Usability
Usability is about assuring users that the system is effec-
tive, efficient, safe to use, easy to use and evaluate, enjoya-
ble, and satisfying [91]. To ensure usability, the user should 
participate in the development process to prevent future user 
frustration and error and meet the users’ requirements. Ac-
cording to Cheng and Tsai [2], usability issues must be con-
sidered in AR technology because, without well-designed 
interfaces, students might encounter difficulties when using 
AR. 
I. Maintenance and Support
After careful planning and hard work, the integrated
technologies in organisations need to be updated to ensure 
that they are running flawlessly. Maintenance and support 
are required after implementing new technologies to keep 
the system running efficiently and effectively. The National 
Center for Education [92] stated that “support services, 
training, and certification must be ongoing to ensure suc-
cessful post-implementation use of technology”. Thus, the 
implementation of new technologies such as AR in universi-
ties should be supported and maintained by them or out-
sourced to contractors to achieve the desired goals. 
J. Training
Training in the use of technologies should be introduced
when universities intend to integrate technology in an edu-
cational environment. The main goal of training is to intro-
duce teachers and students to various appropriate technolo-
gies that shift the traditional learning method to an efficient 
learning approach that will enhance learning outcomes. In 
order to achieve this goal, adequate training is needed to 
encourage both teachers and students to use the technology. 
Follow-up training has been acknowledged as a significant 
factor in integrating technology in the classroom [93]. Final-
ly, in order for new technologies to be used appropriately in 
education, good in-service training is essential. 
K. Testing
The testing stage will allow users to test the new system
via a list of web browsers to ensure that the programme 
code is accurate and meets the intended functional require-
ment. [63]defined the user test as “a systematic approach to 
evaluating user performance in order to inform and improve 
usability design” (p.430).  The AR system must be tested to 
determine whether it meets the expectations of the author-
ized entity. 
L. Evaluation
System evaluation is an important phase when develop-
ing or updating a system. When a system is introduced or 
released, an evaluation should be conducted. Regular evalu-
ation is an important means of identifying the outcomes of 
using AR in education and improving its efficiency.  
VIII. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, the aim of this study was to develop and 
evaluate the AR framework in Saudi Arabia’s higher educa-
tion sector. This is a pioneering study in its field in that it 
attempted to extend the literature by classifying the factors 
that will have the most influence on AR adoption, especially 
on students’ learning outcomes in Saudi Arabia. The results 
of this study will create awareness of the potential ad-
vantages and the weaknesses of adopting AR technology for 
teaching and learning purposes in SA universities. It is an-
ticipated that this study will contribute to the theoretical and 
academic knowledge regarding the important factors that 
are needed for the successful implementation of AR for 
teaching and learning purposes in universities. The context 
of Saudi Arabia’s higher education sector presents a set of 
ambiguities and uncertainties that require careful examina-
tion prior to the widespread introduction of AR in university 
pedagogy. By combining various approaches drawn from 
extant literature on the implementation of AR in universities 
globally, this research suggests a framework of factors 
which could support an integrated and well-considered in-
corporation of AR in higher education in Saudi Arabia.   
In future work, we plan to extend current research by im-
plementing an AR system in Saudi universities and evaluat-
ing its impact on student learning outcomes.  
REFERENCES 
[1]
S. Siltanen and V. t. tutkimuskeskus, Theory and Applications of
Marker-based Augmented Reality. VTT, 2012. 
[2]
K.-H. Cheng and C.-C. Tsai, "Affordances of augmented reality in
science learning: Suggestions for future research," Journal of Science
Education and Technology, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 449-462, 2013.
[3]
P. Milgram and F. Kishino, "A taxonomy of mixed reality visual
displays," IEICE TRANSACTIONS on Information and Systems, vol.
77, no. 12, pp. 1321-1329, 1994. 
[4]
M. J. Schuemie, Human-computer Interaction and Presence in
Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy. TU Delft, Delft University of
Technology, 2003. 
[5]
L. Johnson, R. Smith, A. Levine, and K. Haywood, "The 2010
Horizon Report: Australia-New Zealand Edition. Austin, Texas: The
New Media Consortium," ed, 2010. 
[6]
H. McLellan, "Virtual realities," Handbook of Research for
Educational Communications and technology, pp. 457-487, 1996. 
[7]
S. McGlashan and T. Axling, "Talking to agents in virtual worlds," in
UK VR-SIG Conf, 1996.
[8]
Azuma, Y. Baillot, R. Behringer, S. Feiner, S. Julier, and B.
MacIntyre, "Recent advances in augmented reality," IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 34-47, 2001.
[9]
Azuma, "A survey of augmented reality," Presence: Teleoperators
and virtual environments, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 355-385, 1997. 
[10] Á. Di Serio, M. B. Ibáñez, and C. D. Kloos, "Impact of an augmented
reality system on students' motivation for a visual art course,"
Computers & Education, vol. 68, pp. 586-596, 2013. 
[11] F. Zhou, H. B.-L. Duh, and M. Billinghurst, "Trends in augmented
reality tracking, interaction and display: A review of ten years of
ISMAR," presented at the Proceedings of the 7th IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, 2008. 
[12] K.-F. Hsiao, N.-S. Chen, and S.-Y. Huang, "Learning while
exercising for science education in augmented reality among
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

adolescents," Interactive Learning Environments, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 
331-349, 2012/08/01 2012. 
[13] J. Bacca, S. Baldiris, R. Fabregat, S. Graf, and Kinshuk, "Augmented
Reality Trends in Education: A Systematic Review of Research and
Applications," in Educ. Technol. Soc. vol. 17, ed, 2014, pp. 133-149.
[14] K. R. Bujak, I. Radu, R. Catrambone, B. MacIntyre, R. Zheng, and G.
Golubski, "A psychological perspective on augmented reality in the
mathematics classroom," Computers & Education, vol. 68, pp. 536-
544, 2013. 
[15] A. M. Kamarainen et al., "EcoMOBILE: Integrating augmented
reality and probeware with environmental education field trips,"
Computers & Education, vol. 68, pp. 545-556, 2013. 
[16] M. Dunleavy and C. Dede, "Augmented reality teaching and
learning," in Handbook of Research on Educational Communications
and Technology: Springer, 2014, pp. 735-745.
[17] R. Wojciechowski and W. Cellary, "Evaluation of learners’ attitude
toward learning in ARIES augmented reality environments,"
Computers & Education, vol. 68, pp. 570-585, 2013. 
[18] T. Huk, "Who benefits from learning with 3D models? The case of
spatial ability," Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, vol. 22, no.
6, pp. 392-404, 2006. 
[19] M. Jou and J. Wang, "Investigation of effects of virtual reality
environments on learning performance of technical skills," Computers
in Human Behavior, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 433-438, 2013.
[20] M. Akçayır and G. Akçayır, "Advantages and challenges associated
with augmented reality for education: A systematic review of the
literature," Educational Research Review, vol. 20, pp. 1-11, 2// 2017.
[21] P. M. O’Shea, C. Dede, and M. Cherian, "Research Note: The Results 
of Formatively Evaluating an Augmented Reality Curriculum Based
on Modified Design Principles," International Journal of Gaming and 
Computer-Mediated Simulations (IJGCMS), vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 57-66,
2011. 
[22] K. D. Squire and M. Jan, "Mad City Mystery: Developing Scientific
Argumentation Skills with a Place-based Augmented Reality Game
on Handheld Computers," Journal of Science Education and
Technology, journal article vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 5-29, 2007.
[23] K. Squire and E. Klopfer, "Augmented reality simulations on
handheld computers," The Journal of the Learning Sciences, vol. 16,
no. 3, pp. 371-413, 2007. 
[24] U.-V. Albrecht, K. Folta-Schoofs, M. Behrends, and U. Von Jan,
"Effects of Mobile Augmented Reality Learning Compared to
Textbook Learning on Medical Students: Randomized Controlled
Pilot Study," Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 15, no. 8,
2013. 
[25] K.-E. Chang, C.-T. Chang, H.-T. Hou, Y.-T. Sung, H.-L. Chao, and
C.-M. Lee, "Development and behavioral pattern analysis of a mobile
guide system with augmented reality for painting appreciation
instruction in an art museum," Computers & Education, vol. 71, pp.
185-197, 2014. 
[26] H.-K. Wu, S. W.-Y. Lee, H.-Y. Chang, and J.-C. Liang, "Current
status, opportunities and challenges of augmented reality in
education," Computers & Education, vol. 62, pp. 41-49, 2013.
[27] L. J. Ausburn and F. B. Ausburn, "Spheres of reality: A
conceptualization of desktop virtual environments in career and
technical education and an implementation training model," in
Proceedings of the National Career and Technical Education
Research and Professional Development Conference, Las Vegas, NV.
Retrieved 
from 
http: 
www. 
public. 
iastate. 
edu/~
lannan/ACTER/2010/wednesday. shtml, 2010: Citeseer.
[28] S. A. Barab, T. D. Sadler, C. Heiselt, D. Hickey, and S. Zuiker,
"Erratum to: Relating narrative, inquiry, and inscriptions: Supporting
consequential play," Journal of Science Education and Technology, 
vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 387-407, 2010. 
[29] G. Hokanson et al., "Studying Native American culture in an
immersive virtual environment," in 2008 Eighth IEEE International
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies, 2008, pp. 788-792:
IEEE.
[30] M. Patera, S. Draper, and M. Naef, "Exploring magic cottage: A
virtual reality environment for stimulating children's imaginative
writing," Interactive Learning Environments, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 245-
263, 2008. 
[31] A. K. Hamdan, "The Reciprocal and Correlative Relationship
between Learning Culture and Online Education: A Case from Saudi
Arabia," International Review of Research in Open and Distance
Learning, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 309-336, 2014. 
[32] S. A. Alnassar and K. L. Dow, "Delivering High-Quality Teaching
and Learning for University Students in Saudi Arabia," in Higher
Education in Saudi Arabia: Achievements, Challenges and
Opportunities, L. Smith and A. Abouammoh, Eds. Dordrecht:
Springer Netherlands, 2013, pp. 49-60. 
[33] M. A. Alkhazim, "Higher education in Saudi Arabia: Challenges,
solutions, and opportunities missed," Higher Education Policy, vol.
16, no. 4, pp. 479-486, 2003. 
[34] L. Smith, Higher Education in Saudi Arabia : Achievements,
Challenges and Opportunities / edited by Larry Smith, Abdulrahman
Abouammoh. Dordrecht: Dordrecht : Springer Netherlands : Imprint:
Springer, 2013. 
[35] A. Alrasheed, A. Basahi, A. Alrowais, M. Alrwaished, M. Alrwaily,
and H. Alsuaik, "Study of teaching science in both elementary and
middle schools stages in boys and girls schools in Saudi Arabia,"
Riyadh: King Abdul-Aziz City for Science and Technology, 2003. 
[36] U.-S. A. B. Council, "The Education Sector in the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia," Retrieved on December, vol. 15, p. 2015, 2009. 
[37] K. K. Amoudi and O. Sulaymani, "The Integration Of Educational
Technology In Girls’classrooms In Saudi Arabia," European Journal
of Training and Development Studies, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 14-19, 2014.
[38] EON, "EON Reality and Midwam Open New Interactive Digital
Center (IDC) in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia," 2016. 
[39] M. Goos, "Using Technology to support effective mathematics
teaching and learning: what counts?," 2010. 
[40] V. G. Zakirova and E. E. Purik, "Creative Environment Formation in
Design 
Professional 
Training," 
International 
Journal 
of
Environmental and Science Education, vol. 11, no. 9, pp. 2323-2332, 
2016. 
[41] A. Al Saif, "The motivating and inhibiting factors affecting the use of
web-based instruction at the University of Qassim in Saudi Arabia,"
ETD Collection for Wayne State University, pp. 1-17, 2005.
[42] G. Almalki, G. Finger, and J. Zagami, "Introducing SMART Table
technology in Saudi Arabia education system," Editorial Preface, vol.
4, no. 2, 2013. 
[43] A. B. Nassuora, "Students acceptance of mobile learning for higher
education in Saudi Arabia," American Academic & Scholarly
Research Journal, vol. 4, no. 2, p. 1, 2012.
[44] A. Badwelan, S. Drew, and A. A. Bahaddad, "Towards Acceptance
M-Learning Approach in Higher Education in Saudi Arabia,"
International Journal of Business and Management, vol. 11, no. 8, p.
12, 2016. 
[45] A. Al-Alwani, "Barriers to integrating information technology in
Saudi Arabia science education," R. Aust, Ed., ed: ProQuest
Dissertations Publishing, 2005. 
[46] R. S. Al-Jarf, "Connecting Students across Universities in Saudi
Arabia," Online Submission, 2005. 
[47] K. A. Abou-Elhamd, A. Al-Sultan, and U. Rashad, "Simulation in
ENT medical education," The Journal of Laryngology & Otology,
vol. 124, no. 03, pp. 237-241, 2010. 
[48] R. Adham, K. Lundqvist, and P. Parslow, "The Use of Avatars in
Gender Segregated Online Learning within MOOCs in Saudi Arabia,"
presented at the Global Learn 2016, Limerick, Ireland, 2016.
Available: https://www.learntechlib.org/p/172713 
[49] V. Venkatesh, S. A. Brown, and H. Bala, "Bridging the qualitative-
quantitative divide: Guidelines for conducting mixed methods
research in information systems," MIS Quarterly, vol. 37, no. 1, pp.
21-54, 2013. 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[50] N. V. Ivankova, J. W. Creswell, and S. L. Stick, "Using Mixed-
Methods Sequential Explanatory Design: From Theory to Practice," 
Field Methods, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 3-20, 2006. 
[51] R. B. Johnson, A. J. Onwuegbuzie, and L. A. Turner, "Toward a 
Definition of Mixed Methods Research," Journal of Mixed Methods 
Research, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 112-133, 2007. 
[52] G. B. Rossman and B. L. Wilson, "Numbers and Words: Combining 
Quantitative and Qualitative Methods in a Single Large-Scale 
Evaluation Study," Evaluation Review, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 627-43, 
1985. 
[53] A. Tashakkori, Mixed methodology : combining qualitative and 
quantitative approaches / Abbas Tashakkori, Charles Teddlie. 
Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Thousand Oaks, Calif. : Sage Publications, 
1998. 
[54] J. W. Creswell, Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed 
methods approaches. Sage publications, 2013. 
[55] P. Chen, X. Liu, W. Cheng, and R. Huang, "A review of using 
Augmented Reality in Education from 2011 to 2016," in Innovations 
in Smart Learning, E. Popescu et al., Eds. Singapore: Springer 
Singapore, 2017, pp. 13-18. 
[56] C. Teddlie and A. Tashakkori, "Major issues and controveries inthe 
use of mixed methods in the social and behvioral sciences," 
Handbook of mixed methods in social & behavioral research, pp. 3-
50, 2003. 
[57] J. W. Creswell, Educational research : planning, conducting, and 
evaluating quantitative and qualitative research / John Creswell. 
Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Upper Saddle River, N.J. : Merrill, 2002. 
[58] C. Teddlie and A. Tashakkori, Foundations of mixed methods 
research: Integrating quantitative and qualitative approaches in the 
social and behavioral sciences. Sage, 2009. 
[59] A. Bryman, "Integrating quantitative and qualitative research: how is 
it done?," Qualitative Research, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 97-113, 2006. 
[60] M. a. Saunders, Research methods for business students / Mark 
Saunders, Philip Lewis, Adrian Thornhill, Seventh edition.. ed. 
Harlow Pearson Education, 2016. 
[61] T. Brown and A. Onsman, "Exploratory Factor Analysis: A Five-step 
guide for novices," Australasian Journal of Paramedicine, vol. 8, no. 
3, pp. 1-14, 2013. 
[62] H. K. Wu and Y. L. Huang, "Ninth‐grade student engagement in 
teacher ‐ centered and student ‐ centered technology ‐ enhanced 
learning environments," Science Education, vol. 91, no. 5, pp. 727-
749, 2007. 
[63] J. Preece and L. Keller, "Human Computer Interaction," ISBN: 0-201-
62769-8. Addison Wesley, 1989. 
[64] O. S. Patrick, M. Rebecca, J. Catherine, and D. Chris, "Lessons 
Learned about Designing Augmented Realities," International 
Journal of Gaming and Computer-Mediated Simulations (IJGCMS), 
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1-15, 2009. 
[65] N.-S. Chen, D. C.-E. Teng, C.-H. Lee, and Kinshuk, "Augmenting 
paper-based reading activity with direct access to digital materials and 
scaffolded questioning," Computers & Education, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 
1705-1715, 9// 2011. 
[66] K. J. Carlson and D. J. Gagnon, "Augmented Reality Integrated 
Simulation Education in Health Care," Clinical Simulation in 
Nursing, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 123-127, 4// 2016. 
[67] R. Baki, "Gender-Segregated Education in Saudi Arabia: Its Impact 
on Social Norms and the Saudi Labor Market," Education Policy 
Analysis Archives, vol. 12, no. 28, p. n28, 2004. 
[68] A. Onsman, "It is better to light a candle than to ban the darkness: 
government 
led 
academic 
development 
in 
Saudi 
Arabian 
universities," Higher Education, journal article vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 
519-532, 2011. 
[69] F. Alturise and B. Alojaiman, "Benefits and challenges of using ICT 
in Saudi Arabia universities: A literature review," in International 
conference on advanced in computing, Engineering and Learning 
Technologies, 2013, vol. 2, pp. 2-46. 
[70] E. S. Billings and C. Mathison, "I Get to Use an iPod in School? 
Using Technology-Based Advance Organizers to Support the 
Academic Success of English Learners," Journal of Science 
Education and Technology, journal article vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 494-503, 
2012. 
[71] M. Bower, C. Howe, N. McCredie, A. Robinson, and D. Grover, 
"Augmented Reality in education – cases, places and potentials," 
Educational Media International, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 1-15, 2014. 
[72] S. Gregor, "The nature of theory in information systems," MIS 
quarterly, pp. 611-642, 2006. 
[73] S. Domagk, R. N. Schwartz, and J. L. Plass, "Interactivity in 
multimedia learning: An integrated model," Computers in Human 
Behavior, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1024-1033, 9// 2010. 
[74] J. Munro, "Social-cultural influences on learning," ed: University of 
Melbourne. Retrieved, 2012. 
[75] M. Windschitl and K. Sahl, "Tracing Teachers’ Use of Technology in 
a Laptop Computer School: The Interplay of Teacher Beliefs, Social 
Dynamics, and Institutional Culture," American Educational 
Research Journal, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 165-205, 2002. 
[76] J. Schiller, "Working with ICT: Perceptions of Australian principals," 
Journal of Educational Administration, vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 171-185, 
2003. 
[77] C. Buabeng-Andoh, "Factors influencing teachers' adoption and 
integration of information and communication technology into 
teaching: A review of the literature," International Journal of 
Education and Development using Information and Communication 
Technology, vol. 8, no. 1, p. 136, 2012. 
[78] A. T. Hayes, S. E. Hardin, and C. E. Hughes, "Perceived Presence’s 
Role on Learning Outcomes in a Mixed Reality Classroom of 
Simulated Students," in Virtual, Augmented and Mixed Reality. 
Systems and Applications: 5th International Conference, VAMR 
2013, Held as Part of HCI International 2013, Las Vegas, NV, USA, 
July 21-26, 2013, Proceedings, Part II, R. Shumaker, Ed. Berlin, 
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 142-151. 
[79] J. M. Dirkx, "The meaning and role of emotions in adult learning," 
New directions for adult and continuing education, vol. 2008, no. 
120, pp. 7-18, 2008. 
[80] B.-K. Kye and Y. Kim, "Investigation on the relationships among 
media characteristics, presence, flow, and learning effects in 
augmented reality 
based learning," Journal of Educational 
Technology, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 193-223, 2008. 
[81] B. Dalgarno and M. J. W. Lee, "What are the learning affordances of 
3 ‐ D virtual environments?," British Journal of Educational 
Technology, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 10-32, 2010. 
[82] B. Park, L. Knörzer, J. L. Plass, and R. Brünken, "Emotional design 
and positive emotions in multimedia learning: An eyetracking study 
on the use of anthropomorphisms," Computers & Education, vol. 86, 
pp. 30-42, 2015/08/01/ 2015. 
[83] T.-C. Huang, C.-C. Chen, and Y.-W. Chou, "Animating eco-
education: To see, feel, and discover in an augmented reality-based 
experiential learning environment," Computers & Education, vol. 96, 
pp. 72-82, 2016/05/01/ 2016. 
[84] J. L. Plass, S. Heidig, E. O. Hayward, B. D. Homer, and E. Um, 
"Emotional design in multimedia learning: Effects of shape and color 
on affect and learning," Learning and Instruction, vol. 29, pp. 128-
140, 2014/02/01/ 2014. 
[85] S. J. Derry and S. P. Lajoie, Computers as cognitive tools. Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates Pub., 1993. 
[86] M. Dunleavy, C. Dede, and R. Mitchell, "Affordances and 
Limitations 
of 
Immersive 
Participatory 
Augmented 
Reality 
Simulations for Teaching and Learning," Journal of Science 
Education and Technology, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 7-22, 2008. 
[87] S. Kalyuga and T.-C. Liu, "Guest editorial: managing cognitive load 
in technology-based learning environments," Educational Technology 
& Society, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 1-8, 2015. 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[88] S. Cai, F.-K. Chiang, Y. Sun, C. Lin, and J. J. Lee, "Applications of 
augmented reality-based natural interactive learning in magnetic field 
instruction," Interactive Learning Environments, pp. 1-14, 2016. 
[89] A. Altameem, "What drives successful E-learning? An empirical 
investigation of the key technical issues in Saudi Arabian 
Universities," Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information 
Technology, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 63-70, 2013. 
[90] İ. A. Erdem, "Vision-based human-computer interaction using laser 
pointer," Middle East Technical University, 2003. 
[91] T. Issa and P. Isaias, "Usability and Human Computer Interaction 
(HCI)," in Sustainable Design: Springer, 2015, pp. 19-36. 
[92] S. National Center for Education, Technology @ your fingertips: a 
guide to implementing technology solutions for education agencies 
and institutions (Technology at your fingertips, no. vii, 102 p.). 
Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics : National 
Cooperative Education Statistics System : National Forum on 
Education Statistics, 1997, pp. vii, 102 p. 
[93] S. Martin and M. Vallance, "The impact of synchronous inter-
networked teacher training in Information and Communication 
Technology integration," Computers & Education, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 
34-53, 2008/08/01/ 2008. 
 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

