Creating Free, Interactive Resources to Support Student Success:
Pilot Programs and Preliminary Findings
Tamara Powell
English Department
Kennesaw State University
Kennesaw, Georgia, USA
E-mail: tpowel25@kennesaw.edu
Abstract—The cost of higher education in the United States
continues to climb. In addition to tuition prices, textbook
prices have soared at alarming rates. In the US state of
Georgia, the University System encourages and offers financial
incentives to faculty to create their own course resources,
including textbooks and ancillary materials. This program is
called
Affordable
Learning
Georgia,
or
ALG.
Open
Educational Resources, or OERs, have shown to support
student success including retention, completion, satisfaction,
and learning outcomes. At Kennesaw State University (KSU),
faculty members have stepped up to create course materials,
ancillary resources, and even student support materials. Early
surveys have shown that students have been appreciative of the
faculty efforts and have had positive responses to the various
components
faculty
have
created
and
provided.
This
innovation in the type of resources provided has boosted
student satisfaction. In addition, the resource on academic
integrity has reduced the amount of cheating through social
media.
Keywords-Affordable
Learning
Georgia;
OERs;
student
success; textbooks; United States.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The cost of higher education in the United States
continues to climb. One area driving up costs is the constant
reduction in each, individual state’s contribution to higher
education. “Overall state funding for public two- and four-
year colleges in the school year ending in 2018 was more
than $7 billion below its 2008 level, after adjusting for
inflation” [1]. Students are asked to take on more and more
of the cost burden, and they are encouraged to take out
student loans to fund their educations. The average student
loan debt, per person, in the United States is $31,172 [2].
An additional catalyst in the soaring prices is textbook
publishers. These publishers saw that they had a captive
market and took advantage, jacking up prices and churning
out new editions every year or two just so they could force
students to purchase new editions instead of saving money
buying used copies. Textbook costs have soared, rocketing
up past four times the rate of inflation between 2006 and
2016 [3]. Also, books are no longer always physical and
made of paper. Publishers now “bundle” digital textbooks
with unique access requirements that must be purchased
new each time. This practice puts a stop to selling back
textbooks and purchasing used, and
more affordable,
versions [4].
II.
AFFORDABLE LEARNING GEORGIA
Compared to other US states, the state of Georgia
contributes more than most to public higher education [5].
At the same time, political leaders still want to assure
taxpayers that the state government is keeping prices down
and taxes low. To that end, the state ended many endeavors
that were funding the purchase of hardware and software for
students. This effort returned the financial burden for
expensive educational technology and
student support
software and programs back onto students’ pocketbooks.
The state of Georgia’s University System, also known as
the University System of Georgia, or USG, also set aside
small amounts of money to incentivize and compensate
faculty and staff to create learning materials for students to
replace commercial and publisher materials. This initiative
is called Affordable Learning Georgia, or ALG. What this
initiative means in reality is if a student needs a license for a
software vital to his or her career success, he or she will
have to pay for it out of pocket because the school no longer
can provide a license. However, more classes are being
taught with free textbooks, so textbook expenses are no
longer hindering students.
While some faculty balked at this direction, remarking
that it is not their job to do extra work to reign in publisher
greed, many faculty noted that they had already created such
materials and would be happy to get a little one time
incentive from the state and recognition to share them. Also,
quite a few faculty felt it was the right thing to use their
skills to help defray costs for students. As of Spring 2020,
26 Georgia universities had earned ALG grants, benefiting
417,000 students and saving them a total of $69.19 million
[6].
III.
THE MAGIC OF OPEN EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES
A.
Overview
The author is a faculty member in the state of Georgia
who has enjoyed working with digital tools to create online
learning experiences that replace commercial and publisher
products. In this paper, we will describe the products
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

created, the purpose of them, and the early student
responses. This paper also includes links to the resources
mentioned.
B.
Impact in the Classroom
In 2015, the state of Georgia began pushing the use of
Open Educational Resources or OERs. The USG established
ALG to spread information about the benefits of OERs.
Research shows students learn more, get better grades, save
money, take more classes, graduate faster and are more
satisfied with their experiences when their classes use OERs
[7]. These results sound amazing, but they are a logical
outcome. If a student starts the semester with the course
materials, he or she will not get behind, and, therefore, will
perform better. With the savings from not having to
purchase the textbook or take on an extra job to pay for the
textbook, students can take more classes and devote more
time to those classes—thereby, graduating faster and with
higher grades.
In fall 2015, we worked with a team of faculty and an
instructional designer at KSU. The team received an ALG
grant to create an open technical communication textbook,
currently titled Open Technical Communication [8].
The
textbook was piloted in a summer 2016 online course called
WRIT 3140: Introduction to Technical Communication.
WRIT is a prefix for a group of classes that emphasize
writing. The number 3140 refers to the fact that the course is
taught at a junior, or upper, level at the university. In this
course, students are instructed in the basics of writing for
the
technical
fields,
including
computer
science
and
engineering. Students in the course were surveyed regarding
their experiences with the open educational resource, which
in this case was a free, open, online textbook called Open
Technical
Communication.
Of
the
21
students
who
responded to the survey regarding the textbook, 95%
responded positively. To further evaluate the initial success
of the endeavor, we compared the retention rate, average
grade, and evaluation average with the same course taught
the previous summer with a publisher textbook which cost
around $140. Both courses were taught online. To put this
data in clearer context, the retention rate with OER went
down. However, the average grade went up. In this class,
grades are calcluated as failing, or F (earning 0-58% of the
points available in the course); D (earning 59-69% of the
available points); C or average (earning 70-79% of the
available points); B or good (earning 80-89% of the
available points); A or excellent (earning 90-100% of the
available points). The evaluation in this chart refers to the
average score on the instructor’s end of course evaluation. It
is a measure of student satisfaction. In this case, one can see
that the student satisfaction increased in the course with the
open eduational resources. In the course using OERs, the
retention rate was lower, and the grades and course
evaluations were slightly higher. Also, “Sum” refers to the
fact that the courses being compared were taught in the
summer session of the university, which is 8 weeks instead
of the usual 16 weeks in fall and spring. Table I shows the
retention data.
TABLE I. RETENTION DATA FROM WRIT 3140 WITHOUT
OERs AND PILOT SECTION WITH OERs
Table Showing Comparison of Online WRIT 3140
Course with OER vs. without OER
WRIT 3140
Sum 2015
(without OER)
WRIT 3140 Sum
2016 (with OER)
Retention
Rate
40/42 (95%)
21/25 (84%)
Average
Grade
74 C
78 C
Evaluation
3.56
3.75
IV.
OPEN TECHNICAL COMMUNICATION:
THE GATEWAY TEXT
The
faculty
team
created
Open
Technical
Communication, the free, online, technical communication
textbook, by remixing a previously available, but not yet
completed, free, online technical communication textbook
created by Dr. David McMurrey. It is entitled Online
Technical Writing [9]. Dr. McMurrey gave the KSU faculty
team permission to use his work in the project. We
completed or updated some of the existing chapters,
authored original chapters, and added resources such as
practice quizzes and supplementary videos. Thus, Open
Technical Communication, a remix and derivative of Online
Technical Communication, was born.
In addition to the webpages and examples created by Dr.
McMurrey and the faculty team, the remix contains videos,
interactive exercises, and assignment ideas to support the
use of the text either by teachers and students or persons
simply
wishing
to
learn
more
about
technical
communication. This textbook continues to be in use at
Kennesaw State University and has been adopted for use in
a few institutions. It has had 7,946 downloads over the past
four years, the majority of which are in the Eastern US. The
textbook has been downloaded in 135 countries with the top
three users being the United States (3813 downloads), India
(644 downloads), and the Philippines (428 downloads). The
most downloaded chapter is the one entitled “Ethics in
Technical Communication” [10].
We also teach American literature and wanted to use
freely available resources in our literature courses, as well.
In 2015, the goal was a challenging one to achieve, as the
state was encouraging faculty to create their own textbooks.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

However,
a
professor
cannot
simply
write
10
great
American novels to use in American literature courses. But,
by 2017, the needed resources were becoming available. It
was possible to find a great deal of readings on the Internet.
And in 2018, two OER literature textbooks were made
available. These were Becoming American: An Exploration
of American Literature Precolonial and Post-Revolution
[11] and Writing the Nation: A Concise Introduction to
American Literature 1865 to Present [12]. Both books are
published and maintained by the University of North
Georgia Press. With the publication of these works, it was
possible for us to make one of our literature courses 100%
OER, with the other requiring less than $5 in course
material expenses.
A.
Moving from Publisher Resources to OERs
There are many research-based, positive reasons to adopt
OER. However, OERs are not a panacea. A critic of OERs
might argue that OERs do not work for every course. Often,
they require vetting, adaptation, and supplementation to
work successfully in a course. As was described above
regarding the open technical communication textbook, the
free book available was not yet completed. The faculty at
KSU who wished to use it had to take a semester, create a
work schedule, and update and complete it themselves in
order to provide the benefits to their students. Many of these
reasons are given by faculty and publishers as reasons not to
adopt OERs. To counter these arguments, one might
consider that publisher textbooks, too, require vetting,
adaptation, and often, supplementation. The difference is that
once an OER is adopted and revised to suit an instructor, the
instructor has control over the content.
B.
Filling in the Gaps
While the American literature survey OER textbook
provided these supplemental materials, such as author
biographies, to a degree, we wanted additional support and
more context for students. As a subject matter expert, we
had the knowledge to share with students to support their
learning. Using Articulate Storyline [13], we were able to
create several support pieces for the OER American
literature textbooks. Topics included Transcendentalism, the
Enlightenment, and American Literature after World War II.
These support pieces were entitled Read’n Quizzes because
they presented very text-heavy slides to students, slide by
slide. Periodically, there was a quiz question. Each student
had to complete the Read’n Quiz in order to earn 10 points
for the activity. The technology allowed the instructor to
upload the Read’n Quiz into the Learning Management
System (LMS), in this case Desire2Learn BrightSpace, or
D2L [14], as a Shareable Content Object Reference Model,
or SCORM module so that quiz grade is automatically
transferred to the gradebook. SCORM modules are built to a
standard that includes four traits: “First, sustainability.
Teaching resources will not be invalid because of the update
of technology. It can be used for a long time. Second,
reusability.
Teaching
can
basically
be
used
without
modification. It can be reused in different platforms, and can
be combined with other teaching contents according to their
needs. Third, interoperability. Because teaching materials
follow a unified standard, it can be presented on any
standard platform, or can be modified by editing tools that
conform to the standard. Fourth, availability. With the
platform, learners can read the learning and teaching
resources through the Internet without any time and space
constraints, so as to achieve the purpose of distance
learning”
[15].
Through
creating
Read’n
Quizzes
in
SCORM format, we were able to create learning objects that
can be shared freely and widely. Also, we were able to
motivate students to take in the connecting information,
something that is normally very boring and students are
prone to skip, so that they could gain more context and learn
more.
In a fall 2019 survey regarding the student opinions of
the OER materials, students were asked their impression of
the Read’n Quizzes. On the survey, presented to the course
after the midterm exam, students were posed this question:
To help support the OER materials, your professor created
what she called Read’n Quizzes where you watched
presentations that included questions and were counted for a
grade. Would you recommend she continue using those
materials? Of the nine out of 25 students who answered the
question, 44% said they would recommend the instructor to
continue using the Read’n Quizzes if they keep the cost of
the materials down. Here is a breakdown of the survey
results:
44%=”Yes, if they keep the cost of materials down.”
22%=”Yes, I found them engaging.”
22%-“No, I had a hard time accessing them.”
11%=”No, it wouldn’t record my grade correctly.”
0%=”No, I found them boring.”
Figure 1 shows the response breakdown to the question on
the survey. As can be seen, 66% of students were willing to
Figure 1.
Graphic representation of student perceptions of Read’n Quiz
activities.
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

tolerate the activities/actually liked them, while 33% had a
hard time accessing the materials or could not get them to
record their grades. The sample is small, but this pilot
program shows that technical difficulties, not content, seem
to be the deterrent to student approval. The materials are
undergoing
troubleshooting
to
improve
the
student
experience.
V.
EXPANDING THE STUDENT SUPPORT RESOURCES
In the face of budget cuts mentioned in the introduction,
software and student support programs had to be dropped.
One of those was a commercial product that posed a series of
questions to students and used analytics to help them to
assess their readiness for online courses. It also had
additional helpful features that were not available on the “Is
Online Right for You?” helpsheets many institutions have on
their
websites.
Those
features
included
reading
comprehension assessments, typing instruction, learning
style assessments, and other information that was meant to
benefit students and also provide instructors with an
overview of what strengths and challenges students might be
bringing to each class. Without that online readiness tool,
many faculty members felt that students were not getting the
preparation they needed to be successful in an online course.
After all, KSU did not provide online students with any
special orientation to ensure they understood what may be
asked of them as online students. As this online orientation
resource was created, it became clear that there were several
additional resources that could help support student success:
documentation and social media expectations.
A.
Are You Ready for an Online Course?
To replace the commercial online orientation resource
that was no longer affordable to the institution, a team in the
College of Humanities and Social Sciences (CHSS) worked
together. Using software such as Articulate Storyline,
PowerPoint [16], Camtasia [17], and ShutterStock [18], the
team created “Are You Ready for an Online Course?” [19].
Figure 2 shows the opening screen of the “Are You Ready
for an Online Course” interactive presentation created by
KSU faculty and staff to replace costly materials and support
student success. This interactive presentation addresses tech-
Figure 2.
Introductory image for the resource, “Are You Ready
for an Online Course?”
-nology,
communication, time
management,
goals
and
motivation, and other skills. It is KSU specific, but certainly
any user might find helpful, research-based information
there. Two versions are created. One is available on the open
web for anyone to link to. A second, zip file is also available
for anyone who might like to integrate it into an LMS using
SCORM.
B.
Documentation Resources
One of the goals for the student support resources was to
find topics that were usable across a wide variety of courses
in CHSS. A resource that had been requested for a while was
a tutorial or other learning experience that helped students
better understand documentation in research-based work,
including how to avoid plagiarism.
CHSS
courses
mainly
require
Modern
Language
Association (MLA) and American Psychological Association
(APA) documentation styles. Therefore, two documentation
activities were created, one for MLA and one for APA. The
activity starts with the Goblin Threat game created by Mary
Broussard for Lycoming College [20]. Then it moves to the
basics of MLA or APA, depending upon the presentation
selected by the instructor. Like the online course readiness
tool, it also includes a quiz question that can register in the
LMS gradebook, should the instructor choose. The APA
resource [21] and the MLA resource [22] are freely
available.
Of course, this resource cannot replace the instructor’s
assignment
guidelines
or
answer
every
documentation
question, but it does help remind students that there are
specific rules regarding plagiarism and documentation, and
that they should heed those rules as they research and
complete assignments.
C.
Social Media Guidelines Regarding Academic Honesty
Finally, a new problem facing faculty and students at
KSU
has
been
misuse
of
social
media,
particularly
GroupMe, a text-based chat platform that KSU students
have adopted as their online community. For every course, a
student automatically sets up a GroupMe and invites the
entire class using the LMS classlist.
This GroupMe serves as a wonderful resource and
support for students, particularly in online courses [23].
They go there to clarify assignments, ask about due dates,
discuss issues in the class, and really engage in social
learning and community building. However, it is also a
place where students have the opportunity to engage in
academic dishonesty. Many students didn’t realize that the
consequences for cheating on GroupMe were the same as
cheating in the classroom. Students at the University of
Texas at Austin, Ohio State University, and Louisiana State
University have learned the hard way that social media can
make cheating look too easy: “In 2017, Ohio State found 83
students in violation of ‘unauthorized collaboration’ via
GroupMe” [24].
To help students to make good decisions regarding use of
social media, we created an interactive presentation called
“Academic Honesty and Social Media [25]. Figure 3 shows
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

the opening screen of the “Academic Honesty and Social
Media” interactive presentation designed to help students
make informed decisions about social media use in courses.
Figure 3.
Introductory image for the resource, “Academic Honesty
and Social Media”
This presentation covers three scenarios that students
may find themselves in on the GroupMe. The first describes
a student posting unsolicited answers to assignments. The
second details a student asking for answers on assignments.
The third example features a good-hearted student posting
“help” on the GroupMe that veers too close to academic
dishonesty. As with “Are You Ready for an Online
Course?” and the documentation resources, the “Academic
Honesty and Social Media” resource also comes in a zipped
file SCORM version that can be uploaded to an LMS where
the quiz response can be registered in the grade book.
D.
Early Feedback
The three resources discussed in this section were only
implemented in fall 2019, and there has been no survey of
either students or faculty to gauge whether or not they are
helpful. However, early feedback from students in our
midterm course surveys showed that the “Academic Honesty
and Social Media” presentation has had mixed results. On
the one hand, it has made students more aware of the
penalties for academic dishonesty on social media, but on the
other hand, it has stifled community building in the
GroupMe because of anxiety surrounding innocent mistakes.
That is an unintended and unfortunate consequence that
hopefully future iterations of the resource can try to reverse.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we set out to examine the early impact of
faculty
innovations
in
the
field
of
open
educational
resources. Specifically, what, if any impact, have these new
efforts had on student success, particularly retention and
satisfaction.
With
these
forays
into
open
educational
resources and student success resources, it is too early to
have more than individual student responses and pilot
survey results. However, initial results show that students at
Kennesaw State University are benefitting from adoption of
OERs in the same way that students are showing benefits
nationally. Also, while we will continue to update and
improve the student success resources, we do feel that they
are at least a helpful start.
The faculty will continue to
create
open
educational
resources,
including
auxiliary
materials and materials to support student success generally.
We will continue to research the impact as the reach of these
efforts becomes broader.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Special thanks to the College of Humanities and Social
Sciences at Kennesaw State University, Georgia, USA for
support, feedback, and resources to create these learning
materials and conduct this initial research. The CHSS
Resources are available [26].
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Mitchell, M. Leachman, K. Masterson, and S. Waxman,
“Unkept promises: state cuts to higher education threaten
access and equity.” Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
October
4,
2018.[Online]
Available
from:
https://www.cbpp.org/research/state-budget-and-tax/unkept-
promises-state-cuts-to-higher-education-threaten-access-and
Accessed February 3, 2020.
[2]
N. Issa, “U.S. average student loan debt statistics in 2019.”
Credit.com.
June
19,
2019.
[Online]
Available
from:
https://www.credit.com/personal-finance/average-student-
loan-debt/ Accessed February 3, 2020.
[3]
S. Etan and R. Donoghue, “Covering the cost: why we can no
longer afford to ignore high textbook prices,” Report, The
Student
PIRGs
(Feb.
2016).
[Online]
Available
from:
www.studentpirgs.org/textbooks. Accessed February 3, 2020.
[4]
G. Echevarria and J. Bowman, “Almost 80% of the textbook
industry is dominated by 5 publishing companies that make
books so expensive most students skip buying them.”
Business Insider. December 4, 2018. [Online] Available from:
https://www.businessinsider.com/why-college-textbooks-
expensive-textbook-publishing-2018-12.
[5]
D.
Tandberg
and
S.
Laderman,
“MHEC policy brief:
evaluating state funding effort for higher education.” June
2018.
[Online]
Available
from:
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED587428.pdf.
Accessed
March 16, 2020.
[6]
“Textbook Transformation Grants: Spring 2020,” Affordable
Learning Georgia. University System of Georgia. [Online]
Available
from
https://www.affordablelearninggeorgia.org/about/powerbi.
Accessed March 17, 2020.
[7]
N. B. Colvard, C. Edward Watson, and H. Park, “The Impact
of open educational resources on various student success
metrics,” International Journal of Teaching and Learning in
Higher Education, vol. 30, pp. 262–76, 2018.
[8]
T. Reardon, T. Powell, J. Arnett, M. Logan, and C. Race,
Open Technical Communication. [Online] Available from:
http://open-tc.com/. Accessed February 2, 2020.
[9] D. McMurrey, Online Technical Writing. [Online] Available
from:
https://www.prismnet.com/~hcexres/textbook/.
Accessed February 2, 2020.
[10] “Readership report,” Author Dashboard.
DigitalCommons@Kennesaw State University and Galileo
Open Educational Materials. BePress. [Online] Available
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

from:
https://readership.works.bepress.com/?authdash=1&userid=17
27432&.authP=authdash%2Cuserid%2C.authTX&.authTX=1
588379127&.authT=DN6zP7Z32IPB0Cike6pRA7v5WLfefw
#/. Accessed November 22, 2019.
[11] W. Kurant, Becoming America: An Exploration of American
Literature from Precolonial to Post-Revolution. University of
North
Georgia
Press.
[Online]
Available
from:
https://ung.edu/university-press/books/becoming-america.php
Accessed February 3, 2020.
[12] A. Berke, R. R. Bleil, J. Cofer, and D. Davis, Writing the
Nation: A Concise Introduction to American Literature 1865
to Present. University of North Georgia Press. [Online]
Available from: https://ung.edu/university-
press/books/writing-the-nation-a-concise-introduction-to-
american-literature-1865-to-present.php Accessed February 3,
2020.
[13]
Articulate
Storyline
360,
[Online]
Available
from:
https://articulate.com/360/storyline.
Accessed
March
17,
2020.
[14] D2L, Desire2Learn BrightSpace, [Online] Available from
https://www.d2l.com/ Accessed March 17, 2020.
[15] Y. Shen, “Design of digital network shared learning platform
based
on
SCORM
standard.”
International
Journal
of
Emerging Technologies in Learning, vol 13, pp. 214-227,
2018.
[16] PowerPoint, Microsoft Office. [Online] Available from
https://products.office.com/en-us/powerpoint
Accessed March 20, 2020.
[17]
Camtasia,
TechSmith.
[Online]
Available
from
https://www.techsmith.com/video-editor.html
Accessed
March 20, 2020.
[18]
Shutterstock.
[Online]
Available
from:
https://www.shutterstock.com/ Accessed March 20, 2020.
[19] T. Powell, T. Reardon, J. Azriel, and S. Bartlett, “Are you
ready for an online course?”, Kennesaw State University
College of Humanities and Social Sciences, July 2019.
[Online]
Available
from:
http://ode.hss.kennesaw.edu/Articulate/ReadyforOnline/story
_html5.html Accessed February 3, 2020.
[20] M. Broussard and J. U. Oberlin, Goblin Threat. [Online]
Available
from:
https://www.lycoming.edu/library/plagiarism-game/ Accessed
February 3, 2020.
[21] T. Powell, “Plagiarism and documentation: APA.”
Kennesaw State University College of Humanities and Social
Sciences.
July
2019.
[Online]
Available
from:
http://ode.hss.kennesaw.edu/Articulate/PlagiarismDocumentat
ionAPA/story_html5.html Accessed February 2, 2020.
[22] T. Powell, “Plagiarism and documentation: MLA.”
Kennesaw State University College of Humanities and Social
Sciences.
July
2019.
[Online]
Available
from:
http://ode.hss.kennesaw.edu/Articulate/PlagiarismDocumentat
ionMLA/story_html5.html Accessed February 2, 2020.
[23] S. Gronseth and W. Hebert, “GroupMe: investigating use of
mobile instant messaging in higher education courses.”
TechTrends: Linking Research and Practice to Improve
Learning, vol 63, pp. 15-22, January 2019.
[24] W. Jenkins, “Has technology changed what qualifies as
cheating?” The Chronicle of Higher Education, vol. 66, p.
A28, October 4, 2019.
[25] T. Powell, “Academic honesty and social media.” Kennesaw
State University College of Humanities and Social Sciences.
July 2019. [Online] Available from:
http://ode.hss.kennesaw.edu/Articulate/AcademicHonesty_So
cialMedia/story_html5.html Accessed February 3, 2020.
[26] Kennesaw State University College of Humanities and Social
Sciences Office of Digital Education, Tutorials and resources.
[Online]
Available
from:
https://chss.kennesaw.edu/ode/tutorials.php
Accessed
February
2,
2020.
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

