CoWaBoo: A Descriptive Protocol of Learning Driven Applications 
 
Athanasios Priftis 
Information Systems Department  
HES/HE G-GE, 
Geneva, Switzerland 
e-mail: athanasios.priftis@hesge.ch, 
Jean Philippe Trabichet 
Information Systems Department  
HES/HE G-GE, 
Geneva, Switzerland 
e-mail: jean-philippe.trabichet@hesge.ch,
 
 
Abstract— Algorithms, data, services seem to create a net of 
semantic stability for users to consume information but come 
with concrete disadvantages regarding the way we understand, 
discuss and teach them. Social bookmarking applications are 
no exception to this, as they follow a similarly opaque way to 
organize and publish data. This article will examine the 
possibility to shift from predetermined results to open and 
descriptive 
protocols 
and 
applications 
that 
revisits 
fundamental web user activities such as search, classification, 
group formation and valorization of participation. This 
approach combines both a data handling protocol (CoWaBoo) 
and an application (collective observatories) that serve as 
wider 
concept 
and 
practice 
of 
application 
use 
and 
development. Our initial results from 2015 and 2016 university 
group course works, contributes to shifting our attention from 
how things end up, to how things become, an important 
competence in the field of ICT training and education.  
Keywords-ICT opacity; open protocols; learning driven 
applications  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Scholars agree that we need to look more deeply into the 
opacity of a growing algorithmic reality, where users 
perform prescribed tasks. The nature of the ‘opacity’ of these 
tasks is related to sociological interests in classification and 
discrimination, framed around ‘digital inequality’ that has 
frequently focused on the distribution of computational 
resources and skills [1]. How people may be subject to 
computational classification, privacy invasions, or other 
surveillance methods in ways that are unequal across the 
general population, could be in violation of existing 
regulatory protections [2]. This is crucial for several reasons 
but in this paper, we will focus on its possible effect on our 
training practices in education. 
This “click on the most often” culture [3] is exemplified 
by Google’s searching normalization resulting from user 
habits that have “deeply ingrained habitual patterns” [4]. The 
result of this is a widely spread culture of opacity of web 
applications, data or machine learning algorithms assuming a 
certain normality: when a computer learns and consequently 
builds its own representation of a classification decision, it 
does so without regard for human comprehension. The 
examples of handwriting recognition and spam filtering 
illustrate how the workings of machine learning algorithms 
can escape full understanding and interpretation by humans, 
even for those with specialized training, even for computer 
scientists [5]. 
Algorithms, such as those underlying the Google search 
engine, are often multi-component systems built by teams 
producing an opacity that programmers who are ‘insiders’ to 
the algorithm must contend with as well [6]. The opacity 
concern arises in the middle of an input - black box - output 
approach. For the most part, we know how the data are fed 
into the algorithm: we produce it ourselves through our 
activities. We also typically know the outputs of the 
algorithm: we are either told, or we can reasonably infer how 
the algorithm has classified the data. What we do not know is 
what is going on in the middle, inside the ‘black box’, or 
which bits of data the algorithm selects and how it uses that 
data to generate the classifications. 
To sum up, we cannot rely merely on the modern 
“disciplinary” methods and frameworks of knowledge in 
order to think and interpret the transformative effect new 
technology is having on our culture, since it is precisely 
these methods and frameworks that new technology requires 
us to rethink’ [7]. We need to propose and invent an analysis 
that intersects the current state of opacity and, at the same 
time, applicable in training and collaborative scenarios. 
Following sections of this paper will pursue this analysis, 
further. In Section 2, we, briefly, position protocols as an 
important, but not sufficient, parameter against an opaque, 
black-box culture of application use and development. This 
culture is exemplified by an analysis on social bookmarking 
applications and practices. Section 3 is devoted to 
CoWaBoo, a protocol assuming a socio-semantic logic, 
empowered by specific rules and architecture. In Section 4, 
we 
demonstrate 
how 
an 
application 
of 
collective 
observatories, built on the CoWaBoo protocol serves a 
double objective: validate the rules and functions of the 
protocol, while raising further research and learning 
questions in a context of collaboration and knowledge 
production. Finally, in Section 5 we highlight the initial 
training and experimentation results of using CoWaBoo and 
the collective observatories in university courses.  Our 
conclusions include our future work and challenges.   
 
II. 
ON PROTOCOLS AND SOCIAL BOOKMARKING 
APPLICATIONS 
Partnerships between legal scholars, social scientists, 
domain experts, along with computer scientists may chip 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

away at these challenging questions of fairness in 
classification in light of the barrier of opacity. User 
populations can give voice to exclusions and forms of 
experienced discrimination (algorithmic or otherwise) that 
the ‘domain experts’ may lack insight into. Alleviating 
problems of black boxed classification will not be 
accomplished by a single tool or process, but some 
combination of regulations, audits, the use of alternatives 
that are more transparent, user education, as well as, the 
sensitization of those bestowed with the power to write such 
consequential code. Moreover, we need pedagogical 
concepts and tools that can form and carry a culture of 
educated openness. We would like to introduce protocols as 
an important parameter of future application analysis and 
design. 
A protocol is founded on a contradiction between two 
opposing machines, one machine that radically distributes 
control into autonomous locales, and another that focuses 
control into rigidly defined hierarchies. In order for protocol 
to enable radically distributed communications between 
autonomous entities, it must employ a strategy of 
universalization, 
and 
of 
homogeneity. 
It 
must 
be 
implementing, at the same time distribution and anti-
diversity. It must promote standardization in order to enable 
openness, while organizing peer groups into bureaucracies. 
A protocol, then, becomes an ambivalent space where both 
opacity and transparency are possible and certain short-term 
goals are necessary in order to realize one’s longer-term 
goals [8]. Applications running on protocols can use or, 
sometimes, play down this contradiction but never break 
away from it. 
Social bookmarking applications can be understood as 
social machines, a collective of humans and machines and 
computers (or algorithms) working collaboratively on some 
area. This assemblage involves large numbers of users, some 
level of interaction, responding to a certain task. Software or 
applications mediate between the user and other users or 
machines’ in a way that obscures how searching, tagging, 
curating posts and bookmarks, or forming groups take place. 
Their users are involved in a “many to one to many” schema 
of directive search and classification where the intermediator 
the “one” is setting the agenda of how the documentation 
itself takes place. This combination of directive searching, 
leads to limited diversity for retrieving information and, 
results, to “one-click” driven documentation. We will use the 
terms atonal posts and reticular search to frame the results of 
this process, as a components of how prescription works in 
social bookmarking. 
Atonal posts appear as flat bookmarks with standardized 
description that carry no actual engagement on behalf of the 
user. Atonal posts are produced with the minimum number 
of clicks, where decision and curation process are merely 
mentioned, and, thus, a post exists without any other event 
connected. They flood search engines and information 
aggregators, while creating impressive numbers of individual 
posts. They are prescribing information items as something 
distant but true, a set of data of something classified, thus 
becoming important, with a minimum effort of description or 
documentation.  
The term reticular search carries the user expectation 
that searching of information, in the connected networks of 
our times, is a sufficient proof their own intentionality access 
knowledge. In this sense, searching and documenting 
information is imagined within fixed patterns: being efficient 
in information search implies knowing the “right tricks” as to 
cut down the time needed and the diversity of the possible 
results. This creates a kind of reticular search where a 
minimum set of keywords, thrown in a sea of algorithms, 
consist of a sufficient process. Both reticular search and 
atonal search help us frame how users interact with protocols 
and social bookmarking applications, nowadays. Producing 
atonal posts based on a culture of reticular search acts as an 
explicit normative context to a future self that is mediated as 
time-series structured data streams. Take the example of 
social media: we are often prescribing parts of ourselves, 
within few clicks, words and images, creating more and 
more (atonal) posts, or data for more (reticular) search. 
 
III. 
THE COWABOO PROTOCOL IN A DESCRIPTIVE SOCIO-
SEMANTIQUE LOGIC 
CoWaBoo starts as a concept and an ambition to 
understand and change user actions and results in social 
bookmarking. It enters the field of information search by 
integrating, in a conscious manner, the reuse of results that 
are available in existing curating communities. Searching in 
CoWaBoo means identifying experts as mediators, or 
trusted entities in the research of information. This search is 
not to be inscribed in an immediate response but in a wider 
logic of information culture and curation of information. 
CoWaBoo attempts to move the boundaries of social 
bookmarking from an, opaque, click and post culture 
towards a storytelling event that involves serendipitous 
browsing and learning.  The term “serendipitous browsing” 
is used to refer to information search that result in discovery 
of relevant information as by-product of the main task [9].  
It is heavily connected with its possibility to stimulate 
competences 
including 
“sagacity” 
as 
penetrating 
intelligence, keen perception and sound judgment [10], 
“intellectual readiness” as the ability to recognize clues 
which may lead to meaningful discoveries, “openness” as 
the ability to seize an unexpected and unplanned event [11] 
as well as “preparation, training and knowledge” [9]. The 
CoWaBoo approach on social bookmarking is based on the 
identification of users who share common interests. The 
goal is to find information and websites and to identify 
experts in a field [12] not so much as a final, unmovable 
product but more as an unexpected travel. In this sense, 
information research process can be described as a travel 
with discoveries, information, websites and people. 
CoWaBoo opens this process to community-curated 
resources, while the users are gathering selected discoveries: 
they need to make choices and engage in some kind of a 
result that contributes back to the original sources. 
        In this sense, CoWaBoo opts to explore, not so much 
on “what is social bookmarking”, but “how social 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

bookmarking is”. It is drawing on the previous work on user 
driven data search and management, social bookmarking 
applications and uses cases, online collaboration skills and 
user capacities, in order to reposition them in the proposed 
mediation interface. Positioning CoWaBoo “in between” 
current search and organization of information trends and 
algorithms, means reusing social bookmarking data, 
connecting with communities and users, producing results 
both locally and globally, decentralized and centralized. 
Our next step in this direction is putting trust in the work 
of others by creating a circular understanding of searching 
and curating information. This comes in contrast with web 
2.0, algorithmic based, ways of capturing data, seeking to 
extract value through an unintentional capacity of 
participation and opens a virtuous circle of social 
bookmarking. 
A 
different 
logic 
open 
to 
iterative 
transformations of the work of others, a possibility to 
produce knowledge through the act of redocumentation. 
CoWaBoo, then, is positioning itself, not as another 
collaborative application, but a protocol. We consider the 
addressee of these wider computational systems made up of 
arrays or networks as a future actor of it design. As the 
interaction needs to be open to further development, the code 
of CoWaBoo protocol needs to apply the following default 
rules: 
• 
Assure the lucidity of past (as stored data), present 
(as current data collection, or processed archival 
data), and future (as both the ethical addressee of the 
system and potential provider of data and usage). 
• 
Store objects that do not resemble to complex 
computational models but act as a section to existing 
social 
(bookmarking) 
practices, 
structuring 
assumptions, conditions generated from their use. 
• 
Demonstrate in a transdisciplinary way that code’s 
mediation 
can 
be 
rethought, 
researched 
for 
intervention, contestation and the un-building of 
code/software systems. 
The overarching concept of the protocol is to formalize 
an always-editable space realized by the rules set above. This 
space stays vague if we do not experiment its utility. This is 
why we bring in the collective observatories application, as 
one, of the possible many applications, built upon the 
protocol. In this application, the protocol would store and 
allow us to recover a general index of a given subspace 
(observatory) and then be able to navigate through the 
different versions of the entries in this observatory. To 
achieve this within the application, we introduce two more 
layers of representing information reusing data from the 
protocol: a) the use cases, or the way we propose users to 
explore the possibilities of the protocol, through the creation 
of collective observatories and b) the graphic representation 
of classified information. The use cases need to be concrete 
with a measurable result. Users can search information that 
communities have already curated and form groups. The 
graphic interface attempts to address how users will 
experience the above.  
In terms of communication, data and account handling 
the CoWaBoo protocol adopts the following approach. All 
data are stored on InterPlanetary File System (IPFS), a p2p 
storage protocol, with its current state available in the 
application. Community management is based on Stellar, an 
open source protocol, blockchain based, for value exchange. 
CoWaBoo is utilizing a NodeJs server with a Stellar 
Javascript SDK to provide the CoWaBoo API with a way to 
communicate directly with Stellar. Every time that a new 
member is subscribed, a new Stellar account is also created. 
This account receives the minimum amount of lumens 
(Stellar currency) to work properly as a CoWaBoo account 
Once the account is created, it automatically give its consent 
to carry out currency exchanges created by the “bank” of 
CoWaBoo in Stellar. Consequently, all transactions (votes in 
groups) are stored on Stellar blockchain infrastructure 
creating Stellar exchange community with a cryptographic 
Public Address and Secret Key. While Web 2.0 applications 
tend to prescribe our participation, in CoWaBoo we seek to 
re-open the discussion on the group rules and results as 
entries or definitions are editable and possible to change 
from everyone, as long as her/his entry is voted in a group. In 
the following sections, we will discuss in detail the utility of 
this function. 
It is important, however, to demonstrate if and how the 
default rules are applied. Once an entry is added, modified or 
deleted, the observatory created a new version of itself that is 
registered to a different place of the old. To achieve this we 
have drawn from the blockchain paradigm. Blockchain as a 
distributed, cryptography boosted, database technology is a 
thing of the 80s, that computational capacity of our time 
brought to full implementation with the Bitcoin deployment. 
Blockchain, can also be understood as an implementation of 
distributed ledgers that comes with a unique set of 
possibilities in its design. It opens up the way to shared 
databases, where multiple entities can transact, with no or 
some trust between them, co-existing with no intermediation.  
The CoWaBoo protocol reproduces the main blockchain 
synchronous properties, as described above in the following 
generic approach: a) accessible and affordable shared 
databases with resilience through replication and no single 
point of failure and control, b) where multiple entries are 
possible, c) based on the possibility of disintermediation. 
Blockchain implementation comes with two more interesting 
features: d) interaction “in and between” transactions (or 
more commonly framed as smart contracts). Going back to 
our collective blockchain application, we will try to point out 
the exact process and code that demonstrate the above 
CoWaBoo can be understood as a re-documentation 
effort opening to possible, iterative transformations of the 
work of others, to produce knowledge, in three ways. Firstly, 
searching is based on existing “community curated” 
resources already available in existing socially curated 
results from Diigo, Zotero, two social bookmarking 
applications, and Wikipedia, inviting users to develop an 
intentional logic of collaborative indexing evaluation and 
curation of information. Secondly, groups are initiated with 
the possibility of voting in all group decisions using a 
currency that allows their users to valorize their effort and 
the results in the group. Thirdly, the rules of the protocol are 
themselves configurable and re-applicable in a variety of 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

applications, with our collective observatories serving as an 
initial experimentation. 
 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTING THE PROTOCOL THROUGH THE 
COLLECTIVE OBSERVATORIES APPLICATION   
A protocol is never neutral in the sense that all decisions 
regarding its functions are already set to bring some kind of 
normality on users (agents) behaviors. Thus, it becomes 
crucial to describe in more detail the use cases of the 
collective observatories application and illustrate how the 
interaction with the protocol will take place. We present the 
use cases as a descriptive middleware, between the protocol 
and collective observatories application, appearing itself to 
its users:  
• 
Build your story: A prompt to click on the start the 
button and move to an empty text area is the first 
step. The empty text area is destined to be the user's 
notebook, potentially filled up with search results 
discovered using the connected APIs for search on 
tag, bookmarks, articles and existing entries (linked 
to the Visualize tags and stories in observatories use 
case). Keywords for initial search lead to tags to 
visualize existing stories in bookmarking software or 
CoWaBoo observatories with the selected info are 
inserted in the text area, as part of the actual user 
story. This tentative story-result can stay local, 
private and unfinished, to-be-posted posted in an 
observatory, or become the first entry in a new 
possible observatory. Adding a post in an existing 
observatory is subject to a verification process 
depending on the rules of the observatory: self – 
validated means that the post is validated by the user, 
peer – validated are linked with a “vote” from 
someone of its existing members”. 
• 
Edit a story: A click on the full text search button of 
the application connects the user’s keywords, then 
transformed to used tags, to visualize existing stories 
in observatories or observatories themselves (linked 
to the Visualize tags and stories in observatories use 
case) and select them as content for further editing 
into the text area (linked to the Build your story use 
case) 
• 
Start a community of transactions (group): The 
click on the community button initiate a community 
creation function with the possibility to add emails, 
each participation verified through the related email 
account and attributed both public and secret keys. 
The group creation launches the possibility to start, 
transparent, intra-group transactions where all group 
users being informed on energy limits to credit or 
store value of the group. Group participants use the 
secret key to perform transactions, while the results 
of the effectuated transactions as well as the user 
balance remain publicly linked to each user’s public 
key. New members are proposing themselves 
through direct demands to join an observatory 
(group) 
or 
through 
accepted 
stories 
when 
observatory entries are accepted from someone of its 
existing member”. The user in this instance can be a 
part of a multiple, group transactions possibility, 
his/her public key is added to the group users for 
further transactions. 
• 
Editing tags: CoWaBoo treats tags as distributed 
objects, recasting the tag object as an autonomous 
transaction providing its user with an opportunity to 
redefine, rebuilt and redistribute through the work of 
others. Tags in CoWaBoo acquire a multiple 
meaning as they, simultaneously, represent: a) “Tags 
to be”: user typed search keywords in the text area 
leading to tags used by other users, b) Keywords that 
are then selected as Tags (CoWaBoo step by step 
search), leading educated choices of stories 
description and proposed entries or definitions for 
observatories, c) Tags are treated as semantic 
elements pointing to entries in observatories (list of 
tags per observatory), d) names of observatories are 
also treated as tags (list of observatories) and 
proposed to users in order to contribute or consult 
before creating a new observatory  
• 
Propose or “vote” an entry or a member 
(validation & valorization). Each story is accepted as 
entry (definition) when posted and voted by at least 
one group member as a verification (the fastest reply 
- user is considered for attributing the value of the 
transaction). Each accepted entry is tokenized with 
one (1) energy (limit +10 for every user), while a 
vote for an entry uses 1 energy, (- 10 for every user). 
The variation in personal energy is, initially, 
anonymous but transparent, connected to each user’s 
public key.  
• 
Visualize tags and stories in observatories: This 
use case is connected to user keywords (full text 
search) becoming tags and visualizing an index view 
with linked tags, entries and observatory names. 
    Here follow some important questions that will guide to 
the presentation of the initial results of the protocol and its 
collective observatories application: Firstly, do tags serve at 
the same time descriptive keywords, linked data (to stories) 
and ongoing collections (observatories names)? How do they 
connect entries and observatories? Do they provide some 
kind of navigation through the information initiated by the 
application and stored by the protocol? Secondly, the 
protocol does not promise, or highlights, a completed story 
or observatory but a possibility create stories and edit all 
products in future events. How is this appearing in the 
existing digital space? Can the CoWaBoo (protocol and 
application) unfinished social bookmarking space serve as an 
experimentation 
understood 
both 
in 
semantic, 
representational and process level in a context of 
collaboration and knowledge production? The following 
pages will present the initial answer to these questions. 
 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

V. 
INITIAL RESULTS  
Our efforts on introducing re-documentation and 
collaboration, as pivotal skills in students group works, starts 
during spring 2015, a full semester course, with twenty 
participants. All results of this initial effort entitled HEG 
Digital – Lectures on “Wikinomie are documented at the 
Diigo web social bookmarking application [13]. At that time, 
we used Diigo to document various group activities 
including: thematic awareness on selected areas, business 
and process analysis of Diigo and co-design of a 
collaborative social bookmarking application on the 
CoWaBoo protocol. Each of these activities would deserve a 
separate presentation and analysis. At this point, we will 
focus on the quality of social bookmarking posts produced 
from students during their curse activities. In both the 
examples used below, be it the “expert”, from another 
existing Diigo group or the “student”, from our own HEG 
initiative, we see the emergence of atonal posts, presented in 
Section 2: entries in a system produced with the minimum 
number of clicks, where decision and curation process are 
omitted.  
In this context, posts exist with the minimum set of 
information and without any other rule or event connected 
(Figure 1 and 2). 
 
 
Figure 1 Atonal post – Typical example of an expert’s bookmark in a Diigo 
group (Web 3.0) [14] 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Atonal post – Typical example of a student’s bookmark in a Diigo 
group [15]   
These two posts are indicative of current social 
bookmarking trends: the “expert” will post a minimum set of 
information, using a rich set of tags but shows no further 
engagement in describing the bookmarked resource. The 
“student” provides the bookmark with a minimum set of tags 
and description. Both posts expect the potential user to have 
a specific interest on the topic in order to pursue further with 
their reading or reuse.  
The results of the 2015 experiment led to the creation of 
the collaborative observatories application on CoWaBoo 
protocol. This application was introduced in our university 
courses the during spring semester of 2016. This new 
experimentation organized with twenty-four students of the 
University of Applied Sciences in Geneva during the HEG 
Digital – Lectures on “Wikinomie [16]. This group of, 3rd 
year, bachelor students were invited to work in groups of 
three, around a specific thematic area (i.e. Blockchain, 
Bitcoin, Wikipedia, Airbnb, Uber, Free and Open source 
software, Open licensing, Open innovation) using CoWaBoo 
as the main space of redocumentation, producing four 
concrete results for further evaluation: a) an introductory 
course presented in class, b) a collaborative documentation 
space in CoWaBoo, c) an infographic presentation and d) an 
accepted contribution to an existing Wikipedia article.  
Once more, we are presenting selected results regarding 
the use of tags from students in their respective 
observatories. This is connected to our Editing tags use case 
and our understanding of tags as descriptive keywords, 
linked data and ongoing collections. The first remark on this 
work comes on the way the information of each observatory 
(eight in total) is presented with a certain tags selection. Let 
us use the “blockchain” observatory to see how its tags are 
visualized: 
Blockchain (theme and name of the CoWaBoo 
observatory) with selected tags: 
|| DAO || France || IDE || Parlement || analysis || badge || 
banques || bdd || bitcoin || blockchain || chain || concept || 
crypto-money || ethereum || finance || finance on blockchain || 
fonctionnement || governance || infographie || peer-to-peer || 
plate-forme || politique || presentation || questionnaire || 
reference || smart contract || technologie || wikinomie || 
wikipedia || 
The second remark is the way that each tag find is linked 
to other tags. This uses data coming from all other CoWaBoo 
observatories as linked tags with the word blockchain. 
Linked Tags (in English and French) to other 
observatories for the “tag” blockchain:  
Cowaboo, 
properties, 
avantage, 
bitcoin, 
monnaie, 
concept, fonctionnement, infographie, smart contract, 
reference, presentation, wikinomie, badge, questionnaire, 
Wikipedia, peer-to-peer, innovation ouverte, plateformes, 
copyleft, creativecommons, smartcontract 
A third remark has to done on the entries (stories) that are 
being created and edited in the respective observatories, with 
the tag blockchain in each entry. Entries using the tag 
blockchain: 
• 
CoWaBoo 
|| CoWaBoo || blockchain || properties ||  
• 
Bitcoin  
|| avantage || bitcoin || blockchain || monnaie || 
• 
Blockchain 
|| blockchain || concept || fonctionnement || infographie || 
|| blockchain || smart contract || 
|| blockchain ||reference || 
|| blockchain ||presentation || wikinomie || 
|| badge || blockchain || questionnaire || 
|| blockchain ||smart contract || wikipedia || 
|| bdd ||blockchain || peer-to-peer || 
• 
Innovation Ouverte 
|| R&D || blockchain || innovation ouverte || plateformes || 
• 
Copyleft 
|| 
blockchain 
||copyleft 
|| 
creativecommons 
|| 
smartcontract || 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

A fourth remark needs to be placed around the use of the 
word blockchain in all the observatories that CoWaBoo is 
hosting. Observatories using the tag CoWaBoo:  
• 
CoWaBoo  
• 
Bitcoin 
• 
Blockchain 
• 
Innovation Ouverte 
• 
Copyleft 
These four remarks summarize the possibility of an 
application, like our collective observatories, to use the 
CoWaBoo protocol’s functions in order to reclassify user 
data. The protocol therefore formalizes all the necessary 
functions: 
• 
Data storage, recording new data in an observatory: 
entry, member list, configuration 
• 
Ensuring the current state of an observatory 
• 
Possibility to add, change and delete data from an 
observatory 
• 
Registration and acceptance of new members 
• 
Vote counted and executed through blockchain intra-
community transactions 
• 
Configurability and re-applicability of the rules of 
the group in the protocol itself. 
It is also important, to describe if and how the default 
rules are applied. Once an entry is added, modified or 
deleted, the observatory created a new version of itself that is 
registered to a different place of the old. This is important 
because whatever change on this code is reposted as a new 
block of information [17]. In the following figure (4), we can 
the current state of the blockchain observatory. This includes 
its id, entries, members, date, configuration (public or 
private) author and, most importantly, the path (hash) to its 
previously stored version. This process applies to all data 
stored from the CoWaBoo protocol and generated from the 
collaborative observatories application: observatories, entries 
and member list.       
 
 
 
Figure 4. A CoWaBoo (blockchain) observatory stored on IPFS 
 
As already mentioned the InterPlanetary File System 
(IPFS) is a content-addressable, peer-to-peer hypermedia 
distribution protocol. Nodes in the IPFS network form a 
distributed file system. IPFS plays a crucial role in 
CoWaBoo acting as a public ledger of all posted or edited 
data. The same goes for any rule, or post. All changes in 
membership, authorship and rules of this observatory are re-
traceable in the blockchain logic of the protocol with the 
previous version always available. Content wise, things are 
also significantly different, compared to a standard social 
bookmarking application. Entries are taking more of wiki 
form with descriptive and links. The image below shows the 
text of the || France || Parlement || banques ||finance || 
politique || technologie || entry  
 
 
  
Figure 5. A CoWaBoo entry on the blockchain observatory 
 
There is a clear shift, in all observatories, to adding text 
and sources in entries and forming them more as stories. This 
is due to the discussion related to CoWaBoo lecture on social 
bookmarking and the evaluation criteria but it goes hand in 
hand with our initial anti-click-culture approach. However, 
the creation of a tag dictionary based on group decisions and 
a diverse user participation including researchers, students, 
professors, experts and professionals from all project’s 
entities is, now, emerging CoWaBoo’s next step. In the table 
below, we summarize how CoWaBoo introduces the 
redocumentation process in steps: 
TABLE 1. COWABOO REDOCUMENTATION PROCESS  
Step title 
Description 
Process 
Search and 
Post 
Users are invited to 
search in existing 
communities, 
discern 
knowledgeable 
others, edit text and 
post result in 
existing groups  
Search through tags on existing 
community curated resources  
Select resources and edit a story  
Publish on a group a shared “block 
of information” with tags  ⇒ Create 
unique link (URI) that could be  
posted on selected web services 
Reuse and 
Curate 
Initiate a process of 
critical scrutiny and 
group content 
production for 
participants 
 
Engage in a group - observatory, 
where an exchange between users, 
data and group rules is possible. 
Provide feedback on group’s entries 
Contribute to the implementation of 
the group’s collective observatory 
Provide history of group decisions 
and documentation 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK 
This paper tried to demonstrate how the CoWaBoo 
protocol aims to reverse our habits to prescribe information 
and describe how various processes around this can take 
place. Although we can give not a binary answer as to 
whether (protocol and application) provide with a semantic 
and representational tool, in a context of collaboration and 
knowledge production, we have demonstrated how such a 
process could be initiated. Further work on the use of the 
protocol and its applications include the validation of the 
results of these use cases, during the spring semester 2017, 
within a targeted course in the Information Systems 
Department (HEG) of the University of Applied Sciences in 
Geneva. This pilot will continue the documentation of the 
work of 30 students in 15 sessions in 2017. This involves 
reusing the protocol through its use cases and functions, 
experimenting on: 
• 
More complex group rules and valorization of 
transactions between participants in various groups. 
This should include testing of the default rules of the 
protocol and evaluation of the transactions functions 
in the application, while leading to group rules and 
results editable and possible to change from 
everyone, as long as her/his entry (definition) is 
voted in a group through the CoWaBoo currency. 
• 
An alternative search experience based on an 
understanding of community resources as a 
reference to information search. Our goal is to 
stimulate competences as penetrating intelligence, 
keen perception and sound judgment. 
• 
Creating new applications, scenarios and early 
implementations, based on the CoWaBoo protocol 
API (including both IPFS and Stellar protocols). 
These scenarios can be deployed using the protocol 
and its rules, or being inspired by it. 
    Finally, we believe that understanding web applications as 
potential open and descriptive protocols is a crucial step 
towards more transparency, less opacity, in our digital era. 
We intend to continue our research both as a way to unmask 
current opacity in digital technologies and experiment on 
new tools that could support collaborative and critical 
competences. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] E. Hargittai and A. Hinnant, “Digital inequality”  in 
Communication Research vol. 35 (5), pp. 602, 2008. 
[2] S. 
Barocas, 
“Data 
mining 
and 
the 
discourse 
on 
discrimination” The Data Ethics Workshop, Conference on 
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 2014), 24—27 
August, New York City. 
[3] K. Zetter, “Junk food algorithms and the world they feed us” 
Retrieved 
February 
10, 
2017, 
from, 
URL: 
http://bit.ly/iaHTWq. 
[4] E. Fisher and M. Naumer, “Information grounds: Theoretical 
basis and empirical findings on information flow in social 
settings”, in New directions in human information behavior, 
A. Spink & C. Cole, Eds. Amsterdam: Kluwer, pp. 93-111, 
2006.  
[5] J. Burrell, “How the machine ‘thinks’: Understanding opacity 
in machine learning algorithms” SAGE Publications, 2016, 
DOI: 10.1177/2053951715622512. 
[6] C. Sandvig, K. Hamilton, K. Karahalios and C. Langbort, 
“Re-Centering the Algorithm” Governing Algorithms, (NYU 
School of Law 2014), New York, NY, USA. 
[7] F. Coffield, D. Moseley, E. Hall, and K. Ecclestone,  “Should 
we be using learning styles? What research has to say to 
practice”. London: Learning and Skills Research Centre, 
2004. 
[8] A. 
Galloway, “Protocol: How Control Exists After 
Decentralization”, MIT Press, 2004.  
[9] J. Gritton, “Of Serendipity, Free Association and Aimless 
Browsing: Do They Lead to Serendipitous Learning?”, 
unpublished. Retrieved February 10, 2017, from, URL: 
http://www.education.ed.ac.uk/e-
learning/gallery/gritton_serendipitous_learning/conclusion/ass
ets/assignment_print_version.pdf  
[10] M. Rosenmann, “Serendipity and scientific discover”in  
Creativity and Leadership in the 21st Century Firm”, vol. 13, 
pp. 187-193, 2002 
[11] E. Riley, “The Effects of a Cuban Musical Exchange Tripon 
the Musical Journeys of Students from a Sydney High 
School” Bachelor of music's thesis, University of Sydney, 
2007, 
Retrieved 
February 
10, 
2017, 
from, 
URL: 
http://ses.library.usyd.edu.au/bitstream/2123/2177/1/Riley%2
02007.pdf,  
[12] O. Le Deuff,  Du tag au like, Paris: FYP Editions, 2012. 
[13] The 2015 group work results on Diigo web social 
bookmarking 
application 
are 
available 
at 
https://groups.diigo.com/group/heg-digital 
[14] The source of this expert group in Diigo is available at 
https://groups.diigo.com/group/web_3_0/search?what=wolfra
m+alpha 
[15] This example comes from the HEG – Digital 2015 group 
work 
on 
Airbnb 
available 
at 
https://groups.diigo.com/group/heg-digital/content/tag/airbnb  
[16] All HEG – Wikinomic 2016 results are available at 
http://project.cowaboo.net 
[17] The link for the blockchain observatory is now available at: 
http://project.cowaboo.net/observatory/Blockchain, with all of 
its data stored on IPFS, a p2p storage protocol. Its current 
state 
(blockchain 
observatory) 
is 
 
available 
at 
https://gateway.ipfs.io/ipfs/QmaDv45G23aRmwveRgpqYEu5
GKgqUu1bWqF2vST5SX7SmK 
 
 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

