An Approach toward Automatic Error Detection in Learners’ English Writing 
 Based on the Source Language 
 
Koichi Kawamura1, Harumi Kashiwagi2, Min Kang1 
1Graduate School of Intercultural Studies 
2Institute for Promotion of Higher Education 
Kobe University 
Kobe, Japan 
email: kawamura51@stu.kobe-u.ac.jp, kasiwagi@kobe-u.ac.jp, kang@kobe-u.ac.jp
 
Abstract— Automatic error detection systems for 
English writing have been improved since they were first 
introduced and are being applied to foreign language 
learning. However, these systems mainly focus on local 
errors, such as grammatical aspects in the target 
language and ignore the meaning intended in the source 
language. As a result, teachers must spend an inordinate 
amount of time to detect global errors. In this paper, we 
propose an approach to an automatic error detection 
system to solve this problem. In order to determine 
whether the structure of an English sentence is in error 
or not, criteria for error determination are first needed. 
Our approach is based on the idea that criteria for error 
determination are created by the correspondence 
relation between Japanese and English using sentence 
patterns. In order to evaluate our approach, by way of 
illustration, four sentence patterns were selected from 
the authors’ original six sentence patterns. Automatic 
error detection using these four sentence patterns was 
carried out on 100 Japanese sentences with subjects and 
their corresponding English sentences. As a result, we 
concluded that, using the sentence patterns in the source 
language, automatic error detection is effective when 
based on our criteria for error determination. 
 
 Keywords-Error Detection; Sentence Pattern; Global Error; 
Parser; Source Language; Criteria for Error Determination. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
For English learners, compared to speaking, reading 
and listening, writing is the most difficult skill to improve. 
“Writing abilities are not naturally acquired; they must be 
culturally (rather than biologically) transmitted in every 
generation, whether in school or in other assisting 
environments” [1]. Despite this linguistic feature, writing is 
not taught enough in schools relative to other skills [2]. It is 
especially difficult to teach as teachers must detect and 
correct learners’ errors one by one which is very time 
consuming.  
It is accepted that English essays written by learners 
with low proficiency contain a lot of errors. Of these errors, 
global errors negatively affect the structure of the whole 
sentence, and this limits the readers’ comprehension. 
Therefore, it is necessary for teachers not to overlook such 
errors when proofreading the essay. However, in order to 
detect global errors teachers must devote an inordinate 
amount of attention discovering all the potential structural 
errors. Thus, teachers may have a tendency to overlook 
some structural errors due to time constraints. For this 
reason, a support tool for structural error detection is needed 
in order to reduce the burden on teachers. 
        On the other hand, a number of automatic error 
detection systems using natural language processing 
technology have been tried. They are applied to foreign 
language learning classes to reduce the burden on teachers 
and support students to acquire better writing skills. These 
systems perform excellently with single grammatical errors, 
such as spelling, article usage, prepositions and aspect.  
However, few error detection systems look at structural 
errors. Thus, current automatic error detection systems are 
limited in that they do not cover all types of learners’ errors. 
In addition, most of these systems are designed to analyze 
the target language (English) only. This unilateral approach 
may cause a discrepancy between the system’s automatic 
correction feedback and the learner’s intention [3]. In order 
to overcome these problems, the source language (Japanese) 
should also be an object of analysis. For these reasons, these 
systems are of limited general use in classrooms. 
        In order to support teachers and improve error 
detection accuracy, an automatic error detection system 
which can easily identify sentence structure errors, and cope 
with various types of global errors, and recognize the 
learners’ intention is needed. Therefore, this study proposes 
just such an automatic error detection system, one which 
can easily determine whether a sentence is correct or not by 
comparing the basic sentence elements (subject and 
predicate) of Japanese and English using parsers based on 
sentence patterns. This approach is based on the results of 
our previous study, which showed that “detecting English 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

errors using sentence patterns is more promising than 
detection that depends on full sentences” [4]. 
In Section 2, we propose an approach for an automatic 
error detection system that can determine whether an 
English sentence structure is in error or not. In Section 3, we 
detect structural errors according to criteria for error 
determination. Then we evaluate the accuracy of criteria for 
error determination created by the correspondence relation 
between Japanese and English, based on the four sentence 
patterns selected for illustration. In Section 4, we refer to the 
efficiency of automatic error detection using the sentence 
patterns in the source language. 
II. 
APPROACH 
        To make the detection of global errors easy, we focus 
on basic sentence elements, by comparing them in the 
source language and the corresponding target language. To 
conduct the comparison, we classify the sentence patterns 
and create criteria for error determination: a rule created 
based on the correspondence relation between Japanese and 
English using sentence patterns. We compare the basic 
sentence elements (primary subject and predicate) of the 
source language (Japanese) and the corresponding target 
language (English) using parsers based on sentence patterns 
and criteria, this approach follows the procedure below. 
A. Procedure 
1. Prepare Japanese sentences and the corresponding 
English sentences as analytical data. 
2. Set up a Japanese parser, Cabocha and an English 
parser, the Stanford Parser. 
3. Automatically extract sets of sentence elements, a 
primary subject and a predicate (verb) by a parser 
based on extraction rules. 
4. Automatically classify the sets of a primary subject 
and a predicate (verb) based on the Japanese 
sentence patterns. 
5. Compare the defined sentence patterns with the 
extracted sentence patterns based on criteria for 
determination. 
6. Obtain the results of error determination as 
feedback (ERROR, POSSIBLE, UNKNOWN). 
 
*ERROR stands for “an outright error.” POSSIBLE stands 
for “not an error, but may not be a correct answer.” 
UNKNOWN stands for “indeterminable.” 
B. Sentence Elements 
        Although each Japanese and English sentence contains 
various elements, such as subjects, predicates (verbs), objects, 
complements, etc., this study examines the set of a primary 
subject and predicate (verb) only. This is because all major 
sentence patterns contain a subject and a predicate verb in 
academic writing [5]-[7]. Additionally, it is efficient for 
teachers to determine whether the learners’ English is 
grammatically correct by checking sets of a primary subject 
and a predicate verb only. This will support teachers to 
detect errors easily since learners’ errors are not always clear, 
and teachers have difficulty determining where the problems 
lie. 
C. Parsers and Extraction Rules 
        To extract sets of primary subjects and predicates from 
Japanese sentences, the parser, Japanese Dependency 
Structure Analyzer, Cabocha [8] was utilized. To extract 
sets of primary subjects and predicate verbs from the 
corresponding English sentences, the Stanford Parser [9] 
was utilized. Table I indicates details of both parsers and 
extraction rules of subjects and predicates (verb). 
TABLE I. EXTRACTION RULES OF CABOCHA AND THE STANFORD PARSER 
Parser 
Cabocha 0.69 
The Stanford 
Parser 3.6.0 
Target Language 
Japanese 
English 
Extraction 
Rule 
Subject 
A clause including a 
case particle “が 
(GA)” or a binding 
particle “は (WA)” 
or “も (MO)” which 
has a dependency 
structure with the 
predicate 
A nominal subject 
or a clausal subject 
Predicate 
(Verb) 
The last clause 
 
A verb (transitive 
or intransitive) or a 
“be” verb + copula 
which has a 
dependency 
structure with the 
subject 
*が (GA), は (WA), も (MO) are particles in Japanese grammar that 
immediately follow a noun, a verb, an adjective, and indicate the subject of 
a sentence. 
D. Sentence Patterns and Criteria for Determination 
        In order to clarify the determinate language behavior, 
we selected the following six sentence patterns, because 
they appear frequently in learners’ writing. The patterns 
were classified into two categories (predicate based and 
subject based). First, the predicate based sentence pattern 
was sub-classified into four sentence patterns: A) Subject + 
(ARU / IRU), B) Subject + Noun + (DESU / DEARU / DA), 
C) Subject + Reporting Verb (OMOU / KANGAERU / 
KANJIRU / JIKKANSURU), D) Subject + Verb (excluding 
“be” verb existence and reporting verb). Second, the subject 
based sentence pattern was sub-classified into two sentence 
patterns: E) ~ (SURU) KOTO + (WA / GA / MO) + 
predicate (excluding a modal auxiliary verb), F) WATASHI 
+ (WA / GA / MO) + predicate. Table II indicates the 
Japanese sentence patterns. 
        The following is a supplementary explanation of each 
sentence pattern: A) ARU and IRU represent a “be” verb 
existence, B) DESU, DEARU and DA represent an auxiliary 
verb state, C) ~ (TO) OMOU and KANGAERU represent a 
reporting verb mental state, KANJIRU and JIKKANSURU 
represent a verb perception, E) ~ (SURU) KOTO represents 
an inanimate subject, such as a formal subject, a gerund or 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

an infinitive in English, F) WATASHI represents the 
personal pronoun “I”. Note on Japanese verbs, plain form is 
used. 
TABLE II. JAPANESE SENTENCE PATTERNS 
Type 
Sentence Patterns with Subject 
Predicate 
Based 
A 
主語 ＋（ある / いる） 
Subject + (ARU / IRU) 
B 
主語 ＋ 名詞 ＋（です / である / だ） 
Subject + Noun + (DESU / DEARU / DA) 
C 
主語 ＋ 〜と（思う / 考える / 感じる / 実感する） 
Subject 
+ 
Reporting 
Verb 
(OMOU 
/ 
KANGAERU / KANJIRU / JIKKANSURU 
D 
主語 ＋ 動詞（存在，伝達除く）  
Subject + Verb (excluding “be” verb existence 
and reporting verb)   
Subject 
Based 
E 
〜（する）こと ＋（は / が / も）＋ 述語（法助動詞
除く） 
~ (SURU) KOTO + (WA / GA / MO) + predicate 
(excluding a modal auxiliary verb) 
F 
私 ＋（は / が / も）＋ 述語 
WATASHI + (WA / GA / MO) + predicate 
TABLE III. SENTENCE PATTERN AND ITS CRITERIA FOR ERROR 
DETERMINATION 
S.P. 
Criteria for Error Determination 
A 
If predicate verb is not “be” verb, it should be ERROR. 
B 
If predicate verb is not “be” verb, it should be ERROR. 
C 
If predicate verb is not “reporting” verb, it should be ERROR. 
D 
If predicate verb does not meet semantic agreements, it should 
be ERROR  
E 
If subject is not “it,” “to verb” or “verb-ing,” it should be 
ERROR. 
F 
If subject is not “I,” it should be ERROR. 
S.P. is an acronym of “sentence pattern.”  The above highlighted sentence 
patterns are dealt with in this study as an illustration. 
 
The predicate based sentence pattern A) “Subject + 
(ARU / IRU)” and B) “Subject + Noun + (DESU / DEARU 
/ DA)” always correspond with a ‘be’ verb in English, 
without the ‘be’ verb in the English sentences there would 
be errors. Sentence pattern C) “Subject + reporting Verb 
(OMOU / KANGAERU / KANJIRU / JIKKANSURU)” 
always responds with a reporting verb “think” or “feel” in 
English, without reporting verb “think” or “feel” in the 
English sentences there would be errors. Sentence pattern 
D) “Subject + Verb” is the most common, if semantic 
agreement in terms of predicate (verb) is missing, an error 
would occur.  
        The subject based sentence pattern E) “~ (SURU) 
KOTO + (WA / GA / MO) + predicate” always corresponds 
with an inanimate subject, such as a formal subject, a 
gerund or an infinitive in English, without the inanimate 
subject in the English sentences there would be an error. 
Sentence pattern F) “WATASHI + (WA / GA / MO) + 
predicate” is the most basic, without the subject “I” in the 
English sentences there would be an error. 
        Table above shows six sentence patterns and their 
original criteria for determination whether a sentence is 
correct or not. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Results 
        In order to evaluate our approach, by way of illustration, 
automatic error detection using four sentence patterns (A, B, 
C and F) was carried out on Japanese sentences with subjects 
and their corresponding English sentences. 
        This study utilized 1499 sentences for analysis from 
essay data written by 110 Japanese EFL (English as a foreign 
language) college students. The proficiency level of all the 
learners was equivalent to the A1 level of the Common 
European Framework of Reference (CEFR). All the 
participants were required to write an essay in Japanese with 
the following prompts: “It is important for college students 
to have a part time job” and “Smoking should be completely 
banned at all the restaurants in the country.”  They then had 
to translate the Japanese essay into English. The essay had to 
be 200 - 300 words, written in under 1 hour, with no use of a 
dictionary or internet enabled devices. 
        For parsing, 100 Japanese sentences with subjects and 
the corresponding English sentences were randomly selected 
from essay data. As a result of parsing, 75 sentences were 
analyzed since they had the required one subject only. These 
75 sentences were classified into six sentence patterns. In 
order to obtain feedback, comparisons between Japanese 
primary subjects and predicates and the corresponding 
English primary subjects and predicate verbs were conducted 
based on the extraction by parser and sorted based on 
sentence patterns. 
TABLE IV. SAMPLE RESULTS OF EXTRACTION AND ERROR DETERMINATION 
 
Results of Extraction 
Results of Error Determination 
JPN 
ENG 
Type of S.P. 
S.S. 
Sub. 
Pre. 
Sub. 
Pre. 
Sub-based 
Pre-based 
Sub-based 
Pre-based 
1 
ことは 
大切です 
It 
is important 
E 
B 
- 
POSSIBLE 
2 
人が 
困ります 
smoking 
is difficult 
UNKNOWN 
D 
UNKNOWN 
- 
3 
可能性も 
ある 
we 
have 
UNKNOWN 
A 
UNKNOWN 
ERROR 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
75 
私も 
思います 
I 
think 
F 
C 
POSSIBLE 
POSSIBLE 
*Sub. is an abbreviation of “subject.” Pre. is an abbreviation of “predicate.” S.P. is an acronym of “sentence pattern.” S.S. is an acronym of “sentence 
structure.”  ( - )  is “unanalyzed” on behalf of N/A in this paper. 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Table IV shows sample results of extraction and 
determination. 
TABLE V. EVALUATION RESULTS OF THE PREDICATE BASED SENTENCE 
PATTERNS AND THE SUBJECT BASED SENTENCE PATTERNS 
 
Results of 
Determination by 
Error Detection 
System 
Results of 
Manual 
Determination 
Type 
S.P. 
ER. 
PO. 
UN. 
ER. 
Predicate 
Based 
A 
8 
4 
4 
0 
5  
B 
28 
9 
19 
0 
13 
C 
9 
2 
7 
0 
1 
D 
30 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Total 
(A+B+C) 
45 
23 
22 
0 
17 
Subject 
Based 
E 
4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
F 
10 
4 
0 
6 
3 
Others 
61 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Total 
(F) 
10 
4 
0 
6 
3 
*ER. stands for “ERROR.” PO. stands for “POSSIBLE.” UN. stands for 
“UNKNOWN.” ( - )  is “unanalyzed” due to being non applicable. 
 
        Table V shows the evaluation results on the accuracy to 
criteria for error detection of the predicate based sentence 
patterns (A, B, C) and the subject based sentence pattern (F). 
Manual determination follows the determination method in 
our previous works. The numbers in Results of Manual 
Determination are errors identified by criteria for 
determination (Table III) based on the meaning. 
B. Discussion 
        Comparing the results of determination by error 
detection system with the results of manual determination in 
Table V, we obtained the following information. 
        Sentence Pattern A: In the results of manual 
determination, nine errors were the same as in the results of 
determination by error detection system. The coverage of 
determination was 80%. To increase the accuracy of error 
determination, distinction between existence “ARU” and 
probability “SURUKOTOMO-ARU” is needed. 
        Sentence Pattern B: In the results of manual 
determination, seven errors were the same as in the results of 
determination by error detection system. The coverage of 
determination was 69.2%. To increase the accuracy of error 
determination, the problem arising from conjugation must be 
solved. Cabocha determines conjugation as a noun, although 
conjugation is a part of verb. Therefore, adding detailed 
conditions regarding conjugation to sentence pattern is 
needed. 
        Sentence Pattern C: In the results of manual 
determination, two errors were the same as in the results of 
determination by error detection system. The coverage of 
determination was 100%. To maintain the accuracy of error 
determination, adding more reporting verbs in the list is 
needed. 
        Sentence Pattern F: In the results of manual 
determination, two errors were the same as in the results of 
determination by error detection system. The coverage of 
determination was 100%. However, the error detection 
system over-detects errors. To reduce over-detection it is 
necessary to create detailed sentence patterns and criteria for 
error determination to deal with sentences which contain 
multiple subjects, such as a compound sentence or a 
complex sentence. This will be the subject of further study. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this study, we proposed an approach toward an 
automatic error detection system. Developing sentence 
patterns, which differentiates the system from other 
language error detection systems, is the key point of our 
approach. We concluded that using the sentence patterns in 
the source language, automatic error detection is effective 
when based on our criteria for error determination. The 
remaining issue is to expand the number of sentence 
patterns in order to respond to as wide a range of English 
essays as possible. Furthermore, developing sentence 
patterns enables our system to be applied to other languages. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
        This work was partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI 
Grant Number JP17K01081. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
W. Grabe and R. B. Kaplan, “Theory and practice of writing: 
An applied linguistics perspective,” Harlow: Pearson 
Education, p.6, 1996. 
[2] 
Y. Takada, “Saishuuhoukokusho,” Eigokyouiku Ni Kansuru 
Kenkyuu, Monbukagakushou itakukenkyuu,  [“Final report,” 
Research 
on 
English 
Education, 
Contract 
Research 
Commissioned by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, 
Science and Technology], p.12, 2004. 
[3] 
K. Kawamura, H. Kashiwagi, and Min Kang, “On the 
Potential of Error Analysis Using Source Language in 
Learner’s Written English,” Research report of JET 
conference, JSET, 17(2), pp.225-232, 2017. 
[4] 
K. Kawamura, H. Kashiwagi, and M. Kang, “An Approach 
of Semi-Automatic Correction Feedback for Learners’ 
English Writing Using the Source Language,” Proceedings 
of Symposium on Language and Sustainability in Asia 2017, 
SELSA2017, pp.11-16, 2017. 
[5] 
R. Quirk, S. Greenbaum, G. Leech, and J. Svartvik, “A 
comprehensive grammar of the English language,” London, 
UK: Longman, 1985. 
[6] 
D. Biber, S. Johansson, G. Leech, S. Conrad, and E. Finegan, 
“Longman grammar of spoken and written English,” Essex, 
UK: Pearson Education Limited, 1999. 
[7] 
S. Ando, “Eigo no ronri, nihongo no ronri [The logic of 
English, the logic of Japanese],” Tokyo: Taishukan, 1986. 
[8] 
T. Kudo and Y. Matsumoto, “Fast Methods for Kernel-Based 
Text Analysis,” ACL 2003 in Sapporo, Japan, 2003. 
[9] 
D. Klein and C. D. Manning, “Accurate Unlexicalized 
Parsing,” Proceedings of the 41st Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics, pp.423-430, 2003. 
 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

