Experiences in use Tablet PC to Support Student´s Activities:
Five Years of an Exploratory Study
André Constantino da Silva, Heloísa Vieira da Rocha
Institute of Computing, Núcleo de Informática Aplicada à Educação
UNICAMP – University of Campinas
Campinas, Brazil
{acsilva, heloisa}@ic.unicamp.br
Abstract— Since 2006 we are studying the use of Tablet PCs in 
academic environment to support learning activities in and out 
classrooms. This article resume a five years of Tablet PC use in 
many learning activities, since 2006 until 2011, describing how 
this device was  used. In the exploratory study, the student 
deals with some interaction problems that are described here. 
One conclusion is the difficult to find software for Tablet PC 
that offer functions to support the broad of student´s activities, 
but the main contribution is the perception of the usability 
decrease when use software designed to desktop PC in Tablet 
PCs.
Keywords-Hardware/software 
systems 
for 
mobile 
communications, 
computing 
support 
learning 
activities, 
usability, pen-computing.
I.
 INTRODUCTION
The recent technology forwards minimize part of the 
commons problems in the mobile computing: connectivity, 
length and processor capacity. This possibility brings a 
broad of new applications made to support many areas, 
inside this areas we can highlight the education. One of the 
mobile devices that are gained repercussion in this scenario 
is the Tablet PC, a device with height  is similar to  a 
notebook and have an input device similar a pen.
The paper and pen metaphor implies that tasks performed 
before in paper, like draw or manuscript writing, can be 
more natural in the Tablet PC than in the another computing 
devices. So, educational applications for  contexts where 
paper and pen usually are presents can benefits from this 
new interaction style and from  pen-computing, it  offers 
better use experiences for teachers and students.
Backon  [1] says that the keyboard allows a rapid 
typewriting and do texts structured by topics, but only pen 
can allow a creativity increment, better flexibility and a 
natural record of the think development process and 
rationale in all stages (ideal requirements for the educational 
environment), aging like a direct hand extension. For 
example in the resolution of complex problems with a large 
calculus solution, by using applications is possible to record 
all the steps and draw diagrams that explain the problem 
resolution, step by step.
When move the pen in the screen, the pen trace should 
result in electronic ink that must be treated by the application 
to be rendered   and  stored. But desktop applications, that 
running in the Tablet PCs, do not treat electronic ink, so it is 
necessary special applications,  applications that treat 
electronic ink, to have benefices of the pen interaction style.
But more than treat electronic ink, witch more attributes 
differs desktop applications and Tablet PCs applications? 
Which design issues can be extracted from these attributes 
and used in the design of good usability applications for 
Tablet PCs?
To answer these questions, it is necessary collect and 
analyze the use of Tablet PC applications that support the 
user in the educational context, a student. So, the initial 
question is which available applications can be used in the 
student´s day a day activities? Which functions are important 
to support these activities? Intrigued by these questions, we 
started to do an exploratory study with real use the Tablet 
PC and some applications to support students activities. The 
main objective of this paper is brings some answers to these 
questions describing this exploratory studies until 2011 that 
began in the December 2006.
Section II shows the adopted methodology for the 
exploratory student and its context, and Section III  presents 
the Tablet PCs models used in the study, and  Section IV 
describes the used applications in this period. Section V 
presents a resume of the use and the main problems the u 
dealt. Section VI brings some design issues based on the 
related problems. The conclusions are presented in Section 
VII.
II.
METHODOLOGY
The exploratory study goal is observing and describing 
how the Tablet PC can be used to support students day a day 
activities. So we used the following methodology:
- Identification of student activities in  and  out 
classrooms;
- Identification of Tablet PCs applications that support 
the identified activities;
- Use the collected applications for Tablet PC in the 
activities;
- Analyze the use and collect the student opinion;
- Extract interaction problems.
The study is related with the winning project  [2] 
submitted for the 'Higher Education HP Technology for 
Teaching Grant Initiative Recipients'  [3], an international 
awards where the best project receive financial support to 
equip a classroom with Tablet PC and do the proposed 
research project. The winning project was written in 2006 by 
a group of researches from UNICAMP interested in study 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

the use of Tablet PC in high education. This work is related 
with this project, that dispose a Tablet PC for integral use.
III.
TABLET PCS AND USED MODELS
The Tablet PC is a computing device designed to 
“imitate” a notebook, allowing the user interact with a pen. 
Resuming, the Tablet PC has  the following hardware 
characteristics:
(i) Pen sensitive screen;
(ii) Screen that allow different positions (Fig. 1);
(iii) Wireless network access by WLAN and bluetooth 
technology;
(iv) Microphones and embedded loudspeakers;
(v) 
Keyboard 
(some 
models 
the 
keyboard 
are 
detachable);
(vi) Batteries.
In this exploratory study, we used two HP Tablet PC 
models, both models have processors similar with the 
laptops in them build year. The first model, used between 
2006 and 2008, is a HP/Compaq TC1100 (Fig. 1) [4] with a 
1.2GHz processor and 1 Gb of RAM and a 10.4”  screen. 
Initially equipped with Windows XP Tablet Edition, after it 
was change for Windows Vista with Portuguese manuscript 
recognizer. After, we adopted Linux operation system 
Ubuntu distribution.
The second model, a HP TouchSmart TX2-1040br (Fig. 
2) [5] bought in December 2008, has a 2.2 GHz dual-core 
processor with 3Gb RAM and a 12”  screen. The installed 
operation system was Windows Vista with Portuguese 
manuscript recognizer. This model has the design more 
similar  to HP laptops but equipped  with  the hardware 
described to Tablet PC, and have a touchscreen.
IV.
APPLICATIONS FOR TABLET PC
Passed by 8 year that the Tablet PCs are commercial 
explored, but there is few applications for them yet that can 
be used in the educational context. Comparing the software 
production for smartphones and the software production for 
Tablet PCs, we can see that the Tablet PC ones is timid yet.
During the study case time, tree software for Tablet PCs 
were used: Adobe Acrobat Professional  [6], Windows 
Journal [7] and Jarnal [8]. All these software are for doing 
annotations or writing manuscript text.
The Adobe Acrobat Professional (Fig. 3) is a proprietary 
software that allows the creation of .pdf files and the use of 
some tools to typewriting text edition and doing annotations 
using the Pencil tool for manuscript text and the Highlighter 
tool for highlight parts of the text.
Figure 1. Different positions to use the HP/Compaq Tablet PC 
model TC1100.
Figure 2. Different positions to use the  HP Tablet PC. model 
TouchSmart TX2-1040br.
Figure 3. Example of Adobe Acrobat Professional to do 
annotations.
The Windows Journal (Fig. 4) is a software that comes 
with the Windows XP Tablet PC Edition and allow do 
manuscript 
annotations 
with 
tools 
to 
change 
the 
characteristics of the pen like fat width and color, and some 
functions like highlight, select and erase annotations, and 
commons applications functions like new file, open file, save 
file, copy, cut and paste text and annotations, and insert 
figures and text editor functions, like add or remove pages.
The Windows Journal save in a proprietary format (.jnt), 
and  to be viewed in a desktop computer needs a special 
application, called Windows Journal Viewer, a software to 
visualize the electronic ink saved in the .jnt file. Windows 
Journal Viewer is distributed freely for Windows users.
The Jarnal is an application written in Java programming 
language with functionality similar to the Windows Journal, 
but it is multiplatform and free to use. Among the text editor 
functions and manipulate the electronic ink, Jarnal allows 
include files in the background so that is possible do 
annotations direct over the document. This function allows 
to  use as background files like papers our presentations and 
highlight import parts of the text with the Highlighter tool 
(Fig. 5).
V.
TAKING NOTES WITH TABLET PCS
The first contact with the Tablet PC occurred in a 
Human-Computer Interaction classes, where the students 
were challenged to design applications to this device 
considering usability attributes. One of the applications 
developed  was the Interactive Logic Notebook [9].  But  the 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Figure 4. Example of Windows Journal to do annotations into 
classes.
Figure 5. Example of using Jarnal to highlight text.
real use of the Tablet PC to support student activities 
occurred between 2006 and 2008, when we used the Tablet 
PC to do classes annotations and do exercises from Theory 
of Computing,  Software Engineering, Distributed Systems 
and Informatics Applied in Education courses.
The first used model of Tablet PC was available for the 
students in December 2006, month without classes at 
UNICAMP. To stimulate the use and acquire experience in 
use Tablet PC and software, the student decided to use the 
device to support her in research day a day activities.
The first task the student used the Tablet PC was analyze 
an use case document  available in .pdf format  verifying 
which use cases about an application was implemented 
conform specified or identified points to update the 
document when  the difference  was result from a decision 
process to change the design. The student´s goal was doing 
marks in the text to signalize points that need to be updated 
or points where the implementation needs to be reviewed.
The chose software was Adobe Acrobat Professional, 
because the goal was do annotations in an existing .pdf file. 
Some interactions problems where find in this use, resulting 
in the adoption of another tool to make this kind of activity 
in classroom.
The first problem dealt by the student when she used the 
Adobe Acrobat Professional was the reception of input data 
to render the electronic ink. In the manuscript writing, the 
letters were rendered in a sharped form and sometimes only 
a trace was showed. Maybe this problem was result from the 
device do not match the hardware  requirements that the 
software needs, so the Adobe Acrobat  did not received all 
the points to draw correctly the electronic ink. This problem 
occurred mainly in a short time to start the writing. To 
resolve this problem, the student pressed the pen against the 
screen, waiting one or two seconds and start to write the 
word. But some letters become hard to recognize, because 
the forgotten points that compose the electronic ink. The 
solution adopted was written more slow.
Another interaction problem was related with the 
electronic ink selection function that the Pencil tool have. 
Pressing the pen near an existing electronic ink, the software 
interpret this action has a electronic ink selection. This way 
make hard write letters like “i”, “j”, “k”, “t”, “ç”  in the 
manuscript way and accentuation, that require more than one 
trace to written the letter. When the users will write the 
second trace trace for one of these letters, the first trace 
usually is moved to other position.  The user strategy was 
begin the second trace so far so that  the second trace was 
recognized has a new electronic ink and not has a selection 
for the existing trace. But this strategy works fine with letter 
“t”, and does not work to write the dot for the letters “i” and 
“j” and write the cedilla for letter c.
Another problem deal with the student is related with the 
scroll bar position, disposed in the right corner. For a left-
handed person, the case of this student, when interact with 
the scroll bar the arm embarrass the content visualization 
that are moving, become hard to put the content in the 
wished position. Another problem is the scroll bar width, 
that for the use with a pen must be more fat. Using the scroll 
bar in the default width, the student had the tendency to 
cross the scroll bar borders when the pen was in the second 
half of the screen. The pen cross the bar borders because the 
movement of the fist over the screen (the movement is not a 
straight line). When  the  pen  cross  the  bar  borders, the 
software back the visualization to the content part viewed 
before the scroll operation. 
To scroll, the user adopted another tool that the Adobe 
Acrobat Professional has, the Hand tool. This tool allow 
press in any part of the content and scroll up or down, 
allowing change the document visualization. The users said 
the use of this tool is more efficient form to scroll the 
document.
To shared this use experience, the student written a 
manuscript text using the Jarnal application with the intent to 
publish the text in the Messaging Board tool of TelEduc 
environment, used as a communication platform among the 
project team. But the Internet browsers do not support 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

electronic ink or the Jarnal format, so the student tried to 
publish the annotations as pictures, because her wanted to 
maintain the manuscript way for her readers. To convert the 
annotations made in the Jarnal application in pictures, it was 
necessary save the annotations in a .pdf format (the Jarnal 
does not have functions to convert annotations in pictures, 
but have functions to save the annotations in .pdf format), 
open the saved file and copy page by page using the Adobe 
Reader´s Instant Photography tool. After the selection and 
copy operations, the student paste this content in a image 
editor and save the file as a picture format (.jpg). So the 
images are uploaded to the platform as attached files and 
referenced by the .html file as image to be viewed by the 
readers. This activity was considered too hard to do and 
abandoned lately.
The Tablet PC pen interaction differs from the 
interaction styles that laptops have (keyboard, track pad) and 
shows a great potential to facilitate the activity of do 
annotations in Theory of Computing classes, because in this 
discipline is necessary adopt symbols that not are in the 
QWERTY keyboards.
In Theory of Computing classes, exercises lists was 
shared with students using the .pdf format. As the exercises 
list is a sequence of problems enunciation without space 
among them, this become impossible to resolve the exercises 
using the document as background.  So the student resolve 
cut the enunciation exercise and past in a Windows Journal 
archive (Fig. 6). The student needed to adjust the pasted 
object dimensions to become more readability in the zoom 
used to resolve the exercise (page zoom). After did this 
steps, the student resolve the exercises. The student justify 
this work answering her wants to have a map between 
exercise and resolution for future study., for example, for an 
exam.
Using the problem enunciation with the resolution can 
facilitate the resolution, because it is possible highlight  parts 
of the text that are important to the solution or use pictures 
available in the enunciation (Fig. 6). The digital content 
allows duplicate items that need to be more than one time in 
the resolution, the case of the graph draw in the  Fig. 7, 
when the enunciation ask to the students verify how many 
short-ways the graph has. The student duplicated the graph 
picture instead of draw it.
In problem resolutions, more than the answer, is 
important to have the record of each step until get the answer 
[1]. In some resolutions, some parts needs to be duplicate to 
show the rationale, as the case of the Fig. 8. The exercise 
asks a  spanning tree for the given graph. The use of the 
Tablet PC was specially important to use copy and paste 
functions, turning the answering this exercise more fast 
because many parts did not need to be rewritten.
A common practice among students is share classes 
annotations and resolutions from exercises. This practice 
occurs in Theory of Computing course among the student 
that used the Tablet PC and the others one. So her sent this 
annotations by e-mail in the .jnt format. But the other 
students needed to install the Windows Journal Viewer 
application to view the file content, and asked to shared the 
annotation in a more popular format that  not require a 
software installation, like .pdf format. The students adopted 
this format for all annotations sharing. 
To explain different resolutions, doubt points or indicate 
errors in the shared resolution, the students that did not have 
a Tablet PC used to typewrite text  artifices  when use e-mail
Figure 6. Example of manuscript using Windows Journal when 
resolving Theory of Computing exercises.
Figure 7. Example of annotations in duplicated enunciation part to 
resolve  an exercise.
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Figure 8. Example of use the copy and paste functions to duplicate 
annotations.
or to print the documents for  do annotations with  pen in 
meeting.
In the next course, Informatics Applied in Education 
(cursed in the first semester of 2008), the student used the 
Windows Journal (Fig. 9) to taking classes annotations, 
using the theme classes in the file name when save. The use 
of Windows Journal is justified by the better performance in 
receive the data input and convert into electronic ink, so the 
result letter is more closer than the other applications.
The Jarnal was used  in the Informatics Applied in 
Education course to support the peer review activity. The 
peer review activity consist into read a text written by 
another student and points out how to improve the text. The 
available text was used as a background document, where 
the student did the annotations (Fig. 10). 
VI.
USABILITY PROBLEMS OF THE  ADOPTED 
APPLICATIONS
Analyzing the user interaction, it is possible identify 
some usability problems in the used applications. The first 
one described by the student is related with use the same tool 
to do manuscript text and select electronic ink. Considering 
manuscript letters, allowing select inks with the tool used to 
write it turns hard write letters composed by more than one 
trace, or have points or accentuation. So, one design issue 
for Tablet PC is avoid unify functions for write and for 
select in one tool.
To compose the traces of electronic ink, the application 
needs treat all input data emitted by the pen, composed by 
pen position on the screen and the pressure. For the letter do 
no be shaped and the manuscript in Tablet PC be more 
similar to the manuscript in paper with a pen, the application 
needs treat all the events generated by the pen. Techniques 
for pour rendering of the electronic ink while writing and a 
high fidelity rendering after the the writing can be used to 
not loose data. 
One of the differences between Windows Journal and the 
other  applications  (Jarnal and Adobe Acrobat Professional) 
is the buttons inside the Windows Journal tool bars are softly 
bigger than the buttons of the other applications (Fig. 11), 
this make more easy to select a tool with the pen.
Figure 9. Example of use Windows Journal into Informatics 
Applied in Education classes.
Figure 10. Example of Journal use to do annotations in a text.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Figure 11. Dimensions between buttons  into Windows Journal (a) 
and Jarnal (b) Tool bar.
Analyze the options to erase electronic ink into the 
Windows Journal and Jarnal applications, we perceive that 
the Windows Journal offers two kind of erase forms, while 
the Jarnal offers only one. The form offer by both 
applications is erase all the traces that the erase tool have 
contact. The Windows Journal offers too another way of 
erase electronic ink that erase only parts of the trace, 
allowing a better fine adjust of the writing.
Activities that needs collaborations among students are 
commons in educational context. So, the applications needs 
make easy the communication of many devices, by file 
transfer or by Internet. It is important do not restrict the 
communication only between Tablet PCs, but consider the 
possibility of many devices used like desktops, laptops and 
smart phones.
And for motivate  the  use of an application, the 
application needs have functions that explore the potential of 
digital artifacts. In this case, functions to copy, cut, paste and 
move the electronic ink. These functions turn motivational 
factors to adopt these applications.
We believe that  these described  issues  must be 
considered in the design of Tablet PC applications, with the 
goal to explore the pen interaction and minimize usability 
problems.
VII.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
The Tablet PC is a computing device designed to be 
similar to a notebook, and the main hardware to be used in 
the interaction is a pen.
For five years, we did an exploratory study where two 
models of Tablet PCs are used to support a graduate student 
activities. The main use was do classes annotations in 
classroom, highlight part of texts and doing exercises.
The Adobe Reader Professional, Windows Journal and 
Jarnal applications were used in many periods as annotations 
editors. Many available functions was used like color, 
annotation selection, copy, paste, cut of annotations and 
pictures.
When the pen moves over the screen, it generates input 
data for the applications that need to be used to generate the 
electronic ink. Desktop applications does not manipulate the 
electronic ink, resulting in loose of the Tablet PC potential 
because the pen is used only as a pointer device. In this case, 
the use of pen as a pointer device in desktop applications, 
there are usability problems.
We present and discuss some of them, like the 
dimensions of user interface components, the use of one tool 
to writing and selecting electronic ink and the difficult to see 
the content when  user needs to cross  the screen with her 
hand. The discussed issues plus the needs to  explore the 
interaction style used by the users turns hard the design 
applications for multidevices, mainly when we need to 
consider many interaction styles.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the HP for promote the study of Tablet 
PCs into classroom, and for financial support by CAPES, 
CNPq and FAPESP.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Backon, “Student minds and pen technologies: A wonderful 
pedagogical marriage”, in The Impact of Pen-based 
Technology on Education: Vignettes, Evaluations, and Future 
Directions,  D. Berque, J. Prey, and R. Reed, Eds. USA: 
Purdue University Press, 2006, pp.1-11.
[2]
R. J. de Azevedo and  H. V. da Rocha. An annotation-based 
tool for collaborative learning using mobile technology. 
Tablet PC Technology at UNICAMP Project. Available at: 
http://www.ic.unicamp.br/~rodolfo/tabletpc/ ,  accessed  No-
vember, 2011.
[3]
HP Technology for Teaching 2006 grant. 2006. Available at: 
http://www.hp.com/hpinfo/socialinnovation/us/programs/tech
_teaching/hied_global.html , accessed November,  2011.
[4]
HP Compaq Tablet PC TC1100 – North America/U.S. Quick 
Specs. 2005. Available at: http://h18000.www1.hp.com/produ 
c  ts  /quickspecs/11755_na/11755_na.html
 
 , accessed November 
11,  2011.
[5]
HP TouchSmart tx2-1040br Notebook PC (NL266LA) 
especificações. 2009. Available at: http://h10010.www1.hp.co 
m  /  wwpc/br/pt/ho/WF06b/321957-321957-3835812-3835813-
 
 
3835813-3837256-3937928.html , accessed November,  2011.
[6]
Adobe  Acrobat  Professional,  2011.  Available  at: 
http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobatpro.html ,  accessed 
November, 2011. 
[7]
Windows  Journal.  Available  at:  http://en.wikipedia.org/wi 
ki  /Windows_Journal
 
  , accessed November, 2011.
[8]
Jarnal. Available at:  http://jarnal.wikispaces.com/ , accessed 
November, 2011.
[9]
A. C. da Silva, V. A. Neris, J. Daltio, M. Weinfurter, H. 
Zanetti,  and H. V. da Rocha, “Caderno Interativo de Lógica – 
uma aplicação para TabletPC de apoio ao ensino de lógica de 
primeira ordem”, Proc. Simpósio Brasileiro de Informática na 
Educação (SBIE 06), SBC, Nov. 2006.  Available  at: 
http://200.169.53.89/download/CD
 
  
congressos/2006/SBIE
 
  
2006/msoftware/ms.html , accessed November, 2011.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

