Speech Shadowing Support System in Language Learning 
Carson Lee1, Shinobu Hasegawa2 
1School of Information Science, 
2Research Centre for Advance Computing Infrastructure 
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 
Nomi, Japan 
1crsnlee@jaist.ac.jp, 2hasegawa@jaist.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—Verbal communication is a major part of a 
language, but there are not many systems/solutions in the 
market that caters to self-learning of spoken language. 
Traditional classroom learning is affected by the cultural 
background of the learning environment, thus students from 
different backgrounds might end up speaking a different 
dialect or accent, and this might result in miscommunication. 
Speech Shadowing is an experimental technique where a 
subject repeats speech immediately after hearing it. However, 
it is a time consuming method as it requires 1-on-1 tutoring. In 
this paper, we present our approach to utilizing this method 
for a self-supported learning system and how to utilize 
technology to improve its efficiency over traditional speech 
shadowing methods. 
Keywords- Speech Shadowing; language learning; mobile 
learning 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The development of speech production throughout an 
individual's life starts from an infant's first babble and is 
transformed into fully developed speech by the age of five 
[1]. It is a type of cognitive skill, and thus, we cannot teach it 
the same way we would teach sciences or history, as 
cognitive skill learning is the learning of a skill or knowledge 
that is hard to symbolize. 
Today, the English language is the de-facto lingua franca. 
Despite the widespread usage of English, there exists many 
variations of the English dialects, such as British English, 
Cockney English, American English, Engrish (generally 
refers to poor Japanese influenced English), Manglish 
(Malaysian English), and many more. The more formal 
dialects such as British English and American English are 
often used as the standard for major English proficiency test 
such as IELTS and TOEFL. Other dialects have evolved 
from their original one often due to cultural and 
environmental influences. For example, Manglish is a result 
of assimilating the many languages spoken in Malaysia into 
the English language. Another example would be Japanese 
English, where students often learn English the aid of 
furigana. There exist many consonants and vowels that are 
mutually exclusive in both language, and thus, a student who 
learns to speak English via furigana often end up having a 
hard time to be understood by non-Japanese English [2]. For 
example, a Japanese would often pronounce “eight” as “ei-to 
(エイト), fight as “figh-to (ファイト)”, or “the” as “za (ザ)”. 
Another reason for doing this research is to reduce 
miscommunication due to different accents/dialects. Looking 
at the aviation industry, we can observe that many accidents 
have resulted from communication error. The nuances of a 
language can be complicated and the same word can carry 
multiple meanings. Depending on how it is delivered, the 
message conveyed might vary [3].  
Furthermore, in this digital age, information can be 
disseminated very quickly through the internet and thus 
many people can spend their downtime (riding on a 
bus/train, waiting in line, etc.) to absorb more information 
via their mobile devices. This allows people to learn almost 
anywhere and anytime. However, some domains are not as 
easy to be learnt without the presence of an instructor or 
teacher. There are many applications that cater to language 
learning. However, the amount of smartphone applications 
that focuses on improving a learner’s speaking skill is also 
very limited. Most of these applications focuses on the 
reading/writing aspect, and the speaking aspect is usually 
very simple (such as pronunciation of a single word at a 
time). In teaching a student to speak a foreign language, most 
attention is devoted to the correct pronunciation of sounds 
and isolated words. Generally speaking, much less attention 
is paid to a correct production of intonation [4]. 
In this research, the aim is to utilize Speech Shadowing 
to improve verbal communication abilities according to a 
certain dialect/accent. The scope of this research will cover 
the development of a system to improve a user’s speaking 
skill in the English language via Speech Shadowing. In 
Section II, we will describe what speech shadowing is, and 
the problems faced by this method. The learning model that 
will be applied is discussed in Section III. At Section IV, we 
will describe our approach to solving the problems described 
earlier, and their algorithms. Section V will be the 
conclusion to this paper, summarizing it. 
II. 
SPEECH SHADOWING 
One way to improve a user’s speaking ability is via 
Speech Shadowing. Speech shadowing is an experimental 
technique where a subject repeats speech immediately after 
hearing it, usually through headphones to reduce noise 
and/or speech jamming. The reaction time between hearing a 
word and pronouncing it can be as short as 254ms or even 
150ms [5]. While a person is only asked to repeat words, 
they also automatically process their syntax and semantics. 
Words repeated during the shadowing practice imitate the 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

parlance of the overheard words more than the same words 
read aloud by that subject. We can also observe a similar 
behaviour in children as they begin to develop their speaking 
ability. They are often predisposed to imitate/shadow words 
and speech as a way to guide themselves to enter their 
cultural community [6]. Since children utilize this method to 
learn a language, it could be possible to utilize the same 
method for adults. In fact, learning the patterns of intonation 
is thought to take place unconsciously by mere imitation. 
That is, by listening to, and repeating model utterances the 
foreign-language learner has to acquire a proper intonation. 
A. Traditional Speech Shadowing 
In the traditional speech shadowing method, an instructor 
is needed to sit there to evaluate the student performing 
speech shadowing. Fig. 1 illustrates the usual steps for a 
speech shadowing session and they are as follows: 
1) Playback of a speech/conversation recording 
2) Student performs speech shadowing (repeats the 
heard speech with minimal delay as clearly and loudly as 
possible) 
3) Instructor listens to the shadowed speech and 
provides evaluation/feedback to the student 
4) The student attempts to improve based on the given 
feedback and retries the process on a later date. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Traditional Speech Shadowing Session Setup 
Due to the fact that one instructor can only focus on one 
student at a time during a speech shadowing session, the 
process becomes inherently expensive. The instructor 
should also be highly trained and/or be very experienced 
with the language and dialect that he is instructing on. This 
only adds to the cost of speech shadowing. Furthermore, 
because speech shadowing is still largely an experimental 
technique, there exists no formal feedback/evaluation 
method. Verbal and/or written feedback comments may be 
subjective and thus prove to be ambiguous at times. This 
makes it hard to keep track of past performance that could 
be used to help the student improve. 
III. 
LEARNING MODEL 
The learning model used in this research would be the 
Cognitive Apprenticeship Theory. It is the process where a 
master of a skill teaches it to an apprentice via 5 steps/stages, 
which is modelling, coaching, reflection, articulation and 
exploration [7].  
 
Modelling – Demonstrating the thinking process 
 
Coaching – Assisting and supporting student 
cognitive activities as needed (includes scaffolding) 
 
Reflection – Self-analysis and assessment 
 
Articulation – Verbalizing the results of reflection 
 
Exploration – Formation and testing of one’s own 
hypothesis 
The focus of this research will be modelling, coaching, 
and reflection, whereby the original speech would be the 
model, the scaffolding being the coach, and self-evaluation 
being the reflection. 
Coaching would be done via scaffolding with the 4 
elements being used to control the difficulty. The 4 elements 
would be discussed in Section IV.A. Initially the user would 
be given a questionnaire to judge their own level and a 
speech of appropriate difficulty will be given to the user to 
shadow without any scaffolding. After the initial rating, the 
user will then be given scaffolding suited to his level.  
At this phase of the research, reflection would be self-
evaluation. The user would be given some visual aids such as 
the audio waveform in order to evaluate his own 
performance and then he would answer a questionnaire. 
Feedback such as graphs will then be provided to show the 
user his current performance in various aspect of speech such 
as intonation, tempo, and pronunciation. The user can also 
track his past performances. These metrics would be fed 
back to the system in order to determine the coaching needed 
for the next shadowing session. 
IV. 
OUR APPROACH 
Due to the impracticality of the traditional speech 
shadowing for language learning on a larger scale, we 
propose a system that is able to replace the role of the 
instructor of the traditional method. At the same time, we 
want the system to provide a more tailored learning method 
for the student using it, so that he/she may learn and improve 
faster. The lack of an instructor also allows the student to 
learn independently, and due to the simplicity of our 
proposed system, the system can also be implemented on a 
mobile system, allowing students to learn anywhere and 
anytime. This will be approached by 2 methods 
A. Speech Shadowing System 
The system would contain recordings of speeches to be 
listened to, and the speeches will be sorted by difficulty 
levels according to their length, speed, and difficulty of the 
words or sentences. The system would also pickup and 
record the speech shadowed by the student so that it can be 
analysed to provide feedback and evaluation. 
The difficulty level of the speeches will be determined by 
the following elements of speech: 
 
Length of speech 
 
Speed/tempo of speech 
 
Difficulty of words used 
 
Number of stresses/intonation in sentence  
The reason the elements are chosen are explained as 
follows. The length of speech can directly affect the 
difficulty of the speech as it increases the cognitive load as it 
becomes longer. The speed and tempo of a speech also 
affects the difficulty of a speech as speech rate (the number 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

of words spoken per minute) has been used extensively in 
the previous research of oral fluency [8] [9] [10]. Previous 
research also found that speech rate positively correlated 
with other measures of fluency, such as length of speech 
without pauses, hesitations, or repeats [11] [12]. Difficulty of 
words that appear is also taken into consideration as it can 
affect the understanding of a shadowed speech. 
The number of stresses and intonation in a sentence can 
affect the difficulty of a speech because linguistic, syntactic 
and semantic information is more easily conveyed when a 
speaker produces the correct variations in pitch in a speech 
utterance [13]. Of all the elements of a target language, the 
intonation appears to be the most difficult to acquire [14]. 
First, because the intonation in infants is learned at a very 
early stage in the language-acquisition process [15], it is 
most resistant to change. Second, as a result of the fact that 
suprasegmental patterns are particularly deep-rooted, foreign 
language learners often superimpose the prosodic features of 
their mother language on the sounds of the foreign language. 
For this reason, foreign-language learners are often not 
aware of any differences in intonation between the mother 
language and the foreign language [4]. This makes the 
number of stresses in a sentence directly related to the 
difficulty of shadowing a sentence. 
We propose that the system runs on a smartphone so that 
it can make the learning process more accessible as year-by-
year digital media audiences are increasingly coming from 
mobile devices [16]. Setting up a headset is also easier and 
less costly compared to a desktop-based system as most 
smartphone owner would already have access to a headset. 
This also ensures students can learn on the go, although they 
should use the system in an isolated environment to avoid 
disturbing others. 
An account would be created for progress tracking 
purposes. First time user of the system would take a 
standardised test and answer a short questionnaire to 
determine his/her initial level and proficiency (system 
initialization). The test would be a speech shadowing session 
without any support from the system. The difficulty of the 
speech would also be a predetermined medium level speech. 
Under a normal use-case condition (post-initialization), 
students would login to the system and be presented with a 
list of recommended speeches to shadow, which are 
determined by the student’s proficiency and level. The 
amount and type of scaffolding provided during a shadowing 
session is affected by the student’s proficiency and level 
along with the difficulty of the speech attempted. Take for 
example Student A is rated by the system as a level 6 user 
(out of 10 possible levels, with 1 being lowest and 10 being 
highest) attempts a speech of difficulty level 2 (out of 5 
difficulties with 1 being easiest and 5 being the hardest). 
Student A would get no scaffolding as his proficiency should 
be sufficient to attempt the speech with ease. However, if 
Student A attempts a level 5 difficulty speech, all scaffolding 
would be activated to help Student A with his shadowing 
attempt. In the optimal scenario, Student A should be 
attempting speeches with difficulty level that matches his 
own proficiency level, as the effect of learning via speech 
shadowing can be affected by having too much scaffolding.  
TABLE I.  
USER LEVEL AND SPEECH DIFFICULTY LEVEL MATCHING 
(User Level) 
/ 2 
Scaffolding 
Notes 
> speech level 
No scaffolding 
Scaffolding provided 
depends on user’s 
proficiency on speech 
elements as well 
= speech level 
Partial Scaffolding 
< speech level 
More / All Scaffolding 
Fig. 2 shows the types of scaffolding that is provided by 
the system: 
1) Speech transcript 
2) Pronunciation help 
3) Highlighting sentence stress points 
4) Speed control for recordings 
 
 
Figure 2.  Scaffolding 1,3, and 4 being used in a shadowing session 
Figure 2 provides an example of 3 types of scaffolding 
being used to coach the user. The Transcript is there to help 
the user know what exactly he/she is saying while the 
highlighted word is the part of speech where a stress is 
needed. A playback speed is also displayed and can be used 
to change the speed of the playback to help the user cope 
with higher difficulty speeches. 
B. Performance Evaluation 
In order to provide the student with a valuable feedback 
and evaluation without an instructor, a way to grade the 
speech shadowing session needs to be devised. Using 3 
metrics, the user’s performance can be measured more 
accurately and the training time needed can be shortened as 
the student knows what he has to focus on to improve. The 3 
metrics that is used in this system are: 
 
Intonation 
 
Pronunciation 
 
Tempo 
The user would evaluate the 3 metrics on his own by 
comparing his shadowed speech to the original recording. 
Using a simple questionnaire, the student would rate his own 
performance compared to the sample recording. The system 
will provide some visualisation of the data in order to make 
the process easier. 
 
Figure 3.   
Visualization of intonation differece 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
Figure 4.  Visualisation of tempo difference 
After the evaluation is done, the system would use the 
data to determine if a user has levelled up and thus have 
some of the scaffolding removed. The data would also be 
archived so that users can keep track of their past 
performance and pinpoint where their weakness is.  
C. Evaluation Algorithms – Determining user level 
1) Post system initialization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2) Next Iterations 
 
 
  
TABLE II.  
USER LEVEL AND SPEECH DIFFICULTY LEVEL MATCHING 
Variables 
Definition 
Si 
Score – intonation 
St 
Score – tempo 
Sp 
Score – pronunciation 
Scs 
Score – current session 
Spp 
Score – past performance 
Ns 
Total Number of Sessions 
Wi 
Weightage – intonation 
Wt 
Weightage – tempo 
Wp 
Weightage – pronunciation 
UL 
User Level 
The variables are calculated after the user takes the 
standardised test during the system initialization phase. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In conclusion, speech shadowing could be a good method 
for learning and improving one’s speaking proficiency. 
However, the traditional method of it is not suitable to 
implement on a larger scale. Therefore, we propose the idea 
of a speech shadowing support system so that we can 
overcome the constraint. By breaking down the elements in a 
speech, the system will be able to provide a more tailored 
coaching method to individual students.  By further splitting 
up the user into different levels, the learning curve would not 
be as steep, making the task of learning much less daunting.  
In future research, automated evaluation by the system 
will replace self-evaluation system and it would provide a 
more standardised method for evaluation and thus give better 
feedback for reflection. Just like in self-evaluation, the 
system would use intonation, tempo, and pronunciation to 
evaluate the user, and the result of the automated evaluation 
would be fed back into the system for the next session.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work is supported in part by Grant-in-Aid for 
Scientific Research (C) (No. 26330395) from the Ministry of 
Education, Science, and Culture of Japan. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Kevin Shockley, L. S. Imitation in shadowing words. 
Perception & Psychophysics , pp. 422-429, 2004. 
[2] Marslen-Wilson, W., Linguistic Structure and Speech 
Shadowing at Very Short Latencies. Nature Vol, pp. 244, 
522-523, 1973. 
[3] McMillan, David. Miscommunications in Air Traffic Control. 
Diss. Queensland University of Technology, 1998. 
[4] Gerard W. G. Spaai and Dik J. Hermes, A Visual Display For 
the Teaching of Intonation. CALICO Journal, Volume 10 
Number 3, 1993. 
[5] Shudong, Wang, Michael Higgins, and Yukiko Shima. 
"Teaching English pronunciation for Japanese learners of 
English online." JALT CALL Journal 1.1 (2005): pp. 39-47. 
[6] Trevor A. Harley and L. J., Decline and fall: A biological, 
developmental, and psycholinguistic account of deliberative 
language processes and ageing. Aphasiology, 2011. 
[7] Dennen, Vanessa P., and Kerry J. Burner. "The cognitive 
apprenticeship model in educational practice." Handbook of 
research on educational communications and technology 3 pp. 
425-439, 2008. 
[8] R. Ejzenberg and H. Riggenbach, "The juggling act of oral 
fluency: A psycho-sociolinguistic metaphor," Perspectives on 
Fluency, Ann Arbor University of Michigan, pp. 287-314, 
2000. 
[9] Freed B. Riggenbach H. ‘Is fluency, like beauty, in the eyes 
(and ears) of the beholder?’, Perspectives on Fluency, Ann 
Arbor University of Michigan pp. 287-314, 2000. 
[10] Lennon P. ‘Investigating fluency in EFL: A quantitative 
approach,’ , Language Learning, 1990, vol. 40, pp. 387-417, 
1990. 
[11] Freed, B.F., Segalowitz, N. and Dewey, D.P., Context of 
learning and second language fluency in French: Comparing 
regular classroom, study abroad, and intensive domestic 
immersion programs. Studies in second language acquisition, 
26(02), pp.275-301, 2004. 
[12] Segalowitz N , Freed B . ‘Context, contact, and cognition in 
oral fluency acquisition,’ , Studies in Second Language , 2004 
, vol. 27, pp. 175 -201, 2004. 
[13] Crystal, D. Prosodic Systems and Intonation in English. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969. 
[14] Leon, P. R., and P. Martin, "Applied Linguistics and the 
Teaching of Intonation." The Modern Language Journal, 56, 
3, pp. 139-144, 1972. 
[15] Lieberman, P. (1967). Intonation, Perception and Language. 
Cambridge, MIT Press. ______, and S. B. Michaels, "Some 
Aspects of Fundamental Frequency and Envelope Amplitude 
as Related to the Emotional Content of Speech." Journal of 
the Acoustical Society of America, 34, pp. 922-927, 1962. 
[16] comScore, 
Cross-Platform 
- 
Future 
in 
focus 
2016.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

