A Survey of Visuo-Haptic Simulation in Surgical Training 
 
Felix G. Hamza-Lup  
Computer Science  
Armstrong Atlantic State Univ. 
 Savannah, GA, USA 
felix.hamza-lup@armstrong.edu 
Crenguta M. Bogdan, Dorin M. Popovici 
Mathematics and Informatics 
Ovidius University 
Constanta, Romania 
{cbogdan, dmpopovici}@ univ-ovidius.ro 
 
Ovidiu D. Costea 
General Surgery 
Ovidius University 
Constanta, Romania 
danielocostea@yahoo.com
Abstract – Surgeons must accomplish complex technical and 
intellectual tasks that can generate unexpected and serious 
challenges with little or no room for error.  In the last decade, 
computer simulations have played an increasing role in 
surgical training, pre-operative planning, and biomedical 
research. Specifically, visuo-haptic simulations have been the 
focus of research to develop advanced e-Learning systems 
facilitating 
surgical 
training. 
Visuo-haptic 
simulations 
combine the tactile sense with visual information and provide 
realistic training scenarios, to gain, improve, and assess 
resident and expert surgeons’ skills and knowledge. Choosing 
the suitable haptic hardware, API or framework for 
developing a visuo-haptic e-Learning system is an important 
decision that is based on several factors. We present a survey 
of the most popular hardware and software components for 
haptic 
based 
laparoscopic 
surgical 
training 
system 
development. We also discuss the assessment and integration 
of such systems as e-Learning components in hospitals. 
Keywords - haptics; surgical training; laparoscopy 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Out of the five human senses, touch is the most 
proficient. Touch is the only sense capable of simultaneous 
input and output. Haptics (i.e., haptic technology) is a 
development of the last two decades that allows the 
integration of tactile feedback in computer simulations. 
Visuo-haptic applications are multimodal, allowing the user 
to receive tactile feedback based on the real properties of 
simulated objects. 
Haptic technology can be applied in a variety of fields 
but is specifically successful in the gaming industry [1], 
adding to the entertainment capabilities of existing gaming 
systems and enriching the user’s experience.  Another field 
showing potential for the use of haptics is medical training. 
The sharp realism needed for effective surgical training, 
with little or no room for error, makes haptic-based 
simulators particularly attractive. 
Surgical education requires extensive practice on 
patients with close faculty supervision, and can become 
financially prohibitive for teaching institutions. Surgical 
training for specific procedures is often done on animals or 
cadavers. The Physicians Committee for Responsible 
Medicine found in a survey of 198 Advanced Trauma Life 
Support courses nationwide, that more than 90% use human 
cadavers or simulator dummies for training. The remaining 
courses use live animals to teach these skills. A critical look 
at using animals for medical training [2] emphasizes the 
problems with this approach. The replacement of animal 
testing and animal experimentation with virtual techniques 
such as visuo-haptic simulation often yields both ethical and 
technical advantages. Recent applications of haptic 
technology include training for simple procedures in dental 
surgery, or complex procedures for surgical training. Again 
we emphasize that the rationale for such simulators is also 
coupled with improvements of ethical and  financial nature 
(i.e., eliminating the need and costs of keeping corpses or 
live animals for surgical training). 
In this paper, we provide a survey of the application of 
the haptic paradigm in the medical field, specifically in the 
training and assessment of resident and novice surgeons.  
We provide a brief survey of existing technology, APIs, and 
frameworks, and describe the potential of haptics in surgical 
training. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 contains a 
review of haptic device characteristics. In Section 3, we 
provide a brief survey of existing technology for 
laparoscopic surgical training. Section 4 consists of a brief 
review of existing APIs and frameworks for the integration 
of haptics and associated algorithms into interactive 
simulations. In Section 5, we focus on surgical tasks, the 
skills necessary for their correct execution, and the existing 
frameworks for skills assessment. We conclude with a 
discussion on the challenges of developing and integrating 
such simulators in a genuine hospital environment. 
 
II. 
HAPTIC DEVICE CHARACTERISTICS 
Haptic research originates with the work of Heinrich 
Weber, a 19th century professor at the University of Leipzig; 
however, robotics was almost non-existent at that time. A 
few decades later, Lederman and Klatzky [3] summarized 
four basic procedures for haptic exploration, each bringing 
forth a different set of object characteristics. The first one, 
lateral motion (i.e., stroking), provides information about 
the surface texture of the object; the second, pressure, gives 
information about the firmness of the material; the third, 
contour following, elicits information on the form of the 
object; and last but not least, enclosure, reflects the volume 
of the object. 
The haptic devices currently available on the market 
apply relatively small forces on the user (usually on the 
user’s hands and/or fingers) through a complex system of 
servoengines and mechanical links. There are numerous 
haptic devices on the market, and their price has decreased 
significantly over the past few years due to mass production. 
57
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

Among the most popular are Sensable’s PHANToM® 
Omni™ and Desktop™ [4] devices that can apply forces 
through a mechanical joint in the shape of a stylus. As 
recent as 2007, Novint, a company founded by the 
researchers of Sandia National Laboratory, marketed the 
very first commercial haptic device. Falcon Novint [5] has 
been released on the market at a very low price in 
conjunction with computer games in the USA, Asia and 
Australia. Novint licensed key portions of the technology 
used in Falcons from Force Dimension [6], a leading Swiss 
developer of high-end haptic devices like the Omega.x or 
Delta.x family illustrated in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Omega.x (top-left), Falcon Novint™ (bottom-left), 
PHANToM™ Omni (top-right) and Desktop (bottom-right) 
 
The most important characteristics (i.e., performance 
measures) [7] common to all haptic devices, include:  
• 
Degrees-of-freedom represents the set of independent 
displacements that specify the position of the end 
effectors. 
• 
Work-volume refers to the area within which the joints 
of the device will permit the operator’s motion. 
• 
Position resolution is the minimum detectable change 
in position possible within the workspace. 
• 
Continuous force is the maximum force that the 
controller can exert over an extended period of time. 
• 
Maximum force/torque is the maximum possible output 
of the device, determined by such factors as the power 
of the actuators and the efficiency of any gearing 
systems. Unlike continuous force, maximum force 
needs to be exerted only over a short period of time 
(e.g., a few milliseconds). 
• 
Maximum stiffness of virtual surfaces depends on the 
peak force/torque, but is also related to the dynamic 
behavior of the device, sensor resolution, and the 
sampling period of the controlling computer. 
• 
Haptic update rate is the inverse of system latency, 
measured in hertz (Hz). 
• 
Inertia is the perceived mass of the device when it is in 
use. This should be as low as possible to minimize the 
impact of the device controller on rendered forces. 
A novel approach to implementing haptic feedback is 
through magnetic forces. Magnetic levitation haptic devices 
allow users to receive force-feedback by manipulating a 
handle that is levitated within a magnetic field. Users can 
translate and rotate the handle while feeling forces and 
torques from the virtual environment. Compared with 
traditional haptic devices that use motors, linkages, gears, 
belts, and bearings, magnetic levitation uses a direct 
electro-dynamic connection to the handle manipulated by 
the user. Some of the advantages of this approach are: no 
static friction, no mechanical backlash, high position 
resolution, simulation of a wide range of stiffness values, 
and mechanical simplicity. Magnetic haptics has been 
considered in relation to surgical training systems [8]. 
The first commercial integration of a magnetic 
levitation haptic device is the Maglev 200™ Haptic 
Interface developed by ButterflyHaptics™ [9], illustrated in 
Figure 2. 
Multiple problems arise in 
haptic applications interacting 
with deformable objects. For 
example, costly computation 
time, numerical instability in 
the integration of the body 
dynamics, and time delays 
etc., 
may 
occur. 
Lengthy 
computations are forbidden in 
haptic systems which need 
high simulation rates (around 
1 KHz) to obtain realistic force 
feedback. The update rates of 
the visual component (i.e., graphic rendering) of the 
physical objects being simulated is of the order of 20 to 
30Hz (frames per second). This difference in the simulation 
rates can cause an oscillatory behavior in the haptic device 
that can become highly unstable. Some of these problems 
can be alleviated with the use of magnetic levitation devices 
[9]; however, the development of applications in the area is 
in early research stages. 
III. 
BRIEF SURVEY OF VISUO-HAPTIC  SYSTEMS FOR 
SURGICAL TRAINING 
During 
surgical 
procedures, 
tactile 
exploration 
improves the surgeon’s performance, providing information 
beyond traditional visual cues and intuition.  For example, 
pressure and force magnitude provide information about 
physiological preexisting tensions at the organ level, and 
iatrogenic tensions generated upon the organic structures 
during diagnostic or therapeutic procedures. 
The force applied on the unit surface is directly 
proportional with the physical resistance of the tissues in 
diverse 
physiological 
and 
pathological 
situations. 
Parenchymatous organs are friable, hence a smaller 
prehension and/or traction force is necessary in comparison 
with hollow organs, or organs that pose more resistance at 
traction/torsion. Blood vessels are fragile structures, and the 
forces that act on them must be significantly smaller in 
magnitude than the forces on ligament/bone structures. 
An early study by Moody et al. [10] in 2000 
demonstrated the effect of a force feedback system in the 
Figure 2. Maglev 200™ 
Magnetic Levitation Haptics 
58
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

training and assessment of surgeons. The visuo-haptic 
system included a PHANToM Desktop unit and simulated a 
suturing procedure. After the task was demonstrated and 
explained to each subject by the experimenter, each of the 
20 participants performed two test sutures to familiarize 
themselves with the task and the experimental setting. 
Participants were then asked to form one suture across a 
surgical incision, with the specifications provided by the 
experimenter. Results revealed that force feedback resulted 
in a reduction of the time taken to complete the stitch.  
Most visuo-haptic simulation systems are designed for 
specific procedures. For example needle insertion is a 
common procedure that can range in complexity from a 
simple venipuncture (i.e., to withdraw blood), to a complex 
procedure such as vertebroplasty (i.e., medical spinal 
procedure where bone cement is injected through a small 
hole in the skin into a fractured vertebra with the goal of 
relieving the pain of osteoporotic compression fractures).  
Virtual Veins [11] has been primarily used for venipuncture 
training while a group of researchers at the National 
University of Singapore developed a surgical simulator for 
medical student training in the spinal cement vertebroplasty 
procedure [12]. In vertebroplasty, the surgeon or radiologist 
relies on sight and feel to properly insert the bone needle 
through 
various 
tissue 
types 
and 
densities. 
The 
biomechanical equipment with haptic feedback was 
designed to capture a user’s hand movement and return the 
tactile information to his fingers allowing him to feel the 
forces 
during 
needle 
insertion. 
Other 
haptic-based 
simulators involving the task of needle insertion are used 
for spinal injections [13] and epidural anesthetics training. 
Visuo-haptic prototypes are now being considered in a 
variety of medical related areas from simulation of 
deformable tissues and their attached properties for the 
planning of medical procedures [14], to surgical knot-tying 
procedures [15] and bone surgery [16]. Moreover, when 
long distance collaboration is necessary, there are 
prototypes for remote haptic “guidance” of a novice 
surgeon’s hand by an expert surgeon (i.e., telepresence 
surgery) and other applications of Virtual Reality in 
medicine [17]. Remote training of surgical procedures [18] 
can improve performance and reduce costs associated with 
travel. 
One of the most promising areas of application for 
visuo-haptic simulation is laparoscopy (i.e., laparoscopic 
surgery, non-invasive/minimally invasive surgery) training. 
Residents as well as experienced surgeons can use these 
systems for learning, assessing, and improving their 
surgical procedures and sharpen their skills. The systems 
have the advantage of changing and adapting the simulation 
parameters 
for 
training 
under 
special, 
unexpected 
conditions [19, 20]. 
With the advent of minimally invasive robotic surgery 
(e.g., daVinci surgical system), the haptic coordination of 
robotic equipment during surgery [21]  brought forth new 
research perspectives. A pneumatic system coupled with 
sensors at the tip of the tools was proposed to provide 
haptic feedback to the surgeon during the procedure in a 
clinical setup [22]. 
For training purposes, several companies developed 
integrated systems that have a set of training scenarios. For 
example LAP Mentor™ is a multi-disciplinary laparoscopy 
simulator that enables simultaneous hands-on practice for a 
single trainee or a team. The system offers training 
opportunities to residents and experienced surgeons for 
everything from perfecting basic laparoscopic skills to 
performing complete laparoscopic surgical procedures. 
Another system, the Virtual Endoscopic Surgery 
Training System One (VSOne), provides force-feedback 
employing three PHANToM haptic devices and a virtual 
endoscopic camera. The components are contained in a 
user-interface box [23] such that they provide an optimal  
simulated learning environment, similar to a real one. The 
system contains two applications: VSOne Cho, for 
laparoscopic cholecystectomy training, and VSOne Gyn, 
for laparoscopic gynecologic procedures. The following 
surgical tasks are modeled: grasping, application of clips 
with coagulation, cutting, irrigation, suction, suturing, and 
ligation [24]. A series of studies [25] have shown that 
training with the VSOne system gives similar results to 
traditional methods, with the added benefit of reduced time 
and cost of training. 
A comparable system, CAE Healthcare’s [26] LapVR 
surgical simulator, realistically reproduces laparoscopic 
procedures with haptic technology. The developers claim 
an accurate simulation of the tactile forces and camera 
behavior, exactly as it is experienced during laparoscopic 
surgery. 
A survey by Soler et al. [27] claims that the most 
simulated surgical procedure is the cholecystectomy, 
available on simulators like LapChole from Xitact, LapSim 
from Surgical Science, LapMentor from Simbionix, or RLT 
from ReachIn [28]. 
While all these development efforts are isolated from 
each other, and each group developed the systems from 
basic components and off-the-shelf haptic devices, only a 
few APIs and frameworks have spawned in recent years. In 
the next section we provide an overview of the main APIs 
and frameworks. 
IV. 
HAPTICS APIS AND FRAMEWORKS 
The most important frameworks and APIs that support 
the haptic paradigm, and have been used to develop 
prototypes for commercial applications can be divided into 
two categories, open source and commercial. Some of them 
support deformable objects and allow rapid integration of 
haptics in surgical training simulators. 
A. Open Source Frameworks and APIs 
Haptics3D (H3D) [28] is one of the most well known 
open source APIs. This API is designed mainly for users 
59
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

who want to develop haptic-based applications from 
scratch, rather than for those who want to add haptics to 
existing applications. The main advantages of H3D are the 
rapid prototyping capability and the compatibility with 
eXtended 3D (X3D), making it easy for the developer to 
manage both the 3D graphics and the haptic rendering. 
H3D API uses the X3D and OpenGL standards and builds 
on haptic technology from SensAble’s OpenHaptics™ 
toolkit [4]. It allows users to focus their work on the 
behavior of the application, and ignore the issues of haptics 
geometry rendering as well as synchronization of the 
graphic and the haptic rendering cycles. The API is also 
extended with scripting capabilities, allowing the user to 
perform rapid prototyping using the Python scripting 
language. 
Developed with medical applications in mind, the 
Computer Haptics & Active Interfaces (CHAI) 3D [28] is 
an open source set of C++ libraries supporting haptic-based 
systems, visualization, and interactive real-time simulation. 
The API facilitates the integration of 3D modeling with 
haptic rendering. Moreover, the applications are portable 
and can be executed on different platforms.  This quality 
attribute is obtained by saving object characteristics in 
XML files. The applications can be tested using a real 
haptic device (e.g., PHANToM Omni), or a virtual 
representation using the mouse as a substitute for the haptic 
device. The API was recently extended with a simulation 
engine for rigid/deformable objects. 
The need for standardization and inter-project 
cooperation gave rise to the Simulation Open Framework 
Architecture (SOFA) [28]. SOFA is targeted at real-time 
simulation, with an emphasis on medical simulation. It 
allows the development of multiple geometrical models and 
the simulation of the dynamics of interacting objects using 
abstract equation solvers. An additional advantage of this 
framework is the use of the XML standard to streamline the 
parameters of the simulation like deformable behavior, 
collision algorithms, and surface constraints. 
Another effort targeted at applications of haptics in 
surgical simulators is the General Physical Simulation 
Interface (GiPSi) [29]. It is a general open source/open 
architecture framework for developing organ level surgical 
simulations. The framework provides an API for interfacing 
dynamic models defined over spatial domains. It is 
specifically designed to be independent of the specifics of 
the modeling methods used and therefore facilitates 
seamless integration of 
heterogeneous 
models and 
processes. The framework contains I/O interfaces for 
visualization and haptics integration in applications. 
B. Commercial Frameworks and APIs  
The ReachIn API [28] is a modern development 
platform that enables the development of sophisticated 
haptic 3D applications in the user's programming language 
of choice, such as C++, Python, or VRML (Virtual Reality 
Modeling Language). The API provides a base of pre-
written code that allows easy and rapid development of 
applications that target the specific user’s needs. UK 
Haptics [28], a recently established medical software 
development company, used ReachIn API as the core 
haptic technology platform for their Virtual Veins, a 
medical simulation package for training medical staff in 
catheter insertion. 
To test the flexibility and ease of use of the API, we 
developed a simple simulation using VRML, Phyton and 
the ReachIn. In Figure 3, a screenshot of the liver model as 
seen through the laparoscope camera is illustrated. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Deformable liver model from SOFA integrated with a humanoid 
model from MakeHuman [28] 
 
The camera and the light models follow the real 
laparoscope camera. The haptic feedback is simulated in 
conjunction with the deformable liver model as well as the 
humanoid skin surface. The movement of the camera is 
constrained by the trocar. The light source model follows 
the camera position and orientation. The conclusion was 
that ReachIn API is robust and easy to integrate allowing 
rapid prototype development.  
V. 
LAPAROSCOPIC SURGICAL PROCEDURES 
In the following section we focus on the surgical tasks 
and on the assessment methodology for visuo-haptic 
surgical simulators. We present the main skill set and a new 
framework for assessment of visuo-haptic simulation in 
laparoscopic surgery based on a taxonomy of metrics for the 
evaluation of surgical abilities and skills defined by 
Satava[30]. 
A. Surgical Task Set 
Laparoscopic 
surgical 
procedures 
are 
complex 
activities that can be decomposed into simple activities 
called tasks. These tasks can be classified into basic tasks 
and procedural tasks. In the laparoscopic cholecystectomy 
case for example, one encounters the following basic tasks: 
• 
Laparoscope attachments manipulation  
• 
Camera manipulation and navigation 
• 
Light source manipulation and navigation 
• 
Tissue manipulation (e.g., grasping) 
Trocar insertion port 
60
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

• 
Tissue properties investigation (e.g., soft touch) 
• 
Knot-tying  
In the same surgical procedure we also encounter the 
following procedural tasks:  suturing, clip application 
(pre/post resection), surgical cutting, dissecting and 
separating organs. Some procedural tasks involve basic 
tasks. For example, the suturing task involves knot-tying 
tasks. 
B. Skill  Set 
To execute laparoscopic procedures the practitioner 
must have a series of abilities and skills. For the tasks 
above, the surgeon must have the following skill set: 
• 
Basic skills: e.g., spatio-visual orientation and 
exploration ability, perceptual abilities, hand-eye 
coordination, 
two 
handed 
maneuvers, 
objects 
relocation. 
• 
Intermediate skills: knowledge and correct utilization 
of the laparoscopic surgery tools for specific cases and 
the ability to correctly execute the surgical procedure. 
• 
Advanced skills: knowledge of the laparoscopic 
procedures, manual dexterity and precision control. 
The above skill classification is based on the 
performance level of the surgeon and reflects the 
instruction level (i.e., novice, competent and expert) as well 
as technical proficiency. 
C. Skill Assessment 
Currently the students’ skill evaluation is performed by 
expert surgeons. This makes the evaluation process costly 
and subjective. However, using a visuo-haptic system 
which supports skill assessment reduces this subjectivity 
issue and the probability of human error.  
A taxonomy of metrics for the evaluation of surgical 
abilities and skills was proposed in 2001 [30]. This 
taxonomy is based on two main concepts: validity and 
reliability. Each test is designed for a specific objective. 
The first concept, validity of a test, refers to accepting a test 
if it is in compliance with five validity measures. The 
second concept, reliability of a test, refers to the 
consistency of the results as the test is performed multiple 
times by the same person or by different persons.  
Based on Satava et al. [30], there are five validity 
measures: 
face, 
content, 
construct, 
concurrent 
and 
predictive.  These validity metrics endorse the test 
fulfillment of the objective. Each metric determines the 
objective fulfillment from a different perspective: 
• 
Face validity is determined by the appearance of the 
interface of the simulated task addressed by the test. 
• 
Content validity is determined by the expert surgeons 
based on the detailed examination of the test content. 
• 
Construct validity is determined by the capability of 
the test to differentiate among performance levels. 
• 
Concurrent validity is determined by the capability of 
the test to return equivalent results with other similar 
tests. 
• 
Predictive validity is determined by the predictive 
capability of the test. The evaluated surgeon will have 
the same performance level in a real scenario. 
Two complementary metrics are defined for test 
reliability: 
• 
Inter-rater reliability. When the test is performed by 
two 
independent 
evaluators, 
their 
results 
are 
sufficiently close (if not similar). 
• 
Test-retest reliability. Repeating the test at different 
times and dates should return comparable results for 
multiple evaluators. 
The validity metric can also be applied in the case of 
visuo-haptic simulations for laparoscopy procedures. In this 
case each test is designed for a specific skill, and each 
validity metric has the following meaning: 
• 
Face validity: is determined by the visuo-haptic 
characteristics of the interface (i.e., how the simulated 
objects look and feel in comparison with the real 
objects) 
• 
Content validity: if the test measures a certain skill. 
• 
Construct validity: the test results should be able to 
allow differentiation between an expert and a novice 
surgeon. 
• 
Concurrent validity: the capability of a test to return 
equivalent results with other similar test for the same 
skill. 
• 
Predictive validity: certainty that, after passing the test, 
the surgeon will have similar performance in a real 
environment. 
In the next section, we conclude with some of the 
challenges for the development and integration of visuo-
haptic simulators in a genuine hospital environment.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
From the development point of view, the APIs and 
frameworks are currently not interoperable, since they do 
not provide seamless and automatic connections from one 
API or framework to another. Simply put, they cannot work 
together to solve tasks or problems. The solution could be 
the usage of XML-based standards to achieve syntactic and 
structural interoperability or of semantic models, such as 
ontologies, for semantic interoperability.  
Even though some effort has been invested recently in 
developing open frameworks (e.g., GiPSi, SOFA), the 
software components available are not sufficient to allow 
rapid development of robust simulation scenarios.  
From the integration in a hospital setup perspective, the 
main 
challenges 
are: 
budget 
- 
the 
medical 
institution/hospital has to allocate funds and faculty “buy-
in” time to facilitate the integration of such complex 
simulators in a clinical setup; time commitment - for the 
61
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

faculty, expert surgeons and residents; suitable space for 
setting up training laboratories and required resources. 
Solutions exist to overcome these challenges from 
partnerships between industry and education, to employing 
lower fidelity, inexpensive simulators that can be as 
effective as expensive simulators for specific tasks.  
In conclusion, this paper presented a succinct overview 
of existing visuo-haptic laparoscopic surgical training 
systems, the existing APIs and frameworks for haptic 
integration in simulations. We also discussed one of the 
most important components of visuo-haptic simulators, 
assessment. We are currently in the process of developing a 
cost effective battery of visuo-haptic simulation scenarios 
for laparoscopic surgery as part of a medical e-Learning 
system. We will report on the progress in future articles. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This study was supported under the ANCS Grant 
“HapticMed – Using haptic interfaces in medical 
applications”, no. 128/02.06.2010, ID/SMIS 567/12271 
number. We would also like to thank Adrian Seitan, Costin 
Petre, Alexandru Dinca and Mihai Polceanu for their 
contributions. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Farley and C. Steel. “A quest for the Holy Grail: Tactile precision, 
natural movement and haptic feedback in 3D virtual spaces”. In 
Same places, different spaces - Proceedings of ASCILITE, Auckland 
2009, pp. 285-295, 2009. 
[2] C. Anderegg, K. Archibald, J. Bailey, M. J. Cohen, S. R. Kaufman, 
and J.J. Pippin.  “A Critical Look at Animal Experimentation”. 
Medical 
Research 
Modernization 
Committee, 
(online 
at: 
www.mrmcmed.org), 2006. 
[3]  R.L. Klatzky, J. Lederman, and V.A. Metzger. “Identifying objects 
by touch: An expert system”. Perception and Psychophysics, Vol. 
37, pp. 299-302, 1985. 
[4] Sensable Haptics - www.sensable.com. Last access date: 12/03/2010. 
[5] Novint Haptics - home.novint.com. Last access date: 12/03/2010. 
[6] ForceDimension Haptics - www.forcedimension.com. Last access 
date: 12/03/2010. 
[7] S. Wall. “An Investigation of Temporal and Spatial Limitations of 
Haptic Interfaces”. Ph.D. Thesis, Department of Cybernetics, 
University of Reading. 
[8] J. Hu, C. Chang, N. Tardella, J. English, J. Pratt. “Effectiveness of 
haptic feedback in open surgery simulation and training systems”. 
Medicine Meets Virtual Reality, Vol. 119, pp. 213-218, 2005. 
[9] ButterflyHaptics 
- 
butterflyhaptics.com. 
Last 
access 
date: 
12/03/2010. 
[10] L. Moody, C. Baber, and T.N. Arvanitis. “The Role of Haptic 
Feedback in the Training and Assessment of Surgeons”. In 
Proceedings of Eurohaptics, Birmingham, UK, pp. 170-173, 2002. 
[11] S. Smith and S. Todd. “Collaborative evaluation of a haptic based 
medical virtual environment”. In Proceedings of the 4th Intuition 
International 
Confrerence 
on 
Virtual 
Reality 
and 
Virtual 
Environments, pp. 102-110, 2007. 
[12] C.K. Chui, J.S.K. Ong, Z.-Y. Lian, Z. Wang, and J. Teo. “Haptics in 
Computer-Mediated 
Simulation: 
Training 
in 
Vertebroplasty 
Surgery”. In Simulation and Gaming, Vol. 37, pp. 438-451, 2006. 
[13] M. Farcas. “Development of a Virtual Reality Haptic Veress Needle 
Insertion Simulator for Surgical Skills Training”, Medicine Meets 
Virtual Reality, Jan.19-22, Longbeach, California, 2009. 
[14] J. Romano. “Real-Time Graphic and Haptic Simulation of 
Deformable Tissue Puncture”, Medicine Meets Virtual Reality, 
Jan.19-22, Longbeach, California, 2009. 
[15] S. Kurenov. “Development and Initial Validation of a Virtual Reality 
Haptically Augmented Surgical Knot-Tying Trainer for the 
Autosuture ENDOSTITCH Instrument”. Medicine Meets Virtual 
Reality, Jan.19-22, Longbeach, California, 2009. 
[16] D. Morris, C. Sewell, F. Barbagli, K. Salisbury, N. Blevins, and S. 
Girod.“Visuohaptic simulation of bone surgery for training and 
evaluation”.  IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, Vol. 
26(4), pp. 48-57, 2006. 
[17] R.M. Satava and S.B. Jones “Current and Future Applications of 
Virtual Reality for Medicine”. Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 86(3), 
pp. 484 – 489, 1998. 
[18] P. Boulanger, G. Wu, F. Bischof, and X.D. Yang. “Hapto-audio-
visual environments for collaborative training of ophthalmic surgery 
over optical network”.  IEEE International Workshop on Haptic 
Audio Visual Environments and Their Applications, pp. 21-26, 2006. 
[19] E. Dutson. “Simulation in Training for Laparoscopic Surgery”, 
Medicine Meets Virtual Reality, Jan.19-22, Longbeach, California, 
2009. 
[20] C. Hourie. “LACROSS – Laparoscopic Robotic Surgical Simulator”, 
Medicine Meets Virtual Reality, Jan.19-22, Longbeach, California, 
2009. 
[21] S. Suzuki, N. Suzuki, M. Hayashibe, A. Hattori, K. Konishi, Y. 
Kakeji and M. Hashizume. “Tele-Surgical Simulation System for 
Training in the Use of da VinciTM Surgery”. Medicine Meets Virtual 
Reality 13: The Magical Next Becomes the Medical Now, IOS Press, 
pp. 543-548, 2005. 
[22] M. L. Franco, C.H. King, M.O. Culjat, C.E. Lewis, J.W. Bisley, E.C. 
Holmes, W.S. Grundfest, E.P. Dutson. “An integrated pneumatic 
tactile feedback actuator array for robotic surgery”. International 
Journal of Medical Robotics and Computer-Assisted Surgery, 
Vol.5(1), pp.13-19, 2009. 
[23] U.G. Kuhnapfel, C. Kuhn, M. Hubner, H.-G. Krumm, H. Maass, and 
B. Neisius. “The Karlsruhe Endoscopic Surgery Trainer as an 
Example for Virtual Reality in Medical Education”. Minimally 
Invasive Therapy and Allied Technologies. Vol.6, pp. 122-125, 1997. 
[24] U.G. Kühnapfel, H.K. Çakmak, H. Maass, S. Waldhausen.  
”Models for simulating instrument-tissue interactions”. 9th Medicine 
Meets Virtual Reality, Newport Beach, California, Jan. 23-27, 2001. 
[25] U.G. Kühnapfel, H.K. Cakmak, B. Chantier, H. Maass, G. Strauss, 
C. Trantakis, E. Novatius, J. Meixensberger, K. Lehmann, H.J. Buhr, 
M. Lawo, G. Bretthauer. “Haptic I/O: Haptic interface-systems for 
virtual-reality training in minimally-invasive surgery”, Internat 
Statustagung “Virtuelle und Erweiterte Realität”, Leipzig, 2004.  
[26] CAE Healthcare - www.cae.com/en/healthcare/. Last access date: 
12/03/2010. 
[27] L. Soler, N. Ayache, S. Nicolau, X. Pennec, C. Forest, H. Delingette, 
D. Mutter, and J. Marescaux. “Virtual Reality, Augmented Reality 
and Robotics in surgical procedures of the liver”. In Perspectives in 
Image-guided Surgery. Proceedings of the Scientific Workshop on 
Medical Robotics, Navigation and Visualization, RheinAhrCampus 
Remagen, Germany, pp. 476-484, 2004. 
[28] APIs: H3D – h3d.org , CHAI 3D - www.chai3d.org , SOFA - 
www.sofa-framework.org , ReachIn - www.reachin.se , UK Haptics - 
www.ukhaptics.co.uk , MakeHuman  - www.makehuman.org. 
[29] M. C. Cavusoglu, T. G. Goktekin, F. Tendick, and S. S. Sastry. 
“GiPSi: An Open Source/Open Architecture Software Development 
Framework for Surgical Simulation.” In Proceedings of Medicine 
Meets Virtual Reality, Newport Beach, California,  pp.46-48, 2004. 
[30]  R.M. Satava, A. Cuschieri, and J. Hamdorf.  “Metrics for Objective 
Assessment”. In Surgical Endoscopy, Vol. 17(2) , pp. 220-226, 2003. 
62
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

