Web Annotation System in Collaboration with Moodle 
Yoshio Yamagishi 
Department of Media Informatics 
Kanazawa Institute of Technology 
 e-mail: yamagisi@neptune.kanazawa-it.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— The use of annotation has been proven to be quite 
effective for e-Learning. In this paper, an Ajax-based web 
sticky-note system was developed. The system “PnoteIt” 
enables the users to attach their virtual sticky-notes at any 
place on the web page. The users of “PnoteIt” can share their 
sticky-notes with other users, or hide them from others. 
“PnoteIt” was also extended to collaborate with Moodle, the 
world famous open-source Learning Management System 
(LMS). This extension was done in order to implement the 
annotation function in the “Page” contents of Moodle. The 
practical evaluation of our system (PnoteIt for Moodle) is in 
progress.  
Keywords-annotation; Ajax; Moodle.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Sometimes the fact that e-Learning contents are 
displayed on the computer monitor becomes problematic for 
learners. When the learners use paper-based textbooks, they 
can write their comments in the textbooks as they like. These 
written comments can help learners to understand the 
subjects. However, in the case of e-Learning, such comment-
writing is not possible. This situation can be improved when 
the “annotation” tools are introduced into the e-Learning 
system. Moreover, the “annotation” tools are not only used 
for personal comment-writing, but also for collaboration 
between learners. 
We have given lectures at Kanazawa Institute of 
Technology for nine years with Moodle [1], which is 
probably the most famous open-source LMS (Learning 
Management System) in the world. We faced the same 
problem discussed above, then searched for an annotation 
module for Moodle and found “A.nnotate” [2]. This module 
enables “Teacher” users of Moodle to add their comments 
and feedbacks to the Portable Document Format(PDF) and 
Word documents. However, the annotatable documents are 
restricted to the contents of “Assignment” of the “Student” 
users. In addition, “A.nnotate” cannot manage the 
collaboration between students. Hence, the “A.nnotate” is 
not suitable for our purpose.  
In 2009, we developed a web annotation tool named 
“PnoteIt” [3] for the use of the management of “KIT 
Mathematic Navigation” [4], which is a math-education 
website for high-school, college and university students. 
Thus. we came to the idea of the collaboration between 
PnoteIt and Moodle.  
In this paper, the annotation in e-Learning is briefly 
reviewed in Section II. Section III is dedicated to the 
explanation of “PnoteIt for Moodle” system which we 
developed for this study. In section IV, we show the result of 
the usability evaluations for the proposed system. we 
summarize this study in Section V. 
 
II. 
ANNOTATION IN E-LEARNING 
The use of annotation has been proven to be quite 
effective for the e-Learning. For example, Farzan and 
Brusilovsky [5] showed that their system “AnnoteEd” is 
quite effective for collaborative learning. This article also 
presents a comprehensive review for similar studies. The 
annotation of the "AnnoteEd" system does not seem to be 
located in the contents, but only beside the contents.  
Nunes et al. [6] developed and examined their highlight 
annotation tool. The users of this system can add/share 
annotations by marking some sentences of the online 
textbook. However, they cannot write any memo or note in 
the textbook. 
"Writable Web" developed by Kunimune et al. [7] is 
quite powerful annotation tool for learning materials. This 
system enables users to add/share their notes, marking and 
freehand drawing at any place on the contents. However, the 
possibility to realize the collaboration between "Writable 
Web" and Moodle is unknown. 
Moodle is currently very popular in the world. If there is 
an annotation system which is adapted to Moodle, it will 
enhance the availability of the Moodle and also help Moodle 
users extensively. Therefore, we intended to adapt "PnoteIt" 
to Moodle. In the following section, we present a detailed 
explanation of the "PnoteIt" web sticky-note system and its 
collaboration with Moodle. 
III. 
PNOTEIT FOR MOODLE 
"PnoteIt" originated from Perl-based Ajax/Common 
Gateway Interface(CGI) program "NoteIt" developed by 
Baba [8]. We rewrote "NoteIt" in PHP+MySQL manner 
which becomes more popular than Perl CGI currently and 
called "PnoteIt". We also added multi-user function through 
the development of "PnoteIt". This system has been used for 
the management of the "KIT Mathematic Navigation".  
The 
original 
"PnoteIt" 
has 
its 
own 
user 
registration/authentication function. The management of that 
function is available only for the administrator user. The 
users can use sticky-note function after they logged in the 
system unless the administrator permits the "Guest Access" 
at the configuration. The users can share their sticky-notes 
with other users, or hide them from others though the 
administrator user can completely see and manage all sticky-
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

notes attached by all users. In the process of the adaptation of 
"PnoteIt" to Moodle, we omitted the user registration 
function and integrated authentication with Moodle's. By 
checking the user's capability, the administrator function is 
automatically assigned if the user has a "Teacher" role of the 
course which includes "PnoteIt"-enabled contents. 
To add the sticky-note function into the contents of the 
"PnoteIt"-installed website, the author must add the 
following one-line "PnoteIt code" to the "body" in the 
HTML source of the contents is needed: 
 
<script type="text/javascript" src="/pnoteit/pnoteit.php"></script> 
 
Here, we supposed that the "PnoteIt" system files are 
placed into "(webroot)/pnoteit/" directory. This modification 
must be iterated over the sources of all pages on which we 
intend to enable sticky-note function. These are similar for 
the case of "PnoteIt for Moodle" environment. Once the 
"PnoteIt code" is added in the source, the "PnoteIt Toolbar" 
appears in the webpage (Figure 1.). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Example Screenshot of "PnoteIt for Moodle". 
The draft sticky-note appears when the users double-click 
the place where they intend to attach their annotation in the 
contents. After the insertion of the title and text, the 
attachment of the sticky-note is completed by clicking the 
"OK" button. If the user double-clicks the existing note, 
he/she can edit the title or text of the note unless it is locked. 
The sticky-note can be moved to any place by drag-and-
dropping, but the position is restored when the page is 
reloaded unless the sticky-note is "fixed". Usually, the name 
of the "owner"(who makes the note) and the date when the 
note was attached are shown in the individual sticky-notes, 
but the sticky-note management menu appears when the 
mouse pointer is on the note (Figure 2). The "owner" can 
resize, fix, delete, lock/unlock and change the color of the 
sticky-note with this menu. By default, the sticky-note is 
"Private" - only visible to the "owner" user, but the "owner" 
can toggle the accessibility of the sticky-note by clicking the 
icon at the upper-left corner of the note. If the "owner" 
makes their unlocked note "Public", any user can edit it 
freely. 
 
Figure 2.  Sticky-Note Management Menu. 
 
Figure 3.  NoteIt Toolbar. 
The menu provided by "NoteIt Toolbar" (Figure 3) 
includes "Alignment", "Toggle Visible/Invisible", "Search", 
"File Upload", "Backup" and "Trashcan". "Skin of this Page" 
and "Page Configuration" menu is added if the user has an 
"Administrator" or a "Teacher" role. When the user clicks 
the "Alignment” icon, all of the visible notes are aligned at 
the left-hand side and sorted by date. But they can go back to 
the original places by reloading the browser. All of the 
visible notes can be temporally invisible if the user clicks the 
"Toggle Visible/Invisible" icon. The full-text search of all 
visible notes in the page is available with "Search" function. 
Image files uploaded by "File Upload" function can be also 
shown in the sticky-notes. When the collision (two or more 
users edit one shared note simultaneously) occurs, the users 
should check the history shown in the "Backup" window. 
The "owner" can restore the deleted notes from "Trashcan". 
The administrator/teacher can configure the "Skin" and 
inhibited word/host of the page with "Skin of this Page" and 
"Page Configuration" functions. 
The install procedure of "PnoteIt for Moodle" is the 
following: 1. Create the directory named "pnoteit" in the 
Moodle's wwwroot directory and place all files of "PnoteIt 
for Moodle" in them; 2. Configure the place of the 
"config.php" of Moodle and directory permission correctly. 
The tables specific to the "PnoteIt for Moodle" are 
automatically created if they does not exist in the Moodle 
database. We have confirmed that my system works well 
with version 1.9.16 and 2.5.3 of Moodle.  
Private/Public 
Select Color 
Lock/Unlock 
Fix 
Trash 
Resize 
Help 
Skin of this Page 
Trashcan 
Backup 
Search 
File Upload 
Toggle Visible/Invisible 
Alignment 
For Students 
For Teachers/Admins 
Page Configuration 
NoteIt Toolbar 
Virtual Sticky Notes 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

IV. 
USABILITY EVALUATION 
After the development of “PnoteIt for Moodle", we 
conducted the usability evaluation based on the WUS 
(Website Usability Scale) advocated by Nakagawa et al. [9]. 
18 samples that are 4th year students of Kanazawa Institute 
of Technology and are also Moodle users answered the 
questionnaire after 3 hours trial use of “PnoteIt for Moodle". 
Each question is answered by 1 (negative) to 5 (positive) 
point scales. The results are shown in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
RESULTS OF USABILITY EVALUATION 
Question 
Average 
Score 
I think that I would like to use this system frequently: 
4.1 
I think this system is useful: 
4 
I think this system is reliable: 
3.4 
I think this system is easy to use: 
3.5 
I think this system can support the lecture: 
3.7 
I think this system is readable: 
3.6 
I think this system is responsive: 
4.3 
 
It is obvious that the evaluation scores of the reliability, 
operation and readability are relatively low. According to the 
oral communication with some sample students, we found 
that this result might be partially due to the sticky-note 
attachment method which requires slightly complicated steps 
(1.double-click the contents; 2. insert title and text; 3.press 
"OK"). This procedure should be simplified in order to 
improve the usability. Some sample students also claimed 
that the way to move the sticky-notes was confusing. A 
sticky-note can be moved to any place in the contents by 
drag-and-dropping, but when the user reloads the browser it 
goes back to the initial position unless it is not fixed. Such 
behavior is counter-intuitive. Therefore, the implementation 
of the automatic position fixing of a sticky-note seems to be 
necessary. Low readability score might be caused by the 
small fonts of the title/text in the sticky-note. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We developed an annotation tool named "PnoteIt" that 
can collaborate with Moodle, the world famous open-source 
LMS. The user can attach their virtual sticky-notes at any 
place in the HTML based learning contents. The results of 
the usability evaluation suggested the improvement of some 
operation method and readability. Currently, we are planning 
to adapt "PnoteIt for Moodle" to the plug-in module of the 
Moodle in order to ease the installation. 
"PnoteIt for Moodle" is currently used in our class 
"Information Networks" of the 2nd semester.  79 students 
enter the course and about half (not all, unfortunately) of 
them are attaching their sticky-notes on the learning contents. 
The educational effect of "PnoteIt for Moodle" will be 
evaluated after the end of the semester by comparison with 
other class of "Information Networks", which does not use 
"PnoteIt for Moodle". 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Moodle.org. http://moodle.org (retrieved January 30, 2014) 
[2] Textensor Limited, "Moodle annotation", 
 http://a.nnotate.com/moodle-annotation-plugin.html 
(retrieved January 30, 2014) 
[3] Y. Yamagishi and A. Nakamura, "Web Sticky-Notes for e-
Learning Systems", Proceedings of Global Learn 2010, pp. 
121-125. 
[4] A. Nakamura, "Link Back Learning by Using KIT 
Mathematics Navigation", KIT Progress, Vol.12, 2007,    
pp.29-38. 
[5] R. Farzan and P. Brusilovsky, "AnnotatEd: A Social 
Navigation 
and 
Annotation 
Service 
for 
Web-based 
Educational Resources", The New Review of Hypermedia 
and Multimedia, Vol.14, Issue 1(2008), pp.3-32. 
[6] B. P. Nunes, R.Kawase, S. Dietze,  G. H. B. de Campos, and 
W. Nejdl. "Annotation Tool for Enhancing E-Learning 
Courses " ICWL, Vol. 7558 of Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, Springer, 2012, pp. 51-60.  
[7] H. Kunimune, K. Yokoyama, T. Takizawa, and Y. Fuwa, 
"Implementation and evaluation of a method for realigning 
annotations in updated web-based materials", Intelligent 
Decision Technologies , Vol.4, Issue 4 (2010), pp.261-267.  
[8] Detailed information of noteit (Japanese), 
 http://www.vector.co.jp/soft/win95/net/se397419.html 
(retrieved Februaly 18, 2014) 
[9] K. Nakagawa, T. Suda, H. Zempo, and K. Matsumoto, "The 
Development of Questionnaire for Evaluating Web Usability", 
Proceedings of 10th Human Interface Symposium (2001), 
pp.445-448. 
 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

