The Role of Smartphones in Teacher Training Mediated Through Photo-elicitation 
 
Antonio Bautista 
Faculty of Educacion 
Complutense University 
Madrid. España. 
e-mail: bautista@edu.ucm.es 
 
Yolanda Muñoz 
Faculty of Education 
Universidad de Alcalá 
Alcalá de Henares. Spain 
e-mail: yolanda.monozm@uah.es 
 
 
Laura Rayón 
Faculty of Education 
Universidad de Alcalá. 
Alcalá de Henares. Spain 
e-mail: laura.rayon@uah.es 
 
Ana María De las Heras 
Pedagogy Department 
UDIMA 
Madrid. Spain 
e-mail: annita19834@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract- In this paper, we advance the results of a study on the 
use of smartphone functions in the permanent training of 
primary-school 
teachers 
supported 
by 
photo-elicitation 
processes. The study began in January 2015 and will end in 
December 2017. Three teachers participated from the primary 
schools Jaime Vera in Madrid and La Paloma in Azuqueca de 
Henares (Guadalajara), Spain. To date, the smartphone 
functions used for photo elicitation by these teachers to reflect 
on difficulties in their practice include: taking photos of 
classroom situations that are judged difficult by teachers; 
viewing these photos; recording an audio track of sessions 
reflecting on the content of these images; playing back the 
recorded audio tracks to transcribe their content and identify 
the theories and beliefs on which participating teachers’ 
decisions are based and, finally, storing all this information in 
the cloud (Dropbox, Drive, at the rest). 
 
Keywords- teacher education; photo-elicitation; digital hybrids; 
smartphones. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
We begin this section by explaining two conceptual 
elements. Both are essential to understand the functionality 
of the phones in teacher training. These are: the reflection 
on own practice, and photo-elicitation as a means of 
signification. 
 
A. Reflecting on teaching practice  
Extensive theorising exists on the value of professionals’ 
critical reflection on their own practice in order to improve 
their work [3] [6]. Teachers can be helped to improve their 
work once they are aware of their beliefs, theories, attitudes, 
values and so on. To do so, teachers must be “forced” to 
make these explicit. This occurs because they are questioned 
about what they do, and this is achieved by reflecting on his 
practice as a teacher. This reflection is included and is one 
of the three moments of a loop or cycle of Action Research  
[2]. Each is made up of a procedure consisting of the three 
following phases:  
 
1- Planning the teaching or specifying within a document 
the aims, cultural content, materials and so on that the 
teachers are going to work on or will need over a period of 
time. 
2- Executing the plan and recording certain moments of it. 
The plan must be followed and information must be 
recorded on what occurred during the process. Because it is 
difficult to reflect on the action while it is taking place, 
reflection has to take place afterward. To avoid forgetting 
things or missing relevant details the action must be 
recorded. 
        What technological tools are needed to help teachers 
record their actions and reflect upon them? Those whose 
primary function is producing information; in other words, 
audio recorders and cameras that can be found on one of the 
current digital hybrid devices: smartphones. We propose 
that mainly teachers should follow this procedure, taking 
photos of those moments so that later, outside the 
classroom, they can verbally analyse the content. Therefore, 
we focus on the languages of verbal and photographic 
representation. 
  
3- Analysing, questioning, discussing and reflecting on what 
happened. After having carried out the plan, one must 
reflect on the value of what took place; we encapsulate it 
using photo elicitation, for which it is also necessary to use 
the information reproduction functions that all digital hybrid 
devices contain. The result of this phase leads to new 
knowledge on the decisions taken, on the whys or 
wherefores of the latter and consequently new knowledge of 
the theories, beliefs and so on that underlie them.  
This generated knowledge gradually enriches or 
improves the work plan for the following action inquiry 
loop and consequently enhances the teacher-tutor’s training. 
 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

B. Photo elicitation as a means of reflection 
 
Eliciting means drawing something out of oneself, 
arousing an experience, establishing a bridge between the 
past and the present using a photo [1] [4]. It consists of 
capturing an image so as to describe it later. Several 
procedures exist in the field of education: one is that 
directed by the teacher and the photos she or he takes; 
another, when students take the pictures, and finally, a 
mixed procedure in which everybody takes photos. This 
means the photos are taken by users to be screened later so 
users can describe what they represent and explain what 
they have experienced. 
In this sense, we consider that photo elicitation is a good 
procedure for understanding the tangible and intangible 
aspects of human beings’ lives – in our case, the three 
primary school teachers who aim to improve their teaching 
practice. At the point of reflection within the action inquiry 
loops, photos taken by the participants are shown (in our 
case, only the teachers) on different teaching moments as a 
base document on which to question, query or wonder about 
some aspect of the content depicted. This is how we have 
used one of the underused action inquiry procedures called 
observational and narrative, McKerman said: that an 
underdeveloped resource in the conduct of curriculum 
action inquiry is the use of the still photograph [5]. 
In Section 2, we explain the objectives and the 
methodology that we followed. Finally, in Section 3, we 
present the conclusion and future work. 
II. THE AIMS AND RESEARCH METHOD 
 
This research has two objectives: 
a) Identify the functions required on a smartphone in the 
training of primary teachers based on photo elicitation 
processes. 
b) Know whether the photo-elicitation sessions help 
teachers change their teaching practice. 
 
The data needed to achieve the above aims are being 
gathered through a supported discussion group in two 
session types we call photo elicitation and audio reflection.  
Photo elicitation sessions. These are held every two 
weeks. During this time, the teachers take photos of events, 
tasks, dilemmas, conflicts, behaviours and so on that they 
consider most relevant and interesting in the life of their 
classroom and other spaces in the center. After each 
fourteen-day period, the above-mentioned meeting takes 
place. It lasts about 75 minutes with each teacher separately 
and takes place when they have some free time during the 
school day in their respective schools. To do so, the photos 
taken by each teacher are shown and the teacher, the 
research group members and student representatives 
comment on the reasons that led her or him to take each 
photo. Next, the other group members formulate questions 
or doubts on the content of the images and the reasons 
provided by the teacher and students, either on the decision 
taken at a specific classroom moment, or on the tasks 
undertaken by students, etcetera. 
Audio reflection sessions. An audio recording is being 
made of the photo elicitation sessions with a two-fold 
research purpose. Firstly, to analyze each teacher’s 
statements and respond to the questions posed in the first 
aim of the project, regarding the different uses of the 
smartphone. Secondly, to codify and create the information 
provided in the photo elicitation session to be used in the 
second aim. As stated in the summary above, the discussion 
group which conducted this reflection consists of the teacher 
who is the center of the training process, the members of the 
research team who were present during the prior photo 
elicitation session, and some students when they appear in 
the photos. The parents gave permission to use the photos in 
which their children appeared as long as such use was 
confined to teaching and research purposes. 
 
III. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Regarding the first aim, the smartphone functions that 
the three teachers used are: 
- Taking photos of classroom situations the teachers 
considered complex and conflictive, such as dilemmas, 
difficulties emerging from the students and so on.  
- Storing photos in the cloud (Dropbox, Drive, at the rest). 
- Viewing those photos in the photo elicitation sessions with 
the aid of a projector. 
- Recording audio files of the reflection sessions on the 
content of the images projected. 
- Storing the audio files in the cloud (Dropbox, Drive, at the 
rest). 
- Playing the recorded audio files to transcribe their content 
and identify the theories and beliefs that lie behind the 
decisions of the participating teachers. 
- Storing the texts transcribed in the cloud (Dropbox, Drive, 
at the rest) for later analysis. 
- Reading the transcriptions for the analysis of theories, 
beliefs, attitudes and so on, on which the teachers base their 
behaviours and decisions, and communicate such analyses 
so that the teachers are aware of them, can reflect on their 
value and consequently decide whether they should change 
any of the latter. 
Concerning the study’s second aim, based on the results 
as of late November 2015, it can be stated that teachers are 
changing the way they design and approach teaching 
situations. This is because, according to the analysis of the 
transcriptions of the photo elicitation sessions, the teachers 
are becoming aware that they base their actions and 
decisions on five different aspects of their person: 
- Theories: rational ideas or arguments, with a scientific 
basis. 
- Beliefs: ideas or arguments with no scientific basis. 
- Attitudes: forms or kinds of willingness to do or respond 
to something. 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

- Habits: routines they use in certain situations. 
- Emotions: feelings about a situation that guide decisions. 
The teachers have shown a disposition to change once 
they become aware that the above five components 
influence their motivations and decisions, both to improve 
the school tasks in the classroom and to address the personal 
difficulties of their students. 
Finally, we should indicate that all of the smartphone 
functions that the teaching staff required in the discussion or 
photo elicitation processes (those that take place when 
viewing the image of a photo taken by the teacher and 
projected on-screen) were used to record moments in the 
classroom, to bring some quietness to the educational 
practice in order to slow down the analytical processes. 
These pauses made it possible to describe and interpret the 
content reported by the participating teachers, allowing 
them to reflect and comment on their theories, beliefs, 
attitudes, habits and emotions so that, once aware of them, 
the teachers uncovered those that are incongruous with their 
idea of education or unsuitable for working with that unique 
and unrepeatable group of students in a specific context. 
In the future, we want to deepen the possibilities for 
smartphones to locate, select and project a part or element of 
a photograph. We think that the analysis of these details of 
an image can help teachers to evoke their theories and 
beliefs. Also, we want to use smartphones to store and play 
music during sessions photoelicitación. We think that both, 
the projection of detail and background music, can improve 
the evocation of the beliefs and emotions that have 
promoted the decisions taken in their classrooms. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
A project subsidised by the Ministry of Economy and 
Competitiveness of the Spanish Government, within the 
R&D&i State Plan, reference EDU2014-57103-R. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Clark-Ibañez, “Inter-City Children in Sharper Focus. 
Sociology of Childhood and Photo Elicitation Interviews”. In 
Visual Research Methods, Gr. C. Stanczak, Ed. Los Ángeles, 
CA: Sage, pp. 167-196, 2007. 
[2] 
J. Elliott, Action-research in education. Madrid: Morata, 
1990. 
[3] 
J. Gimeno, The curriculum: a reflection on practice. Madrid: 
Morata, 1988. 
[4] 
D. Harper, “Talking about pictures: a case for photo 
elicitation”. Visual Studies, Vol.17, Nº 1, pp.13-26, 2002, 
doi:10.1080/14725860220137345 
[5] 
J. McKernan, Curriculum action research. Madrid: Morata, 
pp. 121, 2008. 
[6] 
D. A. Schön, Educating the Reflective Practitioner. 
Barcelona: Paidós-MEC, 1989. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

