Back to Normality - Changes in Time-Effective Logistics of Project-Based Course 
Electronic Instrumentation after COVID-19 Limitations Release
Samuel Kosolapov 
Department of Electronics 
Braude Academic College of Engineering 
Karmiel, Israel 
e-mail: ksamuel@braude.ac.il 
 
 
Abstract—The classic course Electronic Instrumentation was 
based on analog electronics - analog sensors, actuators, and 
amplifiers, and, in most universities, was taught as the 
theoretical course followed by a specialized and expensive 
laboratory. The appearance of inexpensive microcontrollers 
changed the way sensors and actuators are used; hence, our 
days, Electronic Instrumentation can be taught as "a classic 
course in the modern envelope": by using as analog as digital 
elements and by using special programming techniques needed 
to program microcontroller effectively. This presentation 
describes changes in the time-effective logistics which was used 
for eight years to teach this course in the "normal time", in 
"COVID-19 time", “in the Hybrid time” and, again in the 
“normal time” by using real electronic components and kits, 
and by using TinkerCad simulations.  
Keywords-project-based learning; time-effective logistics; 
electronic instrumentation; TINKERCAD. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The course “Electronic Instrumentation” is one of the 
basic courses in the curriculum of an electronic engineer. 
Most classical books dedicated to this course describe the 
operation, design, and parameters of different sensors and 
actuators – for example, temperature sensors and electrical 
heaters. A significant part of those books discusses analog 
devices (like analog voltmeters and ammeters) used to 
measure different physical parameters by using specialized 
sensors [1] [2]. Books for advanced students additionally 
discuss calibration procedures, errors, and the reliability of 
the measurements [3]. Some books provided a detailed 
description of the full-fledged analog systems designed to 
control relevant parameters by using specialized sensors and 
actuators and electronic amplifiers and filters.    
In the past, the classic course Electronic Instrumentation 
was based on analog electronics - analog sensors, actuators, 
and amplifiers. Hence, in many universities and colleges, this 
course was taught as a theoretical course – mostly due to the 
high cost of the real-life systems used in the industry. For 
example, the description of the course “ENT353 Electronic 
Instrumentation Systems” claims that “At the end of this 
course students will be able to demonstrate the ability to 
design instrumentation 
system 
suitable 
for 
required 
parameter measurement, understand the working principle of 
instrumentation system, and describe the working principle 
of various sensing devices” [4]. 
Many educators in the field of electronic instrumentation 
have emphasized the importance of practical training: “In 
most of the following steps: conceive, experiment, design, 
build, test, improve – practical aspects are critical for 
understanding the items learned” [5].  
Leading educational institutions like MIT [6] and others 
includes in their curricula of electrical engineering set of 
laboratories in which basic electronic equipment and real 
electronics components are used.  
Starting from the 80s, electronic analog systems were 
gradually replaced by digital systems containing “the wonder 
chip Micro-processor” [7] [8]. Large control panels packed 
with analog voltmeters, ammeters, and mechanical switches 
were gradually replaced by small-size digital systems with 
human-friendly displays. Additionally, the appearance of 
inexpensive microcontrollers changes the way sensors and 
actuators are used. Hence, our days, the course Electronic 
Instrumentation can be taught as "a classic course in the 
modern envelope": by using as analog as digital elements, 
plus using special programming techniques. Thus, our days, 
the programming of Micro-processors has become an 
important part of the education of electronic engineers.  
Online technologies were used by many educators long 
ago, but these technologies have become vital because of the 
COVID-19 situation: the situation in education, which is 
seriously dependent on the epidemiological situation, makes 
educators look for new ways of education [9]. It became a 
must to provide a way to carry out electronic experiments 
and assignments, as in a real laboratory, as in a student’s 
home. An interesting option was to use the online platforms 
for implementing elements of the Electronics Laboratory by 
using online electronic simulation platforms like TinkerCad   
[10] [11].  
An additional idea was to lease to each pair of students a 
specially prepared kit containing real electronic components 
and an inexpensive microcontroller development board. 
Then, students would be able to execute assignments at their 
homes – by using the kit and PC. Some elements of this idea 
were partly described in [12] [13]. This article describes 
additional details of the practical implementation of this idea. 
Section II describes “Elements of the Course”: lectures, 
exercises, non-obligatory “in-class Micro Exams”, “Home 
Works” and “Micro Projects”, including practical details of 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

how they were provided in “regular times” (when lectures 
and exercises were provided physically at the campus), in 
“COVID19” time (when lectures and exercises were 
provided by using online ZOOM services), in a “hybrid” 
situation (when some students were physically visited 
lectures and exercises, while others were used ZOOM 
translations), and, finally – last semester – “back to 
normality” – when lectures and exercises were provided 
physically at the campus.  
Section III describes the implementation details of Gmail 
Protocol which is an important element of time-effective 
logistics.  
Section IV describes details of the logistics of “Micro 
Exams”, “Home Works” and “Micro Projects”. The logistics 
of “Micro Exams” are described in subsection ‘A’. The 
logistics of “Home Works” are described in subsection ‘B’. 
The logistics of “Micro Projects” are described in subsection 
‘C’.    
An important part of any “time-effective” logistics of that 
kind is time-effective and fair grading. Details are described 
in Section V named “Time-Effective logistics of reports 
checking”.  
Section VI shortly summarizes the results of student 
pools (partly published in the previous publication [13]) and 
provides some conclusions. 
II. 
ELEMENTS OF THE COURSE 
Course Electronic Instrumentation in the new format was 
provided at the Department of Electronics of Braude 
Academic College of engineering every semester starting 
from 2015. Important elements of this course: 13 two-hour 
frontal in-class lectures, 13 one-hour in-class exercises, three 
“Home Works”, two “Micro Projects”, and 10 non-
obligatory “in-Class Micro Exams” (provided during 
exercise hours).  
“Home works” and “Micro Projects” are executed by 
pairs of students, whereas “Micro Exams” are individual 
assignments.  
In the “normal pre-COVID-19 years” (from 2015 to 
2020), the course “Electronic Instrumentation” was provided 
on campus. During three semesters starting from March 2020 
to August 2021, this course was provided under strict 
COVID-19 restrictions by using online tools only: ZOOM, 
TinkerCad, and Gmail. Specifically: lectures were provided 
by using remote ZOOM sessions, and assignments were 
executed by using TinkerCad simulations instead of using 
real components. Starting from October 2021, the course was 
provided in a hybrid way: lectures were provided at the 
campus, but with ZOOM “on”, so that students have a 
choice: to visit the campus or listen to the lectures by ZOOM 
from outside the campus. “Home Works” and “Micro 
Projects” were executed by using the kits, but in some 
situations, students were asked to provide simulations by 
using TinkerCad and/or MultiSim simulation applications. 
From October 2022, the course is provided in a “normal in-
class” way. However, the practice of using TinkerCad and 
other simulations in combination with using real components 
and development boards was found useful for the goals of 
the course, hence, currently, this practice is continuing to be 
used.  
III. 
GMAIL PROTOCOL 
In prehistoric pre-computer times, students’ assignments 
were prepared by using pen and paper. At due time, students 
put their papers on the educator’s table. Then, the educator 
physically took those papers to his/her cabinet, checked and 
graded those papers by using pen and paper, and returned 
the graded exams to the students. This outdated procedure 
created a lot of logistics problems and conflicts (like lost 
papers, non-consisting grading, problems with grades 
appeal, and others), and, what is more important, it was not 
time-effective from the point of view of the educator – it 
was not an easy job to read handwritten texts.    
When personal computers became available, students 
started to print their assignments, but this solved only the 
problem of reading handwritten texts. 
Email 
services, 
from 
their 
origin, 
were 
found 
instrumental in many businesses in documenting different 
stages of routine operations. Gmail services were pioneers by 
implementing some obvious today ideas like online access to 
all emails from any computer, usage of multiple labels, and 
simple and fast search in the emails. Hence, free Gmail 
services were selected for collecting student assignments. It 
is known that for security reasons, many educational 
organizations effectively forbid using Gmail services by 
enforcing the usage of special educational platforms like 
“MOODLE”. In order to comply with those security 
requirements, the Gmail protocol described never uses the 
full names and full IDs of the students. Additionally, for 
every course, a dedicated Gmail address is used. 
From 2015 this Gmail protocol was evolutionarily 
modified. Currently, the following rules are used.  
The dedicated Gmail address is used to collect and store 
students’ assignments only. Discussions are provided by 
using official college communication means only. 
When the specific assignment is ready, one of the 
students fills the standard fields of the email: 
“To”:  in this field, only the address of dedicated to the 
specific course Gmail must be written. 
“CC”: email address of the second student. This 
requirement is very important as proof that the assignment 
was sent at due time and to the correct address. Additionally, 
the second student may validate that the correct version of 
the assignment was sent.    
The “Subject” field was filled by a specially designed 
alpha-numeric descriptor – “Report ID”. In order to find an 
optimal format, its structure was modified in some 
semesters. In the last semester, the following format of the 
“Report ID” was used: 
ABCD-EFGH-Z-YYYY-MM-DD 
Where: token “ABCD” contains the last 4 digits in the ID of 
the first student, and token “EFGH” - contains the last 4 
digits in the ID of the second student. In order to prevent 
ambiguity, it was requested that numerically ABCD < 
EFGH. This rule, in a pseudo-random way, automatically 
defines who is the first student, and who is the second 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

student (the first student signs on the kits leasing form). 
Token “Z” equals to “HW01” for the “Home Work 01”, 
“HW02” for the “Home Work 02”, and “HW03” for the 
“Home Work 03”. Homework items were the same for all 
pairs of students. For “Micro Projects 1”, token “Z” was 
equal to “MP1V”, where V was the number in the first list of 
assignments to be executed. Those numbers were set in a 
pseudo-random way in the range {1..6}. For the “Micro 
Project 2” token “Z” was equal to “MP2N”, where N was the 
number in the second list of assignments to be executed. 
Those numbers were set in a pseudo-random way in the 
range {1..5}. “YYYY-MM-DD” stands for the year, month, 
and day of the report. Delimiter “-“ was used to make the 
“Report ID” more readable for humans and to make a search 
by tokens plain and simple.     
The “Text” field was used only to comply with the Gmail 
rule to fill it in some way and not to send Gmail with this 
field void. So, students were asked to write there at least two 
letters, or, some very short text. 
The attachment was a PowerPoint file named exactly as 
described before “report ID”:  
      ABCD-EFGH-Z-YYYY-MM-DD.pptx 
In some cases, students were asked to attach ZIP file, 
named as 
    ABCD-EFGH-Z-YYYY-MM-DD.zip 
This strong naming policy enabled a simple search by the 
tokens of the “Report ID”. Two examples of search are 
presented in Figure 1.  On the left is presented an extract of 
the result of the search of all reports of “Home Work 03” by 
using the token “*-HW03-*”. On the right is presented the 
extract of the result of the search of all assignments of the 
specific pair of students by using the short ID token of the 
first student: “*-1608-*”. 
 
 
IV. 
LOGISTICS OF “MICRO EXAMS”, “HOME WORKS”, 
AND “MICRO PROJECTS” 
The logistics of “Micro Exams” are described in 
subsection ‘A’. The logistics of “Home Works” are 
described in subsection ‘B’. The logistics of “Micro 
Projects” are described in subsection ‘C’.    
A. Logistics of “Micro Exams”  
Originally, “Micro Exams” were executed in class, 
during the time of the exercises. In the frames of those micro 
exams, students were asked to solve on paper a short clearly 
defined problem, technically close to one of the problems 
solved during previous lectures and exercises. After a short 
time (say, 5 minutes), an educator collected papers from the 
students. The exact time of the start of the specific “Micro 
Exam” was set by a lecturer in a way unknown to the 
students. 
Later, the logistics of the micro exams was changed. 
Students were still asked to write the solution on paper, but 
then they were asked to take a photo of their solution by 
using a smartphone and email the photo to the lecturer by 
using the subject field “ABCD-MEZ”, where Z is a number 
of the “Micro Exam”. It is clear that only emails sent 
immediately after the “Micro Exam” finish were graded. 
When the COVID-19 restrictions were enforced, these 
logistics was used without changes. During the hybrid 
semesters, the administrative decision was to permit 
participation in micro exams only to the students technically 
present in the class. Hence, it was “return” to the “collection 
of the papers” logistics. This old and non-reliable practice is 
still in usage after “back to normality”. Surprisingly, many 
students started to ask if it is possible to use tablets to solve 
problems by using handwriting tools (like S-pens). So, 
considering that nearly all students have advanced tablets, it 
can be predicted that in the nearest years, paperless logistics 
will be used for “Micro Exams”.    
The first goal of those “Micro Exams” was to provide 
minimal feedback to the lecturer: what is the level of the 
student’s understanding of the material learned? The second 
goal was to provide minimal feedback to the students: do I 
understand the material learned? This is why during “Micro 
Exams” students were permitted to use computers and the 
Internet, and even ask neighbor students for assistance. All 
the above were permitted because the additional goal of 
these exams was to enforce students to learn critical staff (for 
example: correct usage of timers and hardware interrupts) 
now, and not closer to the end of the course. 
 Participation in the “Micro Exams” is not a must, 
however, presenting the solutions to the lecturer may result 
in some improvement in the final grade. Typically, nearly 
50% of students participated in the Micro Exams and nearly 
25% of all the students enrolled in the course have got 
maximal grade improvement. 
B. Logistics of “Home Works”  
At the beginning of the “normal” semester, pairs of 
students get from the lecturer a specially prepared kit to be 
used at their homes to practically implement “Home works”. 
Specifically, in the frames of the course Electronic 
Instrumentation, students get: a 37-in-one Sensor kit, an 
Arduino UNO R3 board, a small-size breadboard, a shield 
with a small breadboard, a short USB cable, a set of wires, 
and a plastic box to store relevant staff. 
As it was mentioned above, during three semesters 
starting from March 2020 to August 2021, this course was 
provided under COVID-19 restrictions. During those 
semesters, the distribution of real electronic components 
became at least problematic, but working in pairs with real 
components became impossible. 
 The selected solution was to use online TinkerCad 
simulations. An important feature of this simulation is that it 
is a free cloud service, without the need for installation or 
license.  
During the exercises provided by ZOOM, the lecturer 
periodically provided live demonstrations of the TinkerCad 
operation.  
So, during “normal” semesters, students were asked to 
implement “Home Works” by using real components, 
prepare a report containing photos of the assembly (step by 
step) and testing the system in accordance with the lecturer’s 
requirements, and, to demonstrate the operation of the 
system physically in the class. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

In the “COVID-19” semesters, students were asked to do 
with TinkerCad simulation actually the same steps as with 
real components: to position modules and to connect them by 
wires, but, instead of photos of real components, screenshots 
of the simulation screens were used. Students were requested 
to include the link to their TinkerCad simulation in the report 
so that the lecturer was able to check the layout, the code, 
and the operation of the system developed by students. The 
same link was used by students to demonstrate the operation 
of their system during the ZOOM session. 
Figure 2 demonstrates typical extracts from the student’s 
reports. On the left, the screenshot of the TinkerCad 
simulation is presented. An educator may immediately see 
that wire from the button is connected to the inappropriate 
pin – which is a severe error – hardware interrupt cannot be 
used as required. On the right, a photo of a real board with 
real modules and wires is presented. An educator may 
immediately see that the photoresistor is not in line with 
LED, which is a problematic layout – leading to a significant 
error in measurement. 
It is clear that if some pair of students had "copied" 
photos and "code" from the report of another pair of 
students, this would be immediately revealed. During eight 
years, such "illegal copying" was revealed less than 10 times. 
Figure 3 presents a simplified flowchart of the steps 
expected to be executed by the educator and by pair of 
students in the frames of the described logistics for the 
different situations.  
 
C. Logistics of “Micro-Projects” 
In the frames of the course, students were asked to 
prepare two “Micro-Projects”.  
The first micro project was about different types of 
motors (6V DC, Servo, Stepper, and Brushless). Each pair of 
students prepared a PowerPoint presentation dedicated to a 
specific type of motor and to a specific type of electronic 
controller and, present it in the class (in case of the “regular” 
semester) or by ZOOM (in case of “COVID-19” semester). 
In these presentations, students were asked to explain the 
physical principles of the specific motor operation and 
explain how this motor can be controlled electronically by 
presenting the exemplary circuit needed to control this motor 
from a microcontroller.  
The second Micro Project was about the design of an 
Automatic 
Measurement 
System 
(AMS). 
However, 
considering the tight timetable, the quality of those Micro 
Project reports was not as good as expected. Hence, in the 
last years, a simpler Manually Controlled Measurement 
System (MCMS) was asked to be designed and implemented 
only by using simulations. Each pair of students was asked to 
develop a different type of MCMS: an MCMS for measuring 
DC voltage in different voltage ranges, an MCMS for 
measuring AC voltages in different voltage ranges, etc. 
Students were asked to prepare the electric circuit of the 
MCMS, provide relevant calculations, and prepare a 
simulation of the analog part only. In this case, each pair of 
students was asked to send a PowerPoint presentation close 
to the end of the semester. Grading was provided by 
evaluating the quality of the report and simulation. 
V. 
TIME-EFFECTIVE LOGISTICS OF REPORTS CHECKING  
It is clear that checking 12*(3+2) reports is a time-
consuming job. Hence, significant efforts were made to 
develop time-effective logistics (a set of formal rules) 
describing how exactly students must prepare and send their 
assignments. 
Figure 4 presents an extract from the specially prepared 
Excel template. To make grading fast and consistent, a 
relatively large number of items to be checked are listed in 
column ‘B’. While grading the specific report, an educator in 
a very short time finds in the student’s report a slide labeled 
as in column ‘A’ and, by looking at the photos or screenshots 
very fast validates if all the requirements were implemented. 
In case of errors, an educator sets a comment in the relevant 
cell. To make this process fast, in column ‘J’ typical errors 
relevant to the specific item and “their price” are 
summarized, so that the educator puts in the comment only 
the number of the relevant error. Grading by template was 
proven as fast and consistent. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS  
During 10 years, different variants of this time-effective 
logistics for the different electronic engineering courses were 
tested.  Some results were published before in [12] [13] and 
reported at a number of international conferences. 
Unfortunately, in recent years the participation of the 
students in the students’ pools was minimal or even zero. 
Considering the semesters when student’ pools were 
provided, grades provided by students for this course were in 
the range {4.23...4.94} (by using 1-5 scale) and were in most 
cases by 0.5 higher than the mean department’ courses grade. 
In the written comments, most of the students’ remarks were 
positive, and, the median grade for this course in most of the 
semesters was 5.0. Additionally, we may evaluate the 
opinions of the students by using the number of students 
enrolled in this course. This course is not obligatory course. 
The number of students that can be enrolled is 24. During 
nearly all semesters the number of students that were 
registered for this course was 24, and, in most semesters, a 
number of students registered themselves on the waiting list. 
Obviously, not all students have got grades at the end. The 
numbers for the semesters {2019-03 .. 2022-10} are {24, 24, 
23, 18, 21, 23, 22, 24}. By analyzing the number of students 
that have got grades, one can conclude that the organization 
and outcome of this course are attractive enough for the 
students.  
Manual management and grading of the student's reports 
(by using grading templates) was found simple and time-
effective, as for the students, as for the educators. An indirect 
parameter that can be considered as an indirect argument 
taken into account is a low number of grade appeals – less 
than 3 per semester. 
 
 
 
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. K. Sawhney, “A Course in Electronic Measurements and 
Instrumentation”, Dhanpat Rai & Co, 19th Edition, 2015. 
[2] W.D. Cooper & A.D. Helfrick, “Electronic Instrumentation, 
and Measurement Techniques”, Prentice Hall, 3 rd revised 
Edition, 1985.  
[3] B. G. Liptak, “Process Measurement and Analysis”, Chilton 
Book Company, 4 th Edition, 2003. 
[4] N. Damle “ENT353 Electronic Instrumentation syllabus”. 
Available from https://www.udemy.com/course/electronic-
instrumentation/ [retrieved: 01,2023] 
[5] D. R. Ramos and F. Alonso-Fernandez, “A practical 
Electronic Instrumentational course for engineering students” 
IEEE EDUCON Education Engineering 2010 – The Future of 
Global Learning Engineering Education, April 14-16, 2010, 
Madrid, SPAIN, pp. 1181 – 1188.  
[6] G. Hom, “Hands-On Introduction to Electrical Engineering 
Lab 
Skills”. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from  
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses. 2008-01. [retrieved: 05, 2022]. 
[7] R. Gopalakrishnan, “Electronic Instrumentation for Control”,  
IETE Journal of Research, vol. 27, issue 2, pp 53-60, 1981 
[8] O. Pandey, “Electronics Instruments”, chapter in the book 
“Electronic Engineerings”, Springer, 2022. 
[9] D. Luchaninov,  R. Bazhenov, V. Sabirova, M. Mamyrova, 
and Z. Zholdosheva, “Online training of students of applied 
physics in the field of circuitry”, ICMSIT-II 2021 pp 1-6.  
[10] F. Jacob, A. Alberto, and P. Guimaraes, “Use of Tinkercad 
platform for Teaching Electronics Subject in Post-Secondary 
Technical Courses”, TEEM21, October 2021 pp. 543-547, 
Available 
from 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3486011.3486517 
[retrieved: 05, 2022]. 
[11] E. A. Juanda, and F. Khairullah, Tinkercad Application 
Software to Optimize Teaching and Learning Process in 
Electronics and Microprocessors Subject”, Proceedings of the 
6th UPI International Conference on TVET 2020 (TVET 
2020), pp. 124 - 128. 
[12] S. Kosolapov and N. Sabag, “Logistics of Electronic Home-
Project-Based Course", International Journal of Information 
and Education Technology”, vol. 9 no. 6, pp. 445-448. 2019. 
[13] S. Kosolapov, “Time-Effective Logistics of Project-Based 
Course Electronic Instrumentation”, eLmL 2022: The 
Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and 
On-line Learning, pp 35-41, IARIA 2022, 
 
 
Figure 1.  Screenshots of the lecturer's Gmail.  
Left: Extract of the result of the search of all reports of “Homework #03” by using token “*-HW03-*“  
Right: Extract of the result of the search of all assignments of the pair of students by using the short ID token of the first student  “*-1608-*” 
       
 
 
Figure 2.  Easy grading.   
Left: Screenshot from Version 1 of the Homework 01 report as implemented by pair of students by using  TinkerCad simulation. 
An error in the wiring can be seen: the pin in the button module is not connected to pin 2 or pin 3 of the Arduino UNO R3 Board.  
Right: Screenshot from Version 1 of the Homework 03 report as implemented by pair of students by using a hardware kit. 
An error in the layout can be seen: the photoresistor and LED are not in line.  
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

                                                                              
  
 
Figure 3.  Simplified flowchart of the exemplary homework roadmap. 
Left: actions of the educator. Right: actions of pair of students 
  
Figure 4.  Extract from Excel template for grading Micro Project 1. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

