Personalized Links Recommendation Based on Learning Analytics in MOOCs 
Ahmed Mohamed Fahmy Yousef 
Fayoum University 
 
Fayoum, Egypt 
Email: amf00@fayoum.edu.eg 
 
 
Abstract— Increasingly, Massive Open Online Courses 
(MOOCs) are widely used and have become a key instrument 
in Technology Enhanced Learning (TEL) models in the last 
few years. However, the key challenge with this kind of larger 
scales platforms is how to provide course participants with a 
quality learning materials that promote effective learning 
based on their needs. Indeed, this requires careful planning, 
monitoring and evaluation of all learning activities. Recently, 
learning analytics and Recommender systems are widely used 
in MOOCs to overcome this challenge in providing 
personalization and accessibility learning materials for course 
participants. The purpose of the current study was to 
determine the usability and effectiveness of a personalized 
links recommendation tool based on learning analytics in 
MOOCs. This personalized links recommendation tool was 
undertaken the power of crowd sourcing to provide course 
participants with an high quality learning material from 
externals recourses, e.g., Open Education Resources (OER). 
The present study makes several noteworthy contributions 
such as researching the mapping of learning data, an open 
personalized - links recommendation architecture, and a user-
friendly 
and 
dynamic 
interface 
to 
deliver 
the 
recommendations. 
Keywords-Massive Open Online Courses; MOOCs; Viedo-
Based Learning; Learning analytics; Recommendation Systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Since then new technologies such as Smartphone’s and 
tablets in combination with social media such as YouTube 
have contributed to increasing social interaction and have 
made it easier as ever to integrate video applications in 
education [1]. More recently, Massive Open Online Courses 
(MOOCs) have offered a whole new perspective for Video-
Based Learning (VBL) in education sector. MOOCs 
incorporate video-based lectures and new ways of 
assessment in courses that are offered on the Web and have 
potentially thousands of participants [2]. In MOOCs 
teachers, create and share videos related to the learning topic. 
The learners can then study the topic by themselves and 
discuss it back by solving problems and doing practical work 
[3]. In video-based collaborative learning learners, are able 
to share responsibilities for their learning. Much of the 
literature since the mid-2000s validates the efficacy of 
collaborative learning especially in VBL environments. They 
report on some educational benefits of learners working 
cooperatively in groups such as shared goals, ideas, 
resources, activities, and supporting each other [4]. Less than 
28% of the studies applied the individual learning style that 
was consistent with the theory of multiple intelligences [5]. 
According to this theory VBL should focus on the particular 
intelligences of each student [1].  
The questions that arise here are: what are advantages 
and disadvantages of current MOOCs? How can the current 
MOOC environments be improved? To answer these 
questions a state-of-the art study was conducted in 2015 [6]. 
The most interesting aspects of this study are: 
 
MOOCs platform consist of several units comprising 
video lectures with support of many learning 
materials such as PDF files, PPT and lecture notes. 
At the same time the participants can discuss the 
content in various groups. 
 
MOOCs are used by several thousand learners per 
course; the teaching assistance offered to support the 
learning activities becomes a critical issue. 
 
Closer inspection of the study results shows the lack 
of human connection as a big challenge, especially 
in MOOCs. The learners in these open courses come 
from all over the world. They speak English in 
different levels and have different cultural believes. 
 
The current versions of MOOCs use traditional 
assessment methods. These include e-tests, quizzes, 
multiple-choice and short answer questions. These 
methods are limited in evaluating course participants 
in open and distributed environment effectively. 
 
Providing life-long learning for more and more 
participants for free, facing a big challenge how to 
deal with information overload caused by massive 
activities.  
 
Based on these analyses, it can thus be suggested that 
educational recommender system is a powerful tool enable 
learners to share their opinions and benefit from each other's 
experience. Indeed, recommender systems are an emerging 
field that has the potential to analysis learners' interaction 
data with MOOC environments to better understand their 
learning process [7]. One important opportunity to develop 
MOOCs is to leverage personalized links recommendation 
based on learning analytics techniques to collect, evaluate, 
analyse, and report data about learners and their learning 
activities in the MOOC environments, in order to achieve 
better learning outcomes. This paper analyzes how 
personalized links recommendation based on learning 
analytics techniques can be applied to current MOOCs to 
guide course participants in personalized inclusive open 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

learning scenarios. The remainder of this paper presents the 
research methodology, the theoretical dimensions and design 
criteria of recommendation systems in educational scenarios 
e.g., MOOCs, the design, implementation, and evaluation 
results of the use of recommendation systems tool in the 
MOOC in more detail. 
II. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
This work employed case study research methodology, 
seeking for exploring new processes or behaviors based on 
the learning experiences surrounding the class of “Producing 
Educational Programs” offered by Fayoum University, 
Egypt using a blended MOOC platform includes a creative 
video tool allows learners to upload and collaboratively 
annotate videos online as shown in Figure 1.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Case study methodology [8] 
In addition, the analytical process is collected and 
combined data from different learners’ activities when they 
interact with learning elements. The approach of the study is 
depicted below and is based on the work of Yin 2003 [8]. 
III. 
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
Recently, a considerable literature has grown up around 
the theme of recommender systems and their potential in the 
educational sector e.g., eLearning and MOOCs. In fact, 
recommender systems are widely used to handle the current 
challenges of MOOC environments in providing standards-
based solutions for learners as well as, for providers 
(Professors) [9]. One of the greatest challenges, professors 
who taught MOOCs have troublesome in recommending 
learners to select suitable learning materials due to the wide 
range of educational material and knowledge shared in 
MOOCs platforms. On the other hand, MOOCs participants 
feel lost and dispersing to select the educational resources 
and the learning style that meet their characteristics the best 
[10],[11],[12]. Thus, research is needed to investigate 
different approaches of user recommendation in MOOCs. 
This work proposes a novel approach which applies 
recommender system techniques for video lectures and 
discussions forum in MOOCs. The contributions of this work 
are these design requirements: 
 
Capture and store large data sets from learners’ 
activities when they watched video lecture. 
 
Observing the items that a user views the video 
lectures. 
 
Keeping a record of the items that a user discusses in 
the forum and newsgroup articles.  
 
Analyzing the user's social network and discovering 
similar likes and dislikes “Only for MOOC 
lectures”. 
 
Provide a recommendation mechanism that enables 
learners to discover external video lecture and 
learning resources based on their interests and 
activities on the learning environment. 
 
This end has led to a renewed interest for developing 
video 
heatmap 
tracking 
feature 
in 
an 
educational 
recommender systems, which are able to visualize exactly 
where each course participant navigated, second by second, 
by retracing individual viewing sessions. In this regard 
learners acquire knowledge and educators support the 
learning process in order to provide them with external 
learning material in MOOC environments.  
 
IV. 
RECOMMENDER SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION 
In their interesting analysis of MOOC design criteria, 
Yousef et al (2014) collected design criteria regarding the 
interface, organization, and collaboration in video lectures 
and discussion [13].Based on the design criteria in this study 
and the recommender system requirement collected above in 
Section III, the study at hand aimed to collect more user 
requirements. 
A. User Requirements 
To gain as full an understanding as possible, an 
Interactive Process Interviews (IPI) with target learners was 
conducted to determine which functionalities they are 
expecting from personalized links recommendation tool. 
These interviews involved 12 students who were between 
the ages of 19 and 15 years and all of them had prior 
experience with MOOCs and recommender systems. 
Almost two-thirds of the participants (70%) are set out the 
following additional requirements and functionalities: 
 
Collect as much data as reasonably possible form the 
video timeline. 
 
Support for a wide variety of current and future 
mobile devices. 
 
The system must deal with privacy police of the 
university. The user must be aware about the fact 
that the application is running, that it is collecting 
data, or what data it is collecting. 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

B. System Architecture 
The architecture of the recommender system follows 
from the design requirements explained above. Figure 2 
shows the learners actions are events explicitly generated by 
them, for example by tapping on the forum, entering text and 
similar.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Recommender System Architecture  
It would be possible to collect more data by analyzing 
video time line data or generating a graphical representation 
of data where the individual values contained in a matrix are 
represented as a video heatmap. All recommender learning 
materials presented in this study are based on observed 
learner’s behavior. 
V. 
CASE STUDY 
The case study of this experiment took place during the 
summer semester 2016 with duration of four weeks. It was 
offered both formally to students from Fayoum University 
and informally with open enrollment to anybody who is 
interested in Producing Educational Programs. A total of 
478 participants completed this course. 89 are formal 
participants who took the course to earn credits from 
Fayoum University.  These participants were required to 
complete the course and obtain positive grading of 
assignments. The rest were informal participants undertaking 
the learning activities at their own pace without receiving 
any credits. The teaching staff provided 8 main video 
lectures and personalized links recommendation tool has 
suggested 38 related videos, 12 PDF articles and 7 images. 
This course was taught in both languages Arabic and English 
and participants were encouraged to self-organize their 
learning 
environments, 
present 
their 
own 
ideas, 
collaboratively discuss the video lectures, and share 
knowledge through forum and newsgroup articles.  
The case reported here illustrates the an example (video 
heatmap analysis) of how a timeline of a video was marked-
up at various points of analysis with total number of views as 
seen in Figure 3.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Video Heatmap Analysis  
In fact, this case confirms the importance of the 
personalized links recommendation to predict the learning 
difficulties and misunderstanding concepts. From the data in 
Figure 3, it is apparent that minutes between 4:00 and 5:10 
are the highest views traffic. By tracking the discussion 
forum associated with the video time line as presented in 
Figure 4. It’s clear that course participants are comments and 
asked many questions regarding the minutes between 4:00 
and 5:10.   
 
 
Figure 4.  MOOC Discussion Forum Analysis  
The personalized links recommendation tool then 
suggested some related videos and articles for particular 
participants they are watched this video part as well as for 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

those who are comments or asked questions for the same 
video part.  
VI. 
EVALUATION 
The next sections are providing the evaluation details of 
the personalized links recommendation tool.  We employed a 
mixed-method evaluation approach based on the System 
Usability Scale (SUS) which is a simple, ten-item attitude 
Likert scale giving a global view of subjective assessments 
of usability as a general usability evaluation [14] and a 
custom 
effectiveness 
questionnaire 
reflecting 
the 
personalized links recommendation tool. 
A. Usability Evaluation 
The System Usability Scale (SUS) was invented by John 
Brooke who, in 1986 and provides a “quick and dirty”, 
reliable tool for measuring the usability [14].The System 
Usability Scale is a Likert Scale which includes 10 questions 
which users of your website will answer. Participants are 
asked to score 10 items with one of five responses that range 
from Strongly Agree to Strongly disagree. Of the study 
population, 213 subjects completed and returned the 
questionnaire.  
TABLE I.  
SYSTEM USABILITY SCALE ( N= 213) 
No 
System Usability Scale (SUS) 
Item 
User 
Rating 
SUS 
Score 
1 
I think that I would like to use this website 
frequently 
4.3 
3.3 
2 
I found the website unnecessarily complex 
2.3 
2.7 
3 
I thought the website was easy to use 
3.9 
2.9 
4 
I think that I would need the support of a 
technical person to be able to use this 
website 
2.1 
2.9 
5 
I found the various functions in this website 
were well integrated 
4.6 
3.6 
6 
I thought there was too much inconsistency 
in this website 
1.9 
3.1 
7 
I would imagine that most people would 
learn to use this website very quickly 
4.6 
3.6 
8 
I found the website very cumbersome to use 
1.1 
3.9 
9 
I felt very confident using the website 
4.8 
3.8 
10 
I needed to learn a lot of things before I 
could get going with this website 
1.2 
3.8 
SUS Total Score 
 
84 
The majority of respondents were in the 18-25 age range. 
Male respondents formed the majority (56%). Participants 
have a high level of educational attainment: 70% of 
participants are studying Bachelor’s degree at Fayoum 
University and 30% have a Bachelor’s degree or higher. 
They also have an experience with TEL courses, nearly, 75% 
reported that they attended more than two TEL courses.   
The overall System Usability Scale (SUS) score from the 
questionnaires was 84, which translates to “Users like your 
site and will recommend it to their friends”. 
B. Effectivness  Evaluation 
The second part of this evaluation aimed to examine the 
effectiveness of using personalized links recommendation 
tool in MOOCs. Effective evaluation questionnaire was 
designed to collect feedback from the course participants’ 
reflection the most applied objectives reported in Section III, 
as shown in Table 2.  A 5-point Likert scale was used from 
(1) strongly disagree to (5) strongly agree. In addition to 
ensure the relevance of these questions, we sent this 
questionnaire to a small panel of 5 learners as well as 5 
learning technologies experts. They were asked for their 
opinions and suggestions for revising the questionnaire. 
Their feedback included a refinement of some questions and 
replacing some others. The revised questionnaire was then 
given to the course participants. 
TABLE II.  
EFFECTIVENESS EVALUATION  ( N= 213) 
No 
Effectiveness Evaluation 
Item 
Mean 
SD 
1 
I think that I the system is able to provide 
specific recommendation for me 
4.3 
0.45 
2 
I thought the system is able to recommend 
me (four to five) relevant learning material. 
4.3 
0.73 
3 
The remmended learning material help me 
to better understand the course content. 
4.1 
0.91 
4 
I think that items recommended to me are 
diverse (Videos, PDF, Images). 
3.45 
1.20 
5 
I found the rating system (Likes) helps me 
to assess the quality of the learning material 
4.6 
0.62 
6 
I found it is too easy to obtain the 
recommened learning resources for me 
form OER. 
3.9 
1.13 
7 
The personalized links recommendation 
helps me to reflect on my own performance. 
4.6 
0.61 
8 
I found the system is very respect of my 
praivacy. 
4.6 
0.34 
9 
I think the discciions formu helps me to 
improve collaboration with peers. 
4.8 
3.8 
10 
  I can get  help  at  any  point  that  is  
tailored  to where is me.  
4.2 
0.82 
Effectiveness Evaluation Average Score 
4.28 
1.06 
The aim of this research was to explore and explain the 
personalized links recommendation tool in MOOCs. 
According to Table 2, responses regarding recommendation 
provided through this tool were largely positive. However, 
some learners received only recommended videos. One 
possible reason for this is that, those participants didn’t 
participate in the discussion forum or students news group 
[15]. It would be interesting to compare experiences of 
individuals within the same group activities.  
VII. CONCLUSION  
The concept of Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) 
is currently accredited with high relevance for prospective 
developments 
in 
eLearning 
technologies 
in 
higher 
education. MOOC providers worldwide are hard pressed in 
meeting the challenges of teaching an increasing number of 
course participants and dealing with growing student 
heterogeneity. Recommendations can be applied to 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

overcome current limitations of MOOCs in providing 
personalization 
and 
accessibility 
features 
such 
as 
recommending resources (e.g., papers, books, images. 
Video lectures). In this investigation, the aim was to assess 
the personalized links recommendation tool in MOOCs. 
One of the more significant findings to emerge from this 
study is the use of information aggregation capabilities of a 
recommender system to improve the teaching assistance and 
consulting course participants in an automated way and thus 
scale tutoring and consulting in a personalized way for a 
large scale of learners worldwide. To validate this approach, 
a mixed-method evaluation approach was employed based 
on the System Usability Scale (SUS) as a general usability 
evaluation and a custom effectiveness questionnaire 
reflecting the personalized links recommendation tool. The 
findings from this study make several contributions to the 
current literature. First, experimental results show that the 
proposed personalized links recommendation tool can 
enhance learners’ performance. Second, create dynamic 
system architecture and finally, a user-friendly and 
accessible interface to deliver the recommendations. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. M. F. Yousef, M. A. Chatti, and U. Schroeder, "Video-
based learning: A critical analysis of the research published in 
2003-2013 and future visions," In eLmL 2014, The Sixth 
International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid and On-line 
Learning, pp. 112–119, 2014.‏ 
[2] A. M. F. Yousef, M. A. Chatti, U. Schroeder, H. Jakobs, and 
M. Wosnitza. "A Review of the State-of-the-Art" In 
Proceedings of CSEDU2014, 6th International Conference on 
Computer Supported Education, pp. 9-20, 2014.‏ 
[3] J. Daniel, J. "Making sense of MOOCs: Musings in a maze of 
myth, paradox and possibility”, Journal of interactive Media 
in education, vol. 3, 2012.‏ 
[4] A. M. F. Yousef, M. A. Chatti, and U. Schroeder, "The state 
of video-based learning: A review and future perspectives”,  
Int. J. Adv. Life Sci, vol. 6, no.(3/4), pp. 122-135, 2014. 
[5] R. A. Berk, "Multimedia teaching with video clips: TV, 
movies, YouTube, and mtvU in the college classroom" 
International Journal of Technology in Teaching and 
Learning, vol. 5, no.1, pp. 1-21, 2009.‏ 
[6] A. M. F. Yousef, M. A. Chatti, U. Schroeder, H. Jakobs, and 
M. Wosnitza. "The state of MOOCs from 2008 to 2014: A 
critical analysis and future visions" In International 
Conference on Computer Supported Education, pp. 305-327, 
Springer International Publishing, 2014. 
[7] O. C. Santos, and J. G. Boticario, "Requirements for semantic 
educational recommender systems in formal e-learning 
scenarios", Algorithms, vol.  4 no. 2, pp. 131-154, 2011.‏  
[8] Yin, R. K. (2003).  Case study research: Design and methods 
(3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks,  CA: Sage.  
[9] N. Thai-Nghe, L. Drumond, A. Krohn-Grimberghe, and L. 
Schmidt-Thieme, "Recommender system for predicting 
student performance" Procedia Computer Science, vol. 1 no.2, 
pp. 2811-2819, 2010.‏ 
[10] C. E. McLoughlin, and E. Catherine, E. "The pedagogy of 
personalised learning: exemplars, MOOCS and related 
learning theories" In Proc. EdMedia, 2013.‏ 
[11] J. Knox, J. Ross, C. Sinclair, H. Macleod, and S. Bayne, 
"MOOC Feedback: Pleasing All the People? " In Krause, S. 
Lowe, C. Invasion of the MOOCs: The Promise and Perils of 
Massive Open Online Courses, pp. 98, 2014. 
[12] J. Wilkowski, A. Deutsch, and D. M. Russell, "Student skill 
and goal achievement in the mapping with google MOOC" In 
Proceedings of the first ACM conference on Learning@ scale 
conference, pp. 3-10,. ACM., 2014. 
[13] A. M. F. Yousef, M. A. Chatti, U. Schroeder, and M. 
Wosnitza, "What drives a successful MOOC? An empirical 
examination of criteria to assure design quality of MOOCs" In 
Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT), 2014 IEEE 14th 
International Conference on, pp. 44-48, IEEE, 2014.‏ 
[14] J. Brooke, "SUS-A quick and dirty usability scale" Usability 
evaluation in industry, vol. 189, no., (194),pp. 4-7, 1996. 
[15] A. M. F. Yousef, M. A. Chatti, I. Ahmad, and M. Wosnitza, 
"An evaluation of learning analytics in a blended MOOC 
environment" In Proceedings of the Third European MOOCs 
Stakeholders Summit EMOOCs, pp. 122-130., 2015. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

