Using the Tools at Hand: Creative Online Course Quality Management 
Brayden Milam, Julie R. Newell, Stephen Bartlett, Tamara Powell, Lesley Gabel, Kaylee Polk, Elly Sloman, Aiden Reichner 
Norman J. Radow College of Humanities and Social Sciences, Office of Digital Education 
Kennesaw State University, Kennesaw, Georgia, USA 
Email: bmilam3@kennesaw.edu, jnewell2@kennesaw.edu, sbartlet@kennesaw.edu, tpowel25@kennesaw.edu, lgabel@kennesaw.edu, 
kpolk7@students.kennesaw.edu, esloman@students.kennesaw.edu, areichne@students.kennesaw.edu  
 
Abstract— Post-pandemic, a requirement that online courses 
be certified for accessibility and meet federal guidelines for 
instructional equivalency created a backlog of courses that 
needed to be processed quickly and efficiently. This situation 
was particularly acute in the Norman J. Radow College of 
Humanities and Social Sciences, the largest College at 
Kennesaw State University, and its 11 component schools and 
departments. Without the availability of increased staff or 
funding, efficient workflow management systems needed to be 
established quickly and using software already available at the 
institution. Team members developed the “Bucket System” 
based on multiple components of Microsoft 365 to map and 
track workflows across multiple criteria and multiple 
reviewers. 
Keywords-course review; online course quality; project 
management; Microsoft 365. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In 2018, Kennesaw State University (KSU) President 
Pamela Whitten chose to discontinue the requirement of 
Quality Matters (QM) Certification for all online classes. 
Colleges within the university could still require quality 
control, but it was left to college leadership to decide if and 
how to implement this control. The Radow College of 
Humanities and Social Sciences (RCHSS) continued to offer 
training and certification options for those departments 
requesting support. Training and certification were also built 
into compensation contracts offered by the college. Despite 
these continued options, the college decided to allow the 
requirement for instructor and course certification to lapse.  
Instead of following QM, which cost money and received 
opposition from faculty resistant to the latest version update, 
digital education experts in what was then the Distance 
Learning Center partnered with faculty to develop a set of 
standards that fit the university’s needs and aligned with best 
practices. This process ultimately resulted in the KSU 
Course Quality Checklist (KSU CQC) and was approved 
through various shared governance bodies. While some 
colleges chose to remain with QM (after memberships were 
provided through the University System) and others 
developed their own rubrics, the KSU CQC was adopted 
across multiple colleges at the university and has become the 
standard quality measure in RCHSS in instances when 
course review is required.  
When the pandemic hit in March 2020, the focus across 
KSU shifted from offering high quality courses to simply 
offering courses. Suddenly, everyone needed to be online. 
Professional development shifted with the needs of faculty 
and training facilitators as they struggled alike to adapt to the 
relatively new modality of synchronous online education. 
The nearly four-month period of online-only education at the 
start of the pandemic allowed misconceptions about online 
teaching and learning to spread as digital learning experts 
scrambled to teach basics to faculty with little-to-no online 
experience. Then, in Fall 2020, as the return to campus 
began, faculty were expected to teach in various rotational 
and hybrid formats with many having had little-to-no 
training in these new modalities. This trend continued into 
Spring 2021, with a complete return to campus planned for 
Fall 2021. By this point, the combined effects of eliminating 
required instructor and course certification for online 
offerings and unsound pedagogical approaches created by 
pandemic pandemonium were beginning to manifest in 
student complaints about the quality of online education.  
The authors first present a description of the context and 
magnitude of the challenge to be addressed. The paper then 
details the project management system developed to 
facilitate the workflow of the overall process and the 
ancillaries intended to help faculty master the skills 
necessary to have all courses certified by the university’s 
deadlines. 
II. 
THE PROBLEM 
After a change in leadership in July 2021, KSU’s Office 
of the President charged the Division of Curriculum and 
Academic Innovation (CAI) with ensuring that all digital 
course content met recently updated federal guidelines and 
the University System of Georgia Board of Regents policy 
on 
accessibility 
standards 
and 
sustained 
instructor 
interaction. Each college, in turn, was asked to submit a 
review procedure for all online and hybrid courses. While 
many colleges already possessed the requested review 
procedure, the lack of required review since 2018 meant 
RCHSS was faced with creating and implementing a new 
review process in a limited window of time.  
A. The RCHSS Proposal 
The RCHSS Office of Digital Education (ODE) solicited 
input from faculty and college administrators and created 
three plans for reviewing asynchronous online, synchronous 
or hybrid online, and template courses (defined as courses 
created in entirety by faculty designers but taught by other 
course facilitators). These processes were then vetted 
through the appropriate college faculty governance channels. 
The CAI charged each college with developing and 
implementing their plans by the start of Spring 2022, which 
gave the ODE team roughly five and a half months to solicit 
feedback, adapt the KSU CQC for hybrid and template 
courses, update faculty certification trainings, and develop 
all tools (including communication and project management 
tools) needed to implement the initial two-year review cycle. 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

No new resources were provided at the university or college 
level to support this initiative.  
B. A Larger College, a Larger Problem 
The five-month implementation timeline and two-year 
review timeline were reasonable for most other colleges at 
KSU. However, RCHSS is, by far, the largest college on 
campus, with 425 faculty and 8,500 students enrolled in 
majors within the College. RCHSS is responsible for eight of 
the fourteen general education standards required for 
institutional accreditation. As shown in Figure 1, of those 
eight standards, the college offers 50 different courses that 
can be completed to fulfill the requirements, compared to 22 
courses offered by a mix of the Coles College of Business, 
the College of Science and Mathematics (CSM), and the 
College of the Arts (COTA) across the remaining six 
standards. In Fall 2021, RCHSS offered 35% of 
undergraduate course sections and 41% of graduate course 
sections, totaling 750 sections, in the online modality (Figure 
1). 
Of the eleven departments and schools in RCHSS, two 
have completely rejected the idea of template courses outside 
of use for emergency hires and two regularly use template 
courses. The remaining seven departments reserve template 
courses for adjunct or emergency use only. This practice is in 
contrast to other colleges at the university. For the most part, 
other colleges only utilize template courses or are so limited 
in size as to require one or two course builds to meet class 
section needs. Because the Radow College is focused on 
disciplines in the humanities and social sciences, RCHSS has 
dozens of sections of one course, all with unique designs, to 
allow faculty to teach to their strengths and provide their 
expertise to students. For example, many faculty teach 
American literature online, and yet each professor has a 
different specialization. When each faculty member creates 
his/her/their online course according to best practices and 
capitalizes on his/her/their area of expertise, students get the 
best instruction and experience. Additionally, bespoke course 
designs allow for continued variety in perspective and 
approach, avoiding some of the pitfalls of intellectual and 
cultural homogenization.  
The ODE team had little time to prepare for this project 
and had no formal structures or tools in place to 
accommodate a project this large. The structures and tools 
previously used needed to be adapted to accommodate a 
higher volume of course designs reviewed in a shorter 
amount of time. This article outlines the RCHSS course 
review process, how the team implemented it, where we are, 
and where we are headed. 
III. 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT TOOL: THE “BUCKET 
SYSTEM” 
It takes an average of three to five hours to review each 
course, contingent on the course content and approach. 
Based upon pre-pandemic numbers, the team had anticipated 
reviewing a total of approximately 750 courses over a two-
year period. In spring 2022, we expected 135 courses to be 
submitted for review. To date, 192 courses have been 
submitted. Projected forward, we are now anticipating 
reviewing around 1000 courses over the next two years using 
a team of two instructional designers, three faculty, and four 
student assistants.  
The most comparable project undertaken by the team was 
a review of 115 partial courses across a seven-month period, 
which was tracked in an Excel spreadsheet. At the time, our 
team consisted of one instructional designer, two faculty, and 
two senior student assistants, and all were able to assist in the 
review process.  
 
RC
COLES
CSM
KSU Undergraduate Co
Curriculum Offerings
  
Hybrid
RCHSS Undergraduate Co
Sections By Modality 
Online
Hybrid
RCHSS Graduate Course Se
By Modality 
 
Figure 1. Three charts showing the division of courses across KSU and 
within the college. 
 
For the much larger challenge now faced, we developed 
what we have christened as “Bucket System.” Our system 
was devised as an easy way to physically move items along 
in a workflow and provide more flexibility than an Excel 
spreadsheet. After reading and watching project management 
tool reviews and testimonies from other higher education 
teams [1][2], the team met and compiled a list of the features 
we would need.  
 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
Access for at least 10 people 
 
Reporting functions and the ability to connect 
files to the task 
 
Ability to assign tasks 
 
Ability to create subtasks 
 
A visual marker for where the course was in the 
review workflow.  
 
Our team also decided that we preferred a more visual 
interface, as opposed to a simple task list. Most importantly, 
all of this needed to be located in a no-cost or extremely low-
cost tool.  
Tools like Slack [3], Trello [4], and ClickUp [5] had been 
utilized by the team before but required monthly 
subscriptions for large projects. Open-source tools like 
OpenProject [6], and Focalboard [7] all had the key features 
the ODE team needed but also had annual hosting costs, 
usually upwards of $150USD. Products offered by 
ServiceNow [8], BMC [9], and IBM [10] were much more 
robust than needed for this one project, so they were not 
considered.  
The team devised a plan to build something similar to 
these systems utilizing various Microsoft applications, as the 
University had recently moved to Microsoft 365 [11]. This 
project management tool would be modeled after existing 
tools [12] but would be customized to our specific needs.  
Microsoft Planner had the tools we would need at a task-
management level (file connection, task assignment, 
reporting functions, and subtasks) and had several layout 
options. It was also integrated with Microsoft Teams—which 
would 
create 
a 
localized 
“dashboard”—and 
Power 
Automate, Microsoft’s backend automation and workflow 
application, which would be crucial in populating the 
system. Microsoft Lists had similar functions—and the 
bonus of custom metadata fields—but lacked the visual 
layout we wanted. Ultimately, the goal was to produce a 
Kanban-like system of workflow visualizations, but we did 
not have the luxury of limiting work in progress (WIP), 
required in a true Kanban system [13]. 
We had three factors to consider when developing our 
workflow [14]. First, we needed to abide by the processes 
put forth by the departments in our college. Because our 
college is so large, the RCHSS Digital Education Council 
requested that each department be allowed to submit their 
own process to us. The outcomes from this request were 
varied: seven departments decided to defer to the ODE and 
have us carry out all reviews; one department decided to do 
the same but added additional faculty support by way of a 
mentoring committee; and three departments decided to 
conduct all parts of the review, with minimal support from 
the ODE.  
Second, our undergraduate student assistants are only 
able to conduct the accessibility portion of the review, not to 
make decisions concerning content and pedagogy. One 
section of the KSU CQC is dedicated to digital accessibility. 
The review process for this section is very clinical, so it can 
be completed by students without years of instructional 
design experience.  
Third, the sheer number of courses was overwhelming to 
a team with only five people qualified to evaluate entire 
courses. Department schedulers indicated a slow return to 
pre-pandemic scheduling practices, so we estimated that we 
would need to review 135 courses across the Spring 2022 
semester. We decided to translate this process into Microsoft 
Planner. Planner utilizes columns called “buckets” and 
projects called “cards” (Figure 2). Each bucket represents a 
step in the workflow, and each card within a bucket 
represents an individual course. Thus, the “Bucket System” 
was born.  
 
 
Figure 2. Screenshot of the "Bucket System" dashboard. 
 
Within the cards, we initially utilized the tag feature to 
indicate whether ODE directors had access to the course in 
the LMS (and, thus, had the ability to add reviewers) and 
whether the course was undergoing a “recheck” or re-review. 
We ultimately added a tag to mark course reviews as 
finished because we initially lost courses that had been 
dismissed as “complete” (Figures 3 and 4). 
 
 
Figure 3. A screenshot of the tagging system the ODE utilizes within the 
bucket system. 
 
 
Figure 4. Screenshot showing how tasks become invisible once marked 
"complete." 
 
We also use the comment section to create a 
documentation trail regarding when communication had 
been sent to faculty. The team found that using the “start 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

date” feature did little to help prioritize courses, as Planner 
does not offer a “start date” option under the sorting tool. 
We instead pivoted to using the “due date” feature, which 
had the bonus of posting the date on the card. This all 
creates an easily accessible history of what courses have 
been reviewed, where they are in the process, and who has 
completed what (Figure 5). 
 
Figure 5. A course review card showing the light green “in D2L tag,” a 
completed checklist, attached documents, and comment trail. 
 
After building the process in planner, the decision was 
made to integrate the structure with Microsoft Forms, which 
would allow faculty to submit “review requests.” We 
reviewed the Certified Course Build SmartSheet developed 
by the CAI, which was designed to track courses certified 
according to quality standards and included key questions on 
our Form (Figure 6). Originally, we created one Form for all 
of RCHSS. As we tested the process, we discovered we 
needed individual Forms for all eleven departments and 
schools. This decision was made to minimize confusion, as 
we initially offered too many review-customization options 
on a single form, and to streamline the automation process. 
The automation process is as follows: a faculty member fills 
out a form, Power Automate pulls information from the 
Form to generate a Planner card in the correct bucket and 
then sends a personalized confirmation email to the faculty 
member (Figure 7).  
A key component of this process is faculty involvement. 
To initiate a review, faculty must submit their courses for 
review, request new course shells for each course review 
needed, and add the ODE directors to the new course shells. 
We wanted to streamline the process as much as possible to 
make it as simple as possible for faculty, so as not to induce 
confusion or increase their workloads. The simple form and 
automated email accomplished most of these goals. We kept 
the forms as simple as possible, included tutorials on how to 
request, copy, and add the ODE directors to the course shells 
in D2L, our learning management system; eliminated an 
additional step of communication by requesting faculty 
utilize the enrollment notification option in D2L; and added 
a layer of familiarity with personalization tools [15]. 
Ultimately, we have received positive feedback from faculty 
about how easy the process is.  
 
 
Figure 6. The first page of the Review Request Form for the Department of 
Psychological Science. 
 
Figure 7. The automated process behind the Psychological Science Request 
Form, built with Power Automate. 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

After the faculty member has added the ODE directors to 
their course shell, the formal review process begins. At the 
beginning of each week, the ODE Associate Director assigns 
courses to ODE reviewers (instructional designers and 
faculty) and student assistants depending on the courses 
available for review. Instructional designers and faculty 
prioritize courses taught by departments with their own 
review 
process, 
while 
student 
assistants 
complete 
accessibility reviews for courses that are reviewed by the 
ODE in full. The instructional designers and faculty then 
complete sections A and B of the review for the courses 
assigned to them, which require greater familiarity with 
digital accessibility standards and state and federal mandates, 
respectively. They then pass the course along to the 
department liaison/representative so the department can 
finish the rest of the review. Alternately, students complete 
section A of the review, which only requires familiarity with 
standards of digital accessibility, for the courses assigned to 
them. After the accessibility review has been completed, 
students pass their reviews on to the ODE instructional 
designers and faculty, who complete the rest of the review.  
Following the completion of the initial review, the review 
documents are sent to the faculty designer. The faculty 
designer then works to make the appropriate changes and 
consults with ODE team members (or their department 
liaisons) if they need assistance. After the appropriate 
changes have been made, the course undergoes a secondary 
review. If the course passes this review, the review 
documents will then be sent to the department chair for 
approval. If the course does not pass the review, the revision 
process begins again. This revision process may be 
completed up to two times before the course is removed 
from the queue. If it is removed from the queue, the chair 
must request reactivation and the faculty designer must 
resubmit the course to be reviewed without priority.  
Once a course is approved by the chair, the ODE Director 
submits the course to the CAI’s Certified Course Design 
SmartSheet and notifies the program coordinator, who 
updates the public-facing spreadsheet maintained by the 
ODE. As of Spring 2022, this process is set to repeat on a 
five-year cycle. The initial review cycle is based on course 
level, so all existing courses will have completed the review 
process by December 2023 and been scheduled for their next 
re-review.  
IV. 
FACULTY RESOURCES: THE COURSE REVIEW 
DASHBOARD AND SYLLABUS TEMPLATES 
The ODE decided to anticipate the needs of faculty and 
create resources to aid them in the course review process. 
The primary resource was the “Course Review Dashboard,” 
which functions as a one-stop-shop for all things related to 
course reviews, including tutorials, policies and checklist 
criteria, review request forms, and contacts. This project was 
designed to be far-reaching and creative. We knew the 
website needed to be easy to navigate and user friendly, but 
we also knew how expansive the topics and resources needed 
to be. We ultimately built eight pages hosted on the site and 
built an additional site specifically for course reviewers 
within the departments. We also completely redesigned our 
tutorial library, which hosted 115 simple technology and 
software tutorials, for a cleaner interface with a more visual 
navigation structure (Figure 8).  
 
 
Figure 8. Two screenshots showing the Tutorial and Course Review 
Dashboard websites. 
 
With a great deal of the accessibility and quality-
checklist requirements focused on course syllabi, a 
significant need for an accessible syllabus template arose. 
The need to include an ever-increasing number of policies 
and links to student success tools had placed syllabi 
templates at the forefront of academic concerns of the 
university for well over a decade. The updated federal 
guidelines and University System of Georgia Board of 
Regents policy only increased the urgency in addressing this 
need. The greatest difficulty was in “locking” the template so 
that required items could not be altered or deleted while 
keeping the remainder of the document open for editing by 
the instructor. An early attempt at an electronic solution to 
the syllabus template issue ended in a costly failed attempt to 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

partner with a professional technical company. Further 
attempts at a lockable form were abandoned.  
After consulting with the RCHSS Digital Education 
Council, the ODE found that the new emphasis on 
accessibility requirements made syllabi templates more 
desired by faculty. Again, lockability remained the greatest 
difficulty, as faculty would frequently mistakenly render 
ADA compliant syllabi inaccessible by altering certain 
document features. After many hours of research, the team 
was able to use Microsoft Word to develop a “lockable” 
template that met accreditation and accessibility standards 
but remained customizable enough for broad use. The team 
also worked with the First-Year Composition (FYC) 
program to develop two syllabi specifically for use in ENGL 
1101: Composition I and ENGL 1102: Composition II, two 
courses all students are required to complete prior to 
graduation. These templates were created with a variety of 
Developer Tools, including content controls and “lockable” 
groups, and general accessibility tools, like Styles and 
list/table structures.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
With varying requirements across the eleven schools and 
colleges that comprise the Radow College, the unexpectedly 
high number of course submissions, and the need to validate 
review practices and feedback information across reviewers, 
much fine-tuning of the Bucket System is still in progress. 
The overall system, however, is proving to be robust and 
flexible while providing consistent tracking and information 
capture.  
Because the Bucket System is built on components of 
Microsoft 365 and accessed through familiar interfaces, the 
time required to learn to use the system effectively is far 
shorter than would be the case using other software tools to 
manage the same project. Bringing new reviewers or content 
specialists online is also simplified, with no need to obtain 
additional software licenses or install additional software. It 
also bridges seamlessly across units within the College and 
across the University as needed.  
The Bucket System has been adapted across multiple 
course review efforts. Each department with their own 
review process has a system customized to their needs, 
including one built for the university-level equivalent of 
ODE. For example, the faculty member designated as the 
Hybrid Specialist in ODE is piloting an adaptation of the 
Bucket System to track and manage a grant-funded Open 
Educational Resource (OER) project. Collection of user 
feedback and its application to further refine the software is 
expected in the coming academic year. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. D. Frame, Managing Projects in Organizations: How to 
Make the Best Use of Time, Techniques, and People (3rd 
Edition), Jossey-Bass, 2003. 
[2] R. Michalak and M. D. T. Rysavy, “Managing Remote 
Projects Effectively with an Action Dashboard,” Journal of 
Library Administration, 60(7), pp. 800–811, 2020.  
[3] Slack, https://slack.com.   
[4] Trello, https://trello.com/en-US.  
[5] ClickUp, https://clickup.com. 
[6] OpenProject, https://www.openprojec.org. 
[7] Focalboard, https://www.focalboard.com. 
[8] ServiceNow, https://www.servicenow.com/products/project-
portfolio-management.html. 
[9] BMC, 
https://www3.bmcgroup.com/solutions/virtual-data-
room/difference/project-management/. 
[10] IBM, 
https://www-
50.ibm.com/partnerworld/gsd/solutiondetails.do?&solutions=
50480. 
[11] Microsoft 365, https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-
365. 
[12] S. L. Catto, & E. A Maccari, “Innovation Projects 
Management: A Systematic Literature Review.” Brazilian 
Journal of Management / Revista de Administração Da 
UFSM, 14 (4), pp. 848–863, 2021. 
[13] N. Damij and T. Damij, “An Approach to Optimizing Kanban 
Board Workflow and Shortening the Project Management 
Plan,” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 
forthcoming, doi: 10.1109/TEM.2021.3120984, 2021. 
[14] Project Management Institute,  A Guide to the Project 
Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide–Sixth 
Edition, Project Management Institute, 2017.   
[15] R. V. Waters & S. A. Ahmed, “Beyond the Spreadsheets: 
Quality Project Management,” Performance Improvement, 59 
(10), pp. 16–29, 2020.  
 
 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

