Finding a Balance for Success: 
Student Success Innovations vs. Faculty Workload Concerns 
Tamara Powell, Julie R. Newell, Stephen Bartlett, Sam Lee, Brayden Milam, Lauren Snider 
Radow College of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Kennesaw State University  
Kennesaw, GA, USA 
email: tpowel25@kennesaw.edu, jnewell2@kennesaw.edu, sbartlet@kennesaw.edu, 
slee229@students.kennesaw.edu, bmilam3@students.kennesaw.edu, lsnider1@students.kennesaw.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Researchers at a public (state funded) institution in 
the United States seek to increase student success rates in 
online courses by encouraging faculty implementation of 
research-based strategies in their online courses without 
significantly increasing faculty workloads. The researchers 
created a program that provided short, research-based, 
student-success strategy segments to faculty already enrolled in 
faculty development. These teaching tools were largely based 
on pedagogical research and methods long understood within 
traditional education disciplines, but not as obviously applied 
to online course delivery. In this sense, the professional 
development modules are innovations to traditional online 
training. After the training program, the researchers analyzed 
faculty response to the training to improve design principles 
and delivery for future development of eLearning materials. 
While the impact of the innovations developed in this student 
success endeavor are still largely to be determined, preliminary 
results indicate that faculty find the professional development 
modules helpful and will be implementing them in their 
courses.  
Keywords-student success rates; innovation; feedback; open 
educational resources; training transfer; social media 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This research project aims to increase student success in 
online courses offered in the Radow College of Humanities 
and Social Sciences at Kennesaw State University while at 
the same time being mindful of faculty workload and lack of 
time for faculty development and course redesign. The bulk 
of the paper describes phase one of the project, which was 
undertaken in spring 2021. Increasing student success 
[measured by decreases in DFWI (Drop, Fail, Withdraw, 
Incomplete) rates] is not only a moral imperative, it is also 
financially incentivized. The researchers first present the 
description of phase one of the project and the initial results 
from participating faculty. The paper concludes with 
descriptions of phases two and three, which will be 
undertaken in summer and fall of 2021.  
II. 
OVERVIEW AND RATIONALE 
 In the United States, education is supported financially 
by a complicated combination of federal and state funding. 
In fact, state by state comparisons reveal huge differences in 
how much a state contributes to its higher education coffers. 
Government funding of higher education has dropped 
substantially in recent decades [1]. For example, overall, 
higher education state funding per student dropped 27% 
from 2000-2014. State by state, the numbers vary widely. 
The state of Michigan cut funding by 53% overall during 
that time while North Dakota increased funding by 31%. Our 
own state of Georgia cut funding by 17% [2].  
When cuts are substantial, the difference is made up in 
budget cuts at the institutional level (such as reduction in 
library holdings and elimination of staff and programs) and 
tuition increases, among other strategies. But, in the United 
States’ political system, the same politicians who strive to 
cut funding to education also strive to claim that they keep 
taxes and other expenses low. Therefore, the state rarely 
allows public (that is, state funded) institutions to raise 
tuition to make up for these budget cuts.  
With funding so tight, any opportunity to gain additional 
budget money to support faculty and students is highly 
prized, and competition is fierce if such opportunities are 
announced. Opportunity sometimes comes in the form of 
“student success dollars,” which is funding that can be 
awarded for initiatives with the intent of bolstering student 
success. In this case, student success is defined as decreased 
DFWI and increased retention (the student stays in individual 
courses and in the university as a whole), progression (the 
student progresses through a degree program), and 
graduation (within a proscribed number of years). This 
definition is often abbreviated as RPG (Retention, 
Progression, and Graduation). While student success dollars 
are not tied directly to RPG, our Executive Director for 
Academic & Fiscal Operations at Kennesaw State 
University, Dr. Michael Rothlisberger, explained, “Student 
success dollars are a systemic example of tying resources to 
strategy” because meeting RPG targets is seen as “a moral 
imperative” [3]. 
In order to compete for these highly prized student 
success dollars, our college wants to stand ready with 
research-based support to facilitate faculty implementation of 
techniques that foster student success. But just as there is a 
balancing act that goes along with cutting state funding to 
higher education and also refusing to allow tuition to raise, 
so there is also a balancing act with innovating to improve 
student success and being mindful of innovations that might 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-873-0
eLmL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

challenge academic freedom or increase already strained 
faculty workloads. 
III. 
STUDENT SUCCESS INNOVATIONS PROJECT 
RCHSS (Radow College of Humanities and Social 
Sciences) is one of 11 colleges at Kennesaw State 
University. The RCHSS ODE (Office of Digital Education) 
offers an award winning “Build a Web Course Workshop” to 
faculty to support them in creating and teaching online 
courses using research-based best practices. In preparing to 
apply for student success funding, college administrators 
recently looked at the DFWI rates of online courses offered 
pre-pandemic.  Surprisingly, it was determined that there was 
no significant difference in DFWI rates between classes 
where faculty had been trained to teach online using best 
practices versus online courses created and taught by faculty 
who had not received training.  
Our administration theorized the lack of discernable 
difference may stem from that fact that the ODE delivers 
training focused on best practices in online and hybrid 
teaching and not specifically on student success. That is, the 
courses created by trained faculty may have been better 
designed because the faculty who created and taught them 
had been trained in research-based best practices, but the 
courses may not have specifically implemented student 
success strategies. 
IV. 
PROBLEM, CONSIDERATIONS, RESEARCH PROJECT 
Our Build a Web Course training program is peppered 
with student-success research from well-known experts like 
Saundra McGuire, Jessamyn Neuhaus, Flower Darby, Anya 
Kamenetz, Richard Arum and Josipa Roksa, which we 
couple with advice and examples of successful strategies 
employed by our own faculty.  However, an informal survey 
of former workshop participants found that none of them 
remembered the workshop topics that addressed student 
success in online courses. 
A. The Problem 
We realized that we needed a more focused strategy to 
supply faculty with information regarding implementing 
strategies for student success in their own online courses. But 
we also realized the need to emphasize student success 
information within the existing training while adding 
minimal time and work for the faculty participants. 
B. Considerations 
We already had a wealth of student success strategies in 
the workshop. However, the information was provided along 
with information on research-based best practices in course 
design and technology tutorials to create course materials. 
Student success strategy information was not pulled out and 
highlighted 
or 
emphasized 
for 
faculty 
participants. 
Especially for faculty new to online teaching, we could see 
how workshop participants would prioritize “how do I create 
the class,” “how do I make it accessible to students who use 
screen readers or who need captioning,” and “what software 
do I use to create course materials” over “how do I strategize 
for student success.” The faculty participants had finite time 
and energy to complete the training and create the course. 
But could we also call attention to student success strategies 
in hopes of encouraging faculty participants to add a few of 
those to their courses, as well?  
C. Research Project 
As mentioned earlier, the chief impetus of this research 
was to position the college to be ready to apply for and 
receive student success funding. Beyond that, we wanted to 
be able to demonstrate that we had identified a way to 
increase and support student success. And of course, the 
heart of our motivation was to assist our students in 
achieving their academic goals.  
The researchers designed a three-phase research project. 
Phase 1 (ongoing) involves creating our student success 
content, sharing it with faculty, and following up with a 
survey to measure their intent to adopt student success 
strategies into their courses. In Phase 2, we will survey 
faculty who have taught their new courses to determine why 
they did or did not implement student success strategies. For 
those who have adopted student success strategies, we will 
seek additional feedback on the impact of adoption on their 
time and effort and their perceptions of the impact of the 
strategies on student success in their courses. In Phase 3, we 
will survey students in courses where student success 
strategies have been implemented to better understand 
student perceptions of the strategies and their utility. 
To begin Phase 1, the researchers did three things: 1) 
pulled the research-based, student-success content out of the 
faculty training modules and put it in separate pieces in the 
training called Student Success Minutes. 2) Added an 
activity to each of the Student Success Minutes to support 
the faculty in remembering the content. 3) Surveyed faculty 
at the end of the training to see if they recall and plan to use 
the Student Success Minutes information (intent to transfer) 
[4]. The researchers decided that each Student Success 
Minutes segment had to be less than 10 minutes, including 
the activity, so as not to overburden the faculty with more 
training content.  In this initial, pilot phase of the project, our 
goals were to create the segments and present them to the 
faculty participating in the spring 2021 “Build a Web Course 
Workshop” and then survey faculty participants, as described 
above, regarding intent to transfer. We started with a small 
number of faculty participants (8). Because of low faculty 
enrollments, in this first phase of the project we were able to 
gather little more than a handful of initial reactions.  
Phase 1 will be continued by developing additional topics 
and offering the Student Success Minutes in “Build a Web 
Course” workshops in summer and fall 2021. In addition, a 
second, shorter, asynchronous training using the Student 
Success Minutes segments is being created. This training 
targets faculty who have completed the “Build a Web 
Course” Workshop previously but did not receive the 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-873-0
eLmL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

redesigned content on research-based strategies for student 
success. The redesigned training will take participants less 
than two hours to complete. It will be asynchronous and at 
participants’ own pace. Currently, other workshops focusing 
on student success strategies at the institution take more time 
and/or lack the flexibility and interaction of our Student 
Success Minutes. The redesigned training and the 
accompanying survey of intent to transfer will be available 
during the second half of summer 2021. 
During academic year 2021-2022, the researchers plan to 
move on to the additional phases in the project. In Phase 2, 
we would ask for volunteers from the workshop completers 
who would put at least one student success strategy from the 
workshop in their course. In Phase 3, we would survey 
students in the course to see if they noticed the strategy and 
if they found it to be helpful. While measuring DWFI rates 
might also be helpful, the researchers are cognizant that 
students drop courses for many reasons that may have 
nothing to do with the professor or the course content. Also, 
DWFI rates can be used against professors who might feel 
targeted by attention to such information. For this reason, we 
chose not to measure DWFI rates from participants in this 
research. At the end of the project, we will gather aggregate 
data on DWFI rates to see if the project had an impact on the 
college DWFI rates as a whole. 
After the three phases of the project, the researchers plan 
to use the information gathered to assess whether 
highlighting 
student 
success 
strategies 
in 
faculty 
development training can encourage faculty to implement 
these strategies. And, if subsequently, that implementation 
leads to increases in student success and reduction in DWFI 
rates. If we find we have a successful strategy, we will be 
able to use this information to better position our college to 
receive student success funding when future opportunities 
arise.  
V. 
RESEARCH-BASED MODULES ON STUDENT SUCCESS 
In the first phase of this project, the research team created 
six, Student Success Minutes segments. This section will 
describe each segment, provide the research it is based on, 
and describe the activity provided with it and faculty 
participant results, if available.  
A. Student Success Minutes 1: Scaffolding 
This student success minutes segment was based on the 
work of Flower Darby (Figure 1). Darby explains scaffolding 
through her experience teaching jazz dance. She writes,  
[B]eginning dancers get frustrated and demotivated 
if I constantly throw new things at them. Better to 
practice one new step for a while, get feedback 
from me on their progress, and build confidence 
and self-efficacy before introducing a slightly more 
complex step or one that requires greater skill” [5 p. 
27].  
Darby extrapolates this idea to other academic realms. 
While scaffolding in college classes is not a brand-new idea, 
Darby provides an excellent explanation and rationale for the 
practice. For example, in a research paper assignment, 
instead of just assigning a 10-page research essay, ask 
students to turn in a topic early in the course. A few weeks 
later, ask students to turn in an annotated bibliography with a 
tentative thesis. And two weeks before the paper is due, ask 
students to turn in (or share on a discussion board) a 
PowerPoint with the title and thesis on slide 1 and the topic 
sentence and paragraph supporting points for each paragraph 
in the paper. Of course, the faculty member would be 
expected to provide timely and helpful feedback on each 
phase before the next phase is due.  
 
Figure 1.  Student Success Minutes 1:a video explaining Flower Darby’s 
approach to scaffolding.  
To introduce (or remind) faculty of this student success 
strategy, in a three-minute video, Dr. Tamara Powell, 
Director of the RCHSS ODE, explained the concept of 
scaffolding and asked participants to share a reflection on 
when they might use the strategy to support student success 
in a class. In the reflection assignment, 100% of faculty 
participants indicated that they already used scaffolding 
strategies in their courses to some degree.  
B. Student Success Minutes 2: GroupMe 
The second student success minutes segment was based 
on a need within the institution. At Kennesaw State 
University, student culture results in the creation of a 
GroupMe (Figure 2) for each class in which students are 
enrolled—bypassing the professor [6]. GroupMe is a social 
media application that allows a group to chat via mobile app 
or website without exchanging personal information. On the 
one hand, GroupMe is excellent for creating community and 
support in an online course. On the other hand, some 
students with the best intentions have been tempted to use 
GroupMe to commit breaches of academic integrity.  
In response to these problems, Mr. Sam Lee, a student at 
Kennesaw State University as well as a teaching assistant in 
the Spanish and French programs and an assistant 
instructional designer in the RCHSS ODE, created an 
interactive presentation using Articulate Storyline 360. The 
presentation walked faculty participants through an 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-873-0
eLmL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

overview of GroupMe and provided suggestions to faculty 
regarding how to minimize student cheating with it and how 
to use it with students to support student success [5, p. 80].  
 
Figure 2.  Student Success Minutes 2: a short, self-paced, interactive 
presentation on the social media tool GroupMe.  
This presentation concluded with a short quiz to support 
comprehension of the main ideas. Faculty participants were 
allowed to attempt the quiz multiple times, and all faculty 
participants scored 100% on their final attempts.  
C. Student Success Minutes 3: Open Educational 
Resources and Creative Commons 
In the past five years, a great deal of research has been 
done on the impact of OERs (Open Educational Resources), 
or no-cost or low-cost course materials, upon student 
success efforts. In the United States, textbook prices have 
risen astronomically. In the last 10 years, the “average cost 
of college textbooks has risen four times faster than the rate 
of inflation,” and “65 percent of students . . . skip buying 
required texts” to save money or simply because they cannot 
afford them [7]. As an alternative to expensive textbooks, 
many faculty members turn to OERs. Research into OERs 
has shown that OERs increase student participation, 
satisfaction, learning, retention, and course and program 
completion. They reduce student debt not only by lowering 
textbook costs in individual classes, but also by allowing 
students to take more courses in a term, thereby graduating 
more quickly and accruing less student loan debt [8].  
Ms. Tiffani (Reardon) Tijerina (Figure 3), the Program 
Director for the Affordable Learning Georgia initiative, 
created a Student Success Minutes segment on OERs for 
this project. In the two minute and 37 second video, Ms. 
Tijerina defines open educational resources and explains 
their benefits as well as Creative Commons licensing. The 
Creative Commons licensing explanation is provided to 
support understanding of the types of resources that can be 
used as OERs in classes.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Student Success Minutes 3: a short video and quiz on Open 
Educational Resources. 
Ms. Tijerina’s student success minutes segment 
concludes with an ungraded self-assessment on the terms 
and concepts presented in the segment and then a graded 
quiz on the same terms and concepts. Faculty participants 
were invited to practice with the ungraded self-assessment 
as much as desired before taking the graded quiz on the 
same information. Every faculty participant scored 100% on 
the graded quiz. Ungraded self-assessments [9] will be the 
topic of a future student success minutes segment.  
D. Student Success Minutes 4: The Quick Write 
Dr. Saundra McGuire recommends a reflection activity 
as part of a class to engage students and enhance self-esteem 
[10, p. 10]. It is hard to imagine that something so simple to 
implement can be such a powerful tool for student success. 
Mr. Stephen Bartlett, Associate Director of the ODE, 
created a short video on a type of reflection assignment 
called “The Quick Write” (figure 4). McGuire uses the 
Quick Write as a confidence booster. She asks students to 
remember a thing they learned that was hard and recall how 
they learned it [10, p.84]. Mr. Bartlett also recommends 
using it as a reflection assignment to help cement 
information students have learned in a class period and to 
“check in” on students regarding to their progress in the 
class.  
 
Figure 4.  Student Success Minutes 4: a short video on the power of 
reflection. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-873-0
eLmL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Asking students to take just one to three minutes to write 
about an aspect of the material that was just presented is a 
great way to support learning and engagement, and it also 
allows the professor to see whether students are paying 
attention or “getting the material” in an online class.  
The reflection assignments, serving as low-stakes or no-
stakes assignments in this case, help reduce stress and 
support student learning [5, p. 9] [11, p. 69]. In the faculty 
development training, this segment ended with a Quick 
Write activity. Faculty participants were asked, “Think for 
two minutes and write for three minutes. Please write at 
least two sentences. What is the most important outcome 
that you want students to achieve in your course, and how 
might quick writes help students toward this goal?” While 
each faculty participant responded differently, the key 
takeaway was that each professor wanted students to be able 
to think critically, and the professor believed the Quick 
Write assignment fostered that goal.  
E. Student Success Minutes 5: Weekly Modules 
Universal Design for Learning Theory states that 
consistency is a key component for supporting increased 
success as it lightens cognitive load, freeing up more time 
and mental energy to assist the student in learning the course 
content [12].  It is important to be consistent in scheduling 
expectations for students in online courses. Students are used 
to organizing their college schedules by weeks in face-to-
face classes, and it makes sense to use that structure in online 
courses as well. It also makes sense to create folders, 
organized by weeks, with everything a student needs in that 
folder to complete that week of class.  
When faculty instead create modules of random lengths 
(module 1 is three weeks, module 2 is four days, module 3 is 
seven weeks, etc.), students who already struggle with time 
management can suffer severely. When faculty create overly 
long modules (one 16-week course with only four, four-
week-long modules), students who wait until the last minute 
find out four weeks into the course that they have fallen too 
far behind to succeed. Student Success Minutes 5: Weekly 
Modules (Figure 5) provides the rationale for organizing the 
online course in a weekly fashion and examples of why it is 
the easiest way to support student success in an online 
course. 
 
Figure 5.  Student Success Minutes 5: a short video on weekly modules.  
Weekly organization of online classes supports student 
success by providing consistency, reducing cognitive load, 
and helping students to organize their time [13]. This 
segment, created by Dr. Tamara Powell, ended with a quiz 
over the material presented in the short (two minutes and 38 
seconds) video. All faculty participants scored 100% on the 
quiz.  
F. Student Success Minutes 6: Timely and Effective 
Feedback 
A great deal of research on student success supports not 
only feedback, but timely and effective feedback [5, p. 44, p. 
107], [11, p. 70]. For our last student success minutes 
segment in this pilot, Mr. Sam Lee created a website that 
included an interactive presentation on the importance of 
timely and effective feedback. As Darby points out, “It’s 
easy for online students to feel isolated and unsupported” [5, 
p. 44]. Feedback, even small notes about low or no stakes 
assignments, can motivate students to invest more time in the 
course. Such feedback can also alert students that they are 
not doing enough to succeed in the class—or are on the 
wrong track—long before they fail a high stakes assignment. 
In this way, timely and effective feedback promotes student 
success.  
As the reader may remember, this project was inspired 
partly as a way to provide student success strategies to 
faculty who were already strapped for time. And as we know 
very well, suggesting faculty take time to provide more 
feedback is not a timesaver. However, in the age of 
technology, faculty can use the learning management system 
to “work smarter, not harder.”  
Solutions that support student success and reduce faculty 
workload are not always possible, but in this case, the 
student success strategy was able to support both positive 
outcomes.  
 
Figure 6.  Student Success Minutes 6: a website with interactive exercises 
and a quiz that provide information about the importance of timely and 
effective feedback.  
This module included the interactive presentation, 
mentioned above, along with a practice quiz that allowed 
participants to check their understanding of the material. 
After the practice quiz, participants took a graded quiz with 
the same questions. The quiz was worth 20 points, total, and 
the average grade was 75%. This information suggests that 
the presentation on timely and effective feedback needs 
adjustment to increase participant retention of the 
information. In the next offering of the workshop, this 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-873-0
eLmL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

segment will include more engaging activities to support 
active learning. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The summaries of each segment show that faculty 
participants did engage with the materials—although they 
were less successful with the material presented in module 6. 
At the time of this writing, four faculty members had 
completed the survey regarding intent to transfer. (The 
survey is anonymous.) The faculty members did remember 
all of the Student Success Minutes and liked segments 2, 5, 
and 6 (GroupMe, weekly modules, and feedback) the best. 
All faculty members indicated that they will implement at 
least one of the strategies in the course they are building. 
When asked if these segments should be included in future 
trainings, three of the respondents answered “yes.” The 
fourth observed “It would depend on that person's level of 
familiarity with the pedagogy.” Even respondents with 
previous training made comments such as “This was good--
well put-together. Thanks! It added a few small changes that 
I think will have big effects to my class, so it was worth the 
time.” 
Two additional segments are planned-- the power of 
ungraded self-assessments and engaging discussions--for a 
total of eight. RCHSS ODE will offer subsequent trainings 
and collect more data.  Additionally, the segments will be 
separated out and offered as an online, asynchronous faculty 
training on student success, and participants will be surveyed 
in those trainings as well. Finally, in the fall 2021, two 
faculty have offered to incorporate at least one strategy in 
classes and to survey students regarding responses to the 
innovation. Additionally, we hope to recruit workshop 
participants to do the same and share survey results.  
Our goal is to have a set of strategies all faculty can 
easily incorporate into their courses to support student 
success and gather data showing positive results so that we 
can have strong, research-based arguments in our funding 
proposals that increase our chances of earning student 
success funding. Preliminary results indicate that faculty find 
the Student Success Minutes helpful and will be 
implementing them in their courses. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Special thanks to Ms. Tiffani (Reardon) Tijerina, 
Program Manager for Affordable Learning Georgia, for her 
creation of the OER and Creative Commons Student Success 
Minutes for this project.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Pew, “Two decades of change in federal and state higher 
education 
funding: 
Recent 
trends 
across 
levels 
of 
government.” 
October 
15, 
2019. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/issue-
briefs/2019/10/two-decades-of-change-in-federal-and-state-
higher-education-funding 2021.06.10. 
[2] S. Baum and M. Johnson, “Financing public higher education: 
the evolution of state funding,” Research Report. The Urban 
Institute. 
pp. 
1-24, 
2015. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.urban.org/research/publication/financing-public-
higher-education-evolution-state-funding/view/full_report 
2021.06.10. 
[3] M. Rothlisberger. Executive Director for Academic & Fiscal 
Operations at Kennesaw State University. Personal Interview, 
2021.05.02.  
[4] K. Hye-Sook and S. Yu. “Structural relationship among 
environment, motivation, engagement and transfer of training 
of teachers in distance education.” KEDI Journal of 
Educational Policy, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 221–245, Dec. 2020, 
doi:10.22804/kjep.2020.17.2.004. 
[5] F. Darby. Small Teaching Online. San Francisco: John Wiley 
and Sons, 2019.  
[6] GroupMe. https://groupme.com/ 2021.06.10. 
[7] K. Kristoff, “What’s behind the soaring cost of college 
textbooks,” Moneywatch. CBSNews. January 26, 2018. 
https://www.cbsnews.com/news/whats-behind-the-soaring-
cost-of-college-textbooks 2021.06.10. 
[8] N. B. Colvard, C. E. Watson, and H. Park. “The impact of 
open educational resources on various student success 
metrics.” International Journal of Teaching and Learning in 
Higher Education, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 262-276, 2018. 
Available 
from: 
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1184998.pdf 2021.06.10. 
[9] J. Eustace and P. Pathak. “Retrieval Practice, Enhancing 
Learning in Electrical Science,” Proceedings of the 11th 
International Conference on Computer Supported Education 
(CSEDU 
2019), 
vol. 
1, 
pp. 
262-270, 
May 
2019, 
doi:10.5220/0007674102620270. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/332858972_Retriev
al_Practice_Enhancing_Learning_in_Electrical_Science 
2021.06.10. 
[10] S. McGuire. Teach Students How to Learn: Strategies You 
Can Incorporate Into Any Course to Improve Stuent 
Metacognition, Study Skills, and Motivation. Sterling, VA: 
Stylus, 2015.  
[11] J. Neuhaus. Geeky Pedagogy. Morgantown, WV; West 
Virginia UP, 2019.  
[12] S. Johnson. “Design, consistency, access.” Online Course 
Development 
Resources. 
Vanderbilt 
University. 
https://www.vanderbilt.edu/cdr/module1/design-consistency-
and-access/ 2021.05.10. 
S. Negash and T. Powell. "What if We Put Best Practices into 
Practice?: A Report on Course Design Beyond Quality 
Matters,” Proceedings, Learner Conference (2013) University 
of 
the 
Aegean. 
Rhodes, 
Greece. 
Available 
from: 
https://radow.kennesaw.edu/ode/docs/BestPractices.Powell.N
egash.2013.doc 2021.06.10. 
 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-873-0
eLmL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

