Remote Working - The Webseries: Training Meets People Caring and the 
Liberating Power of Laughter 
Elena Messore 
Instructional Design and Digital Course Devepolment Area 
Piazza Copernico s.r.l 
Rome, Italy 
email: emessore@pcopernico.it  
 
 
Abstract— Adult motivation is the main issue about 
engagement, and in the recent pandemic it has been specially 
under surveillance in companies that have had to reorganize 
into remote working. People caring has rapidly become a 
strategic issue for Human Resources management, which used 
tools and training language to support organizational 
transformation, to engage people, to spread and promote the 
corporate culture even in remote working contexts, to 
recognize individual contribution and to support a sense of 
belonging. Training, therefore, even in phases of organizational 
change and transition, is a lever not only for learning, but also 
for managing people. The training experience presented in this 
paper regards best practices about WFH (Working From 
Home) in Sorgenia s.p.a. (Italian energy company) and 
highlights this double level of training objectives on learning 
and people caring. The adoption of a training approach 
oriented to known situations, practical contents and possible 
solutions, humorous video realization, characterized the 
illustrated didactic experience. Participants’ engagement 
passes through the levers of familiarity of the situations (and 
recognition of possible or already known problems), 
accessibility of the solutions provided in a light and ironic way 
enabling individual resources. Engagement is promoted by a 
serial format (the web-series), which is periodically released 
and thought a humorous language. It is also interesting that 
engagement was pursued through active participation in the 
video production process to maximize the familiarity of the 
situations also through the recognizability of places and 
colleagues.  
Keywords-Engagement; humorous video-learning; web-
series; people caring. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Andragogical studies always tried to identify what 
influences adults' motivation to learn and what encourages 
greater engagement in training courses. There are two initial 
strands, one dating back to Thorndike [96] and inaugurated 
by the book "Adult Learning", in which it was 
experimentally demonstrated that adults are capable of 
learning but do it differently from children; and the other 
from 1926, with "The Meaning of Adult Learning" by 
Lindeman [58], that dealt in greater depth with how adults 
learn. 
In 
addition, 
many 
contributions 
are 
from 
psychotherapy (Freud and the subsequent), psychiatry, 
clinical psychologists and humanists, such as Maslow [61], 
who emphasized the role of a sense of security in human 
growth, and Rogers [88] who talked about learner-centered 
teaching in the same way that therapy focuses on the patient.  
Training design is based on adult learning principles both 
to create an entire course or a single training session 
(synchronous or asynchronous), to be engaging, effective 
and memorable for those who participate. It is well 
established that adults first and foremost need to know why 
they need to learn something new, the benefits they might 
gain from learning and the negative consequences of not 
learning. Adults also need their self-concept to be respected, 
to feel autonomous regarding the content to be learned.  
Adults, after all, “are the experiences they had”: they feel 
ignored or undervalued if their past experiences are not 
considered. Good training must therefore start from real 
experiences, accompany analysis and understanding, and use 
them as a starting point for improving future experiences. 
Adults are motivated to engage in training if what they are 
taught actually improves their ability to deal with tasks and 
situations in every day and working life. They ask and want 
the answer to the question: will what they learn really be 
useful to them? In line with the andragogical model, the role 
of the learner is therefore central: adults must become active 
participants in the process, supporting the trainer in the 
implementation of the whole activity, clearly in various 
forms, as summarized and rationalized in the 1980s by 
Knowles [54]. Bruner [8] distinguished between expositional 
and hypothetical modes of teaching: in the former, the 
teacher decides and exposes the contents and the student 
listens, while in the latter, teacher and student cooperate and 
the participant is not just a mere listener but a protagonist in 
the formulation of the contents. These concepts are all 
consistent 
with 
Knowles' 
andragogical 
model 
[54]. 
Andragogic theories and models on the value of engagement 
in learning have their roots unquestionably in pedagogical 
studies. Consistent with the andragogic approach, in Kolb's 
theory of Experiential Learning [56] we find not only the 
reference to the studies of Dewey, Piaget and Lewin but also 
the central role of concrete experience and reflective 
observation in the learning process. Experiential learning is a 
process in which knowledge occurs through observation and 
transformation of experience, i.e., not through the passive 
acquisition of notions, concepts and relationships. Kolb [56] 
picks up on Dewey's [34] "experience-reflection-learning" 
scheme, which highlights how the meeting point between 
personal development and education is fundamental. 
According to Piaget too, knowledge does not come from 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

perception but from action and interaction with the 
environment: a process of adaptation that oscillates between 
assimilation and accommodation. Piaget [78] also talked 
about learning as a process: the knowledge path is 
fundamental, not just the achieved result. All learning is re-
learning and constantly linking new learning to previous 
experiences. Experience and experimentation are two key 
words of training for Kolb [56]. It is also correct to highlight 
the "experiential approach in groups" in this analysis. 
According to Lewin [57] there is a relationship between 
group dynamics and the experiential approach. The group is 
unity, totality, dynamic reality: single person action modifies 
the group and vice versa. Despite its dynamism, the group 
will always tend towards balance between forces that tend 
towards disintegration. The group facilitates the integration 
of theory and practice: new learning emerges from reflection 
between the group's experience and theory. From the 
reflection on group dynamics, comes the interest in the value 
that the sense of belonging has in the engagement on 
learning paths. This view origin stems, on the one hand, from 
the deepening of positive parenting and, on the other, from 
modern approaches to learning design and gentle leadership. 
Although the concept of discipline is conceived with a view 
to raising responsible, independent and collaborative 
children, in families and schools, with respect and kindness, 
we have found in the concept of a sense of belonging 
touched on several times by the theoretical approach, a 
further confirmation of how fundamental it is, even in adults, 
to engage in participation, learning, sharing, availability, 
openness. "The primary goal of a child is: I just want to 
belong". "The child who needs love is very often the one 
who behaves in the least loving way". "An encouraged child 
does not need to behave badly". "Children behave better 
when they feel better". Trying to substitute the word child, in 
these sentences from J. Nelsen's text [74], it becomes evident 
that leveraging the sense of belonging increases engagement 
in training courses, in line with the main techniques for 
attracting attention and flipped classroom considerations. In 
his book "Happiness: a hypothesis", Haidt [47] talks about 
the human brain as an elephant and its driver. The driver is 
conscious, controlled thinking. The elephant is everything 
else and the opposite. It is gut feelings, reactions, emotions, 
visceral intuitions that make up a large part of the automatic 
system. The driver part of the brain is the rational part, then. 
The elephant wants, but the driver tends to curb the desire. 
However, if the elephant is not involved, the adult is not 
attracted, motivated, engaged. And elephants like stories, 
they like to feel like heroes of the journey, they favor the 
urgent, they are attracted by emotional resonance, by 
unexpected rewards, surprises, interesting questions, by 
collaboration and social proof, not always but sometimes by 
competition, if used sparingly. By play, by beauty, by fun. 
The project presented in this work rise in response to the 
specific need expressed by the company Sorgenia Spa, to 
train its staff on the good practices to be followed to live the 
remote working in an effective, efficient and stress-free way 
by the development of the training proposal "Remote 
working- The Webseries" (during the Covid-19 pandemic).  
In the development of the training proposal "Remote 
working - The Webseries", it was important to experiment 
how the different dimensions touched upon in the 
andragogical approaches, combined with the enhancement of 
the sense of belonging, are fundamental to raising the level 
of engagement in training initiatives. This article recounts an 
experience and is structured as follows: in section I the 
theoretical context, in section II the need and the 
methodological response with related drivers, in section III 
the subject matter of the training, in section IV the work 
phases and the professionals involved, in section V the 
elements of transferability of the project, finally in section VI 
the insights gathered for future experiences. 
II. 
TRAINING PROPOSAL "SMARTWORKING”:  
TRAINING WITH THE WEB SERIES MEETS PEOPLE CARING AND 
INCREASES ENGAGEMENT 
The training proposal "Remote working- The Webseries" 
addressed to all the staff of Sorgenia Spa (Italian energy 
company) during the Covid 19 pandemic and was motivated 
from the express desire and concern of the company to 
support its employees in the new working methods 
introduced by remote working. 
A. Format 
The Sorgenia staff were not only the recipients of the 
training intervention, but they actively participated as actors. 
This choice helped to strengthen engagement and 
identification, leveraging the need to belong, even stronger in 
a period of forced "distancing". Remote working- The 
Webseries is built on the stories of a small number of 
characters, in a familiar and ordinary environment, a block of 
flats revolutionized by the new rules generated by remote 
working. The protagonists are four condominium families, 
chosen with great attention to the values of diversity and 
inclusion. The web series, made up of nine episodes, winks 
at some typical situations of working life in remote working, 
touching on critical aspects but also on their inner value. It 
thus stages absurd, comical and yet decidedly realistic 
situations. And there is no lack of small "homages" to the TV 
series of the moment. 
 
First episode is available at 
 
https://vimeo.com/534372808/05c5b0b645  
 
 
Figure 1.  Example of a of one episode. 
A short downloadable infographic (Figure 1) at the end 
of each episode proposes a recap of good practices, as a 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

memo to keep handy to live your "connected" life with 
balance. It contains a few instructions to work better and 
smart safeguarding people's wellbeing, work-life balance, 
but also productivity, and narrated in a "typically Sorgenia" 
language that every employee could relate to. With the 
pandemic and the spread of remote working, the way 
companies communicate with their employees and the way 
they communicate with each other has also been 
transformed. The values of sharing and communication are a 
fundamental component of this new productivity paradigms, 
because they keep people together and allow them to 
overcome critical issues simply through dialogue.  Sorgenia, 
a highly innovative company that is attentive to people's 
wellbeing, is a forerunner in this sense, because it believes 
and feels strongly that people's wellbeing is a value that 
affects motivation and productivity, helping to improve 
every aspect of the business. For Sorgenia, in line with the 
values it has in common with Piazza Copernico, taking care 
of its employees and their wellbeing passes through a clear 
trajectory, which the webseries wanted to follow to become a 
symbol of a culture, a way of thinking, a way of being and 
understanding the company. In addition to the classic 
incentives for workers, such as benefits of any kind and 
economic rewards that have a limited and temporary 
influence on motivation, there is a whole series of activities 
that can be introduced by companies to take care of their 
employees and their well-being, to make them feel a 
fundamental part of the company: 
• 
offer trust, flexibility, autonomy; involve people: the 
more the employee is involved in company dynamics, 
the more productive he/she is.  
• 
spreading the company culture by training management 
first, so that they lead by example. 
• 
involve people in work strategies and objectives. 
• 
build loyalty by acting on the sense of belonging, to 
make people feel part of the company and its 
development. 
• 
improving communications, spreading and acting on 
the culture of sharing. 
B. Chosen method drivers 
Three drivers guided our methodological approach (Figure 
2):  
 
Figure 2.  Method drivers 
VIDEO EXPERIENCE: watching videos, as well as 
creating videos, is now part of everyone's experience. The 
society that has become increasingly audiovisual (Feierabend 
and Rathgeb, 2009) [36] and increasingly mobile (James, 
2016) [52]. Smartphone itself is also increasingly a tool 
aimed at learning (Giannakos, Jaccheri and Krogstie, 2014) 
[44]. Video as an educational tool has great potential: it 
involves simultaneously several senses, is direct, immediate, 
achieves direct and emotional communication. Educational 
sciences 
talk 
about 
Kirkpatrick's 
so-called 
'picture 
superiority effect' [53], referring to the greater likelihood that 
pictures 
have 
of 
being 
remembered 
than 
words. 
Neuroscience support the effectiveness of visual experience: 
about half of the resources committed by the brain at any 
given time are devoted to sight, according to Medina [63]. 
The effectiveness of video-based interventions in training 
is certain: video integrates and supports, through the visual 
dimension, practical and direct observation, the teaching-
learning of good practices otherwise explained only verbally 
(Santagata, Zannoni & Stigler [92]). Video is valuable in 
modelling practices (Santagata & Guarino, [93]) and 
contributes to the development of a specific professional 
language (Minaříková, Janík, Píšová & Kostková, [67]); 
video promotes general and personal reflection - in the case 
of self-analysis on didactics, if we think for example of the 
practice of micro-teaching (van Es & Sherin, [107]); and is 
able to focus students' attention (Franke et al, [39]; 
Santagata, Zannoni & Stigler, [92]; van Es & Sherin, [108]). 
Video supports learning (Chambel, Zahn, and Finke, [19]): 
the reconstruction of real experiences, of the high degree of 
authenticity and realism, of the visualization of dynamic 
processes, which cannot be observed live (difficult to 
reproduce, dangerous, expensive) or which are difficult to 
describe verbally. 
STORYTELLING: This does not only refer to images, 
but to the telling of stories, i.e., stories in which the viewer-
learner can recognize himself. Because storytelling connects, 
promotes, facilitates remembering.  
"Stories reshape information, transforming it into 
meaning", 
Duarte, 
[33]. 
Stories 
are 
powerful 
and 
indispensable tools of human beings to connect with other 
human beings.  As neuromarketing teaches, the primitive 
brain reacts very positively to emotional storytelling. 
Everyone learns and builds his or her own meaning system 
from an early age with stories. Life itself constitutes a 
narrative as a story, according to Bruner, [8]. Narrative is 
innate to mankind, there is no evidence of civilization that 
has not used narrative: with the emergence of sociality and 
inter-human relations, narrative was born, an attitude that has 
always been present together with rationality. Each person is 
not only the sum of his/her experiences or the relationships 
he/she establishes, but even more so the sum of his/ her 
stories and the contextual frames that are created around the 
stories (Bruner [8]). Narrative thinking is, moreover, a 
specific cognitive mode through which individuals structure 
experience and construct interaction with the external 
environment. 
Understanding 
actions, 
behaviors 
and 
experiences according to the typical mode of narrative 
thinking is a fundamental operation that guides the human 
mind in the attribution of meaning and significance (De 
Rossi, [29]). Restak [84], a neurologist who has studied the 
role of neural networks in learning processes, maintains that 
narration modifies the structure of the brain as much as 
personal experience. This claim is also supported by the 
behaviour of so-called mirror neurons, which are dedicated 
video 
experience
humor
storytelli
ng
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

to recognizing the emotions of others. Stories can be 
experienced emotionally and have meaning for each of us 
because these emotions trigger a process of identification 
with the characters who live those emotional experiences. 
Researchers including Hung [51] have now clearly 
demonstrated that storytelling used for learning has positive 
effects on motivation, knowledge consolidation and 
awareness building. 
HUMOR: and then you want to laugh and make people 
laugh. Laughing relaxes mind and opens it up to new stimuli, 
it helps to fix situations in memory and promotes learning, 
because mind does not distinguish between spontaneous and 
induced laughter. In general, laughing always produces great 
psychological and physiological benefits. According to 
Hippocrates and Galen laughter inevitably influenced the 
course of an illness. Gelotology (from the Greek ghelos= 
laughter and logos= science; the science of laughter) studies 
and applies laughter and positive emotions for the purposes 
of prevention, therapy, rehabilitation and training. This 
science has ascertained that in our bodies there are numerous 
connections between the nervous, endocrine and immune 
systems. Any alteration to one system also affects the others, 
influencing the overall health of an individual. Laughter 
activates the glands that produce endorphins, which stimulate 
and strengthen the immune system. Various studies over 
time have richly demonstrated the power of laughter in 
different areas of life. Patch Adams, the father of clown 
therapy, together with other doctors, has made great 
contributions to the study of the effects of positive emotions. 
And today, laughter therapy also enters homes and offices. 
Many coaches use laughter to facilitate the achievement of 
serenity, well-being and success in private life and at work. 
Warm cognition or warm learning undoubtedly makes it 
possible to learn better and faster, by using smile and fun. 
Irony produces solidarity, cohesion, inclusive dialogue, but 
also adaptability, resilience and questioning. Laughter is a 
fundamental aspect of antifragility. It is no coincidence that 
we are increasingly talking today about humor training or 
even humor coaching. Smile: 
• 
resizes limiting beliefs and reactivates positive 
attitudes towards potential and limits. 
• 
activates psychological and neural resources that 
awaken the body and mind from moments of 
immobility. 
• 
deconstructs habitual patterns of perception.  
This allows to see, feel and therefore experience things from 
another point of view. It stimulates lateral thinking and 
creativity, facilitates the magical synthesis of fantasy and 
reality. Davies [23] hypothesized that the origin of the forms 
of humor linked to tragedies or catastrophic events is also a 
consequence of the widespread and massive media coverage 
of such events, as was also the case during the Coronavirus 
pandemic. It seems that the continuous media narrative plays 
a significant role in how the pandemic emergency is 
perceived, generating increases in stress and anxiety (Garfin, 
Silver, & Holman, [43]). In this scenario, as in the past, 
humor has been and is a possible way of salvation (Fessell, 
[37]), "[...] the most powerful defense mechanism" (Freud, 
[41]), with different functions acting on physical and mental 
well-being, quality of life and perception of events. The use 
of humor or comedy helps to overcome stressful moments 
(Fritz, Russek, & Dillon, [40]) or to mitigate their negative 
effects (Pietrantoni & Dionigi, [79]). More generally, 
experiencing comic situations supports mental and emotional 
well-being (Borcherdt, 2002[5]), has a beneficial effect on 
health conditions and mood (Marziali, McDonald, & 
Donahue, [62]; Vagnoli & Dionigi, [106]) and allows for a 
more positive evaluation of experiences and quality of life 
(Rivista italiana studi sull'umorismo, [86]). 
III. 
CONTENT AND LEARNING PATH 
The content of the webseries was divided into 9 episodes: 
- Video call: your survival kit (episode zero) 
- Remote working- how to live it well 
- The effects of remote working 
- Video calls: how to deal with them 
- A good video presence 
- Dive into deep working 
- Video calls: instructions for use 
- Managing a team remotely 
- Healthy misunderstandings 
 
The development team was made up of different 
professionals: 
learning 
experience 
designer 
(trainer), 
scriptwriter (trainer), actors, video maker, web designer, 
graphic designer, developer, social media manager, as well 
as Sorgenia representatives and staff. 
An article in “Sorgenia Up”, the company's official 
magazine, kicked off not only the training campaign, but also 
the related social experience, to increase the interest of the 
company's population in the release of the episodes, which 
ended with the publication of the classic bloopers. In a 
difficult moment of health emergency and from the 
company's need to communicate to its employees, who had 
been remote working for months, “We are here”, and the 
idea of the dedicated web series was born. 
The proposal was a targeted training and information 
initiative, but also a people-caring operation aimed at 
providing employees with 'good practices' to deal with 
remote working positively, effectively and without stress. 
The "distance" in carrying out work activities did not affect 
the sense of belonging to the company, which continued 
unabated to take care of its employees. 
 
IV. 
WORKING METHOD 
Compared to a classical model of designing and developing 
content for digital learning, in this project some phases were 
specifically taken care to make content and method 
functional for the objective to promote participants high 
engagement. In the following, indications on the most 
peculiar phases of the project are given. 
1) Client material receipt  and demand analysis  
The project started with a careful analysis of the client's 
needs. In several meetings, the client's values, intentions, 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

objectives and received reference materials were brought to 
light. At the end of the analysis, a project document was 
produced which presented the methodology and action plan. 
2) Drafting of the macro-design (number of episodes, 
subjects, campaign calendar) 
The design work started with the analysis of the 
materials/interviews with the owners, to structure a 
preliminary map of the learning experience. The next step 
was to identify the learning objectives, as "the description of 
a performance that students must be able to show in order to 
be considered competent" by Mager [60]. Specifically, the 
learning objectives’ tree is hierarchical structure, constructed 
in relation to content, explicit in the results to be produced 
and enriched with indications of complexity according to 
Bloom's taxonomy [4]. Design and development of two 
prototypes, differing in narrative style and graphic format 
and client’s choice of prototype 
3) Script editing 
For the design of videos Piazza Copernico uses a 
storyboard model inspired by real screenplays, with 
essential editing, typical of the genre. This format is used 
indiscriminately for videos with live actors, such as video 
lessons, sketches, commercials, and for graphic videos such 
as motion graphics, whiteboard animation, etc. The script is 
divided into several columns containing: narration and 
dialogue, scene description, settings, character mimicry, 
graphic effects and text on screen, music, filming materials, 
location, etc. 
4) Script validation 
5) Casting actors and extras 
Piazza Copernico has professional actors, with experience 
in theatre and cinema/TV, who are able to perform and 
enhance the scripts at various levels. In addition to the 
actors, in order to act on engagement, enhancing the sense 
of belonging to the project and the company, Sorgenia 
workers also participated in the role of protagonists, who 
were available for filming and interpreting the scripts. 
6) Filming 
For videos played by actors, Piazza Copernico shoots in 
its own studio, or in other indoor or outdoor locations, 
depending on the needs of the script. In this case, both studio 
filming, on green screens, and in real locations were carried 
out, as well as direct screen casting to reproduce remote 
working situations and video calls. The operator/director and 
scriptwriter cooperated constantly throughout the production. 
Sorgenia's HR representatives launched a company contest 
for employees to participate as actors: the countless entries to 
the experience confirmed the interest in the initiative. A short 
casting among people was carried out and 10 employees 
were selected to participate in the filming. 
7) Design and creation of final infographics 
 
Figure 3.  Figure: Infographic example 
8) Editing and post-production 
Made by professional video makers with dedicated 
software such as Premiere and After Effect, suitable for 
editing and compositing, with the possibility of adding text, 
motion graphics and VFX elements of various kinds, 
designed and planned by the developer in consultation with 
the director and screenwriter. 
9) Tracking preparation 
10) Debug and publishing in Piazza Copernico’s LMS 
(Learning Management System) 
The episodes were assembled in a scorm package, with 
content structuring that follows a linear and sequential logic: 
it is necessary to complete the fruition of each episode, 
before being able to move on to the next one. The engine 
used, standard scorm, is accessible and mobile friendly. 
11) Serial delivery 
The training campaign lasted approximately six months 
(May - October 2021).  A calendar for the publication of the 
episodes was structured and shared with the company. The 
episodes were published every 2-3 weeks, also in 
consideration of Sorgenia's working calendar (e.g., holidays). 
V. 
RESULTS 
In the pilot phase, the results were collected from the 
point of view of the perceived impact by the management, 
since by design choice no direct ex post evaluation tools 
were included on the training experience. Instead, it is 
important to consider the impact on the working climate and 
processes, as assessed by the company, internally and 
independently from the webseries design group. 
The evaluation carried out within the company is 
summarized in the contribution of Dr. Silvia Guidi 
(Diversity, Inclusion & People Care, Innovation & 
Development Department of Sorgenia SpA) commenting on 
the experience: "Remote working - The web series was a new 
learning experience for us: thanks to our collaboration with 
the Piazza Copernico team, for the first time we used irony to 
transfer valuable content and we did it in the midst of a 
pandemic, when the context around us was anything but 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

'playful'. Hence the decision to convey instructions on how to 
best live our new 'connected life' in a light-hearted and fun 
way that was in line with our values, among which the 
principle of 'HAVE FUN' stands out, which translates as 
follows: in Sorgenia we face the challenges we face with 
enthusiasm and passion, collaborating with each other and 
encouraging self-fulfillment in everyone. In addition, we 
directly involved our colleagues through a 'contest' that 
allowed them to play a leading or co-leading role in some 
episodes of the web series, alongside the actors of Piazza 
Copernico: another aspect that generated engagement and 
helped make this training project even more interesting and 
stimulating for us at Sorgenia". 
Future corporate objectives include adopting the 
developed model as applicable to all content of universal 
interest to the corporate population, where it is essential to 
share best practices and corporate values. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The project was strongly oriented towards training 
engagement, as important factor for a broad and widespread 
participation for remote workers, and to actively promoting 
the best fundamental practices for working effectively and 
maintaining adequate wellbeing and a good quality of life.  
In transformative organizational contexts where practices 
and values need to be conveyed clearly, quickly and 
effectively, traditional training paradigms are out of place. 
engagement is the winning factor to be achieved and 
promoted. In the project, engagement was pursued at all 
stages of the project, i.e.:  
• 
in the design of real-realistic situations related to the 
working context,  
• 
in filming by involving company people and places, 
• 
in the direct, ironic and emblematic language,  
• 
in dissemination on the company's social networks. 
The fundamental lever used was the recognition/ 
identification that created closeness in single participant to 
the stories, and the sharing among the participants (who 
recognized the situations experienced from different points 
of view), as well as the ironic key to demystify the criticality 
in favor of a more solution-oriented reading. 
The project has shown multiple potential transferability 
elements, as this methodology is exportable to other 
contexts, contents and organizational change process. In 
terms of content, the episodes are built on typical work 
routines of many companies, which could benefit from the 
dissemination of good practices to experience remote 
working effectively and positively. From the point of view of 
method, its effectiveness was demonstrated precisely in its 
ability to shorten the distance between personal experience 
and organizational experience, helping to reduce the 
emotional distance from the organization, and encouraging 
involvement. In terms of development, all material was used, 
even errors (bloopers), which helped to interest people in the 
content. From the training point of view, in fact, the aim of 
this type of training material is to use formats typical of other 
contexts (e.g., television), to interest people in the topics of 
interest, then providing content (e.g., infographics, materials, 
etc.) to refocus the training meaning of the video material. 
This refocusing on training is fundamental to avoid the risks 
connected to these types of formats, which, by focusing 
attention on situations, can risk a blurring of the underlying 
training meaning. Therefore, authors suggest some caution in 
method use and dissemination, alias the reality ironical copy 
(ironical replication of reality). It is necessary to strengthen 
the collection of emblematic stories and concrete examples at 
an early stage, to strengthen the link with the reality. It is 
also strategic involving company staff more actively in the 
material production. Finally, a key winning element is to 
include tools for collecting and listening to the real effects in 
the working context (e.g., surveys, communities, focus 
groups, kpi analysis.). Only through a perceptions and 
meanings analysis on actual difficulties, it will be possible to 
design and redesign videos and the learning mix to be most 
suitable to support the organization’s objectives. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
A heartfelt thanks goes to Silvia Guidi (Diversity, 
Inclusion & People Care, Innovation & Development 
Director of Sorgenia SpA) for her far-sighted vision, her 
passion, the concreteness of her values and the trust she 
places in our team. Thanks also to the whole design and 
development team of Piazza Copernico, for the dedication 
and engaging energy with which they carry out training 
initiatives that are always new, engaging, beautiful, believing 
in creativity as a group value: Claudia Falconio, Saverio 
Santulli Sanzo, Marta Federici, Daniele Consorti, Alice 
Antonello, Silvio Meconi, Teresa Orlando, Thomas 
Mezzetti. Many thanks to Daniela Pellegrini and the entire 
R&D group of Piazza Copernico for their support, 
motivation and the always stimulating exchange on 
experiences and experiments. Sincere thanks to Oliviero 
Vittori (Director) and Marco Luzzatto (Administrator) for 
allowing this initiative and all Piazza Copernico' staff who 
enthusiastically joined the research and for their rich 
contribution. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] P., 
“Salute! 
Ovvero 
come 
un 
medico-clown 
cura 
gratuitamente i pazienti con l’allegria e con l’amore”, Urra, 
Milan, p. 130, 2004 
[2] M. Banzato, “Apprendere in rete”, Utet Libreria, Torino, 2002  
[3] P. L. Berger, “Homo ridens”, Mulino, Bologna, 1999 
[4] B. S. Bloom, “Tassonomia degli obiettivi educativi”, Giunti & 
Lisciani, 1983 
[5] B. Borcherdt,  “Humor and its contributions to mental health”. 
Journal of Rational - Emotive and Cognitive - Behavior 
Therapy, 
20(3–4), 
247–257,  
https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1021168527963, 2002 
[6] A. Briganti, “On line education. Formare in rete”, Consorzio 
Universitario For.com, Franco Angeli, Milan, 2002  
[7] S. Brown (eds.), “Open and distance learning: case studies 
from industry and education”, Kogan, London, 1997 
[8] J. S. Bruner, “The process of education”, Harvard U. P., 
Cambridge, Mass., 1961 
[9] J. S. Bruner, “Actual Minds: possible words”, The Jerusalem-
Harvard Lectures, 1987. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[10] J. S. Bruner, “The Narrative Construction of Reality.” Critical 
Inquiry 18, vol. 1, pp-1-21, 1991. 
[11] M. Bruscaglioni, “Per una formazione vitalizzante”, Franco 
Angeli, Milan, 2011 
[12] F. Butera and M. La Rosa, “Formazione, sviluppo 
organizzativo e gestione delle risorse umane,” Franco Angeli, 
Milan, 1997 
[13] J. Calder and A. McCollum, “Open and flexible learning in 
vocational education and training”, Kogan, London, 1998 
[14] A. Calvani and M. Rotta, “Comunicazione e apprendimento 
in Internet, Erickson”, Trento, 1999.  
[15] A. Calvani and M. Rotta, “Fare formazione in Internet. 
Manuale di didattica on line”, Erickson, Trento, 2000 
[16] A. Calvani and M. Rotta, “Progettare Multimedia”, 
Garamond, Roma, 2000. 
[17] M. Castagna, “La lezione nella formazione degli adulti”, 
Franco Angeli, 2007 
[18] C. Casula, “I porcospini di Schopenhauer. Come progettare e 
condurre un gruppo di formazione di adulti”, Franco Angeli, 
Milan, 2007 
[19] T.Chambel, C. Zahn and Finke M., “Hypervideo and 
Cognition: Designing VideoBased Hypermedia for Individual 
Learning and Collaborative Knowledge Building”, in E. 
Alkalifa (Ed.), “Cognitively Informed Systems: Utilizing 
Practical Approaches to Enrich Information Presentation and 
Transfer”, Idea Group Publishing, 2006 
[20] L. Crosta, “E-learning fra apprendimento e insegnamento: 
dimensioni etiche e linee formative”, U&Strumenti, Milan, 
2002 
[21] F. E. X. Dance, “A Helical Model of Communication, in 
Human Communication Theory”, Holt, Rinehart&Winston, 
London, 1967. 
[22] T. H. Davenport and L. Prusak, “Working Knowledg”e, 
Harvard Business School Press, 2000 
[23] C. Davies, “Jokes that follow mass-mediated disasters in a 
global electronic age”. In P. Narváez (Ed.), “Of Corpse: 
Death and Humor in Folkore and Popular Culture”, pp. 15–
34, Logan, UT: Utah State University Press, 2003 
[24] D. De Masi (eds.), “L’avvento del postindustriale”, Franco 
Angeli, Milan, 1985  
[25] D. De Masi (eds.), “L’emozione e la regola”, Laterza, 1995 
[26] D. De Masi (eds.), “Verso la formazione post-industriale”, 
Franco Angeli, Milan, 1993. 
[27] D. De Masi, “Il futuro del lavoro. Fatica e ozio nella società 
postindustriale”, Rizzoli, Milan, 1999 
[28] D. De Masi, “Ozio creativo”, Rizzoli, Milan, 2000 
[29] M. De Rossi and C. Petrucco, “Le narrazioni digitali per 
l'educazione e la formazione”, Carocci, 2013 
[30] J. Dirksen, “Learning Design. Progettare un apprendimento 
efficace”, Pearson Italia, 2017 
[31] W. Draves, “Teaching online”, River Falls, Lern Books, 
Wisconsin, 2000 
[32] N. Duarte, “Presenta storie visive che trasformano il 
pubblico”, Unicomunicazione, 2019 
[33] N. Duarte, “Slide:ology. L’arte e la scienza di creare grandi 
presentazioni”, Unicomunicazione 2019 
[34] J. Dewey, “The Training of Thought”, Kessinger Pub Co, 
2005 
[35] M. Eisenstad and T. Vincent, “The knowledge web learning 
and collaboratine on the net”, Kogan Page, London, 1998 
[36] Ebert, L., Feierabend, S., Karg, U., Rathgeb, T., 2011. JIM-
Studie 2012. “Jugend, Information, (Multi-) Media (JIM study 
2012th 
Youth, 
Information, 
(multi-) 
media). 
Medienpädagogischer 
Forschungsverbund 
Südwest”, 
Stuttgart, 2011  
[37] D. Fessell, “Laughter Leaves Me Lighter”. JAMA, 323(24), 
2476. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.9283, 2020 
[38] D. Francescato, “Ridere è una cosa seria”, Mondadori, Milan 
2002 
[39] Franke et al., “Capturing teachers’ generative change: A 
follow-up study of professional development”, American 
Educational Research Journal, vol. 38, n. 3, pp. 653- 689, 
2011 
[40] H. L. Fritz, L. N. Russek and M. M. Dillon, “Humor Use 
Moderates the Relation of Stressful Life Events With 
Psychological Distress”. Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 
vol. 
43(6), 
pp. 
845–859. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167217699583, 2017 
[41] S. Freud, “Jokes and their relation to the unconscious” (J. 
Strachey, Trans.). New York, NY (ed. or. 1905): Norton,1960 
[42] R. M. Gagné, “Le condizioni dell'apprendimento”, Armando 
Armando editore 1990 
[43] D. R. Garfin, R. C. Silver and E. A. Holman, “The novel 
coronavirus (COVID-2019) outbreak: Amplification of public 
health consequences by media exposure”. Health Psychology, 
vol. 39(5), pp. 355–357, 2020 
[44] M. Giannakos, L.E. Jaccheri and J. Krogstie, “Exploring the 
relationship between video lecture usage patterns and 
students' 
attitudes”, 
British 
Journal 
of 
Educational 
Technology, vol. 47, no. 6, 2014 
[45] G. Gambirasio, “Formazione formatori”, Franco Angeli, 2014 
[46] M. Gotuzzo and F. Tassistro, “L’arte di presentare”, Edizioni 
FAG Milan, 2013 
[47] J. Haidt, “Felicità: un'ipotesi. Verità moderne e saggezza 
antica”, Codice, 2008 
[48] L. Haraism, “Learning networks: A field guide to teaching 
and learning online”, MIT Press, Cambridge, 1995. 
[49] L. Haraism, “Online education: prospectives on a new 
environment”, Praeger, New Y De Rossi, 2009ork, 1990 
[50] B. Holmberg, “Individualized distance education”, IAD, 
Anno X, n. 10-11, Tecnodid, Naples, aprile-agosto 1998. 
[51] C. M. Hung, G. J. Hwang, and I. Huang, “A project-based 
digital storytelling approach for improving students' learning 
motivation, 
problem-solving 
competence 
and 
learning 
achievement”. Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 
15(4), 368-379, 2012 
[52] Rapporto_JAMES, School of applied psychology, Zurich 
University, 2016 
[53] E. A. Kirkpatrick, “An experimental study of memory”. 
Psychological Review, vol. 1, pp. 602 -609, 1894 
[54] M. S. Knowles, “The Modern Practice of Adult Education: 
Andragogy Versus Pedagogy”. Association Press, 1980 
[55] M. S. Knowles, E. F. Holton III and R. A. Swanson, “Quando 
l’adulto impara. Andragogia e sviluppo della persona”, 
Franco Angeli, 2016 
[56] D. Kolb, “Experiential Learning: Experience As The Source 
Of Learning And Development”, Prentice-Hall, 1984 
[57] K. Levin, “Frontiers in Group Dynamics: concept, method 
and reality in Social Science; social equilibria and social 
change” in Human Relations, 1947 
[58] E. C. Lindeman, “The Meaning of Adult Education”, New 
Republic, New York, 1926. 
[59] D. Lyon, “La società dell’informazione,” Il Mulino, Bologna, 
1988 
[60] R. F. Mager, “Gli obiettivi didattici”, Giunti & Lisciani, 1987 
[61] A. H. Maslow, “A theory of human motivation”, 
Psychological Review, 1943 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[62] E. Marziali, L. McDonald and P. Donahue, “The role of 
coping humor in the physical and mental health of older 
adults”, Aging & Mental Health, vol. 12(6), pp. 713–718.  
doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/13607860802154374, 2008 
[63] J. Medina, “Il cervello: istruzioni per l’uso”. Bollati 
Boringhieri, 2010 
[64] M. D. Merril, “Constructivism and Instructional Design”, in 
T. M. Duffy e D. H. Johansen “Contructivism and the 
Tecnology of Instructon: a Conversation”, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, 
1992 
[65] J. Meyrowitz, “Oltre il senso del luogo”, Bakerville, Bologna, 
1993  
[66] S. Miceli, “Imprese, reti e comunità virtuali”, Etas, Milan, 
2000 
[67] E. Minaříková, T. Janík, M. Píšová and K. Kostková, “ELF 
teachers' use of Czech and/or English language when 
commenting on EFL classroom videos”. EARLI SIG 11 
“Practice-Oriented Teacher Learning and Professional Devel- 
opment” Frauenchiemsee, Germania. 2014 
[68] P. Montero, “Individualizaciòn del aprendizaje a distanzia: un 
reto”, IAD Istruzione a Distanza, vol. X, pp. 10-11, Tecnodid, 
Naples, aprile-agosto 1998. 
[69] M. 
Morabito, 
“Online 
distance 
education: 
historical 
prospectives and pratical application”, American Coastline 
University, Dissertation.com, 1999 
[70] G. Moro, “La formazione nelle società post-industriali. 
Modelli e criteri di valutazione”, Carocci, , 1998. 
[71] P. Mottana, “Il mentore come antimaestro”, Clueb, Bologna, 
1996 
[72] R. C. Nacamulli, “La formazione, il cemento e la rete. E-
learning, management delle conoscenze e processi di sviluppo 
organizzativo”, Etas Libri, Milan, 2003. 
[73] N. Negroponte, Being Digital, Alfred Knopf, New York, 1995 
[74] J . Nelsen, “La Disciplina positiva”, Il leone verde, 2019 
[75] I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi, “The knowledge-creating 
company”, Guerini e Associati, Milan, 1997 
[76] R. M. Pallof and K. Pratt, “Building learning communities in 
cyberspace: effective strategies for the online classroom”, 
Jossey-Bass Publishers, S.Francisco, 1999 
[77] O. Peters, “Learning And teaching in distance education”, 
Kogan, London, 1998 
[78] J. Piaget, “The Psychology Of The Child”, Basic Books, 1972 
[79] L. Pietrantoni and A. Dionigi, “Quando ridere fa male: la 
relazione tra eventi di vita, stili umoristici e disagio 
psicologico”. Psicoterapia Cognitiva e Comportamentale, vo. 
12(3), pp. 301–316, 2006 
[80] M. Pigliacampo, “Formazione e nuovi media. Modelli 
culturali ed organizzativi per le tecnologie della formazione”, 
Armando Editore, 2003 
[81] M. Polanyi, “Personal Knowledge”, University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago, 1958 
[82] M. Polanyi, “The tacit dimension”, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 
London, 1966 
[83] L. Porter, “Creating the virtual classroom: distance learning 
with the Internet”, Wile, New Jersey, 1997 
[84] R. Restak, “Think Smart: A Neuroscientist's Prescription for 
Improving Your Brain's Performance”.  Penguin Publishing 
Group, 2009. 
[85] J. Rifkin, “L’era dell’accesso. La rivoluzione della new 
economy”, Baldini&Castaldi, 1995 
[86] Italian Journal of Humour Studies, Vol. 4, Issue 1, January 
2021. Available from: https://www.risu.biz/en/volume-4-
issue-1-january-2021/ 
[87] S. Rodotà, “Tecnopolitica”, Laterza, 1997 
[88] C. R. Rogers, “Client-Centered Terapy”, Houghton-Mifflin, 
Boston, 1951 
[89] C. R. Rogers, “Freedom to Learn, Merril, Columbus, Ohio, 
1969” 
[90] P. G. Rossi (eds.), “Da testo alla rete, multimedialità e 
didattica”, Tecnodid, Naples, 2000 
[91] D. Rowntree, “Exploring open and distance learning”, Kogan 
Page, London, 1994 
[92] R. Santagata, C. Zannoni and J. W. Stigler, “The role of 
lesson analysis in pre-service teacher education: an empirical 
investigation of teacher learning from a virtual video-based 
field 
experience”, 
Journal 
of 
Mathematics 
Teacher 
Education, vol. 10,  pp. 123-140. 2007 
[93] R. Santagata and J. Guarino, “Using Video to Teach Future 
Teachers to Learn from Teaching”, ZDM The International 
Journal of Mathematics Education, vol. 43, n. 1, pp. 133-145, 
2011. 
[94] O. Scardella, “Tutorship e apprendimento”, La Nuova Italia 
Scientifica, Firenze, 1995. 
[95] M. Sykes, A. N. Malik, M. D. West, “Storytelling e visual 
design”, Edizioni FAG Milan, 2013 
[96] E. L. Thorndike, “Adult Learning”, Macmillan, New York, 
1928. 
[97] M. Tomassini, “Apprendimento continuo e formazione”, 
Franco Angeli, Milan. 1995 
[98] A. Tough, “The Adult’s Learning Projects”, Ontario istitute 
for Studies In Education, Toronto, 1979 
[99] G. Trentin, “Lo spettro dei possibili usi delle reti nella 
formazione continua e a distanza”, Lettera ASFOR. 
Formazione manageriale, vol. XII, n. 1-2  
[100] G. Trentin, “Apprendimento in rete e condivisione delle 
conoscenze”, Franco Angeli, Milan, 2004 
[101] G. Trentin, “Dalla formazione a distanza all’apprendimento in 
rete”, Franco Angeli, Milan, 2001 
[102] G. Trentin., “Didattica in rete. Internet, telematica e 
cooperazione educativa”, Garamond,1996  
[103] G. Trentin, “Insegnare e apprendere in rete”, Zanichelli, 
Bologna, 1998  
[104] G. Trentin, “Telematica e formazione a distanza: Il caso 
Polaris”, Franco Angeli, Milan, 1999 
[105] G. Trevisol, “Il tutor nei processi formativi”, Franco Angeli, 
Milan, 2002 
[106] L. Vagnoli and A. Dionigi, “I clown a sostegno del processo 
di cura: una revisione della letteratura”. Italian Journal of 
Humour Studies RISU, vol. 2 (1), pp. 7–22, 2019 
[107] E. A. van Es and M. G. Sherin, “Using Video to Support 
Teachers' Ability to Interpret Classroom Interactions”, 
Northwestern University, 2002 
[108] E. A. Van Es and M. G. Sherin. “Mathematics teachers’ 
learning to notice in the context of a video club”, Teaching 
and teacher education, vol, 24.2, pp. 244-276, 2008 
[109] T. Vescovi, (eds.), “E-learning. La formazione manageriale 
nella rete”, Il Sole 24 Ore, 2002  
[110] L. S. Vygotskij, “Pensiero e linguaggio”, Giunti, Firenze, 
1996 
[111] K. White and B. Wheight (eds.), “The online teaching guide: 
an handbook to attitudes, strategies, and techniques for the 
virtual classroom”, Allyn and Bacon, Needham Height, MA, 
1999 
 
 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

