Designing a Hybrid Breadth-first CS1 Course 
Cynthia Y. Lester 
Office of STEM Initiatives 
Georgia Perimeter College 
Decatur, Georgia, USA 
cynthia.lester@gpc.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract – With the cost of education rising, more no-
traditional students returning to school and employers looking 
for students with experience beyond the classroom, institutions 
are evaluating how to best deliver the educational experience 
to today’s student. The Babson Survey Group reported that in 
2011, there were more than 6 million students enrolled in 
online courses. The report also stated that approximately one-
third of all higher education students now take at least one 
online course with this number projected to grow.  However, in 
higher education there still remains a debate on the merits of 
online courses versus the traditional face-to-face classroom 
experience. In response to this debate, many institutions now 
offer three modes of instruction which include traditional face-
to-face, online and hybrid. Hybrid courses can be described as 
a blended method of face-to-face and online.  However, there 
are challenges to designing a hybrid course, especially in the 
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) 
areas.  The aim of this paper is to present the design for a 
hybrid course in an introduction to computer science course 
taught a two-year institution.  The course is a breadth-first 
course taken by majors, as well as students who need a course 
to substitute for a mathematics course, required as part of the 
common core curriculum. The uniqueness of the work is tri-
fold: 1) the environment in which the course is offered; 2) the 
student population enrolled in the course; and, 3) the nature of 
the delivery mode.  The paper presents the design of the course 
which includes course content and learning outcomes; the 
teaching pedagogy; course organization and how the course 
will be evaluated.     
 
Keywords – Hybrid learning; collaborative learning; learning 
content management system; undergraduate computer science 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
The United States Department of Commerce, Economics 
and Statistics Administration in its July 2011 report stated 
that science, technology, engineering, and mathematics 
(STEM) occupations are projected to grow by 17.0 percent 
between 2008 and 2018, compared to 9.8 percent growth for 
non-STEM occupations [1].  Additionally, STEM workers 
command higher wages, earning 26 percent more than their 
non-STEM counterparts and for women who hold STEM 
jobs; they earn 33 percent more than women in other 
occupations.  Moreover, STEM degree holders enjoy higher 
salaries, regardless of whether they are working in STEM or 
not [1].  These statistics provide an impetus for more 
students to choose STEM areas as fields of study.  However, 
the number of students choosing STEM disciplines, 
inclusive of computer science is not growing at the rate 
necessary to keep up with job demand. 
According to The New York Times’ Christopher Drew, 
studies note that approximately 40 percent of students who 
choose to pursue a STEM area either switch their major in 
college or do not graduate at all [2].  This statistic, as stated 
by Drew, is twice the combined attrition rate of all other 
majors [2].  A great deal of research has been conducted on 
the reasons as to why students choose not to study STEM. It 
has been suggested that societal stereotypes, environmental 
and cultural factors, a lack of visible role models, different 
interests and experiences, and academic un-preparedness are 
some of the reasons [3]-[6].  However, while these reasons 
are substantive and well-documented, more research is now 
being conducted on what happens to students during the 
first two years of college which deters them from pursuing 
their goals of becoming a scientist, engineer, mathematician 
or computer scientist. 
One article posits that there has been a dramatic shift in 
the way in which students learn [7].  It suggests that most 
high school classes are small. A teacher works with about 
30 students at a time rather than the 200 students a college 
professor teaches during each session.  Consequently, many 
professors cannot offer individual attention to all students 
enrolled in the course, sometimes leaving some students to 
teach themselves, which they have not learned how to do 
[8].  Therefore, a continuously studied issue in higher 
education is teaching pedagogy and how to best offer course 
content to a larger population of students who has different 
learning styles and needs, especially found in the STEM 
areas.   
In the report entitled Distance Education at Degree 
Granting Postsecondary Institutions 2000-2001, from the 
National Center on Education Statistics, it was noted that 
during the 2000-2001 academic year, 56 percent (2,320) of 
all 2-year and 4-year Title IV-eligible, degree-granting 
institutions offered distance education courses.  Moreover, 
there were an estimated 3,077,000 enrollments in all 
distance education courses offered by 2-year and 4-year 
institutions during the 2000-2001 academic year [9]. Since 
that report, it has been noted that online course enrollment 
in the United States hit an all-time high in 2010 with more 
than 6.1 million students and according to the report from 
the Babson Survey Group, this number surpassed itself in 
2011 and will only increase [10].  The report also stated that 
approximately thirty-one percent of higher education 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

students now take at least one course online and that 
academic leaders believe that students are satisfied with this 
type of content delivery method [10].  
However, there remains a question concerning online 
instruction and its effectiveness as compared to face-to-face 
instruction. Researchers have found that while some online 
courses have reported significant improvements in student 
performance over their face-to-face counterparts, other 
courses found no significant improvement and sometimes 
students performed worse [11].  Researchers also reported 
that the reason some online courses are unsuccessful in 
improving student performance is because they lack the 
face-to-face interaction that students desire with their 
instructor and classmates [12], [13].  Consequently, an 
alternative to online instruction is blended teaching or 
hybrid courses.  
Hybrid courses are often seen as a third alternative in 
instruction delivery because they offer a mix between online 
courses and traditional face-to-face instruction.  Some 
researchers describe hybrid courses as a course where 24% 
to 75% of the course content is delivered online and the 
other is face-to-face; or the use of a system that relies on 
computer-mediated instruction; or even a combination of 
web-based learning delivered using a Learning Management 
System, face-to-face meetings and chats or blogs [14],[15].  
However, no matter what definition is used, hybrid teaching 
is becoming increasingly popular with many educators 
because not only do they view it as an effective method for 
reaching students whose way of learning has shifted away 
from more traditional techniques but also as a way to 
promote more active learning among a large student base. 
The 
following 
section 
begins 
by 
providing 
an 
introduction to the environment in which the hybrid course 
will be offered.  The next section introduces the face-to-face 
course which provides the foundation for the hybrid course.  
The subsequent section presents the hybrid course.  The way 
that the course will be evaluated is also presented and future 
work is offered in the last section. 
 
II. COURSE ENVIRONMENT 
 
The hybrid course is designed to be offered at Georgia 
Perimeter College (GPC), a state college part of the 
University System of Georgia (USG).  The University 
System is composed of 35 higher education institutions 
including 4 research universities, 2 regional universities, 13 
comprehensive universities, 14 state colleges, 2 two-year 
colleges and the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography.  GPC, 
a 2-year institution, offers Associate degrees in Arts, 
Sciences, and Applied Sciences [16]. GPC typically hosts 
the largest freshman and sophomore enrollments in Georgia, 
making it the top producer of transfer students to 4-year 
institutions within the state of Georgia. It has five campus 
locations throughout the Atlanta-metro area and services 
approximately 22,000 students. The number of students 
choosing one of the STEM disciplines is roughly 10% [17]. 
A. Instructional Methods of Delivery 
GPC offers courses through several modes of delivery 
which include face-to-face, online and hybrid.  While the 
number of online course offerings and students enrolled in 
online courses has grown significantly, there still remains a 
need for hybrid course offerings in certain areas.  The 
STEM areas typically have less hybrid courses than their 
humanities counterparts, yet all students are required to take 
at least College Algebra with a large population required to 
take Chemistry I and one computer science course.  A 
survey of the 95 hybrid classes offered during the 2011-
2012 academic year found that there were approximately 
eight hybrid classes offered in science and mathematics and 
none offered in computer science or engineering.  
Furthermore, of the eight science and mathematics hybrid 
classes offered, only the statistics course offered is accepted 
as credit toward a STEM degree; the other courses offered 
are general science courses. An additional survey of hybrid 
courses was conducted for the fall 2012 semester.  The 
results again revealed that basic science and mathematics 
courses were offered, one upper-level division computer 
science course offered and again no hybrid course offered in 
engineering. 
B. Hybrid Courses at GPC 
Hybrid courses are offered in five instructional delivery 
modes at GPC.  These modes include:  
1) Type A - face-to-face meeting once per week 
2) Type B- face-to-face meeting on alternate weeks  
3) Type C - face-to-face meeting on alternate Saturdays 
4) Type D – fact-to-face meeting on four Saturdays in 
which classes meet for a double class period 
5) Type E – face-to-face meeting on Super Saturdays, in 
which classes meet for a triple class period for two or 
three Saturdays.   
The other instruction is offered online.  It should be noted 
that students are informed that hybrid courses do not offer a 
reduced workload, but offer the flexibility of online learning 
with personal contact with the instructor and classmates. All 
hybrid course students complete the same amount of course 
work with the same learning goals and outcomes as their 
traditional face-to-face or online course counterparts [18].  
The classes are held during a 16 week semester. 
 
The author has taught traditional face-to-face courses at 
the undergraduate level within the computer science 
curriculum for many years.  Prior to the design of the hybrid 
course, the author taught CSCI 1300 – Introduction to 
Computer Science using the traditional face-to-face method 
of delivery. At GPC, CSCI 1300 is a course that is part of 
the common core and therefore it is a commonly taught 
course.  The next section describes the course; the student 
population enrolled; and, includes the methodology the 
author used to teach the course.  This material is used as the 
basis for the design of the hybrid course which is presented 
in the subsequent section. 
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

III. INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER SCIENCE 
A. Course Description 
CSCI 1300 – Introduction to Computer Science is 
designed to provide students with an overview of selected 
major areas of current computing technology, organization 
and use.  Topics surveyed include the history of computing, 
data representation and storage, hardware and software 
organization, communication technologies, ethical and 
social issues, and fundamental problem solving and 
programming skills [19].  
Prerequisites are exit or exemption from all Learning 
Support, English as a Second Language (ESL) requirement 
and successful completion of College Algebra [19]. For 
computer science majors, the course is a prerequisite for 
successive courses within the program of study.  For non-
math based majors, the course meets the requirements of the 
common core in the area of science, mathematics and 
technology from which students must choose. 
B. Topics Covered 
Since the course is a commonly taught course, all 
students regardless of delivery mode are presented with the 
following topics [19]: 
 
The history and vocabulary of computers 
 
Problem-solving, 
algorithms 
and 
algorithm 
efficiency 
 
Data representation and storage 
 
Computer hardware and software concepts 
 
Computer networks 
 
Information security 
 
Programming concepts and problem-solving 
 
Social and ethical issues 
C. Learning Outcomes 
The learning outcomes are designed by the course 
curriculum committee.  It was decided that by the end of the 
course, a student should be able to [19]: 
 
Discuss the history of computing. 
 
State the methods by which data is represented and 
stored in a computer’s memory.   
 
Recognize 
and 
understand 
the 
fundamental 
hardware components of a computer system.  
 
Recognize 
and 
understand 
the 
fundamental 
software components.  
 
Understand the concepts of current communication 
technologies. 
 
Understand basic networking and information 
security. 
 
Recognize and understand social and ethical issues 
involved in computer use.  
 
Analyze a basic real world problem and solve it 
with a computer program. 
 Understand and write algorithms using fundamental 
computing concepts.  
D. Student Population 
The course is designed for and utilized by students who 
have chosen one of the STEM areas as a major.  Non-STEM 
majors are encouraged to enroll in another course, with 
similar content but designed specifically for students not 
pursuing one of the STEM areas as a major. However, since 
CSCI 1300 can also be used by non-STEM majors to satisfy 
a math requirement, the student population is often varied. 
On average, course enrollment is between 20 and 30 
students, with the percentage of STEM to non-STEM 
majors fluctuating. 
 
The next part of this section describes popular teaching 
styles and introduces collaborative learning.  Also presented 
is the rationale for the utilization of the stated teaching style. 
E. Teaching Methodology 
According to Grasha, there are four approaches to 
teaching [20]: 
 Formal authority, an instructor-centered approach 
where the instructor provides the flow of content  
 Demonstrator/personal model, an instructor-centered 
approach where the instructor demonstrates the skills 
 Facilitator, a student-centered approach where the 
instructor acts as a facilitator and the responsibility is 
placed on the student to achieve results 
 Delegator, a student-centered approach where the 
instructor delegates and places the responsibility for 
learning on students and/or groups of students 
 
The instructor decided that based on the student 
population enrolled in the course, that formal authority 
would be used as the teaching style.  It is noted that this 
teaching approach has its challenges, with one being the 
lack of personal engagement between teacher and student; 
and student and student.  Consequently, the instructor also 
incorporated collaborative learning into the course.   
F. Collaborative Learning 
 
In educational environments, student study groups are 
often formed to gain better insight on course topics through 
collaborative efforts. Collaborative learning is defined as the 
grouping and/or pairing of students for the purpose of 
achieving an academic goal [21].  Davis reported that 
regardless of the subject matter, students working in small 
groups tend to learn more of what is taught and retain it 
longer, than when the same content is presented in other 
more traditional instructional formats [22].   
Supporters of collaborative learning suggest that the 
shared learning environment allows students to engage in 
discussion, take responsibility for their own learning, hence 
becoming critical thinkers [21]. Research has shown that 
collaborative learning encourages the use of high-level 
cognitive strategies, critical thinking, and positive attitudes 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

toward learning [23]. Further, it has been suggested that 
collaborative learning has a positive influence on student 
academic performance [24].   
G. Content Delivery 
The class time was divided into three segments.  The 
first half of the class time was spent providing students with 
the theoretical concepts, while the second part of the class 
period students spent solving problems independently or in 
groups.  Toward the end of the class period, students shared 
the results of the work and concepts were summarized and 
reinforced.  The instructor found that this method worked 
well for both STEM majors, who needed both the 
theoretical foundation and the application; and, for the non-
STEM majors who enjoyed the application of the course 
content.  Consequently, the instructor decided to use this 
model as the premise for the development of the hybrid 
course. 
 
IV. HYBRID COURSE DESIGN 
 
As previously stated, a survey of courses found that 
during the academic year 2011-2012, no hybrid courses 
were offered in computer science.  A survey of the fall 2012 
classes, found that once hybrid computer science course was 
offered, but it was for computer science majors only and is 
typically taken by second year students who are on the 
verge of transferring to a 4-year institution the next 
semester. Therefore, the uniqueness of this design is for a 
course offered at the freshman level which will impact a 
larger student population with a wide variety of technical 
backgrounds. 
A. Course Content and Learning Outcomes 
Since the course is a common course, the learning 
outcomes and the course content remains the same. 
However, it was decided that during the first face-to-face 
meeting 
an 
overview 
of 
the 
Colleges’ 
Learning 
Management System, iCollege/Desire2Learn, would be 
done to ensure that students know how to properly use the 
system since the course would rely heavily on its use. 
B. Teaching Pedagogy 
It was decided that the facilitator teaching style would be 
utilized.  The facilitator teaching method, unlike formal 
authority, is a more student-centered approach which shifts 
the focus of activity from the teacher to the learners.  This 
method includes active learning, collaborative learning and 
inductive teaching and learning [20]. The facilitator 
teaching style has been stated to work best for students who 
are comfortable with independent learning and who can 
actively participate and collaborate with other students [25]. 
In particular, this approach was chosen because in education 
literature, the method has been shown to increase students’ 
motivation to learn, to lead to a greater retention of 
knowledge, and to positively impact attitudes toward the 
subject material being taught [24], [26], [27].  Moreover, the 
method places a strong emphasis on collaborative learning. 
Additionally, the author had previously used this method in 
similar courses and has had good results [28].  
C. Content Delivery 
As previously stated, researchers note that there has been 
a dramatic shift in the way in which students learn [7]. 
Technology supported learning provides students with an 
opportunity to view online situations and examples that help 
to aid the learning process. Additionally, technology 
supported learning has been shown to be beneficial to 
students who are visual learners rather than auditory 
learning [29]. It has been noted that students process visual 
information 600,000 times faster than text, and visual aids 
can improve learning by 400% [30]. However, from a 
delivery 
perspective, 
technology 
supported 
learning 
provides a semi-permanent resource which allows students 
to re-visit the clips, thereby having the potential to develop 
greater understanding of the material.   
Consequently, it was decided that the PowerPoint slides 
that the author typically uses in face-to-face classes, would 
be revised to include an enhanced learning experience for 
students.  The slides would be revised using Camtasia 
Studio. Camtasia is a screen recording and video editing 
tool that allows educators to edit and share high-quality 
screen video on the Web, YouTube, DVD, CD, portable 
media players and the iPod [31]. The slides would be posted 
in iCollege.  iCollege also has chat, blogs, video and email 
features.  
D. Course Organization 
The instructional delivery format that the CSCI 1300 
hybrid course will utilize is Type A, which means that the 
face-to face class period will meet once per week for 1 hour 
and 15 minutes and all other meetings will take place online.   
Prior to the class meeting, students will be strongly 
encouraged to view the enhanced PowerPoint lecture slides 
available in iCollege/Desire2Learn.  At the end of each 
lecture, end-of-lecture questions will be asked to which 
students will receive immediate feedback.  The instructor 
will also have access to student responses and performance.  
This information will be used to determine the content and 
the time frame needed for review of material during the 
face-to-face class period.  
The face-to-face class period will be spent as an 
interactive lab environment coupled with collaborative 
learning, much like those seen in flipped classroom models 
[32],[33].  For the first 15 minutes of the course, the 
instructor will answer questions and review key concepts 
from the online lectures.  The next 45 minutes will be spent 
by students engaged in hands-on laboratory work using the 
computer.  The last 15 minutes will be used to summarize 
the concepts presented and to briefly introduce the next 
concepts to be discussed.  Figure 1 presents the design for 
the face-to-face class meeting. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
Figure 1. Hybrid Course Design 
 
To teach hardware and operating system concepts, 
computer simulators will be used like those from teach-sim 
educational simulators and Cisco Binary Game [34], [35].  
To teach problem-solving, algorithm writing and efficiency, 
students will utilize the algorithmic simulators that 
accompany the required laboratory textbook.  Visual Studio 
is used as the development environment and students will 
use this to program small-scaled projects in C++.  Lastly, to 
engage students in the concepts of social and ethical issues, 
it was decided to use case studies and debates.  Students will 
be divided into teams and given an issue in which they must 
debate the pros and cons of the argument. Table 1 provides 
an overview of how topics will be covered during the 16 
week semester. 
 
TABLE I. CONTENT DELIVERY 
Week 
Topic 
Activity 
1 
Introduction to Course and 
History of Computing 
iCollege review 
2 
Representing Algorithms  
Algorithmic 
simulators 
3 
Attributes of Algorithms  
4 
Binary Numbering System 
Cisco Binary Game 
and binary 
numbering 
simulators 
5 
In class exam 
6 
Boolean logic and gates 
Logic gate 
simulators 
7 
Components of a computer 
system 
Computer 
simulators  
8 
9 
Basic networking 
Network software 
simulator 
10 
Software security 
Research on threats 
and encryption 
software simulators 
11 
In class exam 
12 
Introduction to C++ 
Introduction to and 
using Visual Studio 
14 
Ethical issues 
In class debates 
15 
16 
Prepare for final exam 
 
V. ASSESSMENT 
A. Student Assessment 
Students will be assessed in the following manner: 
 End-of-lecture questions – these questions are 
basically designed for student use and will be used by 
the instructor not as a tool for grading but to 
determine concepts on which the instructor needs to 
spend more time reviewing during the class period. 
 Assignments – the common course outline requires 
that there be a minimum of eight projects completed 
during the semester 
 Exams – there will be two in-class exams 
 Final exam – one final examination will be given at 
the designated time at the end of the semester 
B. Course Assessment 
Two types of assessments will be utilized to determine 
the effectiveness of the course.  The first assessment will be 
a student survey which will include measures on students’ 
attitudes and self-efficacy as it relates to course material and 
content delivery.  The second evaluation will be student 
performance. 
 
VI. CONCLUDING THOUGHTS 
 
The aim of this paper was to present the design for a 
hybrid breadth-first introductory course in computer science 
taught at a 2-year institution.  The course content, learning 
outcomes, teaching pedagogy, course organization and how 
the course will be evaluated were presented. Future work 
includes the redesign of the traditional PowerPoint slides to 
include an enhanced learning experience for utilization in 
the hybrid course. 
The course is unique in that it provides an opportunity 
for a large number of students whose technical skill set is 
often varied to engage in and actively learn foundation 
principals in computer science.  The delivery of the content 
through hybrid learning provides a blended mix of the 
traditional face-to-face interaction students often desire with 
the flexibility of online learning, which many 2-year 
institution 
students 
need. 
However, 
the 
author 
acknowledges that the redesign is not without its challenges.  
The author anticipates concerns in the areas of student 
perception and performance.  Moreover, the author has 
some concerns on creating the videos to ensure that the 
theoretical concepts are correctly captured for the skill set of 
the audience.    
It is projected that the U.S. will see over 1.2 million 
STEM job positions open up by 2018. As the workplace and 
the way in which students learn change, the way in which to 
best meet the needs of these constituency groups must 
change as well. As educators it is our job to ensure that our 
students are ready for these and other opportunities and to 
provide them with an educational experience that will 
increase their chance for success. 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

REFERENCES 
 
[1] D. Langdon, G. McKittrick, D. Beede, B. Khan and M.Doms. 
STEM: Good Jobs and for the Future.  (2011). U.S. 
Department 
of 
Commerce, 
Economics 
and 
Statistics 
Administration. 
http://www.esa.doc.gov/sites/default/files/ 
reports/documents/stemfinalyjuly14_1.pdf. 
[Retrieved: 
December, 2012]. 
[2] C. Drew. (2011). Why Science Majors Change Their Minds 
(It’s 
Just 
So 
Darn 
Hard). 
 
New 
York 
Times.  
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/11/06/education/edlife/why-
science-majors-change-their-mind-its-just-so-darn-
hard.html?pagewanted=all [Retrieved: December, 2012]. 
[3] J. Cooper and K.D. Weaver. (2003). Gender and Computers.  
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 
[4] C. Y. Lester. (2005). The Influence of Vicarious Learning on 
Computer 
Self-efficacy 
and 
Computing 
Performance. 
Doctoral Dissertation (UMI No. 6133310). 
[5] E.D. Bunderson and M.E. Christensen.  (1995). An analysis 
of retention problems for female students in university 
computer science program.  Journal of Research and 
Computing in Education 28 (1): 1 – 18. 
[6] S. Clegg and D. Trayhurn.  (2000). Gender and computing: 
Not the same old problem.  British Educational Research 
Journal 26 (1):75-90. 
[7] M. 
Minsker. 
(2011). 
Nextgen 
Journal. 
http://nextgenjournal.com/2011/11/statistics-show-a-decrease-
in-stem-majors/ [Retrieved: December, 2012]. 
[8] R.J. Coffin and P.D. MacIntyre.  (1999). Motivational 
influences on computer-related affective states. Computer in 
Human Behavior 15, 549 – 569. 
[9] National Center for Education Statistics. Distance Education 
at Degree-Granting Postsecondary Institutions. 2000-2001. 
http://nces.ed.gov/surveys/peqis/publications/2003017/. 
[Retrieved: December, 2012]. 
[10] Babson Group. (2011). New Study: Over 6 million students 
study on line.  http://www.babson.edu/News-Events/babson-
news/Pages/111109OnLineLearningStudy.aspx 
[Retrieved: 
December, 2012]. 
[11] P. King and D. Hildreth. (2001). ―Internet courses: Are they 
worth the eﬀort.‖ Journal of College Science Teaching, 31, 
112–115. 
[12] R.W. Carstens and V.L. Worsfold. (2000). Epilogue: A 
cautionary note about online classrooms. New Directions for 
Teaching and Learning, 84, 83–87. 
[13] J.M.O. Yazon, J.A. Mayer-Smith and R.J. Redfield. (2002). 
Does the medium change the message? The impact of a web-
based genetics course on university students’ perspectives on 
learning and teaching. Computers and Education, 38, 267–
285. 
[14] M. 
Niemiec. 
(2006). 
―Blended 
learning 
success 
considerations.‖ Paper presented at the Sloan-C workshop on 
Blended Learning and Higher Education. 12th Sloan-C 
International 
Conference 
on 
Asynchronous 
Learning 
Networks. Orlando, FL. 
[15] N. Jones. (2006). E-college wales, a case-study of blended 
learning. The handbook of blended learning: Global 
perspectives, local designs. San Francisco, CA: Pfeiffer 
Publications, 182-194. 
[16] The 
University 
System 
of 
Georgia. 
 
(2012). 
http://www.usg.edu/. [Retrieved: December, 2012]. 
[17] C. Lester. (2012). Georgia Perimeter College STEM Annual 
Report Form 2011-2012.  Report submitted to the USG 
STEM Initiatives II Office. 
[18] Georgia 
Perimeter 
College 
Hybrid 
Courses. 
(2012). 
http://depts.gpc.edu/~gpchyb/ [Retrieved: December, 2012]. 
[19] GPC Teaching Guide, CSCI 1300 – Introduction to Computer 
Science. 2012. 
[20] A.F. Grasha. (1994). ―A matter of style: The teacher as 
expert, formal authority, personal model, facilitator, and 
delegator.‖ College Teaching. 42:142-149. 
[21] A. Gokhale.  (1995). ―Collaborative learning enhances critical 
thinking.‖ Journal of Technology Education 7, no. 1. 
[22] B.G. Davis. (1993). Tools for Teaching. San Francisco:  
Jossey-Bass Publishers. 
[23] S. Wang and S. Lin. (2006). ―The effects of group 
composition of self-efficacy and collective efficacy on 
computer-supported collaborative learning.‖  Computer and 
Human Behavior. 
[24] R.T. Johnson and D.W. Johnson. (1994). ―An Overview of 
collaborative learning.‖  Creativity and Collaborative 
Learning; 
Baltimore: 
Brookes 
Press. 
[Electronic 
Version].http://clearspecs.com/joomla15/downloads/ClearSpe
cs69V01_Overview%20of%20Cooperative%20Learning.pdf. 
[Retrieved: December, 2012). 
[25] R.M. Felder and R. Brent. (1996). ―Navigating the Bumpy 
Road to Student-Centered Instruction.‖  College Teaching.  
44:43-47.  
[26] C.C. Bonwell and J.A. Eison. (1991). ―Active learning: 
Creating excitement in the classroom.‖ ASHE-ERIC Higher 
Education Report No. 1. Washington, DC: George 
Washington University.  
[27] C. Meyers and T.B. Jones.  (1993). Promoting active learning: 
Strategies for the college classroom. San Francisco: Jossey 
Bass.  
[28] C. Lester. ―Advancing the Multidisciplinary Nature of Human 
Computer Interaction in a Newly Developed Undergraduate 
Course.‖  (2008). Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interaction.  
IEEE Computer Society Press. 
[29] M. Freeman and J. Capper. (2000). ―Obstacles and 
opportunities for technology innovation in business teaching 
and learning.‖  International Journal of Management 
Education 1 (1): 37-47. 
[30] M. Guhlin. (2004).  Creating video lesson plans.  
http://www.techlearning.com/features/0039/creating-video-
lesson-plans/42255. [Retrieved: December, 2012].  
[31]  Camtasia 
Software. 
(2012) 
http://www. 
camtasiasoftware.com/camtasia/index-camtasia-us.htm. 
[Retrieved: December, 2012]. 
[32] C. Demetry. "Work in progress — An innovation merging 
―classroom flip‖ and team-based learning," Frontiers in 
Education Conference (FIE), 2010 IEEE, vol., no., pp.T1E-1-
T1E-2, 27-30 Oct. 2010. doi:10.1109/FIE.2010.5673617. 
[33] D.L. Largent. (2012). A tale of two courses: an experience 
report about student engagement related to the use of an 
electronic student response system and pre-lecture videos. J. 
Comput. Sci. Coll. 28, 1 (October 2012), 47-54. 
[34] Teach-sim. (2012) http://www.teach-sim.com/. [Retrieved: 
December, 2012). 
[35] Cisco Binary Game http://forums.cisco.com/CertCom/game/ 
binary_game_page.htm. [Retrieved: December, 2012]. 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-253-0
eLmL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

