Teaching ESL and Instruction Design with Computational Thinking and Robot-
Assisted Language Learning 
 
Jianan Zhou  
School of Education, Duquesne University  
Pittsburgh, United States 
E-mail: zhouj4@duq.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Living in the 21st century, it seems impossible for 
everything to develop without technology, critical thinking, 
and computational thinking. This paper is to address the 
application of computational thinking on English as Second 
Language (ESL) teaching and robot-assisted language learning. 
After illustrating that computational thinking is a process to 
solve problems, while computational linguistics is a field 
concerned with the statistical or rule-based modeling 
of natural language, this paper gives a brief introduction of the 
Language Acquisition Device theory and how ESL teachers 
design the instructions and teach English by following the 
computational thinking process. Robots, however, can also be 
used to interact with English language learners and to help 
them with their speaking skills in the 21st-century classroom. 
Keywords-Computational 
Thinking; 
Computational 
linguistics; ESL instruction; Robot-assisted language learning. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Computational thinking (CT) is a problem solving 
process that includes a number of characteristics, such as 
logically ordering, analyzing data and creating solutions 
using a series of ordered steps; and dispositions, such as the 
ability to confidently deal with complexity and open-ended 
problems. CT is essential to the development of computer 
applications, but it can also be used to support problem 
solving across all disciplines, including math, science, and 
the second language learning. 
Currently, CT is broadly defined as a set of cognitive 
skills and problem solving processes that include (but are not 
limited to) the following characteristics [8][9]: 
• 
Using abstractions and pattern recognition to 
represent the problem in new and different ways. 
• 
Logically organizing and analyzing data. 
• 
Breaking the problem down into smaller parts. 
• 
Approaching the problem using programmatic 
thinking techniques such as iteration, symbolic 
representation, and logical operations. 
• 
Reformulating the problem into a series of ordered 
steps (algorithmic thinking). 
• 
Identifying, analyzing, and implementing possible 
solutions with the goal of achieving the most 
efficient and effective combination of steps and 
resources. 
• 
Generalizing this problem-solving process to a wide 
variety of problems. 
Computational linguistics (CL) is an interdisciplinary 
field concerned with the statistical or rule-based modeling 
of natural language from a computational perspective, as 
well as the study of appropriate computational approaches to 
linguistic questions. The theoretical goals of CL include the 
formulation of grammatical and semantic frameworks for 
characterizing languages in ways enabling computationally 
tractable implementations of syntactic and semantic analysis; 
the discovery of processing techniques and learning 
principles that exploit both the structural and statistical 
properties of language; and the development of cognitively 
and neuroscientifically plausible computational models of 
how language processing and learning might occur in the 
brain [7]. Today, CL often works as a member of 
interdisciplinary teams, which can include regular linguists, 
experts in the target language, and computer scientists. 
In this paper, we are going to address the application of 
computational thinking on English as Second Language 
(ESL) teaching and robot-assisted language learning. In 
Section II, the Language Acquisition Device theory shows 
how the human mind processes language acquisition of 
children's innate predisposition. Additionally, Section III 
gives a brief introduction of how ESL teachers design the 
instructions 
and 
teach 
English 
by 
following 
the 
computational thinking process. Robots are discussed in 
Section IV that they can also be useful in interacting with 
English language learners and to help them with their 
speaking skills in the 21st-century classroom. 
 
II. 
UNIVERSAL GRAMMAR (UG) IN LINGUISTICS 
The theory of universal grammar proposes that if human 
beings are brought up under normal conditions, then they 
will always develop language with certain properties. For 
instance, our brains can distinguish nouns from verbs, or 
distinguish the function words from the content words. 
The Language Acquisition Device (LAD) is a hypothetical 
module of the human mind posited to account for children's 
innate predisposition for language acquisition [1], and is a 
concept of an instinctive mental capacity that enables 
children to acquire and produce language, same as the 
process of how computers classify different documents. For 
example, we put verbs in the “verb” folder, or distinguish the 
Microsoft Word document by ending of “.doc”. The theory 
proposes that there is an innate, genetically determined 
language faculty that knows these rules, making it easier and 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

faster for children to learn to speak than it otherwise would 
be. 
Chomsky [1] states that the development of language in 
the individual must involve three factors: (1) genetic 
endowment, which sets limits on the attainable languages, 
thereby making language acquisition possible; (2) external 
data, converted to the experience that selects one or another 
language within a narrow range; (3) principles not specific to 
the Faculty of Language.  
As an interesting side note of historical importance, 
Chomsky made a number of important advances in the field 
of computer programming languages. He is credited with the 
development of the Chomsky hierarchy, a rigorous 
mathematical model of grammar [5]. Both of the 
mathematical model of grammar and universal grammar 
theories are vital and a great advance to the field of computer 
science and programming language theory.  
 
III. 
COMPUTATIONAL THINKING IS APPLIED TO ENGLISH 
LANGUAGE TEACHING/LEARNING 
Teachers in Science, Technology, Engineering, and 
Mathematics (STEM) focused classrooms that include 
computational thinking, allow students to practice problem-
solving skills, such as trial and error [10]. Basically, 
computational thinking is an iterative process based on three 
stages: 
1. Problem formulation (abstraction); 
2. Solution expression (automation); 
3. Solution execution and evaluation (analyses). 
However, why can we not apply the computational 
thinking process to the English as a Second Language (ESL) 
teaching in the classrooms? Therefore, this will be how ESL 
teachers structure the language teaching or design the 
instructions by following the computational thinking process 
[3]: 
• 
Exploration 
During the exploration phase, teachers can let ESL 
students watch some movie clips in English, whose contents 
should be related to what grammar or vocabularies they are 
current learning, such as the simple past tense, or 
vocabularies of different colors or animals. After watching 
the materials, students will be given a series of structured 
activities to engage in the production writing and speaking 
skills. 
• 
Analysis and breakdown 
This phase focuses on the analysis of the student’s 
comprehension of the materials and the elements they have 
found, such as new vocabularies, grammar features, etc. 
Particular attention should be drawn on certain elements. For 
example, the present progressive tense has been used whole 
time in the story that they watch. Then, the students will be 
encouraged to use the present progressive tense make 
sentence to talk about what things are happening in their real 
life. Also, as part of this analysis, students will be asked to 
write down the sentences they thought could best express the 
meaning of the story. Each student will choose the most 
important sentences for the whole class brainstormed, and 
then they will come up the main line of the story they read or 
the video they watched.  
• 
Identification of language patterns and theme 
Identification of language patterns and theme is the 
process of the study of the grammar, which focuses on how 
language elements are ralted to each other and the rules are 
established. A parse tree, as an example shown in Figure 1, 
models the grammar of a language and expresses the 
grammar in a way that clarifies the meaning of the elements 
in the language [5]. The word “thinking” is classified as a 
noun as a lower level of the parse tree. Meanwhile, the three-
word “the educated student” is classified as a noun phrase at 
the higher level of the parse tree.  
 
 
Figure 1. The structure of an English sentence is shown in this parse 
tree.  
• 
Abstraction 
If the previous stage is to let students generate a complete 
sentence by following the structure of the parse tree, then 
this step is to ask them to organize a short story following the 
five “wh-” question and one “how” question shown as 
TABLE 1.  
TABLE 1. THE FIVE “WH-” QUESTIONS AND ONE “HOW” 
QUESTION. 
 
WHAT 
Describe the story you want to present. 
WHO 
What are the characters in the story? 
WHEN 
When does this story happen? 
WHERE 
Where does this story take place? 
WHY 
Why you want to write a story like this? 
HOW 
What does each character interact? 
 
• 
Implementation: coding with “Scratch” 
This is the phase in which students use Scracth.mit.edu to 
code the movements of the cats, make the scenery based on 
their own stories. With Scratch, students can program their 
own interactive stories, games, and animations. Also, they 
can share their creations with others in the online community. 
Scratch helps students, including English language leaners 
learn to think creatively, reason systematically, and work 
collaboratively, which are the essential skills for life in the 
21st century. At this stage each student can works in groups 
in order to get all together to discuss progress, they help each 
other with not only the technology problems, but also the 
language problems. The meetings among group members 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

were very important because they allowed to involve all 
class members and everyone could contribute to the show 
with his/her point of view. On one hand, it improves students 
speaking proficiency; on the other hand, it encourages 
student’s teamwork spirit. 
• 
Assessment and improvement 
In addition to the checks and adjustments made during the 
learning process, instead of using tests or quizzes, the 
students are encouraged to use blogs to share stories or their 
writing assignments with others online where has more of an 
authentic writing experience. Since they can get feedbacks 
from a wider audience typically has access to read posted 
entries, students will get less anxiety and more motivations 
to do that, which means students tend to put more effort on 
it. Also, I believed that language is a communication tool, 
so students are encouraged to talk about what they have 
learned and what they did in the classroom in English with 
their parents and some digital device (e.g., robots, which we 
will discuss in the next section), in order to build an 
English-speaking environment outside of the classroom. 
 
IV. 
ROBOT-ASSISTED LANGUAGE LEARNING 
It is effective when second language learners directly 
interact with a native speaker in a class, and researcher 
believed 
that 
autonomous 
robots 
embedded 
voice 
recognition technology could perform the role of native 
speakers to interact with learners [2]. Also, research study 
has confirmed that this type of interaction between robots 
and humans not only improves teaching effectiveness but 
also learning motivation, because students are less anxious 
and more cheerful [4]. 
Given the fact that computers cannot conduct open ended 
dialogues and cannot give feedback to open ended questions 
[6], these problems can demonstrate that while technology 
could have much to offer for the learners for its high 
efficiency in delivering materials and interations. The robot 
teachers, which enhance English laguage learners’ learning 
process, could fix the difficulties of addressing the complex 
learner needs and inability to answer open-ended question in 
real time. 
Despite 
the 
great 
benefits 
of 
using 
robots 
in 
second/foreign language learning, the current application 
may be limited because of the two major reasons: 
autonomous robots have complex artificial intelligence and 
are so expensive that normally schools cannot afford them. 
Therefore, an alternative to solving the above problems is to 
buy robots with simple autonomous functions (e.g., 
Amazon’s Echo, Jibo, Google Home, etc.). These robots are 
mostly developed in a small size and at a lower cost. 
Meanwhile, they could be simply controlled by instructors to 
perform pedagogical missions and teaching materials in the 
classroom activities for facilitating learner’s engagement and 
oral interaction. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
With the number of courses steadily increasing to meet 
students' needs and demands, ESL students are getting more 
frequently encouraged or required to take English language 
courses to complete their study in English-speaking countries, 
or even non-English-speaking countries. Although the 
development of technology has made language-learning 
opportunities increasingly more accessible to a growing 
number of people, there is not too much research about 
learning English with computational thinking or robots. This 
paper is aim to call the attention of English language teacher 
to the use of the computational thinking and technology tools 
like robots. Future research needs to focus on the pedagogy 
and instruction design of using the computational thinking 
process and technology tool (e.g. robots) in the 21st-century 
ESL classroom. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Chomsky, Approaching UG from below. In Interfaces + 
Recursion = Language? Chomsky’s Minimalism and the 
View from Semantics, eds. Uli Sauerland and Hans–Martin 
Gärtner. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 2007. 
[2] J. Han, “Emerging technologies – Robot assisted language 
learning,” Language Learning & Technology, vol. 16, pp. 1-9, 
2012.  
[3] M. Lonigro, “ESL, computational thinking and robotics,”  
Retrieved from: https://marilina63.wordpress.com/ December, 
2017 
[4] S. Papert, Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful 
ideas (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Basic Books, 1993. 
[5] D. D. Riley, and K. A. Hunt, Computational Thinking for the 
Modern Problem Solver. Chapman and Hall. London, 2014. 
[6] A. Seileek, A. Farhan, and A. O. A. Sa’aleek, “Computer 
assisted language learning: Merits and demerits,” Language in 
India, 
vol. 
12, 
pp. 
31-44, 
2012. 
Retrieved 
from: 
http://www.languageinindia.com/april2012/v12i4april2012.pd
f December, 2017 
[7] L. Schubert, “Computational Linguistics, The Stanford 
Encyclopedia 
of 
Philosophy,” 
Retrieved 
from: 
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2015/entries/computatio
nal-linguistics December, 2017 
[8] S. Grover, and R. Pea, “Computational thinking in K–12: A 
Review of the State of the Field,” Educational Researcher, vol. 
42, pp. 38–43, 2013. doi: 10.3102/0013189X12463051 
[9] C. Stephenson, and B. Valerie, “Defining computational 
thinking for K-12,” CSTA Voice, vol. 7, pp.3–4, 2011.  
[10] D. Barr, J. Harrison, and L. Conery, "Computational thinking: 
A digital age skill for everyone," Learning & Leading with 
Technology, vol. 38, pp. 20–23, 2011.   
 
 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

