Gamification of Higher Education by the Example of Computer Games Course 
 
Martin Sillaots 
Institute of Informatics 
Tallinn University 
Tallinn, Estonia 
martins@tlu.ee 
 
 
Abstract - Use of game elements in course design is one example 
of gamification. The course of Computer Games was selected as 
a basis for gamification because game-like approach can 
support the understanding of the course content. A case study 
was conducted to find out how students perceive game-like 
course. The course of Computer Games was organized like a 
game. At the end of the course, feedback was collected. 
Although most of the game elements were well accepted by the 
students, it did not lead to deep immersion. 
Keywords – Gamification; Game elements; Computer Games. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Video gaming is one of the most important entertainment 
industries after the movies [1] and its importance is growing. 
According to Gartner Inc. the game industry turnover for the 
year 2013 was 93 billion dollars, for the 2015 the revenue is 
estimated to be 111 billion dollars [2]. Universities feel 
increased need to provide curriculums and courses related to 
computer games. Teaching computer game design and 
development provides different possibilities to combine 
technology, pedagogy, art and business [3]. One possible 
approach among others is gamification [4]. This method is 
not new and is frequently used in marketing and business 
conditions [5]. Education is one field where game elements 
have been increasingly used lately [4]. In most cases the 
gamification is implemented for increasing the engagement 
among students [6]. In the course of Computer Games, 
gamification can be used also for delivering content – study 
elements are integrated to the course management [7]. What 
are those game elements and how can they be used for 
organizing the work in the course of Computer Games? How 
students are accepting game mechanics in non-game 
environment? To answer these questions a course Computer 
Games was organized as a game. Later, a survey was 
conducted among students to find out how well different 
game elements were implemented.  
Research design is based on case study. In the 2nd section, 
the literature review is provided, game elements are specified 
and research questions are stated. In the 3rd section, the case 
– course of Computer Games is introduced. In the 4th section, 
research methods are described. In the 5th section, findings 
are presented. 
II. 
GAME ELEMENTS 
Gamification is the use of game elements and game-like 
thinking in non-gaming environment [4].  Examples of 
gamification vary from the single game-like learning activity 
[4] to the entire course that is designed like a game [7]. 
Experience points, scoreboards and awards are the most 
frequently used game elements in gamification but games 
provide much richer list of elements. To find out what game 
elements can be used for gamified course it is important to 
be clear what “game” is. 
“Game is a activity of play in the pretended reality where 
participants try to achieve challenging goal by acting in 
accordance with rules” [8]. By this definition game does not 
have to be a competition. Some authors distinguish games 
from the simulations saying that game is always a 
competition against something or somebody. Game does not 
have to be purely entertaining. For example, educational 
games have a serious goal. Some serious games are not even 
fun (e.g., medical simulators). 
There are different ways how to classify game elements. 
For example, Werbach and Cevin [9] structure game 
elements in three levels: components, mechanics and 
dynamics. In this article the game elements are structured by 
the main game aspects mentioned in the previous definition. 
A. Challenging Goals 
Course Goals can be seen as game goals. Every 
assignment has goals and they can be seen as game 
challenges [4]. Combining learning goals with game goals is 
not only related with gamification. This is a starting point for 
any approach related with game based learning [10]. 
B. Play 
Interactive activities are needed for achieving the goals 
and completing the challenges. Course activities can be 
designed as game activities. For example, easiest way to 
implement interactive activity is to use quiz instead of test 
[7]. Researchers have found that gamified activities have 
better results in practical assignments [11]. 
Feedback – To provide enjoyable playing experience the 
games should provide instant and rich feedback [8]. 
Unfortunately this is not always so in the education field. 
Teachers do not have enough time to provide qualitative and 
fast feedback to all students. The easiest way to provide fast 
feedback during the course is to organize interactive 
activities in the classroom or to design game-like virtual 
learning environment (VLE) that provides automated 
feedback for typical activities. Studies have shown that 
positive feedback stimulates students learning [12]. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Collaboration is one form of interactivity. When majority 
of the games are based on competition, the collaboration 
mode is used in party based interaction modes or in role 
playing games [8]. In both cases, collaboration is achieved 
through teamwork. Game collaboration models can be used 
for improving teamwork in learning conditions [13] and in 
workplace [14]. 
Competition – Not all games have competition (e.g., 
simulations) and not all players like to compete with each 
other. Still it is seen as one of the key fun factors in games 
[8]. Competition is not commonly used in education. 
Compering students by the results is even seen as a bad 
instructional design method (sometimes forbidden by the 
law). Still the easiest way to implement gamification in the 
classroom is to use a scoreboard. Also, learning activities can 
be designed as competitions or fights. For example, debate 
between two students or teams can be seen as fight. Some 
instructional designers use graphical game elements for 
avoiding dissemination of personal learning data but still 
implementing friendly competition between students [15].  
C. Rules 
Game core mechanics are usually complex set of 
different objects and relationships [8]. They declare how 
players and game environment interact with each other. One 
part of the core mechanics is the conditions for the 
progression. How player can earn or lose points, how the 
game is divided into levels and what are the pass or fail 
conditions. This can be easily implemented in education. For 
example, grades are experience points (XP), XP’s form the 
score and players are listed on the scoreboard [7]. 
Levels can be treated differently in games [8]. Usually, 
levels are different parts of the game world and assignments. 
Levels in the course can be seen as lessons or learning units. 
Levels can also refer to the rating of the player based on her 
score. In this case levels can be seen as a final grades for the 
course. Levels can be related with the difficulty of the game. 
In this case levels can describe different versions of the same 
assignment – suitable for personalized learning. The easiest 
way to integrate levels is to bind them with score and grades 
[7]. 
Balance – For providing enjoyable playing experience, 
game elements must be in balance [8]. In game-like course it 
is mostly related with scoring system – how many points for 
certain activity it is possible to get and how the student 
progress on the scoreboard. Balanced scoring system solely 
does not guarantee the balanced user experience. The playing 
activities and the learning content should also be in balance 
[16]. In the gamified course, there is a risk that too much 
effort is put in the play and important information is not 
achieved [17]. Also, the difficulty of the learning activities 
should be increasing during the course. Assignments should 
be balanced in the level where the learner is kept away from 
boredom or anxiousness – in the zone of flow [18]. 
Luck or randomness is one part of game mechanics. 
Some games are heavily based on risk and luck (e.g., 
gambling). Usually, players do not want to be affected by 
randomness [4]. They prefer to believe that their 
achievements are based on their own skills. Luck can be 
integrated to the course by rolling the dice for selecting the 
student who has to make a presentation [7]. 
Risk – Games are entertaining because they provide safe 
environment for taking risks. Usually, players fail with 
missions several times before they achieve the goal. 
Unfortunately this is not acceptable behaviour in educational 
assignments. Failures are usually punished with negative 
grades.  Taking the final exam more than twice is not 
tolerated. While in computer games it is normal to have 
several attempts before defeating the big boss. Risk is a 
game element that is most difficult to integrate with the 
course design. Some researchers have shown how using risk 
simulators will decrease the risky behaviour in real life, for 
example, in traffic [19] 
D. Pretended Reality 
Game world is an imaginary place – magic circle where 
players go during the game play [8]. Usually, it is created 
with the help of the story and graphical elements but not 
always. Sometimes game world is only a virtual space in 
players’ head. Creating this kind of imaginary place in the 
classroom is quite complicated. One possibility to achieve 
this is to design VLE as a game world. One example of 
building the game world is to use the map of local area for 
students’ data collection and presentation activities [20]. 
Characters are avatars and non-player characters (NPC) 
[8]. When implementation of NPC’s requires environment 
similar to the computer game [21], the avatar design can be 
integrated with creating the student’s profile in the course 
VLE [7]. This avatar is used as a character during the entire 
course. Students can pretend that they are somebody else 
(e.g., talented game designer). It can increase the immersion 
to the course [22]. 
Game aesthetics – Modern computer games have rich 
graphics. It is complicated to design educational course in 
the same level of details as commercial videogames have, 
but it’s realistic to design VLE as a game world or use game 
like icons for illustrating the course materials. One example 
is to use a virtual tree as a graphical element for representing 
the students’ progress [15]. 
Story – Games don’t have to be based on story. For 
example, for puzzle games only the rules are important. 
Some games (e.g., adventure games) are heavily story based 
[8]. Stories are also used in education. To build the entire 
course as a story is a complicated task. One method to do 
this is to implement the journey of a hero [23]. It can be 
integrated with avatar design in the beginning of the course, 
with the character growth during the course and self-
assessment at the end of the course.   
Immersion – When goals are clear and activities are 
organized in engaging way the participants loose the sense of 
time and they stop worrying about themselves. This kind of 
immersion is typical for computer games. [24]. 
 
Some of those items are very similar to educational 
elements. They can be implemented simply by changing the 
name of course elements. For example, Grades can be called 
as XP’s, assignments can be called as challenges or missions 
etc. Some elements are not so easy to integrate with the 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

course or lesson. For example, using game aesthetics in 
course design requires a lot of time. Some of the elements 
can be integrated directly; some aspects can be achieved 
through others (e.g., immersion). Implementation of game 
elements in education is growing trend but it is not widely 
studied how those game elements are accepted by the 
learners. The objective of this article is to answer this 
question. 
III. 
THE CASE COURSE 
To find out how game elements can be used in education 
the Computer Games course was designed as a game. The 
selection of the case was made based on convenience – the 
author of this article simply had to teach this course. This 
course is part of the Cross Media bachelor curriculum but the 
admission was open to all students. 35 students enrolled to 
the course and 23 (passing ratio 66%) of them completed it 
with positive result. 1 student didn’t achieved the positive 
end result and 11 students disappeared during the first two 
weeks of the course. Classes took place in the autumn 2013. 
Learning was conducted with the method of blended 
learning. It consisted of 12 face-to-face meetings (4 hour 
sessions per every week) and online learning assignments. 
Course virtual learning environment was based on Elgg 
Social Networking platform [25] and was used for study 
management, sharing learning materials, submitting home 
assignments and running online discussions (see Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Gomputer Games ELGG based VLE starting page. 
The objective of the course was to provide an overall 
understanding of game research and theory, design and 
implementation. The main focus lied on the game design 
[26]. The content of the course was based on the book 
“Fundamentals of game design” [8]. Learning activities were 
inspired by the book “Multiplayer Classroom” [7]. Course 
was organized like a game. The following game elements 
were implemented: Goals, Avatar, XP’s, Scoreboard, Levels, 
Luck, Collaboration, Competition and Feedback. The goal of 
gamification was to achieve deeper immersion among 
students. Elements like game world, visual elements and 
story were left out from the course design because it was too 
time consuming to integrate them with the learning activities. 
Game vocabulary was used instead of pedagogical terms. 
For example, students were called as players, teacher was a 
game master, assignments were missions, exam was a big 
boss fight, grades were levels etc. Most of the assignments 
were based on teamwork. Students formed teams and 
designed a new game from the idea to prototype. Every step 
in this process was treated as stand alone group assignment. 
Every assignment had three sub-activities:  
• 
Creating and uploading an artefact (document or 
drawing or prototype),  
• 
Randomly selected groups or students presented the 
artefact in the class,  
• 
Asking and answering questions from opposing 
teams.  
Most of the activities involved cooperation in the teams 
and competition between teams and provided immediate oral 
feedback to the students and written feedback in the VLE 
with maximum 1-week delay.  
Course started with introducing the learning goals. First 
assignment was to design a personal avatar. Students were 
encouraged to use nicknames that are related with the course 
content. They were also asked to design an icon for the 
avatar and write character background story. The main 
objective for avatar design was to generate safe names that 
can be used on the scoreboard and not to violate the personal 
data protection law.  
Next assignment was related with analysing and 
introducing student’s favourite digital game. Students had to 
write a short paper about one game and to describe its genre, 
gameplay and other elements. Third assignment was 
selecting a role for the game design team based on student’s 
background. Based on roles heterogeneous teams were 
formed with the help of TeamUp (see Figure 2). This tool 
enables forming groups automatically based on students’ 
preferences. 
 
Figure 2.  Forming teams with TeamUp. 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Forth assignment was providing an idea for the new 
computer game. Every student introduced their ideas in front 
of their team. Voting was made inside the group and the 
selected idea was introduced to the rest of the class. The 
owners of the selected ideas earned some extra points. After 
that the rest of the activities were conducted in teamwork. 
The aspect of chance was reduced during the team activities 
because it affected only the order of presentations. 
Next, students were asked to compose a document 
describing the specification of the new game. It included 
design of the game challenges and activities (gameplay), 
defining core mechanics of the game (rules), writing a story 
for the game, sketching the graphical items for the game 
world (backgrounds, characters, objects), composing paper 
prototypes and implementing digital prototype. For digital 
prototype development the eAdventure platform was used. 
eAdventure does not require programming skills [27].  
The course ended with the final exam (Big Boss Fight) 
where teams introduced their game specifications and 
demonstrated digital prototypes. Visitors from game industry 
were invited to listen students’ presentations and ask 
questions. After the exam students were asked to conduct 
self-evaluation. They had a chance to adjust the amount of 
points that were collected during the teamwork. 
Every activity generated certain amount of experience 
points (XP). Based on XP’s students were listed on the 
scoreboard. Game levels were based on scores and later they 
were converted into grades. Course included several bonus 
activities and possibilities to earn extra XP’s like testing and 
evaluating different game projects and providing links to 
additional learning materials. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
Observation diary, online questionnaire and group 
interview were used for data collection. Teacher of the 
course made notes after every class. In the end of the course, 
face-to-face group interview and online survey was 
organized to collect feedback from students. All together 27 
questions were asked (see Table 2). The questions were 
expressed in the form of a Likert scale, with a free text field 
for additional comments. 15 students (63%) out of 24 
answered the questionnaire.  
The interval scale with four values (see Table 1) was 
used for the answers. The neutral answer was left out 
intentionally to force students to take clearer standpoints. 
Descriptive statistics was used for data analysis. Arithmetical 
averages and standard deviations were calculated for every 
question and for the group of questions (game element). 
TABLE I.  
SCALES FOR THE QUESTIONS AND RESULTS 
Options 
Value 
Min 
Max 
Yes 
4 
3.26 
4.00 
Rather yes 
3 
2.51 
3.25 
Rather no 
2 
1.76 
2.50 
No 
1 
1.00 
1.75 
 
Later average results were tied with text-based 
explanations (see Table 1). The range of possible results 
from 1 to 4 was divided in to four equal segments. When the 
average score belongs to the range from 4 to 3.26 it means 
that this game element was successfully implemented and 
accepted by the students (Yes). If the aggregated result falls 
in to the range from 3.25 to 2.51 this game element was 
partly successful (Rather yes). If the result is between 2.5 
and 1.76 the game element was not successfully 
implemented (Rather no). 1.75 to 1 is a bigger failure (No).  
During the data analysis quantitative results were 
enriched with qualitative data collected with the help of open 
questions from the online questionnaire, with notes from the 
observation dairy and comments provided during the group 
interview. 
TABLE II.  
SURVEY RESULTS PER QUESTIONS AND GAME ELEMENTS 
Game Elements and Questions 
M 
SD 
Goals 
3.47 
 
1. Objectives were clear during the entire course 
3.47 
0.74 
Avatar 
2.30 
 
2. Design of a personal avatar was good for the 
immersion to the course 
3.07 
0.96 
3. Avatar influenced my behaviour on that course 
1.53 
0.92 
Scoreboard and XP 
3.42 
 
4. Scoreboard generated the sense of competition 
3.53 
0.64 
5. Scoreboard motivated me to achieve more 
3.53 
0.64 
6. Provided XP's were in balance with the effort needed 
3.20 
0.56 
Luck 
3.23 
 
7. Points that I earned depended on luck [inverted scale, 
yes = 1] 
3.13 
0.64 
8. Points that I earned depended on my knowledge and 
contribution 
3.33 
0.49 
Collaboration 
2.98 
 
9. I felt cooperation between the group members 
3.13 
0.92 
10. Course supported communication between students 
3.13 
0.74 
11. Teamwork was smooth 
2.73 
1.10 
12. Forming teams was justified 
3.13 
0.99 
13. The way how the teams were formed, was suitable 
2.73 
1.16 
14. Presentation of the teamwork results was engaging 
3.20 
0.94 
15 Thanks to the teamwork it was possible to earn points 
without contribution [inverted scale, yes = 1] 
2.77 
1.01 
Competition 
3.10 
 
16. I felt competition between the students 
2.67 
1.05 
4. Scoreboard generated the sense of competition 
(repeated) 
3.53 
0.64 
Feedback 
3.58 
 
17. Feedback to the learning activities was fast enough 
3.80 
0.41 
18. Feedback was rich enough 
3.40 
0.51 
19. The virtual learning environment was easy to use 
3.67 
0.72 
20. I had clear overview about my progress during the 
entire course 
3.47 
0.74 
Big Boss 
3.87 
 
21. Big Boss Fight was a suitable format for the final 
exam 
3.80 
0.41 
22. Inviting external experts to the Big Boss fight made 
the challenge more engaging 
3.93 
0.26 
Immersion 
2.55 
 
23. Learning activities were engaging 
3.20 
0.56 
24. During the learning activities I forgot about my 
everyday troubles 
2.13 
0.64 
25. During the learning activities I felt that time is 
passing faster than usually 
2.33 
0.90 
26. During the learning activities the concern about self 
disappeared 
2.53 
0.92 
27. During the learning activities I felt emotional 
connection with the other students 
2.53 
0.92 
Total 
3.09 
 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

I. 
RESULTS 
In general, the implementation of selected game elements 
was partly successful. The total rating for the case is 3.09 – 
rather yes, although the immersion was achieved in lower 
level (2.55 – rather yes, but close to the average). 
A. Goals 
Game and course goals are not so different from each 
other. Based on the total result (3.47 - yes) it seams that the 
course goals were clearly understood by the students.  
B. Avatar 
The use of avatar was not causing stronger immersion 
into the course (total result 2.30 - rather no). Students agreed, 
that creating an avatar helps them to immerse with the course 
in some level (average result for the question 3.07 - rather 
yes) but it did not change their behaviour during the course 
(average result 1.53 - no). In positive comments, they said it 
was fun to design a new personality and it also created some 
humorous situations during the course (e.g., teacher trying to 
call students with their avatar names). In negative comments 
they mention that this was not creating additional value to 
the course. Some felt it to be silly or even embarrassing. 
C. Scoreboard 
Replacing traditional grades with XP’s, levels and a 
scoreboard was well accepted by the students (total result 
3.42 -yes). Students agreed that XP’s were in balance with 
the effort needed for completing the assignments (3.20 - 
rather yes), scoreboard generated strong sense of competition 
(3.53 - yes) and motivated them to achieve more (3.53 - yes). 
Students provided only positive comments like: “We like 
games and competition” or “It was fun to over score your 
friends.”  
D. Luck 
Students were satisfied with the level of randomness 
(total result 3.23 - rather yes). They did not feel that points 
depended on luck (3.13 – rather no – inversed scale) and they 
had a feeling that points are related with their knowledge and 
contribution (3.33 - yes). 
E. Collaboration 
Although most of the assignments were executed in 
teamwork, the collaboration was moderate (total result 2.98 - 
rather yes). In general, students said that the work in teams 
was rather justified (3.13 - rather yes) but they were not very 
satisfied with the method how teams were formed (2.73 - 
rather yes). Students found that this was the main reason why 
teamwork was not smooth enough (2.73 - rather yes). In 
positive comments, some students justified this grouping 
method because it provided equal chances to everybody. 
Other suggested to form teams based on game ideas, then all 
team members are interested in the outcomes. According to 
students’ evaluation they did not abuse the teamwork for 
doing nothing (2.77 - rather no - inversed scale). But, it 
seams that some of the students were not honest while 
answering this question. One of the student said: “Maybe 
students think they are simply smart when they are letting 
others to do their work, not realizing that the others DO 
realize that they are abused. The work still needs to be done 
and someone has to do it.”  
Students agreed that the design of the course supported 
collaboration (3.13 - rather yes) and communication (3.13 - 
rather yes) among them. One mentioned that communication 
took place mostly inside the teams. She wanted to feel 
stronger connection with other teams as well. Some students 
commented that it was difficult to get the group together for 
team assignments. 
Students agreed that teamwork presentations were 
engaging (3.20 - rather yes). In negative comments they said 
that more time for preparation was needed (one week was 
not enough). 
F. Competition 
Students felt moderate competition during this course 
(total result 3.10 - rather yes). Because most of the work was 
organized in teams, the competition between individual 
students was low (2.67 - rather yes). Students rather 
appreciated that the format of the game was mostly based on 
collaboration and not on competition. They did not feel a 
need for additional competition elements (e.g., quizzes). 
Only game element that created the sense of competition was 
the scoreboard (3.53 - yes). 
G. Feedback 
Students gave high ratings to the quality of feedback 
during the course (total result 3.58 - yes). For them the 
feedback was fast (3.80 - yes) and rich (3.40 - yes) enough. 
The Elgg based VLE was easy to use (3.67 - yes) and thanks 
to the scoreboard they had always clear overview of their 
progress (3.47 - yes). In positive comments, they mentioned 
that personal feedback presented for every group after the 
team presentations was good enough. Only negative 
comment was related with the fact that students have to use 
too many different VLE’s (Moodle, Blogs, etc.). 
H. Big Boss 
Course ended with the exam (big boss). It did not 
demand a lot of extra work if all course assignments were 
delivered on time and with sufficient quality but it required 
some presentation skills and courage. Students were very 
satisfied with the format of final examination (3.80 yes). 
Also, the invitation of external experts was very well 
justified (3.93 - yes) total rating 3.87 - yes. Students gave 
high value to the questions and comments provided by the 
experts. The format of the final exam created a serious and 
challenging atmosphere. Some suggested to organize “small 
boss” before the big boss to make better presentations. It is 
true that training how to make good presentations was 
missing.  
I. Immersion 
Although most of the game elements were well accepted 
by the students (except avatar), the immersion to the course 
was weak (total score 2.55 - rather yes). In general, they 
found learning activities engaging (3.20 - rather yes) but it 
did not lead to forgetting everyday troubles (2.13 - rather 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

no). It did not cause the time to pass faster (2.33 - rather no). 
Loosing the concern about self (2.53 rather yes) and feeling 
emotional connection with other students (2.53 rather yes) 
was achieved in low level. The biggest obstacle for the 
immersion from the students’ point of view was the method 
how teams were formed (teams first ideas later). One student 
suggested that the reason was the scoring system – when 
points are given to teams as whole, individuals in the team 
stop contributing. She recommended to giving points to the 
teams but letting team managers decide how to distribute 
them. Some were not satisfied with the duration of the class. 
They claimed to have a short attention span and 4 hours is 
too much time to keep focus on the same topic. Finally, the 
physical environment of the course was not supporting the 
immersion. Classes took place in a cinema hall. It was nice 
environment but too big room with too comfortable chairs. 
This caused the student`s attention drifting away during the 
presentations and was not supporting the work in teams at 
all. 
II. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
The goal of this article was to find out how to implement 
game elements in course settings and how students accept 
them. The game elements like clear goals, scoreboard, luck, 
feedback and big boss fight were perceived well by the 
students. To some extent, those findings are similar to 
previously conducted survey results. For example, different 
rewarding mechanics e.g., scoreboard, is the most commonly 
used elements in gamification [4]. The element that got the 
highest approval from the students was the big boss fight - 
final exam in the format of presentation in front of experts 
from the game industry. It is worth to mention that students 
were also satisfied with the level of luck used during this 
course. Implementation of randomness was successful thanks 
to the fact that it was used for smaller learning activities. 
Users usually prefer to feel that their achievements are based 
on their skills not on luck [8]. 
Game elements like collaboration and competition were 
implemented partly successfully. In general, students agreed 
that course of game design should be based on teamwork and 
not based so much on competition but they were not satisfied 
with the method how the teams were formed. Forming teams 
on a voluntary basis around the game ideas should be 
preferred instead of randomly generated groups and finding 
ideas inside the teams. Because the interaction mode for this 
course was mostly based on collaboration, the game 
elements supporting competition can be reorganized. 
Although scoreboard seemed to be engaging for students it 
can be replaced with some less competition based rewarding 
system e.g., badges. Some mechanics should be provided to 
reduce possibilities to earn points without actual contribution 
to the teamwork. One method is to provide certain amount of 
points for the teamwork and team members have to decide 
how to share them. If the points are shared in equal level, the 
personal score for every team member is automatically 
reduced by one point. Another method is to allow sacking 
group members who do not contribute at all. 
Game element “avatar” was not successfully integrated 
with the course. It was only implemented for creating user 
profile and using anonymous names in the scoreboard. To 
give more value to the course, avatar can be integrated with 
the story of the course or journey of the character 
development. 
For conclusion, the immersion among students was 
recognized but unfortunately not in very deep level. Mostly it 
was caused by the fact how the teams were formed – there 
was no strong emotional connection between team members 
and between the students and the game idea. Also, the way, 
how the learning was organized, had an effect. For example, 
too much time was spent on traditional presentations. 
Students did not feel the need for stronger gamification in 
learning activities but they agreed that more innovative 
approach like flipped classroom [28] (listening lectures at 
home and doing assignments in the classroom) can be useful. 
Also, the physical classroom conditions had a negative effect 
on immersion. It would be worth of trying to design a game 
world for the course with the help of game aesthetics and 
interactive story. Creation of imaginary virtual place should 
have a positive effect on deeper immersion. 
For broader conclusions, additional research should be 
made. For example, how similar gamification approach can 
be implemented in other subjects and courses. Also, the level 
of immersion can be measured more exactly with the help of 
the flow model [29].  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by SEGAN (LLP-EC 
519332) network and Tallinn University Institute of 
Informatics. Special thanks to Triinu Jesmin for editing the 
article. 
III. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
D. Williams, “Structure and competition in the U.S. home 
video game industry,” Int. J. Media Manag., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 
41–54, Jan. 2002. 
[2] 
R. van der Meulen and J. Rivera, “Gartner Says Worldwide 
Video Game Market to Total $93 Billion in 2013,” 2013. 
[Online]. Available: 
http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2614915. [Accessed: 
10-Jan-2015]. 
[3] 
J. Murray, I. Bogost, M. Mateas, and M. Nitsche, “Game 
Design Education: Integrating Computation and Culture,” 
Computer (Long. Beach. Calif)., vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 43–51, 
Jun. 2006. 
[4] 
K. M. Kapp, The Gamification of Learning and Instruction: 
Game-based Methods and Strategies for Training and 
Education. Pfeiffer; 1 edition, 2012, p. 336. 
[5] 
K. Huotari and J. Hamari, “‘Gamification’ from the 
perspective of service marketing,” in Proceeding of the 16th 
International Academic MindTrek Conference, 2012, pp. 17–
22. 
[6] 
Z. Fitz-Walter, D. Tjondronegoro, and P. Wyeth, 
“Orientation Passport,” in Proceedings of the 23rd Australian 
Computer-Human Interaction Conference on - OzCHI ’11, 
2011, pp. 122–125. 
[7] 
L. Sheldon, The Multiplayer Classroom: Designing 
Coursework as a Game, 1 edition. Boston, MA, USA: 
Cengage Learning PTR, 2011, p. 304. 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[8] 
E. Adams, Fundamentals of Game Design, 2 edition. 
Berkeley, CA, USA: New Riders, 2009, p. 700. 
[9] 
K. Werbach and D. Hunter, For the Win: How Game 
Thinking Can Revolutionize Your Business. Philadelphia, PA, 
USA: Wharton Digital Press, 2012, p. 144. 
[10] J. P. Gee, “Reflections on empirical evidence on games and 
learning,” Comput. Games Instr., pp. 223–232, 2011. 
[11] A. Domínguez, J. Saenz-de-Navarrete, L. de-Marcos, L. 
Fernández-Sanz, C. Pagés, and J.-J. Martínez-Herráiz, 
“Gamifying learning experiences: Practical implications and 
outcomes,” Comput. Educ., vol. 63, pp. 380–392, Apr. 2013. 
[12] C. I. Muntean, “Raising engagement in e-learning through 
gamification,” in Proc. 6th International Conference on 
Virtual Learning ICVL, 2011, pp. 323–329. 
[13] A. Knutas, J. Ikonen, D. Maggiorini, L. Ripamonti, and J. 
Porras, “Creating software engineering student interaction 
profiles for discovering gamification approaches to improve 
collaboration,” in Proceedings of the 15th International 
Conference on Computer Systems and Technologies - 
CompSysTech ’14, 2014, pp. 378–385. 
[14] N. Vegt, V. Visch, H. de Ridder, and A. Vermeeren, 
“Designing Gamification to Guide Competitive and 
Cooperative Behavior in Teamwork,” in Gamification in 
Education and Business, T. Reiners and L. C. Wood, Eds. 
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2015, pp. 513–533. 
[15] R. Cronk, “How can Non-Content Related Online Games be 
Used to Drive Engagement in On-Ground Classes?,” in 
Proceedings of the 8th European Conference on Games 
Based Learning, 2014, pp. 77–83. 
[16] M. Johansson, H. Verhagen, A. Åkerfeldt, and S. Selander, 
“How to Design for Meaningful Learning – Finding the 
Balance Between Learning and Game Components,” in 
Proceedings of the 8th European Conference on Games 
Based Learning, 2014, pp. 216–222. 
[17] A. Hawlitschek and V. Köppen, “Analyzing Player Behavior 
in Digital Game-Based Learning: Advantages and 
Challenges,” 2014, pp. 100–206. 
[18] M. Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The Psychology of Optimal 
Experience. New York, NY, USA: Harper & Row, 1990, p. 
300. 
[19] R. Schroeter, J. Oxtoby, and D. Johnson, “AR and 
Gamification Concepts to Reduce Driver Boredom and Risk 
Taking Behaviours,” in Proceedings of the 6th International 
Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive 
Vehicular Applications - AutomotiveUI ’14, 2014, pp. 1–8. 
[20] E. Hammais, H. Ketamo, and A. Koivisto, “Mapping the 
Energy: A Gamified Online Course,” in Proceedings of the 
8th European Conference on Games Based Learning, 2014, 
pp. 176–181. 
[21] A. Duch, J. Petit, E. Rodríguez-Carbonell, and S. Roura, 
“Fun in CS2,” in Proceedings of the 5th International 
Conference on Computer Supported Education, 2013, pp. 
437–442. 
[22] P. Sweeney, “Sharing a Facebook Avatar Constructively in 
the Classroom,” in Society for Information Technology & 
Teacher Education International Conference, 2012, vol. 
2012, no. 1, pp. 3785–3790. 
[23] J. Campbell, The Hero’s Journey. New York, NY, USA: 
Harper & Row, 1990. 
[24] R. M. Baños, C. Botella, M. Alcañiz, V. Liaño, B. Guerrero, 
and B. Rey, “Immersion and emotion: their impact on the 
sense of presence.,” Cyberpsychol. Behav., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 
734–41, Dec. 2004. 
[25] M. Sharma, Elgg Social Networking: Create and manage 
your own social network site using this free open-source tool. 
Birmingham, UK: Packt Publishing Ltd, 2008. 
[26] M. Sillaots, “Computer Games Course Program,” 2013. 
[Online]. Available: 
http://htk.tlu.ee/icampus/pg/file/martinsillaots/read/212917/c
omputer-games-course-program. [Accessed: 10-Jan-2015]. 
[27] J. Torrente, A. del Blanco, E. J. Marchiori, P. Moreno-Ger, 
and B. Fernandez-Manjon, “<e-Adventure>: Introducing 
educational games in the learning process,” in IEEE 
EDUCON 2010 Conference, 2010, pp. 1121–1126. 
[28] Z. Jinlei, W. Ying, and Z. Baohui, “Introducing a New 
Teaching Model:Flipped Classroom,” J. Distance Educ., vol. 
4, 2012. 
[29] P. Sweetser and P. Wyeth, “GameFlow: A Model for 
Evaluating Player Enjoyment in Games,” ACM Comput. 
Entertain., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1–24, Jul. 2005.  
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-385-8
eLmL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

