E-learning for Global Citizenship with Conectando Mundos 
A South African Experience
Fortunate Gunzo1; Lorenzo Dalvit2 
Department of Education  
Rhodes University 
Grahamstown, South Africa 
1fgunzo@gmail.com; 2l.dalvit@ru.ac.za 
  
Areta Sobeiraj3; Rodrigo Barahona4 
Education Unit 
3Oxfam Italy; 4Oxfam Intermon  
3Italy; 4Spain 
3areta.sobieraj@oxfamitalia.org; 
4rbarahona@intermonoxfam.org 
Abstract—In this paper we discuss the work we have been 
doing with Connecting World, a global online platform which 
brings together children from around the world to engage 
collaboratively, on different topical issues towards finding 
workable solutions. The project draws on some aspects of 
collaborative learning to ensure that a rich virtual learning 
environment is created for learners. Working closely with 
teachers in their facilitator role, we assist schools and learners 
from different countries, backgrounds to share their 
experiences and tackle difficult questions on Connecting 
Worlds. In this paper, we share our experiences incorporating 
South African schools on this platform. Through an open 
ended questionnaire, teachers evaluated the 2010 edition of 
Connecting World in South African schools on climate change. 
The teachers also participated in a focus group discussion. 
From the findings, issues of time, language and technical 
problems were prominent.    
Keywords-Connecting 
Worlds; 
Collaborative 
Learning; 
Climate Change.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Collaborative learning has over the years become a 
powerful participatory teaching and learning strategy. It 
enables students to develop critical thinking skills and be 
responsible for what they learn and what others around them 
learn [1]. Although it is a difficult way of imparting 
knowledge as it requires the teacher to be aware of what each 
student brings to the class and shares with others, its team 
work approach and learner-centeredness make it a choice for 
the discussion of topical issues, which are sometimes hard to 
teach in a normal teaching environment.  
In this paper, we discuss Connecting Worlds, an online 
platform that gives students from all over the world an 
opportunity to share experiences and learn in a collaborative 
manner. Central to the learning that takes place is the 
Education for Global Citizenship drive of Oxfam, which 
provides for content and topics used for Connecting Worlds 
discussions. 
The first section of the paper focuses on collaborative 
learning which forms the bases of the work we do with 
Connecting Worlds. We then move on to describing the 
project before we discuss the South African experience with 
Connecting Worlds. A section of this paper is dedicated to 
the challenges South African teachers faced as they 
facilitated the project.  
II. 
COLLABORATIVE LEARNING 
Collaborative learning by definition uses teamwork as its 
main method of learning. It involves joint intellectual effort 
by students for understanding, solutions and meaning or 
creating a product [1]. Collaborative learning is about 
building cooperation and teamwork and getting students 
involved in the learning process. It is about building 
learning 
communities. 
In 
a 
class 
situation 
where 
collaborative learning is used, the teacher takes a facilitator 
role and allows students to explore content given to them 
and make sense of it without the teacher teaching or 
presenting the content. This promotes critical thinking skills 
in students as they have to engage with the content 
themselves.  
Collaborative learning views learning in five critical 
ways as outlined by [1]. Collaborative learning views 
learning as an active, constructive process. In order to learn 
students must find a way to integrate new information with 
what they already know. In some cases students might have 
to reorganise what they already know based on the new 
information. Learning is depended and influenced by rich 
contexts. Through collaborative learning students are 
exposed to challenging tasks or questions which provide a 
context for which they must use facts and their ideas to 
tackle the tasks or questions. Collaborative learning also 
views students as diverse because they bring multiple 
perspectives to the classroom based on their diverse 
backgrounds or experiences. Collaborative learning enables 
students to tap on each other‟s diversity as a way of 
learning. Finally, learning is understood as inherently social. 
Collaborative learning allows students to talk, much of 
learning happens through talking [2]. 
III. 
CONNECTING WORLDS 
A. What is Connecting Worlds?  
Connecting Worlds is an online multilingual educational 
platform which allows students aged from 6 to 17 years to 
work and interact with other students with different cultural, 
economic and social realities [3]. The work combines 
classroom activities with networking among students and is 
carried out in a cooperative manner in working teams of the 
same age range. Students are drawn from all over the world. 
Content is available in 7 languages, Italian, Spanish, 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Portuguese, English, Galician, Catalan and Basque. Each 
year, Connecting Worlds tackles a specific issue related to 
Education for a Global Citizenship such as labour standards, 
climate change or poverty and there is a different 
educational topic for each age group. Education for Global 
Citizenship is an initiative of Oxfam, which argues that due 
to globalisation, education plays an important role in 
preparing children and young adults to survive in the world 
today [4]. The initiative focuses on a number of topical 
issues which children and young adults tackle using 
multiple participatory methodologies such as discussions, 
role plays and debates. The project was designed by four 
countries namely Italy, Spain, Malta and Portugal. 
Connecting Worlds seeks to meet its main objective of 
fostering intercultural dialogue among students belonging to 
different 
social 
and 
geographic 
environments 
via 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs), 
which enable mutual knowledge sharing, diverse realities 
and discovering common problems.  
Teachers are central to the success of this project. As a   
facilitator of this learning process, a teacher can register a 
class online and commit to assisting learners throughout the 
duration of activities. Students work in groups on each 
activity before connecting with a „working team‟ on the 
internet. Working teams are made up of students from all 
over the world. Presentations of „working teams‟ findings 
and reflections are made to Connecting Worlds, in Spain by 
students from Spanish schools.  
B. Connecting Worlds in South Africa  
The Connecting Worlds project started in South Africa in 
2009. Teacher training started on the 27th January 2009 at 
Rhodes 
University, 
Grahamstown. 
Learners 
started 
activities on 16th February 2009 and finished on 29th 
March 2009. Schools that are involved are C.M.Vellem, 
Nombulelo, Nathaniel Nyaluza (all in Grahamstown) and 
Ngwane in Dwesa. Since the platform used by Connecting 
World is in several languages, South African teachers and 
students had to translate the communication they had with 
students from other countries whose languages are part of 
the platform. All South African participants communicated 
in English.  
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
A. Description of the context and sample 
The four schools that participated in the Connecting 
Worlds project in South Africa came from a class of 20 
teachers who were doing a professional development course 
at Rhodes University, Grahamstown in the Eastern Cape 
province of South Africa. The Eastern Cape Province, 
where all the schools that participated in this project are 
located, is one of the poorest provinces in South Africa [5]. 
Marginalised schools in the province are faced with the 
challenge of basic infrastructure such as decent, secure 
classrooms [6]. According to the NEIMS report [7], over 
6% (395) of the schools in the Eastern Cape Province are 
mud schools. This figure still stands in 2011 [8]. While over 
20% (1177) schools in the province do not have electricity 
supply [7], 90% of schools (not including private/special 
schools) do not have a computer lab [7]. 
The teachers were all registered for an Advanced 
Certificate in Education in Information and Communication 
Technologies (ACE ICT). The course caters for in service 
teachers interested in ICT and learning how to use ICT in 
their classes. All schools are in the Grahamstown townships. 
In the South African context, the term township usually 
refers to „the urban living areas (often underdeveloped) that 
during the apartheid era were reserved for non-whites i.e. 
blacks, coloured and working class Indians‟ [9]. Townships 
were usually built on the periphery of towns and cities. 
Over the years the ACE ICT course has catered for 
teachers from marginalized schools, who do not have the 
capacity to train teachers in the use of ICT (mainly 
computers) in their teaching. Marginalization is described as 
„occurring when individuals or groups are excluded or in the 
peripheries of dominant groups‟[10]. „Marginalization has 
roots in geographic isolation, race, gender, class, nationality, 
ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, learning disabilities, 
etc. It most often brings about reduced opportunities to fully 
take part in economic, political and social processes‟ [10]. In 
South Africa marginalization has roots in Apartheid which 
divided communities, resources and wealth according to 
race. Since independence the South African government is 
trying to redress these past imbalances, but most of the 
previously disadvantaged schools remain heavily under 
resourced and marginalized.  
Most of the teachers in the course were senior citizens. It 
is interesting to note that most of South Africa‟s teachers are 
on average over the age of 40 [11] as the profession struggles 
to attract young people due to the low salary and lack of 
status associated with teaching in South Africa. With our 
involvement in the teaching of this course we have noted 
how these teachers struggle to grapple with the course that is 
very much technology driven.  
B. Selection of the sample 
Connecting Worlds project was introduced to the ACE 
ICT class and the project and involvement of the teacher and 
their students described. Teachers voluntarily agreed to be 
part of the project. We must emphasize that we got more 
teachers who were interested in the project but could not be 
included in the final number of teachers who participated 
because their schools did not have computers and or internet 
connection. Selected teachers met with the Connecting 
Worlds representative at Rhodes University for training.  
C. Data collection  
Data were collected through an online, opened ended 
questionnaire. Questions were grouped according to five 
broad areas. Beside questions on the teachers views on the 
strengths and weaknesses of the project, we asked questions 
on the knowledge of subject (of climate change), impact of 
the project on the students, change to students‟ behavior and 
the use of the spaces during the activities. Each teacher 
prepared this evaluation and presented before the class. We 
realize that asking participants to present their evaluation 
might be seen as inappropriate. However, for this project, the 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

teachers were made aware that they were the first group to 
participate on Connecting Worlds in South Africa and that 
the purposes of their feedback were to help improve the 
project and ensure that future participants enjoyed the 
experience. We found that using this open method was 
useful as teachers were able to add more to others views and 
it also helped to trigger fresh thoughts and ideas that would 
have otherwise not been included in the written report.  
This was particularly important during the focus group 
discussion, which focused on the challenges faced during the 
project and solicited teachers suggestions for improvements. 
This provided a platform for an open, honest discussion 
among the teachers.  
V. 
FINDINGS 
Data analysis was done through grouping findings into 
the five themes according to how the questions were 
grouped in the questionnaire. As we continued to interact 
with the data, we found that two main themes were 
prominent and these are presented and discussed below.  
A. Valuable lessons from the activity 
While computer skills were never the focus of the study, 
teachers felt that the activity had an added value of 
increasing student‟s computer proficiency. Teachers found 
searching for information on the internet about sources of 
energy was relevant for students. “It was a good experience 
to work with the computers…gathering information through 
internet about the topic”. Teachers also said a project like 
this would help in that it encouraged students to search for 
information on the internet, once this skill is mastered 
students will always be able to find the necessary 
information on any topic and be aware. Teachers shared 
how students were excited to interact online with students 
from another country.  
For the teachers, the activity was also a learning curve. 
“We are able to communicate with other people from 
different countries through the internet. You share ideas 
with different people. You learn a lot from other people's 
experiences”.  
Although it was not possible to talk of real change, as 
the activity was short, teachers expressed how team work 
was reinforced. Learners participated quite well in all the 
activities that were set for them. The project increased 
knowledge on climate change “looking for information from 
the internet increase our knowledge, we find out more 
things about this climate change”. However, teachers noted 
that given enough time for the students to absorb all the 
information, the project had the potential to form an aware 
global citizen. One teacher said “my group was between 8 
years and 10 years therefore it was not easy for learners to 
capture the whole information immediately, but they learnt a 
lot about energy use”.  
 
 
 
B. Collaborative learning 
Teachers felt that the project through its activities gave 
their students a platform to share ideas with other students 
from all over the world. One teacher said “They [students] 
had an opportunity to see and read what learners from other 
countries wrote and created”. This is one of the main 
objectives of the Connecting Worlds and collaborative 
learning, to encourage students to tap into their diversity [1] 
in a classroom situation in order to enrich their learning. The 
activity also promoted communication and collaboration 
among students from different countries.  
Learning through discovery as has been seen to work in 
other research [12, 13, 14] was confirmed in the online 
learning that took place during the activities. “The learners 
worked independently, they discovered some skills on their 
own by helping each other. Activities were learner 
cantered”. “They [students] are able to search for 
information using internet independently”, 
Group work was the most important of all class work 
“The actual value of this activity was to develop listening, 
discussion as well as inventing skills; students were able to 
share ideas”. Another teacher said “group work reinforces 
working together” and encourages sharing experiences as a 
way of learning. Allowing for the group work involved all 
students. “Working in groups taking part in group 
discussions has involved students in a more participatory 
and enthusiastic way, because sometimes some children do 
not feel comfortable working or talking in front of their 
teacher”. “The students know how to work in groups and 
look for information from the internet”.  
Teachers found the activities allowed for participatory 
learning. One stated “Both online activities and classroom 
activities involved student in a more participatory and 
enthusiastic way. Creation of a little windmill using 
different materials was done in the classroom and later it 
was on the online activity”. “In both activities they 
participated very well because in the classroom activity they 
move around looking for materials for building a windmill 
and online activities they were looking for information from 
the internet”.  
VI. 
 CHALLENGES 
A. Language  
Language was mentioned as the biggest challenge.  
Since all the teachers and students from South Africa were 
IsiXhosa mother tongue speakers, and not proficient in 
English language, it was difficult for the students to express 
themselves within the working teams in English. One 
teacher said “Learners exchanged with other groups, but 
because of the language problem they could not read other 
languages, 
nevertheless 
they 
felt 
encouraged for 
participating”. Teachers were confident though that the 
experience motivated learners to practice more with English 
and to strive to have a good command of the language that 
serves as a lingua franca on the global scene. Another 
challenge came from the fact that the default language on 
the Connecting World home page site is Spanish. Teachers 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

struggled at times to change this to English. As a result, 
there was a discussion about the possibility of translating 
the website into IsiXhosa so that teachers and students from 
South Africa can use a language that they fully understand. 
Localization of websites is on the increase in African 
languages [15, 16]. 
B. Technical problems  
There were several technical problems along the way, 
chief among them being Internet connection problems. The 
schools that took part are part of another project at Rhodes 
known as Eyethu whose aim is to provide internet 
connectivity to schools in the township [17, 18]. Schools are 
therefore provided with a limited amount of internet 
connection quota after which a school can be disconnected. 
On a number of occasions, schools found themselves 
without internet quota and were unable to connect to the 
internet and students had to wait until the school could 
connect again to search for information and prepare for their 
activities. In cases where internet was available, students 
were allocated limited time to browse the web. 
C. Time  
Teachers felt that the one day training that they received 
before the project commenced was too short. There were 
also teachers who felt the six weeks period of the project 
was short for the students who participated in the project. 
More time, it was argued would have given the students 
time to interact with the data and make meaning changes to 
their way of thinking. There were also concerns about the 
timing of the project. The teachers felt that the project fell 
during times when teachers and students alike were busy at 
the schools and had to make time during weekends and after 
schools for the project. 
D. Teacher training and facilitation 
The teachers said the guide and instructions for the 
project were not clear enough for them to follow. Since 
there was no facilitation from the authors during the actual 
activities that the teachers and students had to undertake as 
part of the Connecting Worlds project, the teachers said they 
faced a number of challenges. These included difficulties 
with registrations on the website and logging in for 
activities, being unable to retrieve the training manual off 
the internet and translations. Teachers were confident that 
with facilitation some of these minor challenges could have 
been avoided. 
VII. SUGGESTIONS FOR IMPROVEMENTS  
Three critical areas emerged from the data as pointed out 
by the teachers; these are time, technical problems, and 
language. More time allocated for the activities was cited as 
a possible way of improving the project. Teachers also 
suggested more training time for teachers, now that there are 
teachers that have undertaken the project, training can now 
be done for a longer duration and done at peer to peer level. 
They also stated the need for a contact person in South 
Africa who can assist teachers along the way if they cannot 
access the internet to contact Italy.  
While language was viewed as a critical point as it had 
implication for the whole learning that was intended to take 
place during the activities. Teachers made a few suggestions 
towards curbing the problem of language, teachers 
suggested an easier translation process on the website as 
most of them struggled “there was a way of translating but it 
was not easy to do that”. Teachers were unfamiliar with 
other languages and did not know which language was 
which in order for them to translate it. “Countries should try 
to state their language they use when responding so that it 
will be easy to do translations”. “We could not identify any 
foreign language nor could we not read the responses from 
other countries”. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we described the Connecting Worlds online 
platform, which brings together children from all over the 
world to discuss topics around Education for Global 
Citizenship. We showed how this project draws from 
collaborative learning as its theoretical underpinnings. The 
objectives of Connecting Worlds among others are to foster 
intercultural communication and learning among students 
from different countries though the sharing of experiences 
and their realities through ICTs. The main aim of the project 
is to prepare students who are able to survive as a global 
citizen, aware and informed of what is happening around 
them. With the project growing in the European countries 
we discussed the introduction of South African schools 
teachers and students to the online platform. In this paper 
we focused on the evaluation of the project made by the 
teachers who participated. Teachers thought the project 
enhanced 
teamwork 
through 
the 
collaborative 
and 
participatory teaching strategies that were used such as 
group work. Language, time, technical problems and teacher 
training and facilitation were noted as the main challenges 
for the South African experience. Teachers suggested way 
of dealing with these challenges. We are of the view that the 
same collaborative and participatory learning strategies as 
those used in the Connecting Worlds project can be used to 
development students‟ critical thinking skills elsewhere.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to acknowledge funding from the Andrew 
Mellon foundation and the Telkom Chair at Rhodes 
University. We also would like to thank the ACE ICT 
students at Rhodes for their help during this study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Smith, B. and MacGregor, J. (1992). “What is collaborative 
learning?” in Goodsell, A., M. Mahler, V. Tinto, B.L.Smith, 
and J. MacGreger, (Eds), Collaborative Learning: A 
Sourcebook for Higher Education (pp. 9–22). University 
Park, PA: National Center on Postsecondary Teaching, 
Learning and Assessment. 
[2] Golub, J. (1988). Focus on Collaborative Learning. Urbana, 
IL: National Council of Teachers of English. 
[3] Conectando Mundos (2011). Available: 
http://www.conectandomundos.org/en  
[4] Oxfam (2006). Education for global citizenship: A guide for 
schools. Available: 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

http://www.oxfam.org.uk/education/gc/files/education_for_gl
obal_citizenship_a_guide_for_schools.pdf  
[5] Herskovitz, J. (2010). Rural schools from apartheid cloud 
South Africa‟s future. Reuters. Wednesday, July 21. 
[6] Farrell, G. and Isaacs, S. (2007). Survey of ICT and education 
in Africa: A summary report based on 53 country surveys, 
Washington DC: InfoDev/World Bank. Available: 
http://www.infodev.org/en/Publication.353.html 
[7] South Africa Department of Education (2009). NEIMS report. 
Available:www.education.gov.za/neims 
[8] Conway-Smith, E. (2011). In South Africa, attending school 
in a mud hut. Independent Education. April. Available: 
http://www.ieducation.co.za/in-south-africa-attending-school-
in-a-mud-hut/ 
[9] Bond, P. (2008). Townships, In International Encyclopedia of 
the Social Sciences, 2nd edition: Macmillan, USA 
[10] Hourcade, H.J.P., Bullock‐Rest, N.E. and Schelhowe, H. 
(2010). Digital technologies and marginalized youth. In 
Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on 
Interaction Design and Children (IDC '10). ACM, New York, 
NY, 360‐363. 
[11] Amstrong, P. (2009). Teacher pay in South Africa: How 
attractive is the teaching profession. Stellenbosch Economic 
Working Papers: 04/09. Available: 
http://www.ekon.sun.ac.za/wpapers/2009/wp042009/wp-04-
2009.pdf. 
[12] Mitra, S. (2003). Minimally invasive education: A progress 
report on the 'Hole in the wall' experiments. The British 
Journal of Educational Technology, 34(3), 367-371. 
[13] Cambridge, G. (2003). Minimally Invasive Education, digital 
doorways and smart cards. Presentation at the Smartcard 
Society 
Conference 
5-7 
July. 
Available: 
www.digitaldoorway.org.za  
[14] Dangwal, R., Jha, S., & Kapur, P. (2005). Impact of 
Minimally Invasive Education on children: An Indian 
perspective. British Journal of Education Technology, 37(2), 
295. 
[15] Dalvit, L., Tsietsie, M., Mapi, T., Sam, M., Maseko, P. and 
Terzoli, A. (2008). “The localisation into isiXhosa of iLanga, 
a VoIP PBX”. Paper presented at the 4rd Annual International 
Conference on Computing and ICT Research (SREC-2008), 3 
- 6 August 2008, Makerere University, Kampala. Available: 
http://ijcir.org/specialissue2008/article5.pdf  
[16] Dalvit, L., Maseko, P., Nosilela, B., Mapi, T., Sam, M., 
Terzoli, A. and Bailey, D. (2008). “The first translate@thon at 
Rhodes: localising Horde/Imp into isiXhosa”. Paper 
submitted for presentation at the 10th Annual Conference on 
WWW Applications, 3 - 5 September 2008, Cape Town. 
[17] Brandt, I., Hodgkinson-Williams, C., and Terzoli, A. (2005). 
“Wireless communications in previously disadvantaged 
secondary 
schools 
in 
Grahamstown 
South 
Africa”. 
Conference presentation accepted for the 10th Annual Tech 
International 
Conference 
and 
Exposition, 
Pasadena, 
California, USA, 2005. 
[18] Siebörger, I., Terzoli, A., and Hodgkinson-Williams, C. 
(2008). “The development of ICT networks for South African 
schools: Two pilot studies in disadvantaged areas”. Learning 
to Live in the Knowledge Society, 281, 167-170 , IFIP WCC 
2008, Milan, Italy, September 2008. 
APPENDIX  
Questions for teachers: Strengths/weaknesses 
1. 
In your opinion what were the strengths and the added 
value of this type of activity? 
2. 
What are the main critical points of the activity? What 
could make it more effective? 
3. 
Which part of the activity did you find more relevant and 
interesting (input online activities in the classroom - 
group work/research - or in the territory, the exchange 
between students of different countries, exchange with 
colleagues from other countries etc.)? 
4. 
As to online activity, which was the impact and value of 
the work? 
5. 
As for the work done in class, what were the impact and 
the actual value of the activity? 
Questions for teachers: Knowledge on the subject  
6. 
With regard to learning, do you believe that this activity 
has increased your knowledge and the knowledge of your 
class in respect to the subject of climate change? 
7. 
Do you believe that an activity/project of this type is 
really useful for the formation of an aware, informed and 
responsible citizen of tomorrow?  
Questions for students 
8. 
Which part of the activity (online activities, activities in 
the classroom.) has involved students in a more 
participatory and enthusiastic way? 
9. 
To what extent has the class exchanged experience with 
other classes of the group? Have you found that your 
students have felt encouraged by participating in shared 
activities with students from other countries and of other 
languages? 
10. Has Conectando Mundos changed the dynamics of 
student learning (group work, researching materials on 
the internet)? 
Change of behaviour  
11. Have you been able to verify a real change of behaviour 
in class and individual students, regarding the issues 
studied? 
Use of space 
12. Did you and your class use other spaces/tools platform 
(blackboard, forums)? If not, why?
 
 
 
 
 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9
eLmL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

