An Existential-Humanistic Process Model of Knowledge Creation 
Evidence, Limitations, and Potential for Innovation in Virtual Organizations 
Michelle Marquard 
Cisco Systems, Inc. 
Roseville, CA, USA 
mmarquar@cisco.com 
Murtuza Ali Lakhani 
Apollo Education Group 
Roseville, CA, USA 
ali.lakhani@apollogrp.edu
 
 
Abstract—Despite 
rigorous 
business 
strategies, 
astute 
leadership, abundant capital, state-of-the-art technology and 
tools, creative skilled workforce, and established processes, 
many companies are waking up to a scene of despair.  The 
tumultuous times of change marked by a complex business 
environment, exponential technologies, and market turmoil are 
driving the race to the finish for innovation.  The premise of 
this research study was that if people are ultimately 
responsible for leveraging organizational assets and their own 
intellectual and imaginative resources for the creation of 
knowledge, then their need for a sense of community should 
matter and guide the social structure of their omni-connected 
work environment.  From the participation of 264 knowledge 
workers across more than 12 industries, this quantitative study 
found that 48% of knowledge creation can be attributed to 
sense of community characterized by feelings of co-leadership, 
connection, belonging, give and take, ability to influence 
organizational outcomes, and creative growth.  The results 
revealed that both high-tech and high-touch work practices, 
such as telecommuting, spontaneous face-to-face interactions, 
and synchronous and asynchronous collaboration lend positive 
support for sense of community, the source of undeniable 
advantage.  The strategic outcome of this study is an 
existential-humanistic process model of knowledge creation 
presented along with evidence, limitations, and potential for 
innovation in virtual organizations. 
Keywords-knowledge 
creation; 
innovation; 
sense 
of 
community; 
technology-mediated 
collaboration; 
virtual 
organization; telecommuting; needs fulfillment; emotional 
connection; 
group 
membership; 
influence; 
socialization; 
externalization; combination; internalization. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A business environment characterized by shocks, 
disorder, and volatility can drive unadaptive companies to 
extinction, while persistently favoring, to the bitter end, 
companies that are prepared to innovate.  Knowledge 
creation has therefore long been recognized in the business 
literature as a crucial construct [1][2].  Scholars and 
practitioners from a range of disciplines have devoted their 
energies to uncovering ways to foster the creation of 
knowledge [3][4][5].  The reality is that knowledge creation, 
rather than being about the talent of a single individual, is an 
interpersonal process [6][7][8].  Knowledge is created out of 
a rigorous dialectical exercise of gathering, interpreting, 
communicating, synthesizing, and applying collective 
reasoning, observations, and experiences [9][10][11].   
Dialectic collaboration is a means for amalgamating 
human ideas permeated in a multiplicity of social, cultural, 
and historical contexts [12].  Exponential technologies have 
opened doors for evermore participants to join in virtual 
collaboration [13] to solve the foremost challenges facing 
their organizations.  Being more impersonal and inhibited 
than face-to-face interactions, virtual collaboration can lead 
to conflicts and misunderstandings [5] and increase the risk 
of perpetuated acrimony and stress [14].  This dilemma 
surrounding virtual work has spawned off a vociferous 
debate among practitioners and scholars.  Meanwhile, 
companies across the board are struggling to find ways that 
not only promote social bonds, workplace fluidity, and 
serendipitous encounters, but also 
foster employee 
flexibility, engagement, and loyalty [4][5].  Yahoo! and 
Hewlett Packard, two of the companies caught in the virtual 
work dilemma, have reversed their longstanding telework 
practices [15][16][17], without comprehending how that 
makes them vulnerable to a subtractive effect detrimental to 
innovation [12].   
Knowledge is a complex, organic asset [18][19] that 
arises out of an interdependent process of collective 
imagination [4][8].  Literature is replete with evidence that 
throwing money perfunctorily into research and development 
or incentive systems does little to promote innovation 
capabilities.  Apple ranked the most innovative company for 
three consecutive years, yet its spending on research and 
development was nearly half as much as that of its nearest 
rivals [20][21].  The fact that the companies judged the most 
innovative and the best places to work for are vastly different 
[21][22] suggests that innovation is neither a result of 
inundating research and development with resources nor is it 
about pampering employees with over-the-top perks.   
The most powerful strategy for companies seeking to 
build and sustain the capacity for innovation is to focus on 
the virtues, skills, and knowledge of people and how to 
connect their talents [23][5].  For companies aspiring to 
produce game-changing breakthroughs for their markets, the 
game change must begin at home.  We argue that sense of 
community, the imperceptible link that connects and drives 
people, is both an antecedent and a consequence of 
knowledge creation and, as such, that the overarching 
priority of organizations must be to shape the social 
structures of knowledge work with a careful consideration to 
sense of community. 
The next section comprehends the important theoretical 
research and empirical studies published in the literature on 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

knowledge creation, sense of community, and social 
structure of virtual organizations.  The sections on problem 
and purpose statements interpret the problem researched and 
state the purpose of the study.  The following sections 
present the research questions used to extend prior theory, 
the instruments underpinning the study, and the research 
framework of this study.  The sections that follow present the 
results and limitations of this study.  Finally, the conclusions 
and the scope for future work are presented. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Enduring companies are built by people having the 
passion to bring innovative products to life [4][24].  To such 
companies, success 
is 
more than 
material gains.  
Knowledge, the root of innovation, is fueled by humanity.  
When the participants feel a sense of belonging, know that 
they make a difference, and believe that their commitment 
will get them what they need, they are said to share a sense 
of community [25][26], which helps build trust, inspire 
sacrifice, and power collaboration [27].  The social 
connection renders the knowledge creation process organic 
by helping grow the participants’ personalities and extend 
the response repertoire of the company sustainably over 
time.  While the human ability to find patterns in random 
noise and apply imagination is crucial [4][24], knowledge 
creation is not about the talent of a single individual with 
bounded rationality [10][28][29][30].   
Dyer et al. [9] observed that innovators are consistent 
exemplars of the skills for questioning, observation, 
networking, experimentation, and association.  Knowledge 
creation includes generation, improvement, application, and 
utilization of new ideas [31, p.70], the basis of which is in 
the social, cultural, and historical contexts of the individual 
[32].  However, interpersonal networks are indispensable to 
a dynamic evaluation, permeation, and adoption of 
knowledge [5][33], characterized as complex, tacit, 
subjective, embedded, and socially constructed [6][34][35].   
Sense of community is an invisible force that unites 
people, embodying trust and affection associated with 
feelings of sacrifice, loyalty, and engagement [36].  It 
affords an aggregation of human assets needed to deal with 
forces in the external and internal environments [37], and 
delimits in-groups from out-groups and creates a form of 
safety, belonging, and intimacy among the participants [25].  
Interpersonal configurations flourish if the relationships that 
underpin them are accumulative [38].  Hirshi [39] held that 
attachment, commitment, involvement, and belief in 
common values were the principal aspects of social bond, a 
facet of the sense of community.  A measure of bonding is 
social capital, which Putnam [23] referred to as the currency 
of trust, partnership, compassion, and communal interplay 
that not only satisfies the social needs of an individual, but 
also bears the potentiality for the improvement of the 
collective unit to which the individual belongs.  Nisbet and 
Perrin [40] observed, “First and foremost of the social bond 
is the symbolic nature of all true behavior or interaction” (p. 
39).  Sense of community stimulates extension of the 
interpersonal selves of participants in the knowledge 
creation process, resulting in a broadening of the response 
repertoire of the organization [12][28]. 
An ever-increasing number of companies are adopting a 
distributed, networked structure, in which collaboration 
among dispersed people is largely mediated by technology.  
Such workplaces are called virtual organizations, wherein 
the knowledge workers are considered the most valuable 
asset [1].  Companies across the board are in a battle for 
talent.  Drucker [1] observed that managers must treat 
knowledge workers as volunteers who are more concerned 
about autonomy and empowerment, connection with their 
peers, and engagement in organizational governance than 
they are about pay.  Virtual organizations work when they 
offer workers a share in collective success, a way to govern 
themselves, effective collaborative structures and processes, 
and technologies for communication and coordination [13].  
The downsides of virtual organizations, however, include 
virtual communication being more inhibited than face-to-
face interactions and conflicts and misunderstandings being 
more pronounced [5].  Since social interplay is essential to 
knowledge creation, the need to understand how proper 
work practices and social dynamics might help overcome 
the shortcomings facing virtual organizations is greater than 
ever before.   
Social technologies, including video telephony, have 
altered the concept of virtual organization.  Pervasively 
available synchronous and asynchronous collaboration tools 
afford geographically-distant employees with the feeling of 
being together by enabling them to track position, opinions, 
movement, actions, and voice [41][42][43].  However, the 
fundamental prerequisite to knowledge creation is a free and 
fresh flow of ideas across organizational levels in physical 
and virtual work environments [44], for only when the 
participants’ subjective and objective discernments afforded 
the opportunity to fuse is knowledge utilized and 
proliferated [8].  Hamel [2] suggested that being prisoners to 
the paradigms established and supported by the bureaucratic 
class may have limited further innovation.  Changing these 
paradigms is counter to the traditional way of thinking and 
being [45].  McMillan and Chavis [26] observed that “the 
first task of the community is to make it safe to tell ‘the 
Truth’” (p. 316).  Adverse group and intergroup 
relationships are the sources of anti-learning behaviors and 
organizational defenses detrimental to knowledge creation 
[18], a sense of community fostered by healthy 
interrelationships is the foundation of knowledge making in 
human-centered organizations [2][7][46].   
Knowledge creation at the foundation of innovation has, 
in fact, been acknowledged as a dynamic process of 
continuously resolving contradictions, chaos, and conflicts 
[12], which can often be sources of stress rather than job 
satisfaction [14].  Employees noted for leading Apple’s 
transformation to the world’s most innovative company 
described their journey as both inspiring and unsettling [4].  
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Just as human muscles get stronger when subjected to 
physical strain [11], knowledge creating organizations 
benefit from pressure, disorder, and unpredictability, 
provided their energies are suitably invested in talent, 
process, and tools [21].  In a global environment where 
innovation is front and center on the agenda of companies 
[9], it is crucial to understand how to sustainably foster 
knowledge creation. 
III. 
PROBLEM STATEMENT 
Exponential technologies have placed organizations in a 
dilemma by lifting the barriers to borderless collaboration 
[5][41], while rendering social interrelationships more 
impersonal and inhibited [2][13].  Evermore people are able 
to collaborate with great flexibility, yet their interplay is 
prone to conflict, misunderstanding, and distress [14].  
Collaboration remains situated in legacy work practices and 
a leadership mindset that favors hierarchy, silos, and rigidity 
over practices that free people to stay human, express their 
creativity, and empower them to design their own work 
spaces [47].  Sense of community, the tacit link that allows 
people to build bridges across departments and geographic 
boundaries, can aid in resolving this dilemma by helping 
companies balance inclusion, cohesion, and empowerment.  
Knowledge creation and sense of community have long and 
independently been investigated [6][9][12][25], but the 
linkages between the two constructs have not been 
adequately explored in the ubiquitous context of omni-
connected virtual organizations.  Innovation is a field of 
unfair advantage and the lifeblood of business success [48].  
There is therefore an urgent need to develop an 
understanding of the relationship between sense of 
community and knowledge creation and construct an 
instrumental model of knowledge-based work practices for 
the optimization of sense of community. 
IV. 
PURPOSE OF THE STUDY 
The purpose of this quantitative research was to 
investigate the relational linkages between sense of 
community and knowledge creation in the ubiquitous 
context of virtual organizations and explore the social 
structure of knowledge work with regard to sense of 
community.  Knowledge-creating ability can only be 
sustained when organizations drive out self-protective, 
coercive, and socially-closed behaviors and instead offer 
workers a share in communal success, ways to express and 
govern themselves, and effective collaborative structures, 
tools, and processes. 
V. 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
The following three research questions guided this study: 
1. 
What is the nature of relationship between sense of 
community and knowledge creation? 
2. 
What is the nature of relationship between sense of 
community and structure of knowledge work? 
3. What are the most important variables in the above 
relationships?  
VI. 
RESEARCH FRAMEWORK 
Sense of community has been described as “a feeling that 
members have of belonging, a feeling that members matter 
to one another and to the group, and a shared faith that 
members’ needs will be met through their commitment to be 
together” [26, p. 9].  The four factors that encompass the 
force of sense of community are group membership, 
influence, needs fulfillment, and emotional connection.  
Group membership is a perception of oneness that leads 
members to act along the salient characteristics of the group.  
Influence is a mutual sense of significance and making a 
positive impact. It is a bidirectional concept that applies to 
the group member as well as the group.   The needs of group 
members may include status, success, and association.  A 
strong community arranges members and provides them 
with opportunities to satisfy their mutual needs.  Emotional 
connection arises from the history the members share or 
recognize with.  The more the positive experiences the 
members have experienced together, the greater their bond.  
In summary, a strong sense of community is built from 
members sharing a sense of oneness; feeling a bidirectional 
influence; having their needs of status, success, and 
association addressed; and experiencing a growth of social 
bonds with other members.  
In Nonaka and Takeuchi’s [8] constructionist model, new 
knowledge forms a spiral resulting from four modes of 
interactions between implicit and explicit forms of current 
knowledge, 
namely 
socialization, 
externalization, 
combination, and internalization.  Socialization is the 
process of transferring implicit knowledge through a sharing 
of day-to-day experiences.  Externalization is the process of 
making implicit knowledge explicit through articulation and 
communication.  Combination is the process of synthesizing 
the implicit and explicit forms of current knowledge into an 
explicit form of new knowledge.  Internalization is the 
process of assimilating or making implicit the explicit 
knowledge gained through the combination process.  The 
process of incorporating knowledge into the regular 
activities of the organization has also been termed 
routinizing [5]. In summary, knowledge creation is a 
continuous and dynamic process of making current 
knowledge accessible and, through a dialectical process, 
enabling interactions among individuals in the organization 
and external environment drive the construction of new 
knowledge.   
Sense of community is the locus (source) and work 
practices are the mechanism (means) in the knowledge 
creation (outcome) process.  The technologies for 
communication and coordination in virtual organizations 
include email, 
audio and video 
interactions, and 
asynchronous tools, such as wikis, blogs, and e-learning 
forums. 
 
Collaborative 
technologies have enabled 
telecommuting, whereby employees are able to work 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

remotely.  The consideration of the demographics of the 
participants, namely the diversity of age (generations), 
gender, role, tenure, and national culture is also important to 
the comprehension of sense of community and knowledge 
creation.  
Fig. 1 illustrates the broad conceptual framework of this 
research. Based on the above discussion of knowledge 
creation, sense of community, and work structure, the 
following fundamental linkages were hypothesized: 
H1. Sense of community is positively related to 
knowledge creation. 
H2. Work practices are positively related to sense of 
community. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Locus (Sense of Community) and Mechanism (Work Practices) 
of the Outcome (Knowledge Creation). 
VII. 
  INSTRUMENTS 
The 8-item Brief Sense of Community Scale (BSCS) [49] 
represented the sense of community dimensions of needs 
fulfillment, group membership, influence, and emotional 
connection.  The BSCS was used with certain adaptations to 
be consistent the format of the combined survey and the 
research context.  The 10-item Knowledge Creation 
Practices (KCP) [50] assessed the construct of knowledge 
creation 
based 
on 
Socialization, 
Externalization, 
Combination, and Internalization (SECI) processes of the 
knowledge creation theory.  The KCP scale was used with 
certain significant adaptations not only to be consistent with 
the format of the combined survey and research context, but 
also to add further clarity to questions. The authors 
demonstrated their respective scales to possess acceptable 
levels of psychometric robustness. 
VIII. RESULTS 
Data for this research were obtained through a combined 
survey composed of adapted versions of the BSCS and KCP 
survey instruments supplemented by five demographic 
items and eight items related to work practices.  The survey 
was hosted on Constant Contact, an online marketing 
company.  The combined instrument, including the 13 new 
items and modifications to the original BSCS and KCP 
scales, was re-tested for reliability and factor goodness.  The 
final instrument was confirmed to be psychometrically 
sound.  Results of the reliability and factor analyses are 
available upon request. 
From a professional contact database comprising 15,979 
knowledge workers, such as skilled and qualified engineers, 
scientists, and managers, a random sample of 2,354 names 
was drawn, representing a wide range of industries and 
demographics.  Emails were sent to the selected participants 
informing them of the purpose of the research and soliciting 
their voluntary and confidential participation.  Of the 2,354 
invitees, a total of 286 knowledge workers participated.  22 
entries had to be discarded due to incomplete entries.  A 
tally of 264 participants made this study, representing an 
11.21% return rate.  Data were analyzed using both SPSS 
v.13 and Minitab 16.   
45 (17.2%) of the research participants were from the 
education industry, 44 (16.8%) were from healthcare, 34 
(12.9%) from technology and telecommunications, 31 
(11.7%) from service, 23 (8.6%) from government, 10 
(3.9%) from consumer products,  9 (3.5%) from energy, 8 
(3.1%) from banking, 7 (2.7%) from manufacturing, 7 
(2.7%) from consulting, 5 (1.9%) from biotechnology, 4 
(1.6%) from entertainment and leisure, and the remaining 35 
(13.4%) were from the defense; software; food, beverage, 
and tobacco; transportation; aircraft; automotive; cargo 
handling; chemical; real estate; and sports industries.   
More than twice as many females participated in the 
study as males.  Participants whose work location was the 
United States dominated the study in terms of raw count. 
All age groups were represented in the study, except for 
workers under the age of 21.  The participants spanned the 
entire range of tenure in their organizations.  The largest 
representation was of those with more than 15 years of 
experience.  Similarly, all the roles in the organization were 
represented, with senior managers having the largest 
representation.  
Shapiro-Wilk and K-S tests of normality indicated that 
the constructs of sense of community and knowledge 
creation as well as their subfactors have bivariate normal 
distributions, making it possible to run parametric analysis.  
Data supported both hypotheses, H1 and H2.  We concluded 
that 0.48 (or 48%) of the variation in knowledge creation 
could be explained by the linear relationship between sense 
of community and knowledge creation.  This means that 
about 52% of the variation in knowledge creation can be 
explained by factors other than sense of community.  Such 
other factors may include the skills and creativity of the 
participants, leadership effectiveness, processes and tools, 
organizational culture, R&D and capital investments, and so 
on.  The p value of .00 indicates there is sufficient evidence 
to support the claim of a linear relationship between sense 
of community and knowledge creation. Fig. 2 presents the 
linkages across work practices, sense of community, and 
knowledge creation, representing the first of the three parts 
of the existential-humanistic process model of knowledge 
creation. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Although the factor of group membership was found to 
be independently related to socialization (r=.50, p=.00), 
externalization (r=.42, p=.00), combination (r=.49, p=.00), 
and internalization (r=.50, p=.00), it was found not to be 
significant when the influence of all the sense of community 
factors was considered collectively.  It was noteworthy that 
audio teleconferencing and video teleconferencing were not 
significant to sense of community.  This may be attributable 
to their limited deployment and usage in the participating 
organizations.  Face-to-face interaction was found unrelated 
to sense of community both on its own and when considered 
with other work practice factors. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Part I: The Existential-Humanistic Process Model of Knowledge 
Creation 
The results of ANOVA and general linear modeling 
indicated the significance of work practices on sense of 
community.  The extent of telecommuting was found to be 
related to sense of community, needs fulfillment, emotional 
connection, and influence.  The extent of ad interaction, 
defined as those interactions using instant/text messaging 
and spontaneous face-to-face meetings, was found to be 
related to sense of community, group membership, 
influence, and emotional connection.  The extent of 
synchronous interaction, defined as those interactions taking 
place face-to-face, over instant/text messaging and 
audio/video conferencing, was found to be related to sense 
of community, emotional connection, group membership, 
and influence.  The extent of asynchronous interaction, 
defined as those interactions taking place over email, wikis, 
blogs, and e-learning forums, was found to be related to 
sense of community, group membership, and influence. 
A significant difference in the needs fulfillment score was 
found across the genders, with females reporting a higher 
mean score.  The scores for sense of community, emotional 
connection, influence, and group membership were found to 
be significantly different across age and role.  A significant 
difference in the needs fulfillment score was also found 
across age.  No significant difference was found to exist in 
any of the sense of community dimensions across tenure.  
Participants aged 60 and above reported the highest scores 
for needs fulfillment, group membership, influence, 
emotional connection, and sense of community, whereas 
those between the ages of 21 and 30 reported the lowest 
scores.  Senior managers reported the highest scores for 
group membership, influence, emotional connection, and 
sense of community, whereas individual contributors 
reported the lowest scores. 
Fig. 3 illustrates the second part of the existential-
humanistic process model of knowledge creation.  Virtual 
collaboration is defined as the interface that occurs over 
email, text and instant messages, and asynchronous means, 
whereas proximate collaboration is defined as the interface 
that occurs over a face-to-face contact and over audio and 
video teleconferencing.   
All four types of collaboration namely, virtual, 
proximate, synchronous, and asynchronous were found to be 
positively related to sense of community.  The relationship 
of sense of community was found to be stronger with virtual 
collaboration than with proximate collaboration.  Similarly, 
the relationship of sense of community was found to be 
stronger with synchronous collaboration than with 
asynchronous collaboration.  To summarize, the five key 
findings of this study were as follows: 
1. Sense of community is positively related to knowledge 
creation.  48% of the variation in knowledge creation 
can be explained by its linear relationship with sense of 
community. 
2. Needs fulfillment, influence, and emotional connection 
are positively related to the four stages of knowledge 
creation, 
namely 
socialization, 
externalization, 
combination, and internalization. 
3. Work practices are positively related to sense of 
community.  Email, text and instant messaging, 
asynchronous 
interaction, 
telecommuting, 
and 
spontaneous face-to-face interactions are supportive of 
sense of community. 
4. Virtual collaboration is more positively related to sense 
of 
community 
than 
proximate 
collaboration.  
Synchronous collaboration is more positively related to 
sense of community than asynchronous collaboration. 
Despite their positive relationship with sense of 
community, telecommuting and spontaneous face-to-
face interactions are in sparse use across virtual 
organizations.  
5. The more senior the member in both age and role terms, 
the higher his or her score for sense of community. 
IX. 
LIMITATIONS 
The cross-sectional nature of this study yielded only a 
snapshot of the understanding of sense of community, 
knowledge creation, and work practices.  The sample for 
this study was not representative of the workforce.  For 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

instance, twice as many females participated in this study 
than males.  As such, the results could not be generalized.   
A limitation to the reliability stemmed from the low 
Cronbach’s alpha for the factor of influence, suggesting a 
small degree of inconsistency in the meaning drawn by the 
participants for the factor.  The influence of microeconomic 
and macroeconomic conditions, the honesty of the 
participants in their responses, and the culture and maturity 
of the participating companies was uncontrolled.  No 
definitive cause-and-effect relationships could be drawn. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Part II: The Existential-Humanistic Process Model of 
Knowledge Creation 
X. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This quantitative study integrated the two constructs 
significant to knowledge-driven organizations, namely sense 
of community and knowledge creation and investigated their 
interrelationships through an examination of talent, 
technology, and work practices.  From the participation of 
264 knowledge workers across more than 12 industries, this 
quantitative study found that 48% of knowledge creation is 
attributed to sense of community, which is characterized by 
feelings of connection, belonging, give and take, ability to 
influence organizational outcomes, and creative support in 
omni-connected organizations.  The results revealed that 
both high-tech and high-touch work practices, such as 
telecommuting, spontaneous face-to-face interactions, and 
synchronous and asynchronous collaboration lend support 
for sense of community, the source of undeniable 
advantage.  The strategic outcome of this study was an 
existential-humanistic process model of knowledge creation 
presented along with evidence, limitations, and potential for 
innovation in virtual organizations. 
While this study investigated the linkages between the 
constructs of sense of community and knowledge creation, 
follow-on research may focus on associated factors that may 
work together to sway the constructs.  This study evaluated 
the constructs of sense of community and knowledge 
creation without considering the influence of other 
contributing factors, such as business strategies, leadership, 
capital and R&D spending, state of technology and tools, 
creativity and skills of the workforce, and processes in use.  
Subsequent research may replicate this research study with 
longitudinal approaches and triangulation methods to test 
the consistency of findings.  Such studies might explore the 
lived experiences of the participants and the performance of 
their organizations over time.   
This study serves as a reflection of technological 
adoption at a given point in time.  Follow up studies might 
track shifts in the use of technology.  As previously 
mentioned, it cannot be said that geographic and national 
culture differences do not contribute to relational outcomes.  
The opportunity to repeat this study across national cultures 
is also present in order to grow a multicultural 
understanding of knowledge and people practices.   
This study did not attempt to examine the physical 
environment 
within 
which 
knowledge 
work 
is 
accomplished.  Future research may explore the blend of 
work practices, such as telecommuting, ad hoc interactions, 
and synchronous and asynchronous collaboration in order to 
optimize sense of community and knowledge creation.  
Research may be supplemented with more in-depth 
evaluation of the specific work practices within companies, 
prevailing extent of sense of community, and innovation 
outcomes.  In particular, research is warranted in 
understanding the influence of sense of community among 
the learners in online universities and its long-term 
consequences on the overall development and success of 
their graduates. 
The participants in this study indicated a limited use of 
video technology, making it difficult to glean the influence 
of video-based collaborative technologies on sense of 
community.  It might be worth replicating this study in 
companies where video technologies are more broadly 
deployed. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
P. Drucker, Peter Drucker on the profession of management.  Boston, 
MA: Harvard Business School Publishing, 1998. 
[2] 
G. Hamel, The future of management. Boston, MA: Harvard Business 
School Press, 2007. 
[3] 
C. Christensen, The innovator's dilemma: The revolutionary book that 
will change the way you do business. New York, NY: HarperCollins 
Publishers Inc., 2011. 
[4] 
W. Isaacson,  Steve Jobs.   New York, NY: Simon & Schuster, 2011. 
[5] 
E. M. Rogers, Diffusion of innovations (5th Ed.)  New York, NY: 
Free Press, 2003. 
[6] 
C. Argyris and D. A. Schon, Organizational learning II: Theory, 
method, and practice.  Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1995. 
[7] 
D. Katz and R. L. Kahn, The social psychology of organizations.  
New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 1966. 
[8] 
I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi, The knowledge-creating company: How 
Japanese companies create the dynamics of innovation.  New York, 
NY: Oxford University Press, 1995. 
[9] 
J. Dyer, H. Gregerson, and C. Christensen, The Innovator's DNA: 
Mastering the Five Skills of Disruptive Innovators. Harvard Business 
School Publishing, 2011. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[10] K. Ichijo and I. Nonaka,  Knowledge creation and management: New 
challenges for managers.  New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 
2006. 
[11] N. N. Taleb, Fooled by randomness: The hidden role of chance in life 
and in the markets.  New York, NY: Random House, 2004. 
[12] I. Nonaka and R. Toyama, “The knowledge-creating theory revisited: 
Knowledge creation as a synthesizing process,”  Knowledge 
Management Research in Practice, 1, 2-10, 2011.   
[13] M. L. Markus, B. Manville, B., and E. C. Agres,  “What makes a 
virtual organization work?”  Sloan Management Review, vol. 42, no. 
1, pp. 13-26, 2000. 
[14] P. Pritchett, and R. Pound, The stress of organizational change.  
Pitchett: http://www.pritchettnet.com, 2008. 
[15] AllThingsD, “Survey says despite Yahoo! ban, most companies 
support 
work-from-home 
for 
employees,”  
http://allthingsd.com/20130225/survey-says-despite-yahoo-ban-most-
tech-companies-support-work-from-home-for-employees/, 2013. 
[16] Mercury, “ HP reportedly calling workers back to the office,” 
http://www.siliconbeat.com/2013/10/08/hp-reportedly-calling-
workers-back-to-the-office/, 2013. 
[17] SHRM, 
“Yahoo 
bans 
telecommuting,”  
http://www.shrm.org/hrdisciplines/technology/Articles/Pages/Yahoo-
Bans-Telecommuting.aspx, 2013. 
[18] C. Argyris, On organizational learning (2nd Ed.).  Oxford, UK: 
Blackwell Publishers Inc, 1999. 
[19] M. Polanyi, Personal knowledge.  Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1969. 
[20] Apple, 
“ 10-K 
Annual 
Report,” 
http://investor.apple.com/financials.cfm, 2013. 
[21] Booz, 
“The 
10 
most 
innovative 
companies 
of 
2013,”  
http://www.booz.com/global/home/what-we-think/global-innovation-
1000, 2013. 
[22] Fortune, 
“ 100 
best 
companies 
for 
work 
for.”  
http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/best-companies/, 2013. 
[23] R. D. Putnam, Bowling alone: The collapse and revival of American 
community.  New York, NY: Simon & Schuster, 2000. 
[24] N. Silver, The signal and the noise: Why so many predictions fail—
but some don’t.  New York, NY: The Penguin Press, 2012. 
[25] D. W. McMillan, “Sense of community,”  Journal of Community 
Psychology, vol. 24, no. 4, 315-325.  John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 1996. 
[26] D. W. McMillan, and D. M. Chavis,  “Sense of community: A 
definition and theory,”  Journal of community psychology, vol. 14, 
1986. 
[27] B. E. Ashforth and F. Mael, “Social identity theory and the 
organization,”  The Academy of Management Review, 14, 1, 20-39, 
1989. 
[28] S. M. Anderson and S. Chen, “The relational self: An interpersonal 
social-cognitive theory,”  Psychological Review, 2002, vol. 109, no. 
4, 619-645, 2002. 
[29] A. 
A. 
Gawande, 
“Slow 
ideas,”  
http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2013/07/29/130729fa_fact_gaw
ande, 2013. 
[30] J. March and H. Simon, Organizations. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell 
Publishers, 1993. 
[31] R. Mitchell and B. Boyle, Knowledge creation measurement methods. 
West Yorkshire, UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 2010. 
[32] L. Vygotsky, Thought and language.  Boston, MA: Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, 1986. 
[33] J. C. Spender, “Making knowledge the basis of the dynamic theory of 
the firm,”  Strategic Management Journal, vol. 17, Winter, 45-63, 
1996. 
[34] A. Chua and D. Goh, “Untying the knot of knowledge management 
measurement: A study of six public service agencies in Singapore,”  
Journal of Information Sciences, vol. 34, no. 3, 259-274, 2008. 
[35] J. Piaget, The mechanisms of perception.  Abingdon, Oxon: 
Routledge, 1969. 
[36] W. B. Miller and J. L. Rodgers, The ontogeny of human bonding 
systems: Evolutionary origins, neural bases, and psychological 
manifestations.  New York, NY: Springer, 2001. 
[37] R. Dawkins, The greatest show on earth: The evidence for evolution.  
New York, NY: Free Press, 2009. 
[38] P. G. Zimbardo, C. Haney, W. C. Banks, W. C., and D. Jaffe, “The 
mind is a formidable jailer: A Pirandellian prison,” The New York 
Times Magazine, section 6, pp. 38-42, April 8, 1973. 
[39] T. Hirshi,  Causes of delinquency.  Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press, 1969. 
[40] R. Nisbet and R. G. Perrin.  The social bond.  New York, NY: Knopf, 
1977. 
[41] L. S. Bacow, W. G. Bowen, K. M. Guthrie, K. A. Lack, and P. Long, 
“Barrier to adoption of online learning systems in the U.S. higher 
education,” 
http://www.sr.ithaka.org/research-publications/barriers-
adoption-online-learning-systems-us-higher-education, 2012. 
[42] S. Klososky, Enterprise social technology: Helping organizations 
harness the power of social media, social networking, social 
relevance.  Austin, TX: Greenleaf Book Group Press, 2011. 
[43] M. A. Lakhani and M. Marquard, “ Classroom of the future: A 
purposeful application of technology and context to personalize adult 
learning, foster social attachment, and promote collaboration,” 
www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=elml_2013_1_20_5005
0, 2013. 
[44] D. A. Garvin, Learning in action: A guide to putting the learning 
organization to work.  Boston, MA: Harvard Business School 
Publishing, 2000. 
[45] M. 
Marquard, “ Leadership 
Behavior 
Impact 
on 
Employee 
Engagement,” (Doctoral Dissertation, Pepperdine University) UMI 
ProQuest Digital Dissertations, 2011. 
[46] B. M. Bass and R. E. Riggio, Transformational leadership (2nd Ed.)  
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2006. 
[47] T. Kelley, The art of innovation.  New York, NY: Doubleday, 2001. 
[48] T. Kelley and D. Kelley, Creative confidence: Unleashing the creative 
potential within us all.  New York, NY: Crown Business, 2013.    
[49] N. A. Peterson, P. Speer, and D. W. McMillan, “ Validation of a brief 
sense of community scale: Confirmation of the principal theory of 
sense of community,”  Journal of Community Psychology, vol. 36, 
no. 1, 61-73, 2007. 
[50] J. H. Song, X. Uhm, and X. Yoon, “Organizational knowledge 
creation practice,” Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 
32.3 (2011): 243-259, 2010.  
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-328-5
eLmL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

