 
An Introduction to Code.org 
 
Bria Koch  
Department of Instructional Technology and Leadership 
Duquesne University 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA 
e-mail: kochb@duq.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Computational thinking and computer programming 
are permeating the landscape of today’s schools. In order to 
prepare students for 21st-century careers, students of all ages 
need to learn fundamental skills in a developmentally 
appropriate way. How can that best be accomplished? What is 
Code.org? How can teachers use it in the classroom? This paper 
gives an introduction to the site, provides information about its 
free curriculum, and describes how teachers can begin using this 
in their classrooms. 
Keywords-computational thinking; coding; teaching; elementary 
education; 21st-century learning. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
In September 2017, the White House announced a $200 
million per year commitment to implement computer science 
programs in America’s schools. The funds were distributed 
immediately with the goal of increasing participation by all 
students but especially women and underrepresented 
minorities [4].  Currently, 20 US states have changed policy 
to support computer science education and ongoing work 
continues in 30 US states [1]. One of the organizations to 
spearhead this movement with prominent companies is 
Code.org. 
Code.org is a non-profit organization dedicated to 
expanding access to computer science and increasing 
participation by women and underrepresented minorities. In 
Code.org’s online courses, 45% of students are girls and 48% 
are underrepresented minorities, and in Code.org’s high 
school classrooms, 37% are girls, and 56% African American 
or Hispanic. In partnership with corporations and foundations 
like Facebook, Amazon, Microsoft, and Google, Code.org is 
devoted to the vision that every student in every school 
should have the opportunity to learn computer science [2]. 
Code.org works to increase diversity in computer science 
because it is able to reach students of all backgrounds 
regardless of skill level or location. Its courses are available 
in over 50 languages and are used by students in over 180 
countries [1]. Code.org can be used on any device with an 
Internet connection, and a specific app is not necessary to use 
it on a tablet or Smartphone. 
This paper will provide a thorough introduction to the site 
Code.org and many of its offerings for students of all ages. 
Section 2 will take a look at the goals of Code.org and how 
teachers around the world are using this to help encourage 
learning in computer science. Section 3 takes a closer look at 
Code.org’s curriculum and how teachers can best use the 
resources in their classrooms. Special consideration is given 
to teachers in Section 4. Lesson plans, professional 
development, and teacher accounts are all discussed. Finally, 
Section 5 concludes with some final thoughts about the future 
of this site and how it can continue impacting all learners. 
II. 
GOALS OF CODE.ORG 
Code.org utilizes eight specific goals and metrics within 
its program. These goals include improving diversity in 
computer science, inspiring students, creating powerful 
courses, and reaching classrooms. Nearly 700,000 teachers 
have signed up to teach introductory courses using Code 
Studio, and over 21 million students have been enrolled, 9 
million of which are female. The goal of preparing new 
computer science teachers is being met through professional 
development sessions conducted both online and in-person. 
Over 57,000 new teachers have been prepared to teach 
computer science across grades K-12 using Code.org’s 
computer science curriculum. Code.org works to meet the 
goals of changing school district curriculums, setting up 
policies to support computer science, and implementing 
computer science programs on a global scale by partnering 
with 120 of the largest United States school districts to add 
computer science to their curriculum. These districts are far-
reaching and teach almost 10% of all students in the United 
States, 15% of which are Hispanic and African American 
students [1]. 
Code.org can be used by students of all ages, including 
adults. Learners from any age group can be targeted, and the 
content is free. Creating an account provides teachers with an 
easy-to-understand key which allows them to see how 
students are progressing through each of the lessons. 
Assessments and surveys can be conducted for middle to high 
school students to help them prepare for the Advanced 
Placement (AP) test in computer science. Code.org has an 
entire curriculum for AP computer science in addition to 
courses that teach Java for older students [5]. 
III. 
CODE.ORG CURRICULUM 
Code Studio is where Code.org’s full course catalog is 
housed. These courses take students through step-by-step 
modules independently, and the site automatically advances 
them to the next lesson upon completion. For each of the 
modules, there are videos and directions for students. The 
videos are also transcribed with still pictures to allow students 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
to slow down the play or refer back to specific parts. Lessons 
are grouped for students in grades K-12, but using a tablet or 
touchscreen device can allow even younger students to 
experience Code.org [3]. 
For students in grades K-5, there are both “Express 
Courses” and fundamental courses for elementary schools. 
The “Express Courses” serve as great options for students 
getting started on their own because they are guided and have 
students using drag and drop blocks for coding. Pre-reader 
express, designed for children ages four to eight, combines 
the best of the kindergarten and first grade courses. The 
Express Course, for students ages nine to eighteen, provides 
an introduction to computer science and combines the best of 
the elementary school curriculum for older students [3]. 
Students start by learning the basics with simple directions 
like “move forward” or “move backward.” Younger students 
can improve their understanding of positional words to make 
sure they are prepared for the following modules. As they 
move through the modules, they can program the characters 
to turn left or right, a great way to teach directional skills, and 
then eventually by number of degrees or even pixels.  
Six courses are provided in the computer science 
fundamentals for elementary schools curriculum. Courses A 
and B are designed for pre-readers in elementary school 
classrooms. Course A provides an introduction for pre-
readers aged four to seven, and while Course B is similar, it 
provides more variety for older students aged five to eight. 
Courses C through F are designed for older students in 
elementary classrooms. Course C, for students ages six to ten, 
teaches basics of computer science and allows students to 
create art, stories, and games. Course D, for ages seven 
through eleven, provides a review of Course C and then goes 
further with learning algorithms, nested loops, and 
conditionals. Course E introduces functions, and Course F, 
for ages nine through thirteen, combines all of the 
fundamentals to create more advanced art, stories, and games. 
All of these courses use themes that are relatable to the 
students including characters Angry Birds, Moana, Star 
Wars, Minecraft and Frozen [3].  
Students in grades 6 to 12 have the opportunity to build 
real working apps, games, and websites using block coding, 
Java, Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), and HTML. The App 
Lab allows students to design and easily share apps using 
coding with blocks or Java. The Game Lab immerses students 
in a more complex programming environments with both 
animations and characters. Finally, the Web Lab allows 
students to make simple webpages using HTML and CSS. If 
students are able to successfully move through all of these 
courses and labs, Code.org provides links to third-party sites 
to teach even more difficult concepts [3]. 
IV. 
CODE.ORG FOR TEACHERS 
Teachers can learn how to use Code.org from both the 
student-side and the teacher-side through Code.org’s 
professional development opportunities that work to lower 
the level of “coding intimidation” for learners of all ages [5]. 
Code.org offers no cost teacher workshops both in person and 
online. Lesson plans are provided throughout each level to 
help teach the information, and current documents are 
supplied to show teachers the importance of computer 
science and computer science education. Because the site is 
so guided, especially the lessons on the computer, students 
can move through at their own pace, and it essentially teaches 
the students. This is especially helpful even if the teacher is 
not totally comfortable with the level of programming. There 
are also “Unplugged Activities” that have videos and full 
lesson plans for teachers to use in their classrooms. These 
activities do not require any type of technology or devices in 
the classroom but still teach the concepts of computational 
thinking [5]. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Code.org is a non-profit organization was launched in 
2013 with the goal of expanding access to computer science 
and increasing participation in computer science by girls and 
underrepresented students of color. They believe that all 
students should have the opportunity to learn computer 
science and that it should be part of the core curriculum 
within a school. The programs within Code.org meet students 
where they are at and enable all students the opportunity to 
learn about computer science and programming. 
Currently, 20 percent of students in the United States have 
accounts on Code.org, and tens of millions have tried 
activities on the site [1]. Because of Code.org’s dedication to 
diversity, in the future it could be beneficial to create even 
more opportunities for differentiation. While it is available in 
over 50 languages, it would be incredibly advantageous to 
take steps toward courses designed specifically for students 
with special needs. In the past two years using Code.org with 
K-4 students, the site is constantly evolving to best meet the 
needs of all 21st century learners.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to thank Dr. Joseph Kush for his 
encouragement to pursue this international endeavor and Dr. 
David Carbonara for his direction and reassurance throughout 
my graduate career.  
REFERENCES 
[1] About us. (2017). Retrieved October 13, 2017, from 
https://code.org/about 
[2] Colby, J. (2015). 2,445 hours of code: What I Learned from 
Facilitating Hour of Code Events in High School Libraries. 
Knowledge Quest, 43(5), 12-17. 
[3] Learn on Code Studio. (2017) Retrieved October 15, 2017, 
from https://studio.code.org/courses. 
[4] Partovi, H. (2017, September 23). White House commits $200 
million a year for computer science. Retrieved from 
https://medium.com/@codeorg/200-million-a-year-for-
computer-science-6daf7e16fcc0   
[5] Teach with Code Studio. (2017). Retrieved October 15, 2017, 
from https://studio.code.org/courses?view=teacher
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

