The Perception of Students Regarding E-Learning Implementation in Egyptian 
Universities 
The Case of Arab Academy for Science and Technology  
Sarah El Gamal,  
College of Health, Community and Education 
Northumbria University  
Newcastle Upon Tyne, England, UK 
sarah.el-gamal@unn.ac.uk   
 
Rasha Abd EL Aziz,  
College of Management and Technology 
Arab Academy for Science and Technology 
 Alexandria, Egypt 
rasha_a@aast.edu 
Abstract—Adopting e-learning in Egypt with population, 
over 80 million, needs clear understanding of the students' 
characteristics, perception, and cultural aspects.  The large 
number of students per class in higher education in Egypt 
has highlighted the role of and the need for e-learning. This 
paper will focus on the Egyptian students as the customer in 
the e-learning process. It will try to identify the students' 
education preference, perception regarding e-learning mode 
effectiveness, and their e-readiness to its adoption by 
answering 'What is the preference of the Egyptian students' 
regarding HE mode in Egypt?' and 'What is the students 
perception regarding the effectiveness of e-learning as a 
higher education mode of learning in Egypt?' A structured 
questionnaire was designed to target higher education 
students in main two cities in Egypt. Data collected was 
statistically analyzed using Statistical Packages for the Social 
Sciences. Findings enabled the researchers to make 
conclusions and recommendations regarding e-learning 
implementation in Egypt. 
Keywords: e-learning; perception; e-readiness; cultural 
aspects. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The penetration of technology and computers in 
different sectors including education has changed the ways 
services are delivered to customers, making automating 
applications obvious in learning systems [1]. There are an 
increasing number of university networks of this kind all 
over the world, and the use of computers in the learning 
process, access to the Internet by students as a vehicle for 
self-directed learning, educational broadcasting and video-
conferencing are all being stepped by [2]. 
With 
the 
changing 
environment, 
educational 
institutions are forced to reconsider the methods in which 
they deliver their educational services. They now need to 
serve more students, yet, they have to shrink their budgets 
[3]. This creates a calling need for e-learning, which 
creates new opportunities for both educational institutions 
and students. E-learning has been defined by Wagner et al. 
as the learning experience enabled by electronic 
technologies [4].  
Despite the clear need for studies that address the 
students' perception, preferences and e-readiness in 
developing countries, literature seems to focus on 
technical aspects. Accordingly, the main focus of this 
paper is the Egyptian students' preference regarding the 
different higher education modes, and their perception 
regarding the effectiveness of e-learning as a higher 
education mode in Egypt.   
II. 
PROBLEM DOMAIN 
Learning is a major sector in the Egyptian industry. As 
a service provider, learning institutions have realized the 
importance of investing in technology to control cost, 
attract students, and fulfill customers’ needs for 
convenience and technical innovation [16]. Literature has 
been rich with studies regarding e-learning potentials. It 
also provides a clear view on how e-learning is adopted in 
developed countries. However, technologies can not be 
adopted regardless of the adopters' nature, perception, and 
preferences. 
A study [12] about Egypt has highlighted that the 
quality of higher education in Egypt is decreasing due to 
the rapidly growing enrolment that started in the 1970s and 
1980s, which, as a result, lead to large classes and the 
decrease of resources available [12].  
Although e-learning seems to be the dream that would 
solve the education hassle in Egypt, in order to make e-
learning more popular in Egypt, and to successfully adopt 
this technology, it is required to understand the users', 
perception, and preferences.  Therefore the study at hand 
aims to survey the students' perception towards e-learning 
and whether they believe that it is an effective mode or 
not.  It seeks to understand the nature of the Egyptian 
students, their frequency of use, and whether they believe 
that e-learning can help improve education in Egypt 
III. 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
In order to understand the perception of students 
regarding e-learning implementation in Egypt, we need to 
answer the following questions:  
• What is the preference of the Egyptian students' 
regarding HE mode in Egypt? 
• What is the students perception regarding the 
effectiveness of e-learning as a higher education 
mode of learning in Egypt?   
1
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

IV. 
E-LEARNING PERCEIVED USEFULNESS 
E-learning has been significant in Information and 
Communications Technology (ICT). It delivers knowledge 
to developing countries and it integrates many ICT 
capabilities in a noble cause. E-learning could dramatically 
increase access to education. It improves quality of 
education by accessing global academic resources and by 
offering training to academics. It also helps learners take 
an active role, work with their colleagues/instructors from 
a variety of locations [17]. 
E-learning is believed to take a competitive advantage 
over the conventional methods due to the speed and 
efficiency 
of 
the 
Internet, 
especially 
in 
making 
announcements. Moreover, e-learning could be the dream 
for people with work or family commitments; due to the 
high flexibility in time and place it offers [8]. E-Learning 
creates an interactive environment for teachers and 
students, as well as the opportunity for discussion and 
clarification of class content [9]. It also enables educational 
institutions to target learners who are unable to participate 
in traditional-learning environments [10].  
The Internet provides a rich source of information with 
different perspectives in research, high speed and 
countless resources to improve student work. Students can 
undertake group work through the collaborative groupware 
[11]. E-learning also enables participants to choose the 
course scope, appropriate time, access up-to-date content 
and even customize it.  
A. E-Learning in Egypt 
The higher education quality in Egypt has been 
declining due to the rapidly growing enrolment rate that 
started in the 1970s and 1980s, which lead to a large 
number of students per class [4] [12] [13]. 
Beckstorm et al. [12] stated in their investigation about 
readiness for e-learning in Egypt that there is a positive 
response to Egypt readiness. Regarding the Internet 
initiative, 
the 
Ministry 
of 
Communications 
and 
Information Technology has been maintaining a free 
internet access nationwide since 2002, where more than 
15,000 ports serving 2 million internet users, with users 
paying only for local phone tariffs. 
E-learning in Egypt could provide solutions to 
problems 
such 
as 
overcrowded 
classrooms 
and 
transportation problems. The adoption of e-learning in 
Egypt can provide an economic and more suitable solution 
to the higher education problem by filling in the gap 
between the number of university places available in 
Egypt and the growing demand for higher education. 
The Egyptian Ministry of higher education has made 
its first attempt in collaboration with higher education 
institutions in Italy, Canada and the United States to 
launch Egypt’s first electronic non-profit university.  
E-learning in Egypt has many challenges, some of 
which are the immature infrastructure, unawareness, 
resistance to change, and computer/Internet illiteracy 
[3][5]. Yet, it is essential [8][9] that the Egyptian 
government considers e-learning, especially in the higher 
education, where most of problems originate; in order to 
meet the needs of increasing numbers of students and 
cover the requirements of the job market in a period of 
communication and knowledge revolution [9]. 
To sum up, we would say that although e-learning in 
Egypt is expected to face many challenges, yet the 
perceived usefulness outweighs the disadvantages. But in 
order to adopt a new technology in Egypt, users can not be 
ignored [14]; as they are the real customers without which 
the system will fail. Since the overall customer satisfaction 
is not a new issue; it can be a central factor to evaluate and 
control strategic marketing [3].   
V. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
In order to answer the above stated questions, a 
questionnaire was designed to survey students' usage 
patterns, e-readiness, their perceptions and priorities with 
regard to E-learning usefulness, effectiveness and 
implementation issues. The survey was administered in the 
two main cities in Egypt. 100 questionnaires were 
distributed over higher education student respondents from 
Alexandria and Cairo. 77 valid questionnaires were 
returned.  
The questionnaire was designed in English and 
translated 
into 
Arabic. 
Questionnaire 
forms 
were 
distributed in both languages, according to respondents’ 
preferences. The questionnaire contained 24 variables 
distributed among 12 different questions. A summary of 
the questionnaire form is presented in Tables 1. 
A. Statistical Treatment 
Simple frequencies derived for the questionnaire 
variables are reported below. For further analysis of the 
findings, Statistical Packages for the Social Sciences 
(SPSS) was used to analyse the data. Chi-squares tests 
were applied to the questions, as they tabulate the variable 
into categories and computes a chi-square statistic. This 
test compares the observed and expected frequencies in 
each category to test that all categories contain the same 
proportion of values or test that each category contains a 
user-specified proportion of values.  
Where the answers were ordinal as in questions 4 and 
5, the mode was calculated to assume an average, making 
the standard chi-square test also applicable, to assess 
whether the distributions of results differ significantly 
from findings given by different segments of the 
population in the questionnaire which might have arisen 
by chance. For questions 4 and 5, two supplement 
hypotheses were developed. Mode, Crosstabs and Chi 
square tests were used to assess student’s preference mode 
against the mode effectiveness for the following 
hypotheses.  
B. Frequencies 
• 
97.1% of the study sample uses the Internet on a 
daily basis, while only 2.9% use it monthly. 
• 
80% of students are aware of the e-learning 
concept, while 20% of them did not even hear 
about it. 
2
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

• 
61.8% of students prefer traditional on-campus 
learning mode, while only 35.3% choose e-
learning and 2.9% preferred other modes of 
learning. 
• 
51.4% of students agree that e-learning is an 
effective mode, while a close percentage of 48.6 
opposed the idea. 
• 
The majority of students (94.3%) believe that e-
learning 
will 
face 
difficulties 
during 
its 
implementation, while only 5.7% believe the 
opposite.  
• 
Exactly half of the students (50%) believe that e-
learning would help in overcoming the problems 
of higher education, while the other half do not. 
• 
62.9% of respondents agree that the introduction 
of e-learning will enhance the quality of higher 
education, while 37.1% agree on the opposite. 
• 
54.3% of the sample believes that there is no 
chance to gain skills via e-learning graduates as 
compared to traditional learning, while 45.7% 
agree that e-learning graduates may gain more 
skills. 
C. Data Analysis 
In order to analyse the data collected the following null 
hypotheses were tested and interpreted as shown below: 
١) H01: Higher education students in Egypt are 
aware of e-learning educational mode. 
Since e-learning programs have been evolving and 
adopted all over the world, we would expect that higher 
education students in Egypt would be aware of this 
learning module. To see whether there was greater than 
expected e-learning awareness in the survey population, 
we used the chi square test. Results were obtained as 
follows: 
'Have you ever heard of e-learning before?'  (Q2): Chi-
square= 12.600a (df = 1, sig. =0.000). 
With these values, we can reject the null hypothesis.  
The interpretation is that the majority of Egyptian students 
seem to have heard of e-learning. Although e-learning has 
just come out of its infancy, it is sound enough to make 
this clear significance in the awareness question.  
٢) H02: There is no significant variation in students' 
preferences regarding the higher education learning 
mode. 
Since e-learning programs advantages have been clear 
and obvious, and because it has not yet dominated the 
Egyptian market, we would expect that higher education 
students in Egypt will not have a clear inclination towards 
any of the learning modes. To see whether their 
preferences are different from our expectations, chi square 
test was used and the results obtained as follows:  
'Which would you prefer e-learning, or traditional on-
campus learning?'  (Q3): Chi square = 17.706 (df = 2, sig. 
= 0.000). With these values, we can also reject the null 
hypothesis. The interpretation is that the majority of 
Egyptian students seem to prefer the traditional on-campus 
learning mode despite of all the advantages of e-learning. 
This may ring the bell to show that the Egyptian culture 
seems to resist change and fear uncertainty.   
٣) H03: There is no significant difference between the 
perceptions of student’s regarding the educational mode 
and its effectiveness. 
 
 
Figure ١.  EL would improve the higher education in Egypt 
 
In order to test hypothesis three, we formulated two sub-
hypotheses: 
١. H03.1 Students prefer on-campus education because 
they are more familiar with it 
The majority of the Egyptian higher education students 
in the sample under investigation preferred traditional on-
campus education. This may be due to resistance to 
change, cultural aspects, fear of uncertainty and the low 
expectations of e-learning programs. To assess the 
previously mentioned hypothesis, Modes, Crosstabs and 
chi square tests were applied and results obtained were as 
follows: 
 ‘E-learning is not an effective mode because:’ (Q5) 
Chi square = 19.402a (df = 9, sig. = 0.022).   These results 
allow us to reject the null hypothesis. The interpretation is 
that most respondents prefer on-campus educational mode. 
They believe that e-learning is not an effective educational 
way. This may be due to their fears from a number of 
factors as minimum interaction and students and lack of 
synchronous feedback to questions and assignments.  
٢. H03.2: Students preferred e-learning because it solves 
HE problems.   
For those respondents who preferred e-learning, it is 
assumed that their choice is built upon the problems that 
already exist in traditional higher education programs as 
large class sizes and limited number of universities 
available with respect to population. Therefore, e-learning 
is taken as a way out of such problems. To test these 
assumptions modes, Crosstabs and chi square tests were 
applied and results obtained were as follows: 
‘E-learning is an effective mode of education because’: 
(Q4) Chi square = 34.444a (df = 20, sig. = 0.023). 
Consequently, we can again reject the null hypothesis. The 
interpretation is that higher education students who prefer 
e-learning as an educational mode believe in its 
effectiveness.  Factors such as addressing differences in 
learning styles and studying according to learner’s 
convenience are the main causes of such results. 
Therefore, we can reject hypothesis H03. Beliefs about the 
94.3
% 
5.7% 
3
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

ineffectiveness of e-learning as educational approaches are 
the main reasons for student’s preference of on-campus 
education mode. On the other hand, students who prefer e-
learning trust its effectiveness. 
٤) H04: E-learning will not face difficulties during its 
implementation. 
As e-learning technologies have been available and 
widely used across different nations, we would expect that 
e-learning should not face any difficulty during its 
implementation in the higher education in Egypt. To see 
whether Egyptian students believe that e-learning may face 
difficulties during its implementation, chi square test was 
used and the results obtained as follows: 
'Do you think e-learning will face difficulties during its 
implementation?'  (Q5): Chi square = 27.457a, (df = 1, sig. 
= 0.000). With these values, we can again reject the null 
hypothesis.  The interpretation is that most of the Egyptian 
students highly believe that e-learning will face many 
difficulties during its implementation in Egypt. This may 
be because of the cultural aspects that always seem to be 
neglected by decision makers, and technology adopters. 
٥)    H05: E-learning will improve HE problems in 
Egypt. 
Logically and theoretically speaking, e-learning should 
be regarded as the dream that would solve higher 
education problem, but in order to test whether in reality, 
students believe that it will improve the higher education 
situation in Egypt or not, chi square tests were used and 
the results obtained as follows: 
'Do you think e-learning will help in overcoming the 
problems of higher education?'  (Q6): Chi square = 0.029a, 
(df = 1, sig. =0.866). 
      'Do you think e-learning can help in improving the 
quality of higher education in Egypt?' (Q7): Chi square = 
2.314a, (df = 1, sig. = 0.128). With these values, we fail to 
reject the null hypothesis. The interpretation is that 
students seem to lack confidence in the way e-learning 
would be implemented and are rather disappointed with 
the current system. They seem to doubt that higher 
education problems in Egypt could be solved by adopting 
a new technology.  
٦) H06: Egyptian higher education Students in Egypt 
are infrequent Internet users. 
As Egypt is a developing country, with a high rate of 
illiteracy, we would expect students to be infrequent 
Internet users. In order to test this hypothesis, chi square 
test provided the following results:  
'How often do you use the Internet?' (Q1): Chi square 
= 0.029a, (df = 1, sig. = 0.000). With these values, we can 
reject the null hypothesis. The interpretation is that higher 
education Egyptian students are very frequent Internet 
users. This is very interesting because it clarifies that 
young adults are technology users and most of them use 
the Internet on a daily basis.  This puts a big question mark 
on 
why 
they 
negatively 
perceive 
e-learning 
implementation in Egypt. 
٧) H07: There is no significant variation between e-
learning graduates and on-campus graduates with 
regards to recruitment chances.  
Because e-learning advantages is known to the public, 
and its content should not be of less value than the 
traditional on-campus learning mode, we expect that there 
should not be any significant variation between e-learning 
graduates and on-campus graduates with regards to 
recruitment chances. In order to test this hypothesis chi 
square test was again used and the results obtained as 
follows: 
'Do you think e-learning will improve higher education 
problems in Egypt?'  (Q10): Chi square = 17.371a, (df = 1, 
sig. = 0.000). 
With these values, we can reject the null hypothesis. 
The interpretation is that students believe that recruiters 
are biased and will not give equal chances to e-graduates. 
One more time cultural aspects speak out to prove that 
technology adopted in the West may not have the same 
effect.  
TABLE I.  
QUESTIONNAIRE SUMMARY 
# 
 
Question 
Possible 
answers 
1 
How often do you use the Internet? 
 
Daily/Weekly/ 
Monthly 
2 
Did you hear about e-learning before? 
Yes / No 
3 
If you have th opportunity to choose the type of higher 
education would you prefer e-learning?  
Traditional/On-
campus 
education 
E-learning 
4 
Do you think e-learning is an effective way of learning in 
higher education?(If your answer is NO go to question 6). 
Yes / No 
5 
E-learning is an effective mode of education because: (Go 
to question 6) 
− 
Offers an interactive mode of education 
− 
Courses are presented in separate modules 
− 
Learning is reinforced through clear learning 
objectives for each module 
− 
Courses are easy to navigate 
− 
Helps in developing learner's skills 
− 
Encourages access to more related electronic course 
material 
− 
Students may have the opportunity to mix what they 
learn with practical work 
1: 
Strongly 
agree 
2: Agree 
3: I do not know 
4: Disagree 
5:Strongly 
disagree 
6 
E-learning is not an effective mode of education because: 
− 
Students need to feel connected to their school 
− 
Lack 
of 
interaction 
between 
classmates 
and 
instructors 
− 
Lack of real time feedback to questions and 
assignments 
− 
Classroom environments helps students to learn more 
− 
Needs perfect computer and Internet skills 
− 
More expensive that traditional education 
− 
Bandwidth and Internet speed could represent some 
obstacles 
1: 
Strongly 
agree 
2: Agree 
3: I do not know 
4: Disagree 
5: 
Strongly 
disagree 
7 
Do you think e-learning will face difficulties during its 
implementation in Egypt? 
Yes / No 
8 
Do you think e-learning will help in overcoming the 
problems of higher education in Egypt? 
Yes / No 
9 
Do you think e-learning can help in improving the quality 
of higher education in Egypt? 
Yes / No 
10 
Do you think that e-learning graduates will gain more 
skills than traditional education graduates? 
Yes / No 
11 
Do you think e-learning graduates will be acknowledged 
and accredited as equally as traditional learning students 
from professional bodies and employers? 
Yes / No 
12 
Do you think that e-learning graduates will have equal 
chances of recruitment as on-campus students? 
Yes / No 
4
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

VI. 
DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSION 
E-learning seems to be the upcoming trend. It has been 
spreading worldwide. However, Egypt has not really 
begun to take advantage of the e-learning medium. 
Although the adoption of e-learning in Egypt can provide 
an economic and more suitable solution to the higher 
education problem by filling in the gap between the 
number of university places currently available in Egypt 
and the growing demand for higher education, the 
Egyptian Ministry of Higher Education has not yet 
dominated the Egyptian Market. Egypt has just launched 
its first non-profit private, electronic university in order to 
put some light and support to the e-learning modules, but 
still students seem to doubt the effectiveness of such a 
mode besides the difficulties during the implementation 
phases. They prefer the traditional on-campus learning 
mode as a way to avoid uncertainty.  
A variety of reasons have lead to students’ doubt about 
the new educational platform such as the lack of normal 
college 
environment, 
asynchronous 
interaction 
and 
feedback 
between 
learners 
and 
instructors, 
and 
technological infrastructure problems such as Internet 
speed and bandwidth besides the familiarity of the 
structure routine of traditional on-campus education. This 
highlights the role of the Egyptian Higher education 
authorities and the Ministry of Communication and 
Information Technology in increasing public awareness 
about e-learning concepts, benefits, validity of the e-
learning 
degree 
granted 
and 
the 
technological 
infrastructure available in Egypt.       
As Lorenzi and Riley have reported in their article [16], 
the main success factors to system success are behavioural 
more than technical.  An interesting feature of the 
Egyptian situation is the clear concern regarding learning 
via electronic forms, and yet are very frequent Internet 
users. They seem to trust the technology, and even use it 
frequently and yet do not trust the system and its power in 
solving improving the higher education in Egypt. Egyptian 
students seem to have heard about e-learning, but actually 
are not aware of the associated benefits which again 
emphasize the role of Egyptian authorities in dealing with 
resistance to change dilemma and addressing customer 
needs.  
 In the wider study of which this survey is part of, 
further investigation of the social and stakeholder context 
will be undertaken. Better understanding of the context of 
e-learning readiness and perception should enable decision 
makers in Egypt to address their customers’ needs more 
fully. As customers are becoming more powerful than they 
previously were, and are more able to switch to other 
providers that if their expectations are not met [17], 
universities seeking e-learning adoption should try to make 
their potential students aware of the technique, process, 
and output. 
Finally, we would say that although e-learning has a lot 
of potentials and advantages, it can not be actually 
promising in Egypt until e-learning readiness and 
perception have been taken into consideration.   
REFERENCES 
[١] Abd El Aziz, R. (2009), ATM Location and Usage in Egypt: Social 
and Technical Perspectives, PhD Thesis, University of the West of 
England, Brisol, UK 
[٢] Varis, T. (2006), ‘e-learning and higher education’, [Online]. 
[Accessed: 
1December 
2010]. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.elearningeuropa.info/files/media/media11006.pdf  
[٣] Wagner, N., Hassanein, K., and Head, M. (2008). Who is 
responsible for E-Learning Success in Higher Education? A 
Stakeholders' Analysis. Educational Technology & Society, 11 (3), 
26-36. [Online]. (Accessed: 2 December 2010). Available at: 
http://www.ifets.info/journals/11_3/3.pdf. 
[٤] Weinert, K. D. (2005), ‘A Brief History of ATMs’. Accessed 
online 
10 
December 
2010 
at 
[http://www.stopoutmfees.com/newpage3.htm] 
[٥] Richard, 
A., 
(1992), 
Higher 
Education 
in 
Egypt.[Online].[Accessed: 
1 
April 
2010]. 
Available 
at: 
http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/servlet/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2000/07
/19/000009265_3961002123123/Rendered/PDF/multi_page.pdf 
[٦] Abdel-Wahab, A. Gad (2008), ‘Modeling student’s intention to 
adopt e-learning: A case from Egypt’, Turkish Online Journal of 
Distance Education TOJD, January 2008, Vol.9, No.1, pp.157-168. 
[Online]. [Accessed: 25 November 2010]. 
Available at: 
http://www.ejisdc.org/ojs2/index.php/ejisdc/article/view/355. 
[٧] Yieke, Felicia A. (2005), ‘Towards Alternatives in Higher 
Education: The Benefits and Challenges of E-Learning in Africa’. 
CODESRIA Bulletin, No. 3 & 4, pp.73-75, [Online]. [Accessed: 
24 
May 
2010]. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.codesria.org/Links/Publications/bulletin3_05/yieke.pdf 
[٨] Palloff, R. and Pratt, K. (1999), Building Learning Communities in 
Cyberspace: Effective Strategies for the Online Classroom. San 
Francisco; Jossey-Bass Publishers.  
[٩] Rossiter, D. (1997), The Digital Edge?: Teaching and Learning in 
the Knowledge Age. Queensland: QUT Publications and Printery.  
[١٠] Maddux C. (ed.) and Johnson D. (2001), The Web in Higher 
Education: Assessing the Impact and Fulfilling the Potential. New 
York: The Haworth Press. 
[١١] Online Collaborative Learning in HE (2003), [Online],. 
11 
Accessed: 
25 
November, 
2010. 
Available 
at: 
http://clp.cqu.edu.au/introduction.htm  
[١٢] Beckstrom, M, Croasdale, H, Riad S M, and Kamel M M, (2004) 
‘Assessment of Egypt’s elearning readiness’. [Online].. Accessed: 
7 
December 
2010. 
Available 
at: 
http://mohamedelzayat.net/egypt%20readiness%20for%20elearnin
g.pdf 
[١٣]  Khaled, A.  (2008) 'EGYPT: Uncertain future for e-university', 
University world News, [Online]. [Accessed:  3 November 2010].  
Available 
at: 
http://www.universityworldnews.com/article.php?story=20080703
152831554 
[١٤] Abd El Aziz, R., Beeson, I., and El Ragal, A. (2007), ‘An 
Empirical study to measure ATM usage in Egypt’ IBIMA 
Proceedings, Dublin, Ireland, ISBN: 0-9753393-7-0 
[١٥] Goode, M. and Moutinho, L. (1995), ‘The effects of free banking 
on overall satisfaction: use of automated teller machines’, 
International Journal of Bank Marketing, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 33-40, 
MCB UP Ltd. 
[١٦] Lorenzi, N. and Riley, R. (2000), ‘Managing Change’, J Am Med 
Inform Assoc. 2000; 7(2): 116–124. 
[١٧]  Ijazdar, R. and Hu, Y. (2004), ‘How Banks Manage CRM: A B2B 
Perspective’, Masters thesis, Lulea University of Technology, 
Nordic region. 
5
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

