 
   
 
 
Abstract-The emergence of Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICT) in teaching and learning has brought 
significant changes in the educational settings of students and 
teachers. The usage of E-learning in the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia (KSA) academic institutions is still in its early stage 
and its impact is insignificant. In Saudi Arabian universities, 
there is a need to improve the understanding of how to deal 
with the new technology, how to meet the staff and students 
requirements for teaching and learning, and how to tackle 
students’ lack of motivation concerning independent learning. 
Hence, this study aims to identify the main issues that are 
hindering the use of modern techniques of E-learning in Saudi 
Arabian educational system effectively, such as personal 
factor, and learning attributes. This study provides an initial 
framework that can be used as a detailed, structured 
E-learning roadmap by stakeholders in Saudi universities, as 
well as those in developing countries. A mixed-methods 
approach (an explanatory sequential design) will be carried 
out in Saudi Arabian universities. This study is part of 
research project and it is anticipated that the findings will 
increase the awareness of the use and effectiveness of 
E-learning systems in Saudi’s higher education sector. 
 
Keywords-E-learning; Saudi higher education; Initial 
framework.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
The education system in the KSA has developed to 
make sure that education becomes more effective, meets 
the country‟s religious, economic and social needs, and 
eliminates illiteracy among the Saudi youth. The KSA is 
one of the countries in the world spending the largest 
amount on education according to the 2014 National 
Budget. The education and healthcare sectors remain the 
priority sectors in the national budget. The education sector 
accounts for 25% of the total expenditure in the national 
budget and is considered the highest in the world [1]. The 
KSA has been expected to be one of the fastest developing 
countries in the world, particularly in establishing 
E-learning systems in the educational institutions. 
According to the Information and Communication 
Technology (CITC 2011), the number of internet users 
increased rapidly from 200,000 in 2000 to 11,400,000 in 
2011, which accounts for 43.6% of the total population [2]. 
For this reason, Saudi‟s government has established a new 
vision and strategy to develop education systems. In 
particular, the plan is for the public universities in this 
country to be among the most advanced in the world by 
2030. By the year 2030, the government aims to have at 
least five Saudi universities among the top 200 universities 
in the international rankings [3]. Currently, the KSA has 
twenty-six public universities and ten private universities 
located in various geographic regions. Hamdan [4] and 
Alharbi [3] pointed out that the Saudi government strives to 
overcome the challenges the universities encounter such as 
improving education quality, productivity, accreditation, 
and 
develop 
modern 
curriculum 
using 
different 
technologies to increase the interaction between teachers 
and students and focus on the rigorous development of 
standards in literacy, numeracy, skills, and character. A few 
studies from the Saudi Arabia perspective [5]-[7] have 
examined academics‟ perceptions of E-learning in Saudi 
higher education. Their findings showed that academics‟ 
perceptions toward E-learning integration in their teaching 
and learning are highly influenced by demographic factors 
such as age, gender, and education level. Female faculty 
members perceived less E-learning barriers and they 
displayed more willingness to implement it while compared 
to male equivalents.  
In line with the aim of this study, an initial framework 
proposed to measure academics‟ and students‟ attitudes 
toward the effectiveness of E-learning usage in Saudi 
universities. This paper is organized as following: Section 
II introduces the current literature relating to E-learning in 
Saudi education system. Section III describes the research 
methods. Section IV outlines the research outcomes 
followed by an initial framework in Section V.  The paper 
concludes the study and scopes future work in Section VI. 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
This paper reviews the current literature relating to 
E-learning in overall and in the KSA in specific. 
A. E-learning definition  
Dublin [8] and Rosenberg [9] mentioned that the 
literature on E-learning is vast, which makes it difficult to 
have a consensual definition of E-learning. In fact, there is 
no prevalent definition of E-learning. E-learning implies 
the use of ICT in various processes of education to enhance 
the learning and teaching, and it offers flexibility in terms 
of when, how and where information is received and 
delivered by staff and students [10].  In the context of this 
study, E-learning has been used in various ways in 
education. For instance, there is blended learning, online 
distance learning, and distributed learning. The E-learning 
environments offer a really interactive and engaging 
learning approach using various technological tools that are 
available today such as a whiteboard, video conferencing, 
audio chatting, online discussion, and Blackboard [11][12]. 
These technologies give students, academics, and other 
learners the opportunity to engage in an effective and 
flexible interaction.  
B. Saudi education system 
The education system in the KSA has developed within 
the last decade due to the increased population, and the high 
demand to provide additional instructional opportunities for 
students. According to [3], the total population of the KSA 
in 2016 was 32,430,000, which means that most of the 
population ranges in age from 15 to 64 years. In addition, to 
meet the increased student enrolment, the number of Saudi 
public universities has now increased to twenty–six. 
However, more than 60,000 students are still unable to 
study in the Saudi public universities because they are 
Abdullah Salem Alqahtani   
         School of Information Systems 
          Curtin University, Perth, Australia                                                 
           Email: abdullah.alqahtani1@postgrad.curtin.edu.au 
E-learning Framework for Saudi Universities 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
   
 
 
already filled to capacity [3]. Furthermore, because of the 
socio-economic conditions and increased population 
demands, more students are enrolling in universities and 
undertaking online learning or are studying overseas 
[3][13]. Alharbi [3] concluded that the performance of 
universities, outcomes of quality, and reputation need to be 
considered by university leaders and face these challenges 
throughout adopt a benchmark strategy. Therefore, the 
KSA in 2008 planned to adopt Information and 
Communication-based Technologies such as E-learning 
and distance learning in higher education. The mission of 
the Ministry of Education in the KSA, E-learning not only 
adds value to and simplifies the traditional education 
system, but it also improves the quality of education. It 
develops an environment that incorporates various 
components of the educational process, thereby not only 
providing a huge amount of information, but also helping to 
improve the quality of the education materials [2]. 
C. E-learning in Saudi higher education 
Unnisa [1] reported that there are many reasons for the 
increase in the growth of E-learning in the KSA. First, 
E-learning has been suggested as a means of overcoming 
the increasing demand for higher education and solving the 
problems the universities face with the traditional delivery 
of education such the overcrowding, lack of facilities, and 
inadequate human resources. Second, since the KSA is one 
of a few large countries in the world in terms of its 
geographical area, and there are a number of communities 
distant from the major centres of population [14][15], the 
online E-learning system can provide education facilities to 
the remote areas without students having to travel to the 
main location, thereby reducing the geographical inequity. 
Third, the KSA has a different culture and religion. 
Especially in the universities, due to religious reasons, the 
female students study in isolation from the male students. 
Due to limited facilities and human resource available, it is 
easier for female students to access higher education via an 
E-learning system. Currently, E-learning enables course 
content to be conveyed to students, enabling them to access 
information and communicate with their teachers easily 
wherever and whenever they want [16]. 
D. National Centre of E-learning and Distance learning 
(NCEL) 
In 2005, the Ministry of Education in the KSA 
established the National Centre of E-learning and Distance 
learning (NCEL) to assist the universities to develop 
information technology using E-learning [14]. The vision 
of the NCEL is to implement the techniques of E-learning 
in the education system, which will improve both learning 
and teaching outcomes. The NCEL strives to become a 
national reference for E-learning. Also, one of NCEL‟s 
projects is the Saudi Digital Library [17], which holds 
310,000 e-books on diverse subjects from 300 international 
publishers [17]. 
E. Student’s attitude toward E-learning 
Al-Harbi [15] stated that E-learning success is affected 
by various factors. A student‟s attitude toward E-learning is 
the significant factor in determining a student‟s intention to 
utilise the E-learning facilities. Hence, the shaping of the 
students‟ behavioural intention about using the E-learning 
plays a critical role in perceived E-learning success.  In the 
context of the KSA, a study conducted by Al Zumor, et al. 
[18] shows the impact of students‟ E-learning acceptance 
through the Blackboard at King Khalid University. They 
found that students are willing to use E-learning and accept 
technology. Similarly, Al-Dosari [7] revealed that 
academics‟ and students‟ attitudes were positive toward 
using E-learning in the department of English at King 
Khalid University and the educational system improved as 
a result of the E-learning environment compared with the 
traditional learning system. Quadri, Muhammed, Sanober, 
Qureshi and Shah [19] emphasised that the necessity of 
E-learning system is more prominent because of the 
gender-based educational system. Consequently, the 
E-learning system in Saudi Arabia offers equal opportunity 
to people seeking education regardless of their gender. In 
addition, there is a high demand from students who are 
working in part-time jobs and wish to continue their studies 
for better opportunities in the future. After inclusive review 
on the literature related to issues towards the use of E- 
learning, this study leads to uncovering the E-Learning 
influential factors that will be critical for understanding the 
basis of the effectiveness of E-Learning and its impact in 
Saudi higher educational system. 
III. RESEARCH METHODS 
To find out the most factors that may influence the 
effectiveness of E-learning implementation at Saudi higher 
education, a mixed method will be employed. Mingers [20] 
has defined the research methodology as the activities and 
guidelines that assist a researcher to obtain valid and 
reliable research findings. Silverman [21] agreed with this, 
and indicated that the research methodology helps a 
researcher to choose the appropriate research strategy, and 
data collection techniques, etc. in planning and executing a 
research 
study. 
Hence, 
Information 
Systems 
(IS) 
researchers frequently encounter challenges in obtaining 
adequate results and theories that offer fundamental 
thoughts into a phenomenon of interest [22].  
A. Pragmatism philosophy 
The philosophy of this research is pragmatism with an 
abductive approach to determine the use of E-learning 
systems in Saudi higher education and then generate an 
initial framework [23]. Pragmatism philosophy was 
proposed for IS researchers. They advocate the use of 
mixed methodologies as one of the favored paradigms for 
amending the usage of mixed-methods research [22]. In this 
paper, the research method is the mixed-methods design to 
achieve the research aims and answer the research 
questions by using Explanatory Sequential Design. This 
means that the data will be gathered equally through a 
quantitative approach using an online survey and a 
qualitative approach using semi-structured interviews to 
understand the research problem, then the data from each 
approach is analysed separately and then merged into one 
study [24][25].  
Venkatesh et al. [22] stated that if the Information 
Systems researcher decides to conduct a research for which 
a powerful theoretical basis previously exists. However, if 
the study context is novel or past results were unsatisfactory 
or indecisive, the researcher should take into account using 
a quantitative approach first, followed by a qualitative 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
   
 
 
approach to offer further insights based upon the 
context-specified results. This research methodology is 
adopted based on the understanding of the study objective 
that can be delivered by the quantitative approach and the 
subsequent data analysis. In the qualitative phase, Creswell 
et al. [26] mentioned that the statistical findings for 
participants‟ views will be processed and clarified by 
means of interviews. This research will use the 
mixed-methods approach to offer a general understanding 
regarding the use of E-learning systems in Saudi higher 
education.   
In the first phase, this research will investigate the 
academics‟ and students‟ attitudes toward using E-learning 
systems in Saudi higher education through a quantitative 
(deductive) approach to understand their reactions to using 
E-learning systems and to develop a range of new factors 
from the survey [27]. The online survey will be used to 
examine the five factors that may influence the use of 
E-learning. In the second phase, a qualitative (inductive) 
approach will be conducted with the help of semi-structured 
interviews to analyse the data in depth and to obtain an 
understanding of the phenomena in its real-life context and 
through the meanings that people assign to them. The 
validity and reliability of mixed methods research are 
achieved by fundamentally measuring the quality of results 
or deductions from all of the quantitative and qualitative 
data in the research inquiry [22]. Tashakkori and Creswell 
[28] report that the surveys in a quantitative data gathering 
approach can bring breadth to a research by assisting 
researchers to collect data about various aspects of a 
phenomenon from many participants. Subsequently, the 
validation of the qualitative data collection will be used by 
conducting the interviews to provide the depth in the 
research inquiry and allow the researcher to obtain deep 
insights from rich data.  
For the purpose of this study, the researcher will also 
use the quantitative data to determine the factors that may 
influence the use of E-learning systems in Saudi higher 
education followed by a qualitative approach so as to 
understand academics‟ attitudes toward the use of 
E-learning systems. In this regard, the factor analysis will 
be applied to achieve a rigorous picture of what might 
create a successful set of factors for a framework for 
E-learning within the context under examination. Hence, 
the factor analysis technique can be used to reduce data by 
grouping it into factors. According to Pallant [29], factor 
analysis has been used as a compression methodology that 
manages a large set of factors by decreasing it based on 
correlations that exist between variables, and can then be 
utilized in other tests.   
B. The participants 
The participant population for this research will include 
all academics and students who are currently enrolled in 
Saudi universities. In order to obtain valuable results, three 
public universities will be selected to identify the factors 
influencing the E-learning systems in Saudi higher 
education. 
C. Quantitative online survey  
In the first phase, quantitative data will be used to 
examine the factors that will ensure the effectiveness of 
E-learning in the Saudi higher education framework and to 
identify the factors for the proposed framework. 
Consequently, an online survey utilising Qualtrics software 
will be distributed via E-mail to all participants (academics 
and students). Data analysis will be conducted using IBM 
SPSS (version 25) statistics, and exploratory factor analysis 
(EFA) will be applied for statistical testing of the gathered 
data to identify the factors for the proposed framework for 
the E-learning usage in Saudi higher education. 
D. Qualitative interviewing 
In the second phase, semi-structured questionnaire will 
be conducted to collect information regarding the opinions 
and attitudes of experts toward the use of E-learning 
systems in Saudi higher education. A suitable strategy for 
gathering the data is to ask open-ended questions through 
face-to-face interviews or to use other technological 
applications such as Skype in order to allow the researcher 
to explore various opinions of individuals. The sample size 
of semi-structured interviews in this study will be 
determined between six to ten interviews. In terms of the 
upper limits of qualitative sample size, previous 
Information Systems studies pointed out that there is no 
recommended number of interviews. Recent studies 
suggest that the sample size should be 5-10 interviewees so 
that the researcher ensures that the state of theoretical 
saturation has occurred [30][32]. A thematic analysis 
technique will be employed in order to develop themes 
based on analysing and detecting data and also grouping the 
information according to identified patterns. Following this 
grouping of themes, the data will be analysed using NVivo 
software (version 11) [31][33]. Furthermore, King and 
Horrocks [34] highlighted interview methods involving 
connecting elements, recording, interview venue, the 
introduction and conclusion of the interviews. 
IV. RESEARCH OUTCOMES 
Numerous studies [1][2][5][6][15][35][36] have been 
conducted in Saudi Arabia to implement E-learning in the 
education sector to improve students‟ learning outcomes. 
However, none of the articles which have been reviewed 
identify these factors such as, Technological Pedagogical 
Content Knowledge (TPACK), ICT factors, teaching 
principles, learning attributes, and personal factors on the 
effectiveness of E-learning use. After reviewing these 
studies, some of the factors were missing in some models, 
and hence an initial framework will be developed to 
examine the gap in the literature of a theoretical framework 
for the effectiveness of E-learning use in teaching and 
learning especially in Saudi Arabia. Education is the most 
important sector in any country, especially developing 
countries like the KSA. Therefore, educational institutions 
need 
to 
extensively 
use 
the 
Information 
and 
Communication Technologies as an alternative method of 
course delivery to students in order to guarantee that 
technologies are utilized efficiently within education 
sectors [2]. One of the modern common technologies is 
E-learning which plays a significant role in developing 
learning environments. The academics and students are 
likely to face some problems when adopting E-learning in 
the Saudi universities such as meeting staff and students 
requirements for teaching and learning, and the poor 
understanding of the new technology such as web 2.0 [19]. 
Currently, the Saudi universities face extensive pressure 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
   
 
 
due to an increase in the number of prospective students 
and the limited number of places available [37]. Hence, 
with the opportunity of remote learning being facilitated 
through the successful incorporation of E-learning into 
teaching practice, this issue may be mitigated or even 
resolved. The lectures and lesson times are short in certain 
subjects such as applied science, medical, and engineering 
programs offered by faculties in Saudi universities. So, the 
provision of E-learning in these faculties will provide 
various teaching methods involving the computerised 
methods of blended learning practices which can help to 
address this issue [18].  
The lack of knowledge in the use of technologies, and 
the underdeveloped university websites need to improve in 
updating their information and presenting the information 
in a usable manner to the students and academics, and 
offering training programs to help staff design their 
modules. ICT infrastructure is one of the biggest challenges 
in the implementation of E-learning in the higher education 
sector due to interruption problems with the internet. 
Furthermore, the KSA has a different culture because the 
delivery of education is segregated according to gender as it 
is not permitted for the male lecturer to teach female 
students face-to-face according to Islamic law [15][37][38]. 
KSA is one of the most conservative Muslim countries in 
the world, particularly regarding the situation of women, 
and it has solid roots in religious and family histories 
compared to developing countries [39][42]. For this reason, 
E-learning could help to solve this issue as male lecturers 
can teach female students through Blackboard or 
video-conferences by using such technologies.  
Moreover, gender is a significant factor and believed to 
be of influence on academics‟ attitudes toward E-learning 
implementation [6]. Consequently, female faculty members 
held more positive attitudes toward E-learning integration 
in teaching and learning compared to their male 
counterparts [5][7]. However, to the best of the researcher‟s 
knowledge, none of the previous literature yet has 
examined all of these factors inclusively, such as TPACK, 
ICT factors, teaching principles, learning attributes, and 
personal factors. These factors have been chosen as they are 
the most prominent in existing E-learning literature. 
V.  E-LEARNING INITIAL FRAMEWORK 
The proposed framework in this research is designed to 
integrate a set of the influential factors drawn from existing 
literature which must be considered when addressing 
E-learning systems in Saudi‟s higher education as well as 
achieving the research aims. It consists of five factors: 
TPACK, ICT factors, teaching principles, learning 
attributes, and personal factors (see Figure 1). 
 
 
 
Figure 1: E-learning Framework in Saudi Universities 
 
A. Technological 
Pedagogical 
Content 
Knowledge 
(TPACK)  
A few decades ago, Shulman [43] developed the 
concept of Pedagogical Content Knowledge (PCK), 
combining the relationships between content knowledge 
that the academics view as the need to teach subject matter 
separately from the way it needs to be taught, and the 
technological knowledge that refers to knowledge of 
E-learning such as the Internet, digital video, blackboards 
etc. Twenty years later, Mishra and Koehler [44] integrated 
the third domain and created the technology-based 
conceptual 
framework 
proposed 
by 
Shulman 
(PCK-TPACK) framework to become the Technological 
Pedagogical and Content Knowledge (TPACK). TPACK  
defines as, a framework that is used to include an 
understanding of the complexity of the relationships 
between academics, students, content, technologies such as 
(E-learning), practices, and tools [45]. Also, TPACK 
describes teacher knowledge for the technology integration 
into the learning environment. Niess [46] indicates that the 
TPACK framework develops academics‟ knowledge of 
subject content using technology such as E-learning to 
facilitate student learning and pedagogical knowledge. 
Mishra and Koehler [44] noted that TPACK is the 
integrated forms of knowledge that develop the interaction 
between these three main forms, namely, Technological 
Pedagogical 
Knowledge 
(TPK) 
that 
encourages 
interactivity among students in E-learning and the 
understanding of how E-learning can influence learning 
and teaching, and the Technological Content Knowledge 
(TCK) that the academics use in E-learning to enhance 
students‟ skills and understanding of the concepts in a 
specific 
subject 
matter, 
and 
Pedagogical 
Content 
Knowledge (PCK) [14][47][48].   
In this study, the researcher focuses on the type of 
knowledge that include technology (E-learning) such as 
TK, TPK, TCK, TPACK since these are directly related to 
the study objectives. A study was conducted by Habowski 
and Mouza [47] to investigate the use of technology for 
pre-service science teachers in a Mid-Atlantic University in 
the USA. They found that the pre-service teachers had 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
   
 
 
opportunities 
to 
integrate 
content, 
pedagogy, 
and 
technology in their practice. They used online resources 
such as YouTube video clips to present topics in biology 
and physics. Habowski and Mouza [47] used the survey of 
TPACK framework to measure pre-service teachers‟ 
knowledge and technology in science, and their findings 
show that pre-service teachers‟ TPK documents more than 
their TCK. Similarity, a study conducted on pre-service 
elementary teachers [49] through open-ended pre-service 
teachers‟ responses found that out of 55 teachers, 22 agreed 
with TPK compared with TCK. Evidently, the TPACK 
framework could be used as a determinant to measure the 
extent to which academics actually use E-learning in their 
educational practice. Also, the results could provide better 
ways to prepare pre-service teachers for the integration of 
E-learning in education [50]. 
B. ICT Factors 
According to Kabilan and Rajab [51] and Al-Adwan 
and Smedley [10], ICT infrastructures can be used in 
teaching and learning environments. Implementation of 
ICT in teaching and learning is challenging not only for the 
students, academics and instructional materials but also for 
the teachers‟/lecturers‟ awareness, acceptance, technical 
and skills. A suitable infrastructure for ICT development 
such as the availability of the internet, extranet, intranet and 
LAN networks is also necessary for the implementation of 
E-learning in higher education, especially in developing 
countries [10][11]. Hence, dealing with the challenges in 
the implementation of E-learning is important. In the Saudi 
higher education system,   Altameem [52] revealed that 
some technical constraints in several universities such as 
inadequate ICT infrastructures preventing the successful 
development and implementation of E-learning systems. 
For example, the lack of the availability of the internet 
facility at any time, and the inadequate bandwidths hamper 
the academics‟ teaching and the students‟ learning when 
there is access. Mokhtar, Alias and Rahman [53] suggest 
that the lack of resources and ICT equipment such as 
software and hardware especially those related to 
computers, teaching-learning materials and classroom size 
[54], shortcomings in teacher development [55], and lack of 
online IT support [11] made teachers less inclined to 
implement the online-based teaching and learning methods. 
Also, a critical factor recognized by the students is that 
more attention needed to be paid by Saudi universities to 
this aspect of E-learning [52]. Moreover, higher education 
institutions must invest in the right ICT infrastructure that 
allows academics and students to readily access the ICT 
hardware, utilizing friendly software and offering 
permanent technical support [10].  
Another ICT factor in this research is the usability of the 
developed software which is easy to use [56]. Usability is 
the main consideration when developing E-learning 
technology, as it is also for other kinds of software since 
usability helps to develop the systems with improved 
instructional and pedagogical approaches. According to 
Juristo, Lopez, Moreno and Sánchez [56], usability is often 
ignored in the design of E-learning software. Bevan and 
Azuma [57] mentioned that usability means that the 
software is simple to learn, effective to use, easy to 
remember, has few errors, and is subjectively satisfactory, 
[58] as well having performance, acceptance, and 
learnability. Additionally, web usability is becoming a 
significant issue for E-learning and an important factor in 
the planning and use of E-learning applications. Battleson, 
Booth and Weintrop [59] considered usability as a 
component of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI); it is 
defined as "the ease with which a user can learn to operate, 
prepare inputs for, and interpret outputs of a system or 
component" [60]. Hence, HCI is about the interaction 
between computers and users [61]. However, an E-learning 
system that aligns with students‟ and academics‟ needs is 
desirable and more useful. Obviously, lecturers and 
students should be involved in the HCI development 
process in order for their reactions and other behavioural 
factors to be taken into account at the time they use the 
computer [62]. Therefore, as many Saudi universities have 
introduced E-learning systems, the current study aims to 
help the universities in the KSA in their endeavour to 
successfully use E-learning systems by discovering the key 
challenges such as ICT infrastructure, Internet connectivity, 
technical 
support, 
usability 
and 
Human-Computer 
Interaction (HCI) that enable the academics and students to 
use E-learning effectively. 
C. Teaching principles 
The traditional curriculum design is such that the 
academics focus on the content delivery and on the 
assessment by means of which the students‟ knowledge and 
absorption of the taught material can be ascertained. Tam 
[63] reported that the curriculum designers and academics 
reflect through planning what should be learned, and select 
the learning activities appropriate for the desired outcomes. 
They are required to create and develop the learning 
environments not only for the academics to be proficient in 
their discipline but also for the use of a diversity of 
resources, methods, technologies. These include the 
E-learning systems, assessment resources, and e-mail so 
that the students achieve valuable outcomes. The academics 
need to change their role from the subject- proficient 
teacher to being facilitators of the learning process. 
Through this, the learning and teaching activities will be 
aligned with the educational process instead of being just 
content-driven [63]. The focus on learning requires the 
academics to develop the syllabus [64], and establish a 
course syllabus which becomes a central for documentation 
and demonstration of curriculum intentions [65]. Syllabi 
can make particular course outcomes clear in the context of 
broader program outcomes and can direct the students to 
work when the assignments are due and identify the kind 
and level of anticipations, and what are the aims that will be 
reached [65]. In regards to using E-learning in higher 
education, Meyen, et al. [66] stated that the pedagogy of 
online teaching involves “teaching methods related to the 
presentation of experiences, engagement of learners, 
reinforcement, motivation, an organization of teaching 
tasks, feedback, evolution, and curriculum integration” 
(2002, 40). 
Another study by Dron [67] mentioned that pedagogies 
are, in a true and essential sense, the area of study relating 
to teaching and as a strategy for education; and 
technologies represent a series of techniques and tools for 
education. For instance, technologies involve the use of 
computers, discussion boards, virtual classrooms, and 
institutional constructions. Hence, the adoption or 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
   
 
 
acceptance of new technologies (like E-learning) needs to 
create pedagogical concepts that could not be applied 
without technology and considers the current and future 
needs of the students, which are essential in a digital world. 
To use new technologies and create digital pedagogies, we 
need to know what to use, how to use, and when, and for 
what purpose. In the education field, the academics and 
students have access to the internet. So, there is a need to 
change their knowledge about using the technology so that 
it is more useful. 
Lawless and Pellegrino [68] and Dron [67] pointed out 
that knowledge sharing has become more significant than 
the knowledge itself. Therefore, creating digital pedagogies 
will shift the concentration from technology and skills to 
one that consists of connectivity, knowledge process, 
interaction, and development of knowledge by working in 
the digital world. Palomba and Banta [69] indicated that the 
academics deliver course content to students by 
determining what should be learned in order to achieve the 
desired learning outcomes; and whether their expected 
learning outcomes are introduced and reinforced in the 
given educational course.  In the same context, Biggs [70] 
pointed out that the learning outcomes, the teaching and 
learning activities should be aligned, and this is determined 
by the assessment system. The alignment of these three 
components will ensure the coherence in the curriculum in 
terms of the desired learning outcomes which should 
correspond with the teaching and learning activities, and 
the assessment tasks should be consistent [63][70]. 
However, in the case of the Saudi higher education system, 
Saudi vision 2030 wants the academics to have effective 
training and academic processing for teaching online 
courses in order to improve the teaching curriculum and 
enhance the E-learning systems in all subjects [3][71]. 
D. Learning Attributes 
Maor [72] stated that the learning attributes were 
utilized as the basis for the students‟ perception of the 
courses and the students‟ interaction. For more explanation, 
Interaction means that students share knowledge and 
interact with their peers and teachers by using discussion 
boards. Peer learning refers to students reflecting on the 
comments made during peer conversations on and offline. 
Reflection practice means that students create reflective 
journals by using technology such as Blackboards to show 
their understanding and transformation in their thinking 
over time. For instance, reflection refers to the learning 
process that assists students to express their attitudes, 
feelings, experiences, actions, and beliefs. It provides 
students with opportunities to examine the knowledge they 
have absorbed [73]. The interaction between the lecturer 
and students enables the lecturer to pose questions to 
encourage students to engage in reflective thinking. 
In E-learning environments, the term „interaction‟ could 
refer to learning activities and includes the online 
communication between lecturers and students, sharing 
information, and exchanging learning experiences. There 
are various types of interactions such as learning content 
interaction, 
student-student 
communication, 
and 
student-lecturer communication [74]. In an E-learning, 
students engage in interpersonal interaction over computer 
networks 
and 
interfaces 
instead 
of 
face-to-face 
communication. The synchronous communication or 
interaction may occur online between students and 
lecturers, and among students in E-learning environments, 
and may involve questions, answers, and discussions [75].  
In previous studies, the interaction between students 
and lecturers means that lecturers must perform a variety of 
tasks in the process of teaching such as providing an 
overview of the course contents, giving feedback on 
achievements, stimulating students‟ motivation to process 
and reflect on the content, and helping them to engage in 
learning activities, supporting knowledge construction, and 
establishing the foundation for a social relationship 
[74][76]. Students‟ peer interactions comprise the 
communication processes among the students, where 
students exchange information about the course contents 
and socio-emotional information. Students benefit from 
working in small groups to construct understanding, 
provide socio-emotional support, and learn within a 
consistent and positive environment [75][77]. According to 
Wong and Bakar [78], the interactive learning environment 
is an important factor in promoting students‟ positive 
attitudes through perceived satisfaction, usefulness, and 
peer learning, and reflect students‟ skills required for 
problem-solving in the E-learning environment [74]. 
E. Personal Factors 
Al-Adwan and Smedley [10] reported that any 
institution wants to have a successful E-learning strategy 
should be prepared culturally as well technologically. 
Cultural factors have a massive influence on how students 
learn, involving the style of interaction and communication, 
establishing the core basis of E-learning. These factors 
strongly impact two key elements of online learning 
systems: 1) system development and design, and 2) system 
usability and usage [79]. Hence, the engagement of cultural 
characteristics of academics and students is an important 
motivational factor in designing E-learning system and in 
contributing to the acceleration of the usage process toward 
the technology [80]. However, the KSA has a different 
religious and cultural influence on people‟s attitudes, 
practices, and behaviour [14]. Also, their social life and 
living standards are different and this may influence the 
success of the E-learning in higher education [19].  
Baki [39] notes that the Saudi system and methods of 
education differ from those of other countries around the 
world due to the different culture and religious beliefs. Asiri 
[44] agreed with him as the KSA is one of the most 
conservative Muslim countries in the world, particularly 
regarding the situation of women. In the KSA, male and 
female students in the universities are completely 
segregated. Consequently, the male academics cannot teach 
female students to face-to-face due to the Islamic restriction 
imposed by the Saudi government. The faculty members 
provide lectures to female students separately in buildings 
equipped with the audio-visual materials. This puts a 
substantial pressure on the available resources and facilities 
[41]. Therefore, Saudi universities are encouraged to 
introduce E-learning system to offer online courses for the 
female students in different faculties via a variety of 
E-learning systems [15][19]. 
Another study conducted by Hussein [81] investigated 
the attitudes of Saudi universities‟ faculty members 
towards using the learning management system (JUSUR). 
His findings show that 85% of the participants have a 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
   
 
 
positive attitude towards the E-learning management 
system JUSUR, and no variances in the attitudes among the 
faculty members regarding gender or the college 
classification type, whether it be the humanities, sciences or 
health subjects. 
In addition, the research results 
demonstrate that the faculty members have sufficient 
awareness of the significance of E-learning and usage of 
technology in teaching. This indicates a significant 
encouraging sign for the development of the use of 
E-learning management systems  by faculty members [82]. 
However, Hussein [81] suggests some weakness in the 
activation of E-learning management systems based on the 
participants‟ responses: the shortage of awareness 
regarding the basics of using the E-learning system; 
concerns of some faculty members and students‟ families 
regarding the E-learning; and the resistance of the 
community to the E-learning systems as they consider that 
technology is for entertainment, not for learning.  
Yahya et al. [83] indicated that personal management is 
the different needs and preferences of learner which 
involves the learning style and technical skills needed to 
solve the problems that occur when the learner access the 
E-learning system. Personal management means that 
academics become more knowledgeable about the 
technology that they use in the classroom. Academics must 
overcome personal confusion and uncertainty through 
being aware of the issues that they face such as time 
management of non-academic problems related to 
technology and thereby helping IT developers recognize 
their academics needs and providing them easily [84]. 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
As a conclusion, the main purpose of this research is to 
develop the awareness of academics and students regarding 
the use of E-learning technology in Saudi higher education. 
This research is expected to have a practical implication. To 
the best of the researcher‟s knowledge, none of the previous 
literature yet has examined all provided factors in the 
proposed framework inclusively. The deliverable outcome 
of this research will be a framework that provides a clearly 
structured roadmap for the stakeholders to use E-learning 
within the Saudi universities and it can be carried out in 
those 
developing 
countries 
especially, 
the 
Gulf 
Cooperation Council (GCC) countries due to they share the 
same factors such as culture, languages, religion, and 
education system. Centred on the university level, it is 
anticipated that the findings will enlighten stakeholders 
about the different uses of E-learning, and how these can be 
encouraged to develop learning and teaching at the 
university itself, and in the KSA higher education sector in 
general. 
In future work, we plan to extend current research by 
investigating the influential factors on the effectiveness of 
E-learning usage in Saudi universities and its impact on 
student learning outcomes. In addition, this paper is part of 
a broader research project and the findings will be utilized 
as the basis of an in-depth survey which will be published in 
future research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Unnisa, “E-Learning in Saudi Arabia's Higher Education,” 
Kuwait Chapter of the Arabian Journal of Business and 
Management Review, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 152-157, 2014. 
[2] S. Alkhalaf, S. Drew, R. AlGhamdi, and O. Alfarraj, 
“E-Learning system on higher education institutions in KSA: 
attitudes 
and 
perceptions 
of 
faculty 
members,” 
Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, vol. 47, pp. 
1199-1205, 2012. 
[3] E. A. R. Alharbi, “Higher Education in Saudi Arabia: 
Challenges 
to 
Achieving 
World-Class 
Recognition,” 
International Journal of Culture and History, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 
169, 2016. 
[4] A. Hamdan, “An Exploration into" Private" Higher 
Education in Saudi Arabia: Improving Quality and 
Accessibility?,” The ACPET Journal for Private Higher 
Education, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 33, 2013. 
[5] A. Alenezi, “Faculty members‟ perception of e-learning in 
higher education in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA) ,” 
PhD 
diss., 
Texas 
Tech 
University, 
2012. 
http://hdl.handle.net/2346/45399 
[6] M. Al Gamdi, and A. Samarji, “Perceived barriers towards 
e-Learning by faculty members at a recently established 
university in Saudi Arabia,” International Journal of 
Information and Education Technology, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 23, 
2016. 
[7] H. Al-Dosari, “Faculty members and students perceptions of 
e-learning in the English department: A project evaluation,” 
Journal of Social Sciences, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 291, 2011. 
[8] L. Dublin, “If you only look under the street lamps... or nine 
e-learning myths,” Best of The, pp. 1, 2003. 
[9] M. J. Rosenberg, E-learning: Strategies for delivering 
knowledge in the digital age: McGraw-Hill New York, 2001. 
[10] A. Al-Adwan, and J. Smedley, “Implementing e-learning in 
the Jordanian higher education system: Factors affecting 
impact,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Education 
and 
Development using Information and Communication 
Technology, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 121, 2012. 
[11] A. Sife, E. Lwoga, and C. Sanga, “New technologies for 
teaching and learning: Challenges for higher learning 
institutions in developing countries,” International journal of 
education and development using ICT, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 
57-67, 2007. 
[12] S. Guri-Rosenblit, “Distance education in the digital age: 
Common misconceptions and challenging tasks,” Journal of 
Distance Education (Online), vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 105, 2009. 
[13] K. T. Hilal, “Between the fears and hopes for a different 
future for the nation-states: Scholarship programs in Saudi 
Arabia and United Arab Emirates from a public policy 
standpoint,” International Journal of Higher Education, vol. 
2, no. 2, pp. 195, 2013. 
[14] R. Alebaikan, and S. Troudi, “Blended learning in Saudi 
universities: challenges and perspectives,” ALT-J, vol. 18, 
no. 1, pp. 49-59, 2010. 
[15] K. A.-S. Al-Harbi, “E-Learning in the Saudi tertiary 
education: Potential and challenges,” Applied Computing 
and Informatics, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 31-46, 2011. 
[16] M. Alamri, “Higher education in Saudi Arabia,” Journal of 
Higher Education Theory and Practice, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 88, 
2011. 
[17] SDL. "The Saudi Digital Library  ", May 12, 2018, 
https://sdl.edu.sa/SDLPortal/en/Publishers.aspx,  
[18] A. W. Q. Al Zumor, I. K. Al Refaai, E. A. B. Eddin, and F. H. 
A. Al-Rahman, “EFL Students‟ perceptions of a blended 
learning 
environment: 
Advantages, 
limitations 
and 
suggestions for improvement,” English Language Teaching, 
vol. 6, no. 10, pp. 95, 2013. 
[19] N. Quadri, A. Muhammed, S. Sanober, and A. Shah, “Barriers 
Effecting Successful Implementation of E-Learning in Saudi 
Arabian Universities,” International Journal of Emerging 
Technologies in Learning (iJET), vol. 12, no. 06, pp. 94-107, 
2017. 
[20] J. Mingers, “Combining IS research methods: towards a 
pluralist methodology,” Information systems research, vol. 
12, no. 3, pp. 240-259, 2001. 
[21] D. Silverman, Interpreting qualitative data: Sage, 2015. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
   
 
 
[22] V. Venkatesh, S. A. Brown, and H. Bala, “Bridging the 
qualitative-quantitative divide: Guidelines for conducting 
mixed methods research in information systems,” MIS 
quarterly, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 21-54, 2013. 
[23] M. Saunders, P. Lewis, and A. Thornhill, “Research Methods 
for business students 7th edition Pearson education limited,” 
2016. 
[24] J. W. Creswell, A concise introduction to mixed methods 
research: Sage Publications, 2014. 
[25] J. M. Morse, Mixed method design: Principles and 
procedures: Routledge, 2016. 
[26] J. W. Creswell, and V. L. P. Clark, “Designing and 
conducting mixed methods research,”: Sage Publications, 
2017. 
[27] D. M. Mertens, Research and evaluation in education and 
psychology: 
Integrating 
diversity 
with 
quantitative, 
qualitative, and mixed methods: Sage publications, 2014. 
[28] A. Tashakkori, and J. W. Creswell, "Mixed methodology 
across disciplines," Sage Publications Sage CA: Los 
Angeles, CA, 2008. 
[29] J. Pallant, SPSS survival manual: McGraw-Hill Education 
(UK), 2013. 
[30] B. Marshall et al., “Does sample size matter in qualitative 
research?: A review of qualitative interviews in IS research,” 
Journal of Computer Information Systems, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 
11-22, 2013. 
[31] J. W. Creswell, and C. N. Poth, Qualitative inquiry and 
research design: Choosing among five approaches: Sage 
publications, 2017. 
[32] R. K. Yin, Case study research: Design and methods: Sage 
publications, 2013. 
[33] J. A. Maxwell, Qualitative research design: An interactive 
approach: Sage publications, 2012. 
[34] N. King, and C. Horrocks, Interviews in qualitative research: 
Sage, 2010. 
[35] A. M. Al-Asmari, and M. S. Rabb Khan, “E-learning in Saudi 
Arabia: Past, present and future,” Near and Middle Eastern 
Journal of Research in Education, pp. 2, 2014. 
[36] F. N. Al-Fahad, “Students attitudes and perceptions towards 
the effectiveness of mobile learning in King Saud University, 
Saudi Arabia,” Turkish Online Journal of Educational 
Technology, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 111-119, 2009. 
[37] M. Algahtani, “Factors influencing the adoption of learning 
management systems in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabian 
universities by female academic staff,” 2017. 
[38] A. Onsman, “It is better to light a candle than to ban the 
darkness: government led academic development in Saudi 
Arabian universities,” Higher Education, vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 
519-532, 2011. 
[39] R. Baki, “Gender-Segregated Education in Saudi Arabia: Its 
Impact on Social Norms and the Saudi Labor Market,” 
education policy analysis archives, vol. 12, no. 28, pp. n28, 
2004. 
[40] S. Almutairy, T. Davies, and Y. Dimitriadi, "The readiness of 
applying m-learning among Saudi Arabian students at higher 
education." pp. 102-106. 
[41] M. J. S. Asiri, “Factors influencing the use of learning 
management system in Saudi Arabian Higher Education: A 
theoretical framework,” Higher Education Studies, vol. 2, no. 
2, pp. 125-137, 2012. 
[42] J. G. Alzahrani, and G. Ghinea, "Evaluating the impact of 
interactivity issues on e-learning effectiveness." pp. 1-5. 
[43] L. S. Shulman, “Paradigms and research programs in the 
study of teaching: A contemporary perspective,” 1986. 
[44] P. Mishra, and M. J. Koehler, “Technological pedagogical 
content knowledge: A framework for teacher knowledge,” 
Teachers college record, vol. 108, no. 6, pp. 1017, 2006. 
[45] L. Archambault, "Using TPACK as framework for 
understanding effective online teaching." pp. 5190-5195. 
[46] M. L. Niess, “Preparing teachers to teach science and 
mathematics with technology: Developing a technology 
pedagogical content knowledge,” Teaching and teacher 
education, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 509-523, 2005. 
[47] T. Habowski, and C. Mouza, “Pre-service teachers‟ 
development 
of 
technological 
pedagogical 
content 
knowledge (TPACK) in the context of a secondary science 
teacher education program,” Journal of Technology and 
Teacher Education, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 471-495, 2014. 
[48] C. S. Chai, J. H. L. Koh, and C.-C. Tsai, “Facilitating 
preservice 
teachers' 
development 
of 
technological, 
pedagogical, and content knowledge (TPACK),” Educational 
Technology & Society, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 63-73, 2010. 
[49] M. Hofer, and J. Harris, "TPACK research with inservice 
teachers: Where‟s the TCK?." pp. 4704-4709. 
[50] J. Tondeur et al., “A comprehensive investigation of TPACK 
within pre-service teachers' ICT profiles: Mind the gap!,” 
Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 33, no. 
3, pp. 46-60, 2017. 
[51] M. K. Kabilan, and B. M. Rajab, “The utilisation of the 
Internet by Palestinian English language teachers focusing on 
uses, practices and barriers and overall contribution to 
professional 
development,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Education and Development using Information and 
Communication Technology, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 56, 2010. 
[52] A. Altameem, “What drives successful E-learning? An 
empirical investigation of the key technical issues in Saudi 
Arabian universities, ” Journal of Theoretical & Applied 
Information Technology, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 63-70, 2013. 
[53] S. A. Mokhtar, R. A. Alias, and A. A. Rahman, “Academic 
computing at Malaysian colleges,” International Journal of 
Education and Development using ICT, vol. 3, no. 2, 2007. 
[54] P. J. Clarke, “Exploring the use of computer technology in a 
Caribbean 
context: 
Views 
of 
preservice 
teachers,” 
International Journal of Education and Development using 
ICT, vol. 3, no. 1, 2007. 
[55] R. Wells, and S. Wells, “Challenges and opportunities in ICT 
educational 
development: 
A 
Ugandan 
case 
study,” 
international journal of Education and Development using 
ICT, vol. 3, no. 2, 2007. 
[56] N. Juristo et al., "Improving software usability through 
architectural patterns." pp. 12-19. 
[57] N. Bevan, and M. Azuma, "Quality in use: Incorporating 
human factors into the software engineering lifecycle." pp. 
169-179. 
[58] K. J. Alotaibi, "Gathering of usability requirements by Saudi 
e-learning software developers." pp. 255-261. 
[59] B. Battleson, A. Booth, and J. Weintrop, “Usability testing of 
an academic library web site: a case study,” The Journal of 
Academic Librarianship, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 188-198, 2001. 
[60] H. S. Al-Khalifa, "A first step in evaluating the usability of 
Jusur learning management system." pp. 450-459. 
[61] T. Issa, and P. Isaias, "Usability and Human Computer 
Interaction (HCI)," Sustainable Design, pp. 19-36: Springer, 
2015. 
[62] A. J. Head, Design wise: A guide for evaluating the interface 
design of information resources: Information Today, Inc., 
1999. 
[63] M. Tam, “Outcomes-based approach to quality assessment 
and curriculum improvement in higher education,” Quality 
Assurance in Education, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 158-168, 2014. 
[64] M. B. Eberly, S. E. Newton, and R. A. Wiggins, “The 
syllabus as a tool for student-centered learning,” The Journal 
of General Education, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 56-74, 2001. 
[65] N. F. Veltri et al., “Curriculum mapping as a tool for 
continuous improvement of IS curriculum,” Journal of 
Information Systems Education, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 31, 2011. 
[66] E. L. Meyen et al., “e-Learning: A programmatic research 
construct for the future,” Journal of Special Education 
Technology, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 37-46, 2002. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
   
 
 
[67] J. Dron, “The pedagogical-technological divide and the 
elephant in the room,” International Journal on E-learning, 
vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 23-38, 2012. 
[68] K. A. Lawless, and J. W. Pellegrino, “Professional 
development in integrating technology into teaching and 
learning: Knowns, unknowns, and ways to pursue better 
questions and answers,” Review of educational research, vol. 
77, no. 4, pp. 575-614, 2007. 
[69] C. A. Palomba, and T. W. Banta, Assessment Essentials: 
Planning, Implementing, and Improving Assessment in 
Higher Education. Higher and Adult Education Series: ERIC, 
1999. 
[70] J. B. Biggs, Teaching for quality learning at university: What 
the student does: McGraw-Hill Education (UK), 2011. 
[71] N. Yusuf, “Changes Required in Saudi Universities 
Curriculum to Meet the Demands of 2030 Vision,” 
International Journal of Economics and Finance, vol. 9, no. 9, 
pp. 111, 2017. 
[72] D. Maor, “Using TPACK to develop digital pedagogues: a 
higher education experience,” Journal of Computers in 
Education, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 71-86, 2017. 
[73] S.-W. Hsieh et al., “Effects of teaching and learning styles on 
students‟ reflection levels for ubiquitous learning,” 
Computers & Education, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 1194-1201, 2011. 
[74] S.-S. Liaw, and H.-M. Huang, “Perceived satisfaction, 
perceived usefulness and interactive learning environments 
as predictors to self-regulation in e-learning environments,” 
Computers & Education, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 14-24, 2013. 
[75] A. N. Islam, “Investigating e-learning system usage 
outcomes in the university context,” Computers & 
Education, vol. 69, pp. 387-399, 2013. 
[76] M. Paechter, B. Maier, and D. Macher, “Students‟ 
expectations of, and experiences in e-learning: Their relation 
to 
learning 
achievements 
and 
course 
satisfaction,” 
Computers & education, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 222-229, 2010. 
[77] D. Y. Shee, and Y.-S. Wang, “Multi-criteria evaluation of the 
web-based e-learning system: A methodology based on 
learner satisfaction and its applications,” Computers & 
Education, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 894-905, 2008. 
[78] S. L. Wong, and K. A. Bakar, “Qualitative findings of 
students‟ perception on practice of self-regulated strategies in 
online community discussion,” Computers & education, vol. 
53, no. 1, pp. 94-103, 2009. 
[79] A. Rhema, and I. Miliszewska, “Towards e-learning in 
higher education in Libya,” Issues in Informing Science and 
Information Technology, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 423-437, 2010. 
[80] L. Vrazalic, R. MacGregor, and D. Behl, “E-learning barriers 
in the United Arab Emirates: Preliminary results from an 
empirical investigation,” IBIMA Business Review, 2010. 
[81] H. B. Hussein, “Attitudes of Saudi universities faculty 
members towards using learning management system 
(JUSUR),” TOJET: The Turkish Online Journal of 
Educational Technology, vol. 10, no. 2, 2011. 
[82] W. M. Pollock, The impact of on-line training on college 
faculty attitudes and knowledge of students with disabilities: 
Old Dominion University, 2009. 
[83] M. Al-Yahya, R. George, and A. Alfaries, “Ontologies in 
E-learning: review of the literature,” International Journal of 
Software Engineering and Its Applications, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 
67-84, 2015. 
[84] Y.-H. Chen, and S.-J. Jang, “Interrelationship between stages 
of concern and technological, pedagogical, and content 
knowledge: A study on Taiwanese senior high school 
in-service teachers,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 32, 
pp. 79-91, 2014. 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

