Active Learning in Teaching Digital Tourism: Preliminary Results Through Online
Travel Business Simulation
Michele Angelaccio
Management Engineering Dept.
University of Rome ”Tor Vergata”
Rome, Italy
email: michele.angelaccio@uniroma2.it
Lucia Zappitelli
Smartourism Research Lab
University of Rome ”Tor Vergata”
Rome, Italy
email: lucia.zappitelli@gmail.com
Abstract—Today, education requires a constant search of
methods and instruments that stimulate student engagement.
Active learning methods ensure student activities through their
creativeness and reactiveness during educational processes.
Simulation techniques have been used as a crucial component of
active teaching especially in the context of Business Informatics
due to a close relationship between simulated business models and
computer technologies and management skills. In this paper, we
focus on online Travel Agency Business simulation and show how
a real simulation performed through active methodology of web
coding results in a complete set of learning outcomes in Digital
Tourism and Management education.
Keywords— Digital Tourism Courses, Active learning, Project-
based Learning, OTA Business Simulation
I. INTRODUCTION
Over the last decades, simulation resources have been extensively
integrated within teaching programs, especially in engineering. Ini-
tially, many strategies have relied on the use of software tools for
simulating a wide field of engineering problems [3]. In the last
years, a particular attention has been devoted to the programs of
business and management engineering for which digital resources
for computational problems and simulation have been analyzed also
from a learning point of view as usefully employed in terms of
active learning methodology [6] [7]. However, in these cases the
use of a particular simulation tool is required to involve students
in management tasks and strategy building. Often this solution is
difficult to implement for students without some technical and digital
basic skills. As a matter of fact, Digital Tourism is an example of a
business area with the need to teach skills for Online Travel Agencies
(OTA business simulation) and often with students with low-level
profile of digital skills. Therefore, the main aim of this paper is to
describe a simulation based activity to support a complete active
learning framework for digital and management competencies for
OTA management with a web coding based simulation approach that
emulates a simulation scenario of travel business. This is strongly
related to the field of Digital Tourism with emphasis on booking
data and travel business planning.
In the next section, we describe course organization and the
way how web simulation platform has been implemented. Then
we analyze the Travel Business simulation process and discuss the
advantages. A focus on web coding and its role in active learning
strategy it will be discussed in section 4 before the Conclusions.
II. DIGITAL TOURISM COURSES
These specific courses are Digital Tourism and Web Information
systems for Smart Cities. From a general point of view they are
organized in agreement with Agile Learning paradigm by following
a project based approach (see [5] and [8] ). The Digital Tourism
course covers, among others, such issues as Digital Tourism fun-
damentals and software architectures, entrepreneurship, planning of
travel business, organizational structures, destination analysis, market
research and branding, team building in the modern companies, risk
analysis and information gathering.
The teaching methods used so far are: presentations, discussions,
case studies, teaching and learning activities, team exercises and web-
stories on social platforms.
During the course, students carry out a research project, whose
topic is: “Project preparation – Digitalization of a Travel Italian
Destination of small scale to be promoted ”. The student’s task is
to develop a model. They should also find examples of interesting
business solutions based on a literature review and their observations.
During the classes on the subject “Web Information systems for
Smart Cities”, students learn about the concept of “Smart City and
Data analysis”, including the distinguishing factors and consequences
of the fourth industrial revolution. In addition, they learn in detail
the concepts of the Dashboard and web app for Data analysis and
visualization: conditions for the development of this type of web
information system, the impact of ICT on the challenges posed by
this type of analysis, and aspects related to the sharing of knowledge.
The teaching methods used so far in the classes are seminar lectures
and exercises: group work, presentations and discussion. Students of
this course carry out a research project covering the following aspects:
• development (in a team) of a concept of a digital tourism
data model with assumptions and justification/comments on the
selection of individual elements of the model;
• preparation of a multimedia presentation on the developed
concepts.
As remarked in [6], this activity can be made more attractive by
considering business simulation as learning process. In this case this
introduction has been obtained by considering Online Travel Agency
Business implemented through a complete web platform composed
by independent web travel agencies each related to a particular des-
tination assigned to a group of students according to their preferred
destination. This differs from [6], meaning that web coding replaces
business simulation platform and allows a more complete learning
process with respect to the acquisition of digital skills. For example,
there is no need to run an external simulation tool to show the
elements of business reality because in the case of simulation of
online travel agencies , students are able to experiment with real data
gathered from the internet the tourism services and corresponding
data analysis functions thus emulating tour operators and destination
managers behavior. In particular Figure 1 shows the organization of
the two courses obtained by considering collaborative platforms for
the agile learning process resulting in a set of learning outcomes that
are viewed as components of two-levels web architectures BACK-
END and FRONT-END used in the Online Travel Agency Simulation
Web Platform. In the next section it will be described this type of
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

business simulation solution in more detail and it will be discussed
its advantages.
III. OTA BUSINESS SIMULATION ANALYSIS
The Online Travel Agency (OTA) business simulation learning
system is implemented through the use of a project based platform
(Wordpress PM) syncronized with team collaboration system already
used in the class (Microsoft Teams). To engage students in travel
business as potential digital tour operator, the project based platform
works as multi destination management platform hosting a set of
Travel Agencies each assigned to a working group and defined by
e-commerce Wordpress CMS with the following plugin extensions:
• BuddyPress plugin for community management [9]
• Project management plugin for the Tour and destination content
[10]
• Booking plugin for e-commerce travel simulation [11]
As recognized by [4] and [6], competencies needed in Modern
Digital Business society are strongly related to flexible adaptive skills
typical of active learning and collaborative frameworks.
In addition, two of the most significant American human develop-
ment organizations (namely the 21st Century Skills Partnership and
the National Council for Social Studies), based on the research and
analysis conducted, have introduced a map of social competencies
for the challenges of the 21st century. This map contains a catalogue
of social skills deemed necessary for full functioning in 21st-century
societies. It covers the following areas of competences, i.e.:
• Knowledge and Organizational Competencies,
– creativity and innovation,
– critical thinking and problem solving,
– communication,
– cooperation within a community group.
• Character Quality
– efficient use of information and communication technology
tools,
– flexibility and adaptability (the ability to adapt to changing
conditions),
– productivity,
– leadership skills and responsibility.
The use of this Business Simulation solution in teaching helps each
student to develop several competencies relating to a more insightful
understanding of reality, its rational transformation, and stimulation of
her/his creative activity. In particular, for Travel Business simulation
carried out through web platforms, we can summarize the competen-
cies derived from Agile learning activities and learning outcomes in
Table I.
With this business simulation strategy, students develop creativity,
innovation, and decision-making skills, which are desirable for future
roles as needed by new profiles of SMARTOUR OPERATORS
emerging in Digital Tourism society.
However, the most innovative contribution of the two courses
introduced is that the simulation is obtained through the use of web
coding platforms to implement the travel business simulation. In the
next section we describe how such OTA Business simulation has been
carried out through a specific set of activities.
IV. THE IMPACT OF WEB CODING
It is interesting to remark the impact of web coding on OTA
business simulation to improve learning activity level. Coding labora-
tories are a very recent learning activity model used in high intensive
digital skill course to enhance the competencies on software platforms
(cloud, networking, security, algorithms and artificial intelligence).
In this case, we apply the same coding approach but shifted at
level of WEB-coding laboratory in which the use of web platform
is motivated by the fact that in the context of travel business
e-commerce they could sufficient to simulate all required digital
services (tour data map definitions, scheduling and booking services,
etc.) introduced in our courses. This has the potential to extend the
capacity skill set towards the education of future digital managers
with the inclusion of students incoming also from other different
education profiles oriented for example to cultural knowledge.
A. Agile learning and Web coding for Digital Tourism
When applied to OTA Business Simulation, web coding has the
potential to reach a deeper level of learning activities.
This will obtained by considering that:
• there is no predefined timeline sequence of web coding task to
be followed by each student and each group is free to propose
an autonomous task definition except the constraint defined by
the general travel agency template definition.
• travel simulation and destination definition can be autonomously
refined thanks to the online procedures synchronised following
agile scrum methodology.
• web output sharing is very natural in the context of Online
Travel e-commerce platforms leading to shared data map and
services (e.g. booking). A student simulating tour operator on
the assigned destination can participate as client visitor for
another destination leading to be more productive for future
work.
• cross-disciplinary activities are facilitated due to the fact that
different digital skilled profiles can benefit from autonomous
group coding activity.
B. Real Business Gaming issues
In the last session held in spring 2022 at our University of Rome,
it has been experimented a real activity in the context of digital
Tourism Course composed by an outdoor Smartourism Hackathon.
This extra activity has been organized with the collaboration of a
real Tour Operator Organization (Tevere Park) with the contribution
of students participating in a smartourism gaming learning activity
inside a green touristic park located out of Rome and reachable
by train. Such gaming learning activity has been performed by
exploring real river trekking tours through bike and canoe trips and
the associated activities with the assistance of external guides (see
Figure 2). The gaming output has been put in the form of web
stories including travel data analysis with suggestions and annotations
autonomously discussed. In this way, we have confirmed that web
coding for Tourism is a framework to enhance digital and business
skills in a real world of working activities.
Among the the resulting benefits we remark the following ones:
• Refinement of starting paths is achieved on the field by au-
tonomous interaction between groups and park assistants thanks
to a game approach like Hackathon.
• The use of web stories has been made possible in mobile
computing mode using socialmedia story editing functions in
real time (see Figure 3 in which are listed the web stories
collected by students who participated in the game).
• Compared to learning processes conducted only in the class-
room or online, team work on the field and spontaneous game
processes in the park during the realization of the guided tours,
have produced a better level of awareness and self-esteem in
students also facilitating teamwork.
V. CONCLUSIONS
Digital Tourism competencies are strongly related to the acqui-
sition of experience. Thus, one of the most important elements of
education is learning through experience. Business computer simula-
tion currently seems to be the best solution that allows management
and digital education in a joint framework but the use of a particular
business simulation tool must be replaced with a more user friendly
and practical tool due to the increasing number of different sources
of touristic data and processes. Therefore, it is important to indicate
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Fig. 1. Agile Learning Organization for the Course Web for Tourism
TABLE I
LEARNING OUTCOMES FOR SMARTOURIM COURSE
Cognitive
Competencies
Tour and destination discovery
web, map and multimedia design
Planning and Risk analysis
Digital Competencies
Analytical skills
searching for attractions
creativity in content creation
innovation in new smartourism experience definition
Creativity
Action oriented
Competencies
self management of travel business process
time management and task planning
indipendence
self learning
Flexibility
Social
Competencies
Tour integration and comparison
Social networking diffusion
Communication and Collaboration
Team Working
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Fig. 2. Smartourism Hackathon Organization
Fig. 3. web stories and student’s perceptron
the need to develop students’ professional and social competences
with the use of a higher level type of business computer simulation
strongly related to real cases. In this work we have explored the issues
related to a first attempt to learn by means of web coding used in a set
of project based courses for smartourism development. A complete
organization of the learning web platform with a discussion of the
resulting benefits has been given together a first analysis in terms of
novel approaches arising from this type of web based simulation
leading to the implementation of new game learning particularly
suited for OTA business learning.
REFERENCES
[1] Topal, Murat and Karaca, Ozan. , ”Gamification in E-Learning”, 2022,
10.4018/978-1-6684-3710-0.ch001.
[2] M. C´apay, ”Enhancing the Teaching of Informatics through Engaging
Experience”, Proceedings Of The 11th International Conference On
Computer Supported Education - Volume 1: CSEDU, pp. 453-460, 2019.
[3] D.Valiente et al., ”Active Learning Program Supported by Online
Simulation Applet in Engineering Education” Proceedings Of The 9th
International Conference On Simulation And Modeling Methodologies,
Technologies And Applications - SIMULTECH, pp. 121-128, 2019
[4] M. Angelaccio, ”Ecopolytechnic: a sustainable and Flexible e-learning
system for agile smart learning scenarios”, Proceedings Of The 14th
International Conference On E-Learning (EL 2020), pp. 183–186)
[5] M.Angelaccio, ”Design of active learning strategy through agile develop-
ment methodologies: a technological view”, Proceedings Of The CECIIS
2011: Central European conference on information and intelligent
systems, Varazdyn-Croatia, pp. 105-110.
[6] A. Binsztok, B. Butryn, K. Hołowi´nska, M. Owoc, and M. Sobinska,
”Applying Simulation in Teaching Selected Courses in Business Infor-
matics with the FlexSim Platform” (14th International Conference on
Computer Supported Education,pp. 330-337, 2022).
[7] A.Binsztok, B. Butryn, K. Hołowi´nska, M. Owoc, and M. Sobi´nska,
”Business computer simulation supporting competencies. Potential areas
of application and barriers” Procedia Computer Science. 207 pp. 3875-
3883, 2022.
[8] A. Aji, ”The Impact of Active Learning on Students’ Academic Perfor-
mance”, Open Journal of Social Sciences. 207 pp. 204-211, 2019.
[9] buddypress wordpress plugin, ”wordpress.org/plugins/buddypress/”
[10] pm wordpress plugin ”wordpress.org/plugins/wedevs-project-manager/”
[11] booking wordpress plugin ”/wordpress.org/plugins/booking-calendar/”
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-081-0
eLmL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

