Tracking Verb Phrases for Formative Feedback in Foreign Language Writing 
Shuai Shao, Kazuhiro Ohtsuki, Hidenari Kiyomitsu, Min  Kang 
Graduate School of Intercultural Studies 
Kobe University 
Kobe, Japan 
e-mail: samveldf@stu.kobe-u.ac.jp, ohtsuki@kobe-u.ac.jp, 
 kiyomitsu@carp.kobe-u.ac.jp, kang@kobe-u.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—Providing feedback is crucial in the language 
learning process. In time, formative feedback can help both 
learners and teachers confirm the ongoing acquisition of 
language. However, as of today, there is still little research not 
only on manual formative feedback but also on automated 
formative feedback. Thus, in this paper, we elaborate on how 
to track learners’ acquisition for formative feedback by 
developing a system for foreign language writing. The system is 
implemented based on the results of an analysis of data 
collected from conventional face-to-face classrooms in Chinese 
learning. 
Keywords-foreign language writing; automated formative 
feedback; phrase extraction; dependency relation; change 
detection. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Feedback plays an important role in foreign language 
learning [1]. The effectiveness of corrective feedback has 
been clarified by a number of researchers [2]-[4]. 
Meanwhile, formative feedback became an indispensable 
component as well [5]. Because providing feedback can be 
time consuming and costly, automated feedback has also 
drawn much attention [6].  
Previous research has shown the advantage of the 
automated feedback system over the paper-based feedback 
[7]. Educational Testing Service (ETS) has developed a 
Web-based writing evaluation service, Criterion, and 
Vantage Learning has created My Access, which are both 
programs that combine a scoring engine with a separate 
editing tool, which provides grammar, spelling and 
mechanical feedback [8]. On the other hand, Warschauer 
and Grimes [8] conducted a mixed-methods case study to 
evaluate the use of those programs in classrooms. They 
pointed out that although the programs saved teachers’ 
grading time and learners tended to edit their writings more, 
the editing was usually superficial and no iterative process 
was observed. These automated systems are just designed to 
improve the writing quality in the current document by 
finding errors, which is different from a teacher’s goal 
which is to improve the learners’ writing ability to produce 
better new documents [9]. Thus, research on the long-term 
usage of automated systems becomes a necessity.  
Simone and Christian implemented a Web-based 
feedback system in their lectures and analyzed the effects of 
the system which provided automated formative feedback 
throughout the semester [10]. They found that students who 
received feedback achieved higher scores and became more 
motivated and confident. Formative feedback can not only 
help learners but also help teachers improve their 
instructional 
strategies 
[11]. 
Nevertheless, 
additional 
research on automated formative feedback in foreign 
language writing is still rare.  
The aim of our research is to design an automated 
formative feedback environment to facilitate the writing 
process. In this paper, we report the partial results 
concerning the on-going research. We focus on the writing 
process in Chinese for Japanese learners, especially on 
Japanese-Chinese translation process. Furthermore, verb-
object (V-O) phrases are chosen as the targets of providing 
feedback because V-O phrases are basic sentence structures 
expressing the meanings of sentences and appear frequently 
in teaching materials for beginners.  
In Section 2, we look at the V-O phrases in several 
translation exercises conducted in face-to-face classrooms 
and first analyze the translations manually to observe how 
learners translate the corresponding Japanese phrases to the 
Chinese phrases in time-series. In Section 3, based on the 
results of the analysis, we build a prototype system to track 
changes of learners’ translations concerning the phrases and 
provide this to learners to help them confirm their 
progression in the learning process. The tracking results will 
also be provided to teachers to give them an overview of the 
learners’ acquisition of the material. The conclusion will be 
given in Section 4. 
II. 
ANALYZING LEARNING LOG DATA 
A. Data from Classrooms 
68 sophomore students (2 classes of 34 students) taking 
“Intermediate Chinese” at Kobe University, Japan, whose 
overall Chinese proficiency level was empirically considered 
to be intermediate were subjects for this research. The 
students were asked to translate Japanese sentences into 
Chinese as a class exercise every week. One specific word 
“花見” (hanami or cherry-blossom viewing) is chosen as the 
target to providing feedback. We designed three Japanese 
sentences containing the word “花見” (hanami or cherry-
blossom viewing) and put them respectively into three 
exercises over eight weeks: the interval between the first two 
exercises was one week, and the interval after the 2nd 
exercise was six weeks. In the 1st week, the Chinese 
translation of the phrase “花見に行く” (go to see cherry 
blossoms) was presented as a hint along with the exercise 
paper for Class 1 while not Class 2. In the following week, 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

the students from both classes did the 2nd exercise without 
any hint. Then in the interim, in the 3rd week, the teacher 
thoroughly explained about the various translations of 
“cherry-blossom viewing” and told the students of both 
classes that “看樱花” (see cherry blossoms) was the most 
appropriate answer. Five weeks later, the 3rd exercise 
containing “cherry-blossom viewing” was conducted. The 
three Japanese sentences are listed below. 
S1. “もし明日雨が降らなければ，私たちは花見に
行くつもりです．” 
     (If it doesn’t rain tomorrow, we are going to see 
cherry blossoms.) 
S2. “もし花見に行くなら，京都が一番いい．” 
     (If you go to see cherry blossoms, Kyoto is the best 
place.) 
S3. “来年 3 月末に私は神戸に来る予定だが，花見
に来るのではなく，出張に来るのだ．” 
     (I plan to come to Kobe at the end of March next year 
for business trip not for cherry blossom viewing.) 
B. Analysis and Results 
TABLE I.  
CORRECT ANSWER RATE OF “花見” (CHERRY-BLOSSOM 
VIEWING) 
 
Week 1 
Week 2 
Week 8  
Class 1 
100% 
94.1% 
94.1% 
Class 2 
73.5% 
88.2% 
100% 
TABLE II.  
PERCENTAGE OF STUDENTSCHANGING ANSWERS 
BETWEEN EXERCISES 
 
Week 1- 2 
Week 2- 8 
Week 2- 8(G2-G1) 
Class 1 
85.3% 
64.7% 
23.5% 
Class 2 
52.9% 
64.7% 
23.5% 
 
Our analysis focuses on the changes of translation of the 
specific word “cherry-blossom viewing” found in all three 
exercises. There were four main translations, “看樱花” (see 
cherry blossoms), “看花” (see flowers), “赏花” (admire 
flowers), and “ 观 赏 樱 花 ” (admire cherry blossoms). 
Although “cherry-blossom viewing” is a word in Japanese, it 
should be translated as a verb phrase in Chinese, with one 
verb and one noun. The Japanese word “花見” (cherry-
blossom viewing) refers to the tradition of sitting under 
blooming cherry trees to appreciate the beauty of the cherry 
blossoms. Thus, even though the kanji/Chinese character 
“花” (flower) exists in both Japanese and Chinese, in the 
original Japanese word it specifically refers to cherry 
blossoms. However, in translations such as “看花” (see 
flowers), “赏花” (admire flowers), “花” (flower) means 
flowers without explicitly referring to cherry blossoms. 
Hence “樱花” (cherry blossoms) is considered as a more 
appropriate translation. In addition, all three sentences come 
from everyday conversations, “观赏樱花” (admire cherry 
blossoms) seems too formal in this context. Therefore, we 
divided the different translations into three groups: Group 1 
(G1: most appropriate): “看樱花” (see cherry blossoms); 
Group 2 (G2: correct but flawed): “看花” (see flowers), “赏
花 ” (admire flowers), and “ 观 赏 樱 花 ” (admire cherry 
blossoms), as well as Group 3 (G3: mistakes). We then 
calculated the percentage of correct answers for each 
exercise and also the percentage of students changing 
answers overtime according to descriptive statistics methods. 
Table 1 shows the percentage of correct answers (G1 & 
G2) of the word “花見” (cherry-blossom viewing) in the 
three exercises. As we can see, students in Class 1 achieved 
100% accuracy because of the hint, however, Class 2 only 
achieved 73.5%. However, it is noteworthy that in the 
following week, the accuracy of Class 1 fell while that of 
Class 2 increased. In week 3, the teacher explained about the 
exercises conducted previously and emphasized the most 
appropriate translation. In week 8, the accuracy of Class 2 
exceeded that of Class 1, which suggested that giving 
students answers without any explanation was not as 
effective as one might think. This kind of input may lead 
students to just use the answer without any active thinking or 
reflection involved. 
Table 2 shows the percentage of students who changed 
answers between the exercises. In week 1, all students in 
Class 1 used the most appropriate translation owing to the 
hint. However, 85.3% of Class 1 changed their answers in 
week 2, which indicated that the hint had not been properly 
memorized. In week 2, the percentage of G1 was 14.7% in 
Class 1 and 8.8% in Class 2. The percentage of students 
changing answers in both classes between exercise 2 and 3 
were identical, and there were over 20% of students in each 
class who changed their answers from G2 to G1. These 
percentages reveal that students’ self-reflection can improve 
their accuracy but explanations by a teacher can further 
facilitate the learning process.  
Based on the above results, it is revealed that by tracking 
the changes of translation, teachers could confirm the effects 
of the provided hint and explanation; students may benefit 
from the formative feedback to find out the weak points in 
the learning process. 
III. 
SYSTEM DESIGN AND OUTPUT ANALYSIS 
A. Formative Feedback System 
We propose an approach to provide feedback for 
learners’ time-serial data in Japanese-Chinese translation 
process, with a focus on tracking changes on V-O phrases. 
The key idea in the approach is the utilization of the 
dependency relation between two words that consist of a 
phrase for tracking. By using a dependency parser, we can 
obtain the structural information of input sentences in which 
the phrase should be contained; based on that information we 
can extract the phrase within and then detect whether a 
learner has changed the phrase or not by comparing the 
extracted phrase with that from the sentences in previous 
translation exercises. If the phrase cannot be extracted, there 
are two possible reasons. One is that the learner used an 
incorrect phrase. The other is that the learner used a different 
correct phrase with different dependency relation.  
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Currently, the approach is presented for the simple 
sentences with one V-O phrase. The approach can be divided 
into two phases, as shown below. 
1) The preparation for, and extraction of verb phrase: 
a) A teacher or a learner chooses the V-O phrase (We 
call it intended phrase or IP.) to which he/she wants to 
confirm the acquisition. 
b) Learners’ translations which should contain the IP 
(based on the source language sentence) will be processed 
by a Chinese parser and the V-O phrase (We call it learner’s 
phrase or LP.) will be extracted based on the dependency 
parser’s result. 
2) The formative feedback: 
a) The LP will be extracted along with the information 
of the time when it was submitted (timestamp). As a result, 
extracted LPs will be in time series, and LP submitted later 
can be compared with the previous LP.  
b) The extraction and comparison will provide not only 
the information of the phrases but also the detection of 
whether the learners have changed their translations or not. 
Subsequently, the results of all the exercises will be 
presented to both learners and teachers. 
B. Algorithm for Prototype System 
Following the above approach, we built a prototype 
system. In this system, we utilized the Stanford Parser [12] 
through Python NLTK (Natural Language Toolkit) interface 
to analyze the input data. The input data should be simple 
sentences which are produced by learners in an exercise and 
should contain an IP. The steps of the algorithm for the 
prototype system are listed below.  
1) The input will be segmented and the part of speech 
(POS) information will also be generated by exploiting the 
segmentor and POS tagger of the Stanford Parser.  
2) The dependency parser of the Stanford Parser will 
provide the structual information of the segmented input and 
the LP within will be extracted depending on the existense 
of a “dobj” (direct object) tag. If a “dobj” tag exists, the 
contents, as well as their POS tags will be extracted, 
otherwise the output will be “*”.  
3) Since the extracted LPs will have timestamps, the 
system will compare the latter LP with the former one to 
detect whether the learner has changed the translation or 
not .  
C. Output Analysis and Discussion 
In order to evaluate the approach, we used the previously 
collected translations from Class 1 as our testing data. We 
also chose the V-O phrase “看樱花” (see cherry blossoms) 
as the target to provide feedback as described in the Section 
2. The translations for S1, S2 and S3 are the raw data to 
input into the system. Because the raw data was compound 
sentences, we did manual pre-processing to obtain the input 
sentences which should contain the IP. Examples are shown 
in Table 3. 
TABLE III.  
EXAMPLES OF PRE-PROCESSED INPUT 
Original 
如果去看樱花，京都是最好。 
(If going to see cherry blossoms, Kyoto is the best.) 
如果我去看樱，京都最好。 
(If I go to see cherry, Kyoto is the best.) 
Pre-
processed 
如果去看樱花 (If going to see cherry blossoms) 
如果我去看樱 (If I go to see cherry) 
TABLE IV.  
EXAMPLES OF EXTRACTED PHRASES 
No. 
verb 
vPOS 
object 
oPOS 
V&O 
S1 
去
(go) 
VV 
看樱 
(see 
cherry) 
NN 
去看樱 
(go to see 
cherry) 
S1 
看 
(see) 
VV 
樱花 
(cherry 
blossoms) 
NN 
看樱花 
(see cherry 
blossoms) 
S2 
看 
(see) 
VV 
樱花 
(cherry 
blossoms) 
NN 
看樱花 
(see cherry 
blossoms) 
S2 
* 
* 
* 
* 
** 
 
 
Figure 1.  Examples of change detection 
TABLE V.  
ABOUT EXTRACTION OF THE SYSTEM 
 
Extraction Rate of All Inputs 
Usage of “看樱花” 
Week 1 
100% 
100% 
Week 2 
100% 
14.7% 
Week 8 
76.5% 
38.5% 
 
There are two kinds of outputs provided by the prototype 
system that are shown in Table 4 and Figure 1. Table 4 
shows some examples of the output obtained by the step 1) 
of the algorithm. If a LP was extracted, then the verb and 
object, as well as the V-O phrase will be provided to users. It 
can be observed that not all inputs can be extracted with a V-
O phrase. Just like the last example in the table, if the system 
couldn’t find a “dobj” tag, then the output would be “*”.  
For examining the validity of the feedback in Table 4, we 
calculated the extraction rate that describes how many V-O 
phrases there are in the input sentences. The extraction rates 
are presented in Table 5. Meanwhile, we calculated the 
percentages of the IP “看樱花” (see cherry blossoms) used 
by students in the raw data and showed the percentages in 
the same table. From Table 5 it is clear that in week 1, all 
students of Class 1 translated “ 花 見 ” (cherry-blossom 
viewing) into the IP “ 看 樱 花 ” (see cherry blossoms) 
because of the hint. Consequently, all inputs were 
successfully extracted. Apart from “看樱花” (see cherry 
blossoms), other variations were also extracted in week 2 and 
week 8, as long as the input contained a V-O phrase. In week 
2, although every input contains a V-O phrase, the usage of 
the IP decreased to 14.7%. Thus, if students have grasped the 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

basic sentence structure, e.g. the V-O structure, all LP would 
be extracted and Table 4 would provide teachers a visual 
feedback to confirm what different phrases or wrong phrases 
are used by students. On the other hand, the extraction rate in 
week 8 was only 76.5%.  In the case, this results from that 
the two-character words in G2: “看花” (see flowers) and “赏
花” (admire flowers) were treated as nouns instead of V-O 
phrases in the system. It remained a problem when 
automatically dealing with the 24.5% sentences without a 
“dobj” tag. 
Figure 1 shows examples of some change detection 
outputs. With the input parsed and extracted, the system then 
compared the extracted LP of the latter two inputs (S2, S3) 
with the first one (S1) respectively and generate the outputs 
showing whether students had changed their translations or 
not. If a student did not change the translation, then “ok” will 
be shown in the “Detection” column, otherwise it will be 
“changed”. 
According to the results in Figure 1, there are 85.3% of 
the LPs that have been changed in week 2 and 73.5% that 
have been changed in week 8 in comparison with the phrases 
used in week 1. Despite the inputs with no extracted V-O 
phrases, the percentages are agreements with those manually 
calculated from the raw data.  
    Thus, Figure 1 can provide teachers an overview of 
students’ progress in learning process.  It can be readily 
noted that there is only one student who did not changed the 
translation in all three exercises. There were 7 students who 
changed their answer in week 2 but then changed back to the 
most appropriate “看樱花” (see cherry blossoms) in week 8, 
which demonstrated the effectiveness of the teacher’s 
detailed explanation in week 3. The other 26 students failed 
to change back to the correct translation they submitted in 
week 1. This information can help teachers improve 
instructional strategies, and facilitate individual students to 
comprehend whether the required grammatical knowledge 
had been mastered or not as well.    
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we first analyzed learning log data from 
two face-to-face classrooms in Chinese learning. The 
analysis results revealed that tracking the changes of 
translation on V-O phrase could help teachers confirm the 
effects of the provided hint or explanation; and students may 
benefit from the formative feedback to find out the weak 
points in the learning process. Thus, we proposed an 
approach for providing formative feedback and developed a 
prototype system to test the approach.  
It is suggested that the system is effective in providing 
automated formative feedback for both learners and teachers. 
Learners can confirm their acquisition throughout the 
learning process. The feedback on V-O phrases would help 
teachers grasp the whole picture used by learners and 
confirm the effects of the current strategies. Because the 
system focuses on the extraction and comparison of V-O 
phrases by using the Stanford Parser, thus it is expected to 
be applied to other languages as long as similar structures 
can be identified by the parsers. 
There still remained some problems in the approach. In 
the prototype system, the input sentences should be simple 
sentence so that a pre-processing is needed. Developing an 
automatically pre-processing function will be our next work 
soon. The extraction method still needs improvement. As 
we have explained, it is an important issue to deal with the 
phrases without a “dobj” tag. In addition, further practical 
use in classrooms needs to be investigated. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
    This work is supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Number JP17K01081.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
H. Kimura, T. Kimura, and O. Shiki, Theory and Practice in 
Reading and Writing: Nurturing Independent Learning, pp. 
124–134, 2010. 
[2] 
P. Duppenthaler, “The effect of three types of feedback on 
the journal writing of EFL Japanese students,” JACET 
Bulletin, (38), pp.  1-17, 2004.  
[3] 
K. Oi, T. Kamimura, T. Kumamoto, and K. Matsumoto, “A 
Search for the Feedback That Works for Japanese EFL 
Students: Content-based or 
Grammar-based,” JACET 
Bulletin, (32), pp. 91-108, 2000. 
[4] 
A. M. F. Yousef, U. Wahid, M. A. Chatti, U. Schroeder, and 
M. Wosnitza, “The Impact of Rubric-Based Peer Assessment 
on Feedback Quality in Blended MOOCs,” Communications 
in Computer and Information Science Computer Supported 
Education, pp. 462–485, 2016. 
[5] 
I. Goldin, S. Narciss, P. Foltz, and M. Bauer, “New 
Directions in Formative Feedback in Interactive Learning 
Environments,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Artificial 
Intelligence in Education, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 385–392, 2017. 
[6] 
P. D. Ware and M. Warschauer, “Electronic feedback and 
second language writing,” Feedback in second language 
writing: Contexts and issues, pp. 105-122, 2006.  
[7] 
S. W. Yeh and J. J. Lo, “Using online annotations to support 
error correction and corrective feedback,” Computers & 
Education, 52(4), pp.882-892, 2009. 
[8] 
M. Warschauer and D. Grimes, “Automated writing 
assessment in the classroom,” Pedagogies: An International 
Journal, 3(1), pp.22-36, 2008. 
[9] 
C. Leacock, M. Chodorow, M. Gamon, and J. Tetreault, 
“Automated grammatical error detection for language 
learners,” 
Synthesis 
lectures 
on 
human 
language 
technologies, 7(1), pp.109-112, 2014. 
[10] S. van Kol and C. Rietz, “Effects of Web-Based Feedback on 
Students' Learning,” International Journal of Teaching and 
Learning in Higher Education, 28(3), pp.385-394, 2016. 
[11] K. Ludvigsen, R. Krumsvik, and B. Furnes, “Creating 
formative feedback spaces in large lectures,” Computers & 
Education, 88, pp.48-63, 2015. 
[12] C. D. Manning, et al, “The stanford corenlp natural language 
processing toolkit,” In ACL (System Demonstrations) pp. 
55-60, 2014. 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

