Learner Satisfaction in eTexbook Co-reading 
A comparative study of internal and external forums 
Sinini Paul Ncube, Hussein Suleman 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Cape Town 
Rondebosch, Cape Town 
e-mail: ncbsin004@uct.ac.za, husseins@uct.ac.za 
 
 
Abstract—A textbook is a boundary object among students 
within given communities, in some instances, regions or the 
whole country. Students in such communities can engage 
collaboratively to study and gain better understanding of 
common content. While discussion forums have been an 
operative platform for social collaborations, learners are faced 
with the challenge of referencing their posts to linked 
informational resources. A system based on two chapters of a 
Python eTextbook was co-designed with students to evaluate 
its usefulness in supporting textbook based interactions. An 
experimental 
study 
compared 
the 
traditional 
external 
discussion forums to the developed internal forums which are 
embedded within eTextbooks. A systematic content analysis of 
learners' 
interactions 
demonstrates 
insights 
to 
their 
experiences, their needs and the potential benefits of 
combining discussion forums with eTextbooks to encourage 
more collaborations. Learners preferred internal forums. 
Keywords-collaborations; eTextbook; forums; interactions. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A textbook is a common resource that is consistently 
used by teachers and their students from various 
communities. Usually, for every course, there is a standard 
textbook that students rely on to study. This makes the 
textbook a boundary object; a boundary object is an entity of 
interest across school communities. Students tend to meet 
after school to collaborate on course materials [12]. Students 
who do not have the opportunity to study with others may 
now partake in collaborations using their mobile devices on 
virtual environments that have no time, space or cultural 
barriers [12].  This creates an opportunity to structure and 
frame a platform that brings students from various 
communities together, in order to build a shared 
understanding of textbook content. Although research states 
that there should be a significant move away from textbook 
dependence to adopting a variety of sources for teaching, 
many teachers and students still depend highly on textbooks 
[4]. 
Students 
are 
increasingly 
choosing 
to 
purchase 
eTextbooks for their mobile devices as an alternative to 
traditional textbooks because of their low cost, light weight 
and ease of use [9]. Although they provide a cheaper source 
to information they, however, do not improve learning 
outcomes as students sometimes may not comprehend what 
they read [3]. The flexibility of eTextbooks allows for the 
exploration of interactive technologies to incorporate within 
digital textbooks to enable better understanding of content 
[11][18]. While individual digital reading has been the 
subject of much investigation [11], research into co-reading 
is scarce [9][14]. Co-reading normally occurs in classrooms, 
book-clubs, and in less coordinated ways through mass 
media yet it may also be explored for formal resources like 
eTextbooks [9][14].  
Providing the student with an environment that cultivates 
a strong personal interest in constructing knowledge when 
given resources is the most effective way of learning [16]. 
Building effective mobile applications that encompass all 
aspects of collaborations instead of merely delivering 
resources to students is important [16]. In this paper, we ask 
the question: How should discussion forums be presented to 
promote the use of textbook based interactions?  As a result, 
experiments in this paper explore the rationale for separating 
or combining resources like textbooks with their discussions 
for active collaborative learning. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II 
describes the background and related work. Section III 
describes the approach taken in the system design. Section 
IV presents and discusses results. Section V concludes the 
paper and gives future research guidelines. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
In this section we discuss how discussion forums have been 
utilized in learning environments and how they are linked to 
electronic resources which students discuss. The section is 
concluded by explaining the gap in the discussed literature.  
A. Discussion Forums in Learning Environments 
Several researchers agree that group learning as well as 
dialogue based instructional settings are key to learning. 
Students that are involved in group learning improve their 
problem solving and critical-thinking skills by deepening 
their understanding of concepts [13]. Problem solving is 
made easier when people work together because, within a 
group, everyone has something distinctive that they may 
contribute since people have their own unique ways of 
thinking. Exposure to multiple conceptual constructs helps 
create knowledge. Student engagement in networking 
platforms has been stated to be successfully measured by 
discussion forum posting [7]. 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Discussion forums are defined as threaded discussions 
that capture the exchange of asynchronous messages [7]. 
Forums are a primary means of interaction in most online 
distant learning platforms [13]. They are widely employed in 
e-learning setups to support social constructivism. Previous 
explorations of discussion forums have promoted active 
learning [10]. Traditionally, they are used within Course 
Management Systems (CMSs) like Moodle and Blackboard 
as a means for enabling dialog and collaboration among 
connected individuals [11]. Although forums facilitate better 
learning, in reference [13], they argue that forums are not 
good at managing a huge number of posts with fragmented 
topics over too many threads. They also state that forum 
usage is usually limited to a few participants. Also, peer 
answers to posts may be incorrect and counter-productive 
[15][18]. 
Although earlier studies indicated that discussion forums 
were not as effective for learning [17], a number of studies 
state that they are very essential to learning [1]. The 
effectiveness of threaded discussions has been discussed 
extensively in literature and results note their affordances in 
enhancing individual thinking capabilities, promoting 
participation, enabling reflection of peer contributions and 
allowing the sharing of diverse ideas [1][13]. Learners are 
also able to analyse their own ideas before sharing them, 
thereby improving the quality of discussions.  
The popularity of MOOCS for larger student populations 
as well as CMSs for smaller student populations especially at 
University levels is indicative of the latest trends toward 
interactive online course related learning [11]. The 
discussion forums have become the knowledge source to the 
course work [10][18]. Reference [10] describes discussion 
forums as an integral part of online learning, however states 
that they are presented as an afterthought for students to use 
as they wish, which may make them dysfunctional. 
Reference [2] states that forums tend to attract many student 
complaints or topics focused on course administrative issues 
instead of focusing on course challenges. A more directed 
discussion forum may filter such posts. In reference [2], they 
conducted a study that identified if discussion forum posts 
were content related. Their study revealed that, of all the 
posts, only 28% were related to content even though the 
course offered other dedicated areas for asking on non-
content related matters.  
Reference [10] investigated the idea of producing high 
quality interactions through seeding the forum with content 
and varying the sections of comments revealed to students. 
Results from their study indicated that seeding, which is 
selecting prior-semester comments from stimulating topics 
and incorporating them into the new semester, inspired an 
above average amount of discussions. They found that the 
quality of annotations increased when sections were seeded. 
Reference [19] attempted to improve the quality of posts 
by removing confusing posts that tend to lead to student drop 
outs or lack of participation. Other research focuses on 
encouraging more interactions.  Reference [19] also states 
that 
making 
many 
posts 
improved 
learning 
while 
contradictory research argues that a high number of posts 
does not necessarily improve learning outcomes [13]. 
Reference [19] explores increased interactions through 
instructor’s presence and the value of their input in directing 
the forum discussions. 
B. The use of Interactive eTextbooks for Learning 
Discussion forums are usually linked to various resources 
like course eTextbooks. eTextbook related studies have 
incorporated dictionaries within textbooks so that students do 
not have to exit the textbooks in order to seek word 
definitions in trying to understand the content. Various 
eTextbooks also incorporate automatic assessment through 
interactive exercises in order to help students test themselves 
as they read [11].  Content interactions through iPads and 
kindles exist, most research tends to focus on creating a great 
individual experience through the incorporation of videos, 
annotative features, etc. [11][14]. 
Electronic content with instructor annotations can also 
provide guidance to students beyond the classroom as they 
read a textbook [3][6]. This may improve the way that 
students interpret and understand content. Underlining and 
highlighting also contributes to recall [8]. Asking questions 
contributes to meta-cognitive monitoring, thereby improving 
learners’ self-regulation, recall and comprehension [8]. 
Exercises are the most important pedagogical feature of 
interactivity since they provide a better experience on a 
topic, especially since students try exercises as they read [5]. 
In reference [5], they did a study which showed that a high 
number of completed exercises results in high performance 
on written tests. 
Reference [3] states that other research projects have 
focused on redesigning the eTextbook because of its 
flexibility; the kindle and iPad provide new formats of 
presenting these books, with lots of multimedia. However, 
high costs of producing multimedia books makes them 
harder to scale for every textbook [3]. As a result, they 
suggest that it would make more sense to tailor existing 
eTextbooks to the needs of students at low cost. This means 
focusing on how students and their instructors interact with 
the content and each other and doing minimal redesigns.  
C. The Gap in Literature 
The literature above has demonstrated the importance of 
interactions, however the gap in the literature is in that the 
studies are not attempting to explore the way in which 
discussion forums are presented in trying to improve 
collaborations. A majority of research seeks to identify 
strategies for improving the quality and quantity of 
traditional forum posts. Discussion forums already provide a 
platform for interactions, however they are presented 
separately to resources as a choice for students to use [10]. In 
this paper, we attempt to create a discussion forum around 
the intellectual content of textbooks by limiting the distance 
between the forum and the resources to be discussed. In 
references [3] and [6], the researchers describe an idea of 
sharing annotations which may enable students to 
communicate with each other through their personal notes. In 
reference [6], they conducted an experiment that investigated 
on how to improve the quality of annotations for learning. 
However, little systematic research has been conducted to 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

explore the practicability of conversing instead of just 
sharing readable annotations within common content by 
integrating social interactive activities through discussion 
forums within eTextbooks in the hope that this promotes 
more collaborations. The design and presentation of 
discussion forums may have an effect on the way that 
students interact.  
III. 
RESEARCH DESIGN 
An experimental study was conducted with students. The 
aim of the experiment was to determine the feasibility of an 
internal discussion forum within an eTextbook. To achieve 
this, we created an internal forum as well as the traditional 
discussion forum, which we will refer to as the external 
forum in this paper. 
A. System Design 
An experimental system was designed by 15 university 
students in Computer Science who underwent a participatory 
design session in order to define the needs of a collaborative 
eTextbook system that could be relevant to them.  The 
system was specifically designed to explore the possibility of 
including interactive discussions within eTextbooks. The 
design experiment helped outline how discussion forums can 
be presented inside eTextbooks to support interactions within 
books. The design session resulted in inline editing 
eTextbook paper sketches whereby various readers work 
together in group work sessions on mobile phones so as to 
understand the textbooks. In order to test the feasibility of 
this system, we developed two systems using a Python Web 
framework called Web2py. The first platform is the 
traditional external forum that has links to an eTextbook 
resource. The second platform is an internal forum, that is, 
an eTextbook with embedded interactions within it.  
The two platforms were designed in a similar manner 
using similar eTextbook content, see Fig 1. The eTextbook 
used was a relevant support textbook found on the CMS for 
the Python course at the time. Two chapters (Loops and 
Strings) of the Python eTextbook that were being taught in 
parallel to the experiments were chosen for the system.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.    Initial page showing the two platforms. 
 
From Fig. 1, one can see the topic of Loop Control 
Statements. Below that, there are three links. When a user 
clicks on the “Platform A: Textbook” link, it opens the book 
chapter. Otherwise, when a user clicks on the “Platform A: 
Discussion Forum” link, it opens a page where users can 
initiate and respond to discussions, see Fig. 2a for a clip of 
the discussion page. When a user clicks on the “Platform B: 
Embedded discussions in textbook“ link, it opens the book 
chapter whereby the user can read as well as initiate or 
participate in discussions that are found within the book 
chapter, see Fig. 2b for a clip of the book chapter with 
discussions within it.  
The only differentiating variable between the two 
platforms is the location of the forums for conducting 
discussions. The external forum separates the eTextbook 
from the discussion forum while the internal forum integrates 
the eTextbook content together with discussion forums.  The 
internal forum represents the controlled setup of the 
experiment. The purpose of having the two systems was to 
test whether including discussions in textbooks promotes 
better interactions for students thereby suggesting that the 
location of forums for discussions is important to the design 
of collaborative systems. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
           (b) 
Figure 2.    Snippets of (a) the external forum discussion page and (b) the 
internal forum of textbook with discussions within the text 
 
B. Research Participants 
Research participants were randomly recruited from 
approximately 200 first year Computer Science students 
enrolled in a Python programming course at the University 
of Cape Town. A call for participation was emailed to all 
the students in the Python class and the first 30 respondents 
were selected for the experiment. Only 24 participants 
completed the experiments.  
C. Experimental Procedure 
The experiment occurred over a period of two weeks. 
Two tasks were presented to the participants. Before the 
experiments commenced, a pre-questionnaire was given to 
all participants to assess their prior experiences about 
 
 
 
 
 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
eTextbooks, discussion forums and Internet usage on mobile 
devices. Each participant was given a token payment of 
approximately $15 after participation. The amount of $15 
was considered a standard token of appreciation for students 
which is not too small for participants to lose interest in 
doing the experiment and yet not too large an amount for 
participants to only be interested in doing the experiment for 
monetary purposes. Following are the tasks performed by the 
participants: 
1) Task 1 
The first task was meant to give students the opportunity to 
have a feel of both platforms that were being compared. 
They therefore used both the external forum and the internal 
forum. The chapter topic of discussion was Loop control 
Statements. Students were asked to post at least two 
questions and respond or comment to any two other 
questions on each of the two platforms of the system per day 
for one full week. At the end of the week, the task was 
concluded by completing a survey that evaluated 
participants' experiences in using the two platforms. 
2) Task 2 
In the second week, participants were each asked to choose 
one of the two platforms they preferred using after 
experiencing both platforms in task 1. This means that they 
either chose to use the internal forum or the external forum. 
The topic of discussion for that week was Strings. They 
were asked to post two questions and respond or comment 
on any two other questions per day for a full week on the 
platform they selected. They ended the task by completing 
the task survey plus an overall usability questionnaire. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
According to the pre-questionnaire, all participants had 
used discussion forums as well as eTextbooks before. They 
had prior experience in using CMSs and social networking 
platforms. This means that they could easily participate in 
this experiment as they were technologically savvy enough 
to rate and compare the two platforms. Following are results 
of the experiment.  
A. Using Alias names vs. real names on academic forums 
Although on social media networks, people usually sign 
in using their real names for easy identification, in an 
academic platform this might not be preferred. Participants 
had the option of logging onto the system using their 
Facebook names which is usually the name that one is 
known to by friends or using an alias so as to be anonymous. 
Facebook was used as an easier way to centralise users 
without registrations. According to the results, 69% of the 
participants opted to use an alias name as opposed to their 
real name when using the system. 
The findings showed that 31% of the participants used 
their real names and found it unnecessary to be anonymous 
on an academic platform, claiming that everyone was on the 
site to learn hence there was no need to hide identities. They 
also explained that being identifiable increased chances of 
possible meetups for face to face interactions. Although they 
were comfortable to share their identity online, they 
emphasized that this experimental application should not 
post anything on their behalf on the Facebook platform. 
However, of the 69% that used alias names, the participants 
highlighted the need to be anonymous and to owning 
anonymous posts. Students like to protect their identity and 
have a sense of security and privacy as they tend to feel 
uncomfortable to share their identity with strangers. Also, 
they chose alias names to avoid feeling stupid, especially if 
they ask obvious questions or answer other posts wrongly. 
Some mentioned that using alias names for online activities 
had become a habit. 
When the participants who opted for alias names were 
asked what their challenge would be in using their Facebook 
names on the platform, they stated that they feared being 
classed academically or being judged negatively by peers. 
Other participants stated that some students may become 
biased when answering their posts because they know them 
in person. Even people who would never help them in person 
had the opportunity to do so if they kept their identity 
anonymous. Others insisted on being anonymous because 
they were shy to express themselves freely, hence using a 
real name would result in fewer posts and comments from 
them. Students felt that using alias names improved their 
participation levels and gave them liberty in asking any types 
of questions. Students also felt much safer when hiding 
behind alias names. 
1) Discussion 
  It is evident from the results above that the use of alias 
names should not be overlooked when creating academic 
online platforms. University students also have confidence 
challenges on online platforms. Not everyone prefers hidden 
identity, however for discussion forums to cater for 
everyone they should be presented such that students have 
the choice to be anonymous or not. CMSs tend to have 
discussion forums but, because the students have to be 
registered for the course, they can only use their real names. 
Often this is to protect against inappropriate posts. Although 
this is very important, 69% of the participants indicate their 
need to freely express themselves without being judged for 
better participation. 
B. External Forum (Discussion forum plus a separate link 
to an etextbook) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.    Experiences of participants when using the external forum 
 
Fig. 3 above shows that participants had no challenges in 
using and understanding the external forum. Participants 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

found the platform easy to use. Some participants found the 
external forum frustrating to use and this was attributed to 
the fact that one had to switch back and forth from the forum 
to refer to the textbook and also the external forum presented 
different ungrouped topic posts. Not all the participants 
found it convenient to separate the textbook from the forum. 
Reasons were that sometimes one wanted to focus on the 
textbook 
without 
any 
distractions, 
hence 
separation 
encouraged focus to those participants. Some participants 
stated that they only used the discussion forum when they 
had finished reading, hence it was easy to refer to the 
textbook if they had written sections and challenges down. 
Results highlight favourable qualities of the external 
forum to be the convenience of focusing on questions and 
answers without the interruption of the textbook. Participants 
highlighted that it is easier and faster to view all posts in 
separate dialogues and, since posts were easily identifiable, 
they could be answered much faster. Participants also liked 
that one has the freedom to identify and select questions of 
interest to them among many questions. This also enabled 
participants to respond to posts as they browsed questions 
they needed answers to. Another positive quality of the 
external forum is the promotion of general enquiries. Each 
question had its comments, which made it easier to scroll and 
identify answers to a post. 
The not so favourable points of the external forum 
included the difficulty of switching from the forum to the 
eTextbook for referencing. They found the process of 
continuously exiting the forum to open the linked eTextbook 
cumbersome. The participants also stated that the forum 
ended up with many posts such that it was harder to navigate 
and easily identify relevant or particular posts as the forum 
posts 
were 
general 
and 
covered 
numerous 
topics. 
Participants also noted that if a response is delayed the post 
may never be answered as participants said they were usually 
biased to earlier posts and were reluctant to search for older 
posts. Participants also stated that they would have liked a 
notification system as it was sometimes hard to find 
particular questions to check if they had been answered.  
Participants suggested incorporating Web links on 
comment boxes so as to share useful links that explained 
their answers. Other media, like videos, pictures and audios, 
were noted to aid users in providing explanations for their 
posts, although these options where provided on the system, 
learners did not utilize them. Participants also suggested 
inserting a sidebar linked to the textbook for easy referral by 
tagging relevant sections of the textbook. Questions listed on 
the forum should also be categorized and grouped to avoid 
repeats. 
C. Internal forum (eTextbook with embedded discussion 
forum 
Participants understood how the system worked without 
much training. A short demo was given when participants 
filled the pre-questionnaire. Fig. 4 above shows that some 
students found the internal platform frustrating to use and 
this is attributed to students who liked the external forum 
better. The frustration was because they could only ask 
questions related to the textbook and that the textbook had 
been altered. A large number of participants, however, found 
the internal forum easy to use when asking and answering 
posts. They also found the system to be highly convenient 
and referencing the textbook when making posts to be much 
easier. 
Participants were asked what they liked most about their 
experience in using the internal forum. Results showed that 
dividing the textbook so that questioning and relevant 
content was sectioned made reading the book desirable and 
convenient. They highlighted the convenience of having the 
textbook and posts being combined. Each section of a 
textbook was directly above a discussion forum section, 
making it simpler to make references to the relevant textbook 
content for clarifications. According to the participants, 
viewing the internal forum comments based on textbook 
sections made it easy to verify and argue answers in response 
to other participant posts. The eTextbook was more flexible 
since examples were right next to exercises, making it easy 
to switch between the text and discussions when attempting 
to answer the exercises. 
The internal forum system offered a platform to ask 
specific questions related to the topics at hand. Participants 
stated that the internal forum allowed for a more focused in-
depth analysis of a given topic of the textbook as many had 
their own views to share per section. The direct approach of 
topic based discussions made it easier to find answers to 
similar problems. It was also easy to identify which section 
one had to read to attempt the questions before asking. 
Participants stated that having one area that centered on a 
particular topic promoted a wide range of posts, leading one 
to view the topic in many dimensions. The hub of questions 
related to a particular topic enabled participants to find 
answers to common challenges while also making students 
aware of hidden challenges. The highlight of the internal 
forum to many participants was the access to help from other 
users of the system being readily available as they read. 
Because one could easily verify answers from others or the 
textbook if in doubt, participants stated that most answers or 
opinions made sense. Participants also agreed that the 
discussions around a single topic flowed and were easy to 
understand. On this platform, they stated that it was easy to 
see what other people were saying about a given topic. 
The internal forum was convenient in that there was no 
need to exit the eTextbook while reading so as to ask a 
question on another page. The organization of comments 
 
 
 
Figure 4.    Experiences of participants in using the internal forum 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
below each section, aligned by topics, was easy to follow. 
Each section had few posts enabling one to first check if 
their question had been asked before asking the same 
question. One could also easily test if they understood a 
section by attempting to answer questions from others within 
that section of comment posts. 
Some participants even stated that this platform enabled 
them to obtain help on some challenges that they were facing 
in class since the topics used in this experiment ran 
concurrently to the topics they were learning in class at the 
time. Some already made a comparison of this platform to an 
external forum and chose the internal forum, with embedded 
discussions, as their preference. Others also committed to 
using such a system as it provided a platform to easily 
collaborate while reading. 
The internal forum system was designed such that people 
could comment below a section since one of the suggestions 
was to break down the book for easy reading on mobile 
devices. However, one was not able to comment on a 
comment. Most of the negatives about the internal forum 
centered on not being able to respond to a specific person 
below their post. The reason for this not being favourable 
was that a thread may deviate to other questions; as a result 
that thread may remain unanswered. Also, when a section 
has many comments where one cannot tell if a comment is a 
question or answer, the many comments may become 
cluttered and difficult to follow.  
Suggestions for improving this platform included the 
ability to switch off the forum should one need to focus on 
the textbook. Participants also desired that the system would 
load faster despite the compressed images and comments on 
the pages. 
D. External Forum vs. Internal Forum 
The participants had the opportunity to compare the two 
platforms and select a platform that appealed to them. In Fig. 
5, participants were in favour of the internal forum when 
compared to the external forum.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.    User comparison of experiences in using internal forums vs. 
external forums 
 
They found it simpler and less frustrating to use, faster, 
with fewer steps to follow and easier to use than the external 
forum. The referral to the textbook was much easier. Some 
participants found combining the textbook with the forum to 
be interruptive while a majority did not think it interrupted 
their reading. Many participants preferred not to separate the 
textbook from the discussion forum and stated that they 
would recommend the internal forum more than they would 
recommend the external forum. 
In Task 2, 63% of the users preferred the internal forum 
to the external forum. Of the 37% who selected the external 
forum, they found their platform more user friendly with 
much freedom for editing posts. They found that it was 
easier to ask questions and answer questions. Some of the 
users found that the internal forum was unfavourable 
because having discussions got in the way of the textbook 
content. They stated that there were too many writings on the 
internal forum platform. Their main negativity of the internal 
forum was the lack of posting within a post so as to better 
organize comments within each section. 
The majority of the users who selected internal forum for 
task 2 identified the platform as more focused, specific to 
textbook sections, much faster to use, simple, more user 
friendly and convenient in overall. Incorporating everything 
onto one platform is what made the system convenient for 
participants. They described the platform as easier to read 
since the readily visible questions and answers helped one to 
learn easily from peers. They found the conversations easy to 
understand and follow. The reasons that led them to not 
choose the external forum included that the platform was 
more challenging to follow since posts were very 
independent and sometimes one may be clueless as to what 
others are discussing. Referencing specific sections of the 
textbook was difficult and time consuming on the external 
forum. One had to direct their peers to browse through pages 
of the textbook in order to find the relevant section to the 
questions. Separating the textbook meant that a user had to 
switch to the separate discussion forum every time they had a 
question. They insisted that the external forum actually 
stopped the flow of reading as one could easily get distracted 
reading questions instead of reading the textbook or even in 
following new topics instead of reading. Since the questions 
on the external forum were unordered except by date and 
number of replies, one had to go through a lot of unrelated 
material, which could be distracting for people who wanted 
to focus on particular topics. 
In order to improve both platforms, participants 
suggested emoticons as a mechanism of grading answers. 
Emoticons are exciting and require little effort from the user. 
A high number of clicks on the academic emoticon would 
show a consensus among readers about their thoughts on the 
post. Other suggestions stated that notifications would be 
important in reminding people to follow up on their posts, as 
well as keep users motivated to read.  
E. Discussion of Internal vs. External Forums 
In many CMS platforms, the forum is seen as one of the 
major support mechanisms for learning offered to students. 
Discussion forums are often confined to a minority hence 
many tools are being established to increase the number of 
interactions. The use of the eTextbook with embedded 
discussions in it was perceived to be the best at meeting the 
student learning needs and increasing interactions with an 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

average of 30 responses per thread. It is evident that perhaps 
we should investigate more about designing systems that 
allow co-reading within eTextbooks.  
Since students had two weeks to use the platforms, they 
had ample time to learn and be able to choose what they 
figured was the most effective platform for their learning 
needs. There is an obvious difference between an internal 
forum and a traditional external forum. Despite the 
widespread use of traditional forums, there is still room for 
improving interactions and embedding discussions within 
textbooks as one of the strategies for improving engagement 
and locking students into a zone of relevant content to 
encourage participation. Perhaps more experiments should 
be conducted in figuring ways of presenting discussion 
forums. In this experiment, the addition of forums to the 
textbooks appealed to more learners. It is therefore evident 
from the results that students find it convenient to perform 
easier and faster tasks on collaborative platforms. 
Even though preference was for the internal forum, those 
who preferred the external forum had valid arguments for 
separating the discussions with content.  The structure of the 
independent external discussion forum encourages a question 
and answer kind of interaction, whereby people focus on 
receiving a response or asking a question. This was seen in 
the length of discussion forum threads, which tend to have an 
average of two or three responses only. Also, allowing the 
user to focus on the textbook without interruption is an 
important consideration. We therefore suggest a system that 
encompasses the best of both platforms evaluated in this 
experiment. 
Learners 
may 
toggle 
between 
having 
interactions within their textbooks and switching them off 
when they need to focus more on reading. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Increasing student interactions is of great importance to 
the future of active learning. In this study, we investigated 
the effectiveness of social interactions embedded within 
eTextbooks. We built an application to enable students to 
collaborate on a Python eTextbook chapter, which was in 
line with course content. Our results demonstrate that: (1) 
allowing hidden identity is key to socialised learning 
platforms as it gives students the liberty to respond to posts; 
(2) incorporating interactions within eTextbooks encourages 
content related discussions; (3) sectioning the textbook with 
a discussion forum below each section promotes easy 
revision, understanding and referencing of textbook content; 
and (4) although students may find embedding discussion 
forums on eTextbooks to be convenient, combining the 
different aspects of the two platforms may result in a more 
usable system that encourages discussions while also 
promoting individual studying. We therefore conclude that 
interactions may be increased by reducing the gap between 
what is being discussed to its content. Internal forums may 
propel students to focus on their studies. The results in this 
experiment suggests that we reconsider how we present 
discussion forums to students, not as an afterthought as part 
of CMSs but within eTextbooks to encourage student 
engagement. We anticipate that our study will contribute to 
the exploration of forums within textbooks for more effective 
learning. Designers and operators of socialized learning 
platforms must therefore consider the possibility of 
presenting discussion forums in new ways that involves 
resources being discussed. 
This work was conducted with Computer Science 
students at university level. Another experiment already 
evaluated high school students in the subject of mathematics. 
More experiments may test for other subjects. The 
experiment also does not test if internal forums promote 
better learning. Subsequent experiments could be conducted 
with a larger sample over a longer period of time like a full 
semester to promote the findings on this paper.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We acknowledge Hasso Plattner Institute and UCT for 
funding this project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. K. Cheng, D. E. Paré, L. M. Collimore, and S. Joordens, 
“Assessing the effectiveness of a voluntary online discussion 
forum 
on 
improving 
students’ 
course 
performance,” 
Computers & Education, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 253–261, 2011.  
[2] Y. Cui and A. F. Wise, “Identifying Content-related threads in 
MOOC discussion forums,” In Proceedings of the second 
(2015) ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale, pp. 299-303, 
2015. 
[3] A. R. Dennis, K. O. McNamara, A. S. Morrone, and J. 
Plaskoff, “Improving learning with eTextbooks, “In System 
Sciences (HICSS) 2015 48th Hawaii international Conference 
on Systems Sciences, IEEE, pp. 5253-5259, 2015. 
[4] R. Duschl, “Science education in three part- harmony: 
Balancing conceptual, epistemic, and social learning goals,” 
Review of research in education, vol 32, no. 1, pp. 268-291, 
2008. 
[5] E. Fouh, D. A. Breakiron, S. Hamouda, M. F. Farghally, and 
C. A. Shaffer, “Exploring students learning behaviour with an 
interactive 
eTextbook 
in 
computer 
science 
courses,” 
Computers in human behaviour, vol. 41, pp. 478-485, 2014. 
[6] J. Jan, C. M. Chen, and P. H. Huang, “Enhancement of digital 
reading performance by using a novel web-based collaborate 
reading annotation filtering mechanisms,” International 
Journal of Human Computer Studies, vol. 86, pp. 81-93, 
2016. 
[7] R. F. Kizilcec, C. Piech, and E. Schneider, “Deconstructing 
disengagement: analysing learner subpopulations in massive 
open online courses,” In Proceedings of the 3rd International 
Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge, ACM,  
pp.170-179, 2013. 
[8] H. W. Lee, K. Y. Lim, and B. L. Grabowski, “Improving Self-
Regulation, Learning Strategy Use, and Achievement with 
Metacognitive Feedback,” Educational Technology Research 
and Development, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 629-648, 2010. 
[9] D. D. Matthew, “A call to embrace social reading in higher 
education,” 
Innovations 
in 
Education 
and 
Teaching 
International, 2014, DOI:10.1080/14703297.2014.991934. 
[10] K. Miller, S. Zyto, D. Karger, and E. Mazur, “Improving 
online class forums by seeding discussions and managing 
section size,” In Proceedings of the first ACM conference on 
learning @ scale conference, ACM, pp. 173-174, 2014. 
[11] T. Nakahara, T. Soga, Y. Nakamura, M. Mitani, and N. 
Kawana, “Development of an e-Textbook Connected with a 
Learning Management System and a Study of its Effective 
Use,” In EdMedia: World Conference on Educational Media 
and Technology, vol 2014, no. 1, pp. 979-984, 2014. 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[12] S. P. Ncube and H. Suleman, “Complementing formal 
learning with mobile technology outside the classroom,”  
In Interactive Mobile Communication Technologies and 
Learning (IMCL) 2014 International Conference, IEEE, pp. 
51-56, 2014. 
[13] D. F. O. Daniel, J. Sinclair, and R. Boyatt, “Exploring the use 
of MOOC discussion forums,” In proceedings of London 
International Conference on Education (LICE-2014), pp. 1-4, 
2014. 
[14] J. Pearson, T. Owen, H. Thimbleby, and G. R. Buchanan, 
“Co-reading: investigating collaborative group reading,” In 
proceedings of the 12th ACM/IEEE-CS joint conference on 
Digital Libraries, ACM, pp. 325-334, 2012. 
[15] B. 
Schweizer, 
“Confessions 
of 
an 
Unreconstructed 
MOOC(h)er,” Thought & Action, vol 61, pp. 61-68, 2013. 
[16] P. Thinley, S. Geva, and J. Reye, “Tablets (iPad) for m-
learning in the context of social constructivism to institute an 
effective learning environment,” International Journal of 
Interactive Mobile Technologies (iJIM), vol. 8, pp. 16-20, 
2014. 
[17] M. J. Thomas, “Learning within incoherent structures: The 
space of online discussion forums,” Journal of Computer 
Assisted Learning, vol. 18. no. 3, pp. 351-366, 2002. 
[18] J. J. Williams et al., “Connecting collaborative & crowd work 
with online education,” In proceedings of the 18th ACM 
Conference Companion on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work & Social Computing, ACM, pp. 313-318, 2015. 
[19] D. Yang, M. Wen, I. Howley, R. Kraut, and C. Rose, 
“Exploring the effect of confusion in discussion forums of 
massive open online courses,” In proceedings of the Second 
ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale, ACM, pp. 121-130. 
2015.  
 
 
 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-541-8
eLmL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

