Serious Games: Between Training and Entertainment  
 
Andres Navarro, Juan Vicente Pradilla and 
Sebastian londoño 
I2T Research Group 
Universidad Icesi 
Cali, Colombia 
e-mail: anavarro@icesi.edu.co 
Patricia Madriñán  
MIKOS Lab 
 Parquesoft 
 Cali, Colombia 
e-mail: patri@elsitiomio.com
 
 
Abstract— The game industry has suffered an impressive 
explosion of popularity, becoming the largest entertainment 
industry in the world. Games have become a sophisticated 
extension of the reality and an interesting way for 
complementing human mind utopias. Training software allows 
the trainee to immerse in quasi-real controlled situations that 
could be measured by trainers. In this work we discuss the 
duality existing between the training based on a serious game 
and a simple game, based on state of the art technologies. Then 
we show a training system for telecommunications technicians 
based on a combination between serious games and 
“traditional” e-learning platform. (Abstract) 
Keywords-component; games, serious games, e-learnning, 
training software.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The term Serious Game sound like a contradiction; play 
is about simulation, a game is fun, pleasant and free. Then 
the question is: How can a game be serious? To take 
something seriously means that you are talking honestly and 
it is well known that in a game you have to lie, knowing that 
you are lying. It differs from a “true lie” because all the 
people involved in the game know that you are lying, 
because it has been arranged from the beginning [4].  
However, if the game is used with a specific finality, 
beyond the game itself, then we can say that is a Serious 
Game [7]. 
Generally speaking, the game searches for the 
satisfaction of the player [5]. Any additional consequence is 
far beyond the game finality. It means that the use of this 
recreational experience with a learning goal, then we are 
talking about serious games [7]. This special kind of game 
has shown an especial interest in the consequences of the 
game, conceiving those experiences as training processes or 
development guides [3].  Playing is a quite fun way of 
training, is the way as a lion learns hunting. Without 
training games, perhaps a young lion will not survive, or die 
while learning.  Another example of this kind of “Serious 
Games” is combat pilots, because you cannot train a pilot in 
a real combat without a high risk of losing human lives or 
pay a high cost. A previous simulated training process is 
quite important, before passing to the real life. Simulation 
conditions are quite real, but simulated. If the plain crashes, 
nobody gets hurt. One of the characteristics of a serious 
game is that the goal is a serious one; they are not designed 
for leisure or entertainment but for learning.  
Otherwise, conventional training software does not 
consider the user preferences or interest. They presume that 
if a user is using the software, then he needs to learn about 
such issue. For this reason, there is no interest for 
developing an “emotional” interface. Perhaps boring is one 
of the premises of this kind of software, converting these 
developments in a digital version of a traditional lecture 
imparted in a classroom. Finally the result is a new format 
for teaching, not a change in the learning process where the 
human contact is lost and the potential of new virtual media 
is not exploited. 
In this paper, we discuss about the use of the concept of 
serious game for training, try to suggest some differences 
between serious games, training software and entertainment 
games. We describe some characteristics of a serious game 
and show a serious game for learning telecommunications 
and an evolution of such game in a training tool used for 
training technicians in Radio Frequency related activities in 
the field. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section II, discuss 
aspects of training software and serious games; in section 
III, we discuss the evolution from entertainment games to 
serious games; in section IV, we propose some 
characteristics of a serious game; in section V, we briefly 
describe a serious game previously presented [5]; in section 
VI, we describe a training tool based on serious games and 
finally the conclusions and further work. 
II. 
FROM TRAINING SOFTWARE TO SERIOUS 
GAME  
A training program or conventional education, like used 
in lectures, typically use a behaviorist approach; i.e. the 
system guides the student through a series of pre-defined 
steps which goal is to take the student in a “A” grade of 
knowledge or competence and lead him to a competence 
“B”, guiding the student through a series of steps or data 
that lead to the same final point, using almost always the 
same predetermined way. Behaviorist approach knows the 
learning goal and the shortest way to guide the apprentice to 
reach the goal.  
 
72
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

On the opposite side, the constructivist approach gives 
more relevance to the learning experience than the way from 
A to B. The learning experience is more important than the 
knowledge itself. The learning goal is important but not the 
most relevant. The ways to reach the goal have the same 
importance than the goal. The apprentice experience during 
the learning process is quite important as the learning itself. 
Then, the serious game is proposed as a tool with a 
constructivist approach, where the immersion grade is high 
enough as in real training process. Besides, the player 
(apprentice) is influenced with an emotive load and 
surprising situations, exploiting the advantages of virtual 
media and gaming technology, with it sensorial richness. 
The basic idea is that serious games act in similar way as 
entertaining games. A good example of this kind of games 
are Flight Simulators, originally designed for pilot training 
but later used also for entertainment to add other aspects 
such challenging missions. The difference is only the goal 
of the game: Training or leisure.  
III. FROM ENTERTAINMENT GAME TO SERIOUS 
GAME  
An entertainment game just seeks the experience of 
playing itself. If some abilities are acquired with the game, 
is not relevant. Meanwhile, a serious game has a challenge 
or an objective (or a dream), consisting on generating 
knowledge from the user experiences. 
In this way, in a serious game, the practitioner must lead 
their own process. Is sitting in front of a computer and his 
dialog is with a computer, not another person. Besides, 
insert the user in a context or simulated situation, which 
have as a characteristic to be based in real facts and try to 
emulate real situations with good fidelity. Perhaps, this is 
the main difference between a serious game and an 
entertainment game. A serious game needs real data and 
accurate results, similar to those got by a player in the real 
world; meanwhile an entertainment game does not. 
Likewise, a serious game requires a high interaction 
grade; the user is leaded to participate with a high grade of 
control, making it impossible to be passive respect to the 
game: if the user does not involve itself, the game does not 
work. In this way, the learning experience begins with a real 
situation, but without the risks of the real consequences of a 
real training, being: interesting, surprising and even fun. 
Finally, it is a good fusion between an emotional experience 
and knowledge acquisition. 
IV. 
SERIOUS GAME CHARACTERISTICS 
Serious game has both entertaining game and training 
software characteristics. A serious game is aware of the 
consequences (the learning process), real data and the 
accuracy of the results, in a similar way as training software, 
besides of the contextualization and the player activity, as in 
entertainment games. 
 
A serious game emphasises:  
 
 
User experience (self lead) and high interactivity 
 
Player requirements: knowledge, capacities, skills, 
venturing 
 
Software requirements: precision and data and 
images processing capability 
 
Visualization requirements:  efficient management 
of content and development of an attractive and 
friendly interface 
 
Simulation using real data: situation predictability 
 
Specific object: results are important 
 
The 
table 
1 
presents 
a 
comparison 
between 
entertainment games, serious games and training software. 
 
TABLE I.  
 COMPARISON BETWEEN ENTERTAINMENT GAMES, SERIOUS GAMES AND TRAINING SOFTWARE 
 
ENTERTAINMENT  
GAME 
TRAINING  
SOFTWARE 
SERIOUS  
GAME 
Goal 
Nothing further the pleasure, fun and 
entertainment 
Learning , skills and knowledge 
aquisitions 
Player training 
User 
requirements 
venturing and skills 
Knowledge and capabilities 
Knowledge, capabilities, venturing and skills 
Interactivity 
High (could be difficult) more 
challenging implies a better experience 
Low: more easy is better. 
 
High level of player interactivity 
Visualization 
requirements 
Efficient management of content, 
development and an attractive interface 
Friendly interface 
Efficient management of content and 
development of an attractive and friendly 
interface.   
Software 
requirements 
Fast processing of dynamic data and 
images 
Evaluation from comparisons with 
real data 
Precision: comparisons with real data 
simulation. High data and images processing 
capability 
Methodology  
Surprise and interest 
Clear and predectible  
Surprise, interest and clarity 
73
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

V. 
A SERIOUS GAME: COMCITY 
COMCITY [2],[5], could be considered a serious game, 
because it has been conceived as an educational game; it is 
supported in real environments and has a mix between 
reality and entertainment. In COMCITY, game engines 
capabilities are fully exploited in order to obtain a dynamic 
environment, with a rich experience, and, at the same time, 
introduce the student to complex concepts related with 
wireless planning. 
 
 
 
 
WalfishBertoni 
OkumuraHata 
Saunders 
Figure 1.  Avatars of propagation models in COMCITY 
At the same time, the game absorbs the complexity of 
the mathematical propagation models like avatar or 
characters in the game (Figure 1), related with the 
mathematical behavior of such models.  Besides, it is 
supported in real maps, obtained from Digital Terrain 
Models from real cities that usually represents a challenge 
for radio planning. All these features are linked with several 
missions, oriented to improve the abilities of the player. 
Moreover, the game is supported by a real planning tool 
[1], the results are similar to those obtained from a 
commercial planning tool (Figure 3), like those used by 
mobile operators.  Towers, antennas (Figure 2) and other 
elements are modeled with high realism. In this way the 
concept of a serious game is fully applied to this tool. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  An example of 3D models of antennas 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Results from CellGIS Planning Tool 
VI. 
SERIOUS GAMES AS TRAINING SUPPORT: 
TEST 
From the experience obtained with the development of 
COMCITY [5], we begin the development of  a training 
system for radio technicians that develop activities in the 
field, as installations or  technical surveys on radio stations. 
This work requires some specific skills, and then the system 
has some specific requirements. This system was called 
TEST (TESAmerica Software Training), from the name of 
the company that will use it.  
74
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

TEST is a series of “virtual learning objects” running on 
a learning platform that combines serious games with 
training software. The goal of the system is to train people 
for a specific job and evaluating the most qualified people 
for the field job. TEST is in part an application of 
COMCITY for specialized training. 
In order to complain with TEST requirements, we modify 
some aspects in COMCITY, specifically some missions and 
scenarios with problems oriented to some typical task that 
the trainees will perform in their field jobs. In these 
missions, the trainee must solve problems related with radio 
technologies (Wimax, UMTS, etc), antenna type (panel, 
monopole, dipole, etc) and frequency bands. 
For example, in the antenna identification mission the 
player must solve eight cases (Figure 4), including: 
telecommunications support to the army, coverage of a 
transmission of cycling tour and restore communication for 
the public transport service. The player navigates between 
cases and by selecting the most suitable antenna for each 
case, taking into account: environmental conditions, radio 
technology needed and available frequency band (Figure 5). 
 
 
Figure 4.  Cases for antenna identification mission 
In this serious game, we try to reproduce real situations 
that the apprentice will face in their real activities, preparing 
them to recognize potentially dangerous situations. Each 
activity that the player executes is associated with typical 
activities performed in real situations in remote areas where 
the trainee will work in a future, if the training is successful. 
In this way, the player (trainee) makes associations 
between real objects that will find in a real situation, but 
through simulated situations in a 3D environment. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
Serious games are an excellent tool to acquire new 
knowledge and an approach to real skills, applicable directly 
in job environment. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Capture of a mission for antenna identification 
TEST has become is an excellent experience for the 
creation of mechanisms for training and evaluation of 
candidates. Expected that the candidates are to carry out the 
training process and meet the assessment objectives have an 
excellent performance in field. 
The maturity of development tools influence the use of 
3D games and allows designers, developers and educators to 
find a common place to obtain important results in 
knowledge generation.  
The simulation of real situations gives us an efficient 
and inexpensive way to training by experience.  
The experience in the creation of serious games in 
COMCITY and TEST, allowed transform the complex 
concepts of an area of knowledge and make them available 
to students in ways simple and striking, in a multimedia 
environment that involves different learning styles. It is 
expected that the outcome of this process have a positive 
impact on the acquisition of new knowledge by students. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by the National Department of 
Science and Technology from Colombia (Colciencias).  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] CellGis: Radio Planning Tool. Revised on October 10, 2010, 
from http://sourceforge.net/projects/cellgis/ 
[2] i2T. (2009). COMCITY. Recuperado el 10 de Octubre de 
2010, de http://COMCITY.icesi.edu.co/ 
[3] J. Bruner. Acción, pensamiento y lenguaje, Madrid: Alianza 
Editorial, 1989. 
[4] R. Caillois. Les Jeux et les hummens. Los juegos y los 
hombres : la máscara y el vértigo, México: Ed. Fondo de 
Cultura Económica, 1986. 
[5] J. Huizinga. Homo Ludens. Madrid: Alianza editorial,1938. 
[6] A. Navarro,  P. Madriñan and J.V. Pradilla. A 3D Game Tool 
for Mobile Networks Planning 2010 Second International 
Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-Line Learning ,Saint 
Maarten, Netherlands, Antilles February 10-February 16. 
[7] C. Abt. Serious games, New York, Viking Press, 1970  
 
 
75
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

