SmarTTeaching in Pharmacology
J. Pieter H. van Wyk
Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics
Sefako Makgatho Health Sciences University (SMU)
South Africa
e-mail: e.pharmacology.smu@gmail.com
Abstract—The state of education is changing mainly due to
developments in the electronic media. SmarTTeaching in
Pharmacology at Sefako Makgatho Health Sciences University
(SMU) has been developed to introduce the principle of the
flipped classroom to students using electronic lectures and
social media platforms. This was done by reducing face to face
lecture time, providing downloadable PowerPoint slideshows
and worksheets,
offering
potential
test
and examination
questions on Instagram and introducing applications of basic
pharmacology concepts on Twitter. Completed worksheets are
photographed with smartphones by students and these are
emailed to the lecturer for e-filing. Important to note with this
approach is that it can also be completely used for e-learning
where students are mostly not in classrooms.
Keywords - SmarTTeaching; e-learning; e-pharmacology;
flipped classroom; social media.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The flipped classroom concept was in practice for a
number of years before Bergmann and Sams in their
published book, titled "Flip Your Classroom: Reach Every
Student in Every Class Every Day" established it as a
teaching model in 2012 [1].
The aim of this newly
introduced model is to transform dated teaching methods
that are ineffective and often fail to engage students in the
classroom [2]. The flipped classroom aims to give students
the opportunity to prepare themselves on a specific topic,
with the aid of technology. Classes are then structured for
problem solving and guided by the lecturer [1].
Globally, students can be divided into two studying
clusters. The first group is characterized by passive learning
and relies extensively on the lecturer as the leading source
of information. The second group highly values independent
learning and will readily make use of new sources of
information. The flipped classroom is ideally suited to
students who learn autonomously and will use online
teaching materials for example slide shows or videos.
The role of the lecturer differs greatly in these two
teaching methods. Previously lecturers were required to be
present during classes while in flipped classroom lecturers
are now facilitators working alongside prepared students,
guiding them as groups or on individual level.
Section 2 discusses the features and challenges of
smarTTeaching in a flipped classroom. Section 3 looks at
various components used in the smarTTeaching model and
Section 4 briefly shows the e-learning cycle. In Section 5,
the conclusion is that smarTTeaching in conjunction with
electronic and social media is the future of education.
II.
THE FUTURE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION: SMART-
TEACHING IN A FLIPPED CLASSROOM
A.
Features of the Flipped Classroom
Technology will play a huge role in the future of medical
education [3]. While there is not much literature as yet
regarding the relatively new concept of the flipped classroom
approach, the limited data has shown the following:

An analysis of 62 articles indicated that flipped
learning gained popularity amongst engineering
educators after 2012 [4]. This could point to a more
positive attitude regarding flipped classrooms.

One of the most commonly cited benefits of flipped
learning is its flexibility, which allows students to
work at their own pace. This includes being able to
pause or re-watch videos [5].

The rationale behind flipped learning is for students
to prepare for lectures, while face to face class time
is
used
for
exercises
and
interaction
between
students and lecturers [6].

Several
authors
argue
that
flipped
learning
contributes to students’ professional skills such as
life-long learning [7], learner autonomy [8], critical
thinking [9] and interpersonal skills [10].

It was also observed that class attendance improved
[11], students were better prepared for lectures and
information better retained [12]. In the case of
flipped classrooms more time was devoted to studies
and better study habits developed when compared to
traditional teaching [13].
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

B.
Challenges of Flipped Learning
As with any new initiative, flipped learning offers a few
challenges for both instructor and student.
The most challenging for lecturers is the input in
converting a course from a traditional teaching approach to a
flipped format. Challenges for students include uninteresting
online material [14] while Ossman and Warren indicated that
rather than watching the videos, students prefer reading
slides [15]. This increases the workload of the lecturer who
has to create the slides.
It was also reported that class attendance for certain
courses was made not compulsory but students had no excess
to high speed internet connectivity [16]. Student resistance
was another challenge that flipped learning instructors faced.
This was due to the traditional approach throughout their
educational career and students feeling overwhelmed with a
new class format requiring active participation in the
learning process.
III.
SMARTTEACHING PHARMACOLOGY AT THE SEFAKO
MAKGATHO HEALTH SCIENCES UNIVERSITY, SOUTH AFRICA
Pharmacology is unique due to the fact that medicine is
crucial in the practice of almost all medical disciplines. To
be in line with global educational trends the Department of
Pharmacology and Therapeutics at the Sefako Makgatho
Health Sciences University (SMU) has in recent years
developed
an
e-learning
pharmacology
course
called
SmarTTeaching. Many components of social media are
applied in conjunction with the flipped classroom approach
in this blended learning model. The focus is to encourage
studying independent of classroom attendance yet supported
with high quality electronic learning resources.
A.
e-Lectures: PowerPoint Slides
Microsoft PowerPoint is used to create e-lectures in
which a topic is composed of various slides.
Such a
slideshow consists of a title slide (slide 1), a slide showing
the index (slide 2), and slides with sub-topics each followed
by slides with the content. The final slide indicates the topic
of the next slideshow. For best results the majority of slides
should reflect content and contain keywords regarding the
subject of that particular slide. Slides should also be dynamic
with movement and colour, graphs and diagrams that clearly
illustrate lecturing content.
B.
Worksheets: Content-based Worksheets and their
Submission
Each e-lecture has a worksheet that must be printed and
completed by students as they progress through a slideshow.
The questions of a worksheet are based on the content of the
slideshow and completed worksheets are photographed with
students’ smartphones. These photographs are then emailed
to the lecturer and all submissions are stored in a dedicated
e-file for future reference ad as proof of the completion of
both the e-classes and their worksheets.
C.
Instagram: Example Questions
Instagram is used to provide students with examples of
typical test and examination questions as well as related
information concerning topics in the pharmacology syllabi.
This platform is well visited and constantly assists students
with revision of lectures and by providing additional
information on topics [17].
D.
Twitter: Application of Basic Concepts
This account is mostly used for short courses to support
the theoretical aspect of topics covered in e-learning or
flipped classroom lectures. For example, the potential
changes which medicines undergo in the body are explained
and discussed in a slideshow. The Twitter account is then
used to inform students of changes which specific medicines
would undergo. These discussions are not limited to a time
frame but carries throughout the academic year. Students are
examined on information presented on this platform [18].
E.
Facebook: Global Research
The
Pharmacology
Facebook
page
is
used
very
effectively to inform students regarding the latest global
research developments in all fields of medicine.
This
Facebook
page
has
also
become
a
well-recognized
international pharmacology vehicle and is followed by many
medical students, pharmacologists, pharmacists, scientists
and practitioners in different fields of medicine [19].
F.
Website: Central Platform
A web-site dedicated to SmarTTeaching in Pharma-
cology is used as the central platform for interaction between
students and lecturers. e-Lectures can be studied online or
downloaded from the site. Worksheets are available for
download in pdf-format or can be printed directly from the
website.
The site is designed to supply information
regarding various aspects of the Pharmacology Department’s
teaching content and research [20].
G.
Slides: Additional Features
Figure 1 is an example of an e-slide dealing with subject
content. On the top right hand of the slide are icons for
direct access to social media (WhatsApp, email, website,
Facebook, Twitter and Instagram) as well as the last three
icons for learning objects, the index and to exit the
slideshow. Page numbers are indicated to the right of the
slide which, when clicked on, will take the student to slides
with additional information.
IV.
E-LEARNING CYCLE
The aim of smarTTeaching is to establish and place in
practice an e-learning program for Pharmacology teaching
based on information supported by social media. The e-
learning cycle is represented in the figure 3. During this e-
learning cycle the study material is made available to the
students on a website from where the content can be
downloaded or printed.
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Figure 1. Example of an e-slide dealing with subject content.
Figure 2 is an example of a worksheet also containing the
various social media platforms.
Figure 2. Example of a worksheet used to answer questions related to
information on e-slides.
Figure 3: The e-learning cycle as modelled by the smarTTeaching approach.
It is however important that the online delivery system is
reliable to ensure effective use of electronic media. Social
media can be used to different extents and purposes to make
the learning process effective.
Worksheets need to be
submitted electronically on a date and time determined by a
lecturer.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
The impact of electronic and social media on education
is permanent and irreversible. It should therefore be a
logical move for lecturers and students to apply electronic
devices and applications towards the improvement of
academic performance. SmarTTeaching as an initiative not
only focuses on students, but also provides opportunities for
lecturers to be creative to a level not previously possible
without electronics.
Due to their previous exposure to only a face to face
classroom approach, students were initially resistant to the
flipped classroom concept.
Once the benefits of using
electronic devices such as smartphones, tablets, laptops and
desktop computers were realized, appreciation of the
smarTTeaching classroom method greatly escalated.
Participation amongst Pharmacology students at SMU
has become the norm and the various social media platforms
are well utilized. This is especially true for Instagram where
potential test and examination questions are shared. Besides
the students of SMU the information shared on social media
also attracts international attention especially the Facebook
page as it is focused on both students and practitioners of
various medical disciplines.
The compulsory completion and email submission of
worksheets is very effective as studying is immediate and
continuous and not postponed until the first test or exami-
nation.
The introduction of the SmarTTeaching concept to
lecturers has been met with some resistance regarding the
transition from the old way of doing things to the new.
Although the initial input in developing such an e-learning
concept is time-consuming and demanding, the process when
implemented is extremely dynamic for both lecturers and
students. Updates of content are immediately available and
new information can easily be introduced into an e-lecture.
Supporting data such as graphs, figures and videos can also
easily be added. The future and success of such an electronic
teaching intervention requires a mind-shift, mostly by the
teaching
staff
as
students
are
more
susceptible
to
alternatives, especially as it utilizes electronic and social
media.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Bergmann and A. Sams, “Flip Your Classroom: Reach
Every Student in Every Class Every Day,” ISTE/ASCD;
2012.
Click on Icon for Direct Access.
← Running Title.
Click for more information
←Keywords
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[2]
N. B. Mehta, A. L. Hull, J. B. Young, and J. K. Stoller,
“Just imagine: new paradigms for medical education.”
Academic Medicine, vol. 88, 10, 2013, pp. 1418-1423.
[3]
E. Dustyn, M. Williams, and M. Ochsner, “The Future of
Medical Education: Flipping the Classroom” Education
Technology Journal, vol. 16, 2016, pp. 14–15.
[4]
A. Karabulut-Ilgu, N. J. Cherrez, and C. T. Jahren, “A
systematic review of research on the flipped learning
method in engineering education”. British Journal of
Educational Technology, doi: 10.1111/bjet.12548, 2017.
[5]
D. N. Buechler, P. J. Sealy, and J. Goomey, “Three pilot
studies with a focus on asynchronous distance education”.
Paper presented at Proceedings of 121st ASEE Annual
Conference & Exposition, Indianapolis, IN, 2014.
[6]
R. Bailey and M. C. Smith, “Implementation and assess-
ment of a blended learning environment as an approach to
better engage students in a large systems design class”.
Paper presented at Proceedings of 120th ASEE Annual
Conference & Exposition, Atlanta, 2013.
[7]
S. Luster-Teasley, S. C. Hargrove-Leak, and C. Waters,
“Transforming undergraduate environmental engineering
laborato-ries for sustainable engineering using the case
studies in the sciences instructional method”. Proceedings
of the 121st ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition,
Indianapolis, IN, 2014.
[8]
M. K. Kim, S. M. Kim, O. Khera, and J. Getman, “The
experience of three flipped classrooms in an urban
university: An exploration of design principles”. Internet
and Higher Education, vol. 22, 2014, pp. 37–50.
[9]
S. C. Chetcuti, J. T. Hans, and J. P. Brent, “Flipping the
engineering classroom: Results and observations with non-
engineering students”. Proceedings of 121st ASEE Annual
Conference & Exposition, Indianapolis, IN, 2014.
[10]
K. Yelamarthi, S. Member, and E. Drake, “A flipped first-
year digital circuits course for engineering and technology
students”. IEEE Transactions on Education, vol. 58, 2015,
pp. 179–186.
[11]
J. Rutkowski, “Flipped classroom—from experiment to
practice”.
Proceedings
of
the
1st
International
KES
Conference on Smart Technology Based Education and
Training, Chania, Greece: Springer, 2014, pp. 565 – 574.
[12]
B. Love, A. Hodge, N. Grandgenett and A. W. Swift,
“Student learning and perceptions in a flipped linear
algebra course. International Journal of Mathematical
Education in Science and Technology, vol. 45, 2014, pp.
317–324.
[13]
C. Papadopoulos and A. S. Roman, “Implementing an
inverted classroom model in engineering statics: Initial
results.”
Proceedings
of
the
117th
ASEE
Annual
Conference & Exposition, Louisville, KY, 2010.
[14]
R. Olson, “Flipping engineering probability and statistics—
Lessons learned for faculty considering the switch.”
Proceedings of the 121st ASEE Annual Conference &
Exposition, Indianapolis, IN, 2014.
[15]
K. A. Ossman and G. Warren. “Effect of flipping the
classroom on student performance in first year engineering
courses”.
Proceedings
of
the
121st
ASEE
Annual
Conference & Exposition, Indianapolis, 2014.
[16]
A. Amresh, A. R. Carberry, and J. Femiani, “Evaluating the
effectiveness of flipped classrooms for teaching CS1”.
Proceedings of Frontiers in Education Conference, FIE (pp.
733–735). Oklahama City, OK: IEEE Xplore Digital
Library. 2013, pp 733 – 735.
[17]
https://www.instagram.com/pharms.medicine. [Accessed:
March 2018].
[18]
https://twitter.com/PharmsEducation [Accessed: March
2018].
[19]
https://www.facebook.com/pharmacol.
[Accessed: March
2018].
[20]
https://www.pharmacology-medicine.africa [Accessed:
March 2018].
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

