Usage of mobile self-assessment to support a continuous learning process
Thomas Sch¨uler, Karsten Morisse
Dept. of Engineering and Computer Science
University of Applied Sciences
Osnabr¨uck, Germany
Email: [t.schueler, k.morisse]@hs-osnabrueck.de
Abstract—In this article we describe the usage of mobile
self-assessments to support a blended learning context in
higher education. The students have the option to attend self-
assessments and use all other provided learning media on
their mobile devices. We describe the didactical setting in
which the self-assessments are embedded, the development
of a mobile application for using the assessments and the
implementation and evaluation of it in the current term at
our university. Further, we emphasize the beneﬁt of developing
special applications to support mobile learning.
Keywords-Mobile Assessment; Blended Learning; Continu-
ous Learning;
I. INTRODUCTION
The usage of e-assessments is motivated by several facts.
E-assessments may be evaluated automatically and therefore
provide immediate feedback for the learner. Once prepared,
they are easily replicated and used in following courses
without extra work for the lecturer. E-assessments are a
good way to structure and evaluate the students learning
behavior. The Bologna process in Germany has lead to a
higher amount of examinations for the students. As a result,
the number of examinations and assessments that have to
be accomplished within a university increases. Usage of
electronic systems may be a way to reduce the amount of
time needed to organize and evaluate those.
In higher education e-assessments and examinations can
be used for different purposes and in different contexts.
Within this article, we focus our view on the usage as a tool
for self-assessment for the students. Within our didactical
setting the self-assessments are offered every week in our
learning management system. They cover the topics that
have been discussed in the preceding week and are only
accessible for a short time-period. However, participating in
the self-assessments is seen as an optional service for the
students, i.e. they don’t have to participate in them to be
admitted to the ﬁnal examination.
Providing self-assessments in a didactical setting can help
to work against a well known danger of e-learning in gen-
eral: If the teaching material is offered in an electronic way,
the students are ensnared to download and gather everything,
but work with it just right before the ﬁnal examination.
Learning continuously during the semester involves a very
stringent time management, which many students overbur-
dens. These circumstances lead to the procrastination effect:
the learning process is postponed, because the teaching
material is always available later and more pressing tasks
are preferred. [8] sees in electronic self-assessments a very
useful and helpful tool for knowledge control by the students
themselves. If they are offered continuously and in short
time-frames during the semester, they can help activating a
continuous learning behavior.
In the last few years, electronic devices are becoming
more mobile and this may be a crucial factor to support the
adoption of e-learning by students. One of the main beneﬁts
of e-learning is often said to be the independence of time
and location. This only fully applies, when the devices that
are used to access e-learning content and tools are portable
and convenient to use at any place. While the hardware of
mobile devices is getting more powerful, it is now timely
to deliver applications for speciﬁc e-learning tools. To make
our learning scenario truly mobile, a special development
was needed to enable working with the self-assessments on
a portable device.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Sec-
tion 2 of this paper presents our evaluated blended learning
approach which uses self-assessments as a regular service
and in which video lectures substitute the real lecture. Sec-
tion 3 presents the development of an application for mobile
self-assessment on Apple iPhone and iPod touch devices. In
section 4 we describe the implementation and evaluation of
this tool in didactical settings in higher education contexts.
The paper closes with a conclusion and some ﬁnal remarks.
II. BLENDED LEARNING BASED ON LECTURE
RECORDINGS
We are using a blended learning approach based on video
lectures for several years. The development of the concept
and an evaluation of it are published in a series of papers
([2], [3], [5], [4], [6]). Within this section, we summarize
the didactical modules of that concept. It is used in the
lecture Audio- and Videotechnology in a computer science
study program. The course provides insight in the technical
basics of the media types audio and video in the context of
computer science. In addition to the theoretical part there
is a practical part in which the students have to do some
46
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

practical work with audio and video, e.g. the production of
a short movie.
Over the years we have been using different technolo-
gies for the distribution of lecture recordings, namely live-
and on-demand video streaming, synchronized on-demand
presentation and podcasting [2]. In the beginning, lecture
recordings have been provided supplementary to the classical
classroom lecture. Since 2007 the podcast has completely
substituted the classroom lectures. At present, the didactical
structure of the concept combines podcast lectures with live-
coaching, electronic self-assessment and practical sessions to
support the students learning process (see [3]). The podcast
episodes are published in the Apple iTunes Music Store and
are publicly available for everybody. Therefore the students
can access them easily and by means of mobile devices use
them anytime and anywhere. Additionally, the lecture slides
have been annotated in high detail and are available as PDF-
documents corresponding to each of the podcast episodes.
Both are linked together by integrating the URL of the slide
in the corresponding podcast episode.
The modules of the didactical concept are explained in
the following (see also ﬁgure 1). Results of a thorough
evaluation can be found in [5].
A. Podcast
There are more than 40 podcast episodes for this course
publicly available in Apple’s iTunes Music Store. The con-
tent of these podcasts had been recorded during preceding
semesters. However, each recorded lecture underwent an
intensive postproduction process (chapter marks, dividing
into small episodes, integration of animations). They are
available anytime and, using portable podcast-player, also
anywhere. However, to give some structure troughout the
course, a time-schedule on a weekly basis is available.
When using this technology, the learning-process can be
self-organized to a high degree. Each episode of the podcast
offers a ﬁne-granulated access to the content by offering
chapter-marks and can be used platform-independent. Each
episode includes a reference to a PDF-document with a more
detailed explanation of the content.
B. Live Coaching
Live-coaching is a weekly meeting of the students with
the lecturer. Instead of pure content presentation sessions,
these meetings are organized by means of coaching to
support the students’ learning process. Certain aspects of
the content are discussed, misunderstandings are clariﬁed
and practical issues are introduced. Herein, the students
have the possibility to ask content-speciﬁc questions to the
corresponding episodes of the podcast. If there are too many
questions, the content is presented in more detail by the
lecturer. Within the coaching sessions links to the practical
part of the lecture are also given.
C. Electronic self-assessment
To support a continuous learning process of the students,
an electronic online assessment system called VIPS is used
(see [1]). Within this system there are about 10 to 20
questions about the content of each podcast episode or
logical block of episodes. For each week of the semester
there is one set of questions corresponding to the speciﬁc
content of that week. Each set is only available for a short
time frame (e.g. two days). These electronic assessments are
an essential part of the didactical concept and are organized
by means of self-assessment. The students are free to use
the assessments to evaluate their learning process. This way
the assessments are an important motivation to work with
the recordings during the semester. It is up to the students’
choice, if they process the assessments every week or if they
just work on a few of them. However, a bonus system urges
the students to work continuously with the assessments. If
they reach more than 50 per cent of the points overall, they
can collect bonus points for the ﬁnal written examination.
D. Practical Work
Weekly lab hours accompany the theoretical part of the
lecture. Within this part, the students have to work on a
media project, e.g., production of a short movie or the
production of a podcast. This active learning or learning-
by-doing approach strengthens the theoretical facts of the
lecture. Usually, this work is done in small groups of up to
three or four students and the result of their work has to
be presented at three milestones (storyboard, rough cut as a
ﬁrst version, ﬁnal version of the movie). These lab hours take
half of the overall workload and are used to gain practical
experience in video and audio production.
E. Final Examination
To collect credit points for the module, the ﬁnal examina-
tion, which is usually a written examination, must be passed
successfully.
III. MOBILE SELF-ASSESSMENTS
In this section we describe the idea and development of an
application to provide self-assessments on mobile devices.
For now, this application is only available on iPhone and
iPod touch and works with the mentioned VIPS online
assessment system at our university. With this application
the online assessments (see chapter II-C) can be attended
anywhere.
A. E-learning on mobile devices
Above we described a blended learning concept, which
we use already since 2007. In the last few years, electronic
devices were becoming more mobile and, especially with the
introduction of iPhone and iPod touch, more powerful and
versatile. Many of the beneﬁts of e-learning are only truly
visible, when provided on mobile devices. The option to
47
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

Figure 1.
Modules of the blended learning concept
attend classes via video does not mean a true independence
of time and space, when one is bound to a stationary
computer. It is also often not that easy, to use a laptop in
a crowded bus or even likely, to carry it around all day
in search for a sunny spot on the campus chill-out lawn.
And in the odd case that it’s really happening, energy is
low after 30 minutes video. Clearly, e-learning is still often
limited by technology and infrastructure. Therefore, after
experimenting with modern mobile devices, we decided to
pay some attention to the possibility of using our learning
concept on these. For the beginning we decided to use
Apples’s hardware.
The lecture recordings and the annotated slides already
use standardized data formats, which are provided by most
player hardware. Podcasting was introduced with Apple’s
mobile devices and was adapted by many other manufactur-
ers. The PDF-format is common for electronic documents.
Both can be accessed on iPhone and iPod touch as well as
on other mobile devices. The VIPS assessment system is
designed as a plugin for the Stud.IP Learning Management
System [10] and is not available on mobile devices as a
native application. Our goal was to develop an application
for this missing part of our concept.
B. assessMe - a mobile VIPS application
The development of the assessMe iPhone and iPod touch
application was started in late 2009. Recently we released
a ﬁrst version, which is limited to be used within our
university’s structures. This version will not be available in
the Apple iTunes App-Store, which will be considered for
upcoming versions.
The application integrates with the Stud.IP VIPS assess-
ment system, so that the same data is provided for mobile
as well as for stationary users. It may be synchronized to
the server, allowing to switch between devices. assessMe
only displays the data and handles to solve the assessment
questions (see ﬁgure 2 and ﬁgure 3). The users’ responses
are then transferred to the server on a sync command and
are processed further only there. This way complicated
algorithms are used only where enough computing power
is available and granted. Moreover usage of storage space
on the mobile device is low and it is easier to stay in
sync. These are general guidelines for the development of
mobile applications. Unfortunately today it also means that
the feedback to the assessments is only accessible on the web
after the automatic correction was initiated by the lecturer.
There is no option to sync this feedback to the mobile
application. However, this may also be implemented in the
future.
The interface design was kept simple in order to ﬁrst
evaluate functionality. By now 6 basic question types are
supported:
• single-choice
• multiple-choice
• open textbox
• cloze exercise
• yes-no question
• association
Each of these types may consist of text and pictures for
the question and may be supported by an optional hint.
The application shows all active assessments for a student’s
Stud.IP account sorted by courses in which they are offered.
Transfer to and from the server is initiated with correspond-
ing buttons.
48
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

Figure 2.
List of available assessments sorted by courses
Figure 3.
UI of a single-choice question
The application uses XML as the technical basis for
description and transfer of the assessments and answers.
The XML structure for the assessments is build by the
server according to the IMS QTI (Question and Test In-
teroperability) speciﬁcation (see [9]) and parsed by the
mobile application to an internal object structure. On transfer
of the solutions, the answers are wrapped by an XML
structure and transferred to the server. XML is a common
description language, that most programming languages and
applications are able to handle.
With QTI the interoperability of the application between
systems is supported in general. Universally, the design
of interfaces is an important issue when developing an
application that should integrate itself in other systems.
To gain most of it, it’s advisable to use standards so that
the application itself is usable in different contexts. We
therefore tried to develop an application, that is open enough
to support different online assessment systems. However
we didn’t have enough resources yet, to completely reach
this goal. Our application is limited to the VIPS system at
our university, but a second development phase has already
been started. After the ﬁrst successful implementation of
assessMe in our local learning concept, the goal is now
to support different systems on the outside while using the
same UI and data-structure on the inside.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION IN THE
CURRENT TERM
Our blended learning scenario was developed over the
years within the course Audio- and Videotechnology. Since
2007 we made no changes to it and gathered practical
experience with quite different groups of students of the
media computer science program. Overall we gained much
positive feedback from students and colleagues as well.
Also, the average results of the ﬁnal examination has been
improved.
In the last years, smart-phones were becoming more and
more popular and many of our students started using the
podcasts on these devices. We were wondering, if usage of
the e-Learning services improves, when provided on mobile
devices.
The ﬁrst idea for the development of the assessMe ap-
plication was to fully support the usage of the blended
learning scenario from section II on mobile devices. Now
that we ﬁnished the ﬁrst development phase, we are going
to implement it in the current semester. The course Audio-
and Videotechnology will be held according to the blended
learning concept in the winter term 2010. To carry on
with it’s evaluation, we will track the learning behavior of
this term’s attendees. They are forming two groups: One
using mobile devices (iPhone or iPod touch) throughout the
semester and one using less portable devices. To balance the
groups, some students are provided with iPod touch devices
from the university.
Students of both groups are asked to ﬁll a learning diary
where they mark their learning activities for this course. This
will be differentiated by place of learning and used media-
form of our concept. To keep focus on our blended learning
concept we won’t further differentiate learning activities
with other media-forms like textbooks or the WWW. A blank
sheet of the learning diary is shown in ﬁgure 4.
The data of the diaries will be supplemented by qualitative
49
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

Figure 4.
Blank sheet of the learning diary
data. Students of both groups should answer a questionnaire
at the end of the course, where we ask for their subjective
experience with the blended learning concept. This way
we hope to gather information about the importance of
supporting mobile devices within our scenario.
Positive feedback from students of preceding semesters
made us believe that self-assessment should be provided
in other courses, too. Especially in courses where a wide
ﬁeld of knowledge need to be memorized, students will
beneﬁt from a continuous learning process. In the current
semester, we therefore provide self-assessments also in the
course Theoretical Informatics. We distribute the assessMe
application among participants of this course and further
among other users of the Stud.IP VIPS plugin in our
university. This way we have a reasonable group of beta-
testers. Their experiences will be evaluated by means of
a bug tracking system and based on simple quantitative
questionnaires.
V. CONCLUSION
After several semesters of using the lecture concept de-
scribed in section II, we realized the need to fully support
mobile learning. Therefore we developed the application
assessMe, which allows to solve the Stud.IP VIPS assess-
ments on mobile devices. The application was recently
released in a ﬁrst version, which is available only for our
universities infrastructure. A second development phase was
already started with the goal, to release a more universal
version on Apple’s iTunes Store. The usage of the assessMe
application is evaluated in the current semester in our
blended learning scenario as well as among other users
of the assessment system. The results of this evaluation
will be published in the near future. With our work we
emphasize the possible beneﬁt of supporting mobile devices
in approved e-Learning scenarios in general.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Thanks to our developer Dennis B¨ockmann for his great
work on assessMe. Thanks to all participants in the current
studies.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Huegelmeyer, R. Mertens, M. Schroeder and H. Gust.
Integration des Virtuellen Pruefungssystems ViPS in die Lehr-
/Lernplattform Stud.IP,
Proceedings of the Workshop on e-
Learning 2005, HTWK Leipzig, 11.-12. pp. 187-196.
[2] M. Ketterl, R. Mertens, K. Morisse and O. Vornberger. Study-
ing with Mobile Devices: Workﬂow and Tools for Automatic
Content Distribution. World Conference on Educational Multi-
media, Hypermedia & Telecommunications (ED-Media 2006),
Orlando, FL, USA, Juni 2006. S. 2082-2088.
[3] K. Morisse and M. Ramm. Teaching via Podcasting: One year
of Experience with Workﬂows, Tools and Usage in Higher
Education. Proceedings of ED-MEDIA World Conference on
Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia & Telecommunications
2007 (pp. 2081 - 2088). Chesapeake, VA: AACE.
[4] K. Morisse and M. Ketterl.
User Generated Web Lecture
Snippets to Support a Blended Learning Approach. ED-Media
- World Conference on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia
& Telecommunications, 2009, Honolulu (USA).
[5] S. Wichelhaus, T. Schueler, M. Ramm and K. Morisse. More
than Podcasting: An evaluation of an integrated blended learn-
ing scenario. Proceedings of ED-Media - World Conference on
Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia & Telecommunications,
2008 (pp. 4468 - 4475). Chesapeake, VA: AACE.
[6] S. Wichelhaus, K. Moeller, T. Schueler, M. Ramm and
K. Morisse.
Weg von der klassischen Frontalveranstaltung
- Podcasts, Live-Coaching und Onlinetests als integrale Ver-
anstaltungselemente in der Lehre. Delﬁ 2008 - 6. e-Learning
Fachtagung der GI, S. 209 - 220, Lecture Notes in Informatics,
Vol. 132, Gesellschaft fr Informatik, Bonn, 2008.
[7] S. Wichelhaus, T. Schueler, M. Ramm, K. Morisse.
Medi-
enkompetenz und selbstorganisiertes Lernen - Ergebnisse einer
Evaluation. In S. Zauchner, P. Baumgartner, E. Blaschitz, A.
Weissenbaeck (Hrsg.): Offener Bildungsraum Hochschule, S.
124 - 133, Waxmann-Verlag, M¨unster, 2008.
[8] K. Wannemacher.
Computerbasierte Pr¨ufungen. Zwischen
Self-Assessment und Abschlussklausuren. In E. Seiler Schiedt,
S. K¨alin, C. Sengstag (Hrsg.): E-Learning - alltagstaugliche
Innovation?, S. 163 - 172, Waxmann-Verlag, M¨unster, 2006.
[9] IMS Global Learning Consortium - Question and Test Inter-
operability Speciﬁcation http://www.imsglobal.org/question/
[10] Stud.IP LMS http://www.studip.de
50
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

