A User-centric Design and Pedagogical-based Approach for Mobile Learning  
Mohammed Bahja 
IRAC Group, School of Computer Science and Technology 
University of Bedfordshire 
Luton, United Kingdom 
E-mail: Mohammed.Bahja@beds.ac.uk  
Rawad Hammad 
Research and Learning Solutions 
King’s College London 
London, United Kingdom 
E-mail: Rawad.Hammad@kcl.ac.uk 
 
Abstract—The adoption of various learning technologies in 
education has gained momentum in the last couple of decades 
due to: (i) their ability to meet stakeholders’ requirements and 
(ii) offering a wide variety of services that are accessible from 
different platforms, such as mobile learning and online 
learning. Despite the success of mobile learning, certain 
limitations and shortcomings have been reported in literature, 
such as the insufficient design and limited support provided to 
stakeholders. This paper focuses on reviewing the studies 
relating to m-learning application for identifying the issues and 
challenges limiting its adoption, and proposes a pedagogy-
informed and user-centric design framework for mobile 
learning artifacts which would address the issues identified. 
The findings from the review revealed that user-centric issues, 
such as privacy, security, usability, learnability, and socio-
cultural aspects (including adaptability of the application, 
sustainability, integration with pedagogical approaches) are 
the main factors affecting users in adopting an m-learning 
approach. Considering these issues, a user-centric framework 
integrated with socio-cultural aspects, design and technology 
attributes is proposed.  
Keywords- m-learning; pedagogy; user-centric design; user- 
centric 
methodology; 
software 
engineering; 
software 
development methodology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The rapid developments across the Internet and 
telecommunication technologies have paved the way for 
developing and adopting innovative and efficient methods of 
learning in many fields. Various innovative technologies 
such as mobile technologies, Internet and communication 
technologies have been applied in educational sector. This 
has enriched teaching and learning processes, and 
consequently 
has 
reflected 
on 
learning 
flexibility, 
effectiveness and efficiency. It is estimated that 47% of the 
worldwide organizations are using mobile devices in their 
training programs, as it enhances the user engagement in 
learning and helps in knowledge retention [1]. The global 
market for mobile learning, henceforth m-learning, is 
expected to cross $12.2 billion in 2018 as it is advancing at a 
fast rate [2]. Accordingly, a rapid increase in the mobile 
workforce was observed in the recent years, which is 
expected to double or triple its size in 2018 [3]. Since 
stakeholders expect answers at their fingertips, the real-time 
access to information on mobile devices boosts the adoption 
of m-learning [4]. In addition, the number of mobile devices 
would increase to three on average by the end of 2018 [5]. 
Furthermore, the amount of time spent on using mobile 
devices is significantly increasing in the recent years as 
mobile devices become more reliable in accessing various 
types of information [6].  
Though there is a rapid increase in the m-learning 
approaches, there have been various challenges identified 
with it. First, the traditional teaching can have one to one 
access, where the learner’s abilities are assessed and 
accordingly the teaching process is modified to suit the 
learner’s abilities [7], where it is not clear how this could 
happen via m-learning. Second, the insufficient support 
provided via m-learning platforms across various contexts 
[7]. Third, the impact of design on effective learning, where 
design in this context refers to system design rather than 
learning content design. Fourth, the difference in mobile 
usage habits and attitudes across the regions [8]. Other 
challenges identified include security, accessibility, contents 
accuracy, adaptability, etc. [9]. As stated above, most of 
these issues are associated with theory and practice of 
teaching, and user-centered factors.  
Therefore, this paper is an attempt to understand how a 
pedagogy-informed and user-centric design methodology 
could be useful for m-learning. The rest of this paper is 
organized as follows. Section II reviews the related work in 
m-learning and pedagogy. Section III introduces the user- 
centric design framework methodology for developing m-
learning systems. Section IV addresses the user-centric 
design methodology. Section VI concludes the paper and 
suggests future research directions. 
II. 
M-LEARNING AND PEDAGOGY 
M-Learning is the process of learning across multiple 
contexts using various social interactive features on the 
mobile devices [10]. Learning in educational field varies 
from one region to another depending on the socio-cultural 
aspects. Integrating socio-cultural and methods underpinning 
them 
(i.e., 
pedagogy) 
into 
mobile 
technological 
environments is one of the major challenges in m-learning. 
This aspect has been the focus of research in many studies. 
In this context pedagogy refers to theory, methods and 
practices of teaching and learning, which can include various 
approaches. Therefore, the concept of ‘one-size-fits-all’ 
would be an impractical approach in developing m-learning 
platforms [11]. Consequently, integrating pedagogical 
theories and models with technology is inevitable to design 
effective and efficient m-learning platforms [12]. 
In addition to these concerns, it is also very important to 
consider the user-centric aspects such as attitudes, behavior, 
usability, 
learnability 
etc. 
in 
developing 
m-learning 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

platforms. Literature studies [13] investigate the attitudes of 
students and educators in the Arab region towards m-
learning identified significant difference in students’ 
attitudes towards m-learning, while positive attitudes were 
observed among the educators. Another recent study by 
Chung et al. [14] identified that the students’ behavioral 
intentions had high positive correlations with mobile 
devices’ compatibility, self-efficacy, perceived ease of use; 
the majority of the students showed positive approach 
towards adopting m-learning.  
However, Khan et al. [15] reveals the need to increase 
awareness, training, and motivation for adopting m-learning 
approach among students and educators. Moreover, students 
in secondary school have positive perceptions about m-
learning but their m-learning adequacy levels are identified 
as not sufficient enough to put it in to practice. The above-
mentioned studies reveal that m-learning platform features 
and usability aspects could influence the attitude towards 
their adoption. Likewise, the adoption of m-learning would 
be dependent on various user-centric attributes, such as level 
of education, age, awareness etc. Abachi and Muhammad 
[16] investigate the impact of m-learning on educators and 
learners, and found that great enthusiasm was shown by the 
users 
regarding 
augmented 
reality-based 
m-learning 
platforms. Though, the users favored the adoption of m-
learning, they have expressed concerns in relation to security 
and coverage (completeness, accuracy).  
Another important perspective of evaluation is to assess 
how the mobile platform adaptation could influence the 
learning process. M-learning has a dynamic scope as the 
users would be constantly moving and the context from 
which they learn can be changing. Therefore, adaptation 
according to these changes by the mobile platforms is 
essential for providing effective and dynamic learning 
process. Nevertheless, Garcia-Cabot et al. [17] finds that 
mobile adaptation had limited impact on the learning 
process, since students learn in similar contexts despite the 
fact that they use different ways to access learning contents. 
On one hand, technological aspects of m-learning 
platforms design need further investigation in order to embed 
the best teaching practices into innovative m-learning. Such 
technological aspects could influence various features and 
characteristics such as usability, learnability, ease of use, 
understandability, quality of learning, and quality of 
experience [18]. Domingo and Gargante [19] conducted a 
study to assess the teachers’ perception about using mobile 
technology and how learning could be influences. The study 
reveals that content learning applications are used more 
frequently compared to the informational applications. It 
reflects the opportunity to streamline m-learning platforms to 
more detailed content learning applications, which can focus 
on specific contexts rather than integrating various contexts 
in a single platform. Nonetheless, Bird and Stubbs [20] 
identify the challenges from adoption strategy perspective 
for scaling m-learning applications into institution-wide 
learning technologies. The study focuses on integrating m-
learning into the IT Strategy of institutions and universities 
explained through Law/Collon model [20].  
On the other hand, pedagogy is deeply rooted in m-
learning. There are various pedagogical approaches in 
education; however, the need for identifying a sufficient 
pedagogical approach is rarely recognized. Lozanzo et al. 
[21] developed a framework for assessing the pedagogical 
approaches in relation to various competences in m-learning 
contexts. Dennen and Hao [22] developed M-Cope 
framework for designing effective mobile learning by 
considering the following five critical areas: Mobile 
affordances, Conditions, Outcomes, Pedagogy and Ethics. 
However, pedagogical approaches vary across the regions, 
and therefore implementation approaches need to consider 
and reflect cultural differences. Hao et al. [23] focus on 
assessing how students perceive m-learning across three 
culturally different regions including USA, China, and 
Turkey; although all students preferred m-learning approach, 
they raise few concerns such as support, infrastructure and 
embedding the cultural aspects (the local pedagogical 
approaches) in m-learning platforms. Kearney et al. [24] 
investigated the use of distinctive m-learning pedagogies by 
teachers and identified that online collaboration and 
networking were rated unpredictably lower than expected, in 
spite of enhanced connection and flexible learning 
opportunities afforded by mobile technologies. However, 
Lindsay [25] found that opportunities for pedagogical 
transformation that collaborative learning offers appear to be 
partially realized, but the potential for situative learning 
using authentic contexts.  
  To conclude, the majority of the reviewed literature 
assures the positive perceptions about adopting m-learning 
platforms. However, socio-cultural issues, pedagogical 
approaches, design and technology are the main issues 
identified with m-learning. Such issues are related to the 
users of m-learning platforms; hence, the user-centric 
features are one of the major aspects that are not being 
considered in the current m-learning platforms. Additionally, 
the design and technology issues concerning privacy and 
security, usability etc. are very common concerns that need 
to be addressed. Considering these concerns/factors, a user-
centric design framework is proposed in the next section. 
III. 
USER-CENTRIC FRAMEWORK FOR M-LEARNING 
There are various frameworks proposed by various 
researchers [26]-[28] for m-learning applications. Out of 
which UCD (User-Centered Design) [27] and mLUX [28] 
are the most commonly used design frameworks. The UCD 
includes a series of phases including knowing the users; 
analyzing users’ tasks and goals; developing usability 
requirements; prototype and design concept; usability 
testing; and repeating the stages for more features [26]. 
mLUX approach has three layers [28] which include the role 
players, the context of use; and the process. The role players 
includes all stakeholders of the m-learning application who 
are involved in one or more stages. The term role player 
defines not just the users or actors but also considers the 
roles of the users in relation to the application. There are also 
invisible 
role 
players 
which 
include 
individuals, 
organizations, systems, developers, testers etc., who are not 
the actual users of the application, but play important roles in 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

the design and development [26]. The context of use is the 
capability of the application to create an effective user-
centric learning environment. Several factors are to be 
considered in this aspect including the Social (social 
acceptance of application); physical (time & location 
constraints), 
and 
educational 
(learning, 
outcomes, 
pedagogical approaches). The process is a methodology for 
developing m-learning application which includes four 
stages: User Study; Data Analysis; Idea Creation; and 
Product Concept as shown in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. User-Centered Design Process [26] 
  
The UCD framework includes some user-centric 
features; however, it does not cover all of the issues outlined 
in the above in Section II. Therefore, there is a need to 
develop more detailed user-centric framework and design 
methodology, in order to address the continuously emerging 
concerns. Accordingly, a user-centric layered framework is 
proposed as shown in Figure 2. The proposed framework 
aims at helping developers in adopting a streamlined 
approach in developing m-learning applications. It consists 
of the following four layers: (i) user-centered layer, (ii) 
socio-cultural layer, (iii) technology and design layer, and 
(iv) system development layer. 
 
Figure 2. M-Learning User-Centric Framework 
 
A. User-Centered Layer 
This layer represents the core of the framework and 
reflects the user-centric aspects which need to be considered 
in the development of the m-learning applications. Assessing 
user needs and expectations is one of the first and foremost 
tasks in the development process. There are other behavioral 
aspects which include motivation (i.e., factors that enhance 
the user engagement); learning (i.e., factors that enhance 
learnability); perception (i.e., ideas and beliefs of the users 
about the application); personality (i.e., behavioral attitudes 
that define the users); and roles (i.e., various roles played by 
the users, such as: teachers and students).    
B. Socio-Cultural Layer 
Learning is a process often influenced by the cultural 
settings and social environment. As cultures vary across 
regions, so do the pedagogical approaches. Therefore, the 
concept of one-size-fits-all would be impractical in 
developing m-learning applications. Therefore, this layer 
includes the key socio-cultural aspects, which increase the 
adoptability and enhance the learning process using m-
learning applications. These include ideas and customs 
which are practiced by a particular group of people or a 
community. Examples on such aspects include language 
used in the community, social behavior that defines the 
attitudes and behavioral aspects of a community, and 
pedagogical approaches followed by the community in 
learning process [29]. 
C. Technology & Design Layer 
The user-centric aspects and the socio-cultural aspects 
must be enbeded into the design of m-learning application 
with the support of technology. The aspects that need to be 
considered in this layer include mobility (i.e., the ability of 
the application to be accessed on various mobile devices), 
ubiquity (i.e., availability of devices to receive service from 
anywhere on a real-time basis), personalization (i.e., ability 
to personalise features specific to individual users), context-
sensitivity (i.e., localization and interactivity), content (i.e., 
the content on the application measured with completeness, 
accuracy and sustainability), community (i.e., users of the 
application), relationships (i.e., interactions between the 
users of the application), communication types (i.e, ways of 
communicating like messaging, messenger etc.), usability 
(i.e., ease of use, interface, enjoyability, learnability), 
reliability (i.e., how reliable is the application), security and 
privacy (e.g., data protection).  
D. System Development Layer 
The system development layer focuses on the factors 
that need to considerd for the application development. 
These include developing a user-centric methodology; 
designing a prototype and reviewing it before the actual 
development;  adopting  testing  stragies   like   unit   testing  
(testing individual unit/module), integration testing (testing 
integrated units/modules), system testing (testing the whole 
application), and usability testing (testing if the system 
meets all the user requirements).   
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

IV. 
USER-CENTRIC DESIGN METHODOLOGY 
The development methodology proposed for m-learning 
applications engages the users in the development process 
along 
with 
other 
stakeholders 
including 
designers, 
developers, testers, etc. This methodology, depicted in 
Figure 3, is composed of two key parts: (i) the tools used to 
implement such steps (e.g., interview and questionnaires) 
and (ii) the stages/steps (e.g., identify needs) to be taken to 
implement the proposed methodology. Both parts are 
described in the next couple of paragraphs. The most 
commonly used tools include the following: 
A. Tools/Methods Used to Support the Methodology 
First: Focus Groups, which include the actual users or 
acting users of the m-learning application from whom the 
requirements, needs and expectations can be gathered for 
developing the application [26]. The output from the focus 
groups would be non-statistical and need efficient analysts to 
convert them in to system requirements. The process usually 
involves low sample population and the cost incurred is 
comparatively low to the other methods [30].  
Second: Participatory Design, which engages the users 
actively in sharing the opinions and feedbacks during the 
designing stage [31]. This approach is mostly used for 
reviewing the prototype designs, which can be used later for 
the actual development. The output of this step would be 
non-statistical and requires efficient analysts to convert it in 
to the design specifications.  
Third: Questionnaires & Interviews, used to gather the 
requirements from the users before developing the 
application and also for evaluating the system after 
developing the system. They can be used in both 
requirements gathering and evaluation stages. The output of 
this step would be statistical and can be analyzed using 
various techniques to assess the system from various 
perspectives. The sample size would be large and incurs 
fewer costs compared to other approaches [32]. In addition, 
interviews are one of the effective qualitative approaches for 
gathering the quality data which could be the requirements or 
feedback. The output of the interviews is non-statistical, 
often involves low sample size but incurs high costs [31]. 
Also, they can be used in both requirements gathering and 
evaluation stages.  
Fourth: Usability Testing, which is used for testing the 
designs/prototypes, and also the application as a whole. The 
aim of the usability testing is to assess if the 
design/application meets the specified user requirements 
[33]. The output of this usability testing can be both non-
statistical and statistical, often involve low sample size, and 
incurs high costs.   
The previously described four tools or methods are proposed 
mainly to engage the users over the overall software 
development life cycle. Such engagement brings some cost, 
as 
explained 
earlier, 
but 
ensures 
effective 
design, 
development 
and 
implementation 
for 
m-learning 
applications. 
 
 
Figure 3. User-Centric Methodology for M-Learning Applications 
B. Methodology Steps/Stages 
The proposed methodology uses agile/iterative approach 
for mitigating the issues and errors during the application 
development. The user-centric approach specified in ISO 
9241-210:2010 [34] standard is integrated with user-centric 
aspects in specific to M-Learning and includes the following 
stages of development. 
  
Stage I – Identify Needs: Identifying the requirements of 
the m-learning users is the first step in the methodology, 
which uses interviews and questionnaires as a tool for 
identifying the needs, requirements and expectations of the 
users. Focus groups can also be involved at this stage for a 
more detailed assessment of needs based on their roles. 
Stage II – Context of Use: At this stage the context of 
application is assessed by analyzing the users and their roles, 
location, community (i.e., socio-cultural aspects, pedagogical 
approaches) of using application, the purpose of developing 
the application, and the conditions in which the application 
would be used. Focus groups can be used at this stage as well 
to seek their ideas and opinions. 
Stage III – Specify Requirements: After carefully assessing 
the users’ needs and expectations and the context of use, the 
system requirements would be specified.  
Stage IV – Design Component/System: The requirements 
outlined in the previous stage are used for designing the 
component/unit of the system.  
Stage V – Evaluate Designs/Prototypes: At this stage, the 
designed components can be evaluated by using participatory 
approach (c-design) or by using focus groups. Unit and 
integration testing can be done by the testers at this stage. 
Repeat the process again from the context of use stage for 
other components till the final application is developed.  
Stage VI – Application Satisfies: Once the application is 
fully developed, methods like SUMI/QUIS can be used for 
evaluating the application to ensure its completeness, 
correctness and consistency.  
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

To conclude, both parts (i.e., Tools and Steps/Stages) 
complement each other and lead to user-centric design for m-
learning applications. The proposed framework and 
methodology are generic to respond to the significant variety 
of requirements in learning domain [35]. Implementing this 
framework in such a complex domain will include certain 
challenges. One of the key challenges could be managing the 
user-centric approach because more frequent requirements 
will continuously evolve; therefore, better requirements 
management approaches are required. This is expected to 
delineate requirements conflict and specific risks associated 
with that. In addition, the subtle conceptualizations of some 
of the factors bring further complexity to the implementation 
of this framework. For instance, pedagogical approaches 
refer to different concepts for different stakeholders. 
Moreover, cross-layer interaction needs to be handled. This 
is needed to understand for example the relationship between 
motivation, in the core layer, and pedagogical approaches, in 
the next layer. A potential recommendation to manage this 
concern, is to have a detailed-enough instantiation process on 
the top of the above-introduced user-centric design 
methodology. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
M-Learning is one of the most emerging research areas 
since it simplifies the learning process with the help of 
mobile and communication technologies. However, learning 
is an aspect which is influenced by the culture and 
pedagogical approaches specific to a particular community 
or region. Literature evidences identified various user-centric 
concerns, such as privacy, security, adaptability, usability, 
learnability with respect to m-learning applications. 
Considering these concerns, this paper proposed a user-
centric design framework and m-learning development 
methodology in order to address the requirements of the end 
users effectively and efficiently. The proposed framework 
addressed the concerns identified via introducing: (i) user-
centric and socio-cultural aspects in the process of designing 
the system, and (ii) an m-learning tailored development 
methodology by integrating the user-centric design methods 
in to the agile user-centric development stages. The study 
can be further extended by using the proposed framework 
and methodology for developing m-learning applications, 
which remains as future work.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Towards Maturity CIC Ltd., "Mobile Learning at Work – A New 
Towards Maturity In-Focus", Towards Maturity Report, 2017. 
[2] S. Adkins, "The 2014-2019 Worldwide Mobile Learning Market", 
Ambient Insight Report, 2015. 
[3] Gartner, Inc. "Gartner Identifies the Top 10 Strategic Technology 
Trends for 2014", 2013. Available: 
https://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2603623  
[4] Google Inc., "How People Use Their Devices: What Marketers Need 
to 
Know", 
think 
with 
Google, 
2016.   
https://www.thinkwithgoogle.com/consumer-insights/ [Accessed: 07- 
Mar- 2018]. 
[5] Gartner, Inc. " Gartner Says Consumers in Mature Markets Will Use 
and Own Three to Four Devices By 2018", 2015. Available: 
https://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3176217 
[6] S. MacNaught, "Smartphone Usage Statistics 2014 - UK Survey of 
Smartphone Users | Tecmark", Tecmark.co.uk, 2014. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.tecmark.co.uk/smartphone-usage-data-uk-
2014/?utm_campaign=elearningindustry.com&utm_source=%2Fsurp
rising-mobile-learning-statistics-elearning-professionals-
know&utm_medium=link. [Accessed: 07- Mar- 2018]. 
[7] N. Wang, X. Chen, G. Song, Q. Lan, and H. R. Parsaei (2017). 
Design of a new mobile-optimized remote laboratory application 
architecture for M-learning. IEEE Transactions on Industrial 
Electronics, 64(3), 2382-2391. 
[8] E. Ko, D. Chiu, P. Lo, and K. Ho, "Comparative Study on m-
Learning Usage Among LIS Students from Hong Kong, Japan and 
Taiwan", The Journal of Academic Librarianship, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 
567-577, 2015. 
[9] J. Moore, S. Oussena, and P. Zhang. “A portable document search 
engine to support off-line mobile learning” At IADIS International 
Conference Mobile Learning 2009, Spain. 
[10] S. McQuiggan, L. Kosturko, and J. McQuiggan, J. Sabourin, “Mobile 
learning”, 1st ed. New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2015. 
[11] J. Keengwe, and M. Bhargava, "Mobile learning and integration of 
mobile technologies in education", Education and Information 
Technologies, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 737-746, 2013. 
[12] M. Ally, and J. Prieto-Blázquez, "What is the future of mobile 
learning in education?", RUSC. Revista de Universidad y Sociedad 
del Conocimiento, vol. 11, no. 1, p. 142, 2014. 
[13] M. Al-Emran, H. Elsherif, and K. Shaalan, "Investigating attitudes 
towards the use of mobile learning in higher education", Computers 
in Human Behavior, vol. 56, pp. 93-102, 2016.  
[14] H. Chung, S. Chen, and M. Kuo, "A Study of EFL College Students’ 
Acceptance of Mobile Learning", Procedia - Social and Behavioral 
Sciences, vol. 176, pp. 333-339, 2015. 
[15] A. Khan, H. Al-Shihi, Z. Al-khanjari, and M. Sarrab, "Mobile 
Learning (M-Learning) adoption in the Middle East: Lessons learned 
from the educationally advanced countries", Telematics and 
Informatics, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 909-920, 2015. 
[16] H. Abachi and G. Muhammad, "The impact of m-learning technology 
on students and educators", Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 30, 
pp. 491-496, 2014. 
[17] A. Garcia-Cabot, L. de-Marcos, and E. Garcia-Lopez, "An empirical 
study on m-learning adaptation: Learning performance and learning 
contexts", Computers & Education, vol. 82, pp. 450-459, 2015. 
[18] A. Yousafzai, V. Chang, A. Gani, and R. Noor, "Multimedia 
augmented m-learning: Issues, trends and open challenges", 
International Journal of Information Management, vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 
784-792, 2016. 
[19] M. Domingo, and A. Garganté, "Exploring the use of educational 
technology in primary education: Teachers' perception of mobile 
technology learning impacts and applications' use in the classroom", 
Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 56, pp. 21-28, 2016. 
[20] P. Bird, and M. Stubbs, "It’s not just the pedagogy: challenges in 
scaling mobile learning applications into institution-wide learning 
technologies ". 11th International Conference Mobile Learning 2015. 
ISBN: 978-989-8533-36-4 
[21] R. Lozano, M. Merrill, K. Sammalisto, K. Ceulemans, and F. Lozano, 
"Connecting 
Competences 
and 
Pedagogical 
Approaches 
for 
Sustainable Development in Higher Education: A Literature Review 
and Framework Proposal", Sustainability, vol. 9, no. 12, p. 1889, 
2017. 
[22] V. Dennen and S. Hao, "Intentionally mobile pedagogy: the M-COPE 
framework for mobile learning in higher education", Technology, 
Pedagogy and Education, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 397-419, 2014. 
[23] S. Hao, M. Cui, V. Dennen, Y. Türel, and L. Mei, "Analysis of 
mobile learning as an innovation in higher education: a comparative 
study of three countries", International Journal of Mobile Learning 
and Organisation, vol. 11, no. 4, p. 314, 2017. 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[24] M. Kearney, K. Burden, and T. Rai, "Investigating teachers' adoption 
of signature mobile pedagogies", Computers & Education, vol. 80, 
pp. 48-57, 2015. 
[25] L. Lindsay, "Transformation of teacher practice using mobile 
technology 
with one-to-one classes: M-learning pedagogical 
approaches", British Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 47, no. 
5, pp. 883-892, 2015. 
[26] A. Dirin and M. Nieminen, "Assessments of User Centered Design 
Framework for M-learning Application Development", Lecture Notes 
in Computer Science, pp. 62-74, 2015. 
[27] S. Wood, P. Romero. "User-centred design for a mobile learning 
application". Proceedings of the 3rd Mexican Workshop on Human 
Computer Interaction. Pages 77-84. November 08 - 10, 2010. 
[28] A. Dirin, M. Nieminen. "mLUX: Usability and User Experience 
Development Framework for M-Learning". International Journal of 
Interactive Mobile Technologies. Volume 9, Issue 3. 2015. 
[29] R. Hammad, M. Odeh, and Z. Khan, eLEM: A Novel e-Learner 
Experience Model. The International Arab Journal of Information 
Technology 14 (4A), 2017, pp. 586-597. 
[30] R. Krueger and M. Casey, Focus Groups: A practical Guide for 
Practical Research. SAGE, 2014. 
[31] K. Eason, "User-centred design: for users or by users?", Ergonomics, 
vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 1667-1673, 1995. 
[32] Serco, Inc., Performance Measurement Handbook: Serco Usability 
Services , 3rd edition, London: Serco Ltd., 1995, pp. 80-170. 
[33] N. Bevan, "ISO and Industry Standards for User Centred Design", 
Serco Ltd., 2000. 
[34] International Organization for Standardization, "ISO 9241-210:2010 - 
Ergonomics of human-system interaction -- Part 210: Human-centred 
design for interactive systems", ISO, 2010.  
[35] R. Hammad, M. Odeh, and Z. Khan, "Towards a generic requirements 
model for hybrid and cloud-based e-learning systems," The IEEE 5th 
International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and 
Science 
(CloudCom), 
2013, 
pp. 
106-111, 
Bristol, 
UK.
 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-619-4
eLmL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

