Intelligent Tutoring Systems for Generation Z’s Addiction 
 
Ioana R. Goldbach 
Center for Research and Studies in 
Management and Marketing 
Valahia University of Targoviste 
Targoviste, Dambovita, Romania 
e-mail: ioana.goldbach@icstm.ro 
Felix G. Hamza-Lup 
Computer Science 
College of Engineering and Computing 
Georgia Southern University 
Savannah, Georgia, USA 
e-mail: fhamzalup@georgiasouthern.edu 
 
 
Abstract— As generation Z’s big data is flooding the Internet 
through social nets, neural network based data processing is 
turning an important cornerstone, showing significant 
potential for fast extraction of data patterns. Online course 
delivery and associated tutoring are transforming into 
customizable, on-demand services driven by the learner. 
Besides automated grading, strong potential exists for the 
development and deployment of next generation intelligent 
tutoring software agents. Self-adaptive, online tutoring agents 
exhibiting “intelligent-like” behavior, being capable “to learn” 
from 
the 
learner, will 
become 
the 
next 
educational 
“superstars”. Over the past decade, computer-based tutoring 
agents were deployed in a variety of extended reality 
environments, from patient rehabilitation to psychological 
trauma healing. Most of these agents are driven by a set of 
conditional control statements and a large answers/questions 
pairs dataset. This article provides a brief introduction on 
Generation Z’s addiction to digital information, highlights 
important efforts for the development of intelligent dialogue 
systems, and explains the main components and important 
design decisions for Intelligent Tutoring System.  
Keywords- intelligent tutoring systems; machine learning; 
adaptive systems; artificial intelligence.   
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Driven by a large amount of data (i.e., training sets) 
available 
and 
the 
developments 
in 
neural-nets, 
a 
metamorphosis to intelligent-like behavior is catalyzed by 
the increase in the processing power of parallel systems. 
Generation Z (or Gen Z, commonly defined as people born 
between 1995 and mid-2010s) the “digital natives”, are 
becoming more influential in dictating changes in education 
in the years to come. Like generation Y (i.e., Millennials 
[1]), Gen Z accelerates the changes in higher education by 
employing mobile, multimedia, and online technologies. It is 
the generation of online connection that collaborates and 
wants to learn fast, adapts and wants active participation in 
the learning environment. Gen Z students have already 
entered the university level and they adopt social learning 
environments that directly involves them. They are the 
generation of demanders as they request services that are 
available anytime, anywhere. Digital tools are an addiction to 
many, as they participate on a daily basis in social 
networking, specifically in scattered cities around the globe 
where the city architecture is not facilitating social face-to-
face interaction. 
Research from the Center for Generational Kinetics [2] 
shows that 95% of the Z generation has smartphones, 55% of 
them use phones around 5 hours a day, and 26% of them are 
addicted to digital content, as they spend more than 10 hours 
a day online. Addiction-like level involvement with digital 
content shows that 31% of them feel uncomfortable if they 
are disconnected from the phone for more than 30 minutes. 
A recent study on people aged between 14 to 40 in the US 
[3] was targeted towards the behavior, preferences, and 
attitudes of young people. The study revealed fundamental 
differences and similarities between the Y and Z generations. 
About 39% of Gen Z wants to learn with a teacher, while 
47% of them spend more than 4 hours a day on video 
platforms. Compared to Gen Y, Gen Z tends to learn through 
self-guidance and prefers flexibility. Regardless of the 
differences between generations, 66% of Gen Z have a 
positive view of technology in education [3]. 
This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides 
an overview of an Intelligent Tutoring System (ITS) and the 
main actors involved in such systems. Section 3 highlights 
the main research efforts in the area, while the structure and 
the main components of an ITS are presented in Section 4. In 
the conclusion, future trends in ITSs evolution are 
highlighted and explained. 
II. 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN EDUCATION SYSTEMS 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) mainly resorts to machine 
learning algorithms to transform data in decisions and 
provide meaningful user-computer interaction. At the core 
of the machine learning methodology is a set of statistical 
and prediction based algorithms or constructs that allow 
timely big data processing and extraction of meaningful 
patterns.  Such patterns are used to predict (hopefully with 
high probability, e.g., 90%+) future events/values, hence 
allowing automated decisions (i.e., expert decision systems) 
to be taken by machines, providing the user with the 
impression that the computing device makes intelligent 
choices. 
Particularly interesting is the recent application of AI in 
intelligent tutoring for education and, as a consequence, the 
proliferation of ITS. The basic principle of operation and the 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

main actors involved in a possible AI-based ITS are 
depicted in Figure 1. Data about the learner may be 
collected from multiple venues (i.e., social networks, 
instructors, 
online 
course 
preferences, 
etc.) 
and 
recommendations are made based on the processing of 
collected information and other inputs (e.g., exam results, 
learner’s past and current questions, instructor’s feedback 
about the learner, peers feedback, etc.).  
 
 
Figure 1. Possible interaction among the actors in future ITS 
 
In the very near future, a data collection and processing 
module (illustrated in Figure 1) could potentially aggregate 
information from a variety of sources and could extract 
patterns specific to the learner, allowing the learner profile 
generation. Those patterns are further employed by the 
tutoring system to fine-tune the content of the conversation 
with the user in order to generate intelligent dialogue. A 
multilayered neural network, driven by a cost function, is 
constantly evaluating the learner’s feedback and providing 
informed guidance to the learner.  
III. 
BRIEF REVIEW ON INTELLIGENT TUTORING 
ITSs are not a new development, as early research 
efforts that focused on intelligent dialogue have been 
explored for several decades. Among the most notable 
efforts are the Hamburg Application-oriented Natural 
language System (HAM-ANS) project [4] at the University 
of Hamburg, the KLAUS project at the Scientific Research 
Institute (SRI) International [5] and the XCALIBUR project 
[6] at Carnegie-Mellon University. Central to these systems 
was always the requirement for interaction through 
sequential dialogue with a human operator and the capacity 
of the system to generate meaningful dialogue based on the 
collected data.  
The rapid proliferation of automated and online learning 
systems has spawned in the last decade a large number of 
ITSs with the main goal of enabling the student to 
successfully solve problems. Among them, AutoTutor [7] is 
an intelligent guidance system that stimulates dialogue and 
has the pedagogical strategies of a human tutor. It was 
designed to help students learn the basics of hardware, 
operating systems, and the Internet, and enhances the 
learning technology in the following areas: computer 
literacy, critical thinking, and physics. AutoTutor focuses on 
meditation and pedagogical strategies and was designed 
using human tutor strategies to identify motivational factors 
for students. AutoTutor was the basis for the development of 
other intelligent systems such as: AutoManager, AutoTutor-
Sensitive, AutoTutor-3D [8] with interactive 3D embedded 
simulation, 
DeepTutor, 
AutoTutor-Lite, 
GnuTutor, 
MetaTutor - metacognition self-learning, Human Use 
Regulatory Affairs Advisor (HURAA) Web Counselor on 
ethical treatment of experimental subjects, iDRIVE - 
Learning to Ask Deep Questions about Science, Center for 
the Study of Adult Literacy (CSAL) and Operation 
Acquiring Research, Investigative, and Evaluative Skills 
(ARIES) [9]. 
Another prominent example is SmartTutor [10] an 
intelligent system that addresses two basic elements in 
continuous 
education: 
personalization 
and 
intelligent 
guidance. It contains a database of over 3000 reading and 
math lessons. The effectiveness of the system has been 
evaluated and the results have been exceptional at the K8 
level. The system is based on the fact that learners’ answers 
can provide a lot of information about the current state of 
their conceptual understanding. The syntactic dimension is 
explored in Why2-Atlas [11], an intelligent system that 
analyzes students' explanations of physics principles through 
various mechanisms. Students introduce their essays into the 
system as a paragraph, and the tutor uses syntactic analysis 
to proofread the essays and find misconceptions, as well as 
incomplete explanations. If the tutor identifies certain 
mistakes in the essay, it generates a dialogue regarding the 
wrong or non-existent requirements and then asks the student 
to correct the essay. Several iterations and dialogues can take 
place before the process is completed.  
Along the same lines, ElectronixTutor [12] is a fully 
integrated system based on many intelligent learning systems 
(e.g., AutoTutor, Dragoon, LearnForm, ASSISTments, 
BEETLE-II). The system includes a student model that has 
knowledge of electronic circuits and guides other learners in 
the 
electronics 
field 
providing 
feedback. 
Like 
ElectronixTutor, e-Teacher [13] automatically builds student 
profiles while studying online courses and detecting the 
student's performance. The system suggests a customized 
course of action designed to support each learner. 
Introductory knowledge helps learners navigate basic 
concepts in different disciplines. ZOSMAT [14] has been 
developed as an intelligent introductory system in response 
to the student’s needs of individual learning. The role of the 
system is the tracking and the guidance of the learning 
process. It identifies and records student progress and 
changes the study program according to the learners’ effort. 
It can be used for individual learning purposes, but it also 
provides a feature that makes it different from other 
intelligent guidance systems: it can be used in class under the 
guidance of a human tutor. 
While some of these research efforts are still in the 
preliminary phases, there are several successful commercial 
applications, particularly targeted at teaching basic concepts 
and addressing large groups of learners, specifically at the K-
12 level.  
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

IV. 
INTELLIGENT TUTORING SYSTEMS STRUCTURE 
Intelligent tutoring systems consist of four important 
components [15]: (1) an Expert Model (EM), (2) a Student 
Model (SM), (3) a Tutoring Model (TM) and (4) the User 
Interface Model (UIM), as illustrated in Figure 2. The data 
flowing among these components is constantly fine-tuned 
based on the system and the target users group.  
 
  
 
Figure 2. ITS – Generic Structure and Data Flow 
 
The expert model (cognitive/domain model or expert 
knowledge model) is built on learning theories that consider 
all the steps required to solve a problem and contains the 
concepts, rules, and problem-solving tactics of the domain 
to be learned. The EM also contains the mal-rules and 
misconceptions that students occasionally exhibit. EM can 
fulfill several roles: a source of expert knowledge, a 
standard for evaluating the student’s performance or for 
detecting errors and fallacies. Another approach for 
developing the EM is the constraint-based modeling 
approach [16], presented as a set of constraints on correct 
solutions [17].  
The student model can be thought of as a cover on the 
EM. It is considered as the central component of an ITS, 
focusing on the student's cognitive and affective states and 
their evolution as the learning progresses. As the learner 
works step-by-step through their problem-solving process, 
the ITS employs a model tracing approach. If the SM 
deviates from the EM, the system triggers a warning and 
particular actions. In contrast, in constraint-based tutors, the 
SM is represented as an overlay on the constraint set [18] 
and they evaluate the student’s solution against the 
constraint set, to identify satisfied or violated constraints. 
Violated constraints trigger the ITS feedback on those 
constraints [19], providing the learner with immediate 
feedback. The SM builds a profile of strengths and 
weaknesses for each learner relative to the EM. 
Next, the tutor model (or pedagogical model or 
instructional model) accepts information from the EM and 
the SM and makes choices about tutoring strategies and 
actions. The TM contains several hundred production rules 
that exist in one of two states: learned or unlearned. Every 
time a student successfully applies a rule to a problem, the 
system updates a probability estimate that the student has 
learned the rule. The system continues to drill students on 
exercises that require the effective application of a rule until 
the probability that the rule has been learned reaches the 
95% threshold [20]. 
Last but not least, the UIM interprets the learner’s 
contributions through various input media (speech, typing, 
clicking) and generates output in different media (text, 
diagrams, animations, agents). It integrates the following 
information: knowledge about patterns of interpretation (to 
comprehend the speaker) and action (to generate meaningful 
expressions) within dialogues, domain knowledge needed 
for 
content 
communication, 
and 
knowledge 
for 
communicative intent [21]. The communicative intent is the 
use of gestures, facial expressions, articulations, and/or 
written expressions to deliver a message and, sometimes, 
the ITS presents an avatar embodiment to facilitate the user 
interaction.  
ITS are expensive systems to develop both from the 
complexity and development time perspectives. Attempts to 
develop authoring tools [22] have looked into various ways 
to develop agent-based tutors and dialogue-based tutors. 
Significant research has ensued an array of theoretical 
frameworks that remain enthusiastically investigated to this 
day. Reviews of the expert model design in [23]-[25] point 
to the need to extract domain based features. A review of 
student modeling [26] reveals the importance of specific 
learner’s characteristics and also points out the requirement 
for a reward system. A detailed review of tutoring strategies 
is presented in [27]. 
Among the most important categorization dimensions 
for an ITS is the fundamental learning component. Three 
directions are possible:  
 
Simulation-based learning environments. Here, the 
general paradigm of a simulated world is captured in 
the term reactive environment [28] to describe an ITS 
in which the system responds to learners’ actions in a 
variety 
of 
ways 
catalyzing 
learners’ 
concepts 
understanding. 
 
Discourse-based 
learning 
environments. 
Natural 
language interactions have enabled more conversational 
forms in such environments. Discourse as a tutorial 
approach, is intended to operate in an ITS much like it 
does when practiced by a skilled human tutor. 
 
Situation-based learning. Instructional systems may be 
more effective when coupled with situations in which 
the users naturally encounter, learn, and apply the skills 
and knowledge being taught. 
A prominent research effort, the Generalized Intelligent 
Framework for Tutoring (GIFT) [29] is oriented around 
providing three services: authoring of components, 
management of instructional processes, and an assessment 
methodology [30].  
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

V. 
CONCLUSION   
The paper presents several statistical facts about 
Generation Z as it pertains to the use of technology for 
learning tasks, culminating with the need for customized 
intelligent tutoring systems. A brief review of the existing 
ITSs, as well as the fundamental structure of the ITS, is 
presented with a brief description of each structural 
component. 
The relatively high cost of building an ITS makes it a 
viable option only for situations such as simultaneous 
tutoring of large groups, or in cases when tutoring 
redundancy is necessary and can generate significant 
savings (i.e., reducing the need for human instructors or 
freeing human instructors time and resources). With 
advances in processing speed and machine learning 
algorithms, we foresee an increase in the online deployment 
of ITSs and, possibly, a wider adoption of such systems 
among generation Z’s learners. 
REFERENCES 
[1] https://www.inc.com/ryan-jenkins/generation-z-vs-millennials-the-8-
differences-you-.html/ [retrieved: 2020-01-23].   
[2] https://genhq.com/top-10-ways-gen-z-is-shaping-the-future/ 
[retrieved:2020-01-22].   
[3] https://www.pearsoned.com/generation-z-millennials-expect-
technology-education/ [retrieved: 2020-01-31].   
[4] J. A. Mason and  J. L. Edwards, “Surveying projects on intelligent 
dialogue,” International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, vol. 28 (2-
3), Feb-Mar, 1988, pp. 259-307, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0020-
7373(88)80038-5/ [retrieved: 2020-01-25].   
[5] D. Appelt et al., “Research on Natural-Language at SRI,” TechNote 
257, 1981, pp. 5-7. 
[6] J. G. Carbonell, W. M. Boggs, M. L. Mauldin and P. G. Anick, “The 
XCALIBUR project: a natural language interface to expert systems,” 
Proceeding IJCAI'83 Proceedings of the Eighth International Joint 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 2, 1983, pp. 653-656. 
[7] A. C. Graesser, “Conversations with AutoTutor Help Students 
Learn,” International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education,” 
vol. 26, 2016,  pp. 124-132. 
[8] A. C. Graesser, “Learning, thinking, and emoting with discourse 
technologie,” American Psychologist, 66, 2011, pp. 743-757. 
[9] B. D. Nye, A. C. Graesser and X. Hu, “AutoTutor and Family: A 
Review of 17 Years of Natural Language Tutoring,” International 
Artificial Intelligence in Education Society, 24, 2014, pp. 427-469. 
[10] B. Cheung, L. Hui, J. Zhang and J. S. M. Yiu, “SmartTutor: An 
intelligent tutoring system in web-based adult education,” Journal of 
Systems and Software, vol. 68, 2003, pp. 11-25. URL: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0164-1212(02)00133-4, [retvd: 2020-01-30].   
[11] K. VanLehn et al., “The Architecture of Why2-Atlas: A Coach for 
Qualitative Physics Essay Writing,” In: Cerri S.A., Gouardères G., 
Paraguaçu F. (eds) Intelligent Tutoring Systems. ITS 2002, Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2363, 2002, Springer, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, 
URL: 
https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-47987-2_20, 
[retrieved: 2020-01-30].   
[12] A. C. Graesser et al., “ElectronixTutor: an intelligent tutoring system 
with multiple learning resources for electronics,” International 
Journal 
of 
STEM 
Education, 
2018, 
vol. 
5, 
URL: 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40594-018-0110-y/ [retrieved: 2020-01-25].   
[13] S. Schiaffino, P. Garcia and A. Amandi, “eTeacher: Providing 
personalized assistance to e-learning students,” 2008,  Computers & 
Education, vol. 51, pp. 1744-1754. 
[14] A. Keleşa, R. Ocakb, A. Keleşc and A. Gülcü, “ZOSMAT: Web-
based intelligent tutoring system for teaching-learning process,” 
Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 36, Issue 2, Part 1, vol. 1229-
1239, URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2007.11.064/ [retrieved: 
2019-09-27].   
[15] R. Nkambou, R. Mizoguchi and J. Bourdeau, “Advances in intelligent 
tutoring 
systems,” 
2010, 
Heidelberg: 
Springer, 
ISBN 
9783642143632, 
https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007%2F978-3-
642-14363-2/ [retrieved: 2020-01-30].   
[16] S. 
Ohlsson, 
“Constraint-based 
Student 
Modeling. 
Artificial 
Intelligence in Education,” 1992, vol. 3(4), pp. 429-447.  
[17] A. Mitrovic and S. Ohlsson, “Constraint-Based Knowledge 
Representation for Individualized Instruction,” Computer Science and 
Information Systems, vol. 3(1), 2006, pp. 1-22. 
[18] A. Mitrovic, “Fifteen years of Constraint-Based Tutors: What we 
have achieved and where we are going,” User Modeling and User-
Adapted 
Interaction, 
2012, 
vol. 
22(1-2), 
pp. 
39-72, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11257-011-9105-9/ [retrieved: 2020-01-28].   
[19] A. Mitrovic, B. Martin, P. Suraweera, “Intelligent tutors for all: 
Constraint-based modeling methodology, systems and authoring,” 
IEEE Intelligent Systems, 2007, vol. 22(4), pp. 38-45. 
[20] A. T. Corbett and J. R. Anderson, “Student modeling and mastery 
learning in a computer-based programming tutor,” Proceedings of the 
Second International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems, 
1992. 
[21] I. Padayachee, “Intelligent Tutoring Systems: Architecture and 
Characteristics,” In: SACLA 2002 Proceedings of 32nd Annual 
Conference 
of 
the 
Southern 
African 
Computer 
Lecturers’ 
Association, 2002. 
[22] R. A. Sottilare, A. C. Graesser,  X. Hu, K. Brawner. “Design 
Recommendations for Intelligent Tutoring Systems,” vol. 3 
Authoring Tools and Expert Modeling Techniques, Publisher: US 
Army Research Laboratory, Editor: Sottilare, Graesser, Hu, and 
Brawner, 2015, ISBN: 978-0-9893923-7-2. 
[23] N. J. Ahuja and R. Sille, “A Critical Review of Development of 
Intelligent Tutoring Systems: Retrospect, Present and Prospect,” 
International Journal of Computer Science Issues, vol. 10, no 2, July 
2013, pp. 39-48. 
[24] G. Paviotti, P. G. Rossi and D. Zarka, “Intelligent Tutoring Systems: 
An Overview,” Lecce: Pensa Multimedia, Italy, Google Scholar, 
2012. 
[25] S. Sani and T. N. M. Aris, “Computational Intelligence Approaches 
for Student/Tutor Modelling: A Revie,” In Proceedings of the 2014 
Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems, Modelling and 
Simulation, Langkawi, Malaysia: IEE, 2014. 
[26] P. I. Pavlik Jr., K. W.  Brawner, A. Olney  and A. Mitrovic, “A 
Review of Learner Models Used in Intelligent Tutoring Systems,” In 
R. A. Sottilare, A. Graesser, X. Hu, & H. K. Holden (Eds.), Design 
Recommendations for Adaptive Intelligent Tutoring Systems Learner 
Modeling, Army Research Labs/ U. of Memphis, 2013, pp. 39-68. 
[27]  R. A. Sottilare, J. A. DeFalco and J. Connor, “A Guide to 
Instructional Techniques, Strategies and Tactics to Manage Learner 
Affect, Engagement and Grit,” In R. Sottilare, A. Graesser ,X. Hu and 
B. Goldberg (Eds.), Design Recommendations for Intelligent 
Tutoring Systems: Instructional Management, US Army Research 
Laboratory, vol. 2, 2014. 
[28] V. J. Shute  and J. Psotka, “Intelligent tutoring systems: Past, present, 
and future,” In D. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of research for 
educational communications and technology, New York, NY: 
Macmillan, 1996,  pp. 570-600. 
[29] https://gifttutoring.org/projects/gift/wiki/Overview. [retrieved: 2020-
01-25]. 
[30] R. A. Sottilare, B. S.  Goldberg, K. W.  Brawner and H. K.  Holden, 
“A modular framework to support the authoring and assessment of 
adaptive computer-based tutoring systems (CBTS).” Interservice 
/Industry Training, Simulation, and Edu. Conf., 2012,  pp. 1-13. 
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-764-1
eLmL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

