Micro Note-Taking on Smartphone: The Learner Experience
Maram S. Al-Zaidi, Mike Joy, Jane Sinclair
Department of Computer Science
University of Warwick
Coventry, UK
{M.S.Al-Zaidi, M.S.Joy, J.E.Sinclair}@warwick.ac.uk
Abstract—Note-taking is considered as one of the main
activities for students during lectures in the classroom. Indeed,
many
educators
have
suggested
that
note-taking
can
significantly
improve
students’
educational
performance.
Therefore, there are many systems available to capture what
the teacher presents or explains during the lectures. However,
less attention has been paid to the great potential of integrating
Web 2.0 technologies with the learning process at universities
for note-taking purposes so as to make it more effective. As
such, the purpose of this paper is to extend understanding of
learners’ experiences specifically when short text – the 140
characters, often used in social networks – was used for note-
taking. The paper presents findings on learners’ experiences of
using such a “micro” note-taking approach involving just 140
characters and suggests a feature list for a future note-taking
system. The qualitative approach focuses on learners from one
university in the UK. The learners were at postgraduate level,
and data were collected through focus groups with the
learners. Findings indicate that the use of a short text feature
leads to a positive learning experience.
Keywords— micro note-taking; smartphone; social media;
UK.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, there has been a considerable increase in
the number of students carrying one or more mobile devices
into lectures. These include laptops, smartphones and tablet
devices. Sharples [1] highlighted the growth in using mobile
phones amongst students as well as across all educational
areas. New generations of smartphones support fast Internet
connections through 3G and 4G wireless technologies in
addition to faster Wi-Fi connections. Moreover, with new
iPhone
and
Android
phones
providing
millions
of
applications, there has been a dramatic increase in the
interest level in using these devices for educational purposes
[2]. Indeed, in the last decade, and due to these advances,
researchers have shown an increased interest in using new
technologies and computing devices for taking notes.
When it comes to capturing notes using traditional tools,
many different forms of learners’ behaviour can be observed.
The majority of students intend to capture what the teacher
presents or explains during the lecture, and these notes could
either include specific details, or may simply record the most
important points [3]. In line with this, some students attempt
to capture everything presented by the teacher, while others
attempt to select relevant points and a few indulge in a
certain amount of doodling whilst they listen [4].
Note-taking is one of the common techniques used by
learners during lectures [5], and, traditionally, this course of
action is usually conducted either manually (i.e., pen and
paper) or electronically, using electronic devices such as
tablet PCs and PDAs. However, given the massive uptake in
the use of information and communication technologies,
there is great potential for integrating Web 2.0 technologies
with the learning process at universities for the purposes of
note-taking so as to make it more effective.
To give just a few examples of the value and benefits that
can be delivered through the use of SMS features, and more
specifically Twitter, in the practice of note-taking, it was
found that one of the advantages of using Twitter in a
classroom setting is that it offers students an additional
channel for communication [6]. Scornavacca et al. [7] also
found that, for the purposes of handling questions in a large
classroom, using text messages is more practical and
efficient than the traditional method of raising hands.
However, a survey of faculty members, guests, and students
on a pharmacy management course that was conducted by
Fox and Varadarajan [8] showed that, although 80% of the
sample found that Twitter facilitates class participation, 71%
and 69% of the sample, however, indicated that Twitter was
distracting, and prevented note taking, respectively. Hence,
using Twitter during lectures to get involved in classroom
activities may be annoying for instructors leading classes [9].
In line with this, Cherney [10] argued that students who use
Twitter will lose the necessary space for thinking in depth
compared to when they are taught by traditional teaching
methods in classrooms. This research, therefore, contributes
to the use of Web 2.0 technologies, and, more specifically,
the features of Twitter, in the educational process so as to
make it more effective than has been the case hitherto.
This paper reports the evaluation of a new approach
which is mainly based on mobile and Web 2.0 technologies,
and which relies primarily on the employment of micro note-
taking,
or
so-called
micro-blogging,
a
form
of
communication that allows people to generate content by
posting short messages limited to 140 characters [11] [12].
To gain insight into the concerns of this paper, discussions
with the learners who took part in the experiment were
analyzed, in particular regarding their experience while using
the micro note-taking approach.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

The research presented in this paper aims at extending
our
understanding
of
what
university-level
learners’
experiences are in terms of note-taking, when using just 140
characters on (Android) smartphones. Moreover, the nature
of and reasons for the preferences of using this new format
of notes in an educational environment was examined, as
was how this prototype could be improved to support
learners’ note-taking practice in a classroom environment. In
short, this paper describes experiences and lessons learned
from a class activity that incorporated the micro note-taking
approach which is mainly based on mobile and Web 2.0
technologies. It identifies the main positive and negative
features of the proposed micro note-taking application and
provides ideas and general design guidelines applicable to
this approach.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: the
second section describes the methodology used, the third
section describes the experiment itself. In the fourth section
IV findings and interpretations are covered. In the fifth and
last section the conclusion closes the article.
II.
METHODOLOGY
The goal in this section was to present learners’ in-depth
perspectives of their experiences with using a micro note-
taking application. Specifically, this study aims to explore
students’ opinions about the main positive features and
limitations of the proposed micro note-taking application,
and of how the application could be improved to support
their note-taking practices. Therefore, the decision was
made to use a focus group due to the fact that it is a feasible
way to represent the participants’ feelings, beliefs and
experiences [14]. The focus group is part of an evidence-
based qualitative approach, which emerged as a distinctive
approach, and which also involves in-depth interviewing,
observation and projective methods among others [15]. This
paper reports in depth the qualitative findings generated
from two focus groups consisting of participants in an
experiment aimed at enhancing the understanding of the
user experience using the micro note-taking application. The
two focus groups consisted of 14 users who participated in
45-minute
discussions.
The focus
groups
were
audio
recorded but only after all participants approved the
recording. Data were then transcribed and subsequently
analyzed using qualitative data analysis techniques as
described by Guest et al. [16]. The main objective of the
analysis was to transform data into findings but, more
importantly, to make sense out of it. During the analysis, as
a list of ideas emerged, those ideas were grouped based
around significant headings to form the concepts. Next,
related concepts were aggregated in categories to form the
themes that constitute the results. The emerging themes
were then examined based on their intensity, depth, and
specificity with the research questions, with additional
emphasis given to comments that were frequently repeated
or refuted by the interviewees. NVIVO 11.0 software was
used to analyse the qualitative focus group data. NVIVO is a
computer
assisted
qualitative
data
analysis
package
(CAQDAP), settled by QSR International [21]. This software
offers a set of functions that support the coding and recovery
of text. Another remarkable privilege is that it assists
researches to write down memos during the analysis process
[22]. In an attempt to conquer reliable and informative data
out of the interviews, each single focus group has skillfully
created a transcript that was saved in a distinct word
processor document (i.e. two documents). This has enabled
sustaining fertility of the interviews data. Afterwards, the
two documents were imported in NVIVO for reading,
analysis and coding. The main objective of the analysis was
to transform data into findings, but more importantly was to
make a sense out of it. During the analysis, recurring ideas,
patterns of beliefs, and salient themes were extracted with
relevant quotations that demonstrated support for these
themes. The emerging themes were then examined based on
their intensity, depth, and specificity with the phenomenon of
interest, with additional emphasis given to comments that
were frequently repeated or refuted by the interviewees [23].
The results are then presented in a narrative form granting
detailed insights into the main issues related to micro note-
taking practice.
Since this micro note-taking is still at the evaluation
stage, some background information was required, such as
language, mobile experience and Twitter experience, to see
whether or not these features could influence the generated
results. The participants had different levels of experience in
using
mobile
applications
as
follows:
25%
had
no
experience, 63% had experience of less than 5 years and
13% had experience of more than 5 years. Furthermore, 38%
of the total participants were not very familiar with Twitter
in
particular.
The
participants
were
from
different
backgrounds and English was not the first language of most
of them.
III.
EXPERIMENT
The main method of data collection for learners’
perspectives was focus group interviews. The experiment
was conducted at the University of Warwick with the help of
14 learners’ studying courses entitled “Cyber security” and
“Innovation”. The learners’ ages ranged between 20 years
and 25 years. The only commonality among the participants
was that they were part of a community of interest who were
following postgraduate courses in the related fields just
mentioned. They were expected to have enough experience
and
exposure
to
new
IT-based
note-taking
tools
to
interactively take part and subsequently convey pertinent
responses during the discussion. The learners volunteered to
take part in the experiment, which was conducted within 45
minutes for each session. The participants in the focus group
were divided into two groups, and were of mixed gender
comprising 6 males and 8 females. The two sessions of the
discussion were moderated by the main researcher.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

During the experiment, an average of 14 participants
were randomly assigned to one of the note-taking approaches
defined as: traditional pen-paper, micro note-taking and
electronic Microsoft word where requested to use the
different approaches to take notes while viewing the video.
The participants were exposed to the different approaches
over the experiment time. The note-taking experiment was
based on vide played like a lecture.
The use of these
approaches emphases on the effect of the proposed micro
note-taking.
The focus group participants were approached after using
a micro note-taking application in the experiment. An open
ended approach, which was related to the use of the micro
note-taking approach, was conducted. The discussion was
kept
focused
around
the
proposed
micro
note-taking
application. The research aimed to answer the following
questions:
a)
What are the positive features of the mobile
micro note-taking approach?
b)
What are the negative features of the mobile
micro note-taking approach?
c)
Would you prefer using 140 characters for
writing your notes, and why?
d)
What are the difficulties you faced when using
the mobile micro note-taking application in
lectures?
e)
Do you think that other learners would find the
application appealing, and why?
f)
What other features would you recommend to
add to the mobile micro note-taking application?
IV. FINDINGS AND INTERPRETATIONS
As mentioned earlier, data were gathered from the focus
group interviews and analyzed using a thematic approach
[16]. Each theme addresses an issue related to the use of the
proposed micro note-taking application and reflects the
experience of learners regarding their use of the application.
Discussion was centered on these areas in order to ensure
coverage of only key areas that were closely related or
clearly relevant to the study.
A. Perceptions of positive features of the mobile micro
note-taking application
Initially, participants were asked about the positive
features they found using the prototype of the mobile micro
note-taking application that is described in [11]. The results
were consistent with those reported in the current state of the
art as in [17], where learners reported as positive features the
ease of use and that it is a “handy tool”. For example,
participant 1 described the proposed micro note-taking
application
by
saying
that
“it’s
simple,
no
previous
experience required, affordable, easily accessible, all have a
mobile in class”. Participant 4 also agreed with this by
stating that “there is no previous experience required”.
Participant 7 mentioned “it’s an easy tool for note-taking”.
Another positive point that emerged from the analysis is that
the proposed tool is useful and handy, and participant 3
confirmed this point by stating “you don’t need a paper and
pen also there is no need to carry the heavy laptop to start
typing, really handy”. Participant 13 affirmed what his
colleagues said “it’s simple to your eye, anyone can use it
even people who don’t have experience”.
Another positive feature is the applicability of using the
micro note-taking application for quick revision. This
capability has been explicitly expressed in the words of
Participant 10, who stated: “self-revision, jotting down
important notes and bringing them before the examination,
quick review, revision of any last minute study or some test”.
Participant 2 affirmed what his colleagues said: “I think it’s
good for revision for a quick review of any last minute study
or some test, something like that is good”.
Most people use a mobile device such as a smartphone to
support their personal and professional functions [17].
Technology is becoming a ubiquitous part of the academic
environment generally and the process of note-taking in
particular [18]. Mobile devices can be valuable in academic
areas for higher education [17], and the results of a study by
Ward and Tatsukawa [19] suggest that taking notes using
such a system is feasible. Another study by Motiwalla [20]
highlighted the fact that learners liked the ease-of-use and
convenience of using mobile applications in learning.
Consistently, in this paper, participants also revealed that the
main positive feature of the micro note-taking application is
that the application is affordable, convenient and accessible.
Participant 9 said that: “it’s very affordable and is easily
accessible because we all have mobiles, but nowadays
mobiles are present everywhere. So like it’s affordable; it’s
the best thing that I’ve had”. Participant 3 confirmed this
point by saying “mobile micro note-taking is affordable”. As
for accessibility, participant 12 stated: “… read the thing and
you can do it anywhere even on the bus or when travelling”.
Participant 6 also concurred: “ Because it’s mobile, it can be
easy to carry wherever you go”, as did participant 14:
“Because it’s mobile, it can be easy to carry wherever you
go. So I think it’s appealing to the young generation because
they only use or bring their mobiles everywhere”. These
positive features of the micro note-taking application also
have been explicitly expressed as Participant 1 stated: “I
think people feel comfortable using phones to take notes
these days, and they are easy to carry around rather than the
laptop or pen and paper and it’s faster to take notes on. So
it’s easier to capture what you exactly want. I think it could
be useful to have something like this. Definitely”.
B. Perceptions of negative features of the mobile micro
note-taking application
When the participants were asked about what the
limitations of the micro note-taking application are, they
reported
that, although the application includes many
positive features, it does have a number of limitations. These
include the small interface size and lack of a usable keypad
on some actual smart phones, and also difficulties such as
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

slow typing that can be connected to usability issues
(although they had stated earlier that the application is easy
to use). Moreover, they suggested that this tool may lead to
students being distracted during a lecture and that there are
usability issues due to lack of experience.. For example,
Participant 7 stated: “on the device itself, the keyboard is
quite small to type actually”. Participant 11 also gave his
opinion “I think because we’re not used to typing quickly,
I’m speaking for myself, but otherwise it’s okay especially I
think with the new generation they are quicker in typing”.
Similarly,
Participant
8
said
that:
“because
when
I
concentrate on listening, and I just continue typing, I did not
realize that actually the limit is already 140. So, when I look
back, actually there’s some missing words or sentences
already”. Participant 6 found it might be a source of
distraction during lectures and expressed these reservations
by stating: “make sure that they take it seriously and they are
just not playing around with it”. Participant 13 concurred
with this by saying: “I found I was constantly having to look
at what I’m doing so I lost a bit of concentration. That’s
because it was more distracting”. Only one student,
Participant 8, mentioned that the lack of experience about
how to use a micro note-taking application could lead to
limited use of such application, she mentioned that: “I think
the difficulties I faced just because it’s the first time to use it.
So, I face a lot of problems and most of my notes wouldn’t
save because I’ve just done a mistake, so I didn’t save or I
just put back and then it’s not saved. So I think just because
we’re not familiar with most of the difficulties”. To overcome
this limitation, Participant 6 suggested: “I think we need to
do some kind of an introduction to the system before get to
take notes”. Based on these results, we can conclude that
unfamiliarity with using the micro note-taking application
and Twitter is what leads to such negative outcomes.
C. Perceptions of using 140 characters for writing
students’ notes
Based on the analysis, two perspectives have emerged
when the participants were asked about their preference for
using 140 characters for writing their notes. The majority of
participants explained that the limited notes of only 140
characters (i.e., similar to Twitter posts) could improve the
ability to take short notes that can be easily managed and
recalled later. For example, Participant 1 stated that: “using
just 140 characters helps us to think of what we want to
write”. Participant 14 was also totally in agreement: “I was
not distracted as there was no option but to take only
important points with limited words”. However, a few
participants found that the restricted notes of only 140
characters might affect notes in terms of continuity. This
concern has been explicitly expressed by Participant 10:
“For me it’s the continuity of our notes because it’s only 140
characters, so if we write something, you know, the sentence
would be hanging”. Therefore, participant 5 suggested: “…
during a lecture I prefer more than 140 characters because
during the lecture we just take any notes the lecturer speaks,
so we don’t have time to think about what is important and
what is not – just take any notes”.
According to the findings of this study, it can be said that
a 140 character note was a generally useful format for note-
taking practice by learners, providing a positive note-taking
experience but with some important reservations.
D. Suggestions to improve the mobile micro note-taking
application
The participants were asked to share their experience
about
the
micro
note-taking
application
and
suggest
additional features so that it can be improved. Based on the
analysis, Table 1 shows a list of the valuable features and
functionalities that have been suggested by participants. All
participants’ suggestions were taken into consideration in
the updated version of the micro note-taking application.
TABLE I.
SUGGESTED FEATURES AND FUNCTIONALITIES
Feature
Suggested by
Use visual
presentation that
represents certain
words. So each
picture has
correlated notes
Participant 5: “Just make it a bit
more appealing because it’s very
abstract from a point a view and
you can use this drag-and-drop
thing, like you can give them
pictures and this can open up
instead of just making it as
simple and abstract as ….give
them more options, more
features and make them on icon
thing so they just touch it and a
note opens up or, for example, an
annotation opens up, or a shape
opens up.”
Provide a feature
to organize notes
(e.g. folders or
according to
subjects)
Participant 3: “I’m not sure if the
pictures are already there or not
but may be if it would be helpful
if you could organize a note in
folders or according to subjects
because it seems if you have like
different subjects, you could
organize all the notes in one
folders so it will be easy to
access – I think this is one
thing.”
Annotate the
content itself by
providing
different shapes
based on the type
of content. For
example, for
learner’s notes, it
is a rectangle, for
lecture notes, it is
a circle…
Participant 2: “Basically we’re
talking about annotating the
content itself, because sometimes
you need to post somewhere and
put a note there. So I think
shapes make more sense.
Beforehand you can divide the
content into shapes and based on
shapes we can take notes and
annotate that directly on the
shape or the subject or the idea
within the class, just to making
random notes and then putting
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Feature
Suggested by
them altogether and you might
not remember what it was
related to. So it more like
correlating what notes have been
taken with the actual content.
That would help a lot”
Provide options to
have short notes
and long notes
Participant 1: “May be there
should be an option to have short
notes and long notes.”
Integrate Web 2.0
features (e.g.
sharing, hashtags)
Participants 10 and 12: “Maybe
for sharing. Let’s say we have
three of us here…then we can
share. So maybe it might be the
notes that we take.”
“I think may be also having the
feature of hashtag. So having
hashtag would help you to
organize notes so whenever you
use this hashtags to retrieve all
the notes which have this
hashtag so that would maybe
useful.”
Table
1
highlighted
the
features
that
should
be
considered to improve the note-taking system. These features
are mainly related to the interface and functionalities.
V. CONCLUSION
The main aim of conducting the focus group was to
extend the understanding of the learner’s experience of using
the proposed micro note-taking application, as an approach
for note-taking practice in lectures. The findings of this study
reflected
the
perspectives
of
students
regarding
their
experiences
of
using
such
a
tool.
Positive
features,
limitations and suggestions for future improvement were
identified. Based on the analysis, positive features of the
micro note-taking application include: ease of use, the
applicability of using the application for quick revision,
improved access everywhere, any time (i.e., ubiquity) and
affordability. However, as with all applications, the micro
note-taking application is not free from limitations, which
include:
usability
issues,
learners’
distraction
during
lectures, and lack of experience regarding how to use the
application. The limitations of the current application
provide
opportunities
for
further
improvements,
and
students suggested valuable functionalities that could be
added to
improve the proposed
tool. These include:
integrating Web 2.0 features such as sharing and hashtags,
providing options to have short notes and long notes,
providing a feature to organize notes into folders, and
visually
presenting
notes
in
symbols.
The
proposed
approach
discussed
qualitatively
through
the
paper
suggested an innovative approach for note-taking. The
findings of this research add value to the current state of the
art concerned with connecting mobile learning with the
social feature of limiting the note taking to 140 characters
using Twitter like states. This finding would have an impact
on the academic areas to
consider applying
modern
technologies for the current learners’ age and facilitating
their learning. However, as with all studies, this study is not
free of limitations. The major limitation is derived from the
sample size and the geographical location of the sample
which is limited to only 14 participants located in the UK.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Sharples, “Big issues in mobile learning”, Workshop by
the Kaleidscope Network of Excellence Mobile Learning
Initiative, 2006, pp.1-35.
[2]
R. Godwin-Jones, “Emerging technologies mobile for apps
language learning and technlogy”, in Language Learning &
Technology, vol. 15, 2011, pp. 2-11.
[3]
J. Hartley and S. Marshall, “On notes and notetaking”, Higher
Education Quarterly, vol. 28, 1974, pp. 225-235, doi:
10.1111/j.1468-2273.1974.
[4]
J. C. Moore, “Cueing for selective notetaking”, Journal of
Experimental
Education,
vol.
34,
1968,
pp.
69-72,
doi:10.1080/00220973.1968.11011076
[5]
J. Hartley and I.K. Davies, “ Note-taking: a critical review”,
Programmed Learning and Educational Technology, vol. 15,
1978, pp. 207-224, doi:10.1080/0033039780150305
[6]
A. Tyma, “Connecting with what is out there!: using Twitter
in the large lecture”, Communication Teacher, vol. 52, 2011,
pp. 175-181, doi: 10.1080/17404622.2011.579911
[7]
E. Scornavacca, S. Huff and S. Marshall, “Mobile phones in
the
classroom:
if
you
can’t
beat
them,
join
them,”
Communication of the ACM, vol. 52, 2009, pp. 142-146,
doi:10.1145/1498765.1498803.
[8]
Fox, B. and Varadarajan, R., “Use of Twitter to encourage
interaction in a multi-campus pharmacy management course,”
American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education, vol. 75, 2011,
pp. 1-8.
[9]
J.L. Hartman and J. McCambridge, “Optimizing millennials’
communication styles,” Business Communication Quarterly,
vol. 74, 2011, pp. 22-44, 1080-5699
[10] I.D. Cherney, “The effects of active learning on studets’
memories for course content,” Active Learning in Higher
Education,vol.9,2008,pp.152-171,doi:
10.1177/1469787408090841
[11] M.S. Al Zaidi, M.S. Joy and J.E. Sinclair, “Micro notes
application for education: a proposed mobile micro note-
taking architecture, in 13th European conference on e-learning
(ECEL 2014), 2014, pp. 618-623.
[12] A.M. Kaplan and M. Haenlain, “Users of the world, unite!
The challenges and opportunities of social media”, Business
Horizons,
vol.
53,
2009,
pp.
59-68,
doi:10-
1016/j.bushor.2009.09.003.
[13] M.S. Al-Zaidi, M.S. Joy and J.E. Sinclair, “Exploring the use
of micro note-taking with social interaction features for
Education,” in International conference on Education and
New Learning Technologies (EDULEARN 13),2013, pp.
6098-6106.
[14] A. Gibbs, “Focus groups,”, Social Research Update, 1997,
pp.1-8,[retrieved:Jan,2016],
http://www.soc.surrey.ac.uk/sru/SRU19.html
[15] D.W. Stewart and P.N. Shamdasani, “Focus groups: theory
and practice”, 3rd ed., SAGE publication, 2015.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[16] G. Guest, K.M. MacQueen and E.E. Namey, “Applied
thematic analysis”, SAGE publications, 2011.
[17] A. Schepman, F. Rodway, C. Beattie and J. Lambert, “An
observation study of undergraduate students’ adoption of
(mobile)
note-taking
software”,
Computers
in
Human
Behavior,
vol.
28,
March
2012,
pp.
308-317,
doi:
10.1016/j.chb.2011.09.014.
[18] Y. Remier, E. Brimhall, C. Cao and K. O’Reilly, “Empirical
user studies inform the design of an e-notetaking and
information
assimilation
system
for
students
in
higher
education”, Computers and Education, vol. 52, May 2008, pp.
893-913. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2008.12.013.
[19] N. Ward and H. Tatsukawa, “ Software for taking notes in
class”, IEEE Frontiers in Education, vol. 3, pp. 2-8, 2003 [33rd
Annual conf.] doi: 10.1109/FIE.2003.1265956.
[20] F. Motiwalla, “Mobile learning: a framework and evaluation,”
Computers and Education, vol. 49, Nov. 2007, pp. 581-
596,doi: 10.1016/j.compedu.2005. 10.011.
[21] P. Bazeley, P. and L. Richards, “ The Nvivo Qualitative
Project Book”, London: Sage Publications, 2000, pp.1-195.
[22] G. Gibbs,“ Qualitative Data Analysis: Explorations with
Nvivo”, London: Open University Press, 2002,pp.83-218.
[23] C. Marshall and G. Rossman, “Designing Qualitative
Research”,5thEds. London: Sage Publications, 2010, pp.205-
227.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-471-8
eLmL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

