An Active Learning Approach for Teaching Web Development- Action Research 
Study 
 
Mohammed Bahja 
School of Computer Science  
University of Birmingham 
Birmingham, United Kingdom 
E-mail: m.bahja@bham.ac.uk 
Mitul Shukla 
School of Computer Science and Technologies 
University of Bedfordshire 
Luton, United Kingdom 
E-mail: mitul.shukla@beds.ac.uk
 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents an Action Research study for 
incorporating new learning and teaching methods into a Web 
Development module at a U.K. University, addressing the 
problems of varied experiences amongst the students with 
programming languages and computational thinking. Active 
learning concepts were introduced using three experiments 
involving 
Learning 
by 
Teaching, 
Jigsaw 
Puzzle, 
and 
Observations from Videos. These experiments were aimed at 
enhancing the students learning capabilities and computational 
thinking. All three experiments have achieved positive results 
among the students who were evaluated using formative 
assessments during their practical sessions. The study has found 
that Active Learning concepts can enhance student learning 
capabilities and give them more control over their own learning. 
Keywords- Action Research; Active Learning; Teaching; Web 
development 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Action Research in education, unlike other approaches 
focuses on ways of identifying strategies to improve skills and 
techniques of the researcher/teacher so that effective delivery 
methods can be incorporated into the teaching according to the 
various issues identified with the students. For example, 
qualitative and quantitative approaches or a mixed approach 
including both qualitative and quantitative may be effective in 
analyzing a particular issue or context, but they lack a 
collaborative and a democratic approach, which can be 
identified in Action Research [1] [2] [3]. In addition, Action 
Research offers a continued reflection on a problem or issue, 
where the goal is continuous improvement of the processes to 
address the problems [3]. Further, Action Research focuses on 
doing things better rather than investigating why we do those 
said things, and on identifying and adopting a change in 
teaching methods to achieve a positive impact for students [8]. 
A more detailed explanation of Action Research was 
identified in the works of Watts [23], which states that Action 
Research is a disciplined inquiry done by a teacher within the 
context of a teaching environment that would identify and 
inform the changes to be adopted in the teaching 
practice/methods. It is a continuous practice that has to be 
adopted by teachers to identify the solutions to changing 
problems and to deliver the best and most effective 
educational outcome.  
According to Watts [23], the objectives/practices of 
Action Research in teaching and learning processes include 
the following: 
• 
Educators should work best themselves on 
identifying problems in the teaching environment. 
• 
Educators should be more effective in identifying 
problems and considering ways of working 
differently, which could be more effective compared 
to more traditional methods. 
• 
These processes should also aim for professional 
development. 
• 
A collaborative approach has to be practiced 
involving students and other teachers in identifying 
best practices. 
It is also essential to understand the characteristics of 
Action Research that makes it unique and different from other 
research practices. Various characteristics of Action Research 
were identified in [22], highlighting it as an innovative and 
continuous 
approach, 
which 
is 
strategically 
driven, 
participatory in nature, adopting an intervention approach by 
implementing a solution to the problem identified, and the 
whole process is documented, understood and disseminated. 
Therefore, Action Research is different from scientific 
research 
in 
many aspects including the 
objective, 
methodology and the motivation and purpose. Action 
researchers typically do not use complex statistical procedures 
involved in quantitative research to evaluate results; however, 
they do offer other evidence (such as comparison with similar 
data) in order to prove that their measures are reliable and 
valid [3]. Action Research is focused on continuous reflection 
and improvement rather than focusing on the final outcome or 
conclusion, as observed in many scientific research studies. 
Various studies [29]-[32] have implemented the action 
research methods, and found it very useful in the long-term 
process. In the study performed in [29], inquiry-based 
classroom discussions were used as a method for developing 
the higher order cognitive skills among the chemistry 
students. Similarly, action research methodology can also be 
used for analyzing and promoting the learning process of 
students in computing programming module in a blended 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

learning environment [30]. Similarly, online journals learning 
was used as an approach in the study performed in [31] 
through action research for promoting the learning computer 
applications and network programming. Other approaches 
such as Boolean Ninja, Minimum Spanning tree were used as 
the part of study in [32] for developing the critical thinking 
and computational abilities among the computing students. 
The approaches adopted in these studies were depending on 
their objective and the areas of problems identified. However, 
the aspects of collaborative approaches and active 
involvement in action research were not focused to a great 
extent in the research studies relating to the computing 
programming modules.  
The Action Research process involves various stages. 
Different authors have described different stages, which can 
be summarized into the five main stages [8] as shown in the  
 
Figure 1. Stages of Action Research 
 
The five stages explained are used for identifying the 
problems and conducting the Action Research using various 
techniques. The impact of these techniques including 
‘learning by teaching’, ‘jigsaw technique’, and ‘video 
observations and reactions’ on the learning and development 
process of the web development students is investigated in this 
study. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, 
we present the design and the process of action research with 
web development students, which included the problem 
identification, improvement planning process, implementing 
and monitoring the actions, evaluating the effects of the 
planned actions, and planning the improvement. In Section 3, 
we present the limitations and challenges observed in this 
study; and Section 4, concludes the study.   
II. 
ACTION RESEARCH WITH WEB DEVELOPMENT 
STUDENTS 
The web development module is a comprehensive course 
which is designed to educate the students with the various 
technologies used in the web design and development. The 
course syllabus can be summarized under the following 
points. 
• 
Responsive web design using HTML5 and CSS3 
• 
Web 
Information 
Architecture 
and 
Content 
Management Systems 
• 
Web development using Java along with underlying 
technologies including C#, C++, ASP, LINQ 
• 
Client-side and Server-side Programming 
• 
Patterns and methods to enhance maintainability and 
testability 
• 
Applying business logic 
• 
Testing, deployment and configuration 
• 
Performance modelling and management 
The aim of this course is to educate the students in all the 
major spheres of web development and management. 
Accordingly, the teaching process focuses on programming 
and coding to the large extent with the regular lectures 
explaining the major concepts. 
 
In order to incorporate Action Research techniques into 
the teaching process and improving the skills and educational 
outcomes of Web Development students, a strategic approach 
was formulated which is explained in the following sections. 
A. Problem Identification 
One of the important stages of Action Research is the 
identification of the problem. There are various approaches 
such as questionnaire surveys, interviews, observations, 
checklists etc. that are available for identifying the problem 
by involving the population in reflecting their opinions [27]. 
However, surveys and interviews are the most commonly 
used approaches in this process; surveys can be used to assess 
and identify the issues, while interviews can be used for in-
depth analysis of the issues or problems [28]. It is necessary 
to identify students learning issues related to the module, and 
also the topics which cannot be understood by the students, 
so that the effective learning strategies can be planned and 
implemented. 
In order to assess and understand the problems faced by 
students in understanding the concepts of a Web 
Development module, a questionnaire-based survey was 
carried out. The questionnaire was designed with ten 
questions in two sections. The first section had six questions 
focusing on the student abilities, where they are required to 
answer the topics which their awareness, expertise and 
experience related to various topics in the web development 
module. The second section had four questions related to the 
learning abilities and their feedback of using different 
approaches in teaching, such as collaborative approach. All 
the students attending the module (30: 19 males; 11 females) 
participated in the survey. Among the 30 students, 22 
students belonged to the age group 20-25 years; and eight 
students in 25-30 years age group. After analysing the survey 
responses, it was identified that the lack of experience in 
programming languages and computational thinking skills 
among students were the main problems affecting their 
understanding of the concepts in Web Development. These 
problems are mostly focused on the students past learning and 
abilities. Such problems require active involvement of 
students in learning on their own and making them 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

responsible, confident and able to take charge of their own 
learning. Considering the case, Active Learning methods and 
techniques were identified as the best strategy for achieving 
the effective educational outcomes.  
Active learning is a process of engaging students in the 
learning process using different techniques. Unlike a more 
traditional approach where students might listen while 
lecturers explain, Active Learning requires the engagement 
of 
students 
in 
various 
learning 
activities 
through 
collaboration. In [6], it was stated that students must do more 
than just listen, which includes reading, writing, discussing 
and engaging in solving problems, and adopt higher order 
thinking in tasks, such as analysis, synthesis and evaluation. 
In short, students are involved in doing learning activities, 
thinking about the concepts and also what they are doing. 
Several studies have shown greater improvement among the 
students by adopting Active Learning techniques [17]-[19]. 
In Active Learning, students are constantly processing 
what they are learning through discussions, debating, writing 
short notes etc. Various benefits have been identified by the 
authors in different settings. Interactive courses were found 
to be more effective in promoting conceptual understanding 
as compared to traditional courses [11]. In addition, the meta-
analysis of 225 studies across STEM (Science, Technology, 
Engineering & Mathematics) conducted in [10] has found 
that average exam scores of the students were improved by 
6% by adopting Active Learning classes; and also, students 
following traditional lectures were 1.5 times more likely to 
fail compared to the students following Active Learning 
classes.   
Computational Thinking is one of the effective 
techniques 
used 
in 
problem 
solving, 
application 
development, system designing etc. It can be effectively 
applied in both computer programing courses and also in 
other courses [20]. It includes the use of various techniques 
such as decomposition (breaking down data into smaller 
parts), pattern recognition (observing patterns/regularities), 
abstraction, designing etc. [24]. Realizing its importance, The 
International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE), 
Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA) and the UK 
Computing at School working group (CAS) have 
collaborated with representatives from education and 
industry to develop computational thinking resources for 
educators [21].  
Considering these factors, using Active Learning 
methods in teaching practices for a Web Development 
module could help to solve the problem and increase 
students’ achievements. Thus, the following research 
question was formulated. 
How can we use Active Learning methods and techniques to 
mitigate the problem of different skill sets and capabilities by 
helping the student to be in charge of their own learning?   
B. Planning an implementation of Improvement 
An action plan usually involves the process of deciding a new 
strategy or approach for addressing research questions; 
identifying the data needed to learn about the research 
questions; framing an approach or timeline for implementing 
the new strategy; and a plan for evaluating the findings from 
deploying the new strategy [5] [16].  
Accordingly, the problems and the interests of the 
students from the Web Development module were identified 
using a questionnaire-based survey as explained in the 
previous section. The subsequent data analysis has shown 
that the students were interested in adopting Active Learning 
techniques for addressing their concerns and enhancing their 
skills and learning capabilities. Considering these outcomes, 
the approaches in teaching should be focused on actively 
involving the students in the learning process. Learning by 
teaching is one such approach, which directly involves the 
students in learning the concepts by teaching. In addition, as 
the students attending the module are from different regions 
with varying learning abilities, collaborative approaches can 
be very effective in the process of learning [2]. However, 
there is a need for approach that requires collective efforts of 
all the students in the learning process, so that all the students 
can be benefitted from these approaches. In addition, as 
discussed in the introduction, the use of collaborative 
approaches was not explored to a great extent in the 
computing learning environments. Therefore, approaches 
such as, learning by teaching, Jigsaw Puzzle, and Video 
observations were selected as a part of this study. 
Accordingly, three rounds of experiments were planned over 
a period of three weeks with each session of 3 hours duration. 
Each experiment used Active Learning techniques to deliver 
the concepts relating to each chapter of the Web 
Development module. A formative assessment was used for 
evaluating the experiment which focused on using the 
programming exercises during practical sessions. 
a. Experiment 1: Learning by Teaching 
Learning by teaching is an effective Active Learning 
technique that has been widely recognized and 
tested [9]. It is a process where students are asked to 
teach the concepts of a particular subject or chapter 
in a class which would be monitored by a teacher 
and corrected if necessary. This process actively 
involves the students in the learning process as they 
feel more responsible in explaining the concepts and 
more attentive due to the social presence in the class 
room. This approach was found to be more effective 
compared to other techniques like re-study or 
writing [12]. Therefore, using this technique, the 
students from the Web Development module were 
asked to teach the concepts of HTTP Methods in the 
class room. The effectiveness of the experiment was 
evaluated during the practical sessions. 
 
b. Experiment 2: The Jigsaw Technique 
The Jigsaw Technique is a form of teaching strategy 
adopting principles of cooperative learning that 
helps students to develop skills for effectively 
working in teams or in collaboration with one 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

another. It focuses on cooperation rather than 
competition among students and is one of the most 
supported techniques within the education field as 
evidenced by more than 1200 research studies [15]. 
It helps students to understand a concept, apply the 
language of the discipline and practice self and peer 
teaching [7]. The technique usually gives a common 
task to all the students/teams. These students/ teams 
initially have to solve a problem and identify the 
relevant issues, which they later discuss with other 
students/teams. After collaborating with other 
students and identifying different issues, the best 
possible solution is formulated by those students for 
addressing the common task. 
Using this technique, the students from a Web 
Development module were given a task (piece of 
puzzle), which initially they need to solve on their 
own. Later they need to collaborate with other 
students to find the most effective solution to the 
puzzle. The puzzle is about building the most 
effective algorithm to travel from the University 
main compass to a local international airport. This 
task gave students the idea of designing an 
algorithmic solution to a given real life problem 
through individual thinking and team work. This 
approach would also enhance the students 
computational thinking capabilities, as well as 
training them in the process of simplifying complex 
problems into simpler issues by breaking the 
problem down into smaller parts. This approach was 
then evaluated during practical sessions. 
 
c. 
Experiment 3: Videos Observation and Reaction 
Using multimedia content in teaching has been 
widely practiced across various institutions [13]. It 
has many benefits compared to traditional modes of 
teaching [25]. Using videos for teaching and 
enabling students to observe the important aspects 
from those videos is one of the techniques used to 
increase 
student 
observation 
skills 
and 
understanding various issues [4]. Studies have 
proved that videos can be used effectively in 
teaching and can attract students’ attention and 
improve their skills [26].  
Using video as a tool for observational learning, 
students from a Web Development module were 
given carefully chosen short videos from the Big 
Bang Theory comedy series to watch. These videos 
were related to team work, collaborative working, 
and project management. The students were 
distributed into two groups. The first group was 
assigned with the task of identifying the positive 
things from the videos; and the second group for 
identifying the negative things, which they would 
link to their group projects and assignments. This 
experiment was then evaluated during practical 
sessions. 
C. Monitoring and describing the effects of the actions 
All of the three experiments were carefully monitored and 
the observations were recorded. In the first experiment 
(Learning by Teaching), the students were asked to teach 
HTTP Methods, both GET and POST functions to be used in 
the Web development and also how the HTTP request cycle 
operates (the module concepts which the students found 
difficult in programming: observed from survey results). 
Though the students were initially nervous, they were able to 
quickly adapt to the teaching technique and reflected their 
understanding of these concepts in an effective way. Some 
corrections and suggestions were made to the students while 
they were teaching to boost their confidence and correct their 
mistakes. 
The second experiment (Jigsaw Technique) was used for 
enhancing the computational thinking of students. Majority 
of the students (76%) stated that they face problems in 
designing the sorting algorithms. To address this issue, the 
students were asked to build the most effective algorithm to 
travel from the University main campus to a local 
international airport; first by working individually, and then 
in collaboration. The experiment was monitored and tips 
were given to students while working in groups on 
identifying the main points and issues in formulating the best 
possible route.  
Another important issue identified from the survey results 
was that, 86% of the students had problems in identifying the 
right requirements and reflecting them in the coding. As this 
process requires the identification of right set of tools and 
commands in coding, the students are required to develop 
critical thinking capabilities and clear observation and 
analysis skills for selecting the right set of tools and 
commands in coding. Focusing on this aspect, the third 
experiment (Videos) was given to students from two groups 
and tips and examples were given on how to identify the 
positive and negative aspects of the videos. 
D. Evaluating the outcomes from the experiments 
Evaluating actions is one of the most important tasks that 
can be used to identify if the planned improvement has a 
positive impact in addressing the problems identified. The 
first experiment was evaluated during the practical sessions 
of a class using formative assessment by asking the students 
there to build a simple HTML form and send messages using 
GET and POST functions. Interestingly, most of the students 
were active, engaged and completed the task within the given 
time and this was compared to students from a previous 
semester who were not exposed to these Active Learning 
techniques. 28 students out of 30, completed the task 
successfully compared to the 19 students who successfully 
completed the same task in previous year, reflecting a 
significant improvement in the learning process.  
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

The second experiment (the Jigsaw Technique for 
algorithmic routing) was evaluated by asking the students to 
design UML activity diagrams and a flowchart to solve the 
given real-life problem. The students were found to be 
effective in adopting the concepts of simplifying complex 
problems into simpler issues by breaking them down.  This 
was then reflected in their design diagrams and an 
improvement in their computational skills was observed in 
designing a flowchart for a real-life problem. Interestingly, 
all 30 students were able to effectively design the UML 
diagrams and flowcharts. Only 16 students in the previous 
year were able to complete this task successfully. The results 
indicated that collective efforts of the students through 
discussions, knowledge sharing, team management etc. were 
found to be significant in solving the problems, leading to the 
overall development of students.   
The third experiment (Videos) was evaluated by asking 
students to create a group work plan and a Gantt chart for 
their group assignment. Almost all of the students effectively 
categorized and identified the tasks for the group work and 
systematically created a work plan, which was effective and 
easy to implement. Almost 26 students clearly identified the 
activities/steps involved with appropriate time schedule for 
each activity. The results indicate the improvement in the 
planning, assessment and project management skills of the 
students, where they need to identify all the relevant tasks, 
activities, risks, and plan the project/assignment.  
E. Planning an Improvement 
Overall, the three experiments based on the Active 
Learning concepts were found to have a positive impact on 
enhancing the student experiences in using programming 
languages and their computational thinking. Considering the 
outcomes of the experiments, these Active Learning 
techniques are now planned to be used in future teaching of 
Web Development concepts classes. 
III. 
RESEARCH CHALLENGES AND LIMITATIONS 
One of the major challenges identified was about 
identifying issues or problems associated with the students. 
The students in the Web Development module were diverse 
coming from different nations, cultures, and with different 
experiences and skillsets. While some students had job 
experience, others did not. So, identifying the differences and 
getting all of them on a single platform was a big challenge, 
which was addressed by using a questionnaire-based survey. 
Other challenges included identifying a suitable pedagogical 
approach, common interests of students with the type of new 
learning methods, and their expectations associated with the 
individual style of teaching being delivered. These issues were 
addressed by collecting the responses through surveys and 
discussions, and deciding mutually for using Active Learning 
techniques as the solution for addressing the identified 
problem. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Action Research was used for addressing the problem of 
students with varying skillsets and experiences in 
understanding the concepts of a Web Development module 
using Active Learning techniques was the main idea behind 
this work. Using Active Learning techniques especially the 
Jigsaw Puzzle have given positive results, and this experiment 
has led the way forward for introducing new pedagogical 
approaches in teaching. Finally, this approach could be used 
continuously to identify changing issues and problems and 
addressing them using this most effective method of learning 
and teaching. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
J. M. Hashey and D. J. Connors, “Learning from our journey: 
Reciprocal teaching action research”. The Reading Teacher, 57, (3), 
224–232, 2003. 
[2] D. J. Short and J., Echevaria, “The sheltered instruction 
observation 
protocol: 
A 
tool 
for 
teacher-researcher 
collaboration and professional development”. (EDO-FL-ii-09) 
Reston, VA: ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and 
Linguistics, 1999. 
[3] 
M. Lodico, D. Spaulding and K. Voegtle, Methods in Educational 
Research. Jossey-Bass Publishers: San Francisco, 2006. 
[4] C. J., Brame, “Effective educational videos”. [online] 
Available 
at: 
http://cft.vanderbilt.edu/guides-sub-
pages/effective-educational-videos/ [Retrieved: May 2018] 
[5] W.L. Byrne, “Four steps to conducting Action Research in the 
classroom.” 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
https://wiobyrne.com/action-research/ [Retrieved:  May 2018] 
[6] A. W. Chickering, and F. G. Zelda, "Seven Principles for Good 
Practice." AAHE Bulletin 39: 3-7. ED 282 491. 6 pp. 3-7, 1987. 
[7] L. M. Duenas, M. A. Rodríguez, J. H. Llopis, “The Jigsaw: A 
Cooperative Learning Technique As A Tool Of Teaching-
Learning Facilitator In Physical Therapy. Effects Of Working 
With Music As A Motivational Tool To Enhance The Jigsaw 
Benefits”, EDULEARN14 Proceedings, pp. 3958-3962, 2014. 
[8] E. Ferrance, “Themes in Education: Action Research”, 
Published by Northeast and Islands Regional Educational 
Laboratory At Brown University, 2000. 
[9] L. Fiorella, and R. Mayer, “The relative benefits of learning by 
teaching and teaching expectancy”. Contemporary Educational 
Psychology, 38(4), pp.281-288, 2013. 
[10] S. Freeman et al.. “Active learning increases student 
performance in science, engineering, and mathematics”. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(23), 
8410-8415, 2014. 
[11] R. R. Hake, “Interactive-engagement versus traditional 
methods: A six-thousand-student survey of mechanics test data 
for introductory physics courses”. American journal of 
Physics, 66(1), 64-74, 1998. 
[12] V. Hoogerheide, L. Deijkers, S. Loyens, A. Heijltjes and T. van 
Gog, “Gaining from explaining: Learning improves from 
explaining to fictitious others on video, not from writing to 
them”. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 44-45, pp.95-
106, 2016. 
[13] Indiana University Bloomington, “Effectively Using Videos in 
the 
College 
Classroom”. 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
https://citl.indiana.edu/teaching-resources/teaching-
strategies/effectively-using-video-teaching/ [Accessed: May 
2018]. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[14] ITLI (Institute for Teaching and Learning Innovation), (2017), 
“Jigsaw Technique”. The University of Queensland. [online]. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.uq.edu.au/teach/flipped-
classroom/docs/FAB/FABJigsaw_Tipsheet.pdf 
[Retrieved:  
May 2018] 
[15] D. W. Johnson and R. T. Johnson, “An educational psychology 
success story: Social interdependence theory and cooperative 
learning”. Educational Researcher, 38 (5), 365-379, 2009. 
DOI: 10.3102/0013189X09339057 
[16] C. Luo, “An Action Research Plan for Developing and 
Implementing”, The Students’ Listening Comprehension 
Skills.Vol. 1, No. 1. English Language Teaching, 2008. 
[17] W. J. McKeachie et al., “Teaching and Learning in the College 
Classroom: A Review of the Research Literature”. Ann Arbor: 
Regents of The Univ. of Michigan. ED 314 999. 124 pp. MF-
01; PC-05, 1986. 
[18] J. G. Penner, “Why Many College Teachers Cannot Lecture”. 
Springfield, Ill.: Charles C. Thomas, 1984. 
[19] K. L. Ruhl, A. H. Charles, and J. S. Patrick "Using the Pause 
Procedure to Enhance Lecture Recall." Teacher Education and 
Special Education 10: 14-18, 1987. 
[20] P. Silapachote and A, Srisuphab, “Teaching and learning 
computational thinking through solving problems in Artificial 
Intelligence: On designing introductory engineering and 
computing courses”. IEEE International Conference on 
Teaching, Assessment, and Learning for Engineering (TALE), 
2016. 
[21] C. Sykora, “Computational thinking for all”. [online] Iste.org. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.iste.org/explore/articleDetail?articleid=152 
[Retrieved: May 2018]. 
[22] D. Tripp, “Action research: a methodological introduction ". 
Education and Research, 31(3), pp.443-466, 2005. 
[23] H. Watts, “When teachers are researchers, teaching improves”. 
Journal of Staff Development, 6 (2), 118-127, 1985. 
[24] J. 
M. 
Wing, 
“Computational 
Thinking”. 
[online] 
Communications 
of 
the 
ACM. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~15110-s13/Wing06-ct.pdf 
[Retrieved: May 2018]. 
[25] Z. Woolfit, “The effective use of video in higher education”. 
Lectoraat Teaching, Learning and Technology Inholland 
University of Applied Sciences, 2015. 
[26] E. J. Zuckerman, “Videos in Teaching”. Augusta University. 
[online] Available at: http://hdl.handle.net/10675.2/621200 
[Retrieved:  May 2018] 
[27] G.L. Anderson, K. Herr, & L.S. Nihlen, “Studying your own 
school: An educator’s guide to quality practitioner research.” 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press, 1994. 
[28] J. Creswell. “Mixed-method research: Introduction and 
application.” In C. J. Cizek (Ed.), Handbook of educational 
policy (pp. 455–472). San Diego: Academic Press, 1999. 
[29] U. Zoller, "Scaling-up of higher-order cognitive skills-oriented 
college chemistry teaching: An action-oriented research", 
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 
583-596, 
1999. 
Available: 
10.1002/(sici)1098-
2736(199905)36:5<583::aid-tea5>3.0.co;2-m [Accessed 31 
January 2019]. 
[30] D. Mudaly and V. Jugoo, "The use of Action Research in a 
computer programming module thaught using a blended 
learning environment ", PONTE International Scientific 
Researchs Journal, vol. 72, no. 9, 2016. Available: 
10.21506/j.ponte.2016.9.5 [Accessed 31 January 2019]. 
[31] F. Margaret, "Reflecting on my Teaching and Learning in 
Higher 
Education". 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.actionresearch.net/living/farren/ch6.pdf 
[Accessed: Jan 2019] 
[32] G. Jamwal, "Effective use of interactive learning modules in 
classroom study in computer science ". [online] Available at: 
https://digitalcommons.usu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1
223&context=gradreports [Retrieved: Jan 2019] 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-689-7
eLmL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

