Are We Ready to Move Towards a New Type of Teacher Training?  
Case Study: The WETEN Project 
 
Göran Karlsson 
KTH Mechanics 
SCI School, KTH 
Stockholm, Sweden 
e-mail: karlsson@mech.kth.se 
Carmen Holotescu 
Timsoft Ltd. 
Timisoara, Romania 
e-mail: cami@timsoft.ro 
Margareta Hellström 
KTH Learning Lab 
VIL School, KTH 
Stockholm, Sweden 
e-mail: mhel@kth.se 
Gabriela Grosseck 
Faculty of Sociology and Psychology 
University of West Timisoara 
Timisoara, Romania 
e-mail: ggrosseck@socio.uvt.ro
Roza Dumbraveanu 
Information Technologies in Education 
State Pedagogical University “Ion Creanga“ 
Chisinau, Moldova 
e-mail: r.dumbraveanu@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—To assure a quality learning process in Higher 
Education, continuous training of teachers is a priority. This 
paper is a case study about the training of trainers organized 
in the WETEN project, presenting how the topics were chosen, 
how the educational technologies and facilitation contributed 
to the building of learning community. 
Keywords-Higher Education, HE, teachers training, web 2.0, 
social media, WETEN 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Bologna process changes have as consequences the 
increasing demands made on academic staff to contribute to 
life-long learning activities and to put the focus on 
restructuring of teaching and learning, on student centered 
learning. Thus, professional development of the academic 
staff has an important contribution to make in the realization 
of the Bologna objectives. A quality education requires 
teachers, who are better and continuously trained, who 
assume the responsibility of improving continuously their 
own knowledge and skills, who are motivated, enthusiastic, 
e-mature, who collaborate, sharing their experiences and 
learn from the others, from their students too, who innovate, 
improving support for learners through new educational 
technologies [1]. 
This education paradigm implies reform of the initial and 
in-service training of teachers and trainers to prepare them 
for their new responsibilities, in particular by highlighting 
the requirement and the opportunities for continuous 
professional development of academic staff from Higher 
Education (HE) Institutions. 
Among European standards and guidelines for internal 
quality assurance within HE Institutions published by 
European Network for Quality Assurance (ENQA) [2] are 
mentioned that institutions should have ways of verifying 
that staff involved with the teaching of students are qualified 
and competent for these tasks (quality assurance of teaching 
staff) [3]. 
In this context, this paper is a case study about the 
training of trainers from HE organized within the framework 
of the WETEN (definition: see Section II) project [4]. With a 
focus on how the topics were chosen and how the education-
al technologies and facilitation contributed to the building of 
learning community, the paper  presents: 
• 
a short description of the WETEN project (aims, 
objectives, key activities). 
• 
the current situation of teachers’ experience in using 
new educational technologies from two partner 
countries (Moldova and Ukraine). 
• 
two models of the integration of new technologies in 
teachers training (approaches from Sweden and 
Romania). 
• 
the potential benefits of these type of training 
through highlighting some of the problematic issues 
- and barriers we encountered. 
• 
a proposed agenda for future research and 
development of teachers‘ training scenarios for the 
HE sector. 
II. 
THE WETEN PROJECT: SHORT PRESENTATION 
Western-Eastern Teachers education network (WETEN) 
is a three years project funded within the EU TEMPUS 
36
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

Programme. The project started in 2009 and is coordinated 
by Kaunas University of Technology, Lithuania. 
The HE Institutions from Moldova and Ukraine are 
characterized by a limited use of digital services, limited 
ICT integration in their on-campus teaching, and a very low 
proportion of e-learning courses. 
The provision of formal retraining for teachers from HE 
Institutions from Moldova and Ukraine for ICT implement-
ation in the curricula is seldom and uncoordinated. 
In the framework of the WETEN project, a network of 
university teachers from European HE Institutions is built to 
share expertise on effective learning and teaching in 
universities. This network for pedagogical innovation in HE 
aims to bring together experts from universities from 
Europe, to share good practice, materials and new teaching 
methods with teachers from five HE Institutions in two 
eastern countries, Moldova and Ukraine. 
In order to redesign their own courses, teachers from the 
universities in Moldova and Ukraine who are partners in 
WETEN will take part in five courses [5]: 
1. Student centred learning. 
2. Curriculum design. 
3. Quality of teaching. 
4. ICT enhanced learning. 
5. Technologies of e-learning. 
These 5 courses are developed by domestic faculties 
trained by the EU partners (Lithuania, Portugal, Romanian, 
and Sweden). The training sessions in Sweden and Romania 
are presented below. 
III. 
TRAINING OF TRAINERS 
The experience of EU partners in methodology and 
methods of mapping and enhancing education, in promoting 
new teaching methods, in creating eLearning systems, as 
well as application of methods of effective management in 
this field would be extremely useful for partner universities. 
The project has achieved this goal via training domestic 
faculties to propagate EU values, advocate for Moldovan 
and Ukrainian universities. 
The training for trainers’ activities of faculties from the 
participating partner institutions (Ukraine and Moldova) at 
EU member institutions has given insights into pedagogic 
practice at HE and has identified good and innovative 
practice. 
There has been in total five such training activities in the 
EU member countries: Belgium, Lithuania, Portugal, 
Romania and Sweden. 
We will here exemplify with the training activities at 
KTH in Stockholm and at Timsoft Ltd. Romania. 
These activities imply short-term training for trainers in 
mastering and use of eLearning environments and new 
educational technologies. The training sessions have been 
organised to update and enhance the needed competences of 
teachers: how to use the eLearning platforms for sharing 
content, for promoting action learning, for management of 
learning activities. 
A. Training in Sweden: Blended Approach Using LMS 
The training at KTH (Royal Institute of Technology) 
took place for one week in January 2010. From Moldova 
there were eight and from Ukraine three participants. They 
represented university presidents, university vice presidents 
and faculties. 
The aim was to inform about generic staff training of 
new employed faculties, their specific training in web based 
learning, KTH use of LMS, blogs, videos, podcasts. Also to 
give input to the five training courses for partner 
universities’ staff developed in the project. 
The titles were: 
• 
Good elearning design: What to think about? 
Learning by practicing. Self-reflexion. Blogging. 
The course is never finished. 
• 
Elearning academic staff training. Basic communi-
cation and teaching. 
• 
From PLATO global education networking to mash 
up global university. Historical overview of net 
based education at KTH from 1979 to 2009. 
• 
Web 3.0:  Remote and virtual  laboratories. 
• 
IPR, copyrights and Creative Commons licenses. 
• 
Plagiarism, cultural differences among international 
students, use of Urkund [6] web based system for 
text matching. 
• 
Interactive HDTV via fiber networks in Sweden and 
globally. 
• 
Bridging net based introductory course in physics. 
• 
Resource Center for Net Based Education an KTH 
Virtual Campus Project. 
• 
Support resources: Learning Lab, librarian on duty, 
math mentoring. 
• 
Net based coaching in mathematics for grade 6-12 
pupils by KTH students. 
• 
Moving media, video recording of lectures, 
streaming server. 
• 
Academic staff training in Sweden and at KTH 
historically from 1970 to 2010. 
• 
Elearning K-12 staff training. 
• 
Online assessment. 
• 
Accreditation of elearning. 
• 
Benchmarking of elearning. 
The training was organized with an introduction by an 
expert of each subject followed by discussions. A specific 
problem during these discussions is that not everybody is 
fluent in English so translations into Romanian and Russian 
must be done; this hinders somewhat the smoothness of the 
discussions. 
All the materials were published in a LMS, the teachers 
having to participate in online activities after the face-to-face 
training. These activities were facilitated and contributed in 
building a real learning community. 
A. Training in Romania: Blended Approach Using 
Microblogging 
The learning community was consolidated during the 
training organized in Romania, by Timsoft, a company 
specialized in eLearning and mobile applications. 
37
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

The training was organized in a blended manner, using 
the microblogging platform Cirip.eu [7], implemented by 
Timsoft. 
Besides the facilities of a microblogging platform, 
Cirip.eu provides the following: 
• 
Embedding multimedia objects in notes: images, 
audio and (live) video clips, live-streaming, 
presentations, files, google docs and forms, cognitive 
visualizations as diagrams, learning designs as 
mindmaps etc. 
• 
Sending and receiving messages via the web, 
mobile, SMS, IM (Yahoo and Jabber), e-mail, 
Firefox/Chrome extensions, API, Twitter, RSS, 
desktop and other 3rd party applications, etc. 
• 
Creating 
public 
or 
private 
user 
groups. 
Collaboration groups can be created between the 
participants in an event, members of a class or 
university year, for a course enhancement or in order 
to run an entire online course. Groups have an 
announcements section (Group News), where 
moderators can post notes and materials such as 
SCORM/LOM objects, for group activities. 
• 
Domain specification for microblogs and groups. 
This simplifies the search for microblogs or groups 
of a certain domain, for example educational 
microblogs or groups used for online courses or 
workshops. 
• 
Monitoring RSS feeds for sites, blogs, social 
networks or search feeds. 
• 
Tagging the content. 
• 
Creating and conducting polls and quizzes, (which 
can be answered online or by SMS). 
• 
Visualizing statistics and representations of the 
users/groups interaction networks. 
Cirip.eu integrates a wide range of Web2.0 applications 
and social networks organized around educational resources, 
many of them in Top 100 Tools for Learning 2009 [8]. 
The training was focused on the following topics: 
• 
Social  learning in HE. 
• 
Web2.0 in HE. 
• 
Open Educational Resources (OER). 
• 
Moodle LMS. 
There were also examined different solutions for 
delivering online courses, for learning enhancement, for 
integrating social learning in formal learning provided by 
Timsoft, and by three Romanian universities: 
• 
University Politehnica of Timisoara. 
• 
University of West Timisoara. 
• 
University Vasile Goldis Arad. 
The materials of the training were prepared by teachers 
and trainers from Timsoft and the three mentioned 
universities; this way bringing a wide experience and 
perspective. 
On Cirip.eu a private group dedicated to training was 
opened [9]. The aims of the group were: 
• 
To 
gather 
the 
materials, 
interactions 
and 
collaborative multimedia exercises during the 
training; 
• 
To  livestream the presentations during the meeting 
that could be watched and commented by the 
partners and teachers who did not take part in the 
training; 
• 
To offer an environment for practicing new 
educational technologies, such as microblogging and 
the social networks whose resources are embedded 
in cirip notes; 
• 
To integrate future reflections and interactions with 
other teachers who did not take part in the f2f 
training. 
The content of the group was enlarged with feeds/search 
feeds monitored by the group members using the platform 
corresponding facility; they are delicious.com feeds on 
project topics, but also with the _weten tag  [10] correspond-
ing to the collection built by the group members. 
The interaction in the group and on the platform 
continued after a face-to-face meeting. In this way the 
learning community was enlarged with Cirip members such 
as students, trainers, teachers, practitioners, becoming a real 
community of practice. 
Almost all of the group members built her/his own 
Personal Learning Environment on cirip, which can include: 
• 
Connection/ communication with the followed users. 
• 
The groups they participate in, according to the 
topics of interest. 
• 
The site/blog/network/search feeds. 
• 
The social networks providing educational objects, 
which can be included in messages. 
In the group dedicated to learning designs, the trained 
teachers could discuss, validate and improve the scenarios of 
the new courses they have developed, formalizing them as 
mindmaps embedded in cirip notes. 
All the interactions on Cirip constitute also an important 
dissemination activity of the WETEN project. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
During the last years, there exists a growing interest in 
social media, both in society and in education, with tools 
such as blogs and microblogs, folksonomies, RSS feeds, 
wikis, media-sharing applications, networking applications, 
and other social artifacts. When applied to higher education, 
these new Web2.0 technologies enhance students' learning 
experiences through customization, personalization, and rich 
opportunities for networking and collaboration [11]. 
In this context, the trainings presented above were 
designed such as to offer complementary topics, and also 
complementary technologies, consolidating a real learning 
community. Besides the knowledge on the proposed topics, 
the trainings have given the participants knowledge and 
experience: 
• 
In online communication and collaboration. 
• 
In collaboratively using of Web2.0 technologies and 
applications. 
• 
In creating Personal Learning Environments. 
• 
In participating in communities of practice. 
Participating in the blended training programs have 
allowed teachers, themselves nontraditional students, to 
38
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

learn experientially under the same conditions as their future 
students. 
Trainings have provided an opportunity to learn about 
new learning technologies, but also models for best practices. 
As we mentioned above, the approach proposed by the 
WETEN project tries to fill a gap between the theoretical and 
practical aspects of blended learning for  trainers. 
Developing an important number of courses for different 
target groups, using new technologies, the WETEN project 
could become a real pool for research, for experimentation of 
blended learning techniques. 
However, we believe it is necessary to reconsider the role 
of educators. Thus, teachers need to 
• 
Assume a new attitude (without going to extremes); 
• 
Set themselves up as innovators in education, by 
promoting new pedagogical objects: courses under 
an 
audio/video 
form 
(podcasts, 
videocasts), 
books/manuals in the shape of a wiki, communicat-
ing with our students through blogs, etc. 
• 
Try to bring arguments in favour of a taking a 
correct stand when faced with these realities. 
• 
Plead in favour of renewing our psycho-pedagogical 
tools. 
• 
Enjoy the pleasure offered by the act of knowledge. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The WETEN project is funded by the European 
Commission through its Directorate-General for Education 
and Culture programme TEMPUS. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  
C.Holotescu, Technical Requirements of Educational Software 
Report, 
Knowledge 
Economy 
Project, 
August 
2007, 
http://ecomunicate.ro (latest access date  Dec. 14, 2010). 
[2] 
http://www.enqa.eu, latest access date  Dec. 14, 2010. 
[3] 
I. Huet, A.V. Baptista, D. Neri de Sousa, D. Casanova, J. Schreurs,  
and D. Rutkauskiene, “A cross-cultural study of pedagogical 
traditions in four EU universities”, Proceedings of the IASK 
International Conference Teaching and Learning 2009, M. Muñoz 
and F. Ferreira, Eds., pp.192-200, International Association for the 
Scientific Knowledge. Porto, Portugal. 
[4] 
http://www.weten.org, latest access date Dec. 14, 2010. 
[5]  
D. Rutkauksiene, J. Schreurs, I. Huet, and D. Gudoniene, "Train the 
teachers in student-centred learning and teaching", Proc. 13th 
International Conference on Interactive Computer aided Learning, 
Set. 2010, Hasselt, Belgium. 
[6] 
http://www.urkund.com/int/en/, latest access date Cec. 14, 2010. 
[7]  
C. Holotescu and G. Grosseck, “Learning to microblog and 
microblogging to learn. A case study on learning scenarios in a 
microblogging context”, The 6th International Scientific Conference 
eLearning and Software for Education, Bucharest, April 15-16, 
2010. 
[8] 
J. 
Hart, 
“Top 
100 
Tools 
for 
Learning 
2009, 
http://c4lpt.co.uk/recommended, latest access date Dec.14, 2010. 
[9] 
http://www.cirip.ro/grup/wetentm?lg=en, latest access date Dec. 14, 
2010. 
[10] http://www.delicious.com/tag/_weten, latest access date Dec. 14, 
2010. 
[11] G. Grosseck, “To use or not to use web 2.0 in higher education?”, 
New Trends and Issues in Educational Sciences, World Conference 
on Educational Sciences, Nicosia, North Cyprus, 4-7 February, 
2009.
39
eL&mL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-120-5

