A New Telesupervision System Integrated in an
Intelligent Networked Operating Room
Marcus Koeny, Marian Walter, Steffen Leonhardt
Chair for Medical Information Technology
RWTH Aachen University
Aachen, Germany
koeny@hia.rwth-aachen.de, walter@hia.rwth-aachen.de,
leonhardt@hia.rwth-aachen.de
Michael Czaplik, Rolf Rossaint
Department of Anaesthesiology
University Hospital Aachen
Aachen, Germany
mczaplik@ukaachen.de, rrossaint@ukaachen.de
Abstract—In this article, a telesupervision system for the
anesthesiologist is presented. It makes use of a manufacturer
independent standard for a networked operating room, which
is currently under development in a research project called
smartOR. The telesupervision system itself is part of the
smartOR network and consists of a workstation at the anes-
thesiologist’s workplace and a remote tablet PC, a supervisor
can use. Besides a short description of the smartOR network,
this work shows the technical principles of the anesthesiology
workstation and telesupervision system called SomnuCare.
Furthermore, some exemplary opportunities a networked oper-
ating room can offer are presented, based on a data acquisition
during surgery in the University Hospital Aachen.
Keywords-telesupervision;
anesthesiology;
smart
operating
room; network
I. INTRODUCTION
Currently, most of the devices in an operating room
are stand alone, each having its own display and control
panel for human interaction. In Figure 1 such a scenario
from the anesthesiologists view can be seen. It is obviously
challanging to observe all these displays, operate the devices
and locate possible acoustic alarms, especially in critical
situations. A further issue is the communication between the
anesthesiologistical and the surgical team. Due to hygienic
reasons there is often a barrier between the patients head,
respectively the anesthesiologist’s workplace, and the sur-
gical team, which complicates the communication between
the anesthesiologist and the surgical team.
Networking all devices in the operating room can improve
the efﬁciency of the operating room staff and therefore im-
prove the patients safety [2]. It can help breaking the barrier
between the surgeon and the anesthesiologist using central
displays, which shows individually optimized information
for every side of the barrier. For several special procedures
like cardiac surgery, shared, central monitors for vital data
are already common. Telesupervision systems [3] would
even beneﬁt from such a network. They can easily acquire
information from the whole network without effort and are
able to support the patients treatment in critical situations by
an experienced supervisor. Furthermore, intelligent patient
Figure 1.
Operating room scenario [1]
alarms can be generated and displayed using all information
available in the network.
A. State of the art
As above mentioned, most of the devices are stand alone.
The patient monitor and the anesthetic machine are linked in
most cases, via proprietary or semi proprietary protocols like
Draeger Medibus [4]. In the meantime, ﬁrst approaches to an
integrated networked operating room were made for example
by Olympus [5] or Brainlab [6]. A further restriction is
that only manufacturers which are able to implement the
proprietary standard are able to integrate their own devices.
This certiﬁcation process is expensive and time consuming,
so new innovations can enter slowly into the operating room.
As telesupervision systems for the operating room, espe-
cially for anesthesia purposes, only prototypes like [3] exist.
One is the previous version of the SomnuCare system, which
was mentioned before. Patient alarms are, in most cases,
generated by each device on its own. They are primarily
triggered by exceeding pre-deﬁned limits. There are other
concepts like the medical device plug and play [7]. But, there
are currently no systems which are able to generate alarms
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

regarding the anesthesiology with an integrated supervision
system.
B. The vision
Assuming that all devices in an operating room are
networked and able to exchange information, it is possible
to build a central display for both sides of the barrier,
optimized for their special requirements. The display on the
surgical side for example could show only the relevant vital
data for the surgeons. On the anesthesia side, the monitor
shows vital signs, ventilator settings, respiration parameters.
All of these displays can be further optimized to adapt
displayed information to the current workﬂow. For example
alarm limits can be adopted or the anesthesiologist can
be warned if the depth of the anesthesia is not adequate,
depending on the current state of the surgical intervention.
Additionally, the anesthesiologist can consult a colleague
in critical situations using the integrated telesupervision
system. Smart alarms could support the anesthesiologist and
the supervisor to get a quick overview of the current patient’s
situation.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. The smartOR network standard
The smartOR network [8] standard is still in development,
hence the current state is described. As a physical commu-
nication layer, Ethernet will be used, as it is a commonly
used standard and it is already used and approved in many
medical applications like MDPNP [7] or Draeger Inﬁnity
network [9]. To solve problems with the Ethernet CSMA/CD
protocol in time critical networks each operating room has
its own network and is connected to the hospital IT via
a special gateway. This reduces network load, because the
gateway ﬁlters irrelevant trafﬁc from other networks. As
upper layer IP with UDP or TCP will be used, with a
SOAP protocol as a web service architecture [10]. The
complete context of the smartOR network and the developed
anesthesia system is described in Figure 2. The gateway only
exchanges relevant data between the networks. For example
vital signs from the smartOR network are not transmitted to
the clinic IT. Otherwise DICOM images can be send to the
smartOR network for analysis during the surgery, whereas
other information from the clinic network is ﬁltered out.
B. Network structure
As shown in Figure 2, the smartOR network is the central
component. All devices supporting the smartOR protocol
in the operating room are connected via Ethernet. For the
connection to the clinic IT a gateway is used, as described
in Section II-A. This ensures an isolation of the smartOR
network of each operating room and the clinic network. The
anesthesia workstation is connected to the smartOR network,
too. As central processing and viewing component of the
anesthesiologist’s workplace, it has much more features. It
Hospital IT
smartOR
gateway
smartOR network
Tracking system
Endoscope
Anaesthesia workstation
HR
83
LL Lead Off
NIBP
120
80
HR
83
LL Lead Off
NIBP
120
80
Tablet PC
W-LAN
Patient monitor
HR
83
NIBP
120
80
Propofol
15 ml/h
Infusion pumps
Figure 2.
Network structure
integrates devices of the anesthesiologist’s workplace and
therefore all of the devices are directly connected to the
workstation. Necessary data of the anesthesiologist’s devices
can be converted to the smartOR protocol and be provided
to other smartOR devices. Ideally, all devices should be
connected to the smartOR network, but especially the anes-
thesiologist’s devices like patient monitor, respirator and
perfusion pumps are critical. The necessary modiﬁcations
of such devices could not be made during the research
project. Due to high requirements in data processing for vital
signs, it is necessary to process the data stream without any
interruption at data rates of up to 200 Hz with up to 50
channels. Furthermore, a continuously transmission must be
ensured without interruptions. Hence, the remote tablet PC
for the supervisor is directly connected to the anesthesia
workstation and not to the smartOR network. Additionally
the direct connection allows the workstation a pre-processing
of vital signs and enables it to send these directly to the
tablet pc without diversion over the smartOR network. The
anesthesiologist’s workstation and telesupervision system is
described in the following part.
C. The anaesthesia workstation
BIS
50
HR
75
SpO2
75
Anaesthesia and 
Monitoring
Pumps
Camera
Headset
Anaesthesiologist
Supervisor
Anaesthesiologist
Patient Data
Live Video
Live Audio
Conference
HR
75
SpO2
75
ml/h
15
Anaesthesia Workstation
Figure 3.
Telesupervision system. Modiﬁed after [3]
The essential parts of the anesthesiologist’s workplace are
shown in Figure 3. The workstation supplies the smartOR
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

components with the necessary physiologic vital signs and
retrieves the relevant data from the smartOR network. This
can be events like start of the surgical intervention or
other critical procedures. All of the data processed by the
workstation can be transmitted to the supervisor via wireless
LAN. Additionally to the vital signs, events and alarms, a
live video stream from the operating room and a live audio
conference can be transmitted.
D. Description of the SomnuCare software
An overview of the important elements of the SomnuCare
software can be seen in Figure 4. The central element
is the memory mapped ﬁle engine. It stores and caches
all data from the interfaces, where each memory mapped
ﬁle represents one vital sign. Data acquisition is done by
the interfaces described in Section II-D1. All interfaces
in SomnuCare have a speciﬁc API, which is equal to all
interfaces. This concept enables the programmer to add
further interfaces for data acquisition without change of
other parts of SomnuCare. Furthermore, the telesupervision
server emulates an interface for the supervisors tablet PC
and mirrors all data stored in the memory mapped ﬁles to a
special interface on the tablet PC.
1) SCInterface: All interfaces in SomnuCare have a spe-
ciﬁc API. This makes it easy to implement and integrate new
devices into the workstation. The complete communication
and handling with the connected device is done by the
interface, so independently from the physical connection
each device can be integrated in SomnuCare. The interface
only has to implement functions like conﬁguration, starting,
stopping and resetting the interface. Every interface holds
an internal state machine, which is controlled by these
functions. This enables SomnuCare to automatically handle
different types of connected devices the same way. Received
data are directly written by the interface to the memory
mapped ﬁle engine. For each data stream or vital sign one
ﬁle is used.
2) Memory Mapped File engine: The memory mapped
ﬁle engine makes use of the operating system’s memory
mapped ﬁle API and supports reading and writing data to
a segmented memory mapped ﬁle. So, writing and reading
data is cached via operating system functions on the one
hand. On the other hand, the memory mapped ﬁle is a
complete log ﬁle of all inserted data. The engine supports
only one writer which can append data to the memory
mapped ﬁle. This is sufﬁcient because the interfaces are the
only writers to the memory mapped ﬁle and they only need
to append data, because the vital signs are time continuous.
As it can be seen in Figure 5, more readers are allowed. This
is necessary because the data from the interfaces are needed
in parts of the software. The GUI as viewing element needs
access to the last appended piece of data, the telesupervision
server must send the last inserted piece of data to the
client and the smartOR interface needs to send data on
request. To save memory not the whole ﬁle is mapped into
...
Vital sign stream from interface
seg.
1
seg.
2
seg.
3
seg.
4
seg.
n-1
...
Random access for multiple reader
Figure 5.
Memory Mapped File
memory. For writing, only the last segment is allocated.
If the last segment is full, the ﬁle will be expanded with
the segments size and this new segment will be allocated.
The reading function is able to randomly access segments.
To improve the performance of multiple readers, appended
data are tagged as new, so with a special read function only
new recently appended data can be retrieved. The control
of the memory mapped ﬁle is done via a special control
segment. This is held in a separate memory mapped ﬁle, the
control ﬁle. It stores information for the segment handler and
tagging new data. Furthermore individual information about
the data held in the memory mapped ﬁle can be stored in
the control segment.
3) Telesupervision server:
The telesupervision server
mirrors all data in all memory mapped ﬁles over the wireless
network to a client. It makes use of the memory mapped
ﬁle engine and sends all new data over the network. On the
client side the receiver is implemented as a regular interface
(IfNetwork) so there is no modiﬁcation needed for the clients
except activating the IfNetwork interface and setting the
IP address of the server. It acts as a normal interface, but
additionally renames the vital signs and therefore emulates
the interfaces from the server. Like all other interfaces the
IfNetwork interface must implement the state machine for
the interface state. This enables the network interface to
automatically reconnect after a WLAN disconnect or any
other failure. After such a disconnect the IfNetwork tries,
as fast as possible, to reconnect and load missing data and
then continuous with normal operation. The vital signs are
automatically cached by the memory mapped ﬁle engine
described in Section II-D2. Due to automatic caching and
the consistency of the memory mapped ﬁles, no data will
be lost, so a resynchronization is not necessary.
4) Graphical user interface: The graphical user interface
is implemented as a QT grid [11] layout. It can be cus-
tomized via a conﬁguration stored in a SQLite database, but
the standard view is similar to the one of a patient monitor.
5) Simulation interface: The simulation interface is used
to evaluating the new alarming concepts. It is able to load
saved memory mapped ﬁles and CDF data. These data are
send to SomnuCare in deﬁned time steps to simulate a
conventional interface. This enables the user to replay a
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

SCInterface
...
Patient data
Memory mapped file storage
Telesupervision Server
From file
SomnuCare
Patient data
Patient data
Matlab
Export
Type:
Patient monitor
Manufacturer:
Datex Ohmeda
Connection:
RS232
IfDatexAS3
Type:
Patient monitor
Manufacturer:
Philips
Connection:
Ethernet / UDP
IfMP70
Type:
Suringe pump
Manufacturer:
BBraun
Connection:
Rs232 / Dianet
IfBBRaun
Type:
smartOR interf.
Connection:
Ethernet / SOAP
IfsmartOR
Type:
Input from
ComnuCare
server
Connection:
WLAN - TCP/IP
IfNetwork
Simulates 
interfaces
with loaded
data from other
files
IfSimulation
From smartOR
Emulates data which 
can be read from
IfNetwork 
smartOR output
Sends generated and 
data from interfaces to 
the smartOR network
Graphical user interface
Handles data storage and 
caching for all vitals signs
HR
83
LL Lead Off
NIBP
120
80
Figure 4.
Functional diagramm of SomnuCare
scenario faster than normal time for studies evaluating the
new smart alarms.
E. Data acquisition during surgery
The described data acquisition during surgery is the
foundation of the alarm system integrated in SomnuCare.
First the realization of this data acquisition is described.
After that the ﬁrst approach to the smart alarms is described
in Section II-E2.
1) Realization of the data acquisition: In order to im-
prove comparability of the collected data, similar surgical
interventions, most of them laparoscopic, were selected for
recording. Anonymous data acquisition took place at the
University Hospital Aachen (UKA) after approval by the
local ethics committee within a time period of three weeks.
Generally, the most important steps were pointed out as
milestones:
• Start of the presence of the anesthesiologist
• Start of anesthetization
• Approval for surgery
• Start of the surgical preparation
• Start of the surgical intervention
• End of the surgical intervention
• End of the surgical wrap-up
• End of anesthesia
• End of presence of the anesthesiologist
Furthermore the following events were recorded:
• Anesthetic events, like intubation or inserting of a
stomach tube
• Surgical events like skin incision, intra-operative relo-
cation
• Intravenous drug injection
All vital signs and information from the following devices
were recorded:
• Datex Ohmeda AS/3 patient monitor
• Draeger Cicero and Cato anesthetic machine connected
over Datex monitor
• Up to four BBraun perfusor infusion pumps
This represents the standard setup in the UKA for these
surgical interventions and resulted in the following recorded
vital signs:
• Heart rate, non-invasive and/or invasive blood pressure,
oxygen saturation
• Respiratory rate, tidal volumes, pressures, fractions of
end-tidal CO2, O2 and anesthetic gases
• Anesthesia agents via perfusion pumps or and/or anes-
thetic gas concentration via the anesthetic machine
For recording all the vital signs and events, a special
software has been developed. This software is a prerelease of
SomnuCare and is able to capture the data from Datex and
BBraun serial interfaces and store them as comma separated
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

text ﬁles. The events and milestones were recorded using
the software as well, so all timestamps have the same time
basis. Furthermore the patients sex, weight, age and size
were recorded.
In total, data from 17 surgical interventions were recorded.
(8 female, 9 male patients) A balanced anesthesia using
anesthetic gases was carried out in 8 cases, the remaining
9 received a total intravenous anesthesia using propofol and
remifentanil.
After 15 seconds
Alarm acknowledged
Alarm acknowledged
&
trend twards limits
Trend out of limits
Vital sign out of limits
Vital sign within limits
Vital sign within limits
Red alarm
Orange alarm
Yellow alarm
No Alarm
Figure 6.
Stateﬂow
2) First approach to smart alarms: As a ﬁrst approach to
intelligent alarms, the following state machine was imple-
mented for every important vital sign, for example like heard
rate, non-invasive blood pressure and oxygen saturation.
Compared to conventional alarms, which are triggered by
exceeding pre-conﬁgured but ﬁxed limits, the state machine
considers the change of the vital sign after exceeding the
limits. So, the concept of classical limits is kept, but sup-
plemented with the state machine after the alarm rises. The
alarm is rated into four conditions, similar to a trafﬁc light.
• RED for a serious danger for the patient
• ORANGE for a situation with a potential danger for
the patient
• YELLOW for the phase after a RED or ORANGE
alarm is cleared
• GREEN for no alarm
The resulting state machine and ﬂow diagram can be seen in
Figure 6. For evaluation the state machine was implemented
in Matlab/Simulink/Stateﬂow [12]. The results are presented
in Section III-B.
III. RESULTS
Some parts described in this paper like the smartOR
protocol and the integration of the anesthesia workstation
into the smartOR network are work in progress. Therefore,
the authors cannot present any results regarding these parts.
A. SomnuCare software
The SomnuCare software is, except the smartOR part,
fully functional. It will be improved continuously as well
as its design.
1) Memory mapped ﬁle: The memory mapped ﬁle engine
has been tested and veriﬁed by regular software operation.
By only allocating needed segments, we have a much better
memory efﬁcient use. As tested under Microsoft Windows
7 the allocation granularity of the segments is 64 KB. So
only 128 KB are reserved for one reading and one writing
segment for each memory mapped ﬁle. Compared to a 12
channel ECG signal sampled with 100 Hz over one hour
and each value stored as double with 8 Byte timestamp
which needs 66 MB this signal stored under the same
condition with the memory mapped ﬁle. Regarding a surgical
intervention lasting 5 hours with multiple other vital signs
recorded, the beneﬁt is obvious. Because of the pointer
exchange function the MS Windows API offers there is
nearly no overhead due to the allocation algorithm.
2) Wireless LAN connection to the client: The WLAN
connection is currently in implementation. First tests showed
a good performance. Disconnects are handled directly by the
interface manager, which reconnects the interface as soon
as possible with the device, in this case with the server.
It should be noted that for the network interface a faster
handling should be implemented by the manager. For short
disconnects, which can depend on the network architecture,
it is not sufﬁcient to wait 2 seconds for the reconnect. Exact
timing measurements have not yet be done, but will follow.
B. Data acquisition during surgery
The beneﬁt of this concept can be demonstrated by the
following example in Figure 7: The patient shows a strong
reaction to the anesthesia agents. The blood pressure and
heart rate decreases. As reaction to this, the anesthesiologist
decreases the anesthesia depth. Once the skin incision occurs
the patient reacts heavily to this pain stimulus. The heart rate
and blood pressure increase rapidly and on the O2 curve
spontaneous breathing can be seen, due to an inadequate
depth of analgesia. The above described state machine is
currently not able to prevent the situation, but can relieve
the anesthesiologist from unnecessary raised alarms. Pos-
sibly advising the physician of a trend (like an increasing
blood pressure), at an early stage, would result in a more
appropriate behavior of the anesthesiologist. Compared with
the state diagram in Figure 6, the blood pressure alarm will
raise directly after the skin incision, because the alarm limits
are exceeded. For the ﬁrst 15 seconds it will turn to an
orange alarm. If nobody acknowledges the alarm it will turn
into a red one. If the alarm is acknowledged, it will turn into
an orange one and as long as the blood pressure shows a
falling trend it will turn into a yellow alarm with no acoustic
warnings. If the vital sign is back in normal range, the alarm
is switched off and reaches the green state. Compared to
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

conventional alarms, the alarms rises every 2 minutes with
an acoustic sound.
0:15
0:30
0:45
1:00
1:15
1:30
1:45
time
60
70
80
90
100
110
HR
1
0
50
100
150
200
250
NIBP
0:00
0:15
0:30
0:45
1:00
1:15
1:30
1:45
time
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Rate (ml/h)
1
Remifentanil
Propofol
0:15
0:30
0:45
1:00
1:15
1:30
1:45
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
CO2 / RR
1
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
O2
Preparation into operating area
Skin incision
heart rate
systolic blood pressure
diastolic blood pressure
mean blood pressure
time
CO2 end-tidal
OS end-tidal
respiration ratio
Figure 7.
Recorded data of a patient during a surgery
So, at this point the alarm state machine is based only
on the information of one vital sign, as described in Section
II-E2. This reduces the number of unnecessary alarms essen-
tially and helps the anesthesiologist to keep an overview in
critical situations. For example a conventional alarm which
is generated by exceeded limits can only be switched off for
2 minutes and then raises again. The described concept is
only a basic example and it is still in development.
IV. DISCUSSION AND OUTLOOK
A. Multi operating room ability
As described in Section II-A, the smartOR network is
an isolated network for each operating room, which is only
connected to the hospital IT via a special gateway, due to
security reasons. Hence exchanging data between different
operating rooms is difﬁcult, but usually not necessary, the
telesupervision system can only be connected to one oper-
ating room. However in reality the supervisor must be able
to supervise more than one operating room. One possible
realization could be a network between the gateways of each
operating room connected to a central Wireless LAN access
point, which is accessed by the supervisors tablet PC. This
is more efﬁcient than realizing a Wireless LAN for every
operating room and switching between them, because the
tablet PC is only able to login to one WLAN at the same
time.
B. Data acquisition during surgery
With the basic concept described above it is only possible
to reduce the number of unnecessary acoustic alarms. As
mentioned in Section II-E2 the system cannot prevent the
above described situation, because the actual context of the
surgical intervention is not considered and the state machine
analyses only one vital sign. Furthermore the state machine
should consider multiple vital signs for a smart alarm.
In the future the state machine will be developed further
to analyze heart rate, blood pressure, CO2/O2 concentration
and depleted anesthesia agents at the same time. Furthermore
the state of the surgical intervention will be considered. This
will enable the system to recognize the trend in future and
support the anesthesiologist during the anesthesia.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The project is supported by the Federal Ministry of
Economics and Technology. Furthermore the authors would
thank Christoph Schorn and Paul Voigtlaender for the great
programming support.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Walter, “Telesupervision und automatisierung in der ans-
thesie,” VDE Kongress 2006 Aachen.
[2] J. Goldman, “Advancing the adoption of medical device
plug-and-play interoperability to improve patient safety and
healthcare efﬁciency,” Medical Device ”Plug-and-Play” Inter-
operability Program, Tech. Rep., 2000.
[3] M. Walter, A. Kanert, S. Macko, J. Schnoor, R. Rossaint, and
S. Leonhardt, “Tele-assist system for anaesthesia,” European
Society for Computing and Technology in Anesthesia and
Intensive Care (ESTIAC), 2006.
[4] “Draeger medical company website (last visited: June 2011)
http://www.draeger.com.”
[5] “Olympus
company
website
(last
visited:
June
2011)
http://www.olympus.com.”
[6] “Brainlab
company
website
(last
visited:
June
2011)
http://www.brainlab.com.”
[7] “Medical device ”plug-and-play” website (last visited: June
2011) http://mdpnp.org.”
[8] “Website
smartor
project
(last
visited:
June
2011)
http://www.smartor.de.”
[9] (2011, Jun.) Draeger inﬁnity protocol. [Online]. Available:
http://www.draeger.de
[10] J. Benzko, B. Ibach, and K. Radermacher, “Der traum vom
plug u. play im op,” MED engineering, vol. 03-04, pp. 76–79,
2011.
[11] “Qt website / layout management (last visited: June 2011)
http://doc.qt.nokia.com/latest/layout.html.”
[12] “The mathworks company website (last visited: June 2011)
http://www.mathworks.com.”
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

