   
MTM Parameters Optimization for 64-FFT 
Cognitive Radio Spectrum Sensing using Monte 
Carlo Simulation 
Owayed A. Alghamdi, Mosa A. Abu-Rgheff and Mohammed Z. Ahmed 
Mobile Communications Research Group 
University of Plymouth 
Plymouth PL4 8AA, UK 
{owayed.alghamdi, mosa, m.ahmed}@plymouth.ac.uk 
 
Abstract—This paper presents parameter optimization of the 
multi taper spectrum estimation method (MTM) for 64-FFT 
based cognitive radio (CR) spectrum sensing.  The design 
problem is formulated to determine the MTM parameters pair; 
the half time bandwidth product, and the number of tapers that 
maximize the performance at a fixed number of data samples. 
Maximum performance is defined by the highest probability of 
detection at a fixed false alarm probability. A Monte Carlo 
simulation is implemented to find the optimal parameters. The 
binary hypothesis test is developed to insure that the effect of 
choosing optimum MTM parameters is based upon performance 
evaluation. The whole band under sensing is divided into 
subbands, some contain primary user signal (PR), and the other 
does not. Consequentially, in addition to the variance of the 
estimate, the spectral leakage outside the PR subband is included 
in the performance evaluation. We found that the half time 
bandwidth product of 4 and 5 tapers gives the highest 
performance. We examined both MTM and periodogram (i.e., 
energy detector) methods in Gaussian (AWGN) and Rayleigh flat 
fading environments. The CR system performance using the 
MTM technique outperforms the performance of the same 
system that uses periodogram in all the cases we examined. 
 
Keywords-cognitive radio; spectrum sensing; multitaper spectrum 
estimation.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
High data rate applications in the emerging wireless 
technologies are faced with the problem of the ever-increasing 
scarcity of spectrum, coupled with the underutilization of the 
current licensed spectrum.  Cognitive radio’s basic idea is the 
opportunistic use of the unused spectrum of a licensed PR 
user.  Consequently, CR technology is expected to become an 
increasingly popular part of future wireless networking 
technologies.  
Cognitive radio, proposed by Mitola in 1999 [1], addresses 
the problem of secondary usage of underutilized spectrum 
using techniques of accurate spectrum sensing. It intelligently 
interacts with its operational environment to dynamically and 
autonomously 
adjust 
the 
radio 
operating 
parameters 
accordingly, to avoid interference with PR transmission. 
The key enabling functionality for practical CR concept is 
a reliable spectrum sensing scheme to avoid harmful 
interference to licensed users. The classical spectrum sensing 
techniques 
such 
as 
the 
matched 
filtering 
and 
the 
cyclostationary detector have high performance for CR 
applications [2-4]. But such techniques require prior 
information about PR’s signaling. The periodogram (i.e., 
energy detector) is a simple method at the expense of 
performance. Large variance, and bad biasing of the power 
spectrum estimates are main drawbacks of periodogram [5]. 
Thomson proposed the ‘Multitaper spectral estimation 
Method (MTM)’ to produce single spectrum estimate by 
multiplying the sampled data by several leakage resistant 
tapers [6]. Haykin , on the other hand, suggested the use of 
MTM as an efficient method for spectrum sensing in cognitive 
radio systems [7].   
The CR systems using the Orthogonal Frequency Division 
Multiplexing (OFDM) technology have the ability to 
dynamically fill the spectrum holes by activating the available 
OFDM 
subcarriers, 
and 
deactivating 
the 
remaining 
subcarriers. The FFT operation in the OFDM demodulation 
process can be used for the analysis of the spectral activity of 
the licensed users [8].  
Practically, using the MTM in the OFDM-based CR 
systems will be supported by the already available IFFT/FFT 
processors to perform the spectrum estimations. MTM has to 
be optimized for implementation in OFDM-based CR systems. 
Half time bandwidth product (NW) and the number of tapers 
(K) play key functions in the MTM process. In [9], and in 
[10], the recommended range of NW is recommended to be 
between 4 and 10, and K between 10 and 16.  
Based on these recommendations, it is clear that such 
parameters are still an open issue, and have to be optimized 
towards achieving high performance and low complexity by 
determining a specific number of tapers.  
In this paper, we consider issues of optimizing the MTM 
parameters for 64-FFT CR systems. In order to determine the 
optimal NW, and K we examine the performance using the 
107
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

binary hypothesis. The objective is to include the spectral 
leakage effect and the large variance as performance metric 
parameters in the evaluation to determine the NW, and K that 
maximize the performance. A Monte Carlo simulation is 
implemented for the formulated problem. A comparison to the 
periodogram is presented in term of performance and 
complexity.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
defines the model for the system under consideration and 
reviews 
MTM 
technique. 
Section 
III 
considers 
the 
optimization of the MTM parameters used in the system 
model. Section IV presents the results and Section V 
concludes the paper. 
II. 
SYSTEM MODEL  
Our system model consists of a single PR transmit/receive 
node, transmitting QPSK-OFDM signal in the sub-band 
between    and     as shown in Fig. 1, and an OFDM-based 
CR sensor (node) that detects the PR user’s signal and decides 
whether the PR’s signal is present or absent in the searched 
frequency band. 
A family of orthonormal tapers is generated using Discrete 
Prolate Slepian Sequences (DPSS) [10], of length N to 
concentrate the received PR energy in the frequency interval 
   between       . The total number of sequences (tapers) 
produced, is             = N   , and K is the number of 
tapers used in the estimation. The associated eigenvalues of 
the  K  tapers, are                            
             . The     taper is represented by 
  
        , where            , is a time index. 
The received PR signal at a CR sensor (node) is sampled to 
generate a finite discrete time samples series       
           that is ‘dot multiplied’ with different tapers. 
The product is applied to Fourier Transform to compute the 
energy concentrated in the bandwidth        centred at 
frequency  . For    orthonormal tapers, there will be    
different eigenspectrums produced and defined as :  
          
                  
   
   
                   
 
where                   are the normalized frequency 
bins.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. System Model. 
The spectrum estimate given by Thomson’s theoretical 
work is defined as: 
                    
 
                   
   
 
          
   
                      
On the other hand, the periodogram method, when the 
samples are taken at uniform time spacing, gives the power 
spectrum density estimation as: 
            
             
   
   
 
 
                            
III. 
OPTIMAZIATION OF MTM PARAMETERS 
Maximum-likelihood methods provide an optimal estimate 
of the power spectrum. MTM technique is an approximation 
to the Maximum-likelihood power spectral estimates but at 
reduced computation  [11], [12]. The main motivation of the 
work presented in this paper is to fnd the MTM parameters 
that optimize the performance of this technique. 
In this section, we investigate the optimization of MTM 
parameters in OFDM-based CR systems.  The CR transceiver 
carries out 64-IFFT/FFT digital processing for both 
transmission and receiving operations. Consequently, the 
MTM processing in the spectrum sensing will not add 
additional hardware at the receiver except for taper sequences 
generation, multiplication and adding operations. 
MTM tolerates the classical problems which occurred in 
spectrum estimation by averaging over a number of 
orthonormal 
tapers/windows. 
The 
tapering 
sequences 
concentrate the energy within a bandwidth  , where  
     . The half time bandwidth product    determines 
the bandwidth resolution for fixed length . As the half time-
bandwidth product decreases, the half bandwidth   decreases 
resulting in higher resolution in the spectrum sensing and vice 
versa. The main spectrum lobe of each taper/window is 2NW 
frequency bins (where the FFT- frequency bin spacing is 1/N)  
[13]. Thus in OFDM-based CR applications with 64-FFT, the 
main band under sensing can be divided into a number of 
subbands based on the half time bandwidth product. For 
example using NW=2, means that there will be 16 subbands 
with 2W width each, and then the main lobe is 4 frequency 
bins out of the 64. Therefore in such applications the useful 
half time bandwidth products should be 0.5,1,2,4,8, or 16, and 
32 to concentrate the energy in one band, which is the whole 
band under sensing; consequently, the higher edge of the half 
time bandwidth is 16.  
 Furthermore, the number of the tapers in the higher 
resolution sensing is smaller than that in the lower resolution 
since the total number of tapers is            .  
The eignevalues         of the first few tapers for the 
higher bandwidth resolution is much smaller than eignvalues 
in the lower resolution which implies that lower bandwidth 
resolution sequences have more energy concentration than 
sequences in the higher bandwidth resolution.   
 
   
  
   
   
  
PSD 
Primary 
Signal+Noise 
Noise 
Noise 
108
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

Furthermore, the first few eigenvalues of a specific time 
half bandwidth product are close to one. As the number of 
taper sequences increases, the eigenvalues decrease indicating 
bad bias properties, and as the  number of tapers decreases, the 
eigenvalues increase towards 1 indicating good bias 
properties.  
Our work for choosing appropriate values of NW and K for 
MTM estimator uses two approaches: in the first approach, we 
compute the power spectral density using (2) to show that 
random choice of these values may generate a lot of leakage 
causing an increase in false alarm probability during the 
estimation process. These results are presented in Fig. 2, and 
Fig. 3. The second approach is Monte Carlo simulation to 
estimate the probabilities of detection and false alarm for 
various values of NW, K and SNR, and then to find the 
optimal (NW, K). 
Fig. 2 shows the PR’s power spectral density (PSD) 
computed using (2) with NW=4, and 16 where the number of 
tapers used is K=5, and 25 respectively at AWGN channel 
with SNR=  5dB and number of averaged samples is 2500.  
PR transmits OFDM-QPSK signal from normalized frequency 
      to       with power normalized to one over the 
whole band. Both PR and CR use 64-IFFT/FFT signal 
processing. CR receiver implements MTM to estimate the 
PR’s PSD using different values for NW and K parameters.  
The ideal curve represents the levels of noise, and noise plus 
signal.  We can clearly note how much power spectral leakage 
outside the PR’s signal band when using NW=16 and K=25. 
Such leakage of power will affect the decision outside the 
PR’s band by introducing more false alarms.  At the same time 
we can see how such leakage is reduced when using NW=4 
and K=5.  
Fig.3 shows the PSD for the same system with NW=8 
computed using (2). This figure clearly shows that using a 
small number of tapers K=2 introduces large variance in the 
estimate due to the averaging over small number of tapers. At 
the same time using a large number of tapers K=14 improves 
the variance but at the expense of spectral leakage which is 
noticeable in the figure. Using K=5 produces leakage that is 
between the previous two cases.   
We may conclude from these two figures that an unwise 
choice of NW and K within the range, suggested by Haykin, 
may have catastrophic results on false alarm of the MTM 
estimator. 
Fig. 4 shows a representative diagram of the MTM 
parameters’ optimization problem in a 64-FFT  based CR 
system that is used in the simulation. In our case NW axes 
values are NW=0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16. On the K axes values are 
K=1, 2, 3,…, 32. In regions    ), and    ), the half time 
bandwidth  NW has higher resolution than the other two 
regions     , and    ). At the same time   , and     have a 
small number of tapers with good bias properties at the 
expense of higher variance when used in computing the PSD 
using (2).   , and     regions have large number of tapers that 
improve the variance of the spectrum estimate, but at the 
expense of larger spectral leakage. The recommended values 
of NW, and K ranges in the literature are shown in the figure. 
Although these ranges are useful in the CR spectrum sensing, 
they still need to be optimized to get the highest performance 
for 64-FFT CR systems. In addition to maximizing the 
performance, optimum parameters will contribute to reducing 
the MTM estimator complexity. 
The mathematical derivation of the optimal MTM 
parameters is intractable. Therefore, a Monte Carlo simulation 
program has been used in this paper to examine the effect of 
the different values of NW and K on the spectral leakage 
outside the PR’s subband and the MTM estimator decision 
statistic. Consequently the binary hypotheses at each 
frequency bin will be used to evaluate MTM estimator 
performance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.  Power spectral density (PSD) using MTM computed with NW=4, and 
16 and different values of K at AWGN with SNR=  5dB. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3.  Power spectral density (PSD) using MTM with NW=8, and different 
values of K at AWGN with SNR=  5dB. 
 
 
 
 
109
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.  Representative diagram of the MTM parameters optimization problem 
for 64-FFT based CR systems. 
 
Clearly, optimizing the MTM estimator performance 
requires maximizing probability of PR signal detection     for 
a predefined probability of false alarm   . Here     is the 
probability the MTM estimator decides correctly the presence 
of the PR’s signal, and    is the probability that the MTM 
estimator decides the PR’s signal is present when it is absent.   
The binary hypothesis test for MTM spectrum sensing at 
the      time is given by: 
                                         
                                                               
 
where   = 0,1,…,L-1 is OFDM block’s index,       ,       and 
     denote the CR received, noise, and PR transmitted 
samples. The transmitted PR signal is distorted by the zero 
mean additive white Gaussian noise                  
 
 .  
Additionally the channel between PR transmitter and CR 
receiver is subjected to flat fading. The channel gain h is 
assumed to be constant during the sensing time. The time 
instant   comes from the samples over different OFDM 
blocks; and time instant t comes from the samples from the 
same OFDM block (i.e., IFFT/FFT samples). 
  Decision DEC over time interval  , and at a specific 
frequency bin using the MTM can be formulated as: 
                                         
      
 
    
   
   
                          
Thus, we can reformulate the eigenspectrum in (1), using 
(4) at the     time when the binary hypothesis    is valid to be 
as follows: 
                  
                              
   
   
           
The decision at a specific frequency bin over the spectrum 
sensing time duration L can be rewritten using (6) to be as 
follows: 
                    
  
  
 
         
  
                              
   
   
 
 
   
   
 
          
   
              
   
   
 
When using the periodogram, the decision can be 
formulated as: 
                                        
     
     
   
   
                                 
By rewriting (8) using (3) and (4), the decision at a 
specific frequency bin using the periodogram when the binary 
hypothesis    is valid, is as follow: 
           
                           
   
   
 
   
   
 
             
The detection and false alarm probabilities at each 
frequency bin are defined as: 
                                                           
                                                         
 
The threshold  , is defined according to the noise 
variance       
 
.  The decision statistics (             
         ) are calculated at each frequency bin using (4) to 
(9), and then the probabilities of detection and false alarm can 
be evaluated by comparing the decision statistic to the 
predefined threshold  over a number of realizations using (10). 
The binary hypothesis     will be examined through all 
frequency bins that don’t contain PR’ signal (i.e.,     
                  . The binary hypothesis    will be 
examined through all frequency bins that contain the PR’s 
(i.e.,             ).  
The probability of detection     over the band under 
sensing can be achieved from the averaged summation of the 
individual probability of detection        of the all the bins 
which lie within the subbands used by the PR user, and can be 
written as: 
                                           
 
           
     
  
                                  
The probability of false alarm     over the band under 
sensing can be achieved from the averaged summation of the 
individual probability of false alarm         of the all the bins 
which lie within the subbands outside the PR’s subband, and 
can be written as: 
Recom. NW: 
NW= 4 to 10 in [9]. 
NW=6 to10 in [10]. 
 
 
 
 
 
NW 
K 
   
   
   
   
16 
32 
K=10 to 16 
Recom. in[9] ,[10 ] 
Point (NW, K)? 
For High      at fixed     
110
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

                      
 
             
    
  
      
  
       
  
                 
where 32 represents the total number of frequency bins of the 
hypotheses     , and      of the model.   
The optimization problem here can be written simply as: 
                                                         
where   is a constant false alarm, and is assumed as 10% in 
this paper. 
The complexity of MTM estimator for producing the 
spectrum estimate at a specific frequency bin     and N-FFT 
over L OFDM-Blocks, in terms of the number of mathematical 
operations (i.e., adding, and multiplication) is defined as: 
                                                               
Using the periodogram to produce spectrum estimate at a 
specific frequency bin    , the complexity can be defined as 
follows: 
                                                                                          
IV. 
SIMULATION RESULTS  
 The frequency band under study is divided into three non-
overlapped subbands as shown in Fig. 1. The PR user is 
transmitting QPSK-OFDM signal using the subband between 
the frequencies    16 to     48, and with normalized 
averaged power of 1 over the whole band. The PR user’s 
transmitter uses 64-IFFT with sampling frequency 20 MHz, 
where the symbol duration    0.05µs. The CR’s node uses 
64-FFT with sampling frequency 20 MHz as well. The 
performance is evaluated using number of samples at the CR 
user’ 
node 
as 
                  
1280, 
which 
corresponds to sensing time of     , that is sensing process is 
carried out every   20 OFDM blocks. In all cases of 
simulations the results are averaged over 100000 simulation 
runs. The channels considered in the simulation are AWGN 
with zero mean and variance       
 
, and Rayleigh flat fading. 
The probabilities of detection for NW= 0.5, 1, and using 
different number of tapers are shown in table І. The wireless 
channel is assumed to be AWGN with SNR     dB. The 
threshold   that gives probability of false alarm 10% was 
estimated by Monte Carlo simulation using computer software 
platform. This threshold is then substitutes in (7) to (12) to 
find probability of detection and in (13) to find optimum NW 
and K. The highest probability of detection was found as 
   =98.8150%, which is achieved using NW=2 and K=3 tapers 
in the spectrum sensing.  
Fig. 5 shows the probability of detection versus the 
number of tapers when the half time bandwidth product was as 
NW= 4, 8, and 16, at the same wireless environment applied 
before. We note that each curve has three different behaviors. 
It starts from a lower point that represents the minimum 
probability of detection which is achieved by the first taper. 
Then it increases sharply to a peak point, and starts finally to 
level off. The peak point for the different NW in this case is at 
K=5 tapers. Table II summarizes the probability of detection 
for NW=4, 8, and 16 for K=1, and 5 that obtained from Fig. 5. 
The highest probability of detection is     99.7138%, which 
is achieved using NW=4, and K=5. Generally, 5 tapers is a 
good compromise between the good bias properties, and 
improved variance. However, the maximum value of     may 
vary with the wireless environment conditions Additionally, 
NW=4 is the optimal resolution that gives the highest 
performance.    
 
TABLE І.  PROBABILITY OF DEDECTION FOR NW=0.5, 
1,2  AND DIFFERENT K AT AWGN (SNR= 5dB) WHEN 
FALSE ALARM IS 10%. 
 
NW 
    (%) 
K=1 
K=2 
K=3 
K=4 
0.5 
83.233 
- 
- 
- 
1 
81.2166 
87.7376 
- 
- 
2 
75.9459 
90.7959 
98.8150 
98.560 
 
TABLE II.  PROBABILITY OF DEDECTION FOR NW=4,8,16 AND 
DIFFERENT K AT AWGN (SNR= 5dB) WHEN FALSE ALARM 
IS 10%. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.  Probability of detection versus number of tapers (K) using MTM with 
different half time bandwidth products  (NW) where the probability of false 
alarm was 10% and at channel AWGN with SNR= 5dB. 
 
 
NW 
    (%) 
K=1 
K=5 
4 
73.4531 
99.7138 
8 
71.6678 
99.2422 
16 
69.1575 
98.6350 
 
111
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

Fig. 6 shows the probability of detection versus probability 
of false alarm for MTM with NW=4 using 5 tapers at AWGN 
with SNR   , and     dB. The results are compared with 
those obtained from the periodogram estimator to the same 
system. When the probability of false alarm is fixed at 10% 
and SNR     dB, the probability of the detection using the 
periodogram is less than that using the MTM with NW=4  and 
5 tapers by16 % . 
When the SNR is decreased to     dB, the probability of 
detection of the MTM spectrum sensing with NW=4, and 5 
tapers, is better than that for the periodogram by 
approximately 40% when the probability of false alarm is 
fixed at 10%. Consequently we can conclude that the MTM 
spectrum sensing performance is more robust than the 
periodogram at low SNR. 
Fig. 7 shows the probability of detection versus probability 
of false alarm using periodogram and MTM with NW=4 and 
K=5 tapers schemes. The wireless channel is Rayleigh flat 
fading channel and SNR     dB. We note that the 
probability of detection using the MTM, NW=4 and 5 tapers 
case is better than that using the periodogram by 8% when 
probability of false alarm        .  
Furthermore, comparing the results in Fig.7 with those in 
Fig.6, we conclude that the probability of detection is 
degraded in a flat fading channel compared to Gaussian 
channel for both schemes for the same probability of false 
alarm, NW, number of tapers, and SNR.  
Table III shows the complexity of the MTM spectrum 
sensing based on (14) for different number of tapers K with 
length  N=64 over one OFDM block(i.e., L=1). 
It is clear that, in addition to the high performance 
achieved by K=5, it requires less mathematical operations for 
computation compared to     cases. The periodogram 
complexity is found as 128 operations at the same conditions 
of MTM using (15). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6. Probability of detection versus probability of false alarm using MTM 
with NW=4, and K=5 compared to the periodogram at AWGN with SNR= 5 
and  10dB. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7. Probability of  detection versus probability of false alarm using MTM 
with NW=4 and K=5 tapers  and   periodogram using  Rayleigh flat fading 
channel with SNR=  5dB. 
 
 
TABLE III.  MTM COMPLEXITY EVALUATION FOR 64-
FFT OVER L=1 USING DIFFERENT K. 
MTM 
K=1 
K=5 
K=10 
K=20 
K=31 
Complexity 
193 
973 
1948 
3898 
6043 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have investigated the effects of the  
system parameters, within the range suggested in the 
literature, on the performance of the MTM spectrum sensor 
for opportunistic use by OFDM-based CR users. We have 
examined the MTM parameters to find their optimality to give 
higher probability of detection at lower probability of false 
alarm, and minimal complexity. The MTM technique has been 
analyzed and simulated in AWGN, and Rayleigh flat fading 
environments.  Our primary and secondary users were 
communicating through OFDM-based systems with 64- 
IFFT/FFT. 
Although the first few tapers (Slepian sequences) have the 
best spectral leakage properties, we found that they give the 
worst performance in terms of detection and false alarm 
probabilities. We found that unwise choice of NW and K from 
the range suggested in [9] produces catastrophic false alarms 
in the system. In our chosen 64-IFFT/FFT systems, the 
optimal number of tapers was 5 for the NW=4, 8, and 16 cases, 
and the optimal half time bandwidth product is given by 
NW=4 for 10% false alarm when system is operating in 
AWGN channel with SNR=  5 dB. For cases where NW< 4, 
for example when NW=2, the bad bias properties of the tapers 
overcome the high resolution in this system. Generally, 5 
tapers, and half time bandwidth NW=4 can be considered as 
optimal parameters for different FFT-sizes, since the change in 
FFT affects only resolution. We found that the performance of 
the system using MTM estimator is better than when using the 
periodogram estimator for any number of tapers except for one 
 
 
112
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

taper when both systems are operating at the same channel 
conditions.  
Both estimators suffer by the Rayleigh flat fading 
compared to AWGN environment. Furthermore, the MTM 
technique performance is more robust than the periodogram in 
the AWGN channel. Finally, the improvement in performance 
of the MTM estimator over the periodogram estimator comes 
at the cost of a slightly higher computational complexity. The 
additional complexity seems to be justifiable considering the 
advantages gained from using the MTM technique. 
VI. 
REFERENCES  
[1] 
J. Mitola and G. Q. Maguire, "Cognitive radio: making software radios 
more personal," IEEE personal communications, vol. 6, pp. 13-18, 1999. 
[2] 
W.-Y. L. I. F. Akyildiz, M. C. Vuran, and S. Mohantly, "Next  
Generation/dynamic spectrum access /cognitive radiowireless network: 
A survey," Elsevier Computer Networks, vol. 50, pp. 2127-2159, 
Septemper 2006. 
[3] 
M. Jun, G. Y. Li, and J. Biing Hwang, "Signal Processing in Cognitive 
Radio," Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 97, pp. 805-823, 2009. 
[4] 
T. Yucek and H. Arslan, "A survey of spectrum sensing algorithms for 
cognitive radio applications," Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 
IEEE, vol. 11, pp. 116-130, 2009. 
[5] 
D. B. Percival and A. T. Walden, Spectral analysis for physical 
applications: multitaper and conventional univariate techniques: 
Cambridge Univ Pr, 1993. 
[6] 
D. J. Thomson, "Spectrum estimation and harmonic analysis," 
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 70, pp. 1055-1096, 1982. 
[7] 
S. 
Haykin, 
"Cognitive 
radio: 
brain-empowered 
wireless 
communications," IEEE journal on selected areas in communications, 
vol. 23, pp. 201-220, 2005. 
[8] 
T. A. Weiss and F. K. Jondral, "Spectrum pooling: an innovative 
strategy for the enhancement of spectrum efficiency," IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 42, pp. S8-14, 2004. 
[9] 
S. Haykin, D. J. Thomson, and J. H. Reed, "Spectrum Sensing for 
Cognitive Radio," Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 97, pp. 849-877, 2009. 
[10] D. Slepian, "Prolate spheroidal wave functions, Fourier analysis, and 
uncertainty. V- The discrete case," Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 
57, pp. 1371–1430, 1978. 
[11] P. Stoica and T. Sundin, "On nonparametric spectral estimation," 
Circuits, Systems, and Signal Processing, vol. 18, pp. 169-181, 1999. 
[12] D. J. Thomson, "Jackknifing multitaper spectrum estimates," IEEE 
Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 24, pp. 20-30, 2007. 
[13] J. Park, C. R. Lindberg, and F. L. Vernon, "Multitaper spectral analysis 
of high-frequency seismograms," J. geophys. Res, vol. 92, pp. 675–12, 
1987. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
113
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

