Wireless Health: Making Your Devices Talk 
A Review, Solution, and Outlook for Wireless Health Connectivity 
 
Stephan Hengstler 
 
MeshEye Consulting 
Campbell, California, United States 
hengstler@alumni.stanford.edu 
 
 
Abstract—With 
the 
technological 
revolution 
in 
digital 
networking and connectivity over the past two decades, the 
healthcare sector is at the beginning of a dramatic overhaul. 
These technologies have already made their way into our 
everyday lives and thus changing the way we do things. The 
healthcare industry with its resistance to change has started 
considering, evaluating, and embracing the way connectivity 
can change medical treatment and personal health. In this 
paper, we review the state-of-the-art in medical device 
connectivity with a focus on wireless solutions. Throughout the 
paper, the discussion separately studies the three major care 
delivery settings: clinical, office, and home. Based on the 
challenges and requirements that each of these settings 
present, we discuss the key aspects needed for medical device 
connectivity to succeed from both a technological and financial 
perspective. Cellular connectivity can satisfy many of these key 
aspects. Therefore, we have proposed and operated a testbed 
for cellular connectivity into Electronic Health Record (EHR) 
systems, which we present and report on here for the first time. 
The paper concludes with a longer term outlook on the 
adoption of digital networking and connectivity in the 
healthcare sector. 
Keywords-cellular; connectivity; devices; health; wireless 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
There is much excitement in the electronic health 
(eHealth) and mobile health (mHealth) industry about the 
promise that wireless technologies can bring to healthcare. 
Many grassroots efforts are underway promising everything 
from vital sign monitoring to aging in-place. Naturally, one 
may ask which technologies and solutions truly create value, 
which will survive in the end and ultimately benefit us 
humans. 
The business environment feels similar to the beginnings 
of cellular technology in the mid to late 1990s. Many 
companies offer complementary, overlapping, or competing 
product solutions for improving healthcare through the use 
of wireless connectivity—the same kind of wireless 
connectivity we already use on a daily basis in our laptops, 
tablets, and cell phones. Although they share the same base 
technology, the rules of engagement differ for the healthcare 
sector in many aspects from consumer markets. It is us, as 
the end–user, driving market success in consumer markets 
and hence deciding the fate of a product solution or 
technology. Not so in the healthcare industry. With all the 
parties involved in the chain of treatment, who have a stake 
in deciding the means of treatment, it is us, as the patient, 
who has the least say in the medical devices that facilitate 
our diagnosis and treatment. 
In this paper, we will cover and discuss the deployment 
and usefulness of wireless connectivity technology in a 
variety of medical instruments. The paper starts out in 
Section II with a survey of existing connectivity solutions 
used in medical devices today. In Section III, we look at 
several key aspects that are necessary for a connectivity 
solution to succeed in the healthcare market. Section IV 
applies these keys to cellular connectivity exclusively and 
presents our technology solution for connecting medical 
devices equipped with cellular modems to Electronic Health 
Record (EHR) systems. In Section V, we discuss the 
direction that we see the market taking and our view of what 
the future holds for connectivity solutions in healthcare. 
Section VI concludes the paper with a summary of the 
insights gained and final remarks. 
II. 
EXISTING CONNECTIVITY SOLUTIONS 
The deployment of wireless technology in care delivery 
settings today is widespread. Many solutions already exist or 
are under development aiming to streamline the healthcare 
system [6]. But, as varied as the patient groups are, so are the 
treatment offerings. Today, wireless solutions in healthcare 
are highly fragmented with little standardization beyond the 
medium access layer. While this fragmentation facilitates a 
high degree of targeted solutions, which address specific 
needs, it makes it difficult for medical instrument companies 
to capitalize on their R&D investments. Two different ways 
of categorizing solutions in use today help to shed light on 
wireless deployment: (i) grouping by the intended healthcare 
setting (clinical, office, and home setting) and (ii) grouping 
by the target patient group (teenagers, baby boomers, and 
general population). Let us take a closer look at which 
connectivity solutions have made their way into different 
care delivery settings. 
A. Clinical Setting 
In clinical settings, i.e., clinics and hospitals, the 
objective of connected devices lies in preventing medical 
errors and reducing the cost of treatment. Connected devices 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-292-9
EMERGING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

Figure 1. The BD Veritor™ System. 
 
TABLE I.  
WIRED VERSUS WIRELESS CONNECTIVITY 
 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Wired 
• Robust and reliable 
• Access control on premise 
• Higher cost of installation 
• More complicated to scale 
Wireless • Easy to install and deploy 
• Supports device mobility 
• Security more challenging 
• Devices need to be 
configured individually 
 
facilitate this through streamlining the flow of admission, 
diagnostic, billing, and release information. 
Clinical healthcare providers still prefer wired solutions 
for most of their medical instruments. Table I lists the main 
advantages and disadvantages of wired and wireless 
connectivity in medical devices. For one, wired solutions are 
more secure, reliable, and easier to maintain once installed 
and configured. Such wired instruments include for example 
vital sign monitors, surgical instrumentation, and hospital lab 
equipment. The use of mobile devices that doctors and 
nurses carry around is limited to smart phones, tablets, 
personal digital assistants, and most notably bedside 
monitors [14]. Both wired and wireless devices that are used 
in diagnosis and treatment typically integrate into the 
facility’s Health Information System (HIS) and Laboratory 
Information System (LIS) through the use of instrument 
middleware. 
With few exceptions, IEEE 802.11 Wi-Fi [27] is the 
preferred connectivity technology for such devices. Cellular 
technology [20] is only used for text message notifications to 
personnel involved in patient care activities. So far, wireless 
connections only make sense for instruments that doctors 
and nurses carry with them to perform routine tasks or for 
patient bedside monitors according to a clinical laboratorian 
at the Palo Alto Medical Foundation. The primary motivators 
for connecting medical devices into electronic medical 
records lie in the reduction of the overall cost structure and, 
in the United States, by federal mandate [25], in the 
reduction of the rate of readmission. 
B. Office Setting 
Doctors’ offices are currently undergoing a fundamental 
change. The federal incentives and mandate towards the 
adoption and meaningful use of electronic health records [9] 
causes smaller doctors’ offices to switch from primarily 
paper-based record keeping to electronic health records for 
their patient base. With it, the use of instrumented testing 
becomes also more lucrative as test results can automatically 
find their way into a patient’s digital record. However, very 
few of such devices are in use today; let alone advanced 
devices offering cellular connectivity. 
Especially for smaller practices, the main hurdle is the 
affordability of diagnostic test instruments and their limited 
insurance reimbursement. Test labs service most diagnostic 
testing needs arising in doctors’ offices with an established 
cost structure for reimbursement. This flow of patient testing 
is more cost efficient as long as the cost of ownership of 
testing equipment exceeds the testing volume of a doctor’s 
office. 
The situation is very different in an adjacent point-of-care 
setting: minute clinics. They specialize in the rapid diagnosis 
and immediate treatment of only the most commonly 
occurring infections and diseases. Their volume of tests 
performed is large enough to justify the use of instrumented 
testing. Therefore, medical instruments have started to make 
their way into these point-of-care facilities. Instrument 
connectivity is of little value thus far unless it can relay the 
prescribed drug treatment through the patient’s health record 
to the pharmacy or send reminders of dosage or refill to the 
patient’s cell phone [21]. 
C. Home Setting 
There is a plethora of solutions already available in the 
wireless health market today. The industry has come up with 
enticing catch phrases to market the products in this market 
segment: quantified self, patient-centric, personalized 
medicine, and aging in place. Products ranging from vital 
sign monitoring, such as body weight, body fat, heart rate, 
blood glucose, and oxygen saturation to dieting, fitness and 
sleep trackers are readily available. They generate massive 
amounts of data which, in most cases, are continuously 
uploaded via Bluetooth, WiFi, or USB to an associated smart 
phone app, which analyzes and visualizes the data. The 
ultimate objective has to be the improvement of individual 
personal health [24] through changes in behavior and 
lifestyle. Reduced healthcare cost for the people using these 
devices on a regular basis is often a desired side effect. 
There are two sizeable markets in the United States for 
these personal health products: the teenage population and 
the baby boomers. The two population groups have different 
health challenges and hence the solutions are tailored to their 
needs. Baby boomers are entering the retirement age and 
with it come the onset of several health concerns such as 
congestive heart failure, hypertension, and diabetes. Hence, 
baby boomers spend money on solutions that enable graceful 
“aging in place,” i.e., detect, prevent, or manage such 
chronic conditions in the convenience of their homes [1]. In 
case of the teenage population, who are sometimes referred 
to as “the fat kids of America,” the primary health concerns 
are obesity, diabetes, and asthma. The objective here is not 
only the management of these chronic conditions under the 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-292-9
EMERGING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

TABLE II.  
WIRELESS CONNECTIVITY IN HEALTHCARE SETTINGS 
Care 
Setting 
Opportunities 
Challenges 
Clinical 
• Bedside monitoring during 
routine patient visits 
• Patient self-monitoring 
after hospital discharge 
• Clinics are slow in 
adopting new technologies 
• Reduction in overall cost 
of care not yet proven 
Office 
• Facilitate adoption of 
electronic health records 
• Seamlessly relay treatment 
to pharmacy or insurance 
• Insurance reimbursement 
limits return on investment 
• Smaller offices not setup 
for wireless connectivity 
Home 
• Detect, prevent, and 
manage chronic conditions 
• Self-tracking to create 
persistent lifestyle changes 
• Monitoring products lack 
standard and aggregation  
• Gap between tracking and 
persistent behavior change 
 
supervision of the teenager’s parents, but to maintain or 
improve his or her overall health through creating a 
persistent change in behavior. 
III. 
KEYS TO SUCCESS 
After this review of medical device connectivity in the 
three care delivery settings, which is summarized in Table II 
in terms of opportunities and challenges, let us take a closer 
look at the keys required for a solution to succeed in each 
setting. The overarching key for success of any new 
healthcare solution is overall cost reduction in the healthcare 
delivery process. And that is the premise of wirelessly 
connected medical devices: their attraction lies in cost 
reduction, detection objectivity, and ease of use. While the 
above mentioned keys are common across all care delivery 
settings, each setting weighs them differently or has 
additional keys to success. 
For illustration purposes, a good example of a medical 
device that exhibits detection objectivity and ease of use is 
the BD Veritor™ System [18], which has recently been FDA 
approved for the clinical as well as the point-of-care care 
delivery setting. It is a rapid testing platform for the 
detection of infectious diseases such as Influenza Type A 
and B and Group A Streptococcus. The BD Veritor System 
[2], as shown in Fig. 1, consists of the device and the 
consumables, that is, the mobile reader and the sample 
extractor and test cartridge (in the figure, the cartridge is 
shown inserted in the reader), respectively. The reader is 
however lacking the option of connectivity into HIS or LIS 
installations. 
A. Clinical Setting 
Since the hospital’s clinical lab along with external 
central labs cover most of the testing needs arising in patient 
treatment, there is not a great deal of potential for adding 
wireless medical devices in hospital settings. The exceptions 
are devices that doctors and nurses use in routine patient 
treatment or patient bedside monitors. 
There is however another emerging class of devices that 
can greatly benefit from wireless connectivity: devices that 
track the state of health of a patient after his release from the 
hospital. To achieve this, the patient could be given a 
monitoring device that facilitates home testing and wireless 
data upload into the hospital’s HIS or LIS. One advantage is 
that the patient could recover in the comfort of his own home 
while the critical parameters of his or her state of health are 
still being monitored by the hospital’s medical staff. The 
other benefit is that this would lower the readmission rate 
while reducing the cost of care at the same time. 
The key to making this a reality is to combine a test 
approved for home usage with an easy-to-use device that is 
able to wirelessly transmit the patient’s health parameters 
reliably and securely into the hospital’s HIS or LIS. 
B. Office Setting 
To successfully place wireless medical devices in the 
point-of-care setting, minute clinics or physician offices, 
requires foremost that the solution makes financial sense. In 
this setting, a patient testing service has a fixed 
reimbursement amount no matter how the test is performed 
(visually read, instrument read, or by a central lab). Hence, 
doctors’ offices will have a difficult time financially 
justifying the expense of instrumented testing if the per 
annum test volume for that particular test is low. In other 
words, wireless medical instruments can only succeed in this 
market if they prove to be less expensive to purchase, install, 
and operate than the already existing solution in place. 
Although the federal mandate towards the use of medical 
health records may aid in deploying more wirelessly 
connected instrument, most instruments are just too 
expensive to be financially viable testing solutions for most 
doctors’ offices. 
Nevertheless, rapid tests that occur frequently such as for 
infectious diseases (Influenza, Streptococcus, sexually 
transmitted diseases, etc.) may justify usage of wireless 
medical instruments. The keys here are that such instruments 
are cleared for the point-of-care setting, i.e., Clinical 
Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) waived, and 
that their cost of ownership lies roughly below $500 per 
year. 
C. Home Setting 
While each of the solutions offered for home deployment 
may address a particular health issue quite adequately, there 
are many challenges facing the wireless health home market 
today. For one, there is little to no standardization. Each 
solution works on its own independent of other health 
products in use. Each solution also requires frequent 
interaction and manual data entry by its user—something a 
society governed by convenience strongly shuns. For this 
reason, the average duration of regular usage does not exceed 
30 days for the majority of these health improvement apps: 
just 5% of all apps (including health apps) are still in use 30 
days after download [8]. In short, they are too intrusive to 
many people’s already hectic and packed life. Decentralized 
storage of data collected through different personal health 
solutions creates another significant challenge. How is one to 
get a comprehensive picture of one’s health if the data 
resides in several different, unique applications? There are of 
course a few solutions like Google Health (discontinued as 
of January 2013) and Microsoft HealthVault [17] attempting 
to address the need of centralized data storage. But, most 
personal health products do not interface with them and 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-292-9
EMERGING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

Figure 2. Healthcare information flow with cellular connectivity of medical devices. 
hence data would have to be manually entered. Therefore, a 
major key to succeed in this market is easy and seamless 
integration of the medical sensing devices, that is, the ones 
that provide personal health metrics, into personal health 
record systems. This can only be achieved effectively 
through standardization of the health data interfaces. The 
Continua Health Alliance [5] and the Institute of Electrical 
and Electronics Engineers [11] for instance are actively 
pushing this standardization and have been issuing design 
guidelines and standards for interoperability in personal 
healthcare [3]. 
Another fundamental issue of personal health tracking is 
that it is not sufficient to create persistent and lasting lifestyle 
changes. In fact, Joseph Kvedar [25] has found “that only a 
small portion of the population, around 10 percent, will 
change their behavior based on tracker information alone.” 
Knowing the right thing and doing the right thing are worlds 
apart. Even if personal health trackers provide us with vital 
information of what foods to avoid for example, we are still 
subjected to the marketing exposure of unhealthy eating 
habits. In the United States, good examples are the Carl’s Jr. 
TV commercials for its selection of big and juicy burgers [4]. 
How can one not watch one of these commercials without 
leaving with the thought that relishing one of these 
irresistibly delicious burgers results in tremendous pleasure? 
Knowing that they are an unhealthy diet will likely not kill 
that thought! It is like running a marathon with a rock tied to 
one ankle. In essence, our lifestyle choices are not only 
impacted by reading our personal health statistics, but also 
by what we exposure ourselves to in the form of billboards, 
commercials, and magazines. And to extract oneself from 
this omnipresent exposure in the United States is a deliberate 
effort that has to be made daily. To assist us in this effort, 
our personal health systems would also have to tie into our 
flat panel TVs and block out commercials that are 
inappropriate for our current health condition. 
IV. 
THE CASE FOR CELLULAR 
At this point, it should have become clear that there is no 
one size fits all solution. The three care delivery settings 
considered 
have 
overlapping 
but 
also 
diverging 
requirements, which cannot be met by one solution all at 
once. Therefore, there are many product offerings from small 
to large companies, which focus on one or a few aspects in 
the healthcare delivery process. In short, the market is highly 
fragmented and proprietary solutions are prevalent. 
But for solutions to be cost effective and scalable 
demands standardization and interoperability that in turn can 
proliferate integrated solutions [10]. Therefore, in the near-
term, healthcare solutions will have to target seamless 
integration into the flow of care from patient over provider to 
payer [1]. Clearly, this is a good idea in theory but not 
enough to succeed in the healthcare market. The present 
reality is that the adoption of mHealth connectivity standards 
has been inconsistent [19]. 
We strongly believe that the adoption of cellular 
connectivity in medical devices is the starting point to 
enabling 
higher 
levels 
of 
standardization 
and 
interoperability—at least at the front-end, where patient 
health data needs to make it into the digital medical record. It 
is crucial for subsequent treatment to consistently store this 
data digitally in a secure and reliable manner. But, if the 
interface method is lacking any of these attributes, the patient 
data will not be stored consistently leading to patchy health 
records. While there are several connection technologies and 
dataflow models conceivable, cellular technology is already 
dominating the personal consumer space and, as a result, has 
been widely adopted, is standardized, and continuously 
increases in data throughput and geographical coverage. 
Moreover, cellular hardware cost is held down by the large 
scale consumer market and service providers continue 
driving down data transmission costs. Therefore, medical 
Patient Home
Hospital
or Office
Medical
Device
Physician
Internet
HIS
LIS
Medical
Device
Patient
Insurance
Provider
Insurance
Record
Payer
Results via GPRS/HL7
Patient Records
Billing Information
Results
Record
Patient Home
Hospital
or Office
Medical
Device
Physician
Internet
Internet
HIS
LIS
Medical
Device
Patient
Insurance
Provider
Insurance
Record
Payer
Results via GPRS/HL7
Patient Records
Billing Information
Results
Record
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-292-9
EMERGING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

Figure 3. Patient test record (top) and instrument test report (bottom) of 
the MeshEye EMR Connectivity Testbed. 
devices equipped with cellular modems can meet several of 
the keys for success discussed in Section III. 
Let us discuss this cellular connectivity solution in more 
detail. Fig. 2 illustrates the flow of healthcare information 
when medical devices are equipped with a cellular GSM 
modem. This enables them to directly communicate with the 
HIS/LIS, or, more generally, the EHR system, through a 
General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) Internet connection. 
Test results can then readily be uploaded into the patient 
health record via the HL7 protocol [11]. Note that this direct 
connection eliminates the need for and expense of 
middleware software, a “middle man”, which only reformats 
the device’s proprietary data output to the standardized EHR 
data format. Once the patient results have been uploaded to 
the EHR, which can either occur from a hospital, physician 
office, or the patient’s home, other need-to-know parties can 
readily access or be notified of the results. Such parties are 
the primary care physician, the insurance payer, as well as 
the patient itself. 
To explore and validate the feasibility of this cellular 
connectivity solution, MeshEye Consulting has been 
operating an Electronic Medical Record (EMR) connectivity 
testbed with an HL7 portal for test record upload since 
November 2010. The testbed deploys the open-source EMR 
software FreeMED [6] in lieu of the HIS/LIS software. The 
FreeMED installation has been modified to accept test 
records from medical devices in the form of HL7 requests 
encapsulated in XML-RPC requests. A medical device 
prototype equipped with a cellular GSM modem was 
designed to upload its test records to this EMR system via 
GPRS. The testbed proved that this approach is feasible and 
easy to implement. 
To notify the physician of completed tests, the EMR 
connectivity testbed has been configured to send out text 
messages with the test results. The end-to-end delay 
commonly encountered is in the order of 10 to 20 seconds. 
Considering that rapid diagnostic tests typically take at least 
10 minutes to complete, such quality of service (QoS) would 
be acceptable. But cellular network carriers do not make any 
guarantees of end-to-end delay for text messaging, and hence 
it is only a solution good enough for demonstration purposes 
but not for professional deployment. Moreover, text 
messaging does not lend itself to encryption, which brings us 
to another area of frequent concern: compliance with the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA). 
HIPAA compliance requires the implementation of 
reasonable safeguards for the protection of patient-
identifiable information. Although the EMR connectivity 
testbed does not transmit any information that would allow 
identification of a patient by name, only an assigned patient 
identifier, it makes sense to encrypt the entire payload. This 
usually diffuses any concerns around patient privacy but 
adds the burden of encryption key management. 
The EMR connectivity testbed was demonstrated to 
several hospitals in California as well as to the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in Atlanta, GA, in 
May 2011. Fig. 3 shows the patient test record and 
instrument test report that the testbed generated during the 
demonstration. The top of the figure shows the view of the 
patient’s test result entry while the bottom of the figure 
shows the automatically generated instrument test report. 
The report contains all the fields expected of a lab test report. 
In addition, it maps the rough location of the testing site, 
which is available from the cellular network registration. 
Most importantly, the test result upload completes in real-
time, i.e., it usually takes less than a minute. This solution 
would allow the CDC to publish their “Influenza 
Surveillance Report” in real-time rather than with data 
lagging by two weeks. Especially CDC’s recently launched 
influenza app [20] could benefit greatly from real-time 
reporting of infectious disease testing. 
V. 
LONGER TERM OUTLOOK 
There is no doubt that interoperability through 
standardization will continue to increase in healthcare 
solutions. From a technology perspective, that is what is 
required to make any medical device talk to any EHR system 
Verix, Mr. Al
Patient ID No. 0815                                D.O.B. 10/16/1968                                            66Y/M
Ordering MD: House Gregory MD                           Physician Copy for Dr: Cavanaugh, Jordan MD
PT Medications: Multivitamins (Centrum)
Specimen(s) Collected: 05/23/2011 05:23                                   
Lab Account No. 0815
Specimen: Swab, Nasopharyngeal                                  
Date Reported: 05/23/2011 05:32
Test Name
Patient's Results
Ref. Range
Units
INFLUENZA A                                P0.85*               
greater than 3.00            % Contrast
INFLUENZA B                                 N7.43               
greater than 3.00            % Contrast
Key: N = Negative, P = Positive, U = Undetermined, *= critical value
End Of Report
Verix, Mr. Al                 Patient ID No. 0815                    
05/24/2011 00:01
© 2008 American Association for Clinical Chemistry
2011 Courtesy of MeshEye Consulting
View Larger Map
Verix, Mr. Al
Patient ID No. 0815                                D.O.B. 10/16/1968                                            66Y/M
Ordering MD: House Gregory MD                           Physician Copy for Dr: Cavanaugh, Jordan MD
PT Medications: Multivitamins (Centrum)
Specimen(s) Collected: 05/23/2011 05:23                                   
Lab Account No. 0815
Specimen: Swab, Nasopharyngeal                                  
Date Reported: 05/23/2011 05:32
Test Name
Patient's Results
Ref. Range
Units
INFLUENZA A                                P0.85*               
greater than 3.00            % Contrast
INFLUENZA B                                 N7.43               
greater than 3.00            % Contrast
Key: N = Negative, P = Positive, U = Undetermined, *= critical value
End Of Report
Verix, Mr. Al                 Patient ID No. 0815                    
05/24/2011 00:01
© 2008 American Association for Clinical Chemistry
2011 Courtesy of MeshEye Consulting
View Larger Map
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-292-9
EMERGING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

[14]. It also makes sense from a business perspective since 
interoperability is an essential component for a scalable 
connected health market [19]. In short, interoperability 
through standardization will likely pave the way for 
widespread use of connected medical devices. 
But, knowing the right thing does not necessarily 
translate into doing the right thing. In fact, the healthcare 
industry is known for its resistance to change and slow rate 
of technology adoption. For instance, Thompson states that 
“I feel frustrated that physicians don’t quite seem to be 
practicing in the 2012 world of technology I see on the 
exhibit floor [at the annual AACC Clinical Lab Expo 2012]” 
[16]. Healthcare investor G. Kurtzman puts it this way [13]: 
“Unless there is a “pull” from customers, patients, providers, 
or payers, an entrepreneur in healthcare IT won’t be able to 
capitalize on just a good idea.” Along these lines, the two 
parties that still need to more convincingly drive the idea of 
connected health are the payers and the regulators. 
The regulatory agencies’ mandate includes issuing 
regulations for marketability of medical devices and 
enforcing them in the marketplace. There still remains a lot 
of uncertainty concerning the regulation of mobile health 
applications and related connected health devices. Therefore, 
the regulatory agencies have to clarify the approval process 
of these emerging technologies. The next step is to speed up 
their approval process. This will also make their pursuit more 
attractive to the investment community. 
The healthcare payers, that is, the insurance providers, 
have to be persuaded that connected healthcare solutions not 
only make sense but also reduce the overall cost of 
treatment. This is especially important in the United States, 
which has the highest cost structure in healthcare. It will 
require several more case studies and clinical trials to make a 
convincing case for the overall reduction in healthcare cost. 
Such studies and trials are however intricate and costly since 
the entire chain of healthcare services involved in patient 
treatment has to be accounted for. 
Finally, a strong push for wireless connectivity in 
healthcare is coming from several players at the bottom of 
the food chain of healthcare reimbursement: medical device 
manufacturers and cellular network providers. Device 
manufacturers have an increasing interest in equipping their 
products with connectivity. This would provide them with 
easier access to test results, which may allow them to move 
up in the food chain. Network providers see the opportunity 
in high-volume data contracts in machine-to-machine 
(M2M) communication, which is viewed as their next big 
market after the cell phone market has started to level off. 
With respect to cellular connectivity in medical devices, 
the outlook is the same as for connectivity in general. 
Nevertheless, it has to bear the additional burden of 
subscription fees paid to cellular network service providers. 
But, there is hope in sight [23]: “[…] The number of devices 
with integrated cellular connectivity increased from 0.73 
million in 2011 to about 1.03 million in 2012, and is 
projected to grow at a CAGR rate of 46.3 percent to 7.1 
million in 2017.” And by the laws of supply and demand, 
increased deployment will result in lower cost of cellular 
connectivity in medical devices. Most likely countries other 
than the United States will lead the way—countries, in which 
cellular subscription fees adapt more rapidly to market 
supply and demand, as is the case in most countries across 
Europe and Asia. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We reviewed the current state of connectivity technology 
for medical devices in the healthcare sector giving special 
attention to wireless connectivity. The review highlighted the 
diversity and fragmentation of existing solutions to address 
the demands in the clinical, office, and home care setting. 
Therefore, the one key aspect to increase adoption of 
connected medical devices is interoperability through 
standardization. 
Cellular 
connectivity 
can 
enable 
standardized, seamless, and ubiquitous integration of medical 
devices into EHR systems. For this reason, we proposed and 
presented a cellular connectivity testbed that confirms and 
demonstrates the validity of this approach. Our connectivity 
testbed indicates that medical devices can be seamlessly 
integrated into the flow of patient treatment across all three 
care settings. However, it remains to be seen whether 
wireless connectivity can actually lead to an overall 
reduction in the cost of care and change towards healthy 
lifestyle choices. Moreover, regulators and payers still have a 
long way to go before wireless connectivity becomes the 
norm in everyday patient diagnosis and treatment. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author gratefully acknowledges the discussions, 
inspiration, and involvement of his colleagues at Alverix Inc. 
in San Jose, CA, and the Becton, Dickinson and Company 
(BD) Diagnostics Group located in Baltimore, MD, and San 
Diego, CA. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] L. C. Baker, S. J. Johnson, D. Macaulay, and H. Birnbaum 
(2011), “Integrated Telehealth and Care Management 
Program for Medicare Beneficiaries with Chronic Disease 
Linked to Savings,” Health Affairs, vol. 30, no. 9, Sept. 2011, 
pp. 1689–1697. 
[2] BD Veritor System, Product Website, [retrieved: September, 
2013] Available: http://www.bd.com/ds/veritorsystem/ 
[3] D. Bowman, “Continua Health Alliance Releases 2011 
Design Guidelines,” FierceHealthIT, iss. 9, Sept. 2011, pp. 1–
2. 
[4] Carl Karcher Enterprises, Inc., Company Website, [retrieved: 
September, 2013] Available: http://www.carlsjr.com 
[5] Continua Health Alliance, Organization Website, [retrieved: 
September, 2013] Available: http://www.continuaalliance.org 
[6] “mHealth in an mWorld: How mobile technology is 
transforming health care,” Deloitte Center for Health 
Solutions, Deloitte, 2012, pp. 1–21. 
[7] FreeMED Electronic Medical Record Software, Product 
Website, 
[retrieved: 
September, 
2013] 
Available: 
http://freemedsoftware.org 
[8] R. Gary, “Why 95% of Mobile Apps are Abandoned—and 
Tips to Keep Your Apps from Becoming Part of that 
Statistic,” Nuance Communications Inc., iss. 20, Nov. 2011, 
pp. 1–2. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-292-9
EMERGING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

[9] Government Health IT, Policymaking, Regulation, & 
Strategy: Meaningful Use, [retrieved: September, 2013] 
Available: 
http://www.healthit.gov/policy-researchers-
implementers/meaningful-use 
[10] J. Hatcliff et al., “Rationale and Architecture Principles for 
Medical Application Platforms,” Proceedings of the 2012 
IEEE/ACM Third International Conference on Cyber-
Physical Systems (ICCPS ’12), Apr. 2012, pp. 3–12. 
[11] Health Level Seven International, Introduction to HL7 
Standards, 
[retrieved: 
September, 
2013] 
Available: 
http://www.hl7.org/implement/standards/ 
[12] IEEE Standards Association, IEEE Standard 11073-10103-
2012 – Health informatics—Point-of-care medical device 
communication, [retrieved: September, 2013] Available: 
http://standards.ieee.org/findstds/standard/11073-10103-
2012.html 
[13] G. Kurtzman, GUEST POST: The question every healthcare 
IT startup must answer, [retrieved: September, 2013] 
Available: 
http://venturebeat.com/2012/08/25/healthcare-it-
startup-tips/ 
[14] P. B. Luppa, C. Müller, A. Schlichtiger, and H. Schlebusch 
(2011), "Point-of-care testing (POCT): Current techniques 
and future perspectives," TrAC Trends in Analytical 
Chemistry, vol. 30, no. 6, Jun. 2011, pp. 887–898. 
[15] B. Malone, “The Cutting Edge of Lab Connectivity: Will 
New Standard Deliver Plug-and-Play Solutions?” Clinical 
Laboratory News, vol. 38, no. 9, Sept. 2012, pp. 1–5. 
[16] B. Malone, “Spotlight on Point-of-Care Testing: Innovation, 
Expansion Evident at AACC Clinical Lab Expo in Los 
Angeles,” Clinical Laboratory News, vol. 38, no. 10, Oct. 
2012, pp. 1–8. 
[17] Microsoft 
HealthVault, 
Product 
Website, 
[retrieved: 
September, 2013] Available: https://www.healthvault.com 
[18] A. Paxton, “Rx for optimizing rapid flu test performance,” 
CAP Today, vol. 27, no. 1, Jan. 2013, pp. 1–5. 
[19] “Interoperability: An essential component for scalable 
mHealth,” mHealthInsights, PwC, Mar. 2013, pp. 1–3. 
[20] S. Saw, T. P. Loh, S. B. L. Ang, J. W. L. Yip, and S. K. Sethi 
(2011), “Meeting Regulatory Requirements by the Use of Cell 
Phone Text Message Notification With Autoescalation and 
Loop Closure for Reporting of Critical Laboratory Results,” 
American Journal of Clinical Pathology, vol. 136, no. 1, Jul. 
2011, pp. 30–34. 
[21] I. Sachpazidis, S. Fragou, G. Sakas, “Medication adherence 
system using SMS technology,” Proc. Intelligent Sensors, 
Sensor Networks and Information Processing Conference 
(ISSNIP 2004), IEEE Press, Dec. 2004, pp. 571–575. 
[22] G. Slabodkin, “CDC's influenza app should be more reliable,” 
Editor’s Corner in FierceMobile Healthcare, iss. 15, Jan. 
2013, pp. 1–2. 
[23] G. Slabodkin, “Research predicts strong growth of patient 
home monitoring systems by 2017,” FierceMobile Healthcare, 
iss. 18, Jan. 2013, pp. 1–2. 
[24] P. Sonnier, POLL RESULTS: What is the single greatest 
health benefit afforded by Digital Health solutions? 
[retrieved: 
September, 
2013] 
Available: 
http://popperandco.com/2012/07/ 
[25] United States Department of Labor, Affordable Care Act, 
[retrieved: 
September, 
2013] 
Available: 
http://www.dol.gov/ebsa/healthreform/ 
[26] E. Waltz, “How I Quantified Myself: Can self-measurement 
gadgets help us live healthier and better lives?,” IEEE 
Spectrum Magazine, vol. 49, no. 9, Sept. 2012, pp. 43–47. 
[27] Wi-Fi® in Healthcare: Security Solutions for Hospital Wi-Fi 
Networks”, White Paper, Wi-Fi Alliance, Feb. 2012, pp. 1–
11. 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-292-9
EMERGING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

