Media Form Effect on Children’s Attention 
 
Chun-Chun Wei                                                                                Min-Yuan Ma 
Department of Industrial Design 
National Cheng Kung University 
Tainan, Taiwan 
email:p38991123@mail.ncku.edu.tw                                                email:mamy@mail.ncku.edu.tw 
 
 
Abstract—Picture books are frequently used as teaching 
materials and have thus been published in diverse media forms. 
By exploiting visual, auditory, and tactile modalities, children 
can construct a reading context in which their attention is 
enhanced and they can learn effectively. In this study, picture 
books of various media forms are used as stimuli for examining 
the effect of various picture book types on children’s attention. 
On the basis of the results of this study, the audiobook group 
demonstrates the highest attention performance. In the gender 
difference, a significant difference in attention response exists 
between the boys and girls. In particular, the attention 
performance of the boys is significantly higher than that of the 
girls in the e-book group.  
Keywords-children's attention; picture books; media forms; 
electroencephalography (EEG). 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Picture books are one of the most commonly used teaching 
materials from preschool to elementary school [1]. Because 
picture books are designed for children, they cater to children's 
characteristics and have features that are relevant to language 
development [2], cognitive engagement [3], artistic thinking, 
and entertainment [4]. The senses are used to communicate 
with the external world during early reading development in 
children. Various types of sensory stimulation help children 
construct a reading context, which enables children to learn 
independently [5]. Picture books are published in various 
media forms; thus, information contained in books can be 
expressed by text, images, symbols, sounds, and texture. 
Accordingly, children who easily receive sensory signals can 
directly communicate with the external world in visual, 
auditory, and tactile manners [6]. For example, pop-up books 
featuring three-dimensional (3D) images and operable 
interfaces, audiobooks with voice dubbing and sound, toy 
books comprising various tactile materials, and e-books 
containing multimedia animation can appeal to the senses of 
children and enhance their comprehension of the content.  
This study determines that effectively using picture books 
that provide sensory stimulation to instruct children can 
enhance their attention and learning performance. Numerous 
studies on picture book instruction have revealed that picture 
books can increase children's interest in learning.  
According to previous electroencephalography (EEG) 
studies [7][8], attention is a type of brain function, and based 
on the activation of the cerebral frontal lobe, α and β waves 
can be measured to investigate the degree of attention in 
learning. The EEG device, is used in the EEG experiment in 
this study for measuring children's attention. We anticipate 
that the results of this study can be applied to children's 
education and picture books design, help parents, teachers and 
designers select and design picture books for children, and 
improve the attention of children. 
The research report comprises the following five sections: 
(1) introduction, (2) media forms of picture books, (3) 
experimental design, (4) quantitative analysis, and (5) 
conclusion. 
 
II. 
MEDIA FORMS OF PICTURE BOOKS 
In the current mature publication market, because of 
reader sensory requirements and improved multimedia 
technology, the content of picture books is presented through 
text, illustration, symbols, and multimedia (e.g., various book 
materials, sounds, music, and animation), and diverse sensory 
stimuli and reading methods are used to attract children’s 
attention and interest. Picture books are not limited to a two-
dimensional (2D) design and are integrated media that provide 
various sensory stimuli. According to previous studies, picture 
books can effectively help children develop their language, 
cognitive, and aesthetic appreciation abilities [2][3].  
This study explores the selection of picture books and 
media types of picture books that suit children and attract their 
attention. We collect the various forms of picture book designs 
that are currently commercially available. These picture books 
are then classified into four types according to the sensory 
perception methods used when reading books, as determined 
by a focus group of three designers with more than 5 years of 
design experience. These four types are (a) conventional book 
(visual perception), which is the most common book format 
and involves page turning when reading; (b) pop-up book 
(visual and tactile perceptions), which transcends the 
limitations of conventional books by including interactive 
components to present 3D concepts, thereby providing an 
enjoyable and interactive reading experience; (c) audiobook 
(audial and visual perception), which offers a multimedia 
presentation of the traditional storybook format with the 
addition of speech feedback (e.g., CD and MP3 formats) so 
that children can elect to hear the story read to them; and (d) 
e-book (multisensory perception), which includes multimedia 
effects such as oral reading, written text, oral discourse, music, 
sound effects, and animations, thereby enriching the content 
of picture books. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

III. 
EXPERIMENT DESIGN 
An EEG experiment is conducted to investigate whether 
sensory stimulation provided by conventional books, pop-up 
books, audiobooks, and e-books affect children’s attention 
performance.  
A. 
Experimental Participants and Procedures 
48 third-grade elementary school children aged 9 to 10 
years are recruited as participants in this study. The 
participants are evenly divided into four groups (12 in each 
group). Each group comprises 6 boys and 6 girls. The 
participants are divided into four groups: the conventional 
book, pop-up book, audiobook, and e-book groups. The 
experimental procedure is as follows:    
Step 1: The researcher explains the purpose and procedure of 
the experiment to a participant and advises the 
participant to relax. 
Step 2: The researcher places an EEG cap on the head of the 
participant.  
Step 3: The participant begins reading a picture book from the 
first page. During the EEG measurement, the 
participant continues to read until he or she reaches the 
end of the book. The reading duration is not fixed.  
 
B. Experimental Tool 
In this study, the EEG device, NeuroSky MindBand [7], is 
used for the EEG experiment. The sensors of the device are 
placed at the frontopolar (FP1) area of the forehead, which is 
the frontal lobe area of the attention network, to measure 
attention performance [8][9]. MindBand is lightweight, stable, 
easy to wear, and highly appropriate for children. Unlike a 
traditional EEG device, MindBand does not require wearing 
an electrode cap, applying gel, or washing hair after testing. 
For convenience, NeuroSky MindBand and related products 
are widely applied in EEG studies on education, psychology, 
and sports [10][11][12]. 
 
C. Electroencephalographic Data Collection 
In the EEG experiment, we collect the EEG data of the 
participants while they read the books. Combined with the 
MindBand, a Universal Serial Bus (USB) brain-wave 
assessment and measurement system developed by Alchemy 
Technology [7] is used to collect data. The data is ranged from 
0 to 100, enabling the collection of real-time information and 
analysis of EEG signals. Through the USB transmission 
hardware interface, the EEG charts and data on visual 
attention state are output [13]. 
 
D. Picture Book: Guess How Much I Love You 
To prevent the story content and children’s comprehension 
of the story content from affecting the attention performance 
of the children, a focus group method (based on the discussion 
of three language teachers at an elementary school) is 
employed for determining the use of the conventional book, 
pop-up book, audiobook, and e-book versions of Guess How 
Much I Love You [14]. 
 
IV. 
 QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS 
A total of 48 children participate in this experiment and 
are assigned to four groups of 12 people each. The average 
score of all the participants for attention is 44.02. According 
to the average score of each group, the audiobook group 
exhibits the highest attention performance (52.92), followed 
by the e-book group (42.17), pop-up book group (41.42), and 
conventional book group (39.58). 
 
A. Picture Book Media Types Independent Samples t-Test 
between Gender 
An Independent Sample t-Test [15] is performed to 
examine whether a significant difference in attention response 
induced by picture books exists between the boys and girls. 
As shown in Table I, the number of boys is 24 and the average 
score is 52.08; the number of girls is 24 and the average score 
is 35.96. The t value is 2.60 (df = 46, p < 0.01), which is 
significant. Thus, a significant difference in average attention 
score exists between the boys and girls. The t value is a 
positive value (2.60), indicating that the attention performance 
of the boys are superior to that of the girls. 
TABLE I.  
INDEPENDENT SAMPLES T-TEST OF GENDER 
Gender 
t 
df 
Sig. 
2.60 
46 
*0.01 
 
Independent Sample t-Tests are performed to examine 
whether differences in attention response exist between the 
boys and girls in the various groups. As shown in Table II, a 
significant difference in attention response exists between the 
boys and girls in the e-book group (p < 0.01). The t value (3.36) 
is a positive value, indicating that for the e-book group, the 
boys demonstrate a significantly higher performance than the 
girls (the average score for boys is 57.83, and the average 
score for girls is 26.50). No significant difference in attention 
response exists between the boys and girls in the other groups. 
TABLE II.  
T-TEST OF GENDER FOR VARIOUS MEDIA PICTURE BOOKS 
Media Forms 
t 
df 
Sig. 
Conventional 
0.92 
10 
0.38 
Pop-up 
0.30 
10 
0.77 
Audiobook 
1.32 
10 
0.22 
e-book 
3.36 
10 
*0.01 
 
 
B. The interaction effect between media forms and 
gender： Two-Way ANOVA (MANOVA) 
To examine whether an interaction effect between media 
forms of picture books and gender on attention response exists, 
a two-way ANOVA is performed. Table III summarizes the 
results of the two-way ANOVA. As shown in Table III, the F 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

value of the group effect is 0.93 (p < .44), indicating that no 
significant difference in attention response exists between the 
various groups.  
TABLE III.  
THE INTERACTION EFFECT OF MEDIA FORMS AND GENDER 
Source 
SS 
df 
MS 
F 
Sig. 
Media forms 
1308.56 
3 
436.19 
0.93 
0.44 
Gender 
3120.19 
1 
3120.19 
6.63 
*0.01 
Media forms * 
Gender 
1149.40 
3 
383.13 
0.82 
0.49 
Error 
18812.83 
40 
470.32 
 
 
Corrected Total 
24390.98 
47 
 
 
 
 
The F value of the gender effect is 6.63 (p < .01), 
indicating that a significant difference in attention response 
exists between the boys and girls. In addition, the attention 
performance of the boys is superior to that of the girls. The 
results are consistent with those presented in Section IV-A. 
The F value of the interaction effect of gender and group is 
0.815 (p < .49), indicating that no interaction effect between 
gender and group on attention response exists. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this study, third-grade elementary school children are 
recruited as participants for examining the relationship 
between children's attention and picture book reading. 
MindBand is used in the experiment to collect EEG data from 
the participants reading various picture book types. 
 Considering the attention performance of the boys, the 
audiobook group exhibits the highest attention performance, 
followed by the e-book group, conventional book group, and 
pop-up book group. Considering the attention performance of 
the girls, the audiobook group achieves the highest attention 
performance, followed by the pop-up book group, 
conventional book group, and e-book group. Both the boys 
and girls in the audiobook group display excellent attention 
performance. The result shows that audiobooks should be 
selected to help children establish reading contexts using the 
acoustic stimuli provided by reciting story contents, thus 
improving their reading comprehension and concentration 
[16][17]. 
 For the e-book group, the attention performance of the 
boys is significantly higher than that of the girls. The results 
suggest that visual and auditory stimulation provided by the e-
book elicit excellent attention performance in the boys. The 
auditory stimulation provided by the audiobook elicits 
excellent attention performance in the girls, whereas dynamic 
visual stimulation provided by the e-book elicits the poorest 
attention performance in the girls. The result show multimedia 
effects of audiobook and e-book with immediate feedback 
might help male learners to increase attention and 
comprehension [18]. 
According to the results of this study, we suggest that the 
audiobooks can be adopted to instruct third-grade elementary 
school children in reading to enhance the attention 
performance of children. Audiobooks and e-books that 
provide auditory and visual stimulation can be used to instruct 
boys and audiobooks can be used to instruct girls. The results 
of this study can serve as a reference for parents, teachers and 
designer to select and design picture books and to enhance the 
attention of children. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Funding of this research work is supported by the Ministry 
of Science and Technology, Taiwan, under grant numbers 
NSC 101-2410-H-006-072-MY2. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Barr, “Memory Constraints on Infant Learning from Picture 
Books, Television, and Touchscreens,” Child Development 
Perspectives, vol. 7, 2013, pp. 205-210.  
[2] A. G. Bus,  M. H. van IJzendoorn, and A. D. Pellegrini, “Joint 
book reading makes for success in learning to read: a meta-
analysis on intergenerational transmission of literacy”, Review 
of Educational Research, vol. 65, 1995, pp. 1–21. 
[3] I. Elia, M. van Den Heuvel-Panhuizen, and A. Georgiou, “The 
role of pictures in picture books on children’s cognitive 
engagement with mathematics,” European Early Childhood 
Education Research Journal, vol. 18, 2010, pp. 125–147. 
[4] M. Y. Lin, Appreciation and application of picture books, 
Taipei: Psychological Publishing, 2000. 
[5] J. Holt, “The underachieving school,” Sentient Publications, 
2005. 
[6] C. Briggs and D. Elkind, “Cognitive development in early 
readers,” Developmental Psychology, vol. 9, 1973, p. 279. 
[7] Alchemy Technology: http://www.alchemytech.com.tw/. 
[8] M. B. Sterman, D. A. Kaiser, C. A. Mann, B. Y. Suyenobu, D. 
C. Beyma, and J. R. Francis, “Application of quantitative EEG 
analysis to workload assessment in an advanced aircraft 
simulator,” In Proceedings of the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 37, 1993, pp.118-
121. 
[9] A. Gevins, M. E. Smith, L. McEvoy, and D. Yu, “High-
resolution EEG mapping of cortical activation related to 
working memory: effects of task difficulty, ” type of processing, 
and practice, Cerebral Cortex, vol. 7, 1997, pp. 374-385. 
[10] J. I. Ekandem, T. A. Davis, I. Alvarez, M. T. James, and J. E. 
Gilbert, “Evaluating the ergonomics of BCI devices for 
research and experimentation. Ergonomics”, vol. 55, 2012, pp. 
592-598. 
[11] D. V. Poltavski, D. Biberdorf, and T. V. Petros, 
“Accommodative response and cortical activity during 
sustained attention,” Vision research, vol. 63, 2012, pp. 1-8. 
[12] C. S. Lin, Y. C. Lai, J. C. Lin, P. Y. Wu, and H. C. Chang, “A 
novel method for concentration evaluation of reading 
behaviors 
with 
electrical 
activity 
recorded 
on 
the 
scalp,” Computer methods and programs in biomedicine, vol. 
114, 2014, pp. 164-171. 
[13] K. Crowley,  A. Sliney, I. Pitt, and D. Murphy, “Evaluating a 
brain-computer interface to categories human emotional 
response”, In Advanced Learning Technologies, 2010 IEEE 
10th International Conference, July 2010, pp. 276-278. 
[14] S.McBratney, Guess how Much I Love You, Candlewick Press, 
2000. 
[15] H. Timothy, and R. D'Agostino. “Robustness of the two 
independent samples t‐test when applied to ordinal scaled 
data. ” Statistics in medicine, vol. 6, 1987, pp. 79-90. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

[16] M. Furini, “Digital audiobook: from passive to active 
pursuit,” Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 40, 2008, pp. 
23-39. 
[17] C. C. Lu, Y. Y. Chen,  and C. W. Chen, “A Correlative study 
of CD-ROM picture books in classrooms and school children’s 
formation of descriptive concepts,” International Journal of 
Science and Mathematics Education, vol. 9, 2011, pp. 47-67. 
[18] S. P. Lee, H. K. Su, and S. D. Lee, “Effects of computer-based 
immediate 
feedback 
on 
foreign 
language 
listening 
comprehension and test-associated anxiety,” Perceptual and 
motor skills, vol. 114, 2012, pp. 995-10
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

