Tiers-Lieu: Exploratory Environments for Service-Centred Innovations  
Michel Leonard, Anastasiya Yurchyshyna 
Institute of Services Science, University of Geneva 
Battelle, Bâtiment A, 7 route de Drize, 
Carouge, Geneva, Switzerland 
{Michel.Leonard,AnastasiyaAnastasiya.Yurchyshyna}@unige.ch 
 
 
 
Abstract—This paper introduces the concept of Tiers-Lieu, 
which is envisaged as an exploratory environment for service-
centred innovations, and discusses its rationale within the 
context of the collaborative inter-disciplinary society. We 
present the approach facilitating discovery of initiatives as the 
result of the collaboration of actors from various domains: 
developing them in the process of negotiations and concretising 
them, in order to be further enabled by services. We discuss 
the difference between Tiers-Lieu and other types of 
collaborative environments, by illustrating its role in ensuring 
freedom in participation and semantic exchange for all 
creativity-oriented actors, independently from their domain, 
profession, and/or way of thinking.  
Keywords-Tiers-Lieu; service; initiative; service-centred 
innovation; 
interorganisational 
and 
interdisciplinary 
collaboration; collaborative environments. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
How may one characterise the current trends in 
Information Science and Service Science that have recently 
entered our world? Their growing importance reflects the 
requirements of the emerging world; a world transcending 
the familiarities of centuries past, due to the explosion of 
exchanges of every kind, in all its parts, the intermingling of 
cultures and the desire of individuals for cognitive freedom. 
This emerging world requires the discovery of new 
cognitive environments, in order to organise different models 
for living together on all levels of Society, in all public, 
private and international sectors, in regional, national and 
international contexts. These cognitive environments will 
transcend those which we currently know. In particular, they 
will offer new answers to crucial challenges, such as 
disastrous hunger, epidemic cataclysms, poverty, energy 
deficits, 
and 
environmental, 
sanitary, 
medical, 
demographical, economic and financial crises.  
This emerging world is born of a desire for universality 
to be facilitated by Internet technologies delivering an 
intensification of exchange that is without precedent in 
human history and has become one of the major factors 
defining the development of our society. It is remarkable 
that, despite a certain level of confidentiality and anonymity 
of Internet environments, they foster collaboration between 
the multitudes of initially unrelated actors and enable 
collective decision-making in innovation processes. In its 
turn, such collaboration ensures sustainability and coherent 
development of underlying processes, interoperability and 
service orientation in different domains (e.g., Internet of 
services [3], public service innovation [13], etc.). 
By underlining the role of service orientation at multiple 
levels of technology and business, it is essential to clarify its 
meaning. It is stated that everything (i.e., good or activity) is 
seen as a service, and is analysed by an interdisciplinary 
approach of Service Science that brings together study, 
design, and implementation of services in which specific 
arrangements of people and technologies take actions that 
provide value for others [5]. This allows thus to concretise 
one of the leading visions for the systems development and 
integration [6], thanks to the service-oriented architecture 
(SOA).  
These services-oriented trends, characteristic for our 
emerging world, lead to the shift of the role of Information 
and Communication Technologies, which are traditionally 
structured around isolated or specific services, and allow 
them to overcome the limits of their initial domains and to 
spread over trans-disciplinary branches of science and 
business. In this way, they support the dissemination of 
interoperable scientific knowledge and contribute to the 
development of practical intelligence [18] in our society, in 
general, and throughout these domains, in particular. 
This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we 
analyze the role of creativity and innovation in developing 
business-oriented services. Some aspects of collaborative 
environments related to innovation are also discussed. In 
Section 3, the Tiers-Lieu concept is introduced and its 
characteristics are described. In Section 4, we discuss the 
main principles of Tiers-Lieu organisation. Finally, Section 5 
concludes with the acquired results of this exploratory paper, 
and the scope of future works for developing Tiers-Lieu is 
identified. 
II. 
TOWARDS INNOVATION: FROM KNOWLEDGE TO 
SERVICES THROUGH COLLABORATIVE ENVIRONMENTS 
It is impossible to overestimate the role of knowledge for 
the development of our society. From one side, it is the 
primary production of resource; from the other side, 
knowledge ensures the possibility of value co-creation in 
services [17]. This nature explains the interdependence of 
knowledge and services-based characteristics of our 
emerging world, supports a tight interconnection between the 
phenomenon of services innovation and the requirements of 
the emerging society and guarantees the consistency of  
sustainable co-creation of the fundamental concepts of 
innovation-based information systems and services [9].  
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-292-9
EMERGING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

With the increasing role of Information Technologies 
(IT) in its everyday functioning, our society benefits from 
new and expanding communication channels that foster 
knowledge production and nurture its creativity-focused 
characteristics. 
Indeed, the new society encourages its members to enact 
their willingness and ability to innovate and create and in 
doing so, to increase the added value of the corresponding 
economic processes. The innovation in services is thus seen 
as a process, whose objectives include the efficient delivery 
of existing services, service quality, and the generation of 
new types of services. This process requires continuous 
collaboration between different people of different skills and 
responsibilities, from multiple organisations and – very often 
– within an international and multicultural context.  
From a different side, the increasing complexity of its 
processes, the multitude of involved actors, and the 
interdependence of the related domains is largely based on 
multiple collaboration processes. Recently, one can witness 
how the importance of collaboration grows exponentially, as 
the result of the development of Information and 
Communication Technologies, social networks and thematic 
clouds, which seem to contribute to decision-making 
processes, concretise the decisional context for different 
actors and remove geographical boundaries. 
It has already become a common practice that enterprises 
and societies require certain level of collective intelligence 
from their members. Indeed, to ensure that a group of 
individuals successfully act together in a certain concrete 
environment [7], they should possess the ability to learn and 
reason, being willing and capable to act collectively thanks 
to their competences.  
There have been numerous works aiming to support 
collaboration and collaborative group decisions. In [2], it is 
suggested to model collaboration by identifying its layers: 
goals, products, activities, patterns, techniques, tools and 
scripts, and by integrating all these layers into an organizing 
scheme, a conceptual representation of the next generation of 
collaboration support systems.  
Another aspect of collaborative group decisions is 
studied in [8]: Keeney introduces a collaborative group 
decision model based on decision analysis techniques. The 
accent is put here on the explicit knowledge differences of 
judgments and values among group members, and an 
approach for taking them into account in the decision process 
is debated. 
Some works specifically address the methods and 
techniques to improve group ideation [14]: to balance 
between the quantity and the quality of ideas generated and 
analysed during the process of ideation. Reinig and Briggs 
particularly note how cognitive inertia and scarcity of 
solution space may affect the ideation process and suggest 
the ways to overcome the possible negative effects. 
In our previous research, we also address the problem of 
collaborative decision-making and discuss some challenges 
typical for collaborative environments [24]. This work 
presents the initial classification of the corresponding risks 
and introduces our approach for decision-constructing by the 
cross-pollination space, a collaborative environment for 
innovation in services. 
The diversity of profound research aiming to encourage 
different aspects of innovation in services corresponds not 
only to the sectors of activity, but also the rationale for 
organisations, their business models, their relationships with 
their environments, especially in the international context.  It 
becomes obvious that interdisciplinary work is required, 
which is to be translated into trans-disciplinary services and 
built using information technology. It is focused on 
combining human and collective knowledge with the 
computational capabilities of informatics, as well as 
combining human and collective activities with services. 
This will allow decision makers to move from a default 
position of reacting to events in their organisations to a more 
active one of anticipating them. 
More concretely, on the level of the European Union, 
there has been achieved a significant success in the projects 
supporting innovation in services. For example, the set of 
initiatives facilitating public support for innovation and 
increasing its effectiveness is presented by the European 
Commission [12], whilst the measurability of innovation 
policies and their impact on productivity, quality and 
employment of services are analysed by Rubalcaba [F15]. 
Despite the acquired positive results, there are still important 
service innovation challenges to be addressed in services 
economies of our society. There are still a variety of 
obstacles that might stand on the way of the sustainable 
service innovation growth: e.g., market and systemic 
failures, 
over-regulation, 
market 
fragmentation 
and 
competition, to mention but a few. Probably less obvious, 
but more serious obstacles lie in the sphere of cognitive 
barriers and fears of all kinds (e.g., unemployment, 
professional non-security, unwillingness or incapacity to 
adapt to new types of organisations, etc.).  
III. 
TIERS-LIEU: COLLABORATIVE ENVIRONMENTS FOR 
INNOVATIONS 
The complexity of business, academic and social 
processes of our society, as well as the increasing role of 
collaborative creativity in development and innovation, 
require new advanced approaches and forms of organisation. 
To answer these challenges, we introduce the concept of 
Tiers-Lieu, study its characteristics and analyze its potential 
benefits. 
A. Concept of Tiers-Lieu 
Initially, the concept of Tiers-Lieu (“third place”) was 
introduced by Roy Oldenburg [10] who identified third 
places, or “great good places”, as new places intermediate 
between home and work, which are adapted to the new 
lifestyle with its elements of urbanisation, mobility and 
individualism and are central to local democracy as well as 
community vitality. 
Such third places are neither private, nor public, and they 
offer the extended possibilities to work in a more informal 
environment, a certain hybrid between a personal and an 
open space. These are coffee shops, cultural centres, 
smoking lounges; the third places are largely the product of 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-292-9
EMERGING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

human relationships, creative interaction and modes of social 
organisation and professional dominant contemporary 
societies [1]. 
In the spirit of Tiers-Lieu, several places of co-working 
have been recently developed. They are, for example, La 
Cantine [20], Festival Temps d’Images [21], tiers_lieu{x} 
[22]; all share the idea of open and creative co-working. As a 
different example, one can witness the work around meetings 
of Autrans 2012  [19], which gather international researchers 
and entrepreneurs interested in innovative Internet-related 
issues, open data, Tiers-Lieu, collaborative consumption new 
usages, etc.  
It is important to note that this initial definition of Tiers-
Lieu has significantly evolved during the recent years, and is 
no longer limited by geographical boundaries of places of 
co-working.  
In our approach, we envisage Tiers-Lieu as an open 
environment of “third place” that motivates collaboration, 
intellectual creativity and surpasses the limits of traditional 
disciplines-defined 
collaborative 
spaces, 
by 
allowing 
defining new services. 
B. Tiers-Lieu: What is different? 
By its origin, Tiers-Lieu has an exploratory nature and 
creates the environments where transformations and changes 
are institutionalised and enable movements of innovations. 
We note also that Tiers-Lieu benefits from the work of the 
people from different organisations, but does not belong to 
any of them. 
Tiers-Lieu aims to go beyond the creation of an 
environment when actors (professional or not, individuals or 
groups, formal or informal) gather around a discussion table, 
in order to exchange their ideas about a situation, an 
identified challenge, or a proposed initiative. In the majority 
of the existing collaborative environments, the skills of 
involved actors are to some extent pre-defined, according to 
the discipline of the discussed idea. Such a pre-definition 
ensures a certain level of consistency in these discussions; 
however, it seldom overcomes the cognitive closeness of the 
discussed idea, and is not truly trans-disciplinary. 
It is the ambition of Tiers-Lieu to overcome the limits of 
such semantic closeness and to give the actors the possibility 
not only to discuss the problem but also to be able to 
understand it in terms of their own professions and beyond 
them. In this context, it is not merely the question of 
understanding 
the 
conceptual 
framework, 
technical 
principles, or usability of an innovative idea but beyond this, 
Tiers-Lieu aims at ensuring the acceptance of this idea by the 
actors, despite their possible resistance, lack of knowledge or 
foreseen expectations.  
This 
way, 
Tiers-Lieu 
differs 
from 
traditional 
collaborative environments, as they are themselves the 
creators of values. This means they generate activities 
common for creative participants, independent from and not 
belonging to any participating organisation. Also, compared 
to traditional environments, the successful functioning of 
Tiers-Lieu relies on a higher level of interaction between 
non-professional actors and openness to their networks. By 
allowing such heterogeneity, 
Tiers-Lieu is boosting 
“cognitive interaction” between project leaders, managers 
and just interested people, the project leaders will develop 
their knowledge and skills to implement their entrepreneurial 
project. At the same time, it also encourages the 
democratisation of the action undertaken by accepting a 
wider audience. 
As a result, Tiers-Lieu allows achievement of the unity of 
the idea, so that it must be concretised as a service. By 
answering this challenge, Tiers-Lieu thus proposes not only 
the creativity-oriented environment fostering innovations, 
but also the way how it can be concretised by services. It 
means that, in addition to the achieved results of traditional 
collaborative environments, Tiers-Lieu also ensures the 
development of services – either on the meta-level (by 
offering a methodology to propagate the discussed 
knowledge between and beyond the involved actors, e.g., 
how knowledge related to smart medicine is widespread in 
medicine and other involved domains), or for the concrete 
complex situation, which is the objective of this Tiers-Lieu 
(by offering a set of services aiming at solving this problem, 
e.g., usage of smart phones in the context of smart medicine). 
C. Objectives of Tiers-Lieu 
By summarizing the ideas towards the development of 
Tiers-Lieu, we can briefly describe its objectives as follows: 
• 
Tiers-Lieu represents an utility, which is created to 
develop a service, 
• 
Tiers-Lieu aims at supporting an activity, 
• 
by enabling initiatives, suggested by involved 
actors and oriented to improve this activity; 
• 
which can be achieved thanks to a collaborative 
platform, 
• 
concretised, according to the requirements of 
sustainability of this activity and the general 
“common sense” vision; 
• 
and which is developed upstream of the projects 
improving this activity.  
In other words, Tiers-Lieu can be seen as a certain 
meeting that leads to service creation. As the result of its 
functioning, coherent and sustainable services will be 
developed. We note, however, that management and 
governing of such created services can remain within the 
scope of the initial Tiers-Lieu but can also overpass it, by 
extending their existance in other domains of business, 
government activities, private sector, etc. 
D. Initiative as Key Concept of Tiers-Lieu 
Tiers-Lieu is envisaged as an environment supporting 
innovations, which are concretised thanks to initiatives. 
Let us study in more detail the phenomenon of the 
initiative, classically introduced at [4], and developed in the 
context of Service Science by [11], by analysing it in the 
context of Tiers-Lieu.  
We envisage an initiative as a breakthrough proposition, 
which is inter-organisational, inter-disciplinary, inter-
domain, aiming the creation of human-oriented and/or 
economic value and that concretises the semantics and leads 
to the realisation of one or several corresponding services. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-292-9
EMERGING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

We particularly note that an initiative with the related 
knowledge is not an object of protection (by copy-right, for 
example). It does not have the nature of consulting or project 
management; neither is it an instrument of education.  
In Tiers-Lieu, initiatives are seen upstream of projects or 
services, which help to create the services for commercial 
products, research or business-oriented methodologies. 
To conclude, the activities of Tiers-Lieu are thus 
regrouped around its initiatives, which respect the following 
conditions: 
• 
An initiative of Tiers-Lieu must be inter-
organisational: it should not belong to the only one 
organisation, but it must represent a general 
interest; 
• 
An initiative of Tiers-Lieu must be inter-
disciplinary: it should not be related to the only 
domain, 
but 
naturally 
aims 
to 
address 
interdisciplinary situations; 
• 
It should take into account international aspects; 
• 
It should create values in human, social and 
economic aspects; 
• 
The initiative must be concretised in the form of 
one or several trans-organisational and trans-
disciplinary services. 
The results of an initiative could furthermore generate 
partnership agreements, internal or inter-organisational 
projects, new forms of organisations, innovative start-ups, 
especially in the context of interconnected services, net-ups, 
or other forms of value-creating organisations. Naturally, an 
initiative of Tiers-Lieu can give a start for new initiatives of 
the same – or different – Tiers-Lieu. 
IV. 
ORGANISATION OF TIERS-LIEU 
Tiers-Lieu is envisaged as an environment supporting 
innovations, which are concretised thanks to initiatives. 
The activities that are supported by Tiers-Lieu are 
naturally discussed during the meetings of co-opetative 
nature concerning strategic questions typical for complex 
competition-based 
environments. 
Despite 
certain 
contradictions between the objectives of each actor, such 
environments 
require nevertheless a 
high 
level 
of 
collaboration in achieving common objectives. For example, 
while introducing new forms of bank services, IT standards 
or compliance norms, the necessity of coherent collaboration 
between direct competitors (e.g., leading companies in the 
sector), standardisation organisations and other interested 
parties have become a crucial factor. 
There are no special limitations on the form of such 
meetings: they can be face-to-face, diffused by Internet, 
supported in real-time or asynchronous, or the mix of 
different forms.  
In many cases, the main actors taking part in Tiers-Lieu 
are top executives of enterprises or non-commercial 
organisations, or – in general – decision-makers. However, 
the participation is open for other contributors: actively 
interested people, and is highly beneficial if various 
interesting – and multi-domain – ideas are exchanged. 
In this context, it is important to underline that the 
participation in Tiers-Lieu is based on the acceptance of its 
members of the main principles of team creativity, their 
desire and ability to create collectively, to share the expert 
knowledge and the acquired results, to avoid innovation 
resistance [16] and to ensure participative safety, to improve 
the quantity and quality of attempts to introduce or develop 
new ideas [23]. 
It is agreed between the actors that innovative ideas are 
represented through initiatives which can dynamically 
change, according to the discussions. Before being selected 
and approved by all actors, initiatives can be modified, 
reorganised, abandoned, etc. 
This implies the necessity for a formal definition of a 
protocol for such a meeting, allowing tracking the history 
and dynamics of ideas exchange, some principles for 
regulating roles and access of actors. In other words, the 
whole Tiers-Lieu infrastructure supporting creation and 
implication of initiatives for services creation should be 
established (Fig. 1). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Tiers-Lieu: from initiative to service. 
Since 
Tiers-Lieu represents 
creative 
collaborative 
environments that involve a lot of multidisciplinary actors, 
the organisation of Tiers-Lieu should respect certain 
principles. 
Firstly, Tiers-Lieu is motivated by the spirit of the PPPP 
approach: they support and are oriented to private (P), public 
(P) partnerships (P) and people (P).  
Secondly, to ensure the smooth organisation of 
discussions and the effectiveness of taken decisions, there 
should be a system of roles within Tiers-Lieu.  
We start by identifying the following 6 roles: 
• 
Initiators: actors, who come with a new innovative 
idea, define an initiative and invite other actors to 
discussions. Initiators are those who take the final 
decision, once the initiative is discussed and 
developed by others. 
• 
Participants: actors, who actively contribute in 
discussions and help to develop the proposed 
initiative. 
• 
Moderators: actors supporting the process of Tiers-
Lieu functioning. 
• 
Observers: actors, who assist at discussions and 
follow them, but are not actively participating in 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-292-9
EMERGING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

them, i.e.,, the ones who do not have a word. 
Observers might have educational purposes (e.g., 
students) or just share the general interest for the 
discussed subject, without offering any concrete 
solutions (e.g., public). 
• 
Historians (or secretaries): actors who play a 
supporting role: helping to register and track 
discussions and contributions of participants, 
introducing required information, keeping in order 
the agreed planning, etc. 
• 
Developers: actors, whose aim is to develop a 
service, once the initiative has been defined and 
validated. 
The role of the initiator is characterised by a high level of 
responsibility and is crucial for functioning of Tiers-Lieu. 
Indeed, it is the initiator who not only introduces a new 
initiative as a subject of innovation, but also defines the 
scope of participation within the scope of Tiers-Lieu. The 
initiator is also the one who evaluates the expressed ideas 
and has the final word on accepting or refusing them.  
To facilitate the discussion procedure and to minimise 
the uncertainty in discussions, the initiator has a set of 
measures to keep the discussions fruitful, by attributing the 
participants a yellow card (warning about the semantic 
inconsistency or non-respect of the ethics of Tiers-Lieu) or a 
red card (serious breach of the rules or consistent 
contradiction with the main idea of the current initiative; this 
leads to the exclusion of the participant from this Tiers-
Lieu). Analogically to football rules, two yellow cards in the 
same meeting constitute a red card. 
A participant with a red card (or in fact any participant at 
any time) may leave this initiative and eventually launch an 
alternative initiative and a different Tiers-Lieu, which might 
have the same participants of the initial Tiers-Lieu. All 
initiatives are launched under the Creative Commons 
License, used when an author wants to give people the right 
to share, use, and even build upon a work that they have 
created. 
It is remarkable that there are no limitations for the 
participants to contribute for multiple initiatives, as well as to 
leave them at any time.  
It is important to develop a balanced system of ethics 
principles 
concerning 
the 
supported 
activity, 
and, 
consequently, the ethics principles defining the developed 
service. 
Despite the self-motivation of the actors to participate in 
Tiers-Lieu, there should be developed a balanced approach 
for supporting their interest in sharing and increasing their 
knowledge about the complex situations, which require 
common effort, even under the risk of competition. Tiers-
Lieu is becoming thus a good choice of a neutral 
environment, which can put together various actors for their 
“winning-winning” collaboration. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
This exploratory paper addressed the challenge of 
supporting creative development of services with the help of 
collaborative environments. To answer the new requirements 
of our emerging society, it seemed insufficient merely to 
support 
existing 
working 
relationships 
between 
organisations, enterprises and academic institutions but 
necessary to offer them an independent “third place”, Tiers-
Lieu, which would help to people from different 
organisations to work together for and in benefit of their 
organisations. We noted that the results of their collaborative 
work should be concretised by the development of a service 
(or several services), might lead to defining a new project, 
and are, for example, supported by Creative Commons 
License.  
In this paper, we introduced the concept of Tiers-Lieu, 
discussed its characteristics and analysed its role as an 
exploratory environment, allowing creativity-oriented actors 
freedom in participation, yet concretised by a system of 
rules. Such conceptual architecture reflected the idea that 
initiatives should not be limited to bottom-up or top-down 
ones but might come from everywhere, beyond the limits 
imposed by a certain form of organisation and/or 
conventions accepted within certain professions. This also 
meant that Tiers-Lieu was defined in the way to enable 
freedom of semantic exchange, and to overcome the limits of 
one domain, one profession, and/or one way of thinking. 
Our future work is focused on formal definition of codes 
and principles of functioning of Tiers-Lieu. We also explore 
the role of the University, identify the risks and challenges of 
its current form for innovation-oriented discovery and 
services development, and analyse its potential improvement 
in the context of the vision of Tiers-Lieu. We envisage this 
approach to become a profound base in our work on 
exploring the phenomenon of the university, and its 
consecutive extension as a result of the new challenges our 
society has been currently offering. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P.Genoud, and A. Moeckli, “The third places, Places of 
emergence 
and 
creativity / 
Les 
Tiers-lieux, 
Espaces 
d’émergence et de créativité”, 2010, retrieved online at 
http://lamusegeneve.files.wordpress.com/2010/03/03_patrick-
genoud-alexis-moecli-2.pdf , last accessed 9/7/2013 
[2] R. Briggs, G. Kolfschoten, G.-J. de Vreede, C. Albrecht, D. 
Dean, and S. Lukosch, “A Seven-Layer Model of 
Collaboration: Separation of Concerns for Designers of 
Collaboration Systems”. In: Proc. ICIS 2009, Phoenix, 
Arizona, USA, December 15-18, 2009. 
[3] J. Cardoso, K. Voigt, and M. Winkler, “Service Engineering 
for the Internet of Services”. Enterprise Information Systems, 
Lecture Notes In Business Information Processing (LNBIP), 
Vol. 19, 2009, pp. 15–27 
[4] R. Cohen, C. Allaby, C. Cumbaa, M. Fitzgerald, K. Ho, B. 
Hui, C. Latulipe, F. Lu, N. Moussa, D. Pooley, A. Qian, and 
S. Siddiqi, “What Is Initiative?” In: User Modeling And User-
Adapted Interaction, 8(3-4), 1998, pp.171–214 
[5] H. Demirkan, R. Kauffman, J. Vayghan, H. Fill, D. 
Karagiannis, and P. Maglio, “Service-oriented technology and 
management: Perspectives on research and practice for the 
coming decade”. In: Electronic Commerce Research and 
Applications 7(4): 2008, pp. 356-376 
[6] T. Erl, “SOA: Principles of Service Design”, ISBN: 
0132344823, Prentice Hall/PearsonPTR, 2008 
[7] W. Guangbin, and C. Dongping, “Research on the Project-
Level Influencing Factors on Information Technology 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-292-9
EMERGING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

Implementation in Construction Industry”. In: Proc. the Int. 
Conference on Management and Service Science MASS 
2010: pp. 1-4, 2010 
[8] R.L. Keeney, “The foundations of collaborative group 
decisions”. In: International Journal of Collaborative 
Engineering, Inderscience Publishers, vol. 1, no. 1-2/2009, pp. 
4-18 
[9] M. Leonard, and A. Yurchyshyna, “Decision constructing as 
conceptualisation 
of 
service 
innovation”. 
In: 
Proc. 
IJCSS2011, the International Joint Conference of Service 
Sciences, 25-27 May 2011, Taipei, Taiwan, 2011 
[10] R. Oldenburg, “The Great Good Place: Cafes, Coffee Shops, 
Community Centres, Beauty Parlors, General Stores, Bars, 
Hangouts, and How They Get You Through the Day”. New 
York: Paragon House, 1989. 
[11] W. Opprecht, A. Yurchyshyna, A. Khadraoui, and M. 
Léonard, “Governance of initiatives for e-government 
services innovation”. In: Proc. Electronic Government and 
Electronic Participation : Joint Proceedings of Ongoing 
Research and Projects of IFIP EGOV and ePart 2010. pp. 
203-210 
[12] PRO Inno Europe, “Making public support for innovation in 
the EU more effective”. Paper No 13, 2009, available online 
at 
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/innovation/files/swd_ef
fectiveness_en.pdf, last accessed 13/08/2012 
[13] D. Pym, R. Taylor, and C. Tofts, “Public services innovation 
through 
technology”. 
Hewlett-Packard 
2007, 
http://www.hpl.hp.com/techreports/2007/HPL-2007-22.pdf, 
2007 
[14] B.A. Reinig and R.O. Briggs, “On the Relationship Between 
Idea-Quantity and Idea-Quality During Ideation”, Group 
Decision and Negotiation, 17(5), 2008, pp. 403-420 
[15] L. Rubalcaba: “Service innovation and innovation policies: 
key challenges and implications”, UNECE Applied Policy 
Seminar, 
25 
March 
2010, 
available 
online 
at 
http://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/ceci/ppt_presentations/
2010/ic/rubalcaba.pdf, last accessed 13/08/2012  
[16] J.N. Sheth, “Psychology of Innovation Resistance: The Less 
Developed Concept (LDC) in Diffusion Research”. In: 
Research in Marketing ed. J. N. Sheth. 4. Jai Press Inc. 1981, 
pp. 273-282 
[17] A. Smedlund, “Value Cocreation in Service Platform 
Business Models”, In: Service Science March 2012 4:79-88 
[18] J.M. Tien, and D. Berg, “A case for service systems 
engineering”. In: Journal of Systems Science and Systems 
Engineering, Vol. 12, No. 1, 2003 
[19] Web 
resource 
Autrans 
2012, 
http://www.autrans.net/ 
[retrieved: June, 2013]    
[20] Web resource La Cantine, http://lacantine.org/, [retrieved: 
June, 2013]    
[21] Web resource Festival Temps d’Images, http://www.104.fr/, 
[retrieved: June, 2013]    
[22] Web 
resource 
tiers_lieu{x}, 
http://www.tierslieux.net/ 
[retrieved: June, 2013]    
[23] M.A. West, (Ed); and J.L. Farr, (Ed), “Innovation and 
creativity 
at 
work: 
Psychological 
and 
organisational 
strategies”. Oxford, England: John Wiley & Sons, 1990, pp. 
309-333 
[24] A. 
Yurchyshyna, 
W. 
Opprecht, 
and 
M. 
Leonard, 
“Collaborative decision constructing supported by Cross-
Pollination Space”. In: Proc.International Conference on 
Advanced 
Collaborative 
Networks, 
Systems 
and 
Applications, COLLA’11, Luxembourg, 2011 
 
 
 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-292-9
EMERGING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

