Smart Monitoring: An Intelligent System to 
Facilitate Health Care across an Ageing Population 
Carl Chalmers, William Hurst, Michael Mackay, Paul Fergus 
School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences 
Liverpool John Moores University 
Byrom Street 
Liverpool, L3 3AF, UK 
{C.Chalmers, W.Hurst, M.I.Mackay, P.Fergus}@ljmu.ac.uk 
 
Abstract— In the UK, the number of people living with self-
limiting conditions, such as Dementia, Parkinson’s disease and 
depression, is increasing. The resulting strain on national 
healthcare resources means that providing 24-hour monitoring 
for patients is a challenge. As this problem escalates, caring for 
an ageing population will become more demanding over the next 
decade. Our research directly proposes an alternative and cost 
effective method for supporting independent living that offers 
enhancements for Early Intervention Practices (EIP). In the UK, 
a national roll out of smart meters is underway, which enable 
detailed around-the-clock monitoring of energy usage. This 
granular data captures detailed habits and routines through the 
users’ interactions with electrical devices. Our approach utilises 
this valuable data to provide an innovative remote patient 
monitoring system. The system interfaces directly with a 
patient’s smart meter, enabling it to distinguish reliably between 
subtle changes in energy usage in real-time. The data collected 
can be used to identify any behavioural anomalies in a patient’s 
habit or routine, using a machine learning approach. Our system 
utilises trained models, which are deployed as web services using 
cloud infrastructures, to provide a comprehensive monitoring 
service. The research outlined in this paper demonstrates that it 
is possible to classify successfully both normal and abnormal 
behaviours using the Bayes Point Machine binary classifier. 
Keywords— Smart Meters, Profiling, Early Intervention 
Practice (EIP), Data Analysis, Patient Monitoring, Anomaly 
Detection, Assistive Technologies. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Smart meters are the foundation of any smart electricity grid, 
used for balancing grid load and demand. They also provide 
consumers with highly reliable and accurate metering services. 
Energy usage readings are taken at 10 second intervals [1] and 
monitor the electrical usage of appliances in the home; 
specifically, their operation time and duration of use. All data 
is produced to a granular level. Their introduction has brought 
about new technological opportunities, which can be applied 
to a health care environment. 
In the UK, around one in five adults are registered disabled. 
More than one million of those is currently living alone [2]. 
Providing a safe and secure living environment places a 
considerable strain on social and healthcare resources. 
Effective around the clock monitoring of these conditions is a 
significant challenge and affects the level of care provided. 
Consequently, a safe independent living environment is hard 
to achieve. Current public policy enables sufferers to live 
independently in their homes for as long as possible. However, 
it faces significant challenges. For example, current 
monitoring services are expensive and are met, often, with 
patient resistance, as the equipment is intrusive and complex. 
Substantial research gaps in non-invasive and cost effective 
monitoring technology exist [3]. Specifically, for safe and 
effective monitoring solutions, that are beneficial to the 
patient and healthcare providers alike. Any remote monitoring 
system must facilitate EIP, enabling front line services in the 
community to intervene much earlier.  
As such, the method put forward in this paper presents the 
concept of smart meter analytics for the detection of 
anomalies in a patient’s electricity usage. Using the Bayes 
Point Machine binary classifier, we demonstrate how the 
identification of abnormal behaviour provides an accurate 
solution for patient monitoring. The remainder of this paper is 
as follows. Section 2 provides a comprehensive assessment of 
current assistive living technologies while highlighting the 
significant caps in each of the methods. In addition, the 
different components that are used to facilitate the profiling of 
patients using smart meters is discussed. Section 3 discusses 
the proposed system methodology. Section 4 presents a 
detailed patient monitoring case study utilising the system. 
The paper in concluded in Section 5. 
II. BACKGROUND 
The use of smart technologies in primary care delivery is 
significantly increasing. In recent years, there has been rapid 
developments in monitoring technologies for independent 
living, early intervention services and condition management. 
In this section, an overview of these technologies, along with 
their feasibility, is provided.   
A. Assistive Technologies and limitations 
The term assistive technology covers a wide range of 
applications and tasks [4]. Assistive technology refers to 
devices or systems that support a person to maintain or 
improve their independence, safety and wellbeing. Typically, 
existing monitoring technologies can be divided into two 
categories. Firstly, physical aids, which assist the sufferer in 
performing 
specific 
tasks. 
Secondly, 
monitoring 
and 
surveillance, whereby electronic devices keep track of a 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

person’s medical condition and automatically alert health care 
staff when required. Although no official standardisations 
exist for assistive technologies, it is widely agreed that 
technology should be personalised, adaptive and non-intrusive. 
Current assistive living technologies involve the deployment 
of various sensors around the home [5]. These include motion 
sensors, cameras, fall detectors and communication hubs. 
However, installing, maintaining and monitoring these devices 
can be costly and a technical challenge [6].   
In addition, diverse wearable technology exists. These 
include personal emergency response systems, wearable body 
networks, ECG, pulse oximeter, blood pressure and 
accelerometers. The main objective of these sensors is to 
obtain essential medical data to assist in the overall 
assessment of a patient’s wellbeing. These readings enable 
clinical staff to assess remotely, while determining if there is a 
requirement for intervention.  
There are many limitations and challenges with existing 
solutions, as many of them are impractical. Affordability and 
associated costs with existing technologies mean they cannot 
be implemented on a large scale. This leaves many solutions 
inaccessible to health care trusts, councils and social services. 
In addition, the use of sensors and cameras around the living 
environment raise many privacy and protection concerns [7]. 
This leads to a general reluctance to use the technology. Often 
technical solutions are tailored to a specific application and do 
not meet the ongoing changing requirements of a patient. 
Many solutions fail to adequately identify tends in behaviour, 
which may indicate health problems. This inhibits early 
intervention.     
B. Deploying Cloud Computing for Patient Monitoring 
One of the most significant limitations in existing solutions 
is the absence of personalisation. The inability to learn the 
unique characteristics of each individual and condition 
degrades the effectiveness of any solution. A person’s habits 
and routines are clear indicators of their wellbeing. The ability 
to model routines and understand them is imperative for any 
patient monitoring system.  
With the emergence of cloud infrastructures, the ability to 
analyse large data and model behaviour in real-time has 
become feasible. Smart meters like many other sensors 
generate large amounts of data [8]. Being able to extract and 
analyse useful information is an imperative requirement for 
any system. In order to achieve this requirement, the use of 
smart and scalable analytics services are needed. Big data is 
often unstructured and is often difficult to process using 
conventional tools. Cloud based analytics utilise complex and 
demanding algorithms which require vast computational 
power [9].  
Using a cloud infrastructure removes the historical 
constraints associated with data analysis, as vast storage and 
flexible computational resources is offered. Using cloud 
services enables the real-time interpretation of data 
intelligence through the integration of front-end applications.  
This can be achieved by deploying analytical services, such as 
ready-to-use web services. These web services enable the 
integration of apps, which can be utilised to provide critical 
information to the patients support network. Our solution 
takes advantage of the cloud infrastructure and big data 
analytics, to provide a personalised patient monitoring system. 
The following section introduces our dataset and discusses the 
system methodology. 
III. METHODOLOGY 
In this section, the components of the system and their 
specific roles are highlighted. A case study is presented, along 
with the data analytics being used. 
A. End to End Processing 
The system directly interfaces with a patient’s smart meter 
to learn and detect changes in routine. It operates in two 
separate modes. Firstly, mode one, which is used for training 
and, secondly, mode two which is used for the prediction of 
health deterioration. The method has a modular design in 
order to cater for different circumstances of healthcare 
monitoring. Smart meter data is collected in an unstructured 
way. Therefore, the data is processed by collecting energy 
usage readings that represent a specific behaviour. Figure 1 
shows this overall process. 
 
Figure 1. End-to-End Process. 
The process starts with the smart meter, which resides 
within the patient’s home. The main function of this device is 
to record accurately and store electricity consumption 
information for defined times (to a minimum of 10 seconds). 
Table 1 shows example readings obtained from a smart meter 
at 10 second intervals. The date time column illustrates the 
date and time of the reading, while the reading column 
displays the amount of electrical load in watts. 
TABLE 1. DATA SAMPLE 
Date Time 
Reading 
01/03/2016 21:25 
1217 
01/03/2016 21:25 
1224 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

In order to collect the energy usage readings from the smart 
meter a Consumer Access Device (CAD) is required. Smart 
meters utilise ZigBee smart energy. The UK Department of 
Energy & Climate Change (DECC) has announced Smart 
Metering Equipment Technical Specifications (SMETS) 2, 
which cites the use of ZigBee Smart Energy 1.x.  
Smart meters establish a wireless Home Area Network in a 
consumer’s home. This is a local ZigBee wireless network 
(the SM HAN), which gas and electricity smart meters and in-
home displays use to exchange data. Consumers are also able 
to pair other devices that operate the ZigBee Smart Energy 
Profile (SEP) to the network. Once a consumer has paired the 
device to their HAN, a CAD is able to access updated 
consumption and tariff information directly from their smart 
meter; a CAD can request updates of electricity information 
every 10 seconds and gas information every 30 minutes. 
All of the obtained data from the CAD is logged remotely 
to a cloud SQL database. Here the data is used to create, test 
and deploy the classification models. Once the model is 
generated the classification models need to be accessible to 
the end user applications to provide real-time monitoring. This 
is achieved by deploying trained models, as ready-to-use web 
services. Once the web service is deployed, data from the SQL 
database can be directly sent to the service for active 
monitoring. The generated monitoring applications interface 
with the service API key to receive real-time monitoring alerts 
about the patient’s wellbeing. 
To further support individual health monitoring, a mobile 
application is provided to the patient. The patient is asked to 
log any unplanned interactions with medical services, such as 
visits to GPs, A and E and Walk-in Centres. The app records 
the visit type and date; this is undertaken so the patient’s 
energy reading can be assessed prior to the visit and to 
highlight any noteworthy changes in behaviour directly to the 
medical practitioner. Figure 2 displays a screen shot of the 
mobile application.  
  
 
Figure 2. Application Screenshot. 
 
B. Data Case Study 
In this sub section, a case study presents the real-time data 
gathering capabilities of a smart meter. An energy monitor is 
installed in a person’s home to perform the collection of real-
time energy usage data. The installation is used to model a 
person’s daily routine and to identify any noteworthy trends in 
device utilisation. Figure 3 shows the patient’s energy usage 
taken at ten second intervals. The y-axis shows the amount of 
energy being consumed in Watts, while the x-axis shows a 
snap shot of the time. Each individual colour represents one 
week’s electricity usage, which has been overlaid to show 
correlation over a three-week period. 
 
Figure 3. Energy Usage over a 3 Week Period. 
Obtaining energy readings at 1 to 10 second intervals 
provides energy signatures for each device. Figure 4 displays 
the amount of electricity being consumed for a kettle and its 
duration of use. Identifying the use of specific electrical 
devices enables the assessment of a patient’s wellbeing. 
 
Figure 4. Kettle Usage. 
C. Behavioural Analysis  
Knowledge about a person’s ability to undertake normal 
Activities of Daily Living (ADL) is an essential part for the 
overall assessment [10]. This is imperative in determining the 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

diagnosis. The following list highlights the main ADL’s that 
can be detected through a patient’s interaction with their 
electrical devices: 
 
Eating patterns – for the purposes of detecting abnormal 
or altering changes in eating habits. These types of 
behavioural changes provide key indicators regarding the 
general health of the patient. 
 
Sleep patterns – changes in sleep patterns can provide 
insights into a patient’s mental and physical wellbeing. 
Sleep disturbances are often key indicators for various 
mental health problems. 
 
Behavioural changes – provide impotent indicators for the 
detection of new conditions while providing information 
about the progression of existing medical problems. 
 
Changes in activity – can highlight possible periods of 
inactivity. These types of changes would require 
intervention to prevent additional complications and 
worsening of a patient’s condition. 
 
Routine alteration – is vital for detecting changes in a 
patient behaviour and forms a key part in our system for 
the purposes of facilitating independent living. The 
identification of a route change especially in more serious 
conditions such as dementia can indicate the need for 
immediate intervention. 
 
The effects of social interaction on consumers and if the 
benefits are short or long lasting. This is important for 
assessing the mental wellbeing of a patient. 
Being able to detect subtle changes early and predict future 
cognitive and non-cognitive changes facilitate much earlier 
intervention. Often, dementia sufferers in hospital are 
admitted due to other poor health caused by other illnesses 
[11]. These illnesses are often a result of immobility in the 
patient. 
Most 
commonly 
infections 
cause 
additional 
complications and can also speed up the progression of 
dementia [12]. Additionally, immobility leads to pressure 
sores, which can easily become infected, other serious 
infections and blood clots, which can be fatal. With any of 
these complications early intervention for both preventative 
care and early treatment is vital to ensure a good prognosis 
and safe independent living. 
D. Mode One 
When the system is in training mode, learning a user’s 
personalised behaviour, features are extracted from the 
collected data. Features represent the dataset’s characteristics 
as a whole and are needed for training the classifiers. While in 
the training mode, the information clearing component runs a 
set of SQL queries against the data store for the specific 
condition or application. Each query returns a balanced data 
set for both normal and abnormal behaviours. A balanced 
dataset is required for the classification process as it removes 
the possibility of a bias prediction and misleading accuracies. 
The period and type of energy usage data collected varies. 
Each training iteration is application specific. A high-level 
view of the data collection process is shown in figure 5. 
Azure SQL
Stored SQL 
Query
Information 
Clearing
Training 
for EIP
Training for 
Independent 
Living
Training for 
Condition 
Progression
Application 
Selection
User 
Interface
 
Figure 5. Information Clearing Data Collection Process. 
E. Mode Two 
Using the trained classifiers and generated models, the 
system automatically detects both normal and abnormal 
patient behaviour in real-time using web services. Where 
appropriate the system alerts the patient’s support network if 
potential problem if detected. In the first instance, the system 
alerts the patient to check in, by performing specific device 
interaction. This reduces any possible false alarms and verifies 
that the patient requires no further assistance. 
The system identifies if interaction has taken place; if this 
is not the case an alert is communicated to a third-party health 
care practitioner. Enabling patients to check in helps to reduce 
the number of false positives while allowing the system to 
retrain. Figure 6 shows the workflow for the prediction mode. 
Regular medical review is required to assess the condition or 
revaluate the patient’s condition were appropriate. This could 
alter the type of health data included in the classification 
process, as different observations from the data might be 
required. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

 
Figure 6. Azure Data Flow for Prediction Mode. 
IV. CASE STUDY 
In this section, a case study is presented utilising the data 
set generated from the energy monitor outlined above. Each 
24-hour period has 86400 individual readings, as the data is 
recorded at 10 second intervals. Figure 7 shows an example 
morning highlighting usage of 2 individual devices. Firstly, a 
kettle, which is represented by the black dot, secondly the 
toaster, 
which 
is 
represented 
by 
the 
orange 
dots. 
Understanding the energy consumption and duration of usage 
enables the identification of an individual device. This is 
important to ascertain the amount of ADL’s the patient is 
performing.  
In addition to appliance monitoring, profiling the lighting 
within a home enables the detection of a patient’s location. 
Lights, light fittings and bulbs create specific profiles based 
on the type of light and the amount of bulbs fitted. This type 
of monitoring is extremely beneficial in assessing a patient’s 
wellbeing. Being able to determine how many times a patient 
visits the bathroom during the night can provide useful 
insights into their current health. For example, frequent visits 
may indicate a urinary tract infarction. 
 
Figure 7. Morning Energy Usage. 
In order to detect reduced ADL’s, which is a key indicator 
in assessing the wellbeing of a patient, a balanced data set is 
created. The data set contains a total of 20 days’ energy usage 
readings taken at 1 minute intervals equating to 1440 readings 
per 24-hour period. This reading frequency is selected, as it is 
granular enough for the detection of significant energy usage 
reductions. 10 days have combined daily energy usage 
exceeding 720000 watts while the remaining 10 days have 
usage readings below 620000 watts representing significant 
reduction in device interaction. 
A. Classification 
The system employs classification methods to identify both 
normal and abnormal energy usage patterns. The specific 
classifier used for this experiment is a Bayes Point Machine 
binary classifier. The classifier was selected for its ability to 
reduce the chance of over fitting during the training process, 
as it deploys a Bayesian classification model [13]. In addition, 
Bayes point machines often outperform Support Vector 
Machines (SVM) on both surrogate data and real-world 
benchmark data sets. Figure 8 shows a diagram of the training 
process. The classifier is conducted 50 times against randomly 
sampled training and testing sets for each iteration [14]. The 
hold out cross validation technique was deployed using 80% 
of the data for training while the remaining 20% is used for 
testing. 
 
Figure 8. Training Process. 
B. Results 
In this section, the results from the training process are 
presented. The classifiers performance is calculated using a 
confusion matrix. This allows the Accuracy (AUC or Area 
Under Curve), Sensitivity, Specificity and error to be 
considered. The results from the classifier are shown in Table 
2. 
TABLE 2. CLASSIFICATION RESULTS 50 REPETITIONS. 
Classifier 
AUC 
(%) 
Sensitivity 
Specificity 
Error 
Bayes Point 
75.00 
1 
0 
0.25 
The Bates Point classifier was able to classify 75.00% of 
the data accurately, with an overall error rate of 0.25. The 
results of the classification can largely be attributed to the use 
of a linear classifier. This is due to the fact that most 
observations are separable due to their large split in values. It 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

is clear from the results that the classifier was able to identify 
the different behaviours with a reasonable degree of accuracy.  
V. CONCLUSION 
This paper discussed the challenges in providing a safe and 
secure independent living environment. Especially for an ever 
increasing proportion of the population living with self-
limiting conditions. It highlighted significant gaps that exist in 
remote patient monitoring that is not intrusive, cost effective 
and facilitates EIP. There is an ever-growing focus on these 
disorders; both from public awareness, health, charitable and 
social organisation. It is widely accepted that patients should 
be able to live for as long as possible in their own homes. In 
order to address this problem, the paper introduces the concept 
of using smart meters for actively monitoring a patients 
wellbeing.  
Every household in the UK will have a smart meter 
installed by 2020. The cost of the roll out and ongoing 
maintenance is being funded by energy suppliers and the UK 
government. The paper highlighted, that by utilising this 
infrastructure, energy usage reading can be obtained in real-
time to identify any deviation in a patient’s habit or routine. 
Therefore, a system framework that utilises the Azure Cloud 
platform to train our classification models was presented. This 
process demonstrates the ability to detect reduced patient 
activity, which would arguably be cause for concern. The 
paper demonstrated that the use of the Bayes Point Machine 
binary classifier to detect a reduction in a patient activity is 
possible. Using a classification approach enables alterations in 
routine and reduced ADLs to be detected. 
Any reduction in activity would often go undetected with 
traditional 
monitoring 
systems. 
Using 
the 
techniques 
described in this paper monitoring both the physical and 
mental wellbeing of a patient becomes possible. This is 
important for providing a true representation of their welfare. 
In order to improve the classification performance, future 
work includes incorporating significantly larger feature sets to 
create a system, which is scalable. In addition, experimenting 
with, dimensionally reduction techniques will be undertaken. 
Deploying these techniques enables a reduction in the noise 
and the identification of the most valuable features in the 
dataset. This will involve the use of Principle Component 
Analysis (PCA) to improve the overall classification. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Eoghan McKenna, Ian Richardson and Murray Thomson, 
Smart meter data: Balancing consumer privacy concerns with 
legitimate applications, Energy Policy, pp. 807-814, 2012. 
[2] Mental Health Foundation, The Fundamental Facts The latest 
facts 
and 
figures 
on 
mental 
health, 
[Available 
at: 
http://www.mentalhealth.org.uk/content/assets/PDF/publicatio
ns/fundamental_facts_2007.pdf?view=Standard], 
Accessed 
June 2015. 
[3] Mert Bal, Weiming Shen, Qi Hao1 and Henry Xue1, 
Collaborative 
Smart 
Home 
Technologies 
for 
Senior 
Independent 
Living: 
A 
Review, 
Computer 
Supported 
Cooperative Work in Design, pp.481-488, 2011. 
[4] Alzheimer’s Society, Assistive technology - devices to help 
with 
everyday 
living, 
[Available 
at: 
https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/documents_info.php
?documentID=109], Accessed June 2016. 
[5] Julie Doyle, Cathy Bailey and Ben Dromey, Experiences of In-
Home Evaluation of Independent Living Technologies for 
Older Adults, The 3rd Annual Irish Human Computer 
Interaction Conference (I-HCI), 17-18 September 2009. 
[6] Grguric, Andrej. ICT towards elderly independent living. 
Research and Development Centre, Ericsson Nikola Tesla, 
2012. 
[7] Jaromir Przybylo, Landmark detection for wearable home care 
ambient assisted living system, 8th International Conference on 
Human System Interaction (HSI), pp.25-27, 2015. 
[8] Soma Sherkara Sreenadh Reddy Depuru, Lengfeng Wang and 
Vijay Devabhaktuni, Smart meters for power grid: Challengers, 
issues, advantages and status, Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews, ELSEVIER, pp. 2736-2742, 2011. 
[9] Kenneth E. Covinsky, Robert M. Palmer and Richard H. 
Fortinsky, et al., Loss of Independence in Activities of Daily 
Living in Older Adults Hospitalized with Medical Illnesses: 
Increased Vulnerability with Age, Journal of the American 
Geriatrics Society,Vol 51, 4, pp 451-458, April 2003. 
[10] Domenico Talia, Clouds for Scalable Big Data Analytics, 
Computer, pp98-101, 2013. 
[11] Sandra Selikson, Karla Damus and David Hameramn, Risk 
Factors Associated with Immobility, Journal of the American 
Geriatrics Society, April 2015. 
[12] Alzheimer's Association. 2013 Alzheimer's disease facts and 
figures. Alzheimer's & dementia 9.2 pp 208-245, 2013. 
[13] Herbrich, Ralf, Thore Graepel, and Colin Campbell. Bayes 
point machines. Journal of Machine Learning Research 1.Aug 
245-279, 2001. 
[14] P. Fergus, A. Hussain, D. Hignett, D. Al-Jumeily and K. 
Abdel-Aziz, A Machine Learning System for Automated 
Whole-Brain Seizure Detection, Applied Computing and 
Informatics, Volume 12, Issue 1, pp. 70-89. 2016.
 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

