ASE-BAN, a Wireless Body Area Network Testbed 
Jens Kargaard Madsen 
Aarhus School of Engineering 
Aarhus University 
Aarhus, Denmark 
jkm@iha.dk 
Henrik Karstoft  
Aarhus School of Engineering 
Aarhus University 
Aarhus, Denmark 
hka@iha.dk 
Finn Overgaard Hansen  
Aarhus School of Engineering 
Aarhus University 
Aarhus, Denmark 
foh@iha.dk 
 
Thomas Skjødeberg Toftegaard 
Aarhus School of Engineering 
Aarhus University 
Aarhus, Denmark 
tst@cs.au.dk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— Miniature Body Area Networks used in health care 
support greater mobility to patients and reduces actual 
hospitalization. 
This 
paper 
presents 
the 
preliminary 
implementation of a wireless body area network gateway. It is 
designed to implement the gateway functionality between 
sensors/actuators attached to the body and a host server 
application. The gateway uses the BlackFin BF533 processor 
from Analog Devices, and uses Bluetooth for wireless 
communication. Two types of sensors are attached to the 
network: an electro-cardio-gram sensor and an oximeter 
sensor. The testbed has been successfully tested for electro-
cardio-gram data collection, and using wireless communication 
in a battery powered configuration.  
Keywords-component; low power wireless sensor network; 
healthcare; ECG sensor; body area network; testbed; ASE-BAN 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The demand for health-related services in Europe is 
expected to grow in the near future, partly because of the 
relative increase in number of elders in the European region. 
Some demands will be on highly patient-centric and 
prevention-based health-related services. Technologies to 
cope with these demands are cheap real-time systems to 
monitor body functions of patients [1]. A ubiquitous 
computing network can be set up, where wireless 
technologies are applied to communicate accurate patient 
medical data to medical practitioners around the clock from 
the comfort of home; hence letting patients experience 
greater mobility and reduce hospitalization. This brings 
electronic health care support, known as m-Health in the 
literature [2], one step further. 
A wireless real-time monitoring system can be organized 
in a wireless body area network (BAN) first coined by Van 
Dam et al. in 2001 [3]. The BAN in Fig. 1 consists of a 
number of different sensors and actuators connected using 
wireless communications to the intelligent personal node 
(body gateway). The sensors could e.g. be an electro-cardio-
gram (ECG) sensor monitoring cardiovascular activity, a 
beat-to-beat sensor monitoring continuous blood pressure or 
an oximeter sensor observing the pulse and blood oxygen 
levels. An actuator could be a device stimulation muscle 
activator. The gateway communicates via a wireless link 
with a local or remote host application at a remote server. 
Such as system can provide ease in information-flow from 
the patient to the medical practitioners, in a convenient and 
secure way for the patient. 
BAN’s can acquire large quantities of patient medical 
information in real-time from the sensors. Such data should 
be communicated to the medical practitioners, in a suitable 
manner and data must be offloaded to the host for storage or 
post-processing from time to time. 
Since wireless transmission is relatively energy costly, 
the gateway should only transmit context relevant data when 
needed, to minimize energy consumption. This give rise to 
several technical challenges such as, how should the sensors 
communicate wirelessly with the gateway? When should the 
gateway communicate data to the host? What data should be 
communicated to the host? How should the data be 
communicated to the host? This paper addresses some of 
these challenges. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The wireless body area network. 
A number of research groups have worked on 
implementing a BAN platform, typically for dedicated 
purposes. One example is the Human++ UniNode from the 
Netherlands [13] monitoring the autonomic nervous system. 
Here the network is build from a number of sensors 
communicating directly and the body area network is not 
connected to a separate gateway. In the same manner the 
MIT Media Lab [14] and the Fraunhofer Institute [15] have 
studied emotions using different portable monitoring 
systems. Additionally in [16] a prototype bio-potential sensor 
node is presented for monitoring a multitude of bio-potential 
signals. A system consisting of three of these nodes 
packaged in a headband enables wireless sleep stage 
120
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

monitoring. What we try to do with ASE-BAN is to create a 
flexible platform that can be use in designing dedicated low 
power sensor nodes, more complex and resource demanding 
nodes e.g. including a signaling processor directly well as the 
gateway node itself where the protocol translation and 
connectivity of the BAN to the outside takes place.  
  
 Section II gives a brief discussion of BAN architectures 
with focus on design requirements/constraints. 
Section III describes the low-cost Aarhus School of 
Engineering BAN (ASE-BAN) gateway prototype testbed, 
initially designed to monitor ECG signal and other patient 
medical signals over long time spans with no user 
intervention. This is work in progress. 
The paper finalizes with a description of the future work 
of the ASE-BAN testbed. 
 
II. 
THE BAN ARCHITECTURE 
 
The network outlined in Fig. 2 illustrates a BAN 
consisting of a number of sensors/actuators nodes (motes), a 
body gateway and a host. 
The motes and the body gateway are connected 
wirelessly within the body zone in a star or mesh network 
topology and relaying data (packets) to or from each other. 
Most (bi-directional) communication is between the gateway 
and the motes, but two motes could also communicate 
directly, e.g. in a sensor actuator setup where a measured 
parameter by sensor-mote-A (drop of glucose level) implies 
a consequent action to be performed real-time by actuator-
mote-B (injection of insulin). Likewise, the gateway is 
connected wirelessly to the host in a bi-directional point-2-
point connection. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Wireless body area network topology and components such as 
sensors/actuators (motes), body gateway and host server. 
 
A. The BAN Communication Protocol 
Challenges with the design of a BAN communication 
protocol are issues like: noisy environment (RF noise and 
interference), variable traffic loads (dynamic bandwidth 
allocation), alarm situations (data priority/interruption), 
secure and accurate transmission (privacy and trustable), 
simple installation and service (plug and play), effortless 
adding/removing of motes and long time operation with 
minimal intervention (weeks/months/years). Therefore, key 
attributes for the BAN are: Reliability, scalability, security, 
power efficient, and easy of use and configure. 
Since, single-hop communication (star topology) not 
always can be guaranteed (e.g. from front to back) and at the 
same time be power efficient, multi-hop communication 
(mesh topology) might be used to obtain optimized power 
efficient connectivity [4]. Interoperability meaning standard 
based protocols is also important to enable mote products 
from several vendors in the BAN. 
An example of a protocol satisfying these requirements is 
the Time Synchronized Mesh Protocol (TSMP) proposed in 
[5], now being integrated into the emerging IEEE 802.15.4E 
standard. Key components of TSMP are: 
 
• 
Time synchronized communication 
• 
Frequency hopping 
• 
Automatic mode joining and network formation 
• 
Fully-redundant mesh routing 
• 
Secure message transfer 
 
In TSMP each transmission, transacted in a synchronized 
specific 
timeslot, 
contains 
a 
single 
packet 
and 
acknowledgements which are generated when a packet has 
been received unaltered and complete. Use of frequency 
hopping reduces the impact of interferences and increases the 
effective bandwidth. Aggressive use of duty-cycle and time-
slot based principles makes the protocol very power 
efficient. A key attribute of TSMP is its self-organization 
mesh routing that makes it easy to add/remove motes. 
Finally, TSMP support encryption, authorization and 
integrity with regards to secure message transfer. 
 
B. The BAN Gateway 
A gateway (optionally two in case of redundancy) per 
BAN performs the following major tasks: 
 
• 
Configuration and synchronization of the BAN 
• 
Controlling and monitoring of the motes 
• 
Collection and further processing of  the sensors data 
• 
Forwarding of processed and aggregated data 
wirelessly to the host for further processing and 
interpretation 
• 
Reception of commands from the host 
 
This requires hardware that includes: a transceiver 
supporting the communication within the BAN (motes), a 
transceiver supporting the communication with the Host, a 
powerful processor including memory and storage, and a 
power supply unit including a (rechargeable) battery. 
Optional, a display could be added for “on-site” monitoring. 
The form factor and weight of the gateway should be 
tailored to be wearable with minimal impact on the body 
comfort, e.g. like a modern Smartphone or smaller.  
121
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

Like most portable devices, the design should be 
optimized with low power consumption in mind. Weeks of 
operation without the need of recharging/replacing the 
battery would be acceptable.   
 
C. The BAN Sensors 
Sensors can be tiny patches worn on or implanted in the 
human body.  The number and types of sensors in a BAN 
depends on the application. Examples of typical ones are: 
 
• 
ECG sensor for monitoring heart activity 
• 
Blood pressure sensor 
• 
Oximeter sensor 
 
The key functions of a BAN sensor are: physiological 
measurement and data collection, (optional) processing and 
forwarding wirelessly to the gateway. This requires specific 
physiological sensor hardware, a processor including 
memory, a transceiver (bi-directional communication) and a 
power supply source.  
Small form factor, light in weight, and ultra low energy 
consumption are required with respect to physical comfort 
and minimal service. The latter one is with regards to 
extended battery lifetime (months or even years) without the 
need of intervention. 
Therefore, sensor hardware should be designed and 
implemented with ultra low power consumption in mind, and 
with support for communication protocol supporting such 
operations. E.g. sensors kept in sleep mode when not 
performing any active tasks. 
  Integrated energy harvesting is another possibility to 
extend the rechargeable battery lifetime, potentially ‘forever’ 
in case the harvested energy is larger than the consumed 
energy over time. In body area networks body heat and body 
vibrations are obvious sources for energy harvesting. In [6] 
an example of using body heat is described that with proper 
energy management may eliminate the use of a battery. 
 
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION & RESULTS 
This section describes the low-cost BAN prototype 
testbed. This is work in progress and only preliminary results 
will be presented. 
 
A. The ASE-BAN Testbed Model Overview 
Fig. 3 illustrates the ASE-BAN functional diagram. Here 
one module describes the actual ASE-BAN gateway and two 
additional modules implement the ECG and the oximeter 
sensors. 
In this initial version the wireless connection between the 
gateway and the host is implemented using Bluetooth 
whereas the connections (wired in this prototype) to the two 
sensor modules is only emulating the wireless channel. In the 
next version of the testbed the wireless ASE-BAN 
connections will be implemented proprietary low power 
radio communication modules. 
 
Gateway
Bluetooth 2.0
module
DSP processor 
module
Blackfin BF533
ECG sensor
3-channel
Sigma-Delta
16bit ADC
Instrumentation
Amplifier
Programmable 
Gain Amplifier
Oximeter sensor
3-channel
Sigma-Delta
16bit ADC
Instrumentation
Amplifier
Programmable 
Gain Amplifier
 
 
Figure 3.  Block diagram of the ASE-BAN gateway with an ECG and an  
oximeter sensor module. 
B. The ASE-BAN Gateway 
The testbed prototype gateway consists of two modules, 
the processor module and the communication module, as 
illustrated in the lower part of Fig. 3. The modules are 
assembled to form a sandwich structure as show in Fig. 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  The physical ASE-BAN gateway module. The size is 13 mm x 
18 mm  x 30 mm. The weight is approximately 6 g. 
The processor module is a small foot-print Digital Signal 
Processor platform equipped with a BlackFin BF533 signal 
processor from Analog Devices [7]. This signal processor is 
a high-performance fix-point processor with two 16 bits 
multiply-and-accumulate 
units, 
capable 
of 
parallel 
processing. The processor is capable of handle clock-speeds 
up to 600 MHz. The on-chip real-time-clock is connected to 
a 32 kHz crystal. The module also includes a M25P10-A 
122
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

serial 1 MBit data flash for program storage and a secure 
digital memory card for on-board local data storage. On reset 
the processor boots the program form the flash. The 
processor may transfer data to the SD-card using the serial 
peripheral interface. 
The wireless communication module, consist of a 
Bluetooth 2.0 module of class 2. The RF range is up to 100 
meter. It supports data transfer rates up to 3 Mbits/s. The 
module is connected to the processor module trough a UART 
interface. The module facilitates connectivity to sensors in 
the ASE-BAN and to the host, in this setup a PC or cell 
phones. The module is easy to use, but costly in terms of 
energy consumption, especially in relation to the rather low 
bandwidth need for the current set of sensors ( < 500 Hz @ 
16 bit ). The next generation will have a more energy 
efficient communication module. 
The processor platform is used to process the signals 
from the sensors. Current software runs standard adaptive 
noise removing techniques to remove hum in the ECG. The 
R-peak in the ECG signal is calculated using the Pan 
Thomkins algorithm [8] and finally classic pNN50 Heart 
Rate Variability [9] is calculated for diagnostic purposes. 
 
C. The ASE-BAN Sensors 
The current prototype supports 2 types of sensors: an 
ECG sensor and an oximeter sensor. 
The ECG sensor module measures 2 lead ECG signal on 
patients. The module includes an ECG amplifier, an analog-
to-digital converter and a power supply unit. 
Since ECG signal typically has peak to peak amplitude of 
approximately 2 mV amplification is needed prior to the 
analog to digital conversion. The amplification is done using 
the AD620 instrumentation amplifier from Analog Devices 
[10]. This amplifier has high bandwidth, low noise and 
providing high common-mode rejection, as such offers high 
quality amplification of the ECG signal. 
The AD conversion is implemented, using the AD770 3-
channel 16 bit Σ∆-converter from Analog Devices [11]. The 
sampling rate for the ECG signal is set to 500 Hz. 
The current power supply unit accepts input voltages in 
the range 0.8 – 3 V and enables warning on low battery. 
The sensor is intended to be worn for a longer time span 
without intervention; hence appropriate electrodes must be 
selected, to provide for high signal quality and patient 
comfort. The prototype uses 2 lead insulated bio-electrodes 
which provide good signal quality and reduced risk for skin 
irritation [12]. Fig. 5 shows a recorded ECG on the host 
server. The power consumption can be as small as 500 µW, 
this means a battery on 0.5 Wh will operate a couple of 
weeks given continuous operation. 
The oximeter measures the oxygen saturation in the 
patient blood. The module is being implemented in a similar 
way as the ECG module (same size etc.), but since the 
module is in the design phase no measurement results are at 
this point in time available. 
 
 
Figure 5.  A real-life ASE-BAN ECG mesurement. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK 
In this paper an initial prototype body area network 
testbed for measuring ECG and oxygen level in blood has 
been presented. The testbed has been implemented and 
successfully tested for ECG data collection. The oximeter 
module is in the design phase so no measurement results are 
available at this point in time. 
Since this paper presents the initial implementation of the 
ASE-BAN testbed a larger number of activities have been 
postponed to further work in the near future. This work can 
be categorized in two levels, short term and long term. The 
immediate short of to implement and test the oximeter 
sensor. Additionally the short term issues are to work with 
power efficient signal processing techniques for robust 
detection of the R-peaks and accurate estimation of the heart 
rate 
variability 
for 
diagnostic 
purposes 
including 
compression of sensor data. In the longer term new sensor 
hardware for the body area network will be implemented to 
create low power solutions with little or no battery power. A 
number of energy harvesting techniques are being 
investigated. Additionally the gateway hardware itself will 
be optimized in terms of energy consumption. This includes 
the radio module as well as the software implementation 
which in the future will offer mechanisms to put the device 
to sleep when not necessary. Additionally the network 
communication protocol itself will be designed to reduce the 
power consumption of the BAN for continuous real-time 
monitoring. Finally the introduction of an ultra-small-scale 
IP stack in the gateway is being considered for connectivity 
to the host and further on a network infrastructure. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Frost and Sullivan. European Remote Patient Monitoring Markets, 
June 2008 
[2] R. S. H. Istepanian, E. Jovanov, and Y. T. Zhang, “Guest editorial 
introduction to the special section on m-health: Beyond seamless 
mobility and global wireless health-care connectivity," Information 
123
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

Technology in Biomedicine, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 
405-414, Dec. 2004. 
[3] K. Van Dam, S. Pitchers, and M. Barnard, “Body area networks: 
Towards a wearable future," in Proceedings of WWRF kick off 
meeting, Munich, Germany, 6-7 March 2001. 
[4] B. Latre, B. Braem, I. Moerman, C. Blondia, P. Demesester ”A 
Survey on Wireless Body Area Network” 
[5] Dust Network “Technical Overview of Time Synchronized Mesh 
Protocol”,Doc.nr. 025-0003-01, June 20, 2006, http://www.dust-
networks.com/technology (June 2010).  
[6] Qadeer A. Khan, Sarvesh J. Bang “Energy Harvesting for Slef 
Powered Wearable Healt Monitoring System”, Oregon State 
University, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Body_Area_Network (June, 
2010). 
[7] Analog Devices, “High Performance General Purpose Blackfin 
Processor”, 2008, http://www.analog.com/en/embedded-processing-
dsp/blackfin/adsp-bf533/processors/product.html 
[8] J. Pan and W. J. Tompkins, A real-time QRS detection algorithm. 
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., BME-32 (3):230-236, 1985.  
[9] 
“Guidelines. Heart rate variability”. European Heart Journal (1996) 17, 
354-381. 
[10] Analog Devices, “Low Drift, Low Power Instrumentation Amp with 
Set Gains of 1 to 10000”, 2008, http://www.analog.com/en/other/ 
militaryaerospace/ad620/products/product.html (june 2010). 
[11] Analog Devices, “3V/5V, 1 mW 3-Channel Pseudo Differential, 16-
Bit Sigma-Delta ADC”, 2008, http://www.analog.com/en/analog-to-
digital-converters/ad-converters/ad7706/products/product.html (May 
2010). 
[12] C. Park, P.H. Chou, Y. Bai, R. Matthews, A. Hibbs, "An ultra-
wearable, wireless, low power ECG monitoring system", Biomedical 
Circuits and Systems Conference, Nov. 2006, pp. 241-244.  
[13] L. Brown, B. Grundlehner, J. van de Molengraft, J. Penders and B. 
Gyselinckx, “Body Area Network for Monitoring Autonomic 
Nervous System Responses”, 3rd International Conference on 
Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare, April 2009, 
London, UK. 
[14] M. Strauss, “Handwave: Design and manufacture of a wearable 
wireless skin conductance sensor and housing,” Master Thesis, MIT 
June 2005. 
[15] C. Peter, E. Ebert and H. Beikirch, “A wearable multi-sensor system 
for mobile acquisition of emotion-related physiological data”, in 
Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Affective 
Computing and Intelligent Interaction, 2005. 
[16] N. de Vicq, F. Robert, J. Penders, B. Gyselickx and T.Torfs, 
”Wireless body area network for sleep staging”, in Proc. Int. Conf. on 
Biological Circuits and Systems, 2007. 
 
 
 
124
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

