Impact of Topology on Service Availability in a 
Smart Grid Advanced Metering Infrastructure 
Bashar Alohali, Kashif Kifayat, Qi Shi, William Hurst 
School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, 
Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, UK,  
B.A.Alohali@2012.ljmu.ac.uk{K.Kifayat, Q.Shi, W.Hurst}@ljmu.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— over the last decade, Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) 
have brought radical changes to the means and forms of 
communication for monitoring and control of a large number of 
applications including Smart Grid (SG). Traditional energy 
networks have been modernized to Smart Grids to boost the 
energy industry in the context of efficient and effective power 
management, performance, real-time control and information 
flow using two-way communication between utility provides and 
end-users. However, integrating two-way communication in smart 
grid comes at the cost of cyber security vulnerabilities and 
challenges. In the context of SG, node capture is a severe security 
threat due to the fact that a compromised node can significantly 
impact the operations and security of the SG network. In this 
paper, node compromise attack is explored on Advance Metering 
Infrastructure (AMI) with smart meters for Neighbor Area 
Networks (NANs) in star and mesh network topologies. Simulation 
of node compromise/failure for a SG network, using ZigBee nodes 
in simulation indicates that a partial mesh topology is more 
resilient to node capture attacks as compared to star topology. A 
larger number of nodes are reachable from the control center of 
the SG in a partial mesh topology compared to that in a star 
topology.  
Keywords- Smart meter; Smart Grid;, Node Capture, Mesh 
Smart Meter, Start Smart Meter 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The swift development of information and communication 
technology (ICT) has not only changed the way we live our lives 
but also changed the industrial automation system including 
Smart Grid (SG) to an effective, efficient and reliable system. 
The integration of ICT has been of great importance to 
transform the traditional energy networks into SGs to ensure a 
reliable system and to overcome the limitations and challenges 
experienced by traditional energy networks. The U.S 
department of energy has defined the smart grid as an 
“electricity delivery system (from point of generation to point 
of 
consumption) 
integrated 
with 
communication 
and 
information technologies for enhanced grid operations, 
customers’ services and environmental benefits [1].”  
Recently, wireless sensor networks (WSNs) have shown 
great potential for various applications including in SGs. The 
SG applications can include a range of devices/systems such as 
smart meters (SMs), advance metering infrastructure (AMI), 
wide 
area 
measurement 
system 
(WAMS), 
substation 
automation system, common information models (CIF), and 
fault diagnosis to achieve seamless, efficient energy 
transmission and distribution, effective and reliable remote 
monitoring due to its easy deployment in remote locations, low 
cost, low date rates and low energy consumption [2-5]. 
Regardless of the economical and functional benefits exploited 
by SGs, its adoption, deployment and resiliency has been of 
great challenge due to potential lack of adequate security and 
vulnerable attacks like node capture to damage confidentiality, 
integrity and availability [6-7]. SMs, deployed in domestic and 
commercial location, required to be interconnected for 
communication and data flow to management entities. The 
deployment (i.e. star, tree, partial/full mesh) will vary as per the 
distribution of SMs in NANs environment and can severely 
impact the network resiliency due to network threats. The aim 
of this paper is to explore the node compromise attack on AMI 
and so smart meters for NANs star and mesh network topology. 
SG network segments in different topologies are simulated 
using OPNET. The simulation results show that a partial mesh 
topology is more resilient to node capture (NC) attacks.  
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the 
related work followed by architecture and the functionality of 
SGs and its components in section 3. Section 4 describes the NC 
attack and its impact on NAN star and mesh topology is 
analyzed in section 5 and 6. Finally, Section 7 concludes the 
paper and future work is outlined.  
 
II. 
SMART GRID OVERVIEW  
A SG network permits services to have bi-directional 
interaction with devices on their electric grid as well with end-
users and distributed power generation and storage facilities. To 
achieve the detailed view of the Smart Grid, it can be considered 
as a heterogeneous network (Fig. 1) based on the 
interconnection of multiple networks segments such as, the 
Home Area Networks (HANs) for effective energy at consumer 
end; the Neighborhood Area Network (NAN) for providing 
advance metering infrastructure; and the Wide Area Network 
(WAN) to distribute automation and the SG backbone [14]. The 
HAN interconnects to the WAN via a SM, which is part of 
NAN. Majority of the devices in the HAN and NAN are 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

wireless communicating nodes. The interconnectivity of SMs 
into NAN is collectively referred to as advanced metering 
infrastructure (AMI) and is the main focus of this paper. NAN 
can be a network of smart meters creating a star, tree, or mesh 
network, which consists of smart meters and gateways that 
relay data. 
AMI facilitates the critical communication and control 
functions required to implement important energy management 
services such as pricing schemes, demand response, automatic 
meter reading, and management of power quality. AMI, 
integrated with million number of low-cost nodes being placed 
in insecure, uninterested and unsophisticated locations, make 
smart metering vulnerable to cyber-attacks such as spoofing, 
eavesdropping, Denial-of-Service (DoS), man-in-the-middle 
attacks and node compromise [13,15]. To ensure secure 
communication and resiliency in SM infrastructure and so AMI 
is one of the critical requirements.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
According to The U.S. Department of Energy, an emerging 
SG system must possess seven critical properties including 
resiliency to vulnerable attacks [8]. Over the last decade, 
malicious security threats on SG system have raised serious 
concerns. In 2003, due to Slammer worm attack from dial-up 
connection, Davis-Besse nuclear plant in Ohio was turned off 
to limit the impact of the threat [9]. In Iran, due the Bushehr 
power plant was infected due to one of the very first malicious 
coding attack known as Stuxnet worm [10]. The recent cyber-
attack on Ukraine’s power network also highlighted the security 
and system resiliency as major requirement for smart grid [11]. 
In [12], a binary tree based topology has been considered to 
introduce an efficient and scalable key management scheme for 
secure unicast, multicast and broadcast communication in SGs. 
The scheme demands considerable manual tasks to create the 
binary tree and transmit it together with secret key to each node. 
Due to binary tree nature, this scheme is vulnerable to NC attack 
where a compromised node can put network resiliency at risk 
due to unavailability of an alternative route. In [13] tree attack 
has been explored on tree topology and highlighted the tree 
topology as vulnerable for energy theft in AMI. There have 
been various studies to highlight and enhance the security of 
Smart Grids based on encryption techniques and key 
management approaches against different attacks. However, the 
analysis of NANs resiliency considering tree and mesh 
topology against attacks like NC has been overlooked. 
 
IV. 
NODE COMPROMISE / CAPTURE ATTACK  
Among various attacks in SGs, node compromise attack is a 
severe threat due to unattended nature of the sensor nodes. In a 
NC threat, an intruder can capture/compromise a node (SM) to 
get the access to secure cryptographic keys, node identification, 
communication between node and the network and monitor by 
re-deploying the compromised node into the network [16-17]. 
Once a node is compromised, it allows an intruder to execute 
various operations/attacks on the network and easily 
compromise the entire network. According to [18], there are 
three critical factors as mentioned below, which can lead 
intruder to compromise the entire network while triggering the 
node capture threat.  
 
1. Cryptography technology has been of great interest 
to secure data transmitted across the AMI and 
authenticates the different entities involved in the 
communication flow. Node capture threat can result 
into a massive threat if the key(s) used to 
encrypt/decrypt data among neighboring nodes are 
deployed with weak key security and management.  
2. The node deployment/topology play a critical role as 
it affects the scope of the node capture attacks. 
Generally, the scope can be defined based on the 
number of communication links such as, fewer the 
communication links between neighboring nodes 
(i.e. tree topology), the greater the possibility that an 
intruder can threat entire network. At the other end, 
higher 
the 
communication 
links 
between 
neighboring nodes (i.e. full/partial mesh topology), 
the smaller the possibility that an intruder can threat 
entire network. Therefore, node capture attacks seem 
to be less effective to mesh topology as compared to 
star topology, where there is only route from a child 
node to parent node.  
3. The node density also plays a critical role as it affects 
the scope of the node capture attacks. A node 
compromised in the larger density network can 
threat the larger section of network.  
 
Therefore, security of SM nodes and so the AMI is a critical 
issue to maintain the security and resiliency. Cryptography 
mechanisms based on symmetric (single share key) and 
asymmetric (public and private key) represents a crucial 
technology to secure the data transmitted across the nodes. A 
key (responsible to encrypt and decrypt data) plays a critical 
role and therefore an unauthorized access to key through a 
compromised node can threat entire network. In this paper, it is 
Figure 1 Smart Grid Network 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

assumed the NANs use encrypted communication based on 
random redistribution key approach. 
SMs, deployed in domestic and commercial location, 
required to be interconnected for communication and data flow 
to management entities. The deployment (i.e. star, tree, 
partial/full mesh) will vary as per the distribution of SMs in 
NANs environment. Fig. 2, 3 shows the example of star and 
mesh NAN topology.  
Star-based network deployment is characterized by central 
root node, connected at the highest level in the hierarchy as 
show in Fig.3. Top-level node is connected to 2nd level, whereas 
2nd level nodes are connected to 3rd level and so forth. The levels 
of the star topology can be denoted by 𝑛 ∈ 𝑁 ∶= {1, 2, … 𝑁}, 
where the 0𝑡ℎlevel is for top root.  
In a mesh network deployment, a node in each of the smart 
meter in NANs will communicate (transmit / receive) data by 
hoping from one node to another node until either the receiving 
node is reached or transmitted data reached to mesh gateway 
from node to node as shown in Fig. 3. The data from the 
gateway is typically transmitted to central data station via a 
backhaul network. The GWs are connected as start topology to 
backhaul network and SMs are connected as partial mesh as 
each SM is not directly connected to each of the other SM in 
the network.  
V. 
METHODOLOGY  
A. Network Security Model 
It is considered that a group of Smart Meters (SMs) with one 
SM taking on the role of a gateway (GW) is interconnected in a 
manner that some SMs have a multi hop path to the gateway 
(GW). The GW interconnects to the central authentication point 
over the backhaul network. SMs that are children of other SMs 
use the multi-hop path to reach the GW node as shown in Fig. 
2. It is assumed the NANs use encrypted communication based 
on random redistribution key approach. Each node is 
configured with a set of (𝐾) different keys from a key pool of 
(𝑃) keys. A pair of nodes with the range (𝑅) can initiate a 
secure connectivity only if appropriate assigned keys are shared 
between them. It is also assumed that every node is deployed in 
a promiscuous approach and is able to recognize sources of all 
messages initiating from its neighboring nodes. Based on this 
assumption, each node will inspect only the source node ID 
therefore 
this 
assumption 
will 
not 
incur 
significant 
communication overhead.  
B. Network Threat Model and Performance Metrics 
It is assumed that an intruder can physically capture a limited 
number of SM nodes in a target region Ŗ and turn them into 
threat node by extracting secure keys and measured data for 
NAN. Considering Ç represents a set of nodes captured by 
intruder and for each node in set Ç, a set of secure keys are 
considered to be compromised. When a node is compromised, 
its connectivity to other nodes is affected. If the node is not an 
end node, a larger number of nodes lose connectivity. It allows 
intruder to clone a captured node and collaboratively deploy 
them in the NAN. The resiliency of NAN star and mesh 
topology in Smart Grid against NC attack will be evaluated 
based on following metrics; hop count, availability of SM, End 
to End Delay, and Energy Consumption. 
C. Network Topology and Simulation Setup 
To carry out evaluation of NC attacks, two NAN topologies, 
star and mesh as shown in Fig. 2 are considered. The NAN 
made of (𝑁) nodes is deployed over a region of (𝐴 ⊆ ℝ). 
Considering that SMs in the AMI are fixed nodes, there is no 
mobility aspect included. Each node is assumed to be equipped 
with an omni-directional radio with fixed communication range 
(𝑅) based on the Zigbee standard. To evaluate the resiliency of 
star and partial mesh topology in NAN in smart grid based on 
Zigbee network against node capture attack, OPNET simulation 
tool has been used. In both star and mesh topology simulation 
of NAN, network consist of a Zigbee coordinator (Gateway) 
and Zigbee end devices (SMs). 
Case 1 – Star Topology: In this case, Zigbee nodes are 
deployed in a star topology for NAN.  
Case 2 – Tree Topology: In a NAN tree topology, there is a 
relationship of root (GW) and child (SM) node. The child 
node can communicate only with their parent node whereas 
the parents can communicate with their child and their own 
parent node. Therefore, child node (SM) always depends on 
the parent node for data availability as there are no alternative 
routes for SM node to get target.  
Case 3 – Mesh Topology: In this case, Zigbee nodes are 
deployed as partial mesh topology for NAN. NAN Mesh 
topology is more flexible as it can allow each node to choose 
between multiple routes to transmit/receive data to the target 
location. It also allows the network to self-heal and search for 
other paths and so that data can be relay through.  
 
Figure 2 Mesh Topology scenarios 
 
VI. 
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION 
In this section, the OPNET simulation [19] of both star and 
mesh NAN topologies against node capture attacks are 
discussed to highlight which NAN topology is more resilient 
against node capture attacks.  
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

A. Node Capture Attack and Impact on Reachability 
Node capture attack involves capturing a node and 
incapacitating it. Often the data in the node is retrieved for 
malicious use, but in case of tamper-resistant hardware, the 
access to data on the ROM of the device is avoided. Therefore, 
the primary impact of a node capture is the loss of the node. In  
 
 
addition to the loss of the sensed data from the node, the 
reachability from/to the central reporting node, the NOC, is 
impacted. This happens when the captured node provides a path 
for the downstream nodes to reach the NOC.  
In order to assess the impact of the reachability in the event 
of a node capture, star and mesh topologies are used to create a 
large network. For each node captured or a group of nodes 
captured, the number of nodes that are unreachable are noted. 
A network comprising ten ZigBee coordinator nodes, thirty 
ZigBee router nodes and a hundred ZigBee devices are used to 
create the network to test the impact of the node capture attack. 
The topology at the coordinator node is set to mesh and star 
respectively for each simulation run, in its network parameters.   
 
The coordinator node sends packets to the routers and end 
devices in each case.   
Nodes are randomly chosen to fail and the reachability from 
the NOC to all nodes is checked. The simulations are run for 
the two topologies separately and in each case, up to 9 nodes 
are failed. The corresponding numbers of nodes that are 
unreachable are noted. The figure plots the number of 
unreachable nodes against the number of captured nodes.  
The plotted results indicate that the mesh topology of the 
ZigBee network fares better than the star topology. The results 
are dependent upon which nodes are captured in the mesh 
topology. If an attacker succeeds in capturing and 
incapacitating all the ZigBee router nodes, then the impact 
could be more intense. It could turn out that the mesh topology 
could fare worse than the star topology. 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Reachability of nodes after node captures 
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
Node capture attacks in Smart Grid can significantly degrade 
network performance and threaten network security. Based on 
the simulation results, it is identified that partial mesh topology 
is more resilient topology as compared to star topology in NAN 
in Smart Grid against node capture attacks. As compared to 
NAN star, NAN mesh topology is more flexible as it can allow 
smart nodes to choose between multiple routes to 
transmit/receive data to the target location, if one of the node(s) 
compromised. Due to the flexibility offered by mesh topology, 
it is not only resilient but also an ideal solution with easy to 
deploy in NAN environment.  
This study has been focused on simple star and partial mesh 
topology for NAN along with NC attack. For future work, the 
study will be extended to complex topology star, star and mesh 
topology along with advance threat model and security scheme 
to detect and avoid node capture attacks to enhance the network 
resiliency as well as security. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1. Sioshansi, F. O, Smart Grid: Integrating Renewable, 
Distributed & Efficient Energy, Academic Press, 2012, p. 
89. 
2. V. C. Gungor, B. Lu and G. P. Hancke, "Opportunities and 
Challenges of Wireless Sensor Networks in Smart Grid," 
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 57, no. 
10, pp. 3557-3564, 2010. 
3. E. Fadel, V.C. Gungor, L. Nassef, N. Akkari, M.G. Abbas 
Malik, S. Almasri, I. F. Akyildiz, "A survey on wireless 
sensor 
networks 
for 
smart 
grid", 
Computer 
Communications, Vol. 1, pp. 22-33, 2015. 
4. Z. Popovic and V. Cackovic, "Advanced Metering 
Infrastructure in the context of Smart Grids," IEEE 
International Energy Conference (ENERGYCON), pp. 
1509-1514, 2014. 
Figure 3 Star Topology scenarios 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

5. L. Nian, C. Jinshan, Z. Lin, Z. Jianhua, and H. Yanling, "A 
Key Management Scheme for Secure Communications of 
Advanced Metering Infrastructure in Smart Grid," IEEE 
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 60, pp. 4746-
4756, 2013. 
6. M. Amin, “Guaranteeing the security of an increasingly 
stressed grid,” IEEE Smart Grid Newsletter, Feb. 2011. 
7. NIST, “Guidelines for Smart Grid Cybersecurity, Volume 1 
- Smart Grid Cybersecurity Strategy, Architecture, and 
High-Level Requirements, The Smart Grid Interoperability 
Panel – Smart Grid Cybersecurity Committee, 2014, 
National Institute of Standards and Technology, U.S. 
Department of Commerce. 
8. U.S. Department of Energy, National Energy Technology 
Laboratory, A Systems View of the Modern Grid, 2007.  
9. Y, Yang, T, Littler, S. Sezer, K. McLaughlin, H. F. Wang, 
“Impact of cyber-security issues on Smart Grid”, 2nd IEEE 
PES International Conference and Exhibition on Innovative 
Smart Grid Technologies, vol., no, pp.1,7, 2011.  
10. D. Kushner. (2016, 8/3/2016). The Real Story of Stuxnet, 
2013, Available: http://spectrum.ieee.org/telecom/security/the-real-
story-of-stuxnet 
11. L. Tomkiw. (2016, 8/3/2016). Russia-Ukraine Cyberattack 
Update: Security Company Links Moscow Hacker Group 
To 
Electricity 
Shut 
Down. 
Available: 
http://www.ibtimes.com/russia-ukraine-cyberattack-update-security-
company-links-moscow-hacker-group-2256634 
12. J. Y. Kim, and H. K. Choi, "An efficient and versatile key 
management 
protocol 
for 
secure 
smart 
grid 
communications," IEEE Wireless Communications and 
Networking Conference (WCNC), pp. 1823-1828, 2012. 
13. S. McLaughlin, D. Podkuiko, P. McDaniel, “Energy Theft 
in the Advanced Metering Infrastructure”, Critical 
Information Infrastructures Security, Vol. 6027 of the series 
Lec Notes in Computer Science, pp 176-187, 2009. 
14. W. Meng, R. Ma, and H.-H. Chen, "Smart grid 
neighbourhood area networks: a survey," IEEE Network, 
vol. 28, pp. 24-32, 2014 
15. S.H. Seo, X. Ding and E. Bertino, "Encryption key 
management for secure communication in smart advanced 
metering infrastructures," IEEE International Conference 
on Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), 
Vancouver, BC, pp. 498-503, 2013 
16. M. V. Bharathi, R. C. Tanguturi, C. Jayakumar and K. 
Selvamani, "Node capture attack in Wireless Sensor 
Network: A survey," IEEE International Conference on 
Computational Intelligence 
& Computing Research 
(ICCIC), Coimbatore, pp. 1-3, 2012. 
17. K.Venkatraman, 
J.Vijay 
Daniel, 
G.Murugaboopathi, 
"Various Attacks in Wireless Sensor Network: Survey", 
International Journal of Soft Computing and Engineering 
(IJSCE), Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 208-212, 2013. 
18. K. Kifayat, M. Merabti, Q, Shi, and D. Llewellyn-Jones, 
Security in Wireless Sensor Networks, Chapter 26, 
Handbook of Information and Communication Security, 
Springer Science & Business Media, 2010. 
19. RIVERBED. 2014. Riverbed Modeler Version 17.5, PL6,, 
Riverbed 
Software 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.riverbed.com/. 
 
 
 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

