Blocking Performance of Multi-Rate OCDMA Passive Optical Networks
John S. Vardakas∗, Ioannis D. Moscholios†, Michael D. Logothetis‡ and Vassilios G. Stylianakis§
∗WCL, Dept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Patras, 265 04, Patras, Greece
Email: jvardakas@wcl.ee.upatras.gr
†Dept. of Telecommunications Science and Technology, University of Peloponnese, 221 00, Tripolis, Greece
Email: idm@uop.gr
‡WCL, Dept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Patras, 265 04, Patras, Greece
Email: m-logo@wcl.ee.upatras.gr
§WCL, Dept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Patras, 265 04, Patras, Greece
Email: stylian@wcl.ee.upatras.gr
Abstract—Optical Code Division Multiple Access (OCDMA)
is one promising candidate for the provision of moderate
security communications with large dedicated bandwidth to
each end user. We present a new teletrafﬁc model for the
call-level performance of an OCDMA Passive Optical Net-
work (PON) conﬁguration that accommodates multiple service-
classes. Parameters related to the local blocking, Multiple
Access Interference (MAI) and user activity are incorporated
to our analysis, which is based on a two-dimensional Markov
chain. In this paper we focus on the derivation of recursive
formulas for the efﬁcient calculation of blocking probabilities.
To evaluate the proposed model, the analytical results are
compared with simulation results to reveal that the model’ s
accuracy is quite satisfactory.
Keywords-PON; OCDMA; Multiple Access Interference; Loss;
Blocking Probability; Recursive Formula; Markov chain.
I. INTRODUCTION
The popularity of broadband applications, including
bandwidth-hungry multimedia services and Internet Proto-
col Television (IPTV), has promoted the ﬁber-to-the-end-
user as a feasible access networking technology. Among
different optical access solutions, Passive Optical Networks
(PONs) have received a tremendous attention from both
industrial and academic communities, mainly due to the low
operational cost, the enormous bandwidth offering and the
absence of active components between the central ofﬁce and
the customers premises [1].
Over the years, several standards for PONs have evolved,
in the form of the G.983 ITU-T recommendations series,
which include Asynchronous Transfer Mode PONs (ATM-
PONs), Ethernet PONs (EPONs) and Broadband PONs
(BPONs). These architectures are based on a Time Division
Multiple Access (TDMA) scheme and they typically use a
1550 nm wavelength for the downstream trafﬁc and a 1310
nm for the upstream trafﬁc [2]. While these TDMA-PONs
employ two wavelengths for the upstream and downstream
direction, respectively, the Wavelength Division Multiplex-
ing (WDM)-PON utilizes multiple wavelengths, so that two
wavelengths are allocated to each user for down/upstream
transmissions. A different approach for the provision of mul-
tiple access in PONs is the Optical Code Division Multiple
Access (OCDMA). In contrast to the other multiple access
schemes OCDMA can multiplex a number of channels on
the same wavelength and on the same time-slot [3]. In
addition, OCDMA offers full asynchronous transmission,
soft capacity on demand, low latency access, simple network
control and better security against unauthorized access [4].
In OCDMA, each communication channel is distinguished
by a speciﬁc optical code. The encoding procedure involves
the multiplication of each data bit by a code sequence either
in the time domain [5], in the wavelength domain [6], or
in a combination of both [7]. The decoder receives the
sum of all encoded signals (from different transmitters) and
recovers the data from a speciﬁc encoder, by using the same
optical code. All the remaining signals appear as noise to
the speciﬁc receiver; this noise is known as Multiple Access
Interference (MAI) and is the key degrading factor of the
networks performance.
To perform service differentiation in OCDMA networks,
different solutions have been investigated. A simple ap-
proach is based on the utilization of multi-length codes
[8]; however, under multi-length coding, short-length codes
introduce signiﬁcant interference over long-length codes,
while high error probability emerges for high rate users.
Optical fast-frequency hopping has been also proposed for
multi-rate OCDMA networks [9]. This technique is based on
multiple wavelengths; therefore it requires multi-wavelength
transmitters with high sensitivity on power control. Another
way to provide service differentiation is the assignment of
several codes to each service-class. This procedure is known
as the parallel mapping technique [10]. In this case the
number of codes is proportional to the data rate of the
assigned service-class.
The research activity on OCDMA networks is mainly fo-
cused on the performance of several OCDMA components;
only a few analytical models have been presented in the
literature involving the computation of blocking probabilities
in OCDMA networks. Goldberg and Prucnal [11] provide
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

analytical models for the determination of blocking proba-
bilities and for the teletrafﬁc capacity in OCDMA networks.
A similar study is performed in [12]. In both cases, a single
service-class is considered, while the different sources of
noise that are present in an OCDMA network are not taken
into account. In [13] we provided a call-level analysis of
hybrid WDM-OCDMA PONs, which is based on a similar
teletrafﬁc model for the call-level performance modeling of
Wireless OCDMA (W-OCDMA) networks [14].
In [15] we proposed a call-level performance analysis of
OCDMA PONs, where multiple service-classes of inﬁnite
trafﬁc source population are accommodated. The shared
medium is modeled by a two dimensional Markov chain.
Based on it, we provided an approximate recursive formula
for the calculation of blocking probabilities in the PON. The
analysis takes into account the user activity, by incorporating
different service times for active and passive (silent) periods.
In this paper, we provide the proof of the recursive formula
that describes the distribution of the occupied bandwidth in
the PON that we presented in [15]. We present the necessary
assumptions that have to be taken into account in order to
derive the approximate recursive formula. The capacity of
the PON is deﬁned by the total interference caused by both
active and passive users. An arriving call may be blocked
if the resulting interference exceeds a predeﬁned maximum
threshold. This case deﬁnes the Hard Blocking Probability
(HBP). A call may also be blocked in any other system
state, due to the existence of different forms of additive
noise (thermal noise, shot noise, beat noise). The latter case
is expressed by the Local Blocking Probability (LBP). The
accuracy of the proposed algorithm is evaluated through
simulation and is found to be quite satisfactory.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II includes the
system model. In Section III, we derive recursive formulas
for the blocking probabilities calculation. Section IV is the
evaluation section. We conclude in Section V.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
We consider the OCDMA PON of Fig. 1. A number
of Optical Network Units (ONUs) located at the users’
premises are connected to a centralized Optical Line Termi-
nal (OLT) through a Passive Optical Splitter/Combiner (PO-
SC). The PO-SC is responsible for the broadcasting of trafﬁc
from the OLT to the ONUs (downstream direction) and for
the grouping of data from the ONUs and the transmission
of the collected data to the OLT through one ﬁber (upstream
direction). We study the upstream direction; however the fol-
lowing analysis can be applied to the downstream direction.
Users that are connected to an ONU switch between active
and passive (silent) periods. The PON supports K service-
classes. The service-differentiation in this OCDMA system
is realized using the parallel mapping technique. When a
single codeword is applied to an active call, the interference
that this call causes to the receiver is denoted by Iunit.
Figure 1.
A basic conﬁguration of an OCDMA PON
Since different service-classes require different data-rates,
a number of codewords is assigned to each service-class;
therefore the interference Ik that an active service-class k
call causes to the receiver is proportional to Iunit. We deﬁne
the bandwidth requirement bk, of service-class k, as the
number of codewords assigned to the speciﬁc service-class,
which is equal to the ratio of Ik to Iunit, therefore:
bk =
Ik
Iunit
(1)
Calls that are accepted for service start an active period
and may constantly remain in the active state for the entire
duration of the call, or alternate between active and passive
states. Throughout an active state, the trafﬁc source sends
bursts, while during a passive state no transmission of data
occurs. When a call is transferred from the active state
to the passive state, the bandwidth (which is expressed
by the interference that this call produces to the receiver)
held by the call in the active state is released and this
bandwidth becomes available to new arriving calls. When
a call attempts to become active again, it re-produces the
same amount of interference (as in the previous active state);
if the total interference at the receiver does not exceed a
maximum value, a new active period begins; if not, burst
blocking occurs and the call remains in the passive state.
At the end of the active period the total interference at
the receiver is reduced by Ik and the call either jumps to
the passive state with probability vk, or departs from the
system with probability 1 − vk. At the end of the passive
period the call returns to an active state only if the call will
not be blocked due to the presence of the additive noise.
Furthermore, calls that belong to service-class k arrive to an
ONU according to the Poisson process; the total arrival rate
from all ONUs is denoted λk. The service time of service-
class k calls in state i, (i=1 indicates the active state, i=2 the
passive state) is exponentially distributed with mean µ−1
ik .
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

According to the principle of the CDMA technology, a
call should be blocked if it increases the noise of all in-
service calls above a predeﬁned level, given that a call is
noise for all other calls. This noise is known as MAI. We
distinguish the MAI from other forms of noise, the shot
noise, the thermal noise and the ﬁber-link noise. The thermal
noise is generally modeled as Gauss distribution (0, th),
and the ﬁber-link noise is modeled as Gauss distribution (0,
σfb) [16]. The shot noise is modeled as a Poisson process
where its expectation and variance are both denoted by p
[16]. According to the central limit theorem, we can assume
that the additive shot noise is modeled as Gauss distribution
(µN, σN), considering that the number of users in the PON is
relatively large. Therefore, the interference IN caused by the
the three types of noise is modeled as a Gaussian distribution
with mean µN = p and variance σN =
q
σ2
th + σ2
fb + p2.
The Call Admission Control (CAC) in the OCDMA PON
under consideration is performed by measuring the total
interference at the receiver. When a new call arrives (which
automatically enters an active state), the CAC checks if
two conditions are valid. The ﬁrst condition (condition A)
estimates the total received interference and if it exceeds a
maximum value Imax, the call is blocked and lost. There-
fore, condition A is expressed by the following relation:
K
X
k=1
(n1
kIk)+Ik+IN>Imax⇔ IN
Imax
>1−
K
X
k=1
(n1
k
Ik
Imax
)− Ik
Imax
(2)
where n1
k represent the number of the service-class k calls in
the active system. The same condition is used at the receiver,
when a passive call jumps to an active state. Based on (2), we
deﬁne the LBP lbk(n1
k) that a service-class k call is blocked
due to the presence of the additive noise, when the number
of active calls is n1
k:
lbk(n1
k) = P
 
IN
Imax
> 1 −
K
X
k=1

n1
k
Ik
Imax

−
Ik
Imax
!
(3)
or
1− lbk(n1
k)=P
 
IN
Imax
≤1−
K
X
k=1

n1
k
Ik
Imax

− Ik
Imax
!
(4)
Since the total additive noise IN follows a Gaussian
distribution (µN, σN), the variable IN/Imax, which is used
for the LBP calculation also follows a Gaussian distribution
(µN/Imax, σN/Imax) Therefore the right-hand side of (4),
which is the Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) of
IN/Imax, is denoted by Fn(x) = P(IN/Imax ≤ x) and
is given by:
Fn(x) = 1
2(1 + erf(x − (µN/Imax)
(σN/Imax)
√
2 ))
(5)
where erf(•) is the well-known error function. Using (2)
and (4) we can calculate the LBP, lbk(n1
k) by means of the
substitution x = 1 − PK
k=1(n1
k
Ik
Imax ) −
Ik
Imax :
lbk(x) =

1 − Fn(x),
x ≥ 0
1,
x < 0
(6)
III. THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE NUMBER OF ACTIVE
AND PASSIVE CALLS
The following analysis is inspired by the multi-rate ON-
OFF model for the call-level performance of a single link,
presented in [17], [18] , which considers discrete state space.
The discretization of the total interference Imax is performed
by using the interference caused by a single-codeword call:
C1 =

Imax
Iunit

(7)
When a call is at the passive state, it is assumed that
it produces a ﬁctitious interference of a ﬁctitious system,
with a discrete capacity C2: This passive system is used to
prevent new calls to enter the system when a large number of
calls are at the passive state. In order to employ the analysis
presented in [17], we use the following notations:
1) the total interference of the in-service active calls rep-
resents the occupied bandwidth of the active system,
and is denoted by j1.
2) the total (ﬁctitious) interference of the in-service pas-
sive calls represents the occupied bandwidth of the
passive system, and is denoted by j2.
Based on the analysis presented in the previous section,
a new call will be accepted for service if the call’s interfer-
ence (which is expressed by the bandwidth requirement ck
together with the interference caused by all the in-service
active calls, (which is expressed by the parameter j1), will
not exceed Imax. Moreover, in order to avert the acceptance
of new calls when a large number of calls are at the passive
state, the interference of the new call together with the total
interference of all in-service active calls and the ﬁctitious
interference of all in-service passive calls should not exceed
the ﬁctitious capacity (which is expressed by the discrete
value C2). Based on this analysis, a new service-class k call
will be accepted for service in the system, if it satisﬁes both
the following constraints:
j1 + bk ≤ C1 and j1 + j2 + bk ≤ C2
(8)
If we denote by Ω the set of the permissible states,
then the distribution ⃗j = (j1, j2), denoted as q(⃗j) can be
calculated by the proposed two-dimensional approximate
recursive formula:
2
X
i=1
K
X
k=1
bi,k,spik

⃗j

q(⃗j − Bi,k) = jsq(⃗j)
(9)
where
⃗j ∈ Ω ⇔
( 
j1 ≤ C1 ∩
 2
X
s=1
js ≤ C2
!!)
(10)
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

The parameter s refers to the systems (s=1 indicates the
active system, s=2 the passive system), while i refers to the
states (i=1 speciﬁes the active state, i=2 speciﬁes the passive
state). Also,
bi,k,s =
 bk,
if s = i
0,
if s ̸= i
(11)
and Bi,k = (bi,k,1, bi,k,2) is the i,k row of the (2K×2) matrix
B, with elements bi,k,s. Also, pik(⃗j) is the utilization of the
i-th system by service-class k:
pi,k

⃗j

=
(
λk[1−lb(j1−bk)]
(1−vk)µ1k
for i = 1
λkσk
(1−vk)µ2k
for i = 2
(12)
Moreover, js is the occupied capacity of the system:
js =
2
X
i=1
K
X
k=1
ni
kbi,k,s
(13)
Proof: In order to derive the recursive formula of (9) we
introduce the following notation:
⃗n = (n1, n2), ni
k = (ni
1, ni
2, ..., ni
K),
ni
k+ = (ni
1, ..., ni
k + 1, ..., ni
K),
ni
k− = (ni
1, ..., ni
k − 1, ..., ni
K),
⃗n1
k+ = (n1
k+, n2), ⃗n2
k+ = (n1, n2
k+),
⃗n1
k− = (n1
k−, n2), ⃗n2
k− = (n1, n2
k−)
(14)
Having determined the steady state of the system ⃗n =
(n1, n2), we proceed to the depiction of the transitions from
and to state ⃗n, as it is shown in Fig. 2. The horizontal axis
of the state transition diagram of Fig. 2 reﬂects the arrivals
on new calls and the termination of calls. More speciﬁcally,
when the system is at state (A) it will jump to state (B) with a
rate λk, when a new service-class k call arrives at the system.
This rate is multiplied by the probability 1 − lb(n1
k − 1)
that this call will not be blocked due to the presence of the
additive noise. Similarly, we deﬁne the rate from state (C) to
state (A). From state (B) the system will jump to state (A)
µ1,k

By using (13) and summing both sides of (20) over the set
of all states of Ω⃗j, we have:
js
X
⃗n∈Ω⃗j
P(⃗n)=
2
X
i=1
K
X
k=1
bi,k,spik
X
⃗n∈Ω⃗j
pik(ni
k−)P(⃗ni
k−)
(21)
The second assumption that we consider is that:
X
⃗n∈Ω⃗j
pik(ni
k)P(⃗ni
k−) ≈ pik(ˆni
k)
X
⃗n∈Ω⃗j
P(⃗ni
k−)
(22)
Based on the fact that (⃗nB = ⃗j) ⇒ (ni
k−B = j − Bi,k)
(17) is equal to (12) and (19) can be rewritten as:
q(⃗j − Bi,k) =
X
−→
n ∈Ω⃗j
P(ni
k−)
(23)
By using the assumption of (22) and substitute (19) and
(23) to (22), we derive the recursive formula of (9). The
LBP is a function of the total interference of the in-service
active calls j1, i.e. lb(n1
k) = lb(j1), since
x=1−
K
X
k=1
(n1
k
Ik
Imax
)− Ik
Imax
=1−
K
X
k=1
(n1
k
bk
C1
)−bk
C1
=1− j1
C1
− bk
C1
(24)
CBP is calculated by combining LBP and HBP as follows:
Pbk=
X
⃗j∈Ω−Ωh
lbk(j1)q(⃗j)+
X
⃗j∈Ωh
G−1q(⃗j)
(25)
where Ωh =
n
⃗j| [(bi,k,1+j1)>C1]∪[(bi,k,2+j1+j2)>C2]
o
.
The ﬁrst summation of the right part of (25) refers to the
probability that a new call could be blocked at any system
state due to the presence of the additive noise. The second
summation signiﬁes the HBP, which is derived by summing
the probabilities of all the blocking states that are deﬁned
by (8). Note that the bounds of the ﬁrst summation in (25)
are accidentally different than those of the corresponding
equation in [16] due to a misprint in (10) of [16].
IV. EVALUATION
In this section we evaluate the proposed anaytical model
through simulation. To this end we simulate the OCDMA
PON of Fig.1 by using the Simscript II.5 [19] simulation
tool. The simulation results are mean values from 6 runs with
conﬁdence interval of 95%. The resulting reliability ranges
of the simulation measurements are small and therefore we
present only mean results. We consider that the OCDMA
PON supports K = 2 service-classes. The trafﬁc parameters
(Ik, µ1k, µ2k, σk) of each service-class are (5, 1, 1.2, 0.9)
and (1, 0.7, 1, 1), where Ik is expressed in µW and µik in
sec−1. The threshold of the total interference at the receiver
is 60 µW, while the ﬁctitious interference that describes the
passive system is 70 µW. The total additive noise follows
a Gaussian distribution (1, 0.1) µW. The interference that a
single-codeworded call is assumed to be 0.05 µW. In Fig.
Figure 3.
Analytical and simulation CBP results vs. offered trafﬁc load
of each service-class.
3 we comparatively present analytical and simulation CBP
results vs. the arrival rate, which is assumed that is the same
for both service-classes. The results of Fig. 3 show that the
accuracy of the proposed analysis is quite satisfactory. Small
declinations between analytical and simulation results are
due to the assumptions that were taken into account in order
to prove (9).
In order to demonstrate the effect of the additive noise to
the CBP, in Fig. 4 we present analytical CBP results of the
ﬁrst service-class versus the arrival rate, for different noise
distributions. As the results of Fig. 4 reveal, the increment
of the additive noise results in the increase of the CBP.
We also study the effect of the ﬁctitious capacity of the
passive system to the CBP. To this end, we present analytical
CBP results of both service-classes vs. different values of the
ﬁctitious capacity. the arrival rate of both service-classes is
0.3 calls/sec. The increment of C∗ results in lower CBP,
since the passive system can accommodate more calls, and
therefore less interference is present in the active system.
However, this increment results in a higher probability that
a call is blocked at its transition from passive to active state.
V. CONCLUSION
We propose a new multi-rate loss model for the calcu-
lation of blocking probabilities in an OCDMA-PON. Our
analysis takes into account the user activity and different
service times for active and passive periods. We provide
and prove an approximate recurrent formula for the efﬁcient
calculation of the CBP, which is a function of the LBP, and
of the HBP. The accuracy of the proposed analysis is quite
satisfactory, as it was veriﬁed by simulations.As a future
work we will incorporate a ﬁnite population of trafﬁc sources
in the CBP calculation, while we will study the case where
the receiver has an interference cancellation capability.
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

Figure 4.
Analytical CBP results of the ﬁrst service-class for different
additive noise distributions.
Figure 5.
Analytical and simulation CBP results vs. the ﬁctitious capacity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Work supported by the Research Program Caratheodory
(Research Committee, University of Patras, Greece).
REFERENCES
[1] F. Effenberger, D. Cleary, O. Haran, G. Kramer, R. Li, M.
Oron, T. Pfeiffer, “An Introduction to PON Technologies”,
IEEE Communications Magazine, March 2007, pp. S17-S25.
[2] T. Koonen, “Fiber to the Home/Fiber to the Premises: What,
Where, and When?”,Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 94, No. 5,
May 2006, pp. 911-934.
[3] K. Fouli and M. Maier, “OCDMA and Optical Coding- Prin-
ciples, Applications, and Challenges”, IEEE Communications
Magazine, August 2007, pp. 27-34.
[4] P. R. Prucnal, Optical Code Division Multiple Access: Funda-
mentals and Applications, New York: Taylor & Francis, 2006.
[5] M. Azizoglu, J.A. Salehi, Y. Li, “Optical CDMA via temporal
codes”, IEEE Transactions on Communications, Vol.40, No. 7,
July 1992, pp. 1162-1170.
[6] D. Zaccarin, M. Kavehrad, “An optical CDMA system based
on spectral encoding of LED”, IEEE Photonics Technology
Letters, Vol. 5, No. 4, 1993, pp. 479-482.
[7] M.
Morelle,
C.
Goursaud,
A.
J.-Vergonjanne,
C.
A.-
Berthelemot, J.-P. Cances, J.-M. Dumas, and P. Guignard, “2-
Dimensional optical CDMA system performance with parallel
interference cancellation”, Microprocessors and Microsystems,
Vol. 31, 2007, pp. 215-221.
[8] W.C. Kwong, G.C. Yang,“Multiple-Length extended Carrier-
Hopping Prime Codes for Optical CDMA systems supporting
Multirate Multimedia services”, IEEE/OSA Journal of Light-
wave Technology, Vol. 23, No. 11, November 2005, pp. 3653-
3662.
[9] E. Intay, H. M. H. Shalaby, P. Fortier, and L. A. Rusch,
“Multirate optical fast frequency-hopping CDMA system using
power control”, IEEE/OSA Journal of Lightwave Technology,
Vol. 20, No. 2, February 2002, pp. 166-177.
[10] A.R. Forouzan, N-K. Masoumeh, N. Rezaee, “Frame Time-
Hopping patterns in Multirate Optical CDMA Networks using
Conventional and Multicode schemes”, IEEE Transactions on
Communications, Vol. 53, No. 5, May, 2005, pp. 863-875.
[11] S. Goldberg and P. R. Prucnal, “On the Teletrafﬁc Capacity
of Optical CDMA”, IEEE Transactions on Communications,
Vol. 55, No. 7, July 2007, pp. 1334-1343.
[12] M. Gharaei, C. Lepers, O. Affes, and P. Gallion, “Teletrafﬁc
Capacity Performance of WDM/DS-OCDMA Passive Optical
Network”, NEW2AN/ruSMART 2009, LNCS 5764, Springer-
Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 132-142.
[13] John. S. Vardakas, Vasillios G. Vassilakis and Michael D.
Logothetis, “Call-Level Analysis of Hybrid OCDMA-WDM
Passive Optical Networks”, in Proc. of the 10th ICTON 2008,
Athens, Greece, 22-26 July 2008.
[14] V. G. Vassilakis, G. A. Kallos, I.D. Moscholios, and M. D.
Logothetis, “The Wireless Engset Multi-Rate Loss Model for
the Call-level Analysis of W-CDMA Networks”, in Proc. of
the 8th IEEE PIMRC 2007, Athens 2007.
[15] John S. Vardakas, Ioannis L. Anagnostopoulos, Ioannis D.
Moscholios, Michael D. Logothetis, Vassilios G. Stylianakis,
“A Multi-Rate Loss Model fol OCDMA PONs”, in Proc. of
the 13th ICTON 2011, Stockholm, Sweden, 26-30 June 2011.
[16] W. Ma, C. Zuo, and J. Lin, “Performance Analysis on
Phase-Encoded OCDMA Communication System”, IEEE/OSA
Journal of Lightwave Technology, Vol. 20, No. 5, May 2002.
[17] M. Mehmet Ali, “Call-burst blocking and call admission con-
trol in a broadband network with bursty sources”, Performance
Evaluation, 38, 1999, pp. 1-19.
[18] I.Moscholios, M. Logothetis and G. Kokkinakis, “Call-burst
blocking of ON-OFF trafﬁc sources with retrials under the
complete sharing policy”, Performance Evaluation, 59/4, 2005,
pp. 279-312.
[19] Simscript II.5, http://www.simscript.com/
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

