Body Aura — A New Approach Towards Ambient Intelligence
Vision Paper
Peter H. Deussen, Edzard Höﬁg
Fraunhofer Institute for Open Communication Systems
Berlin, Germany
{peter.deussen|edzard.hoeﬁg}@fokus.fraunhofer.de
Borbala Katalin Benko
Budapest University of Technology and Economics
Budapest, Hungary
bbenko@hit.bme.hu
Abstract—The 21st century will be characterized by a num-
ber of technical revolutions, which will not leave the ways in
which humans interact unchanged. New forms of interactions
will change our society in unforeseeable ways. On the other
hand, pressing problems such as environmental protection,
energy shortages, the spread of pandemic diseases, global
crises, etc., demand novel approaches to collect and to correlate
more precisely demographic data. To analyze this challenge
and to investigate possible technological scenarios, this paper
introduces the concept of a Body Aura, a digital extension of
the body functions of a person or a group of persons to the
environment.
Keywords-Body Aura, ubiquitous systems, autonomic sys-
tems, self-representation, emergence
I. INTRODUCTION
The 21st century will be characterized by a number of
technical revolutions, which will not leave the ways in
which humans interact unchanged. Current scenarios on
pervasive devices and smart rooms, augmented reality, and
even the (already outdated) idea of the “cyberspace” as a
new type of human/computer interface barely scratch the
surface. New forms of interactions will change our society
in unforeseeable ways. On the other hand, pressing prob-
lems such as environmental protection, energy shortages,
spreading pandemic diseases, global crises, etc., demand
novel approaches to collect and to correlate more precisely
demographic data; and this has to be done in a secure,
reliable way, which respects issues such as privacy and trust.
Considering multiple achievements in areas such as sensor
networks, augmented reality, distributed computing, and
autonomic systems, the major question is not how to interact
technologically with the digital computing, data, and com-
munication resources, but to embed, to maintain, and, to re-
locate sufﬁcient intelligence and functionality into pervasive
devices and networks to perceive them as a useful and trusted
extension of personal, professional, and societal spheres.
Human activities do hardly occur in isolation but in almost
all cases in relation to activities of other humans, organized
by ad-hoc communications on various layers, work-ﬂows,
and with common as well as conﬂicting interests. The capa-
bility of pervasive and ubiquitous systems to perceive and
to support not only individuals but also relations, objectives,
interests, and patterns for (probably large) groups of humans
becomes crucial for their practical applicability.
To analyze this challenge and to investigate possible
technological scenarios, this paper introduces the concept
of a Body Aura, which can be deﬁned as a digital extension
of the body functions of a person or a group of persons to
the environment, both to monitor, correlate and to effectively
understand them in relation to the physical parameters, and
to actually control those parameters, producing notiﬁcations,
performance data, and alarms if necessary.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses
the general concept of a Body Aura. This notion will be
elaborated in more detail in Section III by means of a
number of examples, which are used to identify challenges
concerning the development of a Body Aura. Some technical
aspects are discussed in Section IV. Section VI draws
conclusions and gives an outlook on further work.
II. CONCEPTS
The Body Aura vision assumes that in the near future
a pervasive digitalization of the human environment (and
bodies) will take place, which involves not only various
sensors, control devices, communication facilities (wireless
technologies of various kinds), data sources (such as RFID
tags), but also storage capacities and processing power (a
trend which is already visible today by the omnipresence of
mobile devices). The notion of “processors per cubic meter”
will become a meaningful unit. The deployment of pervasive
applications and systems will become feasible, which today
cannot even imagined, going beyond visions of augmented
reality, pervasive and ubiquitous communication services. It
will be the age of intelligent matter supporting the seamless
extension of human bodies, minds, and interactions by
information and communication technologies.
A Body Aura forms a vital personal ﬁeld for both in-
dividuals and groups of people to provide various direct
interactions between users and their environments, to support
human activities both on a conscious and a sub-conscious
level. A Body Aura establishes itself as a radically dis-
tributed system using resources (sensors, actuators, comput-
ing, storage, and communication) found in the proximity
of its users without centralized elements. There is no “Body
125
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

Aura gadget” to be carried around all the time, a Body Aura
results from the ongoing interaction of those resources. User
movement results in a re-location of parts of the Aura while
maintaining both function and integrity.
Human interactions result in activities which are mean-
ingful only in the context of a group, hence the person-
centric conception of a Body Aura needs to be extended to
an activity-centric conception: Instead of monitoring (and
predicting) the current “state” of a solitary user, common
activities of a set of users need to be recognized and
represented. We refer to this transformational process to
as the emergence of new Auras. Emergent Auras will not
replace personal ones, but complement and extend them.
Body Auras can be considered as exempliﬁcative in-
stances of systems which strongly depend on the internal
quality of self-awareness. A Body Aura needs, at any in-
stance in time, be aware of its own conﬁguration and internal
operation as well as its relationship to its users and their
environment. Autonomic features such as self-conﬁguration,
self-optimization, self-healing, and self-protection, but also
self-organization capabilities, are vital for the functionality
and survivability of Body Auras [1], [2].
III. EXAMPLES AND CHALLENGES
To explain the idea of a Body Aura in more detail and
to identify the accompanying challenges, let us analyze a
number of scenarios from various application areas:
A. Sports Health Monitoring
As a ﬁrst basic example, consider a cyclist in training
(Fig. 1). To obtain optimal training results, his Body Aura
takes measurements of his body functions such as heartbeat,
body temperature, breathing frequency, blood pressure, etc.
To obtain a better estimate of the cyclist’s performance,
it takes also environment data such as temperature, air
moisture, etc., into account. The current position of the
cyclist is determined using GPS. A (hypothetical) actuator
controlling the resistance of the bottom bracket is used to
emulate accelerations, road conditions, etc.; data to emulate
a real racetrack are downloaded and continuously updated
via WLAN. The necessary computations are performed on
various computing nodes in the current proximity of the
cyclists. The Body Aura resides only to a certain part at
the devices carried by the cyclists or mounted on his bike;
other functions are performed by devices in this proximity.
This example illustrates the ﬁrst main challenge that has
to be addressed in the Body Aura approach, namely:
Homeostasis [3] (also called meta-stability) refers to the
capability of a system to maintain its identity, function,
and structure in the presence of continuously changing
conditions. For instance, the cyclist’s Body Aura has to
continuously re-locate parts of it when its user leaves the
range of ﬁxed devices (computing nodes, WLAN access
points) and enters the range of others. It has in particular the
Computing 
node
WLAN access
point
Temperature
& air
moisture
Resistance 
regulator
Body 
temperature
Pulse sensor
GPS
Figure 1.
Health monitoring example
ability to predict the availability of resources for a certain
time frame, and to degrade its functions in a graceful way
if required resources are temporarily unavailable.
A Body Aura of a solitary person may comprise of only a
handful of devices. Scalability becomes an issue if an Aura
relates to more than one person. For instance, each member
of a diving team needs to be aware of the body conditions
of her partners, as well as of environmental conditions such
as currencies, water temperature, etc. The selection of gas
mixes and gas pressure, deceleration and acceleration speed,
diving formation, and so on, are critical parameters for a
successful and safe dive.
Context and situational perception. The above example
illustrate that a precise detection of the current situation
and context of a person in relation to other persons is
another crucial capabilities of Body Auras. It also makes
clear that contextual information can be obtained not only
from environmental sensors but also from the interaction of
several Body Auras.
B. Recreation, Entertainment, and Travel
Everybody who used to travel a lot immediately under-
stands that localized information is of high importance, e.g.,
on public transportation, locations of recreational facilities
and restaurants, current trafﬁc conditions, and so on. Of
course, the idea of localized information has been presented
before. We use this example to identify another challenge:
Identiﬁcation. How does a Body Aura identify the person
it relates to? As already pointed out, there is no Body Aura
device which allows for an authentication. If a Body Aura
is not strongly tied to the body function of a speciﬁc person
(where the actual conﬁguration of worn sensors can be used
as authentication criterion), the maintenance of the relation
between Aura and user becomes a considerable challenge.
Consider a new class of role gaming applications where
players assume roles in real life situations, based for instance
on “spook” scenarios: Players try to investigate the pretended
126
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

activities of other players (e.g., spy out the delivery of—
in the game—crucial information to another player). Body
Auras can be used to mediate between players, to pass
information related to the game situation. Moreover, game
opportunities and limitations depend on the particular role
a player assumes. Not all players are willing or capable
to show James Bond like mannerisms, but prefer a more
realistic style. A Body Aura hence needs not only be capable
to distinguish between game and “ﬁrst life” situations, but
also needs to be able to adapt to the speciﬁcs of the role a
player tries to assume.
Adaptability and Learning. Games can be scripted, but
the speciﬁc reactions of a player to a certain game are not
predictable by the game provider, and will change gradually
over time when the player becomes more experienced.
Therefore, Body Auras need to be capable to learn about
the speciﬁcs of the person it relates to, and adapt itself
accordingly with respect to its assessment of the user’s
state, and its reactions to it, as well as its internal structure
(prioritizing of data and processes for prediction and reaction
establishment).
C. Catastrophe and Emergency Management
Consider a major emergency (a large ﬁre, an earth-quake).
The communication infrastructure might be impaired or not
available at all, making it hard for rescue teams to locate
injured persons, coordinate and prioritize their activities.
Devices powered by batteries or local energy sources (sun-
light collectors), etc. might be still working, capable to
establish an ad-hoc communication network. Body Auras of
the rescue team, members and people to be rescued will not
only interact, collecting, and delivering crucial information,
but in effect “merge” and perform collective activities in an
expanded context.
Another example of Body Aura emergence is the detection
of the propagation of epidemic diseases. Body Auras can
provide a city- or even country-wide instrument to monitor
people’s body functions by the responsible authorities.
Emergence. We refer to the shift from the focus of a
singular person to a group of persons, together with a
reinterpretation and reassignment of Body Aura functions
(that is, data are still related to body functions, but inter-
preted in the context of different tasks) to as Body Aura
“emergence”. The emergency scenario used to introduce this
capability is of course an extreme example, in fact every
group related activity supported by the interaction of Body
Auras to provide services which make sense only in a group
context relates to Body Aura emergence.
Self-assessment. Some applications of the Body Aura
concept just require “best effort”. For instance, for the cyclist
in the ﬁrst example it is not of importance if his Body Aura
stops working for a couple of seconds because the momen-
tarily available resources are insufﬁcient. The emergency
scenario however illustrates that in some contexts best effort
is not desirable. In such situation, a Body Aura has been able
to assess their own ability to work on an appropriate level
given the current restrictions and limitations. If necessary it
has to indicate problems to a human operator.
Two additional problems are immanent:
Security. How can it be ensured that personal information
is not distributed to parties not allowed to have this infor-
mation? How can Body Auras be secured against misuse?
Scalability. Progressing from the example of a cyclist
trying to optimize his training efforts to the emergence of
a population-wide Body Aura is a considerable step which
can only be achieved if the envisioned highly distributed
architecture of Body Auras is utilized to avoid single points
of processing (and failure) and to keep state information as
local as possible.
D. Work Convenience
Consider a group of workers. Their Body Auras do not
only monitor their body functions, but also feedback infor-
mation to the workers. For instance, a worker in a dangerous
environment may get a notiﬁcation about the level of her
exhaustion. But also, the work ﬂow itself can be assisted
by providing sub-conscious interfacing functions to “smart”
environments: The room temperature and illumination may
be automatically adjusted by the Body Auras of ofﬁce
workers, equipment may adjust to the worker’s preferences
and physical state, etc.
User/Environment Interaction. Body Auras are envisioned
to be more than complex measurement instruments; they
actually will perform interactions with the environment on
behalf of their users without an explicit user action. In this
way, Body Auras may be viewed not so much as tools, but
as extensions of the sensoric and haptic body functions of
their users to a computerized environment.
IV. TECHNICAL CONCEPTS
To describe the main concepts of the Body Aura idea,
consider the “high level architecture” displayed in Fig.
2. The general idea departs from the assumption that a
Body Aura can be suitable deﬁned by a “Representation
of its Self”, which describes all aspects, which need to be
considered to perform its tasks.
Sensors both related to the Body Aura users and their
physical environment acquire raw data which are interpreted
using the self-representation as a contextual frame. User
augmentation and environment related actuators are used to
feed back information to the users, and to interact with their
environment. Additional resources for computing, commu-
nication, and storage, are integrated as additional supportive
elements.
Representation of the Self. Self-awareness of Body Auras
is a basic precondition for the establishment of functions
such as autonomic distribution, homeostasis, prediction, etc.
For that, an internal self-representation of Body Auras is
127
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

Representation of
the Self
Body Aura Distributed Execution
Environment
Users
Environ-
ment
computing
communication
storage
Figure 2.
General Body Aura architecture
required which has—with regard to the challenges identiﬁed
in the previous Section III—to fulﬁl a number of properties
(Fig. 3): It has to “store” data about the state of the users,
their environment, and its own actual conﬁguration (sensors,
actuators, resources). We call this the representation of
situational knowledge. Moreover, to provide for planning
and prediction, it has to comprise a causal representation of
the relevant (virtual and real-world) processes, accompanied
by known facts about users, resources, etc. We refer to this
type of information as background knowledge. Finally, a
Body Aura performs a number of tasks to support or serve
its users. These activities—deﬁning the purpose of a Body
Aura—need to be represented within the self-representation
too (one might view them as “application layer” of a Body
Aura).
Distribution and Scalability. Due to the distributed char-
acter of Body Aura there cannot be a centralized self-
representation. Therefore, mechanisms are needed to manage
a distributed version of the Body Aura model. We propose
to use a holistic approach to represent the whole structure of
the Body Aura on each contributing entity, but on different
level of abstractions. An entity maintains model structures
concerning its own functions and capabilities to a higher
Facts
Causality
Background
Activity
Purpose
Konfiguration
Environment
User
Representationof the Self
Situation
Reflex structure
derive
validate
• Abstract
• Refine
• Compose
• Separate
• Generalize
• Distribute
• Relocate
• Replace
• Adjust
• Extend
• Reduce
• Assess
• Plan
• Predict
• . . .
Operations
Figure 3.
Self-representation, reﬂexes, and operations
R1
R2
αααα1(R2)
αααα2(R1)
R1 interest
filter αααα1
R2 interest
filter αααα2
S1
S2
Figure 4.
Abstracted composition of self-representations
degree of detail then the model structures describing adjacent
entities. Body Auras are thus composed of various “knowl-
edge fragments” and pre-deﬁned or learned abstraction op-
erations. The construction of composed representation and
the determination of an appropriate level of abstraction with
regard to a certain entity becomes an automatic process.
A comprehensive discussion of this idea of abstracted
composition of self-representation is far beyond the scope
of this vision paper; Fig. 4 provides an intuition by con-
sidering two sub-systems (devices, sensors, etc.) with self-
representations R1 and R2, respectively, which are contribut-
ing to a Body Aura. Regarding of what is important for
each of these systems to know from each other, a “ﬁlter”
αi is constructed which is used to scale down the self-
representation of the other system. Thus the composite view
of S1 to the system comprising both system consists of
R1 composed with the abstracted view to R2 according to
α1 (and similarly for S2). A formal consideration of these
mechanisms can be found in [4], [5].
Emergence of Auras is—on the level of the self-
representation—performed by the application of composi-
tion/abstraction operations to the involved Auras. Mappings
between group related activities and personal ones have to be
understood as a reinterpretations of representation structures.
This process has to be iterative: Joining of Body Auras will
result in the emergence of another Body Aura, which can
be merged with other Body Auras in a seamless process.
Reﬂex Establishment. Some activities of a Body Aura
occur frequently and thus may be understood as general
behaviour patterns which are applicable is several contexts.
Thus instead of computing those patterns over and over again
(including the validation of their effectiveness), “short cuts”
can be established which apply those pattern without any fur-
ther planning or analysis activities—they become “reﬂexes”.
We assume that the establishment of reﬂex patterns is likely
to increase the efﬁciency of a Body Aura, and thus increase
also the range of tasks which can be performed.
Context-awareness. The creation of self-representation
requires adaptive, efﬁcient and scalable methods for the
exploitation and utilization of the information available
about the user and the actual contextual conditions. An open
system must be ready to detect relationships in a lightweight
128
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

manner, often from raw data, about trends, frequent episodes,
timely relationships and anomalies or abnormal situations.
Another important aspect is the active extraction of predic-
tive relationships, which enables the proactive handling of
predicted near-term situations or presumptive future actions.
Learning and Adaptation. A new-born Body Aura with
its limited, default knowledge is of much less use than an
evolved, optimized one that is highly adapted to its environ-
ment and its user. Hence, mechanisms are needed to adjust
the Body Aura’s self-representation: New self-representation
fragments get “learnt”, existing ones get reﬁned, replaced
or removed. The progress of self-representations is envi-
sioned as an automatic process, without human interaction or
intervention—based on the trends, situations, or predictive
relationships detected in the local Aura. There are several
ways to facilitate this kind of evidence based reﬁnement
the models, for example techniques may be borrowed from
reinforcement learning [6], data mining [7] or immunology
[8]. However, the sole detection of these relationships within
the data is not enough to create self-representation frag-
ments. Cognitive aspects, higher-level decisions and goals
are also vital for a Body Aura in the process of transforming
a detected relationship into an actively utilized, executable
self-representational model. High-level aspects may simply
seek optimality (I already know a better strategy than what
this relationship suggests) or may include meta-reasons (I
don’t want to what the observations suggest because it would
hurt my environment and that’s not in line with my meta-
goals). In other words, a Body Aura needs to be able to learn
from its experience, but is not forced to use the knowledge
blindly, without control. Knowledge both emerges on the
lower level from the observations, and on the higher level,
including cognitive aspects.
Networking.
Due
to
the
non-centralized,
and
self-
organized character of the Body Aura system, where the
amount of conscious control is reduced radically, the classi-
cal telecommunication approaches cannot be used. The lack
of centralized entities means that the Body Aura system is
similar to an opportunistic or a delay-tolerant network in
terms of communication. However the well-known ad hoc
networking solutions cannot be adapted to the Body Aura
system, as it is not taking into account the emergence of
Body Auras, together with the regrouping process.
This means that the Body Auras (which could be repre-
sented as mobile nodes in the communication perspective)
form mobility groups, and the structure of these groupings
could heavily effect the propagation and relaying of the
information in the system. The information propagation and
the dissemination process is not only signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced
by the group mobility patterns of the Body Auras but also
by the common decisions of the groups, for example which
information are important for the given group, or which
information should be disseminated to the neighbouring
groups, namely merged Auras.
Security. The Body Aura dia removes static architectural
features and in favour of heterogeneous structures, and more-
over increases the independence from the “physical layer”.
Thus, its architecture and as a consequence its security
architecture is completely detached from single hardware
instances. Due to this feature, Body Aura also allows its
distribution on multiple devices, representing a distributed
client application which acts on behalf of the body the Aura
is associated with.
In Body Aura, complete sets of devices, and several ser-
vices which are spread among potentially numerous devices
will act on behalf of a “body”. Thus, the question arise:
Who will be the principal, i.e., who authenticates what and
what does this imply for the system? Novel mechanisms
(e. g., based on biometric pattern recognition) need to be
developed to establish a trust relation between Body Auras,
users, and other involved parties.
Augmenting the Person. A Body Aura follows the activ-
ities of the person (the atomic level) or a group of persons
through passive observation. If some tasks are recognized
the Body Aura pursues all activities of the person and
compares them to corresponding activity patterns. If more
than one activity representation applies, these are treated as
competing. Some of the tasks may reduce the amount of
activity models which correspond to the current actions of
the person. In some cases the Body Aura is not able to
recognize what the user is doing and what his intention is. In
this case the Body Aura tries to interact with the user. Hence,
models for the interaction of persons with their own Body
Auras are needed. But interaction between the person and the
Body Aura is an additional load for the person and should
happen as rarely as possible. A model is required, which
describes several levels of interaction complexity (yes/no,
item selection, commands) and its form (gestures, voice,
mouse, keyboard).
V. RELATED WORK
Over the last two decades, a new understanding of the
relationship between human users and computer systems has
emerged, grounded in visions developed in the early 90’s,
of ubiquitous computing [9] (i.e. computation moving out
of the box to be pervasive in the user’s ambient), augmen-
tation of the real world [10] (i.e. enhancing physical reality
with digital interaction), and wearable computing [11] (i.e.
augmentation of humans with always-there computational
services). These original visions have largely converged in
today’s digital world, with personal mobile devices that con-
tinually support their users, pervasive devices and services
available in the ambient, and widespread technologies for
linking digital interaction to the entities and activity in the
real world (passive and active tagging [12], location systems
[13], mobile augmented reality [14]). However, in spite of
the paradigm shift that has taken place, there is a total lack of
concepts for how the intelligence that is deeply and densely
129
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

embedded in people’s environments (in the form of sensors,
actuators, digital media, smart objects, smart materials, etc.)
can be harnessed to effectively support user activities and
needs. Key barriers are the very limited representation of
user context to the environment, and the centralized ap-
proach to interface complex computerized environments.
The distinct approach, in departure from the state of
the art, is to develop the interface between people and
complex computerized environments as a self-aware auto-
nomic system conceived as a Body Aura around the user.
In terms of high-level vision there have been precedents
of conceptual work on auras or spheres around the user,
e.g. Ferscha et al.’s Digital Aura as a thought model for
interactions in a pervasive computing world [15] and Mynatt
et al.’s Audio Aura providing serendipitous information via
background auditory cues [16], but in practically all work
on human-environment interaction, the sphere of interaction
is implicitly deﬁned by the nature of the infrastructure
(network topology, communication range of user devices,
sensor coverage).
VI. CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK
In this paper, we have introduced the vision of a Body
Aura, which acts as an information technological extension
of the user’s body functions to his or her physical environ-
ment, and is capable to provide a functions for (probably
large) groups of persons as well, hence is applicable in a
large variety of scenarios.
The Body Aura vision involves a number of research areas
which cannot be addressed simultaneously. In our future
research, we will concentrate of the following key issues:
1) One of the main concepts of the Body Aura approach
is the deﬁnition and maintenance of a distributed
“representation of the self” describing all operational
aspects of a Body Aura at a “suitable degree of
abstraction”, deﬁned by the knowledge requirements
of devices contributing to the Aura. Although some
work has been already conducted into this direction
[4], [5], further research is needed.
2) Investigations on the interpretation of behavioral rep-
resentations (UML Statecharts) of functions imple-
mented on resource limited devices [17] indicate that
it is possible to maintain computational models even
on very small devices with suitable efﬁciency. Future
research will address different modelling formalisms.
3) An open learning an adaptation model to systemati-
cally detect, reﬁne and utilize relationships within the
environment, with help of data mining techniques.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Kephart and D. Chess, “The vision of autonomic comput-
ing,” IEEE Computer, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 41–52, 2003.
[2] S. Dobson, S. Denazis, A. Fernandez, D. Gaiti, E. Ge-
lenbe, F. Massacci, P. Nixon, F. Saffre, N. Schmidt, and
F. Zambonelli, “A survey of autonomic communications,”
ACM Trans. on Autonomous and Adaptive Systems, vol. 1,
no. 2, pp. 223–259, 2006.
[3] W. R. Ashby, “Homeostasis,” in Encyclopedia of Biochem-
istry, R. J. Williams and J. E. M. Lansford, Eds.
New York,
N.Y.: Reinhold Publishing Corp., 1967, pp. 411–412.
[4] P. H. Deussen, “Model based reactive planning and prediction
for autonomic systems,” in Proc. Workshop on INnovative
SERvice Technologies, 2007, pp. 1–10.
[5] ——, “Supervision of autonomic systems — tutorial,” in
Proc. Budapest Tutorial and Workshop on Autonomic Com-
munications and Component-ware. Budapest, Hungary: HTE
(Scientiﬁc Association for Infocommunictaion Hungary), July
7–9 2008, published on CD, avail. at www.peterdeussen.net.
[6] D. Lanyi and B. K. Benko, “A nontraditional approach
for a highly interactive collective-adaptive system,” in Proc.
EMERGING 2010, 2010, p. (in press).
[7] L. Huan and H. Motoda, Feature Extraction, Construction
and Selection, A Data Mining Perspective.
Springer, 1998.
[8] D. Flower, P. Andrews, J. Timmis, P. Guan, and I. Doytchi-
nova, In Silico Immunology.
Springer US, 2007.
[9] M. Weiser, “The computer for the twenty-ﬁrst century,”
Scientiﬁc American, vol. 265, no. 3, pp. 94–110, Sept. 1991.
[10] P. Wellner, W. Mackay, and R. Gold, “Back to the real world,”
Comm. of the ACM, vol. 36, no. 77, pp. 24–27, 1993.
[11] B. Rhodes, “The wearable remembrance agent: A system for
augmented memory,” Personal and Ubiquitous Computing,
vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 218–224, 1997.
[12] R. Want, K. P. Fishkin, A. Gujar, and B. L. Harrison,
“Bridging physical and virtual worlds with electronic tags,” in
Proc. SIGCHI Conf. on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’99), 1999, pp. 370–377.
[13] J. Hightower and G. Borriello, “Location systems for ubiqui-
tous computing,” Computer, vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 57–66, Aug.
2001.
[14] D. Wagner, T. Pintaric, F. Ledermann, and D. Schmalstieg,
“Towards massively multi-user augmented reality on hand-
held devices,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pervasive Computing (Per-
vasive ’05), 2005, pp. 208–219.
[15] A. Ferscha, M. Hechinger, R. Mayrhofer, M. dos San-
tos Rocha, M. Franz, and R. Oberhauser, “Digital aura,” in
Proc. Advances in Pervasive Computing, 2004, video paper
at Pervasive 2004 conference.
[16] E. D. Mynatt, M. Back, R. Want, M. Baer, and J. B. Ellis,
“Designing audio aura,” in In Proc. SIGCHI Conf. on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’98), 1998, pp. 566–573.
[17] E. Höﬁg, P. H. Deussen, and H. Coskun, “Statechart inter-
pretation on resource constrained platforms: a performance
analysis,” in Proc. ACM/IEEE 12th Int. Conf. on Model
Driven Engineering Languages and Systems, Denver, Col-
orado, USA, Oct. 2009, pp. 99–108.
130
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

