E-business Collaboration Club  
A Case of Public Relation and Information Technology 
 
Yuh-Wen Chen, Jung-Cheng Hsieh 
Institute of Industrial Engineering and Management 
Da-Yeh University 
Chang-Hwa, Taiwan 
 e-mail: profchen@mail.dyu.edu.tw  
 
Steve Hsieh 
Duck Image 
Taichung, Taiwan 
http://www.duckimage.com.tw/ 
e-mail: steve@duckimage.com.tw
 
 
Abstract—Public 
Relation 
(PR) 
is 
an 
under-valued 
management tool for the small and median businesses (SMEs); 
especially, when PR is supported online. To many SMEs, PR is 
another form of advertising while others dismiss it as dealing 
with journalists and sending out press releases. However, PR is 
more than these. As the information technology becomes 
popular and mature, many communities like Facebook, 
Twitter and Line, play important roles in PR for fast 
communications in order to launch international cooperation. 
The traditional SMEs face the biggest challenge from the 
product innovation and the market circuit; interestingly, their 
collaborated ability often comes from the PR. Our research 
group including the Taiwanese and Polish professionals 
expects to assist the SMEs to enhance the competitiveness and 
international exposure by establishing the international 
platform for SMEs: E-Business Collaboration Club (EBCC). 
This research is supported by Ministry of Science and 
Technology (MOST) of Taiwan, Polish Academy of Science 
(PAS). The mutual cooperation leads to our initial success of 
SMEs to form social knowledge groups/communities such that 
we can observe the SME behavior in the platform. In addition, 
an actual bike company is used to validate the value of EBCC. 
Keywords- Small and Medium Enterprise (SME); E-Business; 
Information Technology; Public Relation; Collaboration. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Public Relations (PRs) are concerned with improving 
mutual understanding within an organization as well as 
between two organizations [1]. It directs a deliberate effort 
towards improving communication between the people and 
organizations to broaden its sphere of influence through 
appropriate advertising, publicity and other form of 
communication to create a good impression [3][4]. As the 
competition becomes severe among small and medium 
businesses (SMEs), and they often lack the innovation 
capacity and the marketing channels: setting up a 
collaborated platform for promoting PR of SMEs seems to 
be a good idea [10][11][12]. Although many scholars 
mentioned the value of cooperation among SMEs, they 
seldom talk about and practically observe the relationship 
between PR and collaboration. This study is focused on 
using Information Technology (IT) as a power tool to set up 
the E-Business Collaboration Club (EBCC) for SMEs by the 
following new features: (a) the company of industrial design: 
Duck Image is the supporter and integrator of the platform, 
this platform integrates three main resources and encourages 
mutual dialogue: SMEs which need new product design, the 
design company, and the professors in Da-Yeh University, 
and (b) we try to practically observe that if a poor PR leads 
to the low collaborated ability of SME, and (c) we conduct 
the experiment for cloud prototyping in this study, which 
means we accept the orders of new product design online, 
and use EBCC intensively for online discussion and 3D-
printing [13] to produce the product prototype for SMEs.  
Management Master Prof. Drucker in 2001 [6] pointed 
out that, the business competition already changes from 
management of the traditional tangible assets: human affairs, 
to management of knowledge (intangible asset). In addition, 
the new knowledge: the experience or the technology is 
tacitly stored in staff's brains. Once the staff leaves the 
company, this results in draining or losing this precious 
knowledge. 
Now 
the 
development 
of 
the 
social 
group/community website as a result, online discussion 
either the exchange of new ideas has become simpler than 
before. We attempt to establish the EBCC here in order to 
help Taiwan and Poland's SMEs to share knowledge, to 
exchange information and to develop new products rapidly. 
The international cooperation project of two year grant is 
supported by Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) 
and Polish Academy of Science (PAS): the first year of 2013 
was focused on setting up the enterprise cooperation 
platform. The second year of 2014 is devoted to inviting all 
the partners to join in; thus, we have been able to analyze 
and appraise the knowledge sharing process in reality by 
these registered members. 
In order to help the SMEs discussing the innovation 
concept completely, launch the new product development 
rapidly, and enter the market in time: the product innovation 
process should not consist of unplanned/random operations; 
on the contrary, it should be a sophisticated process from 
design to market. If we can launch the new ideas rapidly into 
product prototype, then the competitiveness of the SMEs will 
be greatly promoted. The design process includes the 
function, the outlook, the color, the material utilization, and 
fast prototyping of new products. In this study, each 
registered enterprise may express/show themselves with 
advantageous services/products by vivid pictures or videos 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

via EBCC (explicit knowledge), and seek for the 
collaboration and dialogue internationally (tacit knowledge).  
This EBCC is different from the traditional non-vivid, non-
interactive websites. 
The paper is arranged as follows: in Section II, we briefly 
introduce the PR and IT. In Section III, the detailed content 
of EBCC is presented. In Section IV, an actual observation 
and an experimental example are proposed to show how 
EBCC works, and validate its value in reality. Finally, the 
conclusion is available in Section V. 
II. 
PUBLIC RELATION AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY  
PRs is much more than advertising [2]. It is the practice 
of managing the delivery of information between two 
individuals or two organizations [8]. Public relations may 
include an organization or individual gaining exposure to 
their audiences using topics of public interest and news items 
that do not require direct payment [9]. This differentiates it 
from advertising as a form of marketing communications. 
The aim of public relations is to inform the public, 
prospective customers, investors, partners, employees, and 
other stakeholders and ultimately persuade them have a good 
view fort the organization, its leadership, products, or of 
business decisions. According to Daramola in 2003 [7], the 
purpose of public relations is “to create goodwill, 
understanding and awareness…of an organization or 
institution by using the PR techniques of persuasion, 
information and education to project the organization to its 
public…”.  
Professionals of PR serve in government organizations as 
well as private sector as a significant field communication. 
Serving its role of management function within and outside 
these organizations in order to meet the demands of the 
rapidly changing world, PR needs to employ an effective 
tool: information technology, that will enable it to achieve its 
objectives, and spread its messages/information globally. 
Therefore, application of information technology is a good 
support of PR [5]. 
Information Technology defined by the Information 
Technology Association of America (ITAA) is: design, 
development, implementation, support or management of 
computer-based information systems, particularly software 
applications and computer hardware. It deals with the use of 
electronic computers to convert, store, protect, process, 
transmit and securely retrieve information. Nowadays, 
numerous users rely on Facebook, Twitter, and Line, etc., 
supported by information technology, to achieve fast 
communication online. The individual impressions are now 
well spread by the social communities above, but the SMEs 
still lack a good tool for international dialogue. The gap 
between the SMEs which are able to or not able to 
effectively 
access 
the 
information 
technology 
and 
international resources, will dominate the successes or failure 
of SMEs. Furthermore, those SMEs without or with limited 
access to information technology are referred to “digital 
divide.” It includes the lack of resources and expertise 
needed to effectively utilize the available information 
technology.   
In this study, we use EBCC to improve the collaboration 
and PR of SMEs. 
III. 
CONTENT OF EBCC  
Our experimental idea is simple. We set up an IT 
platform: EBCC for promoting the PR, and observe the 
behavior of SME and validate the value of EBCC. That is, 
we see how they cooperate together. In this study, we simply 
define the PR of a SME is its used history in EBCC, which 
could be quantitatively tracked by registered members.   
Since the application of information technology is so 
important today, using such a technology to empower the PR 
is valuable [2][5]. The project achievements by our efforts 
comprise:  
A. Establishment of Information Technology (IT) platform 
This is set up for the interior/exterior knowledge 
management, which provides the internal discussion and idea 
exchange for registered members; e.g., the blog, the new 
knowledge sharing, the talented person recruits, the 
immediate messenger in order to promote the team work 
efficiency and to deliver the creativity, thoughts and new 
product files, etc. Furthermore, we also provide the space of 
show case for each registered member such that interested 
customer can track the latest news of SME easily. 
B. Establishment of the exterior IT platform for promotion 
of services/products of SMEs.  
Our platform may provide the demonstration spaces for 
SMEs, and they may interact with exterior customers directly. 
We define this part as the marketing knowledge, which is 
explicit.  
C. Establishment of the interior IT platform for idea 
exchanging of SMEs.  
This platform preserves the dialogue history among 
SMEs when they discuss the new product development. Real 
time messages with sketches, pictures or files could be 
intensively exchanged here. In addition, we also provide the 
service of cloud prototyping by 3D printers. We define this 
part as the collaborated knowledge, which is tacit.   
 
 
Figure 1.  Portal Entrance of SMEs for EBCC [14] 
 
The service goal of EBCC enables the SMEs to have the 
primary IT competition power as soon as possible such that 
their impressions could be improved. The portal entrance is 
shown in Figure 1. On the top area of the webpage pictures 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

in Figure 1, which may be automatically changed for the 
registered members for multimedia (video, pictures) of news, 
this area is available for the browsing of multi-pictures 
within one webpage. 
This platform could be extended by general computer 
languages. The platform is divided into the following parts 
for the development:   
A. 
Discussion Space 
The internal discussion space only allows registered 
companies to propose their own preliminary ideas, discuss, 
and exchange ideas with each other. This part could be open 
publicly or privately by user option. The discussion is set up 
by different industries via blogs; for example, bike blog, 
electrical blog, agriculture blog, ribbon blog, mechanical 
blogs, etc. which is shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Individual Forum for each Enterprise [14] 
B. Sharing Space 
The sharing space is designed for industrial designers in 
order to show their crafts/sketches, these designers may have 
a demonstration space.  
 
 
 
Figure 3.  News of SMEs in EBCC [14] 
This part is mainly used to release the latest issues for each 
registered member, which is shown in Figure 3. In addition, 
the latest news could be easily spread by sharing buttons of 
social networks. 
C. Individual Space 
The individual space allows the individual designer to 
work independently and privately. We provide the cloud 
prototyping service online. Simply speaking, we accept the 
orders by designers or SMEs for prototyping. This means 
we integrate the manufacturing capacity with the designer’s 
idea in order to practically propose the prototype/service in 
time for SMEs. This service is shown in Figure 4. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Individual Service in EBCC platform [14] 
We induct the cloud concept in the system structure, the 
private cloud represents individual/private space; the social 
group cloud represents the discussion space; the blending 
cloud represents the sharing space to the public. The sharing 
space is similar to social groups/communities, such as well 
known models of Facebook or YouTube. The success of 
Facebook and YouTube comes from the user's self-
awareness and the desire of personal showcase. 
IV. 
EXAMPLE 
We had collected about thirty registered members in 
EBCC, such that we can observe how they cooperate 
together by their explicit image (PR). We found that if a 
SME is good at PR by EBCC, then it is easy to get more 
supports/collaboration in EBCC. The PR here is simply 
defined as the tracking number of the specified SME in 
EBCC. This behavior is somewhat similar to the phenomena 
in Facebook. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Bike Frame Example 
 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

We also demonstrate a bike example in Figure 5 here to 
show the EBCC value from design to market. This company 
now enters the platform to seek a new design for a bike 
frame, and expects to see  the frame prototype within 2 
months resulting from the European Bike Exhibition. 
First of all, we accept the order online, and clarify that 
this bike company has the time pressure to finish the job 
within two months.  
Second, the Duck Image Company joins to prepare the 
sketches for candidates. An example of this process is shown 
in Figure 6. The selection process considers multiple 
attributes among five candidates; for example, outlook, 
strength, the time of 3D-printing (time to market), etc. At the 
same time, the bike company and the design company 
communicate mutually and intensively online via EBCC. 
The discussion content mainly focuses on the issues of 
progress and strength of this new product. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Third, once the sketch is chosen, professors in Da-Yeh 
University receive the final sketch with dimensions online, 
and use the software: SOLIDWORKS[15] and ANSYS[16] 
to construct the 3D-model, and analyze the frame to see if it 
meets the European safety requirements. After it passes the 
requirements, professors separated the 3D frame model into 
many small parts for 3D-printing. The 3D printer and the 
research team are shown in Figure 7.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. The Research Team and 3D Printer 
Finally, we join all the small parts from 3D printing to 
form the whole frame, and send the new product (prototype) 
back to the bike company. The company received new orders 
because of the fast-manufacturing prototype via EBCC. The 
prototype is shown in Figure 8. The bike company and the 
design company are both satisfied with the test run via 
EBCC.  
To summarize, we evaluate the EBCC that has the 
following new features which facilitate the success of cloud 
prototyping for the bike company. First, the knowledge 
management system within EBCC is quite huge, which 
contains a series of steps: the knowledge collection, the 
reorganization, the dispersion, the application, the renewal, 
the creation of values, and so on. Taking the bike company 
as an example, we may collect the bike design cases via 
internet: these data include the image, the writing or the 
multimedia. And these data are stored in the interior 
databases for reference by the registered members. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 The Printed Bike Frame 
Second, registered members are able to read the interior 
references. After that, in view of the new product 
development, they may discuss everything in the platform by 
the forum. In addition, if the discussion process is stopped 
for a short run, we allow the user to save the wisdom from 
discussion to the platform for internal databases, the 
discussers may continue the discussion in the next time by 
the support above. This function is just like the discussion 
history in Facebook. 
Third, in the exterior platform, each SME is able to 
summarize, arrange and show their past history, present 
development, and the future vision one by one, and is able to 
contact the external customer by gathering fans via EBCC. 
The feedbacks from exterior customers may enter the interior 
social group/community for additional discussion of new 
products or services. 
Finally, we had already and successfully connected the 
on-line 3D files to the 3D printer, which means if we receive 
the 3D data online, then we are able to control the 3D printer 
online. Furthermore, the company delivering orders is also 
able to track the progress online by project management. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The most common challenging problems for SMEs are 
the innovation capacity and the marketing channels. Our 
approach is not different from the exited approaches of social 
communities; on the contrary, we integrate the existed 
approaches and provide a simple and integrated solution for 
SMEs. Interestingly, we observe that a SME lacks the 
collaboration ability resulting from the poor PR in EBCC. 
Simply speaking, if a company PR is poor, then it is not easy 
to find a good partner to cooperate with it, and vice versa. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. The Sketch of Bike Frame 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

Since the IT power dominates the PR of SMEs today, each 
SME should do it best to show itself and to seek the 
supports/resources internationally for survival.  
The poor PR could come from various aspects: this SME 
may not update its news rapidly, this SME may not be 
enthusiastic to use IT for PR, this SME could be afraid of the 
secret exposed to its competitor, etc. We need further study 
on this issue later. 
The challenging issue of EBCC is the business secret 
security, which is left for resolution. In the phase of business 
secret management, the traditional method is secured by the 
paper copies, which can be read with interior approval of 
company in tradition, but the shortcoming problems are on 
the retrieval of complexity, large consumption of man-power 
for data management (big data), and the data search is not 
easy. Although we had successfully set up the IT framework; 
however, EBCC still needs more protections for business 
secret security. If more products/services and various 
members could be displayed and invited into EBCC, this 
platform could be expanded for PR of SMEs. We now focus 
on the local partners in Taiwan and Poland for customization. 
In the long run, we hope the EBCC could attract more 
international members to join in, and our final goal is 
encourage SMEs stand locally and win globally. Since an 
actual B2B platform to encourage international cooperation 
is still not easy to be observed nowadays; thus, we think the 
experiments here are valuable.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We appreciate the supports from the University of 
Economics in Katowice：Dr. hab. Jerzy MICHNIK, Prof. dr 
hab. Jerzy GOŁUCHOWSKI, Dr. hab. Krzysztof KANIA, 
Dr. Barbara FILIPCZYK and Dr. Tomasz STAŚ. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. 
Theaker, The Public Relations Handbook, Psychology 
Press, 2004.   
[2] C. H. Botan and V.Hazleton, Public Relations Theory II, 
Routledge, 2006.   
[3] L. Curtis, C. Edwards, K. L. Fraser, S. Gudelsky, J. Holmquist, 
K. Thornton, and K. D. Sweetser, “Adoption of social media 
for public relations by nonprofit organizations,” Public 
Relations Review, vol. 36, iss. 1, 2010, pp. 90–92.  
[4] M. A. Johnson, “Public Relations and Technology: Practitioner 
Perspectives,” Journal of Public Relations Research, vol. 9, iss. 
3, 1997, pp. 213-236.   
[5] V. Lance, L.V. Porter, and L. M. Sallot, “The Internet and 
Public Relations: Investigating Practitioners' Roles and World 
Wide Web Use,” Journalism & Mass Communication 
Quarterly, vol. 80, no. 3, 2003, pp. 603-622.  
[6] P. F. Drucker, Management Challenges for the 21st Century, 
Harpercollins, 2001.  
[7] I. Daramola, Introduction to Mass Communication, Rothan 
Press Lagos, 2003. 
[8] J. E. Grunig and T. Hunt, Managing Public Relations (6th ed.), 
Orlando, FL: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1984. 
[9] F. P. Seitel, The Practice of Public Relations. (10th ed.), Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2007. 
[10] R. Vidgen, D. Francis, P. Powell, and M. Woerndl, “Web 
service business transformation: collaborative commerce 
opportunities in SMEs,” Journal of Enterprise Information 
Management, vol. 17, iss. 5, 2004, pp. 372 – 381. 
[11] L. 
M. 
Camarinha-Matos, 
“Collaborative 
networked 
organizations: Status and trends in manufacturing,” Annual 
Reviews in Control, vol. 33, 2009, pp. 199–208. 
[12] A. Sharma, “Collaborative product innovation: integrating 
elements of CPI via PLM framework,” Computer-Aided 
Design, vol. 37, iss. 13, 2005, pp. 1425–1434. 
[13] T. Rayna and L. Striukova, “The Impact of 3D Printing 
Technologies on Business Model Innovation,”  
Digital 
Enterprise Design & Management, Advances in Intelligent 
Systems and Computing vol. 261, 2014, pp. 119-132. 
[14] EBCC, http://iem.ietm.dyu.edu.tw/drupal/, accessed July 2015. 
[15] SOLIDWORKS, http://www.solidworks.com/, accessed June 
2015. 
[16] ANSYS, http://www.ansys.com/,  accessed June 2015. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

