Profiling Users in the Smart Grid 
Carl Chalmers, William Hurst, Michael Mackay, Paul Fergus 
School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, 
Liverpool John Moores University, 
Byrom Street 
Liverpool, UK 
Email: C.Chalmers@ljmu.ac.uk, W.Hurst@ljmu.ac.uk, M.I.Mackay@ljmu.ac.uk, P.Fergus@ljmu.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— The implementation of the smart grid brings with it 
many new components that are fundamentally different to 
traditional power grid infrastructures. The most important 
addition brought by the smart grid is the application of the 
Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI). As part of the AMI, 
the smart meter device provides real time energy usage about the 
consumer to all of the smart grid’s stakeholders. Detailed 
statistics about a consumer’s energy usage can be accessed by the 
end user, utility companies and other parties. The problem, 
however, is in how to analyse, present and make best use of the 
data. This paper focuses on the data collected from the smart 
grid and how it can be used to detect abnormal user behaviour 
for energy monitoring applications. The proposed system 
employs a data classification technique to identify irregular 
energy usage in patterns generated by smart meters. The results 
show that it is possible to detect abnormal behaviour with an 
overall accuracy of 99.45% with 0.100 for sensitivity, 0.989 for 
specificity and an error of 0.006 using the Linear Discriminant   
(LDC) classifier.   
Keywords— Smart 
Meter, Profiling, 
Advance 
Metering 
Infrastructure, Data Classification, Critical Infrastructure. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Smart meters are one of the most significant components of 
the smart grid [1] and they are seen as the foundation of any 
future smart electricity network. Their introduction brings 
with it the ability for consumers to accurately monitor energy 
usage in real-time. By showing consumers their current 
energy usage, along with its associated cost, a more informed 
decision can be taken on when electricity consumption would 
be at its most cost effective. In addition, smart meters provide 
the gateway and monitoring for allowing consumers to 
generate their own electricity, selling any excess electricity 
back into the smart grid. This removes the traditional top 
down distribution, implementing a bidirectional energy flow 
[2]. The result is a bidirectional communication and power 
exchange between suppliers and consumers, transforming the 
traditionally passive end-users into active players.  
The deployment and use of the smart meter generates large 
amounts of valuable data. For example, the amount of energy 
being consumed at set times and intervals. Additionally, smart 
meters can securely communicate many different real-time 
consumption 
values 
including: 
voltage, 
phase 
angle, 
frequency and any home generated energy. This produces 
accurate information about the amount of energy used so 
customers can be better advised on billing and consumption. 
In addition, it allows utility companies to plan future energy 
requirements based on past usage trends. This is achieved by 
analysing the data and identifying reoccurring patters of usage. 
As the roll-out proceeds, devices, including smart appliances, 
can be automatically controlled in order to better balance grid 
demand. 
Smart meters have already been trialled in a number of 
countries, such as the USA, Australia, Netherlands, Italy and 
the UK, with future planned expansion [3]. In 2008, less than 
4% of the electricity meters in the world were smart meters. 
By 2012, the percentage had grown to over 18% and it is 
expected to rise to 55% by the end of 2020.  
In this paper, we present a case study into the data 
generated by three households. The households where selected 
from 78,720 individual smart meters in Australia. Using the 
data an approach for profiling consumers is put forward. We 
address how the development of a system, using advanced 
data analysis techniques, can be employed to assess 
consumers and detect abnormal behaviour. A discussion is 
also put forward on the benefits and challenges that smart 
meters bring with their implementation. The remainder of the 
paper is as follows. Section 2 presents a background on the 
Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) and smart meters, 
section 3 defines the data collected from our smart meter case 
study. Section 4 discusses the methodology and techniques 
used for profiling users. The paper is concluded in Section 5. 
II. BACKGROUND RESEARCH 
The implementation of the smart grid has brought with it 
significant developments in technology such as the ability to 
remote read meters, allow bidirectional generation and 
distribution etc. Its introduction has enriched the way in which 
electricity usage data is produced and collected. This 
comprehensive data access is fundamentally different when 
compared to traditional grid infrastructures [4] and, for the 
first time, operators are able to gather highly detailed 
information about how their individual customers use 
electricity in real-time [5]. In this section, the focus is on the 
technologies which enables access to the data. 
A. Advanced Metering Infrastructure 
The AMI offers bidirectional communication between the 
consumer and the rest of the smart grid stake holders and 
replaces the traditional need for energy usage readings to be 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

collected manually [6]. There are a number of advantages 
associated with Automated Meter Readings (AMR) these 
include:  
 
Reduced costs for meter readings. 
 
The possibility to access meters otherwise difficult to 
attend due to position or security reasons. 
 
Support for real-time pricing. 
 
Increased fraud detection. 
 
Reduced read-to-bill time allowing utility companies to 
learn more about consumer power consumption.  
 
More informed choices about energy usage based through 
the use of in home displays and smart devices [7]. 
Specifically, the AMI can be broken down into three main 
areas: The Home Area Network (HAN), Wide Area Network 
(WAN) and the utility companies. Figure 1 shows the 
interaction between the different components that comprise 
the AMI. Each of the layers is subsequently explained. 
 
Figure 1. End To End Smart Meter Infrastructure 
The Home Area Network (HAN) is housed inside the 
consumer’s premise and is made up of a collection of devices. 
The in-home display unit (IHD), is the most visible and 
accessible part of the AMI. It provides the consumer with up-
to-date information on electricity usage, as well as the units of 
energy being consumed. Secondly, the smart meter provides 
real-time energy usage to both the consumer and all of the 
stakeholders. This builds detailed energy usage profiles of its 
consumers. Smart appliances also react to peak events within 
the smart grid eco system. Adapting to these events enables a 
reduction in demand on the grid and energy costs for the 
consumer [8]. These smart appliances can effectively 
contribute to load management in future energy systems. 
The 
Wide 
Area 
Network 
(WAN) 
handles 
the 
communication between the HAN and the utility companies. 
The sending of polled meter data to the utility, using a robust 
backhaul network such as: Ethernet, GSM, CDMA or 3G, is 
controlled by the WAN. 
Organisations and utility companies have access to the data 
for analysis purposes this may include energy suppliers or 
energy networks. Enabling them to have detailed and accurate 
information. This improves management and planning of 
activities. In addition, grid reliance and performance is 
enhanced, as demand can be better provisioned. 
B. Smart Meter Benefits 
As previously discussed, the smart meter is an advancement 
on existing traditional meters [9]. Many of the advantages 
outlined below can be attributed to smart metering. These 
include lower metering costs; energy savings for customers; 
more reliability of supply through detailed monitoring and 
easier detection of supply problems and fraud. Its 
communication and data gathering capacities offer vast 
improvements and advancements over the traditional meters.  
Electrical data, such as voltage, frequency and energy 
consumption information is recorded in real-time and reported 
every 30 minutes. Additionally, consumers are able to interact 
with their smart meters in order to interpret the data that is 
collected. Overall, smart meters can perform a wide variety of 
tasks including:  
 
Accurately record and store information for defined time 
periods (to a minimum of 30 minutes). This enables 
remote, accurate meter-readings with no need for 
estimates 
[10]. 
As 
these 
meters 
become 
more 
sophisticated, they are able to measure household power 
consumption at ever finer time-scales. 
 
Offer two way communications to and from the meter so 
that, for example, suppliers can read meters and update 
tariffs remotely [11]. 
 
Allow customers to collect and use consumption data by 
creating a home area network to which they can securely 
connect data access devices [12].  
 
Enable other devices to be linked to the home area 
network, allowing customers to improve their control of 
energy consumption [13].  
 
Support time-of-use tariffs, under which the price varies 
depending on the time of day at which electricity is used 
[14]. Energy prices are more expensive during peak times. 
Billing consumers by time, as well as usage, will 
encourage them to change their consumption habits. 
 
Support future management of energy supply to help 
distribution companies manage supply and demand across 
their networks [15]. This is achieved automatically 
through previously agreed Demand Response (DR) 
actions. 
 
Allow remote enabling/disabling of supply by energy 
suppliers [16]. 
 
Measure electricity exported from micro generation 
equipment to the network [17]. Having sensors capable of 
measuring a multitude of consumption generation 
parameters, rewards the consumer for adopting green 
technologies. 
 
Communicate with micro generation, home appliances 
and equipment within the property [18]. Smart meters 
will be able to control smart home appliances and 
communicate with other smart meters within reach. This 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

allows devices to be switched on when grid demand is 
low and turned off when demand is high. 
The implementation of smart meters undoubtedly brings 
many benefits. However, there are also many challenges 
which need to be addressed.  
C. New Technology Challenges 
One of the main concerns is for the privacy of the consumer. 
Smart meters enable detailed profiling of consumers’ energy 
usage and household activities. Patterns can be identified 
without prior knowledge of the consumer. It is possible to 
extract detailed usage patterns and consumer habits from the 
data as readings are at granular intervals. 
Work undertaken by Andr´es [20] highlights the privacy 
concerns associated with smart meters. Their research 
demonstrates how complex usage patterns, can be obtained 
from smart meter data using off-the-shelf statistical methods. 
Specifically, their investigations focus on identifying trends in 
energy usage. However, none of the data was taken from 
actual smart meters. While energy readings were taken every 
second, in order to identify usage patterns, this does not 
accurately reflect real world smart meter usage. Typically 
smart meters report energy usage at 30 minute intervals. This 
is unlikely to change to due to the size of the data that is 
generated. 
Storing, processing and analysing all of the data generated 
from smart meters, and the wider smart grid is also a 
challenge, due to its size and complexity. This is due to the 
variety of data and parameters from consumer usage to power 
generation some of which are shown in table 1. 
TABLE 1. SMART METER DATA PARAMETERS 
The implementation of the smart grid represents a huge 
technical challenge. Aspects such as, networking, security, 
communication and data management require careful planning. 
For example, the integration of Supervisory Control and Data 
Acquisition (SCADA) networks with other commercial 
networks has made control systems vulnerable to various 
threats. Possible refinement, or creation of new and existing 
technology standards, has now become a necessity [21].  
D. Profiling Consumers 
Creating detailed energy profiles with associated data has a 
variety of benefits to the grid stakeholders. Some of which 
include: predicting future energy requirements based on 
historical data; establishing a detailed correlation between 
energy usage, weather conditions and social events; the 
refinement of more accurate demand and response systems 
using historical data; anomaly detection within the smart grid 
and, as our research focusses on, the detection of abnormal 
user behaviour. 
By observing and analysing readings from the AMI and 
smart meters it is possible to detect anomalies, cyber-
intrusions and factors that affect energy distribution. This 
requires the incorporation of data sets which include: 
weather/environmental; 
household 
demographics; 
social 
events; home generation; distribution of Plug-In Hybrid 
Electric Vehicles and home plug readings data. 
E. Discussion and Summary 
There are a number of large scale smart meter deployments in 
various countries. These include: France, Italy, Netherlands, 
Norway, Australia and the United States. Each of these 
counties have different policies and regulations governing 
their smart meter implementation programs. Such as: if smart 
meters are voluntary or compulsory; the frequency of readings 
and whether they have full function of automatic meter 
readings. The United States has one of the largest smart meter 
deployments [22]. In 2012, 533 U.S. electric utilities had 
43,165,185 AMI installations. About 89% were residential 
customer installations. In the UK, the objective is to install 
smart meters for both gas and electricity by the end of 2020. 
The UK government estimates that the installation of smart 
meters will provide £6.2 billion net benefits to the United 
Kingdom. 
The detail and granularity of the data collected can be used 
to address many of current and future challenges faced by the 
grid. One of the main challenges is being able to meet future 
energy demands in an efficient and environmentally safe way. 
The International Energy Agency expects worldwide energy 
demands to increase at an annual rate of 2.2 percent, 
eventually doubling the global energy demand. Analysing 
historical data can help plan the provision of future energy 
needs. It is noteworthy that the introduction of new green 
technologies, such as plugin electric vehicles, will put 
additional strain on the grid [23].  
There has been little research effort to investigate the 
benefits of user profiling in the smart grid. The level of 
granularity in the datasets allows for accurate modelling and 
prediction of an individual’s behaviour. This is beneficial both 
for predicting how the power-grid can accommodate the 
integration of new technologies, such as plug-in vehicles or 
assessing an individual’s well-being. 
Reading 
Description 
Generated interval data kW 
Half hourly interval held on meter for 
13 months – average kW demand over 
half hour period. 
Generated Kilovolt-Ampere-
Reactance (kVAr) 
Reactive power measurement in half 
hourly interval held on meter for 13 
months – average kVAr demand over 
half hour period. 
Generation Technology Type 
e.g. Solar PV, micro CHP, wind, 
hydro, Anaerobic Digestion. 
Import demand kW 
 Load being drawn from grid. 
Export kW:  
KW being exported to grid. 
Total consumption today (kWh) 
Import + Generated –Export. 
 
Cost of energy imported (£/hr) 
and £ today 
Net cost of imported energy less value 
of exported energy. Pushed to the IHD 
via SMS for the consumer. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

III. APPROACH 
By analysing the rich dataset provided by smart meters, the 
research in the paper aims to identify patterns and behaviours 
which can be used to profile users; predict future energy 
requirements; detect faults in the grid and identify 
compromised meters. In this section, a system framework 
which is able to process the significantly large datasets 
generated by smart meters is presented. A case study into 
three different consumers, and a demonstration on how an 
individual’s behaviour can be profiled through their electricity 
usage, are also put forward. 
A. System Framework 
The proposed system shown in Figure 2 is adaptable and can 
be applied to a variety of functions some of which are shown 
in table 2.  
TABLE 2. POTENTIAL SYSTEM FUNCTIONS. 
Functions 
Predicting future energy requirements based on historical data. 
 
Establishing a detailed correlation between energy usage and weather 
conditions. 
Aid in the detection of illegal activates through energy usage monitoring. 
Accurately plan for the use of Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEVs) 
based on historical gird load fluctuations. 
Analyse what effects social events such as football matches, concerts etc. 
have on energy usage to better plan grid requirements for large events. 
The 
system 
operates 
autonomously 
and 
identifies 
anomalies, energy usage, distribution patterns and trends. 
Figure 2 illustrates the proposed system along with the 
dynamics and correlations that the system monitors.  
Half Hour 
Consumption and 
Generation
Home Plug 
Readings
Household 
Demographics
Peak Event 
Response
Information Clearing
Customer 
Applications
External 
Factors
Weather 
Conditions
Social Events
Electric Vehicles
 
Figure 2. Proposed System Along With Associated Factors 
The system provides detailed information about consumer 
consumption, which aids in the provisioning of future energy 
requirements and improving grid design and reliability. 
B. Data Sample 
As a demonstration of the functionality of the system, a case 
study is presented which focuses on an individual user taken 
from a large dataset during an extensive smart meter trial. 
Specifically, the data set generated by the trial contains smart 
meter readings taken from the 78,720 individual consumers 
over a six year period from 2008 to 2014.  
For example, an individual user, selected at random from 
the data set, has 52560 rows of data. A typical sample of the 
data collected over a three hour period is displayed in Table 3. 
TABLE 3. INDIVIDUAL SMART METER DATA SAMPLE (IN 
KWH) 
Time 
(05/03/2013) 
General 
Supply 
Off Peak 
Total Usage 
07:29 
0.014 
No Usage 
0.014 
07:59 
0.064 
No Usage 
0.064 
08:29 
0.107 
1.132 
1.239 
08:59 
0.155 
0.169 
0.324 
09:29 
0.092 
0.563 
0.655 
The data shows the amount of electricity being used for 
each 30 minute interval (starting on the hour or half-past the 
hour) at each service location in the customer trial. Power 
consumption is reported as either normal domestic load or 
controlled load (i.e. off-peak - switched in or out by network 
control). 
IV. USER PROFILING 
To highlight how this data can be used to profile individuals, 
in this section we present a case study of the behaviour of two 
individual smart meter users. By analysing the dataset it is 
possible to develop a pattern of behaviour over one year and 
profile the behaviour of an individual. To enrich the dataset, 
household demographics taken from national census records 
for each consumer in the trial are included as above. This 
includes information about working patterns, household 
income and electrical devices that reside in the premise. For 
the initial profiling, the focus is on one years’ behaviour data. 
A. Profiles 
In order to present a case study into profiling users in the 
smart grid, two individuals are randomly selected from the 
dataset as a sample, one with a normal energy pattern and one 
with an abnormal pattern. However, both users are within the 
same energy usage range. The census records detail that there 
is one occupant living in each of the premises selected for 
analysis. The residents are also known to be absent from home 
during the day.  
Figure 3 and Figure 4 show a scatter plot of the daily max 
energy readings over 365 days of two individual consumers. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

The energy usage is displayed along the x-axis. The y-axis 
refers to the day of the year. 
 
 Figure 3. User 1 Max Energy Usage Kwh 
 
Figure 4. User 2 Max Energy Usage 
The full profile of both consumers was evaluated over a 
one year period. This was undertaken to discover if any 
reoccurring patterns or habits could be identified based on 
their energy usage. Both figures also show the linear division 
of the data. As the division shows, the consumers have a 
tenancy to use more energy overall. Each consumer’s energy 
readings were taken every half hour equating to 48 readings 
per 24 hour period, totalling 17520 individual readings per 
consumer per year. As shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4, clear 
divisions in the usage patterns can be clearly identified. Both 
households in this experiment have 1 resident who is out 
during the day. 
B. Methodology 
Figure 5 shows two users, comparing one with normal 
behaviour against a single individual expressing abnormal 
electricity usage patterns. Normal behaviour is represented by 
blue crosses, while abnormal is displayed as red dots. There is 
a clear visible difference in behaviour when comparing the 
usage.  
 
Figure 5. LDC Total usage per consumer over 1 year period 
However, differences in behaviour are problematic to 
detect in the extensive datasets generated by smart meters. For 
this reason, our approach employs six different supervised 
machine learning classifiers: Uncorrelated Normal Density 
based Classifier (UDC), Quadratic Discriminant Classifier 
(QDC), Linear Discriminant Classifier (LDC), Polynomial 
Classifier (PLOYC), k-Nearest Neighbour (KNNC) and 
Support Vector Classifier (SVC). Each of these classifiers is 
chosen because they have the ability to learn how to recognise 
abnormal values in a dataset. They also employ a supervised 
learning approach, which is a key part of the system design. 
Table 4 presents the results of the classification. 
TABLE 4. CLASSIFICATION RESULTS COMPARISON 
Classifiers 
AUC (%) 
Sensitivity 
Specificity 
Error 
LDC 
99.45 
0.100 
0.989 
0.006 
UDC 
98.90 
0.100 
0.978 
0.011 
QDC 
98.90 
0.100 
0.978 
0.011 
SVC 
78.29 
0.100 
0.565 
0.217 
POLYC 
99.45 
0.100 
0.989 
0.006 
KNNC 
65.93 
0.598 
0.719 
0.341 
LDC and UDC were the most accurate, with both 
classifying over 98.90% of the data accurately. The LDC, is 
able to categorize the dataset with high accuracy (99.176%) 
with an error rate of 0.006. 
LDC is shown in Figure 5 where the classifier is able to 
predict 99.45% of the data accurately. The KNNC classifier as 
shown in Figure 6 was the least accurate with an accuracy of 
65.93%. As the graph displays, samples of the data from the 
abnormal set (red dots) is misclassified inside the KNNC 
contour grouping. 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
User 1 MAX
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
User 2 MAX
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

 
Figure 6. KNNC Total usage per consumer over 1 year period 
C. Discussion 
Despite selecting two users within the same energy usage 
range, clear deviations can be seen in the data sets. This 
change in usage patterns reflects an individual’s unique 
behavioural characteristics. However, Figure 5 shows how the 
second consumer’s behavioural patterns are not as clearly 
identifiable and there is no obvious visible trend in the usage 
pattern. 
Profiling consumers with fine grained measurements brings 
many applications and benefits. For example, when 
comparing a third consumer’s energy usage to the initial case 
study is it apparent that behavioural patterns are unique to the 
individual consumer. This data can therefore be analysed to 
give an accurate account of the customers’ habits, 
characteristics and expenditure. 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The implementation of the AMI and, in particular, smart 
meters enables the analysis of energy usage with a high degree 
of accuracy and granularity. Being able to utilise the collected 
data brings countless benefits to the grid’s stakeholders and 
consumers alike. In order to meet future energy needs and be 
able to incorporate home generation and distribution, it is 
clear that changes in the current grid model are needed. The 
smart grid addresses the constraints imposed by the current 
power infrastructure by allowing detailed grid monitoring and 
involving the consumer. Being able to collect and analyse 
sufficient amounts of usage data makes it possible to identify 
reoccurring patterns and trends which can be used to address 
gird problems by profiling users of current and future grid 
implementations. 
The results have shown that it is possible to identify and 
categorise individual user patterns generated by smart meters. 
Using the classification techniques presented in this research, 
it is possible to establish both normal and abnormal consumer 
behaviour based on granular energy usage data. The classifiers 
achieved high results. However, the main errors in 
classification are seen in the misclassification of normal user 
behaviour (sensitivity). This results in the false positive 
identification of abnormal user behaviour. This will be 
addressed in the future work by including the inclusion of 
more case studies to expand the dataset. Our future work will 
involve incorporating additional datasets, including home plug 
readings showing how much energy each electrical device has 
used at 30 minute intervals. The use of the additional data will 
create a more detailed profile of a user and allow us to make 
accurate assumptions about an individual’s behaviour patterns. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Molina-Markham, P. Shenoy, K. Fu, E. Cecchet and D. Irwin, 
“Private Memoirs of a Smart Meter,” Proceedings of the 2nd ACM 
Workshop on Embedded Sensing Systems for Energy-Efficiency in 
Building, 2010, pp 61-66. 
[2] A. Mengolini and J. Vasiljevska, “The social dimension of Smart 
Grids,” Joint Research Centre of the European Commission, 2013 
[3] J. Zheng, D. Wenzhong Gao and L. Lin, “Smart Meters in Smart Grid: 
An Overview,” Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Green 
Technologies Conference, 2013, Pages 57 -64. 
[4] D. J. Kerrigan, L. Gamberini, A. Spagnolli and G. Jacucci, “Smart 
meters: A users’ view,” PsychNology Journal, 2011 
[5] S. O. Hurtado and P. Parmenter, “The Green Grid Energy Savings and 
Carbon Emissions Reductions Enabled by a Smart Grid,” Electric 
Power Research Institute 2008. 
[6] M. Popa, “Data Collecting from Smart Meters in an Advanced 
Metering Infrastructure,” Proceedings of 15th International Conference 
on Intelligent Engineering Systems, 2011 
[7] A. Faruqui and L. Wood, IEE Releases: “The Benefits of Smart 
Meters,” NARUC Winter Meetings. Institute for Electric Efficiency, 
Washington, D.C. 2011. 
[8] R. Stamminger, “Synergy Potential of Smart Appliances, Project report 
within the Smart-A project,” v2, November 2008 
[9] R. van Gerwen., S. Jaarsma and R. Wilhite., “Smart Metering,” IDC-
Technologies, 2006 
[10] F. Benzi, N. Anglani, E. Bassi and Lucia Frosini “Electricity Smart 
Meters Interfacing the Households,” IEE transactions on Industrial 
Electronics, Vol 58, No10, 2011VOL. 58, NO. 10. 
[11] C. Bennett, D. Highfill, “Networking AMI Smart Meters,” November 
2008, IEEE Energy2030. 
[12] T. Krishnamurti, D. Schwartz, A. Davis, B. Fischhoff, W¨and i Bruine 
de Bruin, L. Lave and J. Wang, “Preparing for smart grid technologies: 
A behavioral decision research approach to understanding consumer 
expectations about smart meters,” Energy Policyc41, 2011. 
[13] M. Venables, “Smart meters make smart consumers,” Engineering & 
Technology, Volume: 2, Issue: 4, 2007. 
[14] L. Olmos, S. Reuster, S. J. Liong and J. M. Glachant, “Energy 
efficiency actions related to the rollout of smart meters for small 
consumers, application to the Austrian system,” Energy Volume 36, 
Issue 7, July 2011. 
[15] M. Anas, N. Javaid, A. Mahmood, S. M. Raza, U. Qasim and Z. A. 
Khan, “Minimizing Theft using Smart Meters in AMI,” Seventh 
International Conference on P2P, Parallel, Grid, Cloud and Internet 
Computing, 2012. 
[16] H. Farhangi, “The path of the smart grid,” Power and Energy Magazine, 
IEEE (Volume:8 , Issue: 1 ), February 2010. 
[17] J. Zheng., D. Wenzhong Gao and L. Lin., “Smart Meters in Smart Grid: 
An Overview,” Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Green 
Technologies Conference, 2013, Pages 57 -64. 
[18] S. S. Sreenadh, R. Depuru, L. Wang and V. Devabhaktuni, “Smart 
meters for power grid: Challenges, issues, advantages and status, 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 15,” February 2011. 
[19] A. Molina-Markham, P. Shenoy, K. Fu, E. Cecchet, and D. Irwin, 
“Private Memoirs of a Smart Meter,” BuildSys '10, 2010. 
[20] Á. MacDermott, Q. Shi, M. Merabti and K. Kifayat: “Intrusion 
Detection for Critical Infrastructure Protection,” June 2009, Neural 
Networks, 2009. IJCNN 2009, Pages 14-19. 
[21] U.S. Energy Information Administration, March, 2015 [Accessed 
online at: http://www.eia.gov/] 
F. Bouhafs., M. Mackay and M. Merabti “Links to the Future,” IEEE 
Power & Energy Magazine, 2012. 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

