Estimation of Trafﬁc Amounts on all Links
by Using the Information From a Subset of Nodes
Yuya Tarutani∗, Yuichi Ohsita†, Shin’ichi Arakawa∗, and Masayuki Murata∗
∗Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
{y-tarutn, arakawa, murata}@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
†Graduate School of Economics, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
y-ohsita@econ.osaka-u.ac.jp
Abstract—Trafﬁc information is required to perform trafﬁc
engineering. However, as the network that require trafﬁc
engineering becomes large, the overhead to collect the trafﬁc
amount information required for trafﬁc engineering becomes
large. In this paper, we propose a method to reduce the over-
head to collect the trafﬁc amount information. In our method,
we select a subset of nodes and collect the trafﬁc amount
information only from the selected nodes. Then, we estimate the
trafﬁc amount on each link by using the information collected
from the selected nodes. According to simulation results, our
method can estimate the trafﬁc amount on each link required
for trafﬁc engineering accurately by monitoring 30% of all
nodes.
Keywords-Estimation; Selection of Monitoring Nodes; Trafﬁc
Matrix; Trafﬁc Engineering.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, various applications are deployed and their
trafﬁc is carried over the Internet. The trafﬁc in the Internet
still doubles each year, the network providers are required
to accommodate their trafﬁc in a cost effective way.
Trafﬁc engineering is a method to optimize the perfor-
mance of networks by dynamically changing the topology
and/or route of trafﬁc [1-5]. The topology and route of
trafﬁc are calculated and controlled with a server called Path
Computation Element (PCE). To perform the trafﬁc engi-
neering at the PCE, we may need to know the information
of trafﬁc in the network. Depending on the granularity of
trafﬁc engineering, we may require different degree of trafﬁc
information. For example, when we apply some optimization
technique to determine the topology and route of trafﬁc, we
need the trafﬁc matrix that expresses the trafﬁc amount for
each edge-to-edge trafﬁc in the network.
However, collecting all the edge-to-edge trafﬁc requires
much overhead: one reason is the monitoring overhead at
each router. Header inspection is necessary at the router to
identify the edge-to-edge trafﬁc that monitored packets be-
long to. However, the header inspection caused the overhead
at each router; another reason is collecting overhead at the
PCE server. To collect all the edge-to-edge trafﬁc, the PCE
server has to query the nodes monitoring edge-to-edge trafﬁc
and obtain the information of the trafﬁc amounts. Especially,
as the number of routers increases, the number of nodes
the PCE server has to query and the size of information
to be collected become large, which causes the signiﬁcant
overhead at the PCE server.
To overcome these overheads, trafﬁc engineering using
only the information of trafﬁc amount on each link has been
investigated. Juva [5] calculates the range of each edge-to-
edge trafﬁc by using the information of trafﬁc amount on
each link, and optimizes the trafﬁc routes that minimize the
worst-case link utilization. Roughan et al. [2] and Ohsita
et al. [3, 4] use the trafﬁc matrices estimated from the
information of trafﬁc amount on each link. The trafﬁc
amount on a link can be easily counted at the node connected
to the link, and the PCE can obtain the information of trafﬁc
amount on the link by querying the node.
However, the granularity of trafﬁc information depends on
the application of them. Recently, network virtualization [6]
to support deployments of various network services, such
as P2P services and cloud computing services, has been
investigated. Virtual networks are prepared and reconﬁgured
for each service. In this case, trafﬁc engineering is required
for each virtual networks and the PCE has to collect the
information of trafﬁc amount on each virtual link of each
virtual network. It will be thought that diversiﬁcation of the
service in the network advances more and the number of
virtual networks that require trafﬁc engineering remarkably
increases in future. That is, the number of links whose
information must be collected by the PCE increases in future
as the number of service increases. This may cause the heavy
collecting overhead at the PCE.
In this paper, we propose a method to reduce the overhead
to collect trafﬁc information necessary for trafﬁc engineering
by estimating trafﬁc amounts on all links from the trafﬁc
information collected from a subset of nodes. In our method,
we ﬁrst select the nodes we collect the trafﬁc information
from, and collect the information of trafﬁc amount on each
link from the selected nodes. Then, we estimate the trafﬁc
amounts of all links by using only the information collected
from the selected nodes. Throughout this paper, we call the
selected node monitoring node.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
explains the existing methods to estimate trafﬁc matrices.
In Section III, we propose a method to select monitoring
nodes and estimate trafﬁc amount on each link by using
18
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

the information collected from the monitoring nodes. In
Section IV, we evaluate our method by simulation and
clarify that our method can estimate trafﬁc amount on each
link accurately by selecting the monitoring node properly.
Finally, Section V provides a conclusion.
II. OVERVIEW OF TRAFFIC MATRIX ESTIMATION
Trafﬁc matrix is the matrix of Ts,d that represents the
trafﬁc amount from node s to node d. Let N be the number of
nodes in the network. Then, the trafﬁc matrix is represented
as,
T =

T1,1
T1.2
...
TN,N

.
(1)
As this equation indicates, obtaining the trafﬁc matrix re-
quires the trafﬁc information between all nodes and requires
more overhead as the number of nodes increases. Therefore
methods to estimate a trafﬁc matrix from the trafﬁc amount
on each link have been investigated. The trafﬁc amount on
each link is determined from the routing information A,
which is known to the network administrator, and trafﬁc
matrix T, which is unknown to the network administrator.
That is, the following equation is hold;
AT = X,
(2)
where X is a matrix of Xi that represents the trafﬁc amount
that pass through the link i. That is,
X =

X1
...
XL

.
(3)
In the above equation, L is the number of links in the
networks. A is a matrix that has an element As,d,l that
represents the route of ﬂow between node s and d and when
the ﬂow passes through the link l, As,d,l takes one, otherwise
takes zero. Note that when we consider the splittable ﬂow,
As,d,l is the rate of end-to-end trafﬁc Ts,d ﬂows the link l. A
is called routing matrix.
A =

A1,1,1
A1,2,1
· · ·
AN,N,1
A1,1,2
A1,2,2
· · ·
AN,N,2
...
...
...
...
A1,1,L
A1,2,L
· · ·
AN,N,L

(4)
Trafﬁc matrix estimation is an approach to estimate T that
satisﬁes the Eq. 2, based on the monitored trafﬁc amount
X and the routing matirx A. However, we cannot obtain the
unique trafﬁc matrix that satisﬁes Eq. 2 since the number
of equations in Eq. 2 is usually less than the number of
elements in T. That is, there are several candidates for the
trafﬁc matrix to satisfy the Eq. 2.
Many approaches have been considered to obtain the true
trafﬁc matrix from the candidates. One of approaches is to
use the model of trafﬁc matrix [7-12]. Zhang et al. [11]
proposed the estimation method called tomogravity method
that estimates trafﬁc matrix so as to follow the gravity model
where the trafﬁc amount between two nodes is proportional
to the product of the trafﬁc of the two nodes. The tomograv-
ity method works as follows. At ﬁrst, the method estimates
the edge-to-edge trafﬁc T grav
s,d
based on monitored trafﬁc in
the ingress and egress links to follow the gravity model by
the following equations;
T grav
s,d
= Xlins
Xlout
d
∑
k Xlout
k
,
(5)
where lin
s is the ingress link at node s and lout
d
is the egress
link at node d. We denote T grav as the matrix in which each
entry is T grav
s,d . Then, the tomogravity method estimates a
trafﬁc matrix ˆT by following equations;
min ∥ ˆT − T grav∥,
(6)
s.t. A ˆT = X.
That is, the tomogravity method calculates ˆT that satisﬁes
Eq. 2 and minimize the difference between ˆT and T grav.
Although the trafﬁc information required for the tomogravity
method is much smaller than the case of collecting trafﬁc
matrix information directly, L numbers of trafﬁc information
are still required to be collected to estimate trafﬁc matrices.
One approach to reduce the collecting overhead is to
collect trafﬁc amount information only from a subset of
nodes and estimate the uncollected trafﬁc amount infor-
mation from the collected information. Zhang et al. [12]
proposed a method to estimate the uncollected trafﬁc amount
information from the trafﬁc amount information that was
monitored and collected before at the same point or cur-
rently at the different points. In this method, we calculate
the correlation between each trafﬁc amount information
monitored at different times or different points by using
the trafﬁc amount information collected before. Then, we
estimate the uncollected trafﬁc amount information by using
the correlation. However, this method cannot estimate the
uncollected trafﬁc amount information accurately when the
trafﬁc change that is different from a past tendency occurs.
In this paper, we investigate the method to estimate the
uncollected trafﬁc amount information of each link from the
information collected from a subset of monitoring nodes
without using the past information. In addition, because
the accuracy of the estimation depends on selection of the
monitoring nodes, we also propose a method to select the
monitoring nodes.
III. ESTIMATION OF THE TRAFFIC AMOUNTS ON ALL
LINKS FROM THE INFORMATION OF A SUBSET OF NODES
In this section, we propose a method to estimate trafﬁc
amounts on all links by using the trafﬁc amounts monitored
at a subset of nodes. In addition, since the accuracy of the
estimated trafﬁc amounts depends on the selection of the
19
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

monitoring nodes, we also propose a method to select the
monitoring nodes. Our method works as the following steps.
Step. 1 Select monitoring nodes and collect the informa-
tion of trafﬁc amount from the selected monitoring
nodes.
Step. 2 Estimate the trafﬁc amount on each link X′ roughly
by using the number of edge-to-edge trafﬁc passing
the link.
Step. 3 Estimate the trafﬁc matrix ˆT from the trafﬁc amount
on each link X′ and the routing matrix A.
Step. 4 Estimate the trafﬁc amount on each link ˆX from the
estimated trafﬁc matrix ˆT and the routing matrix A.
After performing the above steps, we designate ˆX as the
ﬁnal estimation results for the trafﬁc amount on each link.
The details of the above steps are described below.
A. Selecting monitoring nodes
In this subsection, we propose a method to select mon-
itoring nodes so as to estimate the trafﬁc amounts on all
links accurately. The edge-to-edge trafﬁc whose amount
is not monitored at any monitoring nodes is difﬁcult to
estimate and may also cause large estimation errors on
the trafﬁc amount on each link. Thus, in our method, we
select monitoring nodes so as to cover as many edge-to-edge
trafﬁc as possible. In addition, when no nodes can increase
the number of edge-to-edge trafﬁc covered by the selected
monitoring nodes, we select the nodes where the number
of edge-to-edge trafﬁc passing the node is the largest so as
to increase the accuracy of as many edge-to-edge trafﬁc as
possible.
In our method, initially we regard all nodes as the
candidates for the monitoring nodes. Then, we eliminate
the selected nodes from the candidate until the number
of remaining candidates becomes the target number of
monitoring nodes H.
To select the nodes eliminated from the candidates for the
monitoring nodes, we use the number of edge-to-edge trafﬁc
monitored by node i (Qi), the number of edge-to-edge trafﬁc
that cannot be monitored at any other candidates than node
i (Pi), and the number of candidates passed by the edge-
to-edge trafﬁc from node n to node m (Rn,m). Our method
selects the monitoring nodes by the following steps.
Step. 1.1 Select all nodes as candidates for the monitoring
nodes .
Step. 1.2 Initialize Pi to 0, Qi to the number of edge-
to-edge trafﬁc passing the node i and Rn,m to
the number of nodes passed by the edge-to-edge
trafﬁc from node n to node m.
Step. 1.3 If there exists the node whose Pi is 0, eliminate
the node whose Qi is the smallest among the
candidates whose Pi is 0 from the candidates,and
then go to Step 1.5. Otherwise, go to step 1.4.
Step. 1.4 If Pi > 0 for all nodes, eliminate the node whose
Pi is the smallest from the candidates.
Step. 1.5 If the number of candidates is larger than the
threshold H, update Rn,m and Pi for all candidates
and go back to Step 1.3. Otherwise, go to step 1.6.
Step. 1.6 Designate the remaining candidates as the moni-
toring nodes.
In the Step. 1.5 of the above steps, Rn,m is updated by
decrementing its value if the edge-to-edge trafﬁc from node
n to node m passes the node eliminated from the candidates.
Then, Pi is updated by counting the elements of Rn,m where
the edge-to-edge trafﬁc from node n to node m passes
through the node i and Rn,m = 1.
B. Estimation of trafﬁc amounts by using the number of
edge-to-edge trafﬁc
In our method, we use only trafﬁc amount information
monitored at the selected monitoring nodes. However, the
lack of trafﬁc amount information causes the difﬁculty in
estimating trafﬁc matrices. Thus, we estimate the uncollected
trafﬁc amount information before estimating the trafﬁc ma-
trix.
To estimate the trafﬁc amounts, we use the relation
between the number of edge-to-edge trafﬁc passing a link
and the trafﬁc amounts on the link. We investigate this
relation by simulation. In this simulation, we use AT&T’s
router-level topology (523 nodes and 1304 links) measured
in Ref. [13]. We add one ingress link and one egress link
for all nodes in the AT&T topology, and generate trafﬁc
between each pair of ingress and egress links.
According to Ref. [11], actual trafﬁc matrices follow
the gravity model. In addition, according to Ref. [14],
each element of actual trafﬁc matrices obeys a lognormal
distribution. Thus, in this simulation, we generate trafﬁc
matrix T indicating trafﬁc amounts between each ingress
and egress links so as to follow both the gravity model and
a lognormal distribution. The trafﬁc matrix T used in this
simulation is generated as
T = T grav + ∆,
(7)
where T grav is a trafﬁc matrix generated so as to follow both
the gravity model and a lognormal distribution, and ∆ is a
matrix indicating the white Gaussian noise with the mean
of 0 and the variance of 1. We generate T grav
i, j
as
T grav
i, j
= Gi ∗ G j,
(8)
where Gi is the weight for node i. We generate Gi based
on the lognormal distribution with a mean of e4.8 and the
variance e9.7 so as to match the results described in Ref. [14].
In this simulation, the unit of the trafﬁc amount of the edge-
to-edge trafﬁc generated the above steps is Mbps.
Fig. 1 shows the relation between the number of edge-
to-edge trafﬁc passing a link and the trafﬁc amount on the
link obtained by our simulation. According to Fig. 1, we can
model the relation as
Wi = αZi + β,
(9)
20
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

 0
 100000
 200000
 300000
 400000
 500000
 0
 5000
 10000
 15000
 20000
 25000
Traffic amount on each link(Mbps)
Number of edge-to-edge traffic
Figure 1.
Relations of the number of edge-to-edge trafﬁc and the trafﬁc
amount on each link
where Wi is the trafﬁc amount of the link i, Zi is the number
of edge-to-edge trafﬁc passing the link i, and α and β are
the constant parameters. Zi for any node i can be calculated
from the routing matrix.
By using this relation, we estimate the trafﬁc amount on
each link as following steps. First, we calculate the constant
parameters, α and β by using trafﬁc amount on each link
collected from the selected monitoring nodes. To calculate
α and β, we use the least-square method. That is,
α = |S | ∑
i∈S ZiWi − ∑
i∈S Zi
∑
i∈S Wi
|S | ∑
i∈S Z2
i − (∑
i∈S Zi
)2
,
(10)
β =
∑
i∈S Zi
∑
i∈S Wi − ∑
i∈S ZiWi
∑
i∈S Zi
|S | ∑
i∈S Z2
i − (∑
i∈S Zi
)2
,
(11)
where S is the set of links connected to the monitoring
nodes. Then, we estimate the trafﬁc amount U j on the link
j that is not collected from the monitoring nodes as
U j = αZ j + β.
(12)
Finally, we deﬁne the matrix X′ which is a matrix in-
dicating the roughly estimated trafﬁc amount on each link
as
X′ =

X′
1...
X′
L

,
(13)
where
X′
l =
{ Xl
if l is the link connected to the monitored nodes,
Ul
otherwise.
(14)
C. Estimating trafﬁc matrices
We estimate the trafﬁc matrix from the roughly estimated
trafﬁc amount on each link. If we apply the tomogravity
method to estimate trafﬁc matrix from the estimated trafﬁc
amount on each link, the estimation errors may become
large, because the estimation errors included in the trafﬁc
amounts on ingress and egress links cause the inaccu-
rate estimation of T grav and large estimation errors of the
tomogravity method even when trafﬁc amounts on other
links are estimated accurately. Therefore, we need a trafﬁc
matrix estimation method where estimation errors included
in the trafﬁc amounts on particular links do not affect the
estimation results signiﬁcantly.
Though there may be more sophisticated estimation
method, in our evaluation described in Section IV, we
use the simple approach to estimate the trafﬁc matrix by
minimizing the following equation;
min ∥X′ − A ˆT∥.
(15)
The results shown in Section IV clariﬁes that we can
estimate the trafﬁc amount on each link accurately even
when we use this simple approach to estimate the trafﬁc
matrix.
D. Estimating trafﬁc amount from estimated trafﬁc matrices
Once we obtain the estimated trafﬁc matrix ˆT, we calcu-
late the matrix ˆX that represents the trafﬁc amount on each
link as
ˆX = A ˆT.
(16)
Then, we designate ˆX as the ﬁnal estimation results for the
trafﬁc amount on each link. By estimating ˆX as Eq. 16, even
when signiﬁcant trafﬁc changes on a small number of edge-
to-edge trafﬁc occurs and the changes are not captured by
X′, ˆX may follow the trafﬁc changes since ˆX is estimated
so as to ﬁt the current trafﬁc amount information collected
from the monitored nodes.
IV. NUMERICAL EVALUATIONS
In this section, we evaluate our method by simulation. In
this evaluation, we use the same topology and trafﬁc matrix
as Section III-B
In this evaluation, we investigate the accuracy of the
estimation of the trafﬁc amount on each link, because the
trafﬁc amount on each link is important information for
trafﬁc engineering and the estimation errors of the trafﬁc
amount on each link may cause the misidentiﬁcation of the
congested links.
To evaluate the accuracy of the estimation of the trafﬁc
amount on each link, we use the Root Mean Squared
Error (RMSE) and the Root Mean Squared Relative Error
(RMSRE). The RMSRE (XRMS RE) and the RMSE (XRMS E)
are deﬁned as
XRMS RE =
v
u
t
1
L
L
∑
k=1
( ˆXk − Xk
Xk
)2
,
(17)
XRMS E =
v
u
t
1
L
L
∑
k=1
( ˆXk − Xk
)2,
(18)
21
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

 0
 5000
 10000
 15000
 20000
 25000
 30000
 0
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
XRMSE(Mbps)
Number of monitering nodes
random
proposed method
Figure 2.
RMSE of trafﬁc amount on each link
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 0
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
XRMSRE
Number of monitering nodes
random
proposed method
Figure 3.
RMSRE of trafﬁc amount on each link
where L is the number of links in the network, ˆXk is the
estimated trafﬁc amount of link k, and Xk is the actual trafﬁc
amount of the link k.
Figures 2 and 3 show XRMS E and XRMS RE respectively
when we change the number of monitoring nodes. In these
ﬁgures, the vertical axis is XRMS E or XRMS RE, and the
horizontal axis is the number of monitoring nodes. In these
ﬁgures, “proposed method” indicates the case that we select
the monitoring nodes by our method and “random” indicates
the case that we select the monitoring nodes randomly.
According to Fig. 2, we can estimate the trafﬁc amount of
each link accurately by selecting more than 173 monitoring
nodes, while the RMSE of the trafﬁc amount on each link
become signiﬁcantly large if the number of monitoring
nodes is less than 173 since the number of trafﬁc amount
information is too small to estimate the parameters of Eq.
12.
Fig. 2 also shows that we can estimate trafﬁc amounts
much more accurately in the case of selecting monitoring
nodes by our method, compared with the case of selecting
 1e-006
 1e-005
 0.0001
 0.001
 0.01
 0.1
 1
 10
 100
 1000
 0
 5000
 10000
 15000
 20000
 25000
XRMSRE
Number of edge-to-edge traffic
Figure 4.
Relations of the number of edge-to-edge trafﬁc and RMSRE
when our method selectes 173 nodes
 0.1
 1
 10
 100
 1000
 10000
 0
 5000
 10000
 15000
 20000
 25000
XRMSE(Mbps)
Number of edge-to-edge traffic
Figure 5.
Relations of the number of edge-to-edge trafﬁc and RMSE when
our method selectes 173 nodes
monitoring nodes randomly. This is because our method
selects the monitoring nodes so as to cover as many edge-
to-edge trafﬁc as possible. Therefore, most of edge-to-edge
trafﬁc pass at least one of monitoring nodes selected in our
method and can be estimated from the information of the
trafﬁc amounts collected from the monitoring nodes. On
the other hand, in the case of selecting monitoring nodes
randomly, several edge-to-edge trafﬁcs pass no monitoring
nodes. Since we cannot obtain the trafﬁc amount infor-
mation corresponding to such edge-to-edge trafﬁcs from
the monitoring nodes, such edge-to-edge trafﬁcs cannot be
estimated accurately. As a result, the estimation errors of
trafﬁc amounts on links passed by such edge-to-edge trafﬁc
whose estimation error is large become also large.
However, according to Fig. 3, unlike the RMSE, the
RMSRE of our method is still large and close to the RMSRE
of the case of selecting monitoring nodes randomly.
To
investigate this in more detail, we show the estimation error
of trafﬁc amount on each link and discuss whose estimation
22
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

error is large.
Figs. 4 and 5 show the relations between the number of
edge-to-edge trafﬁc passing a link and RMSRE or RMSE of
the trafﬁc amount on the link when we select 173 monitoring
nodes by our method. According to Fig. 4, the RMSREs
only for the trafﬁc amounts on the links where the number
of edge-to-edge trafﬁc is small become large. The actual
trafﬁc amount on the link where the number of edge-to-
edge trafﬁc is small may be small. The small actual trafﬁc
amount makes the value of relative error quite large even
when the estimation error is not large.
In addition, according to Fig. 5, the estimation errors for
the trafﬁc amount on the links where the number of edge-
to-edge trafﬁc is small also become large. This is because
one-hop trafﬁcs whose source and destination nodes are both
ends of a link cannot be estimated from the trafﬁc amounts
monitored at any other links and their estimation errors
become large. The ratio of one-hop trafﬁc among the total
trafﬁc on the link increases as the number of edge-to-edge
trafﬁc passing the link becomes small. Thus, the estimation
errors of one-hop trafﬁc cause the large estimation errors of
trafﬁc amounts on the links where the number of edge-to-
edge trafﬁc is small.
However, routes of one-hop trafﬁc are rarely changed by
trafﬁc engineering. In addition, the links where the number
of edge-to-edge trafﬁc is small are on the edge of the
network. Thus, the estimation errors on the trafﬁc amount
on such links may have only little impact on the trafﬁc
engineering. According to Figs. 4 and 5, most of the trafﬁc
amount on each link passed by many edge-to-edge trafﬁc can
be estimated accurately. That is, our method can estimate the
trafﬁc amount on each link required for trafﬁc engineering
accurately by using only the information from a subset of
nodes.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a method to select the monitor-
ing nodes and estimate the trafﬁc amounts on all links from
the trafﬁc information collected from the selected monitoring
nodes. Through the simulation, we clariﬁed that our method
can estimate the trafﬁc amount on each link required for
trafﬁc engineering accurately by monitoring 30% of all
nodes.
One of our future research topics is to evaluate the
performance of trafﬁc engineering using the trafﬁc amount
on each link estimated by our method.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partly supported by Grant-in-Aid for
Scientiﬁc Research (B) 22300023 and Grant-in-Aid for
Young Scientists (B) 21700074 of the Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology in Japan.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Fortz and M. Thorup, “Internet trafﬁc engineering by opti-
mizing OSPF weights,” in Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM,
vol. 2, pp. 519–528, Mar. 2000.
[2] M. Roughan, M. Thorup, and Y. Zhang, “Trafﬁc engineer-
ing with estimated trafﬁc matrices,” in Proceedings of the
3rd ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Internet Measurement,
pp. 248–258, Nov. 2003.
[3] Y. Ohsita, T. Miyamura, S. Arakawa, S. Ata, E. Oki, K. Sh-
iomoto, and M. Murata, “Gradually reconﬁguring virtual
network topologies based on estimated trafﬁc matrices,”
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 18, pp. 177–
189, Feb. 2010.
[4] Y. Ohsita, T. Miyamura, S. Awakawa, E. Oki, K. Shiomoto,
and M. Murata, “Estimation of current trafﬁc matrices from
long-term trafﬁc variations,” IEICE Transactions on Commu-
nications, vol. E92-B, pp. 171–183, Jan. 2009.
[5] I. Juva, “Robust load balancing,” in Proceedings of GLOBE-
COM, pp. 2708–2713, Nov. 2007.
[6] T. Miyamura, Y. Ohsita, E. Oki, S. Arakawa, Y. Koizumi,
A. Masuda, K. Shiomoto, and M. Murata, “Network virtual-
ization server for adaptive network control,” in Proceedings
of 20th ITC Specialist Seminar on Network Virtualization -
Concept and Performance Aspects, May 2009.
[7] Y.
Vardi,
“Network
tomography:
Estimating
source-
destination trafﬁc intensities from link data.,” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, vol. 91, pp. 365–377, Mar.
1996.
[8] J. Cao, D. Davis, S. Wiel, and B. Yu, “Time-varying network
tomography: Router link data,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, vol. 95, Feb. 2000.
[9] I. Juva, S. Vaton, and J. Virtamo, “Quick trafﬁc matrix
estimation based on link count covariances,” in Proceedings
of IEEE ICC, vol. 2, pp. 603–608, June 2006.
[10] A. Soule, A. Nucci, R. Cruz, E. Leonardi, and N. Taft,
“Estimating dynamic trafﬁc matrices by using viable routing
changes,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 15,
pp. 485–498, June 2007.
[11] Y. Zhang, M. Roughan, N. Dufﬁeld, and A. Greenberg, “Fast
accurate computation of large-scale IP trafﬁc matrices from
link loads,” ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Re-
view, vol. 31, pp. 206–217, June 2003.
[12] Y. Zhang, M. Roughan, W. Willinger, and L. Qiu, “Spatio-
temporal compressive sensing and Internet trafﬁc matrices,”
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, vol. 39,
pp. 267–278, Aug. 2009.
[13] N. Spring, R. Mahajan, D. Wetherall, and T. Anderson,
“Measuring ISP topologies with Rocketfuel,” IEEE/ACM
Transactions on networking, vol. 12, pp. 2–16, Feb. 2004.
[14] A. Nucci, A. Sridharan, and N. Taft, “The problem of synthet-
ically generating IP trafﬁc matrices: Initial recommendations,”
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, vol. 35,
pp. 19–32, July 2005.
23
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

