Extent of the Commitment to Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) in Private
Schools of Beirut (Lebanon)
Hasan Youness, Zeinab Badderedine
School of Education
International University of Beirut
Beirut, Lebanon
e-mails: hasan.youness@b-iu.edu.lb,
11030737@students.liu.edu.lb
Hassan M. Khachfe
Business, Educational, & Management Optimization
Research Institute (BE-MORE)
Lebanese International University
Nabatieh, Lebanon
e-mail: hassan.khachfe@liu.edu.lb
Abstract—Corporate
Social
Responsibility
(CSR)
is
an
approach that focuses on the beneficence of not only the
shareholder, but also the stakeholder. There is also a keen
focus on resolving environmental and social problems that
arise in the corporation. This is a newly emerging concept in
Lebanon, especially in the field of education. This study
investigates one of the CSR policies and the implementation of
its practices in private schools of Beirut. To achieve this
purpose, a sample of three private schools of different
socioeconomic status were chosen to conduct a four-part
questionnaire that covers four major aspects of CSR practices,
which are philanthropic, legal, ethical and environmental. The
teachers and administrative personnel of each school filled the
data asked by the questionnaire. Descriptive statistics were
implemented to check the extent of commitment of CSR
practices exhibited towards teachers, students, parents and the
natural environment. Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) tests
were performed to check the effect of school socioeconomic
status and location on CSR activities. Results showed that CSR
targeting employees, parents and students are taken into
consideration and applied in the chosen schools. In addition,
results showed discrepancies in applying practices of CSR
targeting the society and natural environment among the three
schools based on school location and status. As a conclusion,
the commitment to CSR practices seems to be still in its
emerging phase in most schools in Beirut, and this necessitates
more efforts to ensure a continuous improvement of CSR
implementation in education. More ideas about the topic need
to be extensively researched in Lebanon as well to ameliorate
CSR in Lebanese educational policies and practices.
Keywords-CSR; education; Lebanon.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Being socially responsible adds value to organizations.
With social responsibility comes a level of self-monitoring
which guarantees an organization’s sustainable development
and maintains its public image, including its internal and
external relations [1]. Lebanon’s past performance regarding
the implementation of CSR was mixed, with the country still
facing development challenges, including poverty reduction
and environmental sustainability. According to the United
Nation’s Voluntary Review in 2018, it is stated that “the
situation was highly exacerbated by the impact and spill-
overs of the Syria crisis. While Lebanon has shown
exceptional solidarity by temporarily hosting 1.5 million
displaced from Syria, this has come at a high cost,
compounding pre-existing development
challenges, and
stretching Lebanon beyond its limits.” [2].
However, promising
progress
still
emerges as
the
Voluntary National Report on CSR in Lebanon states that
out of 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), it is
covering 7-8 of these goals, which is a promising number.
Moreover,
for
each
SDG,
there
are
indicators
[2].
Supporting this notion is the report of the Global Compact
Network of Lebanon (GCNL) that shows that 167 companies
in Lebanon have currently adopted one of the principles, and
this is according to the United Nations Global Compact
Organization’s recent report in 2018. Some of these
companies comprise the academic sector. Example of a
school that adopts the principles of CSR is the International
School
of
Choueifet,
and
such
example
extends
to
universities such as the American University of Beirut
(AUB), the Lebanese American University (LAU), the
Beirut Arab University (BAU), the Lebanese International
University (LIU), and Notre Dame University (NDU) [2].
This
serves
to
show
that
the
educational
sector
is
implementing CSR principles in Lebanon and they are taking
accreditation (e.g., the New England Association of Schools
and
Colleges
[NEASC]),
which
stems
from
previous
awareness. Hence, the role of CSR in Lebanon is important
and emerging in the educational sector. This is because the
accreditation of these institutions seek to attain is partly
linked to whether or not they comply with CSR policies and
practices. The national economic and social council forces
them to adopt these policies and practices as a group;
however, the scope and degree of implementation differs
according to considerations of the region and country.
This paper aims to underscore the origins of CSR and the
effect of its implementation in educational institutions,
namely Lebanese schools. It also aims to analyze and
evaluate the extent of commitment of CSR practices in a
representative sample of private schools in the Beirut area.
More importantly, the main objective of this study is to show
the relationship between CSR and the ability of private
schools to achieve high organizational performance.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
gives a background of the topic. Section 3 describes the
methodology used in the study. Section 4 addresses the key
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-680-4
EMERGING 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

findings. Section V discusses the results. We conclude the
paper in Section 6.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
A.
Definition
CSR is widespread in the business world. Corporations
produce an annual report concerning their activities, whether
or not these activities are considered
to
be socially
responsible [3]. The European Commission states that this
concept is active when the enterprises take into consideration
the social and environmental issues in their business, in
addition to staying in contact with their stakeholders [4].
Caroll
defines
it
as,
“a
multidimensional
construct,
encompassing
a
company’s
efforts
to
fulfill
multiple
responsibilities
–
economic,
legal,
philanthropic
[and]
ethical” [5].
B.
CSR Policies vs. Practices
CSR policies are the norms a certain organization
chooses
to
follow
that
can
be
taken
from
different
accrediting institutions or guidelines approaches, such as
NEASC, and the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools
of Business (AACSB). Practices, however, are how we work
on one of these policies and choose some of their indicated
components to implement them. For example, by taking one
of the Sustainable Development Goals and adhering to its
indicators, that is when we can say that an organization or an
educational entity is practicing CSR [6].
C.
Previous Studies
To study CSR implementation effectively, one has to
demonstrate case studies of countries where CSR is being
implemented. One of the important Lebanese studies done on
policy analysis of CSR in Lebanese private university asked
on the balanced school card tool, which is based on four
initial indicators. The four indicators that were used and
analyzed were the following: customer perspective, financial
perspective, learning, growth, and internal business process
perspective. This study was also compiled at the very end
into a book score aimed at conveying the results to other
universities so overall recommendations aimed at enhancing
the level of Universities to reach the international levels are
scribed. This aim helped define the process of this study and
its aim as well [7].
D.
CSR and the Scoreboard
David Norton and Robert Kaplan introduced the concept
of the scoreboard in 1992. In their Harvard Business Review
article, they stated that if a company needed to improve its
intangible assets, i.e. nonphysical or perceived assets, they
would need to use a tool in order to measure those assets.
This is through the Balanced Scorecard approach. “The value
from intangible assets is indirect” [8]. With the Balanced
Scoreboard approach, a corporation should invest to prepare
its employees for developments in service quality, which
would satisfy customers, eventually gain for the corporation
its customers’ loyalty, and thus, produce more revenues and
margins [8].
In order for an organization to measure its performance
from several aspects, it follows the strategic performance
scorecard
system
where
it
uses
“strategic
planning,
management, and the measurement system” [9]. People
working at the corporation apply this strategy from within,
and then communicate it to interested stakeholders.
To accomplish sustainability, an organization must
follow the following strategy [9]:
1.
From a financial viewpoint, it means for the
organization to remain in business and provide the
right return for the investors.
2.
From a customer and stakeholder viewpoint, it
means for the organization to provide value and
satisfaction for sustainability- conscious consumers.
3.
From a process viewpoint, it means handling
materials, energy, and waste following an eco-
efficient method.
4.
From an organizational capacity viewpoint, it
means
working
for
a
culture
that
honors
sustainability, which is shown in the daily choices
employees make.
A
good
CSR
approach
falls
in
the
category
of
organization capacity performance. As an objective, it should
improve the culture and information technology. It should
measure the employee culture score and IT maturity score.
As an initiative, it should grow a life cycle assessment
system and start sustainability training. To build this
scorecard system effectively, a nine-step framework is
adopted and applied in the following order: assessment,
strategy, objectives, strategy map, measures and targets,
strategic initiatives, automation, cascading, and
finally
evaluation.
In order to apply the principles of Balanced Scorecard, a
company should go on a journey where there are motivations
along the road and a few bumps as well. However, this
approach results with “self-inquiry” and “in-depth analysis”
and self-criticism which is “at the heart of all successful
strategic planning and performance management systems”
[9]. This is what private schools should adopt in order to
successfully follow the CSR approach and work for the
benefit of the institution itself along with that of the learners.
III.
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
A.
Data Collection Technique
We have adopted the quantitative approach. The aim is
to examine the validity of the proposed research hypotheses
on a large sample of subjects. The quantitative approach
requires collecting data. The data collection tool for the
present research is the questionnaire. Indeed, a questionnaire
was elaborated especially for the needs of this research and
inspired from various previous studies [10]-[14], which
tackled similar topics. Consulting previous studies for the
preparation of the questionnaire was helpful in setting up the
components of the selected variables. In practice, the
questionnaire comprises nine main variables of different
types, as indicated in Table 1.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-680-4
EMERGING 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

TABLE I. THE MAIN VARIABLES OF THE STUDY
Variable Name and Type
Variable name
Variable type
Age
Control variable
Gender
Control variable
Educational level
Control variable
Job position
Control variable
Work experience
Control variable
Tenure with current employer
Control variable
Annual income level
Control variable
CSR activities
Dependent variable for H1
Independent variable for H2
Employee engagement
Dependent variable for H2
B.
Data Analysis
The Balanced Scorecard approach was adopted, which is
a method utilized in a similar study [7]. The Balanced
Scorecard approach balances internal and external factors
that include profit and nonprofit aspects. The research
questions of the study were developed and to answer them, a
questionnaire was designed. Based on that, a clear set of
questions for the questionnaire were derived underneath the
categories of the balanced approach; hence, an assessment of
CSR in these three sample schools was analyzed. In order to
ensure a scalable assessment across all three schools, the four
prominent aspects were taken into consideration, which are:
philanthropic legal, ethical and environmental. Descriptive
statistics
were
implemented
to
check
the
extent
of
commitment of CSR practices the sample schools exhibited
towards
teachers,
students,
parents
and
the
natural
environment. ANOVA tests were performed to check the
effect of school socioeconomic status and location on CSR
activities.
IV.
RESULTS
The dimension of CSR targeting employees revealed that
70% of the employees surveyed answered that their school
encouraged them to participate in volunteer activities in a
proper and correct way, 73% answered that in their school,
the administrative decisions regarding the staff were fair and
equitable, 70% answered that their school administration was
primarily concerned with the needs of its employees, 65%
said that their school applied flexible policies to provide a
balance between work and personal life of the employees,
70% indicated that their school supported staff who desire
professional development, and 93% answered that their
school policies encouraged the employees to develop their
skills and professions in a proper and correct way.
The dimension of CSR targeting students and their
parents showed that 88% of the surveyed staff said that their
school protects the rights of their students and their parents
according to the law, 93% said that the school provided the
students and their parents with accurate and complete
information about its programs, and 96% said that the
satisfaction of students and their parents was of great
importance for the school in a proper and correct way.
On the dimension of CSR targeting society and natural
environment, 81% of the employees surveyed said that their
school contributed to the projects and campaigns that
promote the well-being of the society, 67% answered that the
school employed special programs to reduce their negative
impact, 72% said that their school aimed to protect and
improve the quality of the general natural environment, 78%
said that the school was making investments to create a
better life for future generations, while 81% answered that
their school aimed to achieve sustainable development that
took into account future generations, in a proper and correct
way.
Finally, the results on the dimension of CSR targeting
employee engagement revealed that 92% of the employees
surveyed knew what was expected from them, 89% had the
required equipment and materials to do their job properly,
77% said that at work there was a chance to do more and
better on daily bases, 43% received appreciation and praise
for doing a good job during the last 7 days, 73% said that the
supervisor or another person at work took care of them, 77%
said that someone at work encouraged their development,
74% said that their opinions were taken into consideration at
work, 83% said that the mission of their organization made
them feel that their job was important, 83% said that their
colleagues were committed in achieving quality work, 77%
had a very close friend at work, 52% said that someone at
work talked to them about the progress they had achieved
during the last 6 months, and 68% had opportunities to learn
and develop during the last year in a proper and correct way.
V.
DISCUSSION
This study is engaging with an educational institute and
using a single source or a more limited version of sources
than the ones expected making it single goal focused and
related to this study.
As noticed in the results above of CSR targeting
employees, most of the answers were above neutral, which
indicates that the CSR targeting employees are being taken
into consideration in the chosen schools in different levels.
On the other hand, it is noticed that some of these CSR are
absent in some cases. This will help indicate the difference
in dealing with CSR seriously in the targeted schools.
The absence of negative results of CSR targeting
students and their parents is obvious in the results above.
This is a clear indicator that despite the category or the area
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-680-4
EMERGING 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

of the school, the CSR targeting the students and their
parents is being taken into consideration and is being
applied.
In terms of schools categories and areas, there were
substantial findings that gave rise to essential concepts. The
results indicate that the CSR targeting society and natural
environment are not applied equally at the three schools.
After connecting these results to the school’s categories and
area, we will be able to indicate if the negative results are
from a specific school while the positive ones are distributed
on the other schools. If so, the negative-results school
condition can be considered as an indicator to navigate or
accept the null hypothesis.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
The general outcome of our statistics proves that,
despite the difference in the level of application of CSR at
Beirut schools, it is still applied throughout schools in
Beirut area.
The outcomes of the first section regarding CSR
targeting employees show that CSR increases in high-
paying schools, but it is only slightly affected by the
geographic area. This indicates that the school category
plays a role in CSR targeting employees; the higher the
category (highly paid school), the more CSR targeting
employees exist.
The outcome of the second section regarding CSR
targeting students and their parents does not show a big
difference between low, medium, and high-paying schools
and it shows no difference at all between Beirut Areas 1 and
2, which indicates that neither the school category nor the
school area plays a role affecting CSR targeting students
and their parents.
The outcomes of the third section regarding CSR
targeting society and natural environment reflect a big
difference between high-paying schools and low and
medium paying schools, where it is clear that the high-
paying schools are much more aware of applying these
CSRs than the low and medium categories. We can also
notice that the area plays a role in CSR targeting society and
natural environment, since these CSRs also rise in Beirut
Area 2 while weak in Beirut Area 1.
Thus, the total CSR activities indicate that schools in
Beirut are committed to CSR practices at different levels.
These levels increase in high-paying schools while they
decrease in low and medium paying schools. In addition,
CSR initiatives rise significantly in high-paying schools, and
this is applicable on different target audiences: employees,
students and their parents, society and the environment. This
proves that adhering to CSR practices is directly related to a
school’s performance.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Kim and E. van Dam, “The added value of corporate social
responsibility,” NIDO, 2003.
[2]
“Voluntary National Review”, United Nations’ Sustainable
Development Platform, 2018.
[3]
D. Crowther and G. Aras, “Corporate Social Responsibility:
Principles, Stakeholders & Sustainability,” Ventus Publishing,
2010.
[4]
Commission
of the European Communities,
“Corporate
Social Responsibility: A Business Contribution to Sustainable
Development,” Brussels, 2002.
[5]
A. B. Carroll, “Carroll’s Pyramid of CSR: Taking another
look,”
International
Journal
of
Corporate
Social
Responsibility,” 2016.
[6]
H. Youness, “#TrendsOfBusiness,” Beirut: Dar Al-Moualef,
2016.
[7]
H. Youness, “Social Responsibility Of The Lebanese Private
Universities,” 2009.
[8]
R. S. Kaplan, “Conceptual Foundations of the Balanced
Scorecard,”
SSRN
Electronic
Journal,
doi:10.2139/ssrn.1562586, 2010.
[9]
Special Report 34, “Balanced Scoreboard. A Finance &
Management Special Report,” 2011.
[10] A. Stancu, G. F. Grigore, and M. I. Rosca, “The impact of
corporate social responsibility on employees,” International
Conference on Information and Finance, vol. 21, pp. 11-16,
2011.
[11] Ž. Prutina, and D. Šehić, “Employees’ Perceptions of 
Corporate
Social
Responsibility:
A
Case
of
Award
Recipient,” Ekon. Misao I Praksa DBK, vol. 1, pp. 239-260,
2016.
[12] M. Ismail, R. F. A. Johar, R. M. Rasdi, and S. N. Alias,
“School as Stakeholder of Corporate Social Responsibility
Program: Teacher’s Perspective on Outcome in School
Development,” The Asia-Pacific Education Researcher, 23(2),
321-331, 2014.
[13] D. Najjar, “Effectiveness of management in private schools in
Lebanon,” PhD thesis, University of Birmingham, 2008.
[14] J. Harter, F. Schmidt, E. Killham, and J. Asplund, “Q12 Meta-
Analysis,”
GALLUP
Consulting,
2006.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-680-4
EMERGING 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

