 
  
Abstract— This paper presents a novel architecture for high 
performance, scalable video surveillance systems. The goal of this 
architecture concept is the creation of an advanced, virtually 
indestructible video surveillance system with the highest possible 
performance level, even under worst-case circumstances. The 
security management process used to build up such a system is 
introduced and analyzed, with the focus on how to achieve the 
highest possible security performance level. The presented system 
was subject to several test methods and phase levels to evaluate 
system performance. From the end user’s point of view, all the 
achieved results verified the high performance and nearly 
indestructible characteristics of the system.  
 
Keywords— Video Surveillance; Performance; Availability; 
Reliability; Security Management Process; Physical Security; 
System Architecture; Quality of Service. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
During the last few years, the world was confronted with 
several security tragedies, bank robberies and art crimes. 
Accordingly, the advance in research and development of 
security systems, especially video surveillance systems, has 
reached a remarkable progress worldwide. However, this 
progress has in turn urged organized crime and underground 
organizations 
to 
develop 
corresponding 
advanced 
technologies. Recently masked robbers brandishing handguns 
succeeded to steal four 19th century masterpieces by van 
Gogh & Monet from a Zurich museum in broad daylight [1]. 
This incident demonstrates the lack of security management 
processes for many systems. 
 
II. AVAILABLE STATE-OF-THE-ART VIDEO SURVEILLANCE 
SYSTEMS 
Video surveillance (hereafter VS) products currently 
available on the market can be segmented into four categories: 
 
 Household surveillance products 
 Commercial small scale products 
 Commercial large scale systems 
 High Performance Surveillance Systems/Solutions (HPSS) 
 
The HPSS category is providing different levels of 
availability, reliability, integrity and performance measures in 
a scalable configuration. 
 
This paper presents a new architecture of video surveillance 
 
 
systems, with extremely high level of robustness and 
performance; 
subsequently 
the 
configuration 
and 
technological aspects are presented. Accordingly a new 
category is presented: “Advanced Nearly Indestructible Video 
Surveillance System: NIVSS” 
III. NIVSS SECURITY MANAGEMENT PROCESS 
In order to design and develop a large-scale VS system, 
which should measure up to the NIVSS standard, security has 
to be part of the planning stage. ISO 27001 [2] provides a 
general blueprint for such a security management process. 
This section gives a first idea of how this process needs to be 
customized to be specifically valid for NIVSS systems. The 
topics to fill this blueprint with can be taken from ISO 17799 
[3], which is considered the best practice collection of 
activities for security management. Fig.1 shows the selected 
topics from ISO 17799, which will be relevant for achieving 
an NIVSS standard in the future. 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Security Management Process Components,  relevant for the NIVSS 
 
According to a recent study [4] the building blocks of the 
VS security management process are the following: 
 
 Access Control takes care of all situations, where assets 
need to be accessed and can possibly be manipulated 
(modified or deleted). Here identification methods and 
technologies for authentication and authorization have to be 
evaluated for aptness; policies for the implementation have to 
be developed. The scope ranges from user management 
aspects for the users accessing the database to the privileges 
under which an application process can access the operating 
Performance Enhancement: 
An Advanced Nearly Indestructible Video Surveillance System 
Stephan Sutor 
KiwiSecurity Software GmbH 
1050 Vienna, Austria 
50
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

 
system’s kernel processes.  
 
Modern advanced security models deal with the formalized 
description of how information flows within a system in a 
secure way. This includes the states in which a secure system 
should be. In this respect the selected security model will also 
have a distinct influence on access control [5]. 
 
Physical security in general is concerned with any kind of 
physical influence on the system. For the proposed 
architecture this will be a major concern, as it will be 
physically distributed and the locations of the cameras mainly 
a given fact. So the planning of measures against natural 
disasters as well as intentional assault will be a challenge. 
Access control of the data center on a physical level, of the 
server farms hosting the applications and of the transmission 
network is also a topic warranting utmost attention. 
 
Network security is concerned with the design of secure 
data transmission systems. This encompasses the development 
of a network architecture, which allows the separation of 
different types of networks (data, operations, security 
management, etc.), that provide secure areas (for the database) 
and demilitarized zones for data access of the various 
applications. It also deals with the lock down of the various 
network elements so that they do not provide any more 
functionality than absolutely necessary and only to those users 
(human or processes) who are allowed to access this 
functionality [6]. 
 
Cryptography deals with privacy aspects of transported or 
stored information. This is especially important as not only 
security critical data, but also personal data is sent via 
networks (possibly passing insecure channels). On the one 
hand the data must not be intercepted, on the other hand data 
must not be tampered with. Methods of how to achieve this 
and which cryptographic algorithms to choose are also a major 
concern of the VS security management process (e.g., if video 
surveillance is used across geographically distributed 
systems). 
 
Application Security is dealing with the questions 
pertaining to the secure development installation and 
maintenance of application SW. Already in the planning phase 
detailed policies need to be worked out, which describe the 
way the applications have to be implemented. 
Operation Security is concerned with all details, which 
concern the actual setup, execution and decommissioning of 
the system. The management process here needs to ensure that 
all processes are well described, operational security measures 
broken down to procedures, and operational descriptions for 
all parts of the system are present. 
 
Business continuity is a topic, which is concerned with the 
high availability of the system. In the case of a surveillance 
system this is a number of policies for the implementation of 
software (e.g., backup & restore system), of redundant 
hardware (e.g., a complete offsite backup facility) and 
procedures to follow (e.g., definition of first response team 
and its actions) in case of disruptive events. Evidently 
business continuity will also play an important role in network 
security and application security, where secure and continuous 
operations of networks and applications are being planned. 
IV. THREATS AGAINST THE NIVSS SYSTEM  
In order to define the NIVSS and its protection 
mechanisms, all types of threats against VS systems have to be 
investigated. These threats are divided into two main 
categories: The first category is the threat of content 
manipulation, i.e., forging or removing of data, or adding 
useless or misleading data. The second category is based on 
system disruption, which ranges from simple attacks like 
destruction of cameras and destroying cables to more 
sophisticated ones like network or software based attacks.  
These two types of threats are discussed for each main 
building block of the NIVSS security management process as 
follows: 
 
A. Content manipulation 
Content manipulation is defined as tampering and 
manipulation of data in the system, ranging from cameras to 
the storage of the video streams. In this section the threat of 
content manipulation is discussed for each aspect of the 
security management process. 
 
• As tampering with data is categorized as part of 
network security, content manipulation on a physical 
level is not possible.  
 
• Social engineering, using interactions to obtain 
confidential information, is considered as the greatest 
operational security threat for a VS system. 
 
• Network Security: An attack on data transferred 
between one of the cameras and the final stage of 
processing, including attacks on analog signals and 
digital TCP/IP streams. When the attacker gets in a 
position to observe and intercept data streaming, this 
is called man-in-the-middle attack. This would allow 
the forging of video data by playing pre-recorded 
video streams or by editing the actual video delivered 
by the camera. 
 
• Application Security: The goal of application security 
is to gain control over the VS system processing the 
pre-processed information or the machine storing the 
data via standard attacks like Trojans, worms, buffer 
overflows or exploiting backdoors, which causes a 
denial of service [7]. 
 
B. System disruption 
The four categories of threats in this case are: 
 
51
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

 
• Physical Security: An attack against any hardware 
component of the VC system e.g., camera, processing 
unit, network element or power supply. This type is 
considered to be the most severe attack on the VC. 
 
• Operational 
Security: 
During 
updates 
wrong 
configuration data could be introduced into the 
system and could cause disruption. 
 
• Network Security: System disruption attacks on 
network security are most likely in the periphery and 
user interface blocks of the NIVSS. 
 
• Application Security: In this attack hackers try to get 
control over machines to manipulate content in order 
to achieve a system disruption. Furthermore, the 
traditional method of flooding the network can be 
used to achieve DoS. 
 
• The architecture of the current NIVSS system was 
designed to withstand any of the above-mentioned 
attacks. 
V. NIVSS: SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE  
To achieve maximum availability, optimal reliability and 
best performance, the NIVSS was designed according to the 
following boundary conditions [8]: 
 
• Redundant components (e.g., hardware): There must not 
be any part of the network without another component 
that can take over its function automatically. That 
means that the whole system has no single point of 
failure. 
 
• Redundant networks (including wired and wireless 
networks as well as network components such as 
switches and routers): Each part of the system has to be 
reached through an alternative route. Backup networks 
have to be in place to take over networks which are 
down or overloaded. 
 
• Tampering protection (software mechanisms to prevent 
tampering of cameras, network components and server 
hardware) 
 
• Scalability (both in terms of video analytics as well as 
network): 
The system has to be scalable up to 100.000 cameras 
and more, interconnecting multiple video surveillance 
sites. 
 
The system is divided into four hierarchical zones: 
 
• Periphery 
• Data Processing Center 
• Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) and 
• User Interfaces 
 
Each of the four zones is subject to high security conditions 
in addition to the overall security concept of the system. 
 
Periphery 
As shown in Fig. 2, the periphery zone includes: 
 
• Smart cameras: 
These cameras are analyzing the video image on 
their internal hardware and send results of this 
analysis to the data processing center. They track 
persons and vehicles, classify those and perform 
other tasks which are computationally intensive and 
which need to be done on the video images. This 
way the system stays scalable without sacrificing 
analysis quality. In addition to video analysis the 
smart cameras also encrypt and sign video streams to 
prevent unauthorized video streams from being 
injected. 
 
• Cameras with image processing units: 
These are cameras (IP or analog), which are 
connected to an image-processing unit, which fulfills 
the same tasks as smart camera. With these units, 
existing cameras can be used in the system. 
 
• Miscellaneous sensors: 
Various sensors (such as audio) help to identify 
events and tampering of cameras. Using multiple 
kinds of sensors, in addition to video, increases the 
security of the system considerably. If an intruder 
manages to tamper with a camera, injecting a video 
feed, simultaneous injection of audio material is 
more unlikely. Thus, if the system detects that sound 
does not correspond to video anymore, a tampering 
alarm can be triggered. 
 
• Wired and wireless networks: 
Video and audio sensors are connected to the  
network with CAT 6 cables and wireless LAN, thus 
creating a redundant network. If one fails, the other 
one is still delivering data. 
 
The NIVVS architecture is illustrated in Figure 2. 
52
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

 
Data processing center 
Video information, including meta-information from image 
processing, is entering the "core zone" of the security system, 
the server network, through redundant firewalls with state full 
advanced package inspection and special intrusion detection 
systems. Just encrypted and correctly signed packages are 
allowed to pass. Both processing and the storage on the 
respective server hardware happen in parallel in consistency-
checked self-healing clusters. 
 
Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) 
The collected and processed information is provided to the 
security guards through application servers. These servers are 
positioned in an internal Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) just 
beside each other because there is no need for them to be 
clustered. To protect the inner and core server nodes, solely 
reading rights on selected data are granted for these 
application servers. The network outside the DMZ is a virtual 
network with no machines connected directly to it; even 
though it should be physically built of multiple firewalls for 
security and reliability reasons. The only function of this 
network is to be the endpoint of the secured tunnel 
connections from the client applications and application 
networks. 
User Interface 
Relevant information from the NIVSS is presented to the 
user on various interfaces, including terminals, PCs and 
mobile devices (such as PDAs), which are used by security 
guards on patrol to get live alarms instantaneously to react to 
security breaches. In addition to the interfaces for the end user, 
operation and maintenance personnel have the right to define 
suspicion rules and conditions to be detected by the system. 
 
Redundancy in the system 
At the camera level power and the network connections 
have to be redundant. To guarantee this with analog cameras is 
anything but trivial. To reach this in digital systems based on 
computer network protocols is more simple. For power 
redundancy, power over Ethernet (PoE) can be used aside 
local power and buffer batteries. Parallel networks can be 
based on different media from copper wires over different 
optical to radio communication. Especially for a camera the 
cooperation of radio networks and wired connections, that can 
be attacked only in completely different ways, is essential. 
Wireless communication is another advantage of digital 
systems. There, protection against tapping is a must on any 
 
Figure 2: System architecture of the NIVSS system 
 
53
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

 
network leaving a single secure room: Here, multi-tier 
encryption (application and network level) and signing 
provide protection must be implemented. The same applies to 
any communication channel [9-10] connecting nodes that are 
not servers in the same secure server room and physical 
redundant networks within this room. 
 
Firewalls 
The use of firewalls and separate networks for such a 
system is essential. However, firewalls should not be the only 
protection in the communication for clients. Furthermore, a 
security system must not only ever be connected to highly 
insecure networks like the internet or ‘normal’ corporate 
networks, but also an application server in an internal DMZ is 
required. This server has the most limited reading rights and 
connection rights in the primary server network. The 
processing servers and the DBMS servers have to be clustered 
as a consistency checked self-healing system. A well 
designed, maintained backup system is necessary, as well as 
an indestructible power supply including UPS, emergency 
power, over voltage and short circuit protection. 
VI. VANDALISM, SABOTAGE AND NATURAL CATASTROPHIC 
SCENARIOS 
A system level failure is defined as the status of having a 
single non observed point or no alarm upon detecting a 
suspected object/person/behavior. Following scenarios of 
attack, destruction or vandalism against the system are 
discussed taking into account the system structure. 
 
 
Figure 3: Attacks on a Single Site NIVSS 
 
The periphery zone involves all the equipment outside the 
secured processing center. This includes cameras, image 
processing units attached directly to cameras and all 
networking connections and devices. Fig. 3 shows the 
infrastructure of a single site surveillance system, where all 
cameras and equipments are in the same VS centre, e.g., the 
main railway station, with the VS operation center directly 
connected to the central security authority or police station. 
Similarly, Fig. 4 illustrates attack attempts on a multiple site 
VS system, e.g., a large-scale airport, with several terminals 
and scattered infrastructure. Each of them is equipped with a 
local VS system, which is interconnected to the central VS 
operation & control room. 
 
Four attack points or points of failure were identified. In 
attack-point 1 one of the cameras is destroyed or damaged. 
The system automatically detects such an event and causes an 
alert to be triggered and the task of the damaged camera is 
immediately covered either by the redundant camera or by one 
in the vicinity. In attack-point 2 the network connection is 
interrupted: The camera now uses full wireless transmission, 
and an alert describing the network failure is being sent. 
 
In attack-point 3, the wireless network is jammed. However, 
the system can still rely on the cable connections and an alarm 
will be set off. If the attacker starts with the wired network, 
the system will switch into wireless mode and trigger an alarm 
immediately; hence the attacker will be stopped. 
 
Attack-point 4 resembles an attack on one of the data 
processing servers or a storage server. Both these events will 
not affect the entire system, because each component is 
redundant, and the system will automatically distribute the 
load of the failed unit to the others. Measures of the required 
redundancy will be discussed in future work. 
 
Even in case of disaster or natural catastrophes, where the 
whole surveillance site is under attack, an alert would be 
reported immediately to the authorities. 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Attacks on a Multiple Site NIVSS Infrastructure. 
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
This paper presented a new security management process used 
to build a nearly indestructible, high-performance video 
surveillance system. Subsequently, a novel architecture for 
such a system was presented and analyzed. Accordingly, this 
video surveillance system was tested, validated and verified 
while running in real time at the highest possible performance 
level, even under worst-case circumstances, identifying 
different types of threats and corresponding counter-measures.  
54
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

 
A patent application was filed for the NIVSS system 
architecture. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Discussions with Prof. O. Martikainen, Department of 
Information Processing Science at the University of Oulu, 
Finland, are highly acknowledged. 
This work was further supported by the Austrian Research 
Promotion Agency “Österreichische Forschungsförderungs-
gesellschaft“ www.ffg.at and the Academic Business 
Incubator INiTS, www.inits.at. This work will be partially 
included in a Ph.D. thesis at the University of Oulu, Finland. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
L. Moran, www.mainstreet.com, “Challenges, Dealing with being a 
Crime Victim, 12.02.2008 
[2] 
“ISO/IEC FDIS 27001 “Information technology — Security techniques 
 Information security management systems — Requirements” Final 
Draft 200 
[3] 
ISO/IEC 17799:2005, Information technology — Security techniques — 
Code of practice for information security management. 
[4] 
K. Kraus, Security Management Process in Distributed, Large Scale 
High Performance Systems”, Proceedings of the World Congress on 
Power and Energy Engineering, WCPEE’10, Alexandria, Egypt, 
October 3-7, 2010 
[5] 
B. Howard, O. J. Paridaens and B. J. Gamm. “Information security: 
threats and protection mechanisms”, Alcatel Telecommunications 
Review, pp. 117-121, 2001 
[6] 
J. Gonzalez, V. Paxson, and N. Weaver, Shunting, “A Hardware/ 
Software Architecture for Flexible, High-Performance Network 
Intrusion Prevention”, Proceedings of ACM CCS, October 2007 
[7] 
J. Bellardo and S. Savage. “802.11 Denial-of-Service Attacks: Real 
Vulnerabilities and Practical Solutions”, Proceedings of the 12th 
conference on USENIX Security Symposium, pp 2-2, 2003 
[8] 
F. Matusek, S. Sutor, F. Kruse, K. Kraus and R. Reda, “Large-Scale 
Video Surveillance Systems: New Performance Parameters and 
Metrics”, The Third International Conference on Internet Monitoring 
and Protection, Bucharest June 29 - July 5, 2008 
[9] 
R. Reda and N. Jordan,  “Signpots for the Future of Mobile 
Communication” , e&I, elektronik und informationstechnik, heft 
9.2006,published by Springer Wien New York, ISSN: 0932-383X 
EIEIEE 123(9) 361-408, a1-a44(2006) 
[10] R. Reda and H. Volopich, Siemens AG Austria, (2003), e-Business 
Evolution, Market Trends, and Business Opportunities: Keynotes 
presented at the International Conference on e-Commerce, Hong Kong 
2002 
 
55
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

