   
Probabilities of Detection and False Alarm in 
MTM- Based Spectrum Sensing for Cognitive 
Radio Systems 
Owayed A. Alghamdi, Mosa A. Abu-Rgheff and Mohammed Z. Ahmed 
Mobile Communications Research Group 
University of Plymouth 
Plymouth PL4 8AA, UK 
{owayed.alghamdi, mosa, m.ahmed}@plymouth.ac.uk 
 
Abstract— The paper presents closed-form expressions for 
the detection, and false alarm probabilities for spectrum 
sensing detection based on the Multitaper Spectrum 
Estimation 
Method 
(MTM) 
using 
Neyman-Pearson 
criterion. The MTM spectrum sensing is a powerful 
technique in Cognitive Radio (CR) systems. It tolerates 
problems related to bad biasing, and large variance of 
estimates, that are the main drawbacks in the periodogram 
(i.e., energy detector). The performance of the MTM 
spectrum sensing system  is controlled by parameters, such 
as the chosen half time bandwidth product, Discrete 
Prolate Slepian Sequence (DPSS) (i.e., tapers), DPSS’ 
eigenvalues, and the number of tapers used. These 
parameters determine the theoretical probabilities of 
detection and false alarm, which are used to evaluate the 
system performance. The paper shows a good match 
between the theoretical and numerical simulation results. 
 
Keywords— cognitive radio; spectrum sensing; multitier spectrum 
estimation.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Cognitive radio is an innovative new technology in 
wireless communications, which was firstly proposed by 
Mitola in 1999 [1]. It allows secondary users (CRs), to 
opportunistically use the vacant spectrum subbands that are 
licensed already to primary users (PRs), at a specific time and 
geographical location. By full exploitation of the vacant 
spectrum subbands while keeping the PR users protected for 
harmful interference, CR technology provides   efficient new 
spectral opportunities for next generations of wireless 
applications. It represents a new paradigm of spectrum 
allocation 
that 
helps 
reduce 
spectrum 
scarcity, 
and 
underutilization. Additionally, it can provide communications 
anywhere at any time  [2].   
A CR system should be capable of scanning through a 
given spectrum to find vacant bands to operate. The accurate 
CR system decision about the availability of vacant bands is 
totally dependent on the quality of the sensing techniques 
used. Clearly, CR technology can only be useful if an accurate 
sensing scheme is used. 
 Although the matched filtering and the cyclostationary 
feature detector have high performance as spectrum sensing 
techniques in CR, such techniques require prior information 
about the PR signaling [3-5].  
On the other hand, the energy detector does not require 
prior information about the PR signaling and has low 
complexity. Such advantages come at the expense of moderate 
performance due to the use of single rectangular windows’ 
tapering  [6].  
Multi taper spectrum estimation (MTM) [7], uses 
orthonormal tapers; known as the Discrete Prolate Slepian 
Sequence (DPSS) [8]. It produces a single spectrum estimate 
with minimum spectral leakage and good variance. MTM is an 
approximation of the optimal spectrum estimate; the 
Maximum-likelihood method but at reduced computation [9], 
[10]. Haykin, on the other hand, suggested the use of MTM as 
an efficient method for spectrum sensing in CR [2]. 
Using 
Neyman-Pearson 
criterion 
[11], 
theoretical 
derivations of probabilities of false alarm, and detection for 
the MTM spectrum sensing optimal detector are necessary to 
evaluate its performance. Furthermore, MTM detection system 
includes parameters, such as time bandwidth product, the 
DPSS, and their associated eigenvalues that control the quality 
of the spectrum estimate. Consequentially, a set of different 
parameters and thresholds can be chosen that maximizes the 
performance of the detection. 
 Although MTM was first studied by Thomson in 1982, 
statistics and probabilistic theoretical work are still an open 
research issue. In [12], the authors derived the probabilities of 
detection and false alarm formulae based on the spectrum 
estimate characteristic function (CHF) by formulating the 
MTM spectrum detector as a quadratic function of Gaussian 
vector.  
In this paper, we present closed-form formulae for the 
probabilities of detection and false alarm for the MTM-based 
spectrum detector. The probability density function (PDF) of  
114
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

 
the 
MTM 
spectrum 
estimate 
(decision 
statistic) 
is 
approximated to Gaussian. The mean and the variance of the 
PDF have been derived for both hypotheses, and used in the 
calculation of the probabilities.   
 
Our theoretical work presented in this paper, includes two 
cases: firstly, the PR signal is known as a modulated signal, 
and secondly, the PR signal is unknown and assumed as 
Gaussian random variable.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
defines the model for the system under consideration and 
reviews MTM technique Section III presents the theoretical 
work of the MTM detector. Section IV presents the results and 
Section V concludes the paper. 
II. 
SYSTEM MODEL 
In our system model, we consider OFDM signaling 
scheme for the PR user. The PR transmitter with N subcarriers 
(N-IFFT/FFT) transmits OFDM-QPSK signal with energy    
over each subcarrier. The CR transceiver is supported by (N-
IFFT/FFT) processor as well so as to perform both tasks of 
communications, and sensing. Additionally, MTM spectrum 
detector is added to the CR receiver for spectrum sensing. 
The received PR signal, at CR receiver, is sampled to 
generate a finite discrete time samples series       
          , where t is time index. The discrete time 
samples are ‘dot multiplied’ with different tapers             
(tapers are Discrete Prolate Slepian Sequences). The 
associated eigenvalues of the    taper is         . The 
product is applied to a Fourier Transform to compute the 
energy concentrated in the bandwidth       centered at 
frequency . The half time bandwidth product is   , and the 
total number of generated tapers is    . For    orthonormal 
tapers used in the MTM, there will be    different 
eigenspectrums produced and defined as [7]:  
                             
   
   
                 
where,      
 
  
 
      
   
  are the normalized frequency 
bins. The spectrum estimate given by Thomson theoretical 
work is defined as [7]:  
                    
 
                   
   
 
          
   
                      
On the other hand, the energy detector, when the samples 
are taken at uniform time spacing, gives the power spectrum 
density estimation as [6]: 
           
             
   
   
 
 
                             
 
In order to evaluate the performance of the MTM spectrum 
detector, we considered the probability of detection       , the 
probability of false alarm       , and the probability of miss 
detection          at each frequency bin     based on the 
Neyman-Pearson (NP) criterion.         is the probability that 
CR detector decides correctly the presence of the PR’s signal, 
         is the probability that CR detector decides the PR’s 
signal is present when it is absent, and         is the 
probability that CR fails to detect the PR’s signal when it is 
present. 
The binary hypothesis test for CR spectrum sensing at 
the  th time is given by: 
                     
                                                                                     
where   = 0,1,…,L-1 is OFDM block’s index,       ,       ,  
and       denote the CR received, noise, and PR transmitted 
samples. The transmitted PR signal is distorted by the zero 
mean additive white Gaussian noise              
  . The 
signal to noise ratio (SNR) is     
  
   .  
The time instant   comes from the samples over different 
OFDM blocks; and time instant t comes from the samples 
from the same OFDM block (i.e., IFFT/FFT samples). Thus, 
the spectrum sensing time in second is           , where   
represents symbol duration, L represents the number of OFDM 
blocks that used in sensing, and N is the number of samples 
per OFDM block (i.e., FFT size).  The decision statistic over   
OFDM blocks using MTM is defined as follows: 
                                                      
  
 
         
                           
   
 
 
   
   
 
          
   
                                       
   
   
 
III. 
DECISION STATISTIC PROBABILITY DENSITY FUNCTION 
For large L at low SNR, we approximate the PDF of the 
eigenspectrum absolute square           from chi-square to 
Gaussian, then the decision statistic (           ) is 
represented by the sum of K correlated Gaussian samples (i.e., 
eigenspectrum absolute square         ).  
Thus, the decision statistic using MTM detector is 
approximately normal Gaussian distributed as expected due to 
MTM linear processing.  
We now consider the mean ( ), and the variance (   ) of 
the decision statistic            for both hypotheses. (i.e., 
               
,
              
   ,                   , and                    ). 
 
The probability of detection, and the probability of false 
alarm at frequency bin      
        , and   
        , 
respectively, for the decision statistic with Gaussian 
distribution are defined as: 
  
                               
 
                                   
                  
                                                 
115
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

 
  
                                   
                                            
                     
                   
                     
The probability of miss detection can be defined as: 
 
                
                     <       
                                      
                  
                                                         
the term       is given by the tails of the distribution, and    
represents the threshold. Note that   can be controlled based 
on   
 . 
 
When only noise is present for    case at frequency bin   , 
and based on the linearity property of the FFT process, the 
mean of the decision statistic                  can be 
defined for   Gaussian samples as: 
                  
 
             
   
   
                 
   
    
   
   
   
   
 
                                                                             (9)                       
 where     
 
 
          
   
  
 
 
          
   
                           (10) 
It can be shown that (9) can be simplified as: 
                                              
              
 
      
 
                      
   
   
   
   
    (11)                         
From the definition of the Discrete Prolate Slepian 
Sequence (DPSS), we have [8]: 
 
           
         
   
                          
                (12) 
The orthonormality of the sequences can be used to 
simplify (11), when     as follows: 
 
                  
       
     
   
   
 
             
 
                                                               
When the PR signal is present for    case at frequency bin 
  , the mean of the decision statistic                  can 
be defined following the same steps of     as: 
                       
                        
   
   
 
                                  
                                          (14) 
 
where
     
              
, 
and
     
      
                     
    
 , and                
   
We now consider the variances of the hypotheses in the 
next stage of the derivation. In order to simplify our 
derivation, we redefine (5) using decision statistic coefficients 
   ,              , as follows: 
                               
   
   
   
   
                                       
where coefficient    is defined as follows: 
                 
                
 
          
   
,                        
Then, the variance of        can be defined as follows: 
                      
  
                        
  
          
   
  
,                 
The variance of the      hypothesis where the noise only 
is 
present 
for  correlated 
Gaussian 
samples 
(i.e., 
eigenspectrum absolute square            )                
   ,  can be defined as follows: 
                                                 
 
  
              
   
   
   
                                       
                                     
                                       
                                   
                                     
                                         
                                                                              
where      ,  is the correlation coefficient between   , and 
  , and since                                    , for 
                applying the orthonormality in (12).  
Then (18) can be rewritten using (10) and (17) as follows: 
                                                   
                 
          
      
   
   
                
   
   
                  
                  
                                
                      
                                                   
when     , and since the variance of Gaussian random 
variable W,                   , then                
   ,  can be defined as follows: 
                                      
      
         
 
     
   
   
 
 
        
     
                                                                             
Finally,                      over    can be rewritten 
using (19) and (20) as follows: 
116
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

                                                     
                
where   , is defined as follows: 
                                      
    
      
   
   
                                  
                                  
                                      
                                                                                           
 
When the PR signal is present-for    case at frequency 
bin 
  
, 
the 
variance 
of 
the 
decision 
statistic 
                   is: 
 
                                                   
when     , and since        
        in this case, and 
                      
  , then 
 
                                                  
        
                         
                                   
       
                                               
Finally, (23) can be written as follows: 
 
                                             
                 
 
The probabilities formulae in (6), (7), and (8) can now be 
rewritten as follow: 
 
                        
           
            
                   
                    (26)             
                          
           
       
                                         (27)  
                 
             
            
                   
               (28) 
It is clear that, the main processing difference between the 
energy detector and the MTM detector is simply multiplying 
the signal by a number of orthonormal tapers; the DPSS to 
produce a single estimate, while the multiplication in the 
energy detector is by a single rectangular taper. Thus in order 
to see  the effect of this difference, we use the probabilities 
formulae of the energy detector which can be defined for the 
same system conditions  as follow [13], [14]:   
                   
          
           
               
                           (29)               
                           
          
      
        
                                    (30) 
               
            
           
               
                        (31)  
The number of OFDM blocks  , which is needed to achieve 
predefined probabilities of detection   
        , and false 
alarm    
         in the MTM technique can be written using 
(26) and (27) to be as follows: 
   
      
               
                                  
         
   
 
 
        (32)            
which can be written in (dB) to be as follows: 
                 
The probabilities formulae when the PR’s signal is 
modeled as Gaussian random process are listed in the 
appendix.  
In multipath fading environment, the binary hypothesis test 
in (4) can be redefined for    to be as follows:  
                                                   
   
   
                     
where the discrete channel impulse response between the PR’s 
transmitter and CR’s receiver is represented by   ,   
         , and   is the total number of resolvable paths. 
The discrete frequency response of the channel is obtained by 
taking the N point FFT, with      as follows [14]: 
                                             
   
   
                                   
In this case, the formulae in (26), and (28) can be written 
as follow: 
          
           
                    
                           
                (35) 
           
             
                    
                           
         (36) 
The SNR can be redefined here to be as follows: 
                                     
          
   
                                               
The same steps can be followed to rewrite the formulae 
(29), (30), and (31) for the energy detector case. 
In this paper, we assume that the channel gain between the 
PR’s transmitter and the CR’s receiver is constant during the 
spectrum sensing duration, and           . In practice, 
         can be estimated priori during the time that PR’s 
transmitter occupies a specific band with specific power [14]. 
IV. 
SIMULATION RESULTS  
 
We evaluate our theoretical work by running a simulation 
program where the PR’s signal is QPSK with normalized 
energy equal to 1 over each subcarrier. Both CR and PR users 
employ 64-IFFT/FFT digital signal processing in their 
communications 
with 
sampling 
frequency 
20 
MHz/ 
  =0.05μs, where    represents the symbol duration, the 
MTM parameters used are NW=4, and 5 tapers, and the results 
obtained over 1000000 realizations.  Additionally, we 
compare the performance of MTM spectrum detector system 
to that of the energy detector under the same conditions.  We 
117
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

used theoretical and simulation results for a chosen frequency 
bin at the CR FFT to examine the hypotheses   , and       
Fig. 1 shows the probability of detection        versus 
probability of false alarm     using MTM detector with NW=4 
and 5 tapers (simulation and theory) and the energy detector at 
AWGN with SNR= 10dB and      OFDM blocks. Note 
that, the total number of samples used is        
       1280, which approximately corresponds to 
sensing time                            μ . 
By comparing the theoretical to the simulation in the MTM 
case, we note that the theoretical results match well the 
simulation one. At the same system conditions, the probability 
of detection    of MTM outperforms that for energy detector 
by 30%, when the probability of false alarm is   =10%, and 
the miss detection      in MTM is lower than that in energy 
detector  case by 40%. 
Fig. 2 shows the theoretical results of the number of 
OFDM blocks     required to achieve        , and  
       at AWGN environment with different SNR using 
MTM with NW=4 and 5 tapers compared to the energy 
detector. It is clear that the number of OFDM blocks used in 
the sensing process in the MTM system is lower than that for 
the energy detector. For example, at SNR=  15dB, the   
required by the MTM is 33dB, and the energy detector is 
47dB. These two values correspond to 1995 and 5012 OFDM 
blocks for MTM and the energy detector, respectively, in the 
linear scale. Thus, the energy detector requires 2.5 times as 
many samples compared to MTM in order to achieve the same 
probabilities at the same SNR. Such a large number of the 
samples for sensing in CR system might hinder the 
opportunistic use of the vacant channels, as it is the main 
objective of the developing of CR systems. 
Fig. 3  shows the probabilities of detection     that gives 
probabilities of false alarm        ,  and 10% versus the 
SNR at AWGN using MTM with NW=4 and 5 tapers and 
    . For both of predefined probabilities of false alarm the 
probabilities of detection are almost 100% for SNR= 7dB or 
higher with unnoticeable change for       % curve, which 
is reasonable.  Both probabilities of detection curves start to 
decrease with the decrease in the SNR with noticeable 
outperforming of the        % curve. At SNR= 25dB, 
        for         curve, and        for        
curve.  
Fig. 4 shows the threshold versus probabilities of false 
alarm and detection using MTM with NW=4 and 5 tapers at 
AWGN with SNR= 7dB (i.e.,   
         ) and      . 
Such a figure presents the range of the threshold that should be 
chosen in order to meet specific probability of false alarm and 
detection at defined SNR level and L used in the spectrum 
sensing. As an example, for threshold=5, the probability of 
false alarm and detection pair (          is (           . By 
increasing the threshold level to 5.3, the pair becomes 
(          . This figure can be revaluated at different SNR 
and  L conditions using (26) and (27). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.  1. Probability of detection versus probability of false alarm using MTM 
with NW=4 and 5 tapers (simulation and theory) and the periodogram (energy 
detector) at AWGN with SNR= 10dB and     .   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.  2. Comparison between the number of OFDM blocks (L) required to  
achieve        , and        at AWGN with different SNR using MTM 
with NW=4 and 5 tapers and the energy detector. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.  3. Probability of detection that meets        and 10% versus the SNR 
at AWGN using MTM with NW=4 and 5 taper and       samples for 
spectrum sensing. 
 
 
 
118
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.  4. Threshold versus probabilities of false alarm and detection using 
MTM with NW=4 and 5 tapers at AWGN with SNR= 7dB and      
samples are used in the spectrum sensing. 
V. 
CONCLUSION  
In this paper, we have derived closed-form formulae for 
the probabilities of false alarm, detection, and miss detection 
as functions of the parameters of the MTM spectrum detector 
such as threshold, number of sensed blocks  , number of 
tapers, eigenvalues of the DPSS, PR signal power, and the 
noise power. These probabilities control the performance of 
the MTM-based spectrum sensing detector. Additionally, 
MTM probabilities can be used to choose the appropriate 
threshold that maximizes the probability of detection at fixed 
probability of false alarm.  
In the process of the derivation, we defined the PDF of the 
MTM decision theory. Statistical parameters, such as the 
mean, and the variance of the distribution have been derived 
for different PR signals. 
Comparing the performance of the MTM spectrum sensing 
detector to that for the energy detector, we found the MTM 
detector outperforms the performance of the energy detector 
by about 40% increase in the probability of detection at fixed 
probability of false alarm 10%. Furthermore the energy 
detector requires 2.5 times the number of samples to achieve 
the same probabilities of detection and false alarm given by 
the MTM detector operating at the same conditions. 
APPENDIX  
For the case when the PR’s signal      , is modeled as a 
random Gaussian variable with zero mean and variance 
  
  (i.e.,               
  ) [15]. Following the same 
derivation steps of the modulated signal case, it can be proved 
that the probabilities formulae are defined as follow: 
                            
           
             
                                     (38)           
                                 
           
       
                                  (39)  
                          
             
             
                               (40) 
and the number of samples   (i.e., OFDM blocks) is defined as 
 follows: 
   
               
                                
         
    
 
 
         (41) 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Mitola and G. Q. Maguire, "Cognitive radio: making software radios 
more personal," IEEE personal communications, vol. 6, pp. 13-18, 1999. 
[2] 
S. 
Haykin, 
"Cognitive 
radio: 
brain-empowered 
wireless 
communications," IEEE journal on selected areas in communications, 
vol. 23, pp. 201-220, 2005. 
[3] 
W.-Y. L. I. F. Akyildiz, M. C. Vuran, and S. Mohantly, "Next  
Generation/dynamic spectrum access /cognitive radiowireless network: 
A survey," Elsevier Computer Networks, vol. 50, pp. 2127-2159, 
Septemper 2006. 
[4] 
M. Jun, G. Y. Li, and J. Biing Hwang, "Signal Processing in Cognitive 
Radio," Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 97, pp. 805-823, 2009. 
[5] 
T. Yucek and H. Arslan, "A survey of spectrum sensing algorithms for 
cognitive radio applications," Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 
IEEE, vol. 11, pp. 116-130, 2009. 
[6] 
D. B. Percival and A. T. Walden, Spectral analysis for physical 
applications: multitaper and conventional univariate techniques: 
Cambridge Univ Pr, 1993. 
[7] 
D. J. Thomson, "Spectrum estimation and harmonic analysis," 
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 70, pp. 1055-1096, 1982. 
[8] 
D. Slepian, "Prolate spheroidal wave functions, Fourier analysis, and 
uncertainty. V- The discrete case," Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 
57, pp. 1371–1430, 1978. 
[9] 
P. Stoica and T. Sundin, "On nonparametric spectral estimation," 
Circuits, Systems, and Signal Processing, vol. 18, pp. 169-181, 1999. 
[10] D. J. Thomson, "Jackknifing multitaper spectrum estimates," IEEE 
Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 24, pp. 20-30, 2007. 
[11] S. M. Kay, Fundamentals of statistical signal processing: detection 
theory: Prentice-Hall, 1998. 
[12] W. Jun and Q. T. Zhang, "A Multitaper Spectrum Based Detector for 
Cognitive Radio," in Wireless Communications and Networking 
Conference, 2009. WCNC 2009. IEEE, 2009, pp. 1-5. 
[13] Q. Zhi, C. Shuguang, and A. H. Sayed, "Optimal Linear Cooperation for 
Spectrum Sensing in Cognitive Radio Networks," Selected Topics in 
Signal Processing, IEEE Journal of, vol. 2, pp. 28-40, 2008. 
[14] Q. Zhi, C. Shuguang, A. H. Sayed, and H. V. Poor, "Optimal Multiband 
Joint Detection for Spectrum Sensing in Cognitive Radio Networks," 
Signal Processing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 57, pp. 1128-1140, 2009. 
[15] J. Hillenbrand, T. A. Weiss, and F. K. Jondral, "Calculation of detection 
and false alarm probabilities in spectrum pooling systems," IEEE 
Communications letters, vol. 9, pp. 349-351, 2005. 
 
 
 
119
EMERGING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-103-8

