Emerging Function Concept Applied to Photonic Packet Switching Network  
Antonio de Campos Sachs, Ricardo Luis de Azevedo da Rocha, Fernando Frota Redigolo, Tereza Cristina Melo 
de Brito Carvalho. 
Departamento de Engenharia de Computação e Sistemas Digitais (PCS) 
Escola Politécnica da Universidade de São Paulo (EPUSP)  
São Paulo, Brazil  
antoniosachs@larc.usp.br; luis.rocha@poli.usp.br; fernando@larc.usp.br; carvalho@larc.usp.br  
 
Abstract—Aiming to contribute to a solution for the number of 
nodes scalability problem, a transparent Optical Packet 
Switching (OPS) network is treated in a new approach that 
considers the network as a complex system. This treatment 
allowed the investigation of a network based on large number 
of autonomous OPS nodes connected in a mesh topology. The 
network operates in a bottom-up organization and the long 
distance signalization, one of the main factors responsible for 
the number of nodes limitation, is avoided and the scalability is 
enabled. 
Desirable 
characteristics 
(scalability, 
traffic 
organization, protection, restoration, etc.) result from simple 
rules executed by individual nodes. All those characteristics 
are referred to as Emerging Functions. It is possible to create 
those simple rules, or fundamental individual functions 
executed by individual nodes, in order to potentiate those 
Emerging Functions. As an example, a set of node interactions 
with their next neighbors is described. That will result in a 
Protection Emerging Function able to maintain the network 
operation after failure and to confine the network degradation 
just around the failure position. That segregation of the failure 
effects represents a new feature that could be observed due to 
the new approach.   
Keywords-complexity; emerging function; photonic packet 
switching; protection 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
One important limit factor for the scalability of the 
number of nodes in a network is the long time necessary for 
communication between two distant nodes. The current 
approach, which treats the OPS network as a complex 
system and the network nodes as autonomous entities, was 
previously described in [1]. That approach avoids long 
distance signalization. A packet is sent from source to 
destination without any previous path determination. Routing 
activities needs to use a shortest path table previously 
calculated at the moment of the network initialization. From 
that shortest path table each node knows the number of the 
output port that corresponds to the shortest path connecting 
itself to any other node. Each packet carrying the destination 
address can find the path from source to destination from 
node to node in a multi hop schema using the output port 
corresponding to the shortest path or the alternative port in 
those cases in which the preferred one is not available. 
Simple switching device without optical buffers that 
forwards the arriving packet without delay to the preferential 
output port or to the alternative one is a procedure referred to 
as "hot potato routing" [2]. That operation can be performed 
by using an optical sample removed before a FDL (fiber 
delay lane). This sample can be converted into electrical 
media for the logical treatment performed by conventional 
electronic circuitry and the optical switch, based on SOA 
(Semiconductor Optical Amplifiers) devices, can be 
positioned before the arrival of the packet that is traveling 
through the FDL. Such operations have been adopted since 
the precursor projects KEOPS [3] and DAVID [4]; but, 
nowadays, the conversion from optical to electrical media is 
not necessary and new photonic devices can do all the jobs 
(including logical operations), and the switching operation 
can be performed in a fully optical process [5]. The network 
described herein works for any technology utilized for 
reading the address and forwarding the packet to the output 
port. Apart from the technology used inside the node, the 
network can operate as a complex system, with a bottom-up 
organization. Each node has the autonomy to carry on the 
switching operation, performing its work exclusively with 
locally obtained information. 
The utilization of large number of nodes with large 
number of alternative paths, provided by the mesh topology, 
is known to be important for the network survivability. 
Since the beginning of the digital telecommunication 
technology, Baran [2] worked with mesh topology and got 
very strong robustness for a network with a large number of 
nodes. Today, the survivability of a complex network is 
associated to the intrinsic robustness of complex systems [6, 
7]. Carlson and Doyle [6] claims that all complex systems 
are intrinsically robust for the most frequent daily events; 
however they are very fragile due to rare and unexpected 
environment events. Reference [7] declares that “hubs make 
the network robust against accidental failures but vulnerable 
to coordinated attacks”. All agree that complexity is 
intrinsically related to robustness.  
Next, Section II describes generically aspects related to 
Emerging Functions applied to a network and Section III 
describes the network operation. Section IV describes the 
adopted theory, calculations aspects and discussions 
analyzing the failure distribution effect for a 256-node case 
study. Section V presents the final conclusions. 
II. 
EMERGING FUNCTIONS APPLIED TO A NETWORK 
The term Emerging Function is utilized in a number of 
different areas, such as physics, chemistry or biology. 
Although there is no single formal definition for the term, 
two main definitions can be inferred: 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

 A function that is not regularly present in a system 
and appears or is activated automatically in an 
emergency situation; 
 A function that is always present in a system (it 
characterizes the system) and emerges from simple 
operations executed by its individual parts.  
An emerging function is associated to the whole system 
and not to its individual parts although its emergence is the 
result of small changes in the normal operations (first 
definition) or of regular operations of individual parts of the 
system (second definition).  
A system based on emerging functions can be 
characterized as a bottom-up organization system or, 
equivalently, a self-organized system [8] and it is associated 
with a complex system composed by a large number of 
individual units following simple operation rules. It is 
difficult to deal with such complex systems, with a large 
number of elements, in a classical and reversible treatment 
that calculates all the possible events in all the system 
components. The models considering the probability of 
transition from one state to the next one to describe the 
system evolution seem to be a more feasible strategy. That is 
also the same strategy found in the chaos theory [9], in which 
the final consequences cannot be derived from the initial 
conditions because there is a high sensitivity to tiny 
fluctuations in those initial conditions. 
The network routing function herein is not controlled by 
the network layer (OSI network layer 3). It emerges from 
simple fundamental functions executed by each node 
individually. There is no high entity accounting for switches 
operation or for the path followed by each packet in the 
network. Instead, the node operation is based on the local 
situation and on the packet header information: each packet 
is sent to the preferred output port, or sent to the available 
port if the preferred one is occupied. This operation rule, by 
itself, turns the network auto-organized or bottom-up 
organized, and provides autonomic network operation. 
Therefore, it is possible to consider “routing” as a function 
emerging from individual nodes operations or, in other 
words, that routing is an Emerging Function. 
Traffic distribution, which can be considered the set of all 
routes, is also an Emerging Function. As the shortest path is 
not always the one which is chosen, the traffic distribution 
obtained is better than the one obtained utilizing only the 
shortest path. 
The access to the network is made only if there is a time 
interval to accept the new packet without collision. This is 
possible because of a fiber delay line (FDL) positioned 
before any input port. Collision avoidance can also be 
interpreted as an Emerging Function, since it is not executed 
by any higher protocol layer, but it results from the careful 
local insertion procedure.  
Protection is an important network function that can be 
enabled through the insertion of an extra individual node 
operation function based on a backward signalization sent to 
all the input ports. The output ports integrity can be checked 
through the signalization received from the next node. 
Protection can also be considered as an Emerging Function 
and its architecture is presented in detail in Section III. 
III. 
NETWORK OPERATION 
The network architecture is based on the “Hot Potato 
Heuristic Routing Doctrine” [2] made up by network nodes 
executing simple well-defined rules. A set of Emerging 
Functions arise from those simple rules. The network 
complexity is related to its size and the number of nodes. 
Each node, in contrast, is idealized to be simple. The first 
simplification is the omission of optical buffers. Without 
optical buffers, it is necessary to use symmetrical nodes in 
order to avoid packet losses. In symmetrical nodes, with the 
same number of input and output ports, there is always a free 
output port for any arriving packet.  
Manhattan-Street Network (MSN) [10] was chosen as the 
main topology for the development of this work, but any 
other mesh topology can be considered. This particular 
choice facilitates the calculations for increasing the number 
of nodes without changing the network symmetry. 
To implement the protection emerging function, it is 
necessary to differentiate the two output ports in order to 
define links sub-domains as described in [1]. Figure 1 is a 
MSN showing clockwise and counterclockwise sub-
domains. Each node belongs to two sub-domains and each 
sub-domain contains four nodes. 
 
After organizing the network links in small sub-domains, 
it is possible to create the protection function by including an 
operation rule for all network nodes. This operation rule is 
composed by a continuous optical signal which is sent 
 
Figure 1: MSN organized with clockwise and counterclockwise link 
sub-domains [1].  
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

backward through the two input ports and the operation of 
reading the arriving signal from the two output ports. This 
signal is named integrity signal, as the integrity of a link sub-
domain is signalized by the optical signal continuously 
traveling in the opposite direction of the optical packet 
signal. When a failure occurs in one link, the backward 
integrity signal is interrupted and the node, which is just 
before that link, is immediately aware of the failure and no 
longer uses that output port. The action rule for all nodes is 
to turn off the integrity signal forwarded to the input port 
belonging to the failed sub-domain. 
In this work, a second signalization was added, sent 
backward to inform the nodes outside the failed sub-domain 
that the link is working properly but the next node belongs to 
a failed sub-domain. 
 
Figure 2 shows four nodes with four links in a 
counterclockwise sub-domain. Each node has a DC laser 
sending a continuous laser signal in clockwise direction 
(opposite direction of the counterclockwise packets) and has 
a detector placed to receive the laser signal sent by the next 
neighbor belonging to the same counterclockwise sub-
domain. In case any one of those four links is interrupted, the 
detector that first stops receiving the signal turns off the laser 
corresponding to the same sub-domain. All the four links in 
the ring are forced to be interrupted. The four lasers are 
turned off. Each node belongs to two sub-domains and uses a 
second laser as well as a second detector for integrity 
signalization of that second sub-domain. In a  normal 
process, without failure, all signalization is of the first type 
(continuous laser signal), but in the case of failure, the 
signalization is interrupted in the failed sub-domain and 
changed from continuous signal to square wave signal in the 
second sub-domain (four next neighbor sub-domains). The 
failure causes four links to stop the first signalization 
(integrity signalization) and to start the second signalization 
(advise signalization) outside the failed sub-domain.  
The implementation of that second level of information 
can be performed by a square wave light signal replacing the 
DC light signalization or, alternatively, a DC laser can be 
used with half optical power to differentiate from the full 
optical power of the regular link integrity signalization. The 
implementation of both signalization types, indeed, can also 
be made by smart photonic devices in a fully optical process. 
All the nodes at a failed sub domain operate with only 
one input and one output. All the other nodes, far from the 
failure, have no information about the failure and their 
procedure remains the same, including the utilization of the 
same preferential output port matrix. The action of the node 
receiving the second signalization is to deflect all packets to 
the other output port (the port that is receiving the first 
signalization type), with the exception of the packets 
addressed to those nodes that are sending the second 
signalization type. That is the only way a failed sub-domain 
node can receive a packet. That deflection corresponds to an 
adaption in the preferential port table.  
As an example, consider a failure in the counterclockwise 
sub-domain connecting nodes 17, 16, 22, 23 in Figure 1. 
Those four nodes extend the information failure to the 
remaining input by changing the backward continuous wave 
light source to square wave light-source. That signalization is 
a sign for the preferential port adaption in nodes 18, 10, 21 
and 29. 
That new feature was implemented in the calculations, 
and the results are shown in Figure 3 for 16 nodes (N=16) 
and 256 nodes (N=256). The caption termination “F” refers 
to the first level protection schema, characterized by not 
using the second signalization type. The caption termination 
“F2” refers to the second level protection schema that 
includes a second signalization type. For 16 nodes, the 
second level protection schema (N=16F2) shows that the 
interference of the failure is remarkably smaller than that 
observed at the first level protection schema (N=16F).  
One additional feature is the correction of a strange 
behavior for low charge condition. In that region (Link Load 
< 50%) the failure causes a large number of hops 
enhancement and it is quite odd to see the number of hops 
decreasing for higher load condition (curve N=16F in Figure 
3). That behavior can be explained by the fact that in the low 
load condition, the packets take the preferential output port 
more often as compared to the large charge condition and are 
 
 
Figure 2: First signalization (link integrity DC laser signal) and second 
signalization (square wave advise signalization).  
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

forced to proceed through the failed region. The failure is 
more efficiently avoided with the second signalization, 
minimizing such effect. All the unnecessary trial through the 
failed region is avoided.  
IV. 
CALCULATIONS 
To deal with scalability, the number of nodes can be 
higher than practical calculations can support. It is 
impossible to implement calculations for an arbitrarily large 
number of nodes. In order to minimize the time and memory 
utilization, connection matrix “c” and preferential output port 
matrix “pp”, were calculated separately. Data were saved in 
files that could be interpreted by the main program. The 
shortest path calculation is presented in sub-section A. The 
algorithm description for the mean number of hops 
calculation is presented in sub-section B. The model 
validation carried out by comparison with the simulation 
model is presented in sub-section C. One important result, 
the segregation of the failure effect, is presented in sub-
section D. 
 
A. Shortest Path Calculation 
The shortest path to reach the destination is calculated 
once for a non-failed topology. As the packet can be 
deflected to any output port, it must be able to find out the 
destination shortest path from any place in the network and 
not only from the origin. The packet is informed about the 
shortest path through a preferential port matrix “pp” with 
dimensions NxN, were N is the total number of nodes. Each 
column of the pp matrix represents the actual position of a 
packet and the matrix elements are numbers indicating the 
best option: number 1 for output 1 or number 2 for output 2 
or number 3 to indicate that there is a shortest path starting 
from both outputs.  
Before the calculation of the preferential port matrix pp, 
it is necessary to know the connection matrix “c”. That 
matrix is a sparse NxN matrix representing the considered 
topology. Each column in the c matrix represents the actual 
position of a packet and each line represents the destination 
to be reached in one hop. With the exception of the two 
directly connected nodes, all the N-2 elements in any column 
of the c matrix are equal to zero. In addition to the 
information of the directly connected nodes, the non-zero 
elements also inform the link sub-domain type number. The 
positions of the matrix elements correspond to the directly 
connected nodes and the matrix element itself represents the 
sub-domain type 1 (output 1) or sub-domain type 2 (output 
2). Type 1 could be, as an example, the clockwise type and 
type 2 the anticlockwise type (see Figure 1). 
Starting from connection matrix c, the preferential port 
matrix pp is constructed. This is done column by column, in 
an adaptive tree procedure [11] that is nondeterministic just 
at the beginning of the algorithm. That procedure is 
nondeterministic because it is necessary to calculate the 
smallest path starting from all possible packet positions.  
B. Mean number of hops calculation 
The network performance is measured by the mean 
number of hops <H> a packet completes from origin to 
destination. The main program, utilized for the main number 
of hops calculation, is based on the evolution of a vector P(x) 
with N dimensions. The x variable is the discrete position for 
the packet (x = 1, 2, …, N). Each vector represents the 
probability of finding a hypothetical packet in etch node. 
That 
is 
called 
probability 
distribution 
vector. 
The 
mathematical treatment for the evolution of a probability 
distribution along time corresponds to the application of an 
operator “U” to the probability vector Pt(x) at any instant of 
time “t” to obtain the probability vector Pt+1(x) at the instant 
of time “t+1” after a discrete time interval. The unitary 
increment of time corresponds to one hop from one node to 
the following in the packet traveling from source to 
destination. 
Pt+1(x)=UPt(x) 
 
 
(1) 
Operator U is analogous to the “Perron-Frobenius 
operator” utilized in the chaos theory for the calculation of 
the time evolution of a probability distribution [9]. An 
analogy can be constructed with the chaos theory, in which 
the idea of trajectory is abandoned and replaced by the 
evolution of a probability distribution. In this work, the idea 
of a path that a packet should follow from its origin to its 
destination is replaced by the probability distribution vector 
time evolution described in [1]. Acampora and Shah [12] 
consider similar statistical procedure to describe the behavior 
of a store-and-forward routing as a comparison with hot-
potato routing. Due to the fact that the probability to go 
directly from one node to the other is zero for almost all 
nodes except for the two directly connected nodes, most of 
the elements in operator U are zero. Each column has only 
two non-zero elements. The preferential output port has 
probability Ppp and the alternative port, corresponding to the 
deflection port, has probability Pd given by: 
 
Figure 3: Number of hops increases after failure for two types of 
signalizations. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

Pd =1 Ppp  
 
(2) 
A packet is sent to the preferential port in tree cases: 
a) There is no other packet in the competitor link that 
could arrive before it. 
b) There is another packet that could arrive before it, but 
that has a local final address and is going to be 
removed before competition. 
c) There is another packet arriving before it that is not a 
local packet, but it has a different preferential output 
port. 
The link occupation probability Poc defines the 
probability of the first case to be 1 Poc. Given that case a) 
is not true, the local packet probability Plp defines the 
second case probability term as Poc*Plp. Finally, given that 
case a) and case b) do not apply, considering Pop as the 
probability of the competitor packet to have a different 
preferential port (another port), the third term is defined as 
Poc*(1-Plp)*Pop. The final probability of a packet to go 
through the preferential port Ppp is given by: 
Ppp =1 Poc + Poc*Plp + Poc*(1Plp)*Pop 
(3) 
In (3), Poc is the occupation probability that is associated 
to the link load. It is considered that a fully loaded link (not 
considering the FDL length) corresponds to Poc=1. The 
probability of a packet preference pointing to another port 
Pop is assumed to be 50% and Pop=0.5 in all cases. The 
local packet probability Plp is evaluated to be 1/<H>, with 
<H> calculated as a preliminary mean number of hops 
obtained with a first guess value Plp=1/(N1). 
The Plp=1/<H> hypothesis is originated by the fact that 
all packets, at any time, belong to his path from origin to 
destination. The mean number of hops in all possible paths is 
<H> and the packet is considered to be a local packet only 
in the last of those hops. That means that Plp is the 
probability of a packet to be positioned at the last hop of its 
path from origin to destination. 
Without 
failure, 
the 
Manhattan 
Street 
network 
architecture 
belongs 
to 
a 
symmetry 
group 
called 
automorphism [10]. In this group, it is impossible to 
differentiate any node from the other concerning its position 
in the network. The mean number of hops is the same 
regardless the position of the final address node. But 
introducing a failure, the symmetry is broken and the mean 
number of hops may assume different values for different 
final destinations. In this case, it is necessary to calculate the 
mean number of hops for all possible destinations and to 
adopt the arithmetic mean of those values as the final 
network mean number of hops. 
One more consideration should be made about the “don’t 
care” nodes. They are already identified and signalized by 
number 3 in the preferential port matrix pp. In that case, it is 
considered that the packet plays no role in the decision of the 
preferable output port. The position of the switch may be 
adjusted to the preferred output port of the packet eventually 
arriving in the competitor link. That procedure corresponds 
to considering Ppp=Pd=50% in all “don’t care” situations. 
The number of hops is obtained recursively by (1) 
starting with P1(x), that represents the probability to reach 
the destination with one hop, to calculate P2(x), that 
represents the probability to reach the destination with two 
hops. That procedure is repeated k times while the total 
probability is less than 100%, with an arbitrary criteria 
chosen to be P=10-6. Further reduction of that criterion 
interferes only with the calculation time and no change is 
observed in the results for P=10-5. 
As an example, for a network with four nodes (N=4), the 
initial probability to find a packet addressed to node number 
one, in any place is considered to be zero to node number 
one and 1/(N-1) for all the other nodes. That condition is 
represented by the initial probability vector P1(x) given in 
(4). 













/3
1
/3
1
/3
1
0
)
(
1 x
P
  
 
 
(4) 
The mean number of hops for each destination x is 
calculated by the equation: 
 

k
tPt x
H
1
( )
  
 
(5) 
With the condition: 
 
1
( )
1
1




k
t x
P
P
  
 
(6) 
 
C. Simulation model 
The time domain simulation model (TDSM) was 
developed over the OMNET++ platform. The simulation 
model considers all the nodes sending packets to all the 
others and following the same rules used for the analytical 
model. Every packet arriving to one 2x2 node is addressed to 
the better output port, unless the node is already occupied 
with a competitor packet. In that case, the packet is sent to 
the available output port. The destination and the exact 
instant of packet generation are randomly chosen. Each link 
Figure 4: Analytical and simulation models. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

load condition is governed by the packet size. A packet with 
half the link size is used to simulate the 50% link load 
condition. Each packet that reaches the destination stimulates 
the insertion of a new one, addressed to a new randomly 
chosen destination. That procedure insures the maintenance 
of the link load condition all along the simulation time. A 
40Gbps bit rate and one kilometer link length were 
considered. The delay line fiber length is considered to be 
equal to the link length, the same hypothesis utilized in the 
analytical model. Figure 3 shows the simulation results 
compared to the analytical model results for two hypotheses 
utilized for the evaluation of the local packet probability Plp. 
The agreement between models is better for hypothesis 
Plp=1/<H> as compared to the hypothesis of the first guess 
Plp=1/(N-1). In fact, that first guess is very close to 
simulation results for the small number of nodes but tends to 
decrease faster than Plp=1/<H> producing wrong results for 
a higher number of nodes. The simulation time is far higher 
than the analytical calculation time, limiting its utilization for 
scalability issues.  
 
D. Failure effect distribution map 
The last calculation performed was the failure 
distribution effect. In case of failure, the symmetry is broken 
and the mean number of hops is no longer the same for any 
destination. Then, it was necessary to calculate the mean 
number of hops executed by an arbitrary packet addressed to 
all the 256 nodes. The overall mean value was considered to 
be the arithmetical median of those previously calculated 
values. Considering the full load traffic condition (100% link 
load), the map in Figure 5 shows an important distribution 
characteristic. The map shows nodes 1 to 16 in the first line 
and 16 nodes per line up to node number 256. The failure 
occurs in a link belonging to the clockwise sub-domain 
connecting nodes 89, 90, 106 and 105. Most of the 
destination nodes are not perturbed by the failure and remain 
with the same average number of hops (ANH) they had 
before failure (ANH<26). The ANH increases only for the 
destinations near the failure. Outside the contour lines, the 
ANH is less than 26. Crossing one contour line, the ANH is 
less than 27. Increased by one unit after crossing each 
contour line, the ANH will be less than 34, near failure, after 
crossing 8 contour lines. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The approach of treating large number of nodes network 
as a complex system, working as a bottom-up organization 
system, was analyzed with a statistical analytical model and 
a simulation model. It was possible to investigate a 
Protection Emerging Function. Protection is achieved by 
local signalization that modifies only the nodes operations 
around the failure. No signalization needs to be transmitted 
over a long distance regardless of the size of the network. A 
map with the number of hops after failure illustrates that the 
network performance degradation occurs only around the 
failure. The segregation of the failure effects represents a 
new feature that could be observed due to the new approach. 
All results can be reproduced for any topology. Reference 
[13] shows preliminary results for the National Science 
Foundation Network (NFSnet) treated as a complex system 
in a bottom-up type of organization. Future work will furnish 
more details about the complex behavior trough the 
utilization of the same statistical analysis. With more nodes 
new Emerging Functions can be emphasized [1]. Several 
new features can be proposed or investigated. Traffic 
distribution, protection and restoration functions can also be 
analyzed 
as 
Emerging 
Functions. 
The 
bottom-up 
organization and the complex system treatment permits 
better performance and to increase the robustness of large 
number of nodes network.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank FAPESP – The State of São Paulo 
Research Foundation – sponsor of the KyaTera Project. The 
authors also thank Lucas Pauli Simões for the contributions 
to the simulation results. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Sachs, C.M.B. Lopes, and T.C.M.B. Carvalho, Protection 
schema for optical packet switching network with large 
number of nodes, Microwave and Optoelectronics Conference 
(IMOC) 2009 SBMO/IEEE MTTS-International, 3-6 Nov 
2009, pp. 47-50. 
[2] P. Baran, On Distributed Communications Netwoks, IEEE 
Transactions on Commnications Systems, CS-l2 (1964), pp. 
1-9. 
[3] C. Guillemot, M. Renaud, P. Gambini, C. Janz, I. Andonovic, 
R. Bauknecht, B. Bostica, M. Burzio, F. Callegati, M. Casoni, 
D. Chiaroni, F. Clerot, S.L. Danielsen, F. Dorgeuille, A. 
Dupas, A. Franzen, P.B. Hansen, D.K. Hunter, A. Kloch, R. 
Krahenbuhl, B. Lavigne, A. Le Corre, C. Raffaelli, M. 
Schilling, J.C. Simon, L. Zucchelli, Transparent Optical 
Packet Switching: The European ACTS KEOPS Project 
Approach, J of Lightwave Technology, 16 (1998), pp. 2117-
2134. 
 
 
Figure 5: Failure segregation. Each contour line corresponds to one more 
hop from source to destination. Outside the contour lines, the Average 
Number of Hops (ANH) is less than 26. Inside all lines, the ANH is less 
than 34. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

[4] L. Dittmann, C. Develder, D. Chiaroni, F. Neri, F. Callegati, 
Member, IEEE, W. Koerber, A. Stavdas, M. Renaud,, A. 
Rafel, J. Solé-Pareta, W. Cerroni, N. Leligou, Lars Dembeck, 
B. Mortensen, M. Pickavet, N. Le Sauze, M. Mahony, B. 
Berde, and G. Eilenberger; The European IST Project 
DAVID: a Viable Approach towards Optical Packet 
Switching; JSAC Special Issue on High-Performance 
Optical/Electronic Switches/routers for High-Speed Internet 
II. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 21 
(2003), pp 1026 – 1040. 
[5] C. Stamatiadis, M. Bougioukos, A. Maziotis, P. Bakopoulos, 
L. 
Stampoulidis 
and 
H. 
Avramopoulos, 
All-Optical 
Contention Resolution using a single optical flipflop and two 
stage all-optical wavelength conversion, paper OThN5 
Proceedings of OSA / OFC/NFOEC 2010. Available at: 
<http://www.photonics.ntua.gr/PCRL_web_site/OFC_10_OT
hN5.pdf>. Retrieved: July, 2012. 
[6] J.M. Carlson and J. Doyle, Complexity and Robustness, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences - PNAS, 
February 19, vol. 99, suppl. 1, 2002, pp. 2538–2545. 
[7] A.L. Barabási, The Architecture of Complexity, IEEE Control 
Systems Magazine, 27(2007), pp. 33-42. 
[8] D.L. Turcotte and J.B. Rundle; Self-organized complexity in 
the physical, biological, and social sciences, in Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences – PNAS, February 19, vol. 
99, suppl. 1, 2002, pp. 2463–2465. 
[9] I. Prigogine, Le leggi del caos, Roma-Bari, Editori Laterza, 
1993. 
[10] A.G.Greenberg and J.Goodman, Sharp approximate models of 
adaptative routing in mesh networks. Telegraffic Analysis 
Computer Performance Evaluation. Elsevier Science -North 
Holland, pp. 255-269, 1986. 
[11] H. Pistori; J.J. Neto; M.C. Pereira, Adaptive Non-
Deterministic Decision Trees: General Formulation and Case 
Study. INFOCOMP Journal of Computer Science, Lavras, 
MG, 
2006. 
Available 
at: 
<http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.60
.1885&rep=rep1&type=pdf>. Retrieved: July, 2012. 
[12] A.S. Acampora and S.I.A. Shah, Multihop lightwave network: 
a comparison of store-and forward and hot potato routing, 
IEEE Transactions on Communications, 40(1992), pp. 1082-
1090. 
[13] A.C. Sachs, Rede auto-organizada utilizando chaveamento de 
pacotes ópticos. 2011. Doctoral Theses (Digital Systems) - 
Escola Politécnica, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, 
2011. 
Available 
at: 
<http://www.teses.usp.br/teses/disponiveis/3/3141/tde-
05082011-152444/>. Retrieved: July, 2012.  
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

