Lowering the Effects of Virtual Reality Cybersickness: A Systematic Review 
 
Monique Hanslo 
University of South Africa  
Pretoria, South Africa 
nickyhanslo@gmail.com 
 
 
Ridewaan Hanslo 
Department of Informatics 
University of Pretoria 
Pretoria, South Africa 
ridewaan.hanslo@up.ac.za
Abstract—Virtual Reality (VR) has several uses in business, 
entertainment, and training. A simulation sickness known as 
‘cybersickness’ is experienced when using VR. Cybersickness 
(CS) poses a severe obstacle to VR systems’ usability. To fully 
utilize VR as a medium, it is essential to reduce the 
uncomfortable sensation of CS. Technology, software, and user 
attributes all play a role in creating a pleasant VR experience. 
There is no comprehensive information on what causes 
cybersickness, how the severity of cybersickness can be 
assessed, and what factors contribute to CS in a VR 
environment. Because of this gap, this research aims to unpack 
the causes of cybersickness, how to assess it, and to identify and 
describe the factors. A systematic literature review identified 
21 factors contributing to VR CS. In addition, a conceptual 
model was developed to allow researchers and VR developers 
to evaluate these factors. 
Keywords-virtual reality; simulation sickness; cybersickness; 
factors; head-mounted display; systematic review. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
VR has recently become part of everyday vocabulary, 
which can be partly ascribed to the recent media coverage it 
has received [1]. Simply put, VR offers a Virtual 
Environment (VE) that enables users to engage with a highly 
realistic artificial world made mostly of three-dimensional 
computer-generated images, audio, and haptic input. VR has 
been used in various fields, such as healthcare, construction, 
and architecture. Still, video games have drawn consumers' 
attention more than other VR applications [2]. The leading 
technology for virtual worlds is visual devices known as 
Head Mounted Displays (HMDs), which are very different 
from standard screens since they completely immerse the 
user in the VE by obstructing outside visual inputs that can 
interfere with the experience. A negative side effect known 
as Cybersickness (CS) has also been identified with such 
immersive experiences [2]. 
An 
unpleasant 
collection 
of 
symptoms 
called 
‘cybersickness’ is brought on by being in a VE and can 
linger for a short while or even for days [3]. Examples of 
such symptoms include headache, nausea, and even vomiting 
[4]. According to estimates, CS affects 20% to 80% of the 
population in some way [3]. CS claims have been rising 
along with the popularity of VR gadgets, despite the fact that 
the ailment has long been understood and researched [2]. 
In the worst situations, the symptoms are so severe that 
people cannot utilize VR equipment. In one instance, game 
makers were forced to remove VR components from their 
creations because users complained of feeling unwell [2]. 
The symptoms of CS may interfere with medical therapy and 
have unfavourable repercussions on the patient. Even minor 
symptoms might be unpleasant and bother the user. 
A. Problem Statement 
VR gives people a chance to imagine a modified three-
dimensional world. However, for optimal efficiency, it 
necessitates total sensory awareness. Interactions and visual 
signals in the VE must be effectively developed to be as 
realistic as possible before VR is adequately adapted and 
understood [4]. Its effectiveness can be measured by how 
much the user feels immersed in the surroundings [5]. 
Usability problems, such as the symptoms related to CS, will 
reduce the feeling of presence in a VE. If users have trouble 
using the environment, they won't be able to experience the 
reality of a VE. 
Numerous factors lead to CS, and the knowledge base 
needs a comprehensive view of all that can lead to it. 
Because of this research gap, this study aims first to identify 
the factors contributing to CS during VR technology use. 
Secondly, a conceptual model will be created incorporating 
these identified factors. 
B. Research Objectives 
The following are the objectives of this study: 
1) To determine the causes of Cybersickness in the 
Virtual Reality environment. 
2) To 
determine 
the 
severity 
of 
cybersickness 
experienced, or susceptibility to it, before, during, or 
following a Virtual Reality session? 
3) To determine the factors that contribute to Virtual 
Reality Cybersickness 
C. Research Questions 
This research will address the following research 
questions: 
1) What are the causes of cybersickness in the Virtual 
Reality environment? 
2) How can the severity of cybersickness experienced, 
or susceptibility to it be assessed before, during, or 
following a VR session? 
3) Which factors contribute to Cybersickness during the 
application of Virtual Reality technologies? 
D. Significance of the Study 
This study aims to present a holistic view of all the 
factors that are posited to cause CS in a VR environment. It 
seeks to provide current and forthcoming VR developers 
with helpful guidance on reducing CS symptoms to facilitate 
a good VR experience. It will also act as a source of 
information for researchers delving into CS in VR. This will 
serve as a roadmap for expanding the study and making the 
link to the variables employed. Additionally, it is believed 
that this research can aid users who experience CS in VR 
settings by enhancing their user experience. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-110-7
EMERGING 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
provides literature on cybersickness causes and theories, and 
the measurement methods deployed. Section III presents the 
research methodology to conduct the Systematic Literature 
Review (SLR). The results of the SLR are presented in 
Section IV and a discussion of the research findings are 
provided in Section V. Section VI concludes the paper and 
provides recommendations for future research. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
A. Cybersickness Causes and Theories 
1) Sensory Conflict Theory 
CS is a disorder that is difficult to categorize since there 
are a variety of symptoms, the illness's effects differ from 
person to person, and there are many theories as to how it 
began [3][33]. The hypothesis discussed the most in 
literature is the Sensory Conflict Theory (SCT). It contends 
that CS results from a conflict between the information 
provided by several senses. It has been demonstrated that 
common 
motion 
sickness 
signs 
and 
physiological 
modifications, such as car or seasickness, are relatively 
similar to CS [34]. Additionally, sensory conflict seems to 
have an impact on both. But the sensory conflict in a car and 
VR are very different. 
When travelling by car, one might perceive acceleration, 
but their visual surroundings, the vehicle's interior, remain 
still. This causes motion sickness. According to the SCT, 
you can lessen the conflict by gazing out the window, 
bringing the vestibular and visual information back into 
alignment. In VR, the conflict is going in the opposite 
direction. While the vestibular sense either detects no 
motion or is out of sync with the visuals, VR users perceive 
motion and accelerations through visual cues. This affects 
how CS is treated differently from traditional motion 
sickness. 
2) Vection 
Vection, which refers to the perception of motion 
through visual stimuli, has frequently been linked to 
Visually Induced Motion Sickness (VIMS) or CS [35][36]. 
However, according to other research, vection can happen 
even when no sickness is present [35]. This shows there is 
more to the relationship between vection and CS than just a 
straightforward causal one. In their study, [36], who 
intended to further explore this connection, discovered that 
sickness is caused by a shift in vection [36]. From the 
standpoint of sensory conflict, it does make sense that CS is 
more often caused by apparent visual acceleration than by 
continuous visual motion. Conflict happens when one 
reason detects acceleration while the other does not since 
the vestibular system can only detect accelerations. 
However, the findings of [37] are at odds with those of 
the study by [36] VIMS was not significantly impacted by 
the vection's strength or fluctuation. It is posited that [37] 
may have yet to be able to successfully create a high level of 
motion sickness, which might account for these conflicting 
results. Therefore, any potential difference in the ability to 
generate motion sickness between constant and variable 
vection may have yet to be able to achieve statistical 
significance. Humans acquire information about body 
motion through their vestibular system, which detects the 
rotational and translational accelerations of the head, in 
addition to visual data. Therefore, combined with the visual 
system, the vestibular system is a crucial tool for humans to 
notice when our body is moving and distinguish between 
object motion and self-motion [38][39]. When you start 
moving in VR with a joystick, something other than this 
multisensory integration may work better. There is a sensory 
conflict since you can feel vection. Still, the vestibular 
system doesn't send any signals of self-motion. 
3) Postural Instability 
Postural instability, a notion that [41] first proposed, is 
another theory that is frequently brought up. They suggested 
that symptoms happen when you have not learned how to 
maintain yourself in that particular situation and are 
experiencing postural instability. When riding a roller 
coaster in VR while standing, you might be familiar with 
this sensation of instability.  Various studies appear to 
contradict one another, with some offering evidence for the 
theory [42][43], while others either only discovered postural 
instability as a result of CS or found no causal relationship 
at all [44]. It still needs to be determined what the exact 
relationship with CS is. However, this idea offers a 
foundation for measuring CS objectively. 
4) Rest-Frame Hypothesis 
The Rest-Frame Hypothesis is another theory that has 
influenced a typical CS mitigation technique [45]. 
According to this theory, CS results from the inability to 
identify or select a stable reference frame, also known as the 
rest-frame, from which to interpret relative movements, 
locations, and orientations. The nervous system chooses the 
rest-frame from among the various reference frames and 
gives it spatial-perceptual data [45]. According to the 
theory, the cognitive conflict that results from being unable 
to identify a single rest-frame compatible with a person's 
inertial and visual motion signals, rather than the sensory 
conflict, causes CS [40]. In other words, illness is more 
likely to be affected by how the user interprets what is 
moving and what is not based on the degree of competing 
cues. 
B. Cybersickness Measurement Methods 
As covered in the section above, there are only a few 
well-established theories on CS. Similar to this, subjective 
and objective approaches to assessing CS exist, categorized 
into physiological state, postural sway, and questionnaires. 
1) Questionnaires 
The Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) is used in 
most articles. Even though this questionnaire was first 
developed for military simulators (like flight simulators), it 
is still the most well-known for CS in VR research. From 
none to severe, participants assess the severity of 16 
symptoms on a 4-point scale. The results are divided into 
four scores: overall score, nausea, oculomotor, and 
disorientation. 
Several 
researchers 
have 
suggested 
alternatives because the SSQ's primary intent was not VR 
and was evaluated on highly skilled professionals [46][47]. 
Both the Cyber Sickness Questionnaire (CSQ) and the 
Virtual Reality Sickness Questionnaire (VRSQ) published 
by [46] and [48] can be seen as subgroups of the SSQ. Only 
nine symptoms remain when the nausea-related symptoms 
are excluded from the VRSQ. 
The Fast Motion Sickness Measure (FMS) is a one-
dimensional scale that ranges from zero to 20. This scale 
which indicates no motion sickness (zero) to severe motion 
sickness (20), was developed by [49]. It is feasible to gauge 
the time of the motion sickness since participants vocally 
rate each minute. The FMS and the SSQ score and its sub 
scores also show a substantial correlation in other research 
[49][50]. The Misery Scale (MISC) was developed by 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-110-7
EMERGING 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

Wertheim et al. as an alternative to the FMS. The scale 
extends from zero (no symptoms), to ten (vomiting). In 
addition to verbal responses, a physical dial may also be 
used to record answers on a one-dimensional illness scale, 
as [51] study showed. 
It might be essential to know a participant's vulnerability 
to motion sickness in addition to measuring CS during or 
after a VR session. Participants' susceptibilities to CS can 
vary. Thus [52] updated Motion Sickness Susceptibility 
Questionnaire (MSSQ) was developed to gauge this. The 
participant's history of motion sickness is examined using 
the MSSQ. The Visually Induced Motion Sickness 
Susceptibility Questionnaire (VIMSSQ), which looks at 
prior encounters with symptoms rather than motion sickness 
in general, was created by [49] since this questionnaire was 
not designed for CS (or VIMS). [53] also suggested and 
examined a condensed version of the VIMSSQ in another 
research study due to its length. 
2) Physiological State 
Although questionnaires are the most popular way to 
detect CS, they have certain drawbacks. First, surveys 
interfere with the user's experience, making it impossible to 
track their illness in real-time [54]. The fact that surveys are 
inherently subjective is another disadvantage. As a result, 
they only sometimes accurately gauge what they are 
attempting to perform. Researchers can assess the 
physiological status of the consumers to get past these 
issues. This is doable in real time and may offer a source of 
unbiased data. 
The user's present status might be assessed by sensors, 
which would subsequently apply the appropriate CS 
mitigation techniques. A method that can evaluate CS in 
real-time using physiological data was developed by many 
researchers using machine learning [44][55]. Based on 
physiological data, such as heart rate, breath rate, heart rate 
variability, and galvanic skin reaction, [55] created an 
entirely closed-loop system. Based on the determined 
amount of sickness, it applied Field of View (FOV) 
reduction or Gaussian blurring, which might lower the level 
of nausea. The degree of CS was determined by periodically 
evaluating the user's physiological data. The system's 
capacity to lessen CS was not put to the test. 
Despite being objective, physiological evidence has not 
been able to displace the SSQ as the gold standard for 
assessing CS. Physiological outcomes have often been 
employed in research to support their conclusions rather 
than as the primary measurement technique. Additionally, 
the SSQ or other questionnaires frequently validate 
physiological measures. Therefore, their validity is 
dependent on arbitrary information. 
3) Posturial Sway 
Postural sway, which is a type of body movement, has 
yet to be included in several investigations as an impartial 
evaluation technique, even if the relationship between 
postural instability and CS still needs to be fully understood 
[56]. [57] showed that gait metrics may also be measured to 
determine CS. They recorded the necessary data using an 
inertial measurement unit on each foot. They then used a 
support vector machine which is a machine learning model 
to create a classifier for CS. 
Using a balancing board to measure movements around 
the center of gravity is one method of documenting postural 
instability [42][58][60]. After analyzing their data, [58] 
identified the precise postural sway characteristics that 
might predict VIMS. According to the findings, those who 
reported feeling worse had postures that were more circular 
in form (as opposed to elliptical) and had a higher frequency 
of forward/backward oscillations. According to each 
participant's postural sway, [60] trained a deep, short-term 
memory model that may forecast their likelihood of 
experiencing CS. 
However, there are also sensors in users' Head Mounted 
Displays (HMD) that may capture postural sway. Head 
dispersion, or the change in roll and pitch, was put to the test 
by [59] and shown to be significantly connected to changes 
on the x- and y-axis around the center of gravity. 
Participants had to hold their heads motionless or stare 
straight ahead to assess head dispersion. The relationship 
between the location information from the HMD and CS 
was also examined by [61]. They found strong correlations 
between a few location factors and the SSQ scores, even 
though the data was pretty noisy. These findings imply that 
it may be feasible to design a system that collects the 
HMD's location data, calculates the user's level of CS in 
real-time, and utilizes that information to modify the 
methods for reducing sickness. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
A. Introduction 
This research is conducted using a SLR, defined as “a 
means of identifying, evaluating and interpreting all 
available research to a particular research question, or topic 
area, or phenomenon of interest” [6]. Simply put, an SLR is 
a review of primary studies. This study follows the SLR 
guidelines by [6], which are: identifying sources, study 
selection, data extraction, data synthesis and writing up the 
study as a report. 
B. Search Terms used in selected databases 
"Virtual Reality" AND ("cybersickness" OR "motion 
sickness" OR "simulator sickness") AND ("factors" OR 
"fail" OR "break down" OR "flounder" OR "blunder" OR 
"flop" OR "deteriorate" OR "challenge" OR "issue" OR 
"problem" OR "obstacle*" OR "success" OR "accomplish" 
OR 
"achieve" 
OR "advance" 
OR "progress*" OR 
"realisation" OR "triumph" OR "victory" OR "fruition" OR 
"attainment" OR "model" OR "method" OR "framework"). 
1) Source Selection 
The following data sources were selected to perform the 
search: 
• 
IEEE Xplore Digital Library 
• 
Scopus 
• 
ACM Digital Library 
• 
Google Scholar 
All of these databases are well-known research 
repositories in the field of information technology. In 
addition, Google Scholar was employed to help locate 
sources via backward and forward citation searches. 
2) Selection Criteria 
The selection of research material for inclusion in this 
systematic review was based on this section's inclusion and 
exclusion criteria. 
For a source to be included in the research, it had to 
meet the following criteria: 
• 
Papers describing the factors that, in a VR setting, 
lead to cybersickness. 
• 
Papers containing at least three keywords in the 
title, abstract, or keywords were chosen. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-110-7
EMERGING 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

• 
Journal articles, conference papers, book chapters, 
dissertations and theses were considered. 
• 
No limitations on publication date. 
A source is excluded from the research for the following 
reasons: 
• 
Papers that don't discuss the factors that contribute 
to cybersickness in a virtual reality setting. 
• 
Non-English language academic papers. 
• 
If the full text of the publication is not available. 
• 
Duplicate papers meaning the same paper retrieved 
from different databases. 
3) Prisma Flowchart 
The search string above was performed on the selected 
databases, returning 1231 articles. The Google Scholar 
citation search found an additional ten records. After that, 
219 duplicate papers were removed. Screening by the title 
and abstract was conducted, leaving 213 full-text articles. 
These full-text articles were further assessed for eligibility 
resulting in 28 remaining articles used for data extraction 
and synthesis (see Figure 1). The search was completed in 
August 2022. 
4) Quality Assessment 
The included papers were assessed using four quality 
assessment questions. The questions aimed to evaluate the 
quality aspects mentioned by [6]. These aspects are 
characterized as objectivity - if the research is free of bias; 
reliability - the accuracy and reliability of the research 
instruments used; internal validity - whether the research 
was well structured, so data was collected from suitable 
sources, and external validity - determines if the findings 
can be predicted for subsequent occasions. 
Therefore, the following questions were devised to 
assess the quality of the selected literature: 
Q1. Is Virtual Reality and Cybersickness factors the 
center of the discussion? 
Q2. Does the research have a clear goal in mind? 
Q3. Does the article clearly follow a research process 
and describe the data analysis techniques used? 
Q4. Does the article report its findings based on 
evidence and argument? 
These questions had three possible answers: Yes and No. 
Each response is given the following weighting: Yes = 1 
and No = 0. The final score was noted and utilized as a scale 
from 0 to 4 to represent the overall quality of the chosen 
literature. The articles' outcomes and quality rating are 
displayed in the results section. 
C. Data Extraction 
The data extraction was carried out on 28 papers 
included in the SLR. Thereafter, a qualitative thematic 
analysis was conducted to synthesize the extracted data. 
Some of the article's content was highlighted in the paper 
while it was being read. These ideas/concepts, usually 
referred to as codes, were carefully investigated to group 
them into common themes. All the pertinent information 
that helped in answering the research question was 
extracted, including the citation, the journal article or 
conference title, the source database, year published and 
study type, article sub-concepts, and the main concept. 
Google Sheets were used to extract data for the thematic 
analysis. 
 
 
Figure 1. Prisma Flowchart. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Search Results 
The articles listed in the source selection section were 
looked at in four databases, which includes Google Scholar. 
Figure 2 displays the percentage distribution. Most of the 
articles came from IEEE Explore (41.8%). Scopus accounted 
for 40.3% and ACM digital library 12.9%. Ten articles (5%) 
derived from the Google Scholar citation searches. 
Most papers included many factors, while some focused 
on one specific factor. Table I lists these 21 factors and their 
sources. 
B. Quality Evaluation of Articles 
Four questions were used to assess the quality of the 
selected literature, as mentioned earlier. Most papers were of 
good quality, with an average score of 3.75 out of 4. No 
paper scored below 3. 
 
Figure 2. Database articles percentage distribution. 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-110-7
EMERGING 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

TABLE I.  
VIRTUAL REALITY CYBERSICKNESS FACTORS WITH 
SOURCES 
Factor 
Sources 
Habituation 
[7][8][9][10] 
Duration 
[4][7][8][9][11][12][13] 
Environmental 
conditions 
[14] 
Physical Health 
[4][8][15][16][17] 
Posture 
[4][13][18] 
Gender 
[4][7][9][12][14][15][19][20][21] 
Age 
[4][7][12][15][21][22] 
Field of View 
[7][8][11][12][23] 
Flicker 
[4][12][21][24] 
Screen size 
[7][24] 
Head 
mounted 
displays 
[1][5][9][12][14][24][25][26][27] 
Lag and Frame 
Rate 
[11][28] 
Method 
of 
movement 
[24][29] 
Calibration 
[4] 
Position Tracking 
error 
[21] 
Head motion 
[13] 
Playing position 
[7] 
Locomotion 
[7][11][12][30] 
Immersion 
[7][12][31] 
Sensory support 
[31] 
Graphic Realism 
[12] 
C. Synthesis of Identified Factors 
A thematic analysis was conducted to identify the core 
themes and subthemes within the selected literature. The 
factors were categorized under subthemes and grouped under 
a theme. Initially, 42 factors were identified as contributing 
to CS in a VR environment. Upon examination of the 
definitions of each of these factors and the references made 
to them by the authors of the selected literature, 21 factors 
were merged into others resulting in 21 final factors. The 
remaining 21 factors were further analysed to identify any 
additional relationships to help categorize them. Categorizing 
the factors helps to understand the more significant themes 
and gives deeper insight. The synthesis using a thematic 
analysis went through 5 iterations resulting in three themes, 
eight subthemes, and 21 factors. These three common themes 
were identified as User, Hardware, and Software. Table II 
lists the synthesized themes, subthemes and the contributing 
CS factors. A conceptual model depicting these concepts are 
shown in Figure 3. 
TABLE II.  
SYNTHESIZED THEMES, SUBTHEMES AND FACTORS 
Themes 
Subthemes 
Factors 
User 
Experience 
Habituation 
Duration 
Environmental 
Conditions 
 
Physical attributes 
Physical Health 
Posture 
 
Demographics 
Gender 
Age 
Hardware 
Device 
Field of View 
Screen Size 
Flicker 
Head Mounted Displays 
Lag and Frame Rate 
 
Tracking 
Method of Movement 
Calibration 
Position Tracking Error 
Head Motion 
Software 
Stabilizing information 
Playing Position 
 
Environment 
Locomotion 
 
Design 
Immersion 
Sensory Support 
Graphic Realism 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
This section of the research aims to answer the three 
research questions. The core SLR themes identified are 1) 
User, 2) Hardware, and 3) Software. Each of these themes 
has sub-themes that translate into factors. The factors under 
each theme and subtheme are discussed next followed by the 
addressing the research questions. 
A. Factors Contributing to CS 
1) User: There are differences in CS susceptibility at the 
user level. These factors include Age, Gender, Habituation, 
Duration, Environmental Conditions, Physical Health and 
Posture. Each of these factors are discussed below. These 
factors are grouped in the subthemes of Demographics, 
Experience and Physical Attributes. 
a) Demographics: 
The 
Demographics 
subtheme 
consists of factors Age and Gender. 
Age. According to the literature, younger persons are 
more resistant to simulation sickness [12]. After the age of 
40, people's vestibular perception threshold, or the lowest 
signal 
recognized, 
decreases, 
rendering 
them 
more 
susceptible to simulation sickness [15]. [22], discovered 
changes in the postural balance between young and middle-
aged test participants. Furthermore, postural balance 
deteriorates when people become older, which can contribute 
to illness. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-110-7
EMERGING 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

 
Figure 3. Virtual Reality Cybersickness Conceptual Model. 
Gender. Females have consistently been found to be 
more susceptible than males to CS. With the usage of HMDs, 
CS may differ depending on gender. [20] investigated the 
influence of gender and technology and their possible 
contributions to simulation sickness. Using data from 223 
people (108 men and 115 women), they investigated the 
degrees of simulation sickness concerning gender, sensory 
conflict, and advancements in VR technology. They 
concluded that women had a greater level of simulation 
sickness than males. [14] conducted many trials. They 
discovered that females were equally susceptible to motion 
sickness caused by an improper fit of the VR headgear to the 
inter-pupillary distance (the distance between the centre of 
one's eyes). They also propose that VR headsets be 
redesigned with adjustable interpupillary distance to decrease 
CS in women. 
b) Experience: The Experience subtheme consists of 
factors Habituation, Environmental Conditions and 
Duration. 
Habituation. According to [9], an increase in exposure 
time was directly related to the degree of unpleasant 
symptoms. Compared to non-susceptible individuals, those 
prone to motion sickness might suffer nearly double the 
severity. Users who feel nausea when riding carnival rides 
might expect to endure unpleasant sensations. Exposing a 
person to virtual surroundings briefly, halting the encounter 
before or during illness, and retrying in a day or two will 
assist the user in acclimatizing to the virtual world. Exposure 
to virtual settings regularly may reduce or eliminate 
simulation sickness. 
Environmental conditions. CS symptoms worsen in 
environments with high temperatures and inadequate 
ventilation. Good airflow and ventilation can help reduce 
nausea and aid recovery after dizziness [14]. 
Duration. Several studies have found that more than 10 
minutes of VR exposure can cause nausea, and the longer the 
exposure period, the more severe the VR sickness [7][8] 
[11][12]. According to these studies, the application should 
allow users to pause the experience for a rest and then 
resume it later. In contrast, an application might advise users 
to take breaks regularly to avoid unpleasant sensations [11]. 
c) Physical 
Attributes: 
The 
Physical 
Attributes 
subtheme consists of factors Physical Health and 
Posture. 
Physical Health. The user's senses must be at their peak 
to attain a heightened presence level. For the optimum VR 
experience, users should be physically fit and have a strong 
sense of balance. If a user has a hangover, cold, headache, is 
tired, or is sleep deprived, it is best to avoid a virtual 
environment since their symptoms may aggravate [11]. 
Posture. Postural instability is a well-documented 
consequence of exposure to a Virtual Environment (VE). 
Postural stability is frequently assessed before and after VE 
exposure to detect changes in stability caused by the 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-110-7
EMERGING 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

exposure. Less posturally stable individuals are more likely 
to get CS or suffer from more severe illness when compared 
to more posturally stable individuals [4][13][18]. 
2) Hardware 
Some factors associated with hardware used in a VE can 
induce CS. These include HMDs, Flicker, Field of View 
(FOV), Lag and Frame Rate, Screen Size, Method of 
Movement, Calibration, Position Tracking Error, and Head 
Motion. These factors are grouped in the subthemes of 
Device and Tracking. 
a) Device: The Device subtheme consists of factors 
HMDs, Flicker, FOV, Lag and Frame Rate, and 
Screen Size. 
Head-Mounted Displays (HMDs). When using HMDs, 
settings, such as contrast, light, exposure length, and 
operating distance all contribute to straining the visual 
system. When utilizing a stereoscopic HMD, such as 
EyePhone LX, in an immersive virtual world for 10 
minutes, around 60% of respondents exhibited symptoms, 
such as eye strain, nausea, and headache, while 20% 
reported a loss in binocular visual perception [27]. Similar 
symptoms were reported by 61% of participants following 
twenty minutes of exposure to immersive virtual material 
using a DVisor HMD [26]. 
Technical developments in VR display technology, such 
as Oculus VR DK1 and Oculus VR DK2, did not 
significantly reduce CS [20]. Sensory conflict, however, 
plays a vital role in developing nausea and other symptoms. 
Body movement, confusion caused by head movement, and 
poor optical design led to strain-induced ocular pain. [1] 
recently observed that using HMDs caused more motion 
sickness than stereoscopic desktop displays. Some users 
stated that they felt more immersed in an HMD. However, 
they could only sustain the experience for a short period. 
Flicker. Flicker has been extensively researched. The 
literature [4][12][21][24] suggests that flicker should be 
avoided at all costs. In a VR scenario, flicker is the 
brightness fluctuation on video screens that can cause 
nausea. This oscillation is visually disturbing and affects the 
user's eye health. When using larger displays, the user is 
likely to see flicker around the screen's edges. Avoiding 
flicker is crucial for HMDs with brighter panels and a high 
refresh rate [12]. Several components of the visual 
presentation influence flicker perception. The most relevant 
to visual displays or VR systems are the refresh rate, 
brightness level, and field of vision [4]. To reduce flicker, 
the refresh rate must increase as the brightness level 
increases [21]. 
Field of view (FOV). The display's horizontal and 
vertical angular dimensions are known as the FOV [23]. CS 
is more common in VE situations with a wide FOV than in 
those with a narrow FOV [7]. This is likely due to enhanced 
vection caused by higher peripheral retina stimulation from 
a broad FOV display [8]. A wide FOV also enhances the 
probability of detecting flicker [11]. This is because the 
peripheral visual system is more sensitive to flicker. To 
eliminate flicker, a broader FOV requires a quicker refresh 
rate [11]. 
Lag and Frame Rate. Latency is the time elapsed 
between the user's input and the visible response in a VE 
display. Frame rate measures how rapidly frames flow 
through the rendering process. A dip in frame rate might 
occur in a VR application with sophisticated visuals. 
Suppose the delay between user input and virtual content 
production is significant. In that case, there is a considerable 
risk of developing simulation sickness [11]. A suggested 
delay is 20 milliseconds; anything greater than 46 
milliseconds might cause motion nausea. Companies, such 
as Oculus, Sony, and Steam stress the significance of virtual 
content with low latency, responsiveness, and fast frame 
rates for greater virtual content quality [28]. 
Screen size. Vection is highest in peripherally moving 
visual flow fields [7]. As a result, huge displays pose an 
increased risk of motion sickness. With full flow fields, 
virtually everyone will feel intense vection. As a general 
rule, the smaller the visual picture (or display), the lower the 
likelihood of CS [24]. Laboratory investigations have shown 
that the danger of vection is limited, with pictures reaching a 
viewing angle of fewer than 300 degrees [7]. A typical 17-
inch computer screen, seen from a distance of 50 cm, 
contains 340 pixels and will not readily cause vection [7]. 
b) Tracking: The Tracking subtheme consists of the 
factor’s Method of Movement, Calibration, 
Position Tracking Error and Head Motion. These 
are discussed below. 
Method of Movement. The VR user does not always 
have control over the character's motions. This lack of 
mobility can lead to significant problems. To satisfy sensory 
expectations, movement in a virtual world should be 
realistic. Inappropriate motions, such as quick tilting, 
rolling, and waveform motions, should be avoided. Gun 
sway, head bob, and moving up and down stairs are 
incorrect movements. According to [11], incorporating 
motions centered on leaps rather than continuous walks may 
help to reduce nausea. Uncontrolled user movement outputs 
should be restricted, such as flipping, falling, or zoom 
transitions [29]. 
Calibration. Because of variances in human physical 
traits, 
poor 
calibration 
exacerbates 
CS 
symptoms. 
Interpupillary distance, for example, the distance between 
the pupils' centers in both eyes, differs among persons [4]. 
Because stereoscopic displays require each eye to get a 
slightly offset image of the virtual world, this offset must be 
as near to the user's individual interpupillary distance as 
feasible. Calibration failure might result in greater spatial 
and temporal distortions, setting the scene for CS due to 
distorted graphics [4]. As a result, each individual requires 
suitable calibration. [4] believe that the right size, 
appropriate focus, and perfect alignment will aid in treating 
CS. 
Position Tracking Error. The VR system's position-
tracking error informs the computer about the location of the 
user's head and, presumably, limbs in the VE [21]. The 
system uses this data to create a graphical depiction of the 
user within the VE. If this information needs to be corrected, 
tracked items may appear in locations where they are not. If 
the tracked items are part of the user's body, the mismatch 
between where the graphical representation of the objects 
appears in the visual display and where the user believes 
they should appear may bother the user [21]. As a result, the 
illusion of the simulation may be broken, resulting in 
sickness-related symptoms, such as dizziness and loss of 
focus. Finally, location tracking mistakes might generate 
jitter or oscillations of portrayed body parts, which can be 
disturbing for users [21]. 
Head motion. According to [13], adopting a supine 
posture results in a considerable reduction in CS. They 
ascribed this to limited head mobility. Head movements are 
known to be related to CS via Coriolis and pseudo-Coriolis 
stimulation pathways [13]. When the head is tilted away 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-110-7
EMERGING 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

from the axis of rotation during actual body rotation, Coriolis 
stimulation occurs [13]. When the head is inclined, apparent 
self-rotation is caused by visual cues, resulting in pseudo-
Coriolis stimulation [13]. 
3) Software 
    The characteristics of the software in a VE may impact 
the probability of CS. The theme is divided into three 
subthemes: Stabilizing Information, Environment, and 
Design. Playing Position, Locomotion, Immersion, Sensory 
Support, and Graphic Realism are contributing factors. 
a) Stabilizing Information: The stabilizing 
information subtheme consists of the Playing 
Position factor. 
Playing Position. [13] revealed that a significant 
reduction in CS occurs when individuals assume a supine 
position, probably due to limited head mobility. Subjects are 
expected to be seated or standing in most circumstances 
within a VE [7]. Because of the lower demands on postural 
control, sitting patients would experience less illness, 
according to [7]. 
b) Environment: The Environment subtheme consists 
of the factor Locomotion. 
    Locomotion. A vital factor in VE discomfort is 
accelerated movement or speed. Sensory conflicts that can 
cause discrepancies occur due to sudden increased or 
decreased acceleration. Therefore, increasing or decreasing 
acceleration slowly would result in a pleasant user 
experience [11]. Rapidly zoomed movements should also be 
avoided, such as when the visual cones move faster than 
expected when a user’s view is zoomed in [30]. 
c) Design: The Design subtheme consists of factors 
Immersion, Sensory Support and Graphic Realism. 
Immersion. [5] studied the impact of virtual content type 
on simulation sickness. They noticed that the type of video 
content, immersive vs. non-immersive, is a critical factor for 
VE 
usability. 
Video 
content 
type 
influenced 
the 
contributor’s 
sensitivity 
to 
simulation 
sickness 
and 
physiology. Their conclusion was based on the results of a 
Simulation Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) and other 
physiological measures. The lowest SSQ score was recorded 
for non-immersive virtual content displayed on a television 
screen, while the highest scores were reported on an HMD 
with immersive content [5]. 
Sensory Support. A user might experience higher VR 
immersion and expect relevant vestibular information after 
exposure to strong illusions. The system can cause motion 
sickness if the VR system cannot provide suitable sensory 
input [31]. Therefore, designing a logical environment in 
which the players can focus and bind is essential. The user 
interface elements should be fixed rather than floating, 
creating an environment with a clear, steady horizon and 
reference points that users can focus on to minimize 
sickness. 
A 
world 
with 
imbalanced 
or 
changing 
backgrounds should be avoided. Designing a virtual world 
that supports human sensory systems is ideal [31]. 
Graphic Realism. [12] investigated the results of 
rendering realistic scenes. Participants who experienced 
realistic graphic content were prone to a higher level of 
simulation sickness. The authors also suspect that a sensory 
discrepancy between the vestibular and visual systems may 
cause a higher level of discomfort. 
B. Answering the research questions 
1) What are the causes of cybersickness in the Virtual 
Reality environment? 
A literature review was done in an attempt to understand 
the reasons why individuals become cyber sick in a VR 
environment. The Sensory Conflict Hypothesis was the CS 
theory discovered to be the most often discussed in the 
literature. According to the hypothesis, illness results from 
an imbalance between two sensory systems, the vestibular 
and visual systems. Other research identifies postural 
instability or the absence of a rest-frame, a fixed reference 
frame, contributing to CS [41]. However, experiencing 
motion sickness in VR can potentially lead to postural 
instability. 
2) How can the severity of cybersickness experienced, 
or susceptibility to it be assessed before, during, or 
following a session? 
To provide an answer to this question, a literature review 
was conducted. According to the literature there are several 
objective and subjective techniques to gauge one's 
vulnerability to or degree of CS. Although the CSQ and 
VRSQ have shown superior validity for VR, according to 
the study of [47], the SSQ is still the most often used 
assessment technique. Examples of one-dimensional scales 
that let researchers quantify CS while participants are in VR 
are the FMS and MISC [49]. The MSSQ assesses prior 
experiences with motion sickness generally, whereas the 
VIMSSQ assesses susceptibility to CS [49]. 
In addition to surveys, the physiological condition also 
reveals how much CS individuals feel. The advantage of 
physiological data collection is that it can be done 
throughout the VR experience and is a reliable source of 
factual information. Measuring the characteristics of gait or 
postural sway is another technique to obtain objective data. 
CS was shown to be connected with specific VR headset 
positional and rotational features by [67]. 
3) Which factors contribute to Cybersickness during the 
application of Virtual Reality technologies? 
A systematic review was conducted to answer this 
question. Systematic reviews deliver an orderly, clear means 
for gathering, synthesizing and evaluating the results of 
studies on a specific topic or question [32]. The purpose of a 
systematic review is to minimize the bias linked with 
solitary studies and non-systematic reviews [32]. A thematic 
analysis was used to identify the core themes and factors 
within the selected literature. 
Twenty-eight publications were included in the 
systematic review based on four carefully chosen databases. 
Twenty-one factors were found to contribute to CS during 
the application of VR technologies. These factors are Age, 
Calibration, Duration, Environmental Conditions, Field of 
View, Flicker, Gender, Graphic Realism, Habituation, Head 
Motion, Head Mounted Displays, Immersion, Lag and 
Frame Rate, Locomotion, Method of Movement, Physical 
Health, Playing Position, Position Tracking Error, Posture, 
Screen Size, and Sensory Support. As a result, a conceptual 
model of the factors that lead to CS has been developed. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
     The primary goal of this study was to identify and 
describe the factors that contribute to CyberSickness (CS) in 
a Virtual Reality (VR) environment. This was achieved 
through a SLR and thematic analysis. A model of the factors 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-110-7
EMERGING 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

that lead to CS has been developed to aid in the study of CS 
in VR. 
     After conducting this study, it became clear that CS is 
a multifaceted issue. At present, there is no silver bullet 
solution. Fortunately, many solutions have been thought of 
already. Some are more effective than others. We can get 
closer to a VR experience potentially free of CS by testing 
and further investigating CS and its underlying mechanisms. 
One-by-one CS-inducing factors could be reduced if not 
eliminated. 
     Limitations of this study are, firstly, only English-
language publications were considered. Therefore, data that 
might be pertinent to the research question but was written 
in a different language is excluded from this study. Second, 
just four data sources were utilized to do the SLR; as a 
result, it's possible that relevant material from other 
databases was missed. Third, there is a chance that the 
SLR's search string is not rigorous enough, which might 
have left out essential themes and factors. 
     Future researchers and practitioners can evaluate the 
factors that lead to CS in a VR environment using the model 
developed. Similar research should also be conducted to 
support or refute this study's factors and themes. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Yildirim, “Don’t make me sick: investigating the incidence of 
cybersickness in commercial virtual reality headsets”. Virtual 
Reality, 24, no. 2, pp. 231-239, 2020. 
[2] K. Berntsen, R. C. Palacios, and E. Herranz, “Virtual reality and its 
uses: a systematic literature review”. In Proceedings of the Fourth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Technological 
Ecosystems 
for 
Enhancing Multiculturality, pp. 435-439, 2016. 
[3] L. Rebenitsch and C. Owen, “Review on cybersickness in 
applications and visual displays”. Virtual Reality, 20, no. 2, pp. 101-
125, 2016. 
[4] S. Davis, K. Nesbitt, and E. Nalivaiko, “A systematic review of 
cybersickness”. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on interactive 
entertainment, pp. 1-9, 2014. 
[5] J. Guna et al., “Virtual reality sickness and challenges behind 
different technology and content settings”. Mobile Networks and 
Applications, 25, no. 4, pp. 1436-1445, 2020. 
[6] B. Kitchenham, Procedures for performing systematic reviews. Keele, 
UK, Keele University, 33, pp. 1-26, 2004. 
[7] L. Rebenitsch, “Managing cybersickness in virtual reality”. XRDS: 
Crossroads, The ACM Magazine for Students, 22, no. 1, pp. 46-51, 
2015. 
[8] L. Rebenitsch and C. Owen, “Individual variation in susceptibility to 
cybersickness”. In Proceedings of the 27th annual ACM symposium 
on User interface software and technology, pp. 309-317, 2014. 
[9] K. M. Stanney, K.S. Hale, I. Nahmens, and R. S. Kennedy, “What to 
expect from immersive virtual environment exposure: Influences of 
gender, body mass index, and past experience”. Human factors, 45, 
no. 3, pp. 504-520, 2003. 
[10] L. Rebenitsch and B. Quinby, “Cybersickness and postural sway 
using hmd orientation”. In International conference on human-
computer interaction, Springer, Cham, pp. 500-509, 2019. 
[11] T. M. Porcino, E. Clua, D. Trevisan, C. N. Vasconcelos, and L. 
Valente, “Minimizing cyber sickness in head mounted display 
systems: design guidelines and applications”. In 2017 IEEE 5th 
international conference on serious games and applications for 
health (SeGAH), IEEE, pp. 1-6, 2017. 
[12] E. Chang, H. T. Kim, and B. Yoo, “Virtual reality sickness: a review 
of causes and measurements”. International Journal of Human–
Computer Interaction, 36, no. 17, pp. 1658-1682, 2020. 
[13] G. Wang and A. Suh, “User adaptation to cybersickness in virtual 
reality: a qualitative study”. In 27th European Conference on 
Information Systems (ECIS 2019): Information Systems for a Sharing 
Society. Association for Information Systems (AIS), 2019. 
[14] K. Stanney, C. Fidopiastis, and L. Foster, “Virtual reality is sexist: but 
it does not have to be”. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 7, 4, 2020. 
[15] M. Mousavi, Y. H. Jen, and S. N. B. Musa, “A review on 
cybersickness and usability in virtual environments”. In Advanced 
engineering forum, vol. 10. Trans Tech Publications Ltd, pp. 34-39, 
2013. 
[16] S. 
Bruck 
and 
P. 
A. 
Watters, 
“The 
factor 
structure 
of 
cybersickness”. Displays, 32, no. 4, pp. 153-158, 2011. 
[17] A. K. Ng, C. H. Leung, L. K. Chan, and H.Y. Lau, “Human Factors 
Related to Cybersickness Tolerance in Virtual Environment”. In 2022 
IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces Abstracts 
and Workshops (VRW). IEEE, pp. 528-532, 2022. 
[18] S. Ang and J. Quarles, “You’re in for a Bumpy Ride! Uneven Terrain 
Increases Cybersickness While Navigating with Head Mounted 
Displays”. In 2022 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User 
Interfaces (VR). IEEE, pp. 428-435, 2022. 
[19] K. Stanney et al., “Identifying causes of and solutions for 
cybersickness in immersive technology: reformulation of a research 
and development agenda”. International Journal of Human–
Computer Interaction, 36, no. 19, pp. 1783-1803, 2020. 
[20] D. M. Shafer, C. P. Carbonara, and M. F. Korpi, “Modern virtual 
reality 
technology: 
cybersickness, 
sense 
of 
presence, 
and 
gender”. Media Psychology Review, 11, no. 2, 1, 2017. 
[21] J. J. LaViola Jr, “A discussion of cybersickness in virtual 
environments”. ACM Sigchi Bulletin, 32, no. 1, pp. 47-56, 2000. 
[22] P. Era, P. Sainio, S. Koskinen, P. Haavisto, M. Vaara, and A. 
Aromaa. “Postural balance in a random sample of 7,979 subjects aged 
30 years and over”. Gerontology, 52, no. 4, pp. 204-213, 2006. 
[23] J. Teixeira and S. Palmisano, “Effects of dynamic field-of-view 
restriction on cybersickness and presence in HMD-based virtual 
reality”. Virtual Reality, 25, no. 2, pp. 433-445, 2021. 
[24] W. Bles, and A. H. Wertheim, “Appropriate use of virtual 
environments to minimise motion sickness”. Human Factors Research 
Inst Tno Soesterberg (Netherlands), 2001. 
[25] D. Saredakis et al., “Factors associated with virtual reality sickness in 
head-mounted 
displays: 
a 
systematic 
review 
and 
meta-
analysis”. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 14, 96, 2020. 
[26] P. Caserman, A. Garcia-Agundez, A. Gámez Zerban, and S. Göbel, 
“Cybersickness in current-generation virtual reality head-mounted 
displays: systematic review and outlook”. Virtual Reality, 25, no. 4, 
pp. 1153-1170, 2021. 
[27] M. Mon‐Williams, J. P. Warm, and S. Rushton, “Binocular vision in a 
virtual world: visual deficits following the wearing of a head‐mounted 
display”. Ophthalmic and Physiological Optics, 13, no. 4, pp. 387-
391, 1993. 
[28] K. Raaen and I. Kjellmo, “Measuring latency in virtual reality 
systems”. In International Conference on Entertainment Computing. 
Springer, Cham, pp. 457-462, 2015. 
[29] S. Sharples, S. Cobb, A. Moody, and J. R. Wilson, “Virtual reality 
induced symptoms and effects (VRISE): Comparison of head 
mounted 
display 
(HMD), 
desktop 
and 
projection 
display 
systems”. Displays, 29, no. 2, pp. 58-69, 2008. 
[30] Y. Farmani and R. J. Teather, “Evaluating discrete viewpoint control 
to reduce cybersickness in virtual reality”. Virtual Reality, 24, no. 4, 
pp. 645-664, 2020. 
[31] Y. Y. Kim et al., “The application of biosignal feedback for reducing 
cybersickness from exposure to a virtual environment”. Presence: 
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 17, no. 1, pp. 1-16, 2008. 
[32] J. Jesson, L. Matheson, and F. M. Lacey, “Doing your systematic 
review-Traditional and systematic techniques”. International Journal 
of STEM Education, 2020. 
[33] M. C. Howard and E. C. Van Zandt, “A meta-analysis of the virtual 
reality problem: Unequal effects of virtual reality sickness across 
individual differences”. Virtual Reality, 25, no. 4, pp. 1221-1246, 
2021. 
[34] A. M. Gavgani, K. V. Nesbitt, K. L. Blackmore, and E. Nalivaiko, 
“Profiling subjective symptoms and autonomic changes associated 
with cybersickness”. Autonomic Neuroscience, 203, pp. 41-50, 2017. 
[35] R. H. So, W. T. Lo, and A. T. Ho, “Effects of navigation speed on 
motion 
sickness 
caused 
by 
an 
immersive 
virtual 
environment”. Human factors, 43 no. 3, pp. 452-461, 2001. 
[36] F. Bonato, A. Bubka, S. Palmisano, D. Phillip, and G. Moreno, 
“Vection 
change 
exacerbates 
simulator 
sickness 
in 
virtual 
environments”. Presence: 
Teleoperators 
and 
Virtual 
Environments, 17, no. 3, pp. 283-292, 2008. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-110-7
EMERGING 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

[37] O. X. Kuiper, J. E. Bos, and C. Diels, “Vection does not necessitate 
visually induced motion sickness”. Displays, 58, pp. 82-87, 2019. 
[38] M. W. Greenlee et al., “Multisensory integration in self motion 
perception”. Multisensory Research, 29, no. 6-7, pp. 525-556, 2016. 
[39] A. M. Green and D. E. Angelaki, “Multisensory integration: resolving 
sensory ambiguities to build novel representations”. Current opinion 
in neurobiology, 20, no. 3, pp. 353-360, 2010. 
[40] A. Delorme and C. Martin, “Roles of retinal periphery and depth 
periphery in linear vection and visual control of standing in 
humans”. Canadian Journal of Psychology/Revue canadienne de 
psychologie, 40, no.2, 176, 1986. 
[41] G. E. Riccio and T. A. Stoffregen, “An ecological theory of motion 
sickness and postural instability”. Ecological psychology, 3, no. 3, pp. 
195-240, 1991. 
[42] D. Risi and S. Palmisano, “Effects of postural stability, active control, 
exposure duration and repeated exposures on HMD induced 
cybersickness”. Displays, 60, pp. 9-17, 2019. 
[43] S. Litleskare, “The relationship between postural stability and 
cybersickness: it's complicated–an experimental trial assessing 
practical implications of cybersickness etiology”. Physiology & 
behavior, 236, 113422, 2021. 
[44] M. S. Dennison and M. D’Zmura, “Cybersickness without the 
wobble: Experimental results speak against postural instability 
theory”. Applied ergonomics, 58, pp. 215-223, 2017. 
[45] E. Chang et al., “Effects of rest frames on cybersickness and 
oscillatory brain activity”. In 2013 International winter workshop on 
brain-computer interface (BCI). IEEE, pp. 62-64, 2013.        
[46] W. B. Stone III, Psychometric evaluation of the Simulator Sickness 
Questionnaire as a measure of cybersickness (Doctoral dissertation, 
Iowa State University), 2017. 
[47] V. Sevinc, and M. I. Berkman, “Psychometric evaluation of Simulator 
Sickness Questionnaire and its variants as a measure of cybersickness 
in consumer virtual environments”. Applied ergonomics, 82, 102958, 
2020. 
[48] H. K. Kim, J. Park, Y. Choi, and M. Choe, “Virtual reality sickness 
questionnaire (VRSQ): Motion sickness measurement index in a 
virtual reality environment”. Applied ergonomics, 69, pp. 66-73, 
2018. 
[49] B. Keshavarz, and H. Hecht, “Validating an efficient method to 
quantify motion sickness”. Human factors, 53, no. 4, pp. 415-426, 
2011. 
[50] R. Reinhard et al., “The best way to assess visually induced motion 
sickness in a fixed-base driving simulator”. Transportation research 
part F: traffic psychology and behaviour, 48, pp. 74-88, 2017. 
[51] N. McHugh, S. Jung, S. Hoermann, and R. W. Lindeman, 
“Investigating a physical dial as a measurement tool for cybersickness 
in virtual reality”. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM Symposium on 
Virtual Reality Software and Technology, pp. 1-5, 2019. 
[52] J. F. Golding, “Motion sickness susceptibility questionnaire revised 
and its relationship to other forms of sickness”. Brain research 
bulletin, 47, no. 5, pp. 507-516, 1998. 
[53] J. F. Golding, A. Rafiq, and B. Keshavarz, “Predicting individual 
susceptibility to visually induced motion sickness by questionnaire”. 
Frontiers in Virtual Reality, 2, 576871, 2021. 
[54] E. Nalivaiko, S. L. Davis, K. L. Blackmore, A. Vakulin, and K. V. 
Nesbitt, “Cybersickness provoked by head-mounted display affects 
cutaneous vascular tone, heart rate and reaction time”. Physiology & 
behavior, 151, pp. 583-590, 2015. 
[55] R. Islam, S. Ang, and J. Quarles, Cybersense: “A closed-loop 
framework to detect cybersickness severity and adaptively apply 
reduction techniques”. In 2021 IEEE Conference on virtual reality 
and 3d user interfaces abstracts and workshops (VRW). IEEE, pp. 
148-155, 2021. 
[56] E. Chang, H. T. Kim, and B. Yoo, “Virtual reality sickness: a review 
of causes and measurements”. International Journal of Human–
Computer Interaction, 36, no. 17, pp. 1658-1682, 2020. 
[57] T. Feigl et al., “Sick moves! motion parameters as indicators of 
simulator sickness”. IEEE transactions on visualization and computer 
graphics, 25, no. 11, pp. 3146-3157, 2019. 
[58] J. R. Chardonnet, M. A. Mirzaei, and F. Mérienne, “Features of the 
postural sway signal as indicators to estimate and predict visually 
induced motion sickness in virtual reality”. International Journal of 
Human–Computer Interaction, 33, no. 10, pp. 771-785, 2017. 
[59] K. Lim, J. Lee, K. Won, N. Kala, and T. Lee, “A novel method for 
VR sickness reduction based on dynamic field of view processing”. 
Virtual Reality, 25, pp. 331-340, 2021. 
[60] G. Wang and S. Ayoung, "User adaptation to cybersickness in virtual 
reality: a qualitative study". In Proceedings of the 27th European 
Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Stockholm & Uppsala, 
Sweden, June 8-14, pp. 5-15, 2019. ISBN 978-1-7336325-0-8 
Research Papers. 
[61] L. Rebenitsch and B. Quinby, “Cybersickness and postural sway 
using HMD orientation”. In Virtual, Augmented and Mixed Reality. 
Multimodal Interaction: 11th International Conference, VAMR 2019, 
Held as Part of the 21st HCI International Conference, HCII 2019, 
Orlando, FL, USA, July 26–31, 2019, Proceedings, Part I 21, Springer 
International Publishing, pp. 500-509, 2019. 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-110-7
EMERGING 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

