Perception of English Teachers towards the Use of Technology in Class
The Case of Nabatieh Area (Lebanon) Schools
Khadija Salameh, Hassan M. Khachfe
School of Education
Business, Educational & Management Optimization Research Institute (BE-MORE)
Lebanese International University
Nabatieh, Lebanon
Emails: 41130018@students.liu.edu.lb, hassan.khachfe@liu.edu.lb
Abstract—This study investigates the perception of English
teachers about the use of technology in their classes in
Nabatieh – South Lebanon – schools. Descriptive qualitative
and quantitative methodology, which includes a questionnaire
and interview questions, is used to answer the research
questions.
Data
is
collected
from
English
teachers
and
coordinators from Nabatieh district schools – both public and
private
–
and
a
university,
the
Lebanese
International
University (LIU).
The findings revealed that technology is
used more in Nabatieh private schools, English teachers at
Nabatieh
schools
are
well-equipped
with
technology,
technology
use enhances the
students’
performance and
attention in class, and that technology is frequently used in
teaching English in classes.
Keywords-attitude; perception; technology; Lebanon.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Technology provides various options to make teaching
more
interesting
and
productive
when
it
comes
to
improvements. Today, technology is being used as part of
new, updated methods in teaching to serve students with
auditory and visuals aids [1]. As the English language is
becoming increasingly used globally, it is being learned and
spoken
by
many individuals
every day.
Technology-
mediated language learning seems to be most successful
when the technology is continuously integrated into the
overall activity and where it is used as a tool in curriculum.
Technology is continuously being used for many skills and
activities of language teaching [2].
This paper is organized into four sections, as follows:
Section 2 contains the literature review of the study. Section
3 investigates the methodology of the study upon discussing
the design of study, participants, instruments, findings, and
data analysis. The results and their discussion are presented
in Section 4. We conclude this paper in Section 5.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
A.
The impact of technology integration
The
impact
of
integrating
Information
and
Communication Technology (ICT) in education has been
explored by many researchers in various contexts and
settings. There was a common result in most of the studies,
which showed the effectiveness of technology use in
education and how it helps in creating teaching methods and
developing
students’
knowledge.
Technology
provides
learners access to high amount of data that the teacher has no
control on. However, teachers in schools are being more
active in implementing new thoughts while their attitude and
beliefs may support improvements in education. Technology
gives students the opportunity to learn in the most updated
ways. Using technology in language classes, like English
language, is changing the way we learn. The Internet gives
access to new vocabulary, mostly because the users lead the
language to specific ways. The positive results of technology
integration in education have persuaded many countries to
include the use of technology in their programs in order to
develop
workforces
that
are
skilled
and
educated
in
technology, as well as being able to meet with international
challenges [3].
B.
The barriers to the effective use of technology in
education
Lack of professional development is one of the barriers,
where in many schools, teachers do not feel ready to learn
technology and integrate it while teaching in class, whereas
students know how to use technology for educational
purposes. Another barrier is resistance to change; in this
case, some teachers prefer to stick to the old methods of
teaching. Using technology in class can be very demanding
at first because students need some assistance [4]. Also, the
lack of innovation can be considered another barrier where
teachers need to be creative when using technology tools in
classes. For some teachers, it is easy to learn, while others
take some time to learn technology tools in their teaching
[5]. Access to technology is the most obvious barrier, where
some schools lack access to technological equipment that
can be used as auditory and visual aids [6].
C.
Training educators to integrate technology in
classrooms
Teachers need to comprehend the latest approaches for
applying technology in class in order to have effective
technology enhanced instructional strategies. How a teacher
feels about applying technology in class impacts how it is
used in classrooms and how it affects students’ learning. It is
important to include teacher training in schools a keep
teachers informed about new technology programs and tools
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-680-4
EMERGING 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

so that teachers will be ready to use it with their students and
make teaching and learning an easy and fun process [3].
D.
Analysis on necessity of application of multimedia
technology to English teaching
There are many reasons to apply multimedia technology
to English teaching. One of the reasons is that it cultivates
students’ interest to study [7]. Another reason is that
multimedia technology promotes students’ communication
capacity [2]. Also, it is used to widen students’ knowledge to
gain insightful understanding to Western culture [7]. In
addition, multimedia technology helps improve the effect of
teaching [2]. Moreover, it improves the interaction between
students and teachers. Multimedia technology also creates a
context for teaching languages [7]. Finally, multimedia
technology provides flexibility for the course content [2].
III.
METHODOLOGY
A.
Design of the study
The study is classified as descriptive qualitative and
quantitative, since the results will be described and analyzed
statistically to get information about research questions and
hypothesis. Commercially available statistical packages are
used to analyze the data.
B.
Participants
The participants that will be helping in collecting data for
the research are English teachers and English coordinators
from various schools – both public and private – and a
university in Nabatieh district.
C.
Instrument
In this research, the techniques or instruments to be used
are a questionnaire that the English teachers will fill in and
an interview that will be done with the English coordinators.
The questionnaire is made up of 24 questions built using
Google Forms and the interview includes 8 questions. We
got the ethical approval from the University Institutional
Review Board (IRB), as well as the permission from the
Ministry of education to be able to apply these two
instruments in the schools
IV.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The teachers who replied to the survey were 46; 34
teachers from Nabatieh, 2 from Bekaa, 1, Mount Lebanon,
and 10 from South Lebanon. English teachers were females
more that they were males, and the age distribution is given
in Fig. 1. The teachers that replied to the survey are public
school teachers more than they are private teachers. Most of
the English teachers have Master’s degree (60.9%), BA
(34.8%) and the others are distributed to other educational
levels. Their educational experience is depicted in Fig.2, and
their distribution by cycle is in Fig. 3.
Figure 2.
Teaching experience of the responding English teachers.
Most of the teachers use computer applications in their
class, and most of the English teachers have received training
sessions. The majority of the schools consider ICT training
as not obligatory. Also, most of the schools do not have an
ICT coordinator, and most the schools do not reward
teachers for using ICT in class.
Figure 3.
The distribution per cycle of the responding English teachers.
The data show that most of the school’s computers are
located
in
the computer
laboratory,
while
others are
distributed in other places in the schools and very few
schools do not have computers.
Not only do most of the
English teachers use ICT in their class (Fig. 4), some because
they choose to do so and some because of curriculum
requirements, the majority of these teachers believe that their
knowledge of content, pedagogy and technology is enough to
use ICT in class. Most of the teachers agree that ICT has a
positive impact on the learning process, and many teachers
agree that ICT allows students to be attracted more to the
lesson explanation, and agree that ICT helps students in
academic performance.
Figure 1.
Age group of the responding English teachers.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-680-4
EMERGING 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

Figure 4.
The frequency of using technology in the classes of the
responding English teachers.
The findings showed that the more teaching experience
the teachers have, the easier the use of ICT in their class. The
teachers who use ICT more in class are in private schools,
holding Master’s degrees, and aged between 21 and 40. Most
of the teachers who believe they are very good in integrating
ICT in class, have received ICT training sessions.
Figure 5.
The presence of proper staff for ICT equipment in the classes
of the responding English teachers.
The teachers that said they do not have computers in their
schools are of public schools, while in private schools, the
teachers have access to computers and technological help
(Fig. 5). It was also shown that, in these private schools, ICT
is obligatory in the curriculum. The teachers who received
ICT training sessions consider they are well-knowledgeable
in the subject matter, are willing to integrate ICT in class
(Fig. 6 and Fig. 7), and use ICT more frequently in teaching
English (Fig. 8).
In correlation, the results revealed (data not shown) that
the teachers, both holding higher degrees and of younger
ages, are the ones advocating the use of ICT in the
classrooms. While the years of experience did not play as
important a role as did the level of training on ICT, it was
evident that the resistance to change concept is a driving
force in halting the introduction of ICT in some schools.
V.
CONCLUSION
Using technology in classrooms is important for both
teachers
and
students.
The
results
have
shown
that
technology is used in private schools more than in public
schools. Also, it is shown that some schools need to be
aware of the use of technology where training should be
provided and technology equipment included.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The researchers would like to extend their gratitude to the
English instructors who were involved in this study and who
made it possible.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Phil, “Integrating Technology into English Language
Teaching,”
Retrieved:
March,
2018
from
http://ijellh.com/papers/2014/October/27-283-290-october-
2014.pdf?x72302
[2]
T. Pepe, “Teacher Perceptions and Attitudes of Classroom
Technology Integration Related to iPad Training,” Retrieved:
January,
2018
from
Figure 6.
The use of ICT in the various English skills in the classes of the
responding English teachers.
Figure 7.
The willingness to use ICT in the classes of the responding
English teachers.
Figure 8.
The ease of use of ICT in the classes of the responding English
teachers.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-680-4
EMERGING 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

http://scholarworks.waldenu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=
3016&context=dissertations
[3]
S. Isamil, A. Almekhlafi and M. Al-Mekhlafy, “Teachers’
perceptions of the use of technology in teaching languages in
United Arab Emirates’ schools,” Retrieved: January, 2018
from
http://kenanaonline.com/files/0097/97821/Teachers%E2%80
%99%20perceptions%20of%20the%20use%20of%20technol
ogy%20in%20teaching%20languages%20in%20United%20A
rab%20Emirates%E2%80%99%20schools.pdf
[4]
C. Patel, “Use of Multimedia Technology in Teaching and
Learning Communication Skills: An Analysis,” Retrieved:
April,
2018
from
http://www.ijoart.org/docs/Use-of-
Multimedia-Technology-in-Teaching-and-Learning-
communication-skill.pdf
[5]
K. Ramey, “Barriers to the effective use of technology in
education,”
Retrieved:
January,
2018
from
https://www.useoftechnology.com/barriers-effective-
technology-education/
[6]
P. Serdyukov, “Innovation in Education: ‘What Works, What
Doesn’t, and What to Do about It,’” Retrieved: April, 2018
from https://www.emeraldinsight.com/doi/full/10.1108/JRIT-
10-2016-0007
[7]
S. Shyamlee and M. Phil, “Use of Technology in English
Language Teaching and Learning: An Analysis,” Retrieved:
March,
2018
from
http://www.ipedr.com/vol33/030-
ICLMC2012-L10042.pdf
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-680-4
EMERGING 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

