Recommendation Method to Make Combined Video from Video Segments 
 
YunKyung Park, KyungDuk Moon 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute  
Daejeon, South Korea  
{parkyk, kdmoon}@etri.re.kr 
Jungtaek Kim, Seungjin Choi 
Pohang University of Science Technology  
Pohang, South Korea  
{jtkim,seungjin}@postech.ac.kr
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a recommendation scheme 
for media framework, which enables users to make their own 
videos by writing a story and reusing parts of accumulated videos. 
To reuse part of videos, we split a video into semantic segments 
based on an analysis of relations among objects in a video and 
store the segments with semantics in repository. To create a new 
video, the user sends queries based on his/her own story, then the 
framework recommends appropriate video segments for each 
query. To determine the rank of searched segments, the 
recommendation engine uses the degree of coincidence between 
the segment and the query. Also, it uses the degree of similarity 
between the searched segment and previously selected segment. 
By doing this, we can recommend a segment, which is consistent 
with user’s intent and harmonized with the other parts of the 
new video. 
Keywords-component; Recommendation; Combined Video; 
Video Segment; Similarity; Conformity. 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Nowadays, it is common to take photos and shoot videos to 
record events in everyday life, and consequently visual data has 
been rapidly accumulating. Roughly 500 million photos are 
uploaded per day on social sites and 100 hours of videos per 
minute on YouTube. As visual data is accumulated, it has been 
reevaluated as new digital asset to trade and the most 
appropriate medium to represent one’s thinking. This is 
because visual data can be intuitively understood, easily 
combined and transformed without any degradation of quality. 
To represent one’s thinking, the parts of video should be 
selected and reconstructed freely by user. Also, new 
recommendation method is needed to minimize user effort.  
Until now, recommendation algorithms are best known for 
their use on e-commerce Web sites [1], where they use input 
about a customer’s interests to generate a list of recommended 
items. To recommend items, many applications use the items 
that customers purchase and explicitly rate to represent their 
interests, or use other attributes, including items viewed, 
demographic data, subject interests, and favorite artists [2]. 
Recommendation systems can be classified into two broad 
groups, content-based system and collaborative filtering system. 
Content-based systems examine properties of the items 
recommended. For instance, if a Netflix user has mainly 
watched cowboy movies, the system recommends a movie in 
cowboy genre. Collaborative filtering systems recommend 
items based on similarity measures between users and/or items. 
The items recommended to a user are those preferred by 
similar users [3]. In this paper, we propose a recommendation 
scheme for new media framework, which enables any user to 
make a new video through reusing parts of videos. The outline 
of this paper is as follows: in section II, we describe the 
proposed architecture in detail. In section III, we present the 
recommendation system and conclude in section IV. 
II. MEDIA FRAMEWORK FOR COMBINED VIDEO 
The proposed media framework enables the reuse of videos 
without user intervention. The framework consists of 4 
subsystems: video analysis subsystem, search engine based on 
semantics, video segment recommendation subsystem and 
visualization subsystem which interfaces with the user. The 
video analysis subsystem analyzes the correlation of multi-
modalities from an input video in order to precisely analyze the 
semantics of objects and splits a video into segments. The 
features of each modality are analyzed, after separating 
modalities from an input video. Noises and ambiguities of an 
object can cause an incorrect analysis. If each modality is only 
considered independently, it is difficult to overcome those 
factors, despite extensive efforts by researchers to address this. 
Video analysis subsystem then analyzes the correlations of 
modalities by fusion of modalities at the feature- and decision-
level in order to overcome the effects of those factors [4][5]. 
Semantic search subsystem infers semantics of segment based 
on the objects and their trajectory in the segment, and stores the 
video segment with annotations. Moreover, semantic search 
subsystem searches all segments that matched user query. 
The recommendation subsystem recommends a segment, 
which is the most appropriate segment to make a new video, 
among searched results. Many studies on recommendation, 
mainly confined to movies, consider not only information of 
persons, such as demographic data and behavior pattern, but 
also information on related content and persons, such as 
content with a similar subject or categories, and information on 
social relations [6][7]. Since the framework makes a new video 
using segments from different videos, the similarity among 
segments and the development of the story should be 
considered for a better recommendation. To choose the most 
appropriate segment, it considers semantic accuracy and 
similarity of back and forth segments. The visualization 
subsystem provides the user interface for describing a story, 
and dynamically reconstructs a series of segments according to 
the story. The subsystem extracts keywords and segment-
sequence from the user story. Next it sends keywords to the 
search engine, and receives metadata for the recommended 
segment. Using Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) of original 
video, start and end point of the segment in the metadata, it 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

makes video plot. The player plays the video according to the 
plot. 
III. RECOMMENDATION SYSTEM 
We determine the proper segment through a 3-step process. 
First, when the subsystem receives searched segments from the 
search engine, the subsystem filters the segments based on 
some contexts in profile, such as guidance rate, using device, 
user defined attributes, etc. Second, it analyzes semantic 
correspondance between query and searched segments, and 
similarity between previously selected segment and searched 
segment. To reflect user preference, user ranks are predicted 
and used as weights. Third it ranks the segments depend on 
previous learning, how much the factors effect user selection.  
Each query consists of <Subject, Predicate, Object> triples 
which describe the segment, Action State (AS) which describes 
movement direction of the objects and some user Designated 
Features (DF). To compute the semantic correspondance 
between the query and the searched segments, we created 
vector space for SPO, DF and AS. To compute degree of 
correspondance, we used euclidean distance in SPO, DF vector 
space and cosine similarity in AS vector space. Fig. 1 shows  
an example of semantic correspondance. 
 
Figure 1. Example of a Semantic Correspondance. 
The similarity between previously selected segment and 
searched segment is computed using euclidean distance in SPO 
space, Low-level Features (LF) space and cosine similarity in 
AS space. Fig. 2 shows an example of similarity between 
previously selected segment and searched segment. 
 
Figure 2. Example of a Similarity Between Back and Forth Segments. 
In filtered search results, some segments have user rank and 
other segments have no rank. To predict the user rank for 
unranked segments, we propagate the known rank to unknown 
rank using a matrix, which is composed of rank propagation 
probability based on similarity. Fig. 3 shows an example of 
preference prediction using distance. In the figure, lspo, las, ldf, 
llf are predicted preference values for unlabeld segment in each 
space. They show how much the user is going to like the 
segment. The values are computed using label propagation 
algorithm. As a result, every segment has forur preference 
values. 
 
Figure 3. Example of Preference Prediction Using Distance 
The final score of a segment is determined by weighted 
semantic correspondance and similarity.  In equation (1), wqi 
and wpi are weights which are learned from user history. And 
fspace(q,s), fspace(p,s)  are consistency and similarity measure in 
each space, respectively.  
     
( , )
3
( , )
2
( , )
1
( , )
3
( , )
2
( , )
1
wp las fas p s
p s
wp llf flf
wp lspo fspo p s
wq las fas q s
wq ldf fdf q s
wq lspo fSPO q s
S
+
+
+
+
+
=
 (1) 
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
Here, we propose a recommendation scheme for media 
framework, which enables users to create their own video by 
analyzing semantics of video and combining segments from 
different videos. In this recommendation system, the key 
differences are that it uses similarity between previously 
selected segment and recommending segment, and consistency 
between query and recommending segment. It can diminish 
awkwardness that occurs when the framework combines 
segments. To customize the recommendation, more research is 
needed on implicit user behavior. To assess the developed 
subsystem, more research on the evaluation method is also 
needed. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the ICT R&D program of 
MSIP/IITP. 
[R0126-15-1112, 
Development 
of 
Media 
Application Framework based on Multi-modality which 
enables Personal Media Reconstruction]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. B. Schafer, J. A. Konstan, and J. Reidl, “E-Commerce 
Recommendation Applications” Data Mining and Knowledge 
Discovery, Kluwer Academic, pp 115-153, 2001. 
[2] G. 
Linden, 
B. 
Smith, 
and 
J. 
York, 
“Amazon.com 
recommendations item-to-item collaborative filtering”, IEEE 
Internet Computing, pp 76-80, January • February 2003. 
[3] A. Rajaraman and J. D. Ullman, “Mining of Massive Datasets”, 
Cambridge University Press, 2011. 
[4] R. Frcke, J. Thomsen, "LinkedTV Platform and Architecture", 
LinkedTV, 2012. 
[5] P. K. Atrey, M.. A. Hossain, A. E. Saddik, and M. S. 
Kankanhalli, "Multimodal fusion for multimedia analysis: a 
survey", Multimedia Systems, Volume 16, Issue 6, pp345-379, 
2010. 
[6] W. W. Cohen, "Collaborative Filtering: A Tutorial,"Carnegie 
Mellon University, https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~wcohen/collab-
filtering-tutorial.ppt, [retrieved: Aug, 2016]. 
[7] D. Tsatsou et al., "Specification of user profiling and 
contextualization", LinkedTV, 2012. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

