Cloud Resource Price System
Sururah A.Bello
Computer Science & Engineering Department
Obafemi Awolowo University
Ile-Ife, Nigeria
sbello@oauife.edu.ng
Claudia L¨uthje, Christoph Reich
Cloud Research Lab
Furtwangen University
Furtwangen, Germany
{claudia.luethje, christoph.reich}@hs-furtwangen.de
Abstract—Cloud Resource pricing has been known to be static.
The rapid nature of resource deployment gave the impression
that differential pricing might not be possible. This study shows
how various factors (e.g., Social User Status, Cloud Provider
Reputation, SLA Type, etc.) can be greatly used to achieve a
dynamic pricing system in Cloud provisioning. An architecture
of a resource price expert system has been developed, that com-
bines mathematical relations, IF-clauses and Neural Networks to
achieve a resource price model for cloud systems. Based on use
cases the effectiveness of this solution is shown.
Keywords—Cloud Computing; Price Models; Expert System
I.
INTRODUCTION
No doubt, the PC and the Internet brought about an
information revolution by making information universally ac-
cessible and affordable.
Cloud computing is a computation revolution, that gives
users the possibility to access and utilize massive amounts of
processing power and computer resources [1]. For example
Amazon offers currently a machine with 613MB RAM [2] for
2 cents per hour, and there exist even cheaper offers from other
providers. These prices are very small compared to the cost
of a computer system. Thus cloud computing enables large
computation affordable and universally accessible.
However, the computation revolution has to be realized
with appropriate business models that will make the economic
case prevail and thus make cloud computing a consumer com-
modity. Payment for Internet services has traditionally favored
the ﬂat pricing mechanism [3], which is basically monthly and
lately hourly subscription (pay-per-use). According to [4], this
static model of pay-per-use and subscription pricing allows
easy prediction of payments. However Lai [5] found that
dynamic pricing policies could achieve more economically
efﬁcient allocations and prices for high-value services. The
ability of cloud providers to attract more cloud users by
employing dynamic pricing through the offering of customized
pricing models for the same product for different customers
could translate into more income for the providers.
In this paper, a new concept of building a pricing model
will be shown. Also the use of additional fuzzy information
about the customer will be investigated as input parameters
for the fair and economical price model. To create such an
dynamical pricing model, artiﬁcial intelligence offers various
techniques. An evaluation of neural networks has brought out
to be the best solution. This method has been proven to be
successful in the past.
After discussing related work in the next section, the
remainder of this paper is structured as following. Section III
will discuss what is inﬂuencing the price of a cloud resource
in general. Section IV gives a detailed description of the
architectural design of the price module, which is evaluated by
use cases in section V. In section VI, a conclusion is drawn.
II.
RELATED WORK
The current static pricing in Cloud Computing basically
employs consumption patterns for pricing i.e., a ﬁxed price for
a ﬁxed quantity per hour. Even though a number of variations
are being introduced, like Amazon offering the opportunity to
reserve machines in advance with an upfront payment which
then grants an discount during usage, the basic model remains
static.
Strømmen-Bakhtiar has discovered that there is a tendency
for customers to think that paying the same price as in th
beginning after a period is not cost effective. Perceived fairness
in pricing signiﬁcantly relates to emotions, and emotions
similarly affect behavioral responses. This means perceived un-
fairness can lead to distrust and diminished shopping intentions
both off and on the Internet. When consumers perceive price
unfairness they feel negative emotions like anger, outrage,
disappointment and may not repeat purchase.
Lai delivered, with an empirical study, evidence that vari-
ous types of differential pricing tactics can have a signiﬁcant
impact on consumers’ perception of price fairness. In addition
it has been shown that employing dynamic pricing through
offering customized pricing for the same product for different
customers could translate into more income [5]. Differential
pricing strategy involves charging varying prices for the same
product based on some characteristics of the customer or the
product.
Miyazaki [7] identiﬁed some differential pricing tactics
that are available to Internet stores: buyer identiﬁcation, time
of purchase, purchase quantity, and asset/usage. In an other
paper [8] this was extended to pricing of Cloud Computing
since Cloud Computing is also a business transacted over
Internet infrastructure like the Internet stores. No doubt there
is a need to develop appropriate business models that will
continuously make Cloud Computing more attractive to users.
Therefore business models have to be created which transform
cloud computing to a pure consumer commodity. In this
paper we present a further pricing scheme for a customer
speciﬁc business model. Against four factors proposed in [8],
a number of factors have been considered here to be inﬂuential
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-357-5
EMERGING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

in developing customer centric Business model for Cloud
Computing.
III.
CLOUD RESOURCE PRICE INFLUENCE FACTORS
Several factors have been identiﬁed which inﬂuence the
price of cloud services. For this a classiﬁcation in ﬁxed and
variable factors was created. As an ﬁxed factor things like the
cost of operating the data center can be seen. Examples for
variable factors are; Social Category of a User, Cloud Providers
Reputation, Type of Service Level Agreement (SLA), the
Reputation of a User, Availability of Monitoring Services,
Public Review and Type of Co-Cloud Users. An overview of
these factors can be seen in Fig. 1. Subsequently, the respective
factors are described in more detail.
Fig. 1: Factors Inﬂuencing the Price of Cloud Resources
A. Cost of Data Center
According to [9], the following entities make up the cost
of the data center. The cost of real estate, power from the
grid, backup power (generators and batteries) maintenance
of backup power, cooling resources, maintenance of cooling
resources, security, network connectivity and ﬁre safety. The
cost may vary from location to location but are ﬁxed for a
particular location.
B. Social Category of Customers (SC)
A fair price should be charged to everyone. But the price
should be adjusted for the different needs thus medical doctors
may charge different fees to different patients [10]. Thus it
is established that a price differential may be on account
of the social status of a consumer. Social classiﬁcations of
users is done here and presented with corresponding pricing
scenarios. An adjusted price may be proffered for a cloud user
perceived to be in need, in this case classiﬁed as a poor user.
Classiﬁcation can be based on the location of the consumer.
The pricing of a hotel room in a downtown area might be
different from a similar room in a resort. In countries like
Nigeria if a company is situated in the nation’s capital, it
is perceived to be a rich company. Hence location could be
used to classify cloud users. The year of operation can also be
used to determine the stability hence the ability of a company.
Magazine publishers offer price promotions to new subscribers
to enhance their purchase intention. So a company that has
existed for some years can be seen to be stable hence classiﬁed
as being rich. Thus the year of operation is employed for
social status in this work. A company of less than 2 years
is categorized as New, those between 2 and 4 years as Middle
and above 4 years are taken as Old.
C. Cloud Provider’s Reputation (CPR)
Trust is a psychological state comprising the intention to
accept vulnerability based upon positive expectations of the
intentions or behavior of another. A single violation of trust
can destroy years of slowly accumulated credibility. There are
a number of ways to establish online trust [11]. Reputation
is a component of online trust [12] and it also measures
reliability. Reputation is the belief by the community of an
entity’s stand. Using Cloud infrastructure for critical busi-
ness computation necessitate that the reputation of the Cloud
provider is well established. A single publicized unethical
activity could create uncertainty that could tarnish a longterm
reputation. The Amazon botnet is a major compromise of a
cloud provider. Company’s reputation could be in terms of
success rate of transactions [13] and conﬁdentiality of user’s
data. Record of Cloud providers experience could serve as
certiﬁcate of credibility for future patronage. Hence, a Cloud
Provider’s reputation can be greatly used to negotiate prices
for cloud services. Provider’s Reputation could be quantiﬁed
using: Record of Past Experience and Record of Compensation
in case of problem. This study uses these two to express the
reputation of Cloud Providers.
D. SLA
As guarantees for service delivery SLAs are negotiated
between the Cloud Providers and Cloud Consumers. Most
often SLAs are dictated by the Cloud Providers [14]. Providers
usually have ﬁxed templates of SLAs where cloud users are
expected to pick from. There is opportunity to also negotiate
SLA online as reported in [15], where cloud user could be
allowed to specify customized SLA at a price. Therefore the
type SLA could be used to inﬂuence the price to charge.
E. Users Reputation
The nature of multi-tenancy in Cloud Computing demands
that users should have a positive reputation. Snifﬁng programs,
Trojans, Ill motive, Attacker and Hackers from the users
end can endanger the Cloud [16]. Social engineering attacks
remain effective - one exploit tried to convince Amazon Elastic
Compute Cloud (EC2) users to run malicious virtual machine
images simply by giving the image an ofﬁcial sounding name,
such as “fedora core”. It’s apparent that not only the data and
software is worth protecting in the Cloud but also the activity
patterns. Activity patterns could constitute conﬁdential busi-
ness information [1]. Users reputation could be quantiﬁed with
the physical address (UPL), the police records of criminality
(UCR) and also users bank details (UBR) of ﬁnancial stability
as banks don’t give credit to bankrupt customers. This study
considered the three of users reputation.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-357-5
EMERGING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

F. Availability of Monitoring Services (MS)
Few Cloud Providers have the conﬁdence to provide
customers with monitoring tools for service availability.
Rackspace Inc., GoGrid or ZOHO are offering 24/7 customer
support for free. However, Microsoft or Amazon is more
inclined to provide paid customer support. Google’s attitude
is more likely: “Cloud it on your own” towards customers. In-
dependent monitoring is largely missing except for Gomez Inc.
and Hyperic Inc. that offer services for monitoring providers,
SLA compliance and elasticity. Hence a good means for
negotiating customer friendly pricing could be availability of
proper monitoring devices. Monitoring services could either
be from the provider itself or a third party.
G. User’s Recommendation, Feedback and Public Review(PR)
Commoditization of Cloud services must emphasize users
rights to have a voice. Public reviews on issues such as
downtime, phishing [17], data loss, password weakness can be
valuable in pricing of cloud services. User ratings is employed
in this study, as done by Airline Operators (from 1 to 5): 1-
Excellent, 2-Very Good, 3-Good 4-Fair and 5-Bad
H. Co-Cloud Users
The nature of multi-tenancy in a Cloud could enable
competitive companies to use the same Cloud platform. There
may emerge clash of interest, fear of possible leakage of
conﬁdential business information, loss of privacy, risk of data
theft [12]. Multi-tenants on cloud infrastructure has introduced
non-obvious threats as a result of sharing physical resources
between VMs [18]. Hence information about co-tenants in
the Cloud can be used to inﬂuence service price. No matter
how cheap the cloud service is, the presence of a business
competitor may scare off similar companies. In the same vein,
a cloud provider may offer a high cost in exchange for a deal
not to host a competitive company.
IV.
ARCHTECTURE OF THE CLOUD PRICE MODULE
To get a most variable price solution for the customer
and the provider, a number of data has to be collected and
evaluated. The information is combined as shown in the
following Figure.
There are two major interfaces: The customer interface and
the provider interface to supply the information, from which
the price is determined. On both interfaces the parameters are
divided into ﬁxed and variable cost parameters. The interface
of the customer requires information about which resources the
customer requires, which are ﬁx parameters like the storage
size, CPU and RAM and variable parameters like the storage
place and runtime. Also the provider interface has input values.
There the ﬁx costs are CPU and RAM and the variable
costs are deﬁned as categories and reputation. This means the
variable costs directly depend on the status of a customer. At
the customer interface different parameters are inﬂuencing the
price for Cloud. SLA speciﬁc parameters are modelled as XML
using the Adaptable Service Level Objective Agreement (A-
SLO-A) language [15].
Fig. 2: Architecture of the Cloud Resource Price System
A. Mathematical Model
First of all the ﬁxed costs or parameters are calculated
by mathematical formulas. Then the costs based on the input
parameters will be added:
•
Costs of Power
•
Costs of Hardware (CPU, RAM, Storage)
•
Costs of required SLA
For example, cost-power + cost-hardware + cost-sla = cost-
total
This cumulative costs will be shown to the customer, to
support them, to ﬁnd a suitable solution
B. Rule Based Model
The model is described using IF-THEN rulesets to specify
the options available. For the SLA factor, the rule based
design is shown in Fig. 3. The SLA level is used to inﬂuence
price for a service. The provider has three distinct SLA tem-
plates for the user to choose from; GOLD TEMPLATE, SIL-
VER TEMPLATE and the PLATINUM TEMPLATE, each of
which is accompanied by its price. The user has also the
opportunity to negotiate a new SLA, speciﬁcally designed for
its needs as it has been established that SLA can be negotiated
online.
C. ANN Model
The artiﬁcial Neural Network Resource Price (RP) system
was developed to further illustrate the concept. Four steps were
adopted in training of the neural network. First assemble the
training data, second create the network neurons, third train the
network and fourth run the neural network. The feed-forward
neural network with back propagation was used because of
their simplicity. The ANN structure is as shown in Fig. 4
with one layer of hidden neurons followed by an output layer.
The inputs are Public Review (PR), Monitoring Service (MS),
Cloud Provider’s Reputation (CPR), Type of SLA (SLA), User
Physical Location (UPL), User Bank Record (UBR), User
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-357-5
EMERGING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

Fig. 3: Knowledge Represented as Rules
Criminal Record (UCR) and the Social Category of user (SC).
As shown in Fig. 5, different combinations of the inputs where
used for the training of the neural network.
Fig. 4: Knowledge Represented with ANN
The function newff was used to create the ANN. For the
initial network, the following command was used and the ANN
network object called “CloudNet” was created.
CloudNet = newff(minmax(input_combination),
[100,1],
{’tansig’,’purelin’},’traingdx’);
Also the weights and biases of the network had to be
initialized. The following function transfers tansig from input
layer to hidden layer and purelin from the hidden layer to
output. The training function is used for the back-propagation
traingdx. Several trainings were carried out and the CloudNet
parameter that gave the best performance is shown below (see
Figure 5):
CloudNet = newff(minmax(input_combination),
Fig. 5: Sample Data for the RP ANN System
[100,1],
{’tansig’,’purelin’},’traingdx’);
CloudNet.trainParam.show = 50;
CloudNet.trainParam.lr = 0.01;
CloudNet.trainParam.lr_inc = 1.05;
CloudNet.trainParam.epochs =1200;
CloudNet.trainParam.goal = 1.63;
[CloudNet, tr] = train(CloudNet,
input_combination,
target_output);
The
ANN
was
simulated
using
the
command
sim(CloudNet, input_combination)
and
the
CloudNet being the network object and different input
combination were tried. The network simulation was static
because the sequence or timing of the inputs is not important.
The training type is incremental because the effect of the
input on the network is not the same. The RP ANN system
was implemented with Artiﬁcial Neural Network toolbox of
Matlab. The codes were deposited in an m-ﬁle. The codes are
shown in Figure 6.
Fig. 6: Neural Network Design for Resource Price System
V.
USE CASES
To illustrate the applicability of our Cloud Resource Price
System a simple use case is introduced. As a precondition the
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-357-5
EMERGING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

Cloud user has to ﬁll in a web form with all required data,
like the ﬁx and variable parameters. Some information depend
on input by the cloud provider, other by the cloud customer.
The following information has to be provided by the Cloud
Provider:
•
The state and the location of the data centers, to
determine their individual ﬁx costs. All ﬁx costs will
be handled by the providers price manager. Assume
a data center in Germany based on the total cost of
ownership of a VM (2 Core, 2G Mem, 100G storage)
has a ﬁxed price of 8.50C.
•
The SLA templates for BRONZE, SILVER, GOLD and
for each offered QoS selectable for the customer has
to be factored by the price manager of the provider.
•
The Cloud Provider Reputation (CR) is expressed
based on the availability of Past Experience or Com-
pensation Records. Suppose the provider has both a
“Record of Success” and a “Record of Compensation”,
then its reputation is Good =>, which will result in
no change in the price.
The following information has to be provided by the Cloud
customer:
•
If the customer wants to deﬁne individual QoS, the
price for each QoS is determined using information of
user, who predicts his usage of the resource. If heavy
usage is predicted during working hours it will costs
more, than during the night. A detailed discussion
about this can be found in the paper “Cloud Utility
Price Model” [8]. So for example a customer has
chosen GOLD (HA, backup every day, restore time <
2h, etc.), this could result in an increase of the price
by 20$.
•
The customer has to check in the template the type
of monitoring services that are available. Monitoring
service can be available from the provider itself or
from a third party or may not be available. If no
monitoring is selected => then there is no change
in the price.
•
The user reputation is measured using the “Physical
Address”, the “Bank Details” and the “Police Record”.
The particular option selected will determine the price
to give. A user with a bad police record is a high
risk user, hence the user has to pay higher price than
others. In our example we assume being Good for all
three reputations attributes.
After that, all information is fed into the price model,
building the ﬁnal price for the cloud service. First, all ﬁx cost
will be calculated with the mathematical formula and other
information like state and location will be evaluated by the if
then rules. Next step is the determination of information like
reputation or customer behavior where the neural networks will
predict the estimated price.
The provider itself has a provider price manager, where
he can add and change the ﬁx and variable costs. All these
informations are used by the price modeling module, which
calculates the price for the cloud resources. The user also
checks the review from the public on this provider. Though the
review does not affect the price heavily, but it has an inﬂuence.
VI.
CONCLUSION
The price of a Cloud resource is inﬂuenced by many
factors. It has been shown how a variety of static and dynamic
factors like hardware price, data center location, provider or
user reputation could be used to adapt the price of a cloud
resource. To keep up with the dynamicity of the factors in-
ﬂuencing the price, an adaptable Cloud Resource Price Model
has been developed. By using a combination of mathematical
formula, IF-THEN rules and a Neural Network this has been
realized. A simple use case was introduced to show how useful
this approach can be.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The study was carried out in the Cloud Research Lab of
HFU. The support of the TWAS DFG Cooperation Visit is
appreciated. The research is supported by the German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) through the
research grant number 03FH046PX2.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Singh, M. Kaur, and C. Batra, “A review of new about cloud
computing security,” INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF COMPUTERS
& TECHNOLOGY, vol. 4, no. 2b1, 2013.
[2]
P. Wayner, “Cloud review: 8 public cloud services put to the
test from amazon to windows azure, iaas clouds differ widely in
features, complexity, and speed.” InfoWorld, March 2013. [Online].
Available: http://www.infoworld.com/d/cloud-computing/cloud-review-
8-public-cloud-services-put-the-test-214403?source=fssr
[3]
A. M. Odlyzko, “Internet pricing and the history of communications,”
Computer Networks, vol. 36, no. 5/6, pp. 493–517, 2001.
[4]
P. C. Fishburn and A. M. Odlyzko, “Competitive pricing of information
goods: Subscription pricing versus pay-per-use,” Economic Theory,
vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 447–470, 1999.
[5]
K.
Lai,
“Markets
are
dead,
long
live
markets,”
CoRR,
vol.
abs/cs/0502027, 2005.
[6]
A. Strømmen-Bakhtiar and A. R. Razavi, “Cloud Computing Business
Models Cloud Computing for Enterprise Architectures,” ser. Computer
Communications and Networks, Z. Mahmood and R. Hill, Eds.
London: Springer London, 2011, ch. 3, pp. 43–60. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4471-2236-4 3
[7]
R. I. Gopalkrishnan, A. D. Miyazaki, D. Grewal, and M. Giordano,
“Linking web-based segmentation to pricing tactics,” Journal of Product
& Brand Management, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 288– 302, 2002.
[8]
S. A. Bello and C. Reich, “Cloud utility price models.” in CLOSER,
F. Desprez, D. Ferguson, E. Hadar, F. Leymann, M. Jarke, and
M. Helfert, Eds.
SciTePress, 2013, pp. 317–320.
[9]
D. Patel Chandrakant and J. Shah Amip, “Cost model for planning,
development and operation of a data center,” Internet Systems and
Storage Laboratory, HP Laboratories, Palo Alto, Tech. Rep., 2005, hPL-
2005-107(R.1).
[10]
S. Maxwell, The Price Is Wrong: Understanding What Makes A Price
Seem Fair And The True Cost Of Unfair Pricing.
Hoboken, N.J.:
John Wiley & Sons, 2008.
[11]
D. Osterwalder, Trust Through Evaluation and Certiﬁcation?
Sage,
2001.
[12]
S. Pearson and A. Benameur, “Privacy, security and trust issues
arising from cloud computing,” in Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE
Second International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology
and Science, ser. CLOUDCOM ’10.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE
Computer Society, 2010, pp. 693–702.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-357-5
EMERGING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

[13]
M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Grifﬁth, A. D. Joseph, R. Katz, A. Konwinski,
G. Lee, D. Patterson, A. Rabkin, I. Stoica, and M. Zaharia, “A View
of Cloud Computing,” Commun. ACM, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 50–58, Apr.
2010.
[14]
P. Hofmann and D. Woods, “Cloud computing: The limits of public
clouds for business applications.” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 14,
no. 6, pp. 90–93, 2010.
[15]
S. Frey, C. L¨uthje, R. Teckelmann, and C. Reich, “Adaptable Service
Level Objective Agreement (A-SLO-A) for Cloud Services.” in
CLOSER, F. Desprez, D. Ferguson, E. Hadar, F. Leymann, M. Jarke,
and M. Helfert, Eds.
SciTePress, 2013, pp. 457–462.
[16]
Y. Chen, V. Paxson, and R. Katz, “What’s New About Cloud Computing
Security,” University of California, Berkeley Report No. UCB/EECS-
2010-5 January, vol. 20, no. 2010, pp. 2010–5, 2010.
[17]
M. Jensen, J. Schwenk, N. Gruschka, and L. L. Iacono, “On technical
security issues in cloud computing,” in Proceedings of the 2009
IEEE International Conference on Cloud Computing, ser. CLOUD ’09.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2009, pp. 109–116.
[18]
T. Ristenpart, E. Tromer, H. Shacham, and S. Savage, “Hey, you, get
off of my cloud: Exploring information leakage in third-party compute
clouds,” in Proceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, ser. CCS ’09.
New York, NY, USA:
ACM, 2009, pp. 199–212.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-357-5
EMERGING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

