What is the Feasible Business Model in the Age of Big Data? Case Studies on the 
Business Models of Two Chinese Mobile Applications  
Liang Guo, Mingtao Fu, Ruchi Sharma 
NEOMA Business School 
Mont Saint Aignan,France 
email: Liang.guo@neoma-bs.fr; 
fu.mingtao.14@neoma-bs.com 
Lei Yin 
Institut Superieur de Management et Communication Paris 
email:l.yin@ismac.fr 
 
Ruodan Lu 
Cambridge University, UK 
email: Rl508@cam.ac.uk 
Sebastien Tran 
ISC Paris, France
Abstract—The present day mobile application’s pick-and-shovel 
business is not thriving, as the vast majority of developers make 
very little revenue. In order to gain insights into mobile 
application business model, we conduct longitudinal case studies 
on two Chinese high profile health-fitness applications. The 
results of our study show both applications have experienced 
three significant business model innovations, from the initial 
freemium, hardware-application hybrid, and open source-based 
coopetition. We discuss the impact of these business models on 
value creation and appropriation. We thereby advocate that in 
the age of Web 3.0, embracing open source movement in an 
application’s business model is a smart move to turn 
competitors into collaborators and hence achieve a positive sum 
game. Our study contributes to the technology management 
literature by integrating the business model perspective with an 
analysis of open source. This also adds to the existing business 
ecosystem conceptualizations, which do not explicitly take 
competitors into account.  
Keywords- Mobile Application; Business Model; Coopetition; 
Open Source; Web 3.0. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The mobile computing technology has opened up new 
frontiers to do business that was inconceivable years ago [1]. 
The recent trend of falling device prices, easy accessibility and 
usability of mobile phone has also spurred the higher adoption 
of the smartphone. From being a device that was previously 
being used for voice or text based communication, a smart 
phone now offers a wide collection of functions and utilities 
including social connectedness, business agility and personal 
well-being. Thus these devices now keep users connected, 
organized, and amused through a range of multi utility 
applications.  
The great “anything, anytime, anywhere” mobile gold 
rush is on with an unprecedented number of firms engaged in 
methods to best monetize the high-value touch points between 
their applications and users.  However, the mobile 
application’s pick-and-shovel business is not thriving. 
Although a few savvy mobile application companies are like 
the golden eggs, the vast majority of developers find 
themselves with little revenue. There is a pressing need to 
understand how the business model of a mobile application 
creates value. In this study, we intend to fill in the 
abovementioned research gap by suggesting a new business 
model that may help a mobile application to create and 
appropriate enhanced value. We broadly define the business 
model as the one that describes the rationale of how an 
organization creates, delivers, and captures value, and how 
market players in a business ecosystem are linked through 
business model components [2, 3]. Unlike the previous studies 
in this field that have mainly focused on Web 1.0 and some on 
Web 2.0 technologies, we focus on the emerging Web 3.0 
technologies highlighting how these technologies have 
triggered the business model innovation in mobile application 
business. We have conducted longitudinal case studies of two 
Chinese mobile application start-ups. Our study reflects the 
business model innovation of these firms from a freemium 
(free premium) to an open-source-based coopetition 
(collaborative competition) model over the period of 2011-
2014. We found that the consumer mobile application market 
at present has been flooded with too many players hence 
making business extremely competitive. The traditional 
freemium business model creates a zero-sum, red ocean 
market in which most mobile applications struggle to survive. 
By nurturing an open source IoT hardware ecosystem, mobile 
applications can create a blue ocean market [4], enhance value 
creation by involving collaborators and even competitors in 
their business model, capture greater value from the expanded 
market horizon and achieve efficiency in resource utilization. 
We combine these insights with a theoretical development, 
resulting in propositions on business model’s impact on value 
appropriation in mobile application business. 
The results contribute theoretically to the technology 
management literature by integrating the business model 
perspective with the analysis of new technology trends. Our 
study also adds to the existing business model and business 
ecosystem theories, which we believe so far, have not 
included the open source movement and strategic alliances 
with competitors within their conceptual framework. We also 
advance prior coopetition studies [5, 6] by analyzing how the 
emerging open source IoT hardware ecosystem, that is a brand 
new governance mechanism, can benefit from the new 
features of Web 3.0. The remainder of this study is organized 
as follows. First, we review major theories in the field of 
business model, followed by the presentation of two 
longitudinal case studies. Thereafter, we discuss a set of 
propositions. Finally, we present our conclusions and 
suggestions for further research. 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

Two case studies will be presented in the second section. 
We will provide three propositions and conclude this paper in 
the third section. 
II. 
EMPIRICAL STUDY 
We conducted two longitudinal, qualitative case studies. 
A lack of prior theorizing about mobile application business 
model makes this kind of inductive case study approach an 
appropriate choice for a holistic analysis of previously 
unexplored phenomena, theory development and study of 
business network-related issues. Hence, to gain a deeper 
understanding in mobile application business model, we have 
conducted in-depth analyses of Gudong and Maikai, two 
leading health and fitness mobile application start-ups in 
China and elicited the sources of value creation from these   
descriptive case studies to explain the phenomenon and the 
real-life context of occurrence.  
The cases are based on a variety of secondary data sources, 
which have been accessed, analyzed, and synthesized in order 
to gain an accurate understanding of the diverse facets of the 
evolution of these firms’ business model over the period of 
2011-2014. The main data sources include: 1) the venture 
capital investment reports of these firms, 2) historical web 
pages of the firms’ websites; 3) news releases, 4) expert 
reviews and 5) user comments on major App Stores. To ensure 
the quality of the secondary data, we mainly rely on more or 
less direct interview data of the CEOs and co-founders of 
these two firms and subjective reports written by industry 
experts. The limitations of the secondary data should be 
acknowledged. These limitations include the difficulty of 
assessing the reliability of the data, as well as a lack of relevant 
data access. We intend to tackle (at least some of) these 
limitations through the actions outlined above and through 
data triangulation by gathering additional primary data. In this 
way, the validity of our understanding of the business model 
of these firms will be enhanced. The primary data includes 
four semi-structured interviews (30 minutes each) with one 
chief engineer, one project manager and two senior developers 
regarding revamping the firms’ existing business models. The 
insights 
gained 
from 
these 
primary 
data 
sources 
complemented with secondary data have assisted us in 
interpreting the business models of these firms.  
This multi-sourced case study approach is chosen as we 
believe that current research on mobile application business 
model innovation is still sparse. We treat a series of 
information sources like a series of experiments. Each source 
serves to test the theoretical insights gained from the 
examination of previous sources, and we thereby modify or 
refine them. Prior studies prove that this replication logic can 
foster the development of a new theory with less researcher 
bias and allows for a close correspondence between theory 
and data. Such a grounding of the emerging theory in the data 
is especially useful in the early stages of research in which it 
is difficult to develop a proper research question based on 
existing theories.   
A. Case Study 1 
Gudong Sport, incorporated by five running enthusiasts, 
started its humble beginning in 2009 in a south-west city of 
China with 1.53 million USD funded by a high-profit venture 
capital firm dealing in IT and mobile business. The first 
version of the application, released in August 2011, was a 
mobile pedometer to count the user’s footstep based on the 
user’s hip movement measured by the iPhone’s inertial 
measurement unit. It was the first GPS-based running tracker 
in China. Just like millions of other mobile applications, 
irrespective of its rich collection of service offers the business 
model of Gudong could not go beyond the widely-adopted 
advertising-supported freemium model. As our interviewees 
pointed out, “the freemium version was so gimmicky that 
Gudong could not convert its free user base to its subscription 
model”. Thus Gudong failed to solicit the desired customer 
loyalty and lost its customer base to other free applications in 
the extremely price sensitive mobile application business. In 
2013, Gudong completely abandoned the freemium business 
model and embraced the centuries-long asset-sales business 
model.  
But Gudong could not sustain its first move advantage in 
the wearables market for too long. The high profit margin of 
wearable devices attracted many new entrants. In a business 
characterized by fierce competition and lack of proper 
intellectual property rights regime, the application market is 
ruled more by players focusing merely on “imitation” than on 
“innovation”.  By late 2013, around 400 small and big 
manufacturers launched similar devices such as smart scale, 
wristband and portable activity trackers on Taobao.com 
(China’s largest online store) creating a fierce price war. 
According to our interviewees, the average price of a smart 
wristband dropped to less than 20 USD from its initial price 
of 66 USD by spring 2014. The market share of Gudong 
shrunk quickly, which forced the firm to integrate and support 
several third-party devices in its application. Its business 
model was adjusted from “free App + devices sales” to a 
“sports social network” platform that could collect sport data 
from the devices made by different producers, integrate social 
elements and create an incentive mechanism.  
The sports social platform of Gudong depended on one 
crucial hypothesis—a large amount of mobile phone users use 
Gudong application to manage their workout activities even 
though they may not necessarily use Gudong wearables 
gadgets. This hypothesis, as our interviewees stated, was 
flawed, “on one hand, the sport application market is highly 
fragmented with hundreds of producers who provide virtually 
the same application and closely similar wearable devices. 
There is no obvious advantage for most users to connect their 
non-Gudong devices with the Gudong application and on the 
other hand, the price of wearable fitness devices continues to 
decline”. By mid2014, the market for wearables and mobile 
application turned into a red ocean with numerous players in 
a highly competitive market. Some business trends are clearly 
visible, including huge price drop in the wearable gadgets 
segment and hundreds of homogeneous mobile applications.  
Gudong noticed a new business opportunity with most 
fitness and wearable devices not sharing their data with third 
party applications. Gudong has decided to create a new 
business model by opening its hardware framework to public 
access. It provides a variety of micro-sized modules that are 
highly customizable, for example a battery charger module, 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

acceleration sensor module, heart rate sensing module, OLED 
display module and so on. The modular-design enables any 
third-party producer to create various wristbands based on the 
user’s requirements by easily assembling the relevant modules 
together and slipping them onto a wearable rubber ring. This 
open source design offers far better options of customization 
to end-users. Gudong also provides its Software Development 
Kit (SDK) and APIs to third-party application developers. By 
opening the door to its competitors, Gudong intends to 
develop a collaborative wearable gear ecosystem that co-
creates China’s wristband market with its low-cost open 
source product. Gudong’s business model has evolved from 
an asset sales based to a more open and ecosystem based 
business model. In 2014, Gudong partnered with Kangtai, one 
of China’s largest life insurance companies to jointly develop 
mobile health metrics. Now, data collected by millions of 
wristbands will empower Gudong and Kangtai joint-venture 
to unleash some innovation into the connected health-fitness 
market. More importantly, Gudong’s open source hardware 
becomes a social hub to support the growing community of 
third party developers. The collective intelligence co-creates 
continuous modifications along with new health-fitness 
algorithms that would have never been developed by 
traditional business models. As our interviewees state, 
Gudong expects that its new open-source-based coopetition 
business model can “unite wristband and fitness gear 
producers and fitness mobile application developers to build a 
strong ecosystem that will be able to co-develop highly 
intelligent applications to be built on top of  the sensor data 
and thus make big data health metrics affordable and 
actionable”. Also thanks to its new business model, Gudong 
has managed to substantially reduce the cost and development 
time in the rapidly evolving mobile IoT market. Thus by 
anchoring a collaborative ecosystem Gudong’s open-source-
based coopetition model creates valuable competitive 
advantage.  
 
B. Case Study 2: Maikai Ltd. 
Beginning with its humble origin in 2011 by three young 
entrepreneurs it was not until 2012 that Maikai launched its 
sports and fitness mobile application on China’s leading 
mobile App Stores. The mobile application allowed users to 
share sport/fitness experiences on the social network, helped 
in community building (through online friends feature) and 
also offered an e-commerce platform dealing with the sale of 
fitness gears such as activity trackers and Bluetooth scales. 
Following the crunch of being a late entrant in the health-
fitness application market, Maikai failed to differentiate itself 
from its competitors, and finally could not provide any 
appealing value to end customers. In late 2012 and early 2013, 
Maikai decided to follow Gudong to launch its own branded 
activity tracker and Bluetooth scale. Maikai successfully 
raised about 20 000 USD through a crowdsourcing website for 
its R&D projects. According to our interviewees, these low-
cost products (about 10 USD) turned out to be quite successful 
and generated sufficient cash flow (about 1.4 million USD) to 
support the firm to expand. In the middle of 2013, the CEO 
decided to launch Maikai’s own wristband but soon realized 
the market for wearable gears was turning red. With too many 
hardly differentiable products, the fierce price war made the 
CEO believed that Maikai could not compete with hundreds 
of wristband producers. Hence the firm had to stop the venture.  
The firm made a strategic shift to a related but unexploited 
IoT segment called the “smart mug”. After months of R&D in 
June 2014, the firm launched a wired mug “CupTime” that 
was meant to automatically log the hydration habits of its 
users throughout the day.  The benefits of this 53USD device 
included not just to remind the user to drink water but also to 
eliminate the need to manually update the water intake in 
Maikai’s mobile application “CupTime App”. This smart mug 
used thermoelectric semiconductor material to convert the 
heat of the beverage to electricity. Evidently Maikai smart 
mug was an innovation in the market of health and fitness. As 
a result, Maikai received huge media coverage and its sales 
surged. With this new product, Maikai was able to leap over 
competitor pressure by expanding its own market horizon. 
However, Maikai was aware that the blue ocean for smart 
mugs would soon turn red because its product and application 
may not be able to lock in customers for too long. Also our 
interviewees stated, “CupTime’s novelty could be easily 
imitated by its competitors as the innovation is incremental 
but not radical”. For start-ups like Maikai, it is important to 
engage partners in order to enhance the value of its smart mug 
with partners’ additional offers and to appropriate value from 
the locked-in customers through its smart mug ecosystem in 
which third-party applications provide complementarities. 
Hence Maikai started building its “health data ecosystem” by 
providing its smart mug SDK and APIs to other health and 
fitness gear producers and mobile applications that could 
automatically baseline the fluid intake according to the 
physical activity. Maikai also partnered with weather and 
pollution data providers to synchronize weather information 
and enrich the user experience according to different external 
environment condition. Through data sharing, Maikai’s latest 
mobile application is able to offer complementarities in value 
by combining the core product in novel ways with partners’ 
offerings, thus eventually resulting in customer lock-in.  
Our interviewees predicted that the smart mug market 
became a red ocean in just a few months. Maikai decided to 
use open source hardware as a weapon against future 
competitors. They are designing a Smart Mug Kit (SMK) that 
provides the ‘building block’ components and free ROM 
source code to third-party mug producers and application 
developers or even consumers who need to build a connected 
mug with minimum skills and tools. The design will be based 
on the GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL), so that 
anybody can integrate Maikai’s SMK into their own products 
without being required by the terms of a strong copyleft 
license to release the source code of their own development-
parts. As a modular platform, SMK will also allow third-party 
companies to easily create, alter, customize and fabricate their 
own-branded mugs with additional sensors and mobile 
applications. Maikai expects that its open source SMK will 
lower the price and help it gain a major market share so that it 
can become the hub of water intake and lifestyle data in an 
ecosystem around its open hardware kit. Maikai is building a 
brand-new open source hardware ecosystem in which it 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

provides the hardware framework for developing advanced 
projects and kernel algorithms that might be beyond the 
available resource of any single start-up and involves many 
developers who might not collaborate otherwise. In addition, 
Maikai hopes its ecosystem will bring network effects and 
open new revenue streams through beverage sales and 
advertisements. Maikai’s latest business model seems to be 
promising and it has received its very first round 0.8 million 
USD venture capital investment in 2014. 
III. 
DISCUSSION  
These two cases vividly present the visible trend of 
business model innovation resulting from different business 
models created in response to changing competitive 
environments. Having started from the famous “freemium” 
model, both mobile application start-ups evolved into a hybrid 
business model manufacturing IoT products and finally ended 
up embracing open source-based cooperation model.  
There are two significant takeaways from these cases. First, 
being that continuous business model innovation as a business 
strategy can provide firms with the much desired momentum 
to success and stay in business. The second and the more 
prominent trend is the emergence of “open source based 
coopetition” as a successful business model. This can present 
newer and diverse ways of engagement through “cooperation 
over competition” and allow mobile application start-ups to 
generate value in ways that would not have been previously 
possible with conventional competitive strategies. The direct 
implication of this business model is to unearth unexplored 
blue oceans (i.e. new business opportunities) from the red 
ocean (i.e. over-exploited market).  
In the following section, we formulate distinct 
propositions based on the insights of the two case studies. In 
particular, we take into account the characteristics of Web 3.0 
to understand how the open source-based coopetition business 
model creates and appropriates value. We hope to enrich the 
fundamental 
business 
model 
theories 
through 
these 
propositions that answer our research questions on how a 
mobile application business model increases value creation by 
collaborating with competitors while allowing collaborative 
market players to appropriate value for themselves. 
1. 
Freemium is no longer a lucrative business model for 
mobile application business. 
Acknowledging well that free aspect of freemium 
applications are online traffic aggregators, yet there is hardly 
any scope for customer lock in with the freemium model. This 
was the cause of failure of Gudong’s freemium business 
model. When it comes to the freemium model, even though 
mobile-specific ads are designed to be less obtrusive, with the 
screen space they occupy the ads only create major visibility 
issues to users. As every pixel counts on a 3~5-inch screen, 
users do not prefer viewing ad-banners which obstruct the 
screen space and distract them. Thus the free part of this 
business model usually results in compromising both user 
experience and potential opportunities to appropriate value 
from customers. In addition, the urgency to reach out to the 
customer segment and to improve bottom-line is seen as the 
primary requirement for most startup developers. Focusing 
too much on monetization through regular pop ups further 
jeopardizes user experience and reduces traffic to the 
application. This also affected the sustainability of Gudong’s 
business model.   
The premium part of Gudong’s business model also could 
not materialize owing to a weak value proposition. The 
explosive rate of mobile application development has resulted 
in far too many nearly similar applications in the market. With 
increasing competition, it becomes extremely difficult for any 
market player to retain its customers because most users may 
prefer to switch over to a competing application that offers 
consumers the free option. With several free applications in 
the market, even the novelty of differentiated applications 
available in premium versions gets tarnished and it becomes 
difficult for developers to convert free users to a subscription 
model. As the two cases suggest, due to the lack of proper 
intellectual property rights regime in the software industry, 
novel features are prone to quick imitation by competitors. A 
part credit of this phenomenon goes to the open source 
movement revolution and technological upgradations like 
open APIs and mashups with which communication between 
applications has been rendered easy to allow developers 
integrate various functionalities with other applications to 
produce much richer applications. The unique features of open 
APIs and mashups are more eminent with the open boundaries 
principle that lowered the entry barriers of application 
development. Thus, open API and mashups are double-edged 
swords for mobile application start-ups. On the one hand, 
businesses have benefitted immensely from open resources by 
effectively expanding the business horizons and leveraging 
free 
technical 
upgradations 
through 
novel 
business 
propositions. But on the other hand, the freely available open 
knowledge stand the chance to hamper the ability of any novel 
mobile application to fully capitalize its innovation effort, as 
open source makes imitation so easy that innovation is no 
longer cost-effective in a crowded market. As the resource 
based theory states that “a firm’s resources and capabilities are 
valuable if, they reduce a firm’s costs or increase its revenues 
compared to what would have been the case if the firm did not 
possess those resources”, it becomes critical for application 
developers to ascertain the choice of resources (i.e. innovation 
or imitation) to attain a novelty. For the extremely price 
sensitive mobile application consumers and in a market filled 
with free substitutable offers, imitation may work better for 
reasons of cost effectiveness. Given that mobile application 
business is ruled by players focusing merely on “imitation” 
than “innovation”, it is not easy for any mobile application to 
achieve adequate returns on innovation through its novel, 
value-added features. In short, freemium business model may 
slacken the value creation potential of an application.   
Proposition 1: Freemium business model does not 
appropriate value for a mobile application. 
2. 
IoT 
products 
are 
indispensable 
for 
mobile 
applications. 
Our cases illustrate that both Gudong and Maikai 
abandoned the freemium business model while adopting the 
new model that associates mobile application and IoT 
products. This “App+IoT” hybrid business model not only 
creates new revenue streams for an application but also serves 
as an effective mechanism to create greater value for 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

customers. This business model is a successful way to harvest 
the monopoly rents derived from innovation. IoT products 
contain advanced circuitry, possess independent processing 
capability, and add mobility as these can be worn by the user 
or placed close to the body for an extended period of time. 
Significantly enhancing the user’s experience, IoT products 
play a crucial role in the age of Web 3.0 because IoT 
technologies permit access of information from disparate 
sources and machines/sensors to make the Web technologies 
more valuable to its users. The advancement in IoT also 
allows machine to machine content sharing resulting in 
superior applications by adding the context variable to the 
content generated on the Web. The ability to closely link IoT 
products to a wide variety of services has emerged as an 
opportunity of success for any mobile application. The two 
companies in this study are good examples of this 
continuously evolving relationship between “smart things” 
and mobile applications as a fertile ground for innovation. 
Both the hardware and software of these two firms were 
interwoven and mutually supportive, and increasingly, these 
firms effectively utilized the combined potential in a 
networked context. IoT products and mobile applications 
designed for their own unique “efficiently connected” destiny 
create a novel business model that helps firms in redefining 
industry boundaries, avoiding cut throat competition and 
moving into a blue ocean in which demand for health-fitness 
gears is created so that there is ample opportunity for growth 
that is both profitable and rapid.  
The case of Gudong shows that as an extension of 
smartphone, wearable gears become the dominant gateways 
to complementary business opportunity for a mobile 
application. The beauty of a smart gear is that it is sleek, easy 
to interact with, more socially acceptable in certain situations, 
and less cumbersome to carry, adding novelty in business 
model re-design. Wearable gears also extend the boundary of 
mobile 
applications 
by 
providing 
complementary 
functionalities about physical activities which could otherwise 
not be possible through mobile applications alone. Also 
wearable gears offer aesthetic benefits to users without 
obstructing their physical activity regime. Thus enhanced 
complementarities are offered by the combination of hardware 
and mobile application services.  In addition, IoT products 
such as Maikai’s smart mug can provide new, unique data 
collection methods supported with powerful processing 
capabilities of the mobile applications.  This uniqueness turns 
out to be an efficient mechanism to lock in mobile application 
users. In short, embracing IoT products alters the boundaries 
of the over-crowded mobile application business and therefore, 
Proposition 2: IoT products create and appropriate value 
for a mobile application. 
3. 
Open source-based coopetition business model is a 
win-win choice in the age of Web 3.0 
Beyond the “App+IoT” business model, our case studies 
show that both Gudong and Maikai chose the open source-
based coopetition and are trying to develop an ecosystem in 
which they serve as focal firms while third-party IoT product 
manufacturers as well as application developers are engaged 
as coopetitors.  There are several reasons that they adopt the 
open source-based coopetition business model. 
Firstly, for both the firms IoT products alone could not 
guarantee a competitive position, making value appropriation 
difficult. Our cases show that, as more and more 
manufacturers are entering the growing consumer IoT 
business, what looks like a blue ocean will soon turn red with 
far too many players. Open source hardware can improve the 
firms’ competitive position. By encouraging open source 
hardware innovation, Gudong has been able to offer stiff 
competition to the existing giants like Fitbit and Jawbone in 
the fitness activity tracking market, as it allows third-party 
developers to developer new algorithms for Gudong’s open 
wristband. It is not only the sale of wristbands, but also 
Gudong’s latest mobile application that seamlessly integrates 
with any third-party developed complementary functionalities 
that steer the monetary and strategic wheel of success.  
Thus, through open source-based coopetition, focal firms 
like Gudong and Maikai can weave an ecosystem in which 
they enjoy a hub position. The collaborative ecosystem 
anchored on open innovation can help the focal firm to gain 
the valuable and intangible collective creativity added by the 
vast ecosystem participants that engages with the focal firm to 
create their own innovations and refurbish the same to the 
larger developer ecosystem. This novel business model helps 
the focal firm to accrue knowledge repositories, lower cost of 
innovation, reduce development time and thus achieve 
resource efficiencies. In addition, open innovation allows 
reuse of IoT data by third-party developers in other 
applications. Increasing returns from the same data service 
can be achieved at a lower cost of same knowledge creation 
or acquisition by a single firm.  
Secondly, the ubiquitous connectivity of Web 3.0 makes 
it clear that the key resource in a Web 3.0-based business 
model is not the product (i.e. wearable gear or application) but 
the way in which the data services are implemented. With its 
power of context awareness, semantic Web technologies and 
superior business analytics, Web 3.0 has rendered immense 
strength to mobile services with free linking of disparate data 
sources, adding personalization through extensive social 
computing, and allowing businesses to better organize 
collective knowledge systems. There is an increasing need to 
access both structured and unstructured data, and derive better 
knowledge lessons from it by the enhanced data-mining and 
artificial intelligence technologies. Essentially, value is 
created by the fast acquisition of rich information and the 
generation of wisdom through business analytics. Therefore, 
the business model of any mobile application should focus on 
how to better deliver more open and intelligent web services 
with the capacity of enhanced data analysis and crunching.  
The open-source-based coopetition business model 
enables mobile application to collect and aggregate 
information from different sources, making the same data 
exponentially valuable. Gudong represents a good example. 
Releasing its wristband hardware design, ROM and SDK to 
the ecosystem for free largely facilitated the production of 
wearables by third party manufacturers and stimulated the 
consumer adoption. As more and more wristbands were worn 
by users, huge amount of user behaviour data was collected 
and transferred back to Gudong, enabling the firm to develop 
value-added intelligent algorithms.  
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

Thirdly, a big challenge to nurture big data services is that 
most IoT products work in silos with an IoT device (for 
instance, a property wearable gear) locked in with its own 
supporting mobile application. The open-source-based 
coopetition business model can overcome the “information 
silo” issue by encouraging open collaborative networks based 
on both insourcing and outsourcing of knowledge and 
expertise. Both Maikai’s and Gudong’s open source products 
are compatible with all smartphone equipped with Bluetooth 
and their APIs allow any third-party mobile applications to 
receive data from their devices. The firms gain value as their 
hardware platforms gain novelty of usability through new 
applications developed by the developer ecosystem. The 
platforms of these firms also become richer and they are able 
to counter competition and foster novelty from new entrants.   
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
To sum up, it is definitely not be easy for any mobile 
application start-up to enjoy the market leader position though 
traditional generic strategies and freemium business model. 
The open-source-based coopetition business model offers an 
out-of-the-box solution to substantially increase the size and 
the total value of the pie in collaboration with other market 
players rather than fighting for a larger share of a small pie.    
Proposition 3: The open source-based coopetition business 
model creates and appropriates value for a mobile application. 
Our study proposes several important managerial 
implications for mobile application practitioners. Firstly, 
open-source-based coopetition business model creates a 
collaborative ecosystem which differs from today’s supply 
chain networks. This ecosystem is the coalition of self-
motivated, proactive market participants that pursue a 
common goal and provide common network benefits. Open 
source eliminates the potential conflict that usually happens in 
the traditional supplier/OEM network and encourages 
participants to invest their resources. This non-conflicting 
business model increases customer intimacy, creates 
operational efficiencies, enables fast-paced innovation and 
allows all parties to reap rewards while pursuing individual 
interests. Secondly, the evolving nature of business model 
innovation driven by pervasive connectivity and open source 
movement has shifted the center of value creation from close 
ended, proprietary products / applications to more open and 
collaborative business ecosystems. Competitive advantage of 
a business model no longer lies in outperforming their rivals 
to grab a greater share of product or service demand usually 
through marginal changes in offering level and price, but in 
the creative use of big data resources and the real-time, 
intimate multi-sided interactions they make possible. This is 
because the open-source-based coopetition business model 
enables focal mobile applications to aggregate data from 
market collaborators and to provide the central processing 
power. These applications cannot be eliminated from the 
value-creation loop by competitors thanks to their possession 
of key data resources, which allow them to offer services more 
intelligently and create distinct barriers to competition. And 
finally, mobile application start-ups should not be wary of 
adopting the open-source-based coopetition business model 
for fear of diminishing value and differentiation. As 
revolutionary and far-reaching as the positive-sum business 
ecosystem is, the greater opportunity usually creates the 
greatest value for all ecosystem participants. No doubt, there 
are risks associated with open technology such as dilution of 
brand identity and loss of control of customer relationships. 
However, the risks of openness can be compensated by the 
value that the new, collaborative business model creates in a 
blue ocean environment with more connected products and 
intelligent applications. Indeed, the greatest risk is to be 
surpassed by risk takers who experiment with the business 
model innovation. 
This study is a first step in attempting to understand the 
business model innovation issue faced by mobile application 
start-ups in a fast-changing digital market. We acknowledge 
the inherent limitations of our study. We are limited by our 
reliance on the information of only two start-ups. Our 
propositions may not be sufficiently universal and hence a 
larger sample is needed to re-examine their applicability as 
well as their boundary conditions. Further, as our study deals 
with the health-fitness category of mobile applications more 
inter-category comparisons on business model innovation are 
necessary to take the category idiosyncrasy into account.  
Finally, future large-scale survey and quantitative analyses on 
the impact of different business models on mobile application 
value should be implemented to test our propositions.   
REFERENCES 
[1] 
K. Ishii, “Internet use via mobile phone in Japan,” Telecommun Policy, 
vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 3–58, 2004. 
[2] 
A. Osterwalder and Y. Pigneur, “Business Model Generation,” London 
John Wiley Sons, 2010. 
[3] 
C. Zott and R. Amit, “The business model: a theoretically anchored 
robust construct for strategic analysis,” Strateg. Organ., vol. 11, pp. 403 
– 412, 2013. 
[4] 
W. C. Kim and R. Mauborgne, “Value innovation: a leap into the blue 
ocean,” J. Bus. Strategy, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 22–28, 2005. 
[5] 
D. R. Gnyawali and B. J. R. Park, “Co‐opetition and technological 
innovation in small and medium ‐ sized enterprises: a multilevel 
conceptual model,” J. Small Bus. Manag., vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 308–330, 
2009. 
[6] 
A. Ritala, P., Golnam and A. Wegmann, “Coopetition-based business 
models: The case of Amazon. Com,” Ind. Mark. Manag., vol. 43, no. 
2, pp. 236–249, 2014. 
 
 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

