Big Data Analytics and Firm Productivity  
 
Liang Guo, Mingtao Fu 
NEOMA Business School 
Mont Saint Aignan, France 
e-mail: Liang.guo@neoma-bs.fr; 
fu.mingtao.14@neoma-bs.com 
                 
                 
Ruodan Lu 
Cambridge University, UK 
e-mail: Rl508@cam.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract—Increasing 
productivity 
is 
a 
key 
task 
for 
contemporary firms. Although big data analytics has been 
generally viewed as an effective advanced information 
processing tool that enables firms to better cope with business 
operation, thus holding the potential to boost firm productivity, 
evidence to support this view is lacking in the literature. 
Equipped with the theory of organizational information 
processing and resource-based view, we hypothesize that big 
data analytics systems (BDAS) can help improve productivity 
and this contribution is influenced by the firm’s BDAS 
capability. These hypotheses are supported with a sample of 45 
Chinese retailers over 2012-2014 using Data Envelopment 
Analysis and Malmquist Productivity Index. This study extends 
our understanding of the business value of IT by shedding light 
on the productivity benefit of big data investment. We also 
underline that for firms that have already implemented BDAS, 
a greater effort seems necessary to build predictive and 
prescriptive analytics capability.  
Keywords-big data analytics; retailing; China. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Today’s fast-moving, complex world of increasingly 
connected people and connected things that are creating vast 
new digital footprints require enterprises to constantly make 
sense of this big and fast-moving data and to gain real-time 
access to powerful insights and deliver them at the point of 
action [1]. Big data, defined as a holistic analytical approach 
to manage, process and analyse 5Vs (i.e., volume, variety, 
velocity, veracity and value, see [2]),  is regarded as a 
powerful weapon to obtain actionable insights for sustained 
value delivery, to create business disruptions, and to establish 
competitive advantages [3].  
However, such presumption confronts with scare 
empirical evidence. Recently, skepticism has emerged about 
the true business value of big data analytics. Given that the 
implementation of big data requires huge physical and human 
capital investment, the stake of embracing big data for a 
company is quite high. Big data may lead to big 
disappointment. Prior studies find that IT implementation is 
inherently risky and post-implementation may also be fail. 
Although related strand of studies has focused on the 
nexus of IT investment and firm performance in general, there 
is not virtually any research that has quantified the 
performance impact of big data analytics system (BDAS). By 
performance, we refer to a firm’s productivity, also called 
operation efficiency (i.e. using less input to achieve the same 
output or using the same input to achieve more output), one of 
the most important performance measures. [4] find that there 
is a significant contribution of IT to total factor productivity 
for the US economy in 2000-2004. However, there are 
relatively few studies addressing IT’s impact on productivity 
at firm level [5] and among the existing works, most of them 
focus on the association between productivity and either 
firm’s IT investment Little attention has been paid to whether 
the use of specific IT system (say, BDAS) is associated with 
a firm’s productivity. 
Therefore, identify the true impact of BDAS on firm 
productivity, if any, would thus provide strong implications 
for both academic research and practice. In this study, we 
intend to fill in the void by examining whether BDAS boosts 
a retail firm’s productivity. Grounded in the theory of 
organizational information processing [6] and resource-based 
view [7], we sought to theorize the business impact of BDAS. 
Productivity is commonly measured with Data Envelopment 
Analysis (DEA), a non-parametric approach to the empirical 
estimation of production function and with Malmquist 
Productivity Index (MPI), a special method of time series 
analysis in DEA [8]. Using a sample of 45 Chinese publically 
listed retailers, we intend to empirically answer two research 
questions: 1) what is the impact of BDAS on firm productivity? 
And 2) how does the impact of BDAS on firm productivity, if 
any, vary with the capability of BDAS? Our findings support 
the claim of BDAS’s business value and its contribution 
increases with the firm’s capability of BDAS. 
In Section 2 we will review relevant literature and propose 
two hypotheses. We will test the hypotheses in Section 3 and 
discuss our findings in Section 4. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW AND HYPOTHESES 
From the late 2000s, the term business analytics has 
gained prominence over the previously dominant business 
intelligence principles, by stressing more on the analytical 
capabilities it offers.  In this sense, business analytics refers to 
the process of transforming data into actions through analysis 
and gaining insights in the context of organizational decision 
making and problem solving. Big data analytics resorts to the 
use of data warehouse, information technology, statistical 
analysis, and computational intelligence models to help 
managers gain improved insights about their business 
operations and make better, fact-based decisions. The 
contextual application of analytical methods to analyse data 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

sets that are very large in size and complex in terms of their 
sources and of the level of unstructuredness has led to the 
growth of big data analytics.  It aids to better data analytics 
that can decipher and understand patterns from the business 
situations based on the data collected from diverse sources 
with the aim to predict future outcomes purely based on 
analytical frameworks. The unique features of big data 
analytics include the use of advanced data collection, data 
visualization technologies, feature extraction, and artificial 
intelligence technologies, which largely increment the speed 
of mining and analysis of previously ignored unstructured 
data that reside in disparate sources and different formats. 
Big data analytics differs from traditional data processing 
architectures in terms of the speed of decision making, 
processing complexity, type and volume of data being 
analysed. The data sources are unstructured in form and rely 
on newer forms of business analytics like web analytics, click 
stream analytics and visual analytics that use advanced 
modelling methods. In general, we argue that big data 
analytics assist in decision making in the following ways: 
descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive analytics.  
Descriptive analytics is the most common form of 
business analytics employed by firms to understand the 
historical business performance and derive useful wisdom as 
past performance summary. The analytics can be visualized 
using charts and figures. Its aim is to condense vast chunks of 
data and decipher useful information from the same. In this 
sense, it serves as a valuable information reduction technique. 
Descriptive analytics can be used to drill-down reports to 
decipher the association between, for instance, an advertising 
campaign and the product performance through patterns or 
trends on the basis of historical data. Descriptive analytics, 
however, cannot be used to test causality.  
Predictive analytics analyses past historical performance 
to forecast future situations by identifying patterns of 
knowledge based on a variety of statistical tools. For instance, 
the use of past historical data of a particular advertising 
campaign to extrapolate the expected response of a new 
product launch campaign or predict the demand of a seasonal 
product based on the past years' data. The efficiency of 
predictive analytics lies in its ability of revealing causality that 
cannot be undertaken from descriptive analysis. The use of big 
data comes handy in adding diversity to data sources to reveal 
more detailed and to elaborate patterns and in modelling 
complex data originating from different, in-compatible data 
sources like text, speech, video, and photos. 
Prescriptive analytics is a relatively new stream of 
business analytics that extends beyond descriptive and 
predictive analytics, by prescribing multiple solutions for 
future situations and the likely impact of each solution. This 
form of analytics is also based on a collection of business rules, 
algorithms, relying on statistical machine learning and 
simulation-optimization 
modelling 
procedures. 
The 
difference between predictive and prescriptive analytics lies 
in the outcome of each option that is offered by the latter 
method. This is incorporated as a feedback loop to track the 
impact of each forecasted solution in different what-if 
scenarios. And finally, based on probabilistic modelling, the 
most optimal solution is recommended. Some of the leading 
applications of prescriptive analytics include optimization 
models in field of operations, marketing, and finance to 
identify the best alternatives to minimize or maximize some 
objective. For instance, its applications in operations 
management include multiple scenario generation balancing 
the production planning based on different demand estimates 
to maximize revenue or natural disaster based recovery 
options. 
The contribution of IT to business performance has been 
studies from two theoretical perspectives [9]. On the one hand, 
the theory of organizational information processing [6] 
suggests that IT systems enable improved information 
processing and managerial decision making so that a firm can 
better handle uncertainty, thus achieve better performance. On 
the other hand, IT is regarded as a kind of key resources for 
achieving business success and a power tool to help firms gain 
competitive advantage by altering the competitive forces that 
collectively determine industry profitability. This study is 
motivated by these two prior theoretical considerations to 
examine whether and how BDA influences firm’s 
performance in general and productivity in particular. 
Answering this question fills a gap in the literature on the 
possible big business value of BDA.  
Prior studies have indicated high level of business risk 
derived from dynamism and complexity decreases firm 
productivity. To boost a firm’s productivity, managers should 
lower their business uncertainties by frequently processing a 
greater deal of information and by making better decisions. 
TOIP attributes part of firm’s risk to the accuracy of 
information and manager’s capability in information 
processing about uncertainty in the business environment. 
TOIP proponents argue that IT provides a technological basis 
for collecting and sharing information from different sources, 
for integrating business processes and for coordinates 
decisions 
makings 
and 
actions 
within 
and 
across 
organizational boundaries.  This information processing effect 
is especially true, when a firm faces high environmental 
uncertainty and often needs to deal with a large amount of 
complex information [9]. Prior studies found empirical 
evidences that support TOIP, indicating improvements in 
information quality and visibility for decision makers reduce 
business risk and improve business performance.  
We draw upon TOIP to theorize BDA’s productivity 
benefits. Through the automation, optimization and 
transparentization effects, BDA equips managers with 
applications that are able to amass and apply information in 
ways in which upends customer expectations and optimized 
business operations to unprecedented degrees. In essence, 
BDA mitigates risks and boosts operational efficiency:  
H1: An increase in firm productivity is associated with the 
implementation of BDA. 
In line with TOIP, we suggest that the practice of a broad 
scope of BDA (i.e. more BDA applications) enhances a firm’s 
information analytics quality and leads to more efficient 
operations. The practice of a broad scope of BDA allows firms 
to take the questions that traditional analytics is answering to 
the next level, moving from a retrospective set of answers to 
a set of answers focused on predicting performance and 
prescribing specific actions or recommendations.  It is 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

reasonable to believe, as TOIP suggests, a firm’s operations 
will be more efficient thanks to the improvement of 
information processing capability and quality. 
What is more, the analytics expertise and experience 
accumulated from practicing multiple types of BDA 
applications form a bundle of strategically important 
resources ranging from IT hardware assets, BDA human 
resources, and intangible social-technical resources. RBV 
theorists assert that firm’s key and unique resources are of four 
properties--- 
value, 
rarity, 
inimitability 
and 
non-
substitutability (VRIN) so that a firm’s performance depends 
on management’s capability to search for the best usage of 
these resources. IT-related resources have long be regarded as 
VRIN, which are firm specific and cannot easily be traded or 
transferred. Following the IT-RBV perspectives, we argue 
that a board scope of BDA helps firms to form valuable 
resources. Like most IT skills, expertise with different 
analytics applications can only be built through learning by 
doing practices and by creating the synergies between human 
and IT-assets. These synergistic intangible resources are 
value-creating, allowing an organization to capitalize strategic 
opportunities or diverge from potential threats. BDA 
professionals who master multiple types of BDA usually 
possess rare qualities that are much in demand, difficult and 
expensive to hire and given the very competitive market for 
their services, difficult to retain. This BDA human capital is 
rare resources for a firm, as there are not a lot of people with 
their combination of scientific background and computational 
and analytical skills.  
Likewise, analytics skill shortage makes BDA human 
capital difficult to be easily imitated by competitors. More 
importantly, combining big data hardware and skill sets to 
create an enterprise-specific BDA infrastructure can be 
inimitable, because creating such synergy requires carefully 
melding IT and organizational resources to fit firm needs and 
business priorities. Finally, BDA expertise can be viewed as a 
social-technical synergy of tacit and explicit operations 
policies and practices within a firm. It is the result of the long-
term, enterprise-wide integration of various BDA applications, 
business processes, human capital and continuous learning 
and innovation. BDA expertise is then difficult to substitute, 
because it is scarce, specialized, and appropriable. And given 
that data are woven into every sector and function in modern 
economy, much of advanced business decision making simply 
could not take place without BDA. There is then virtually no 
substitutable technology that can bring large pools of data, 
analyze to discern patterns, and optimize decisions.  
Therefore, we argue that combining with organizational 
expertise gain from the practice of a broad scope of BDA is a 
source of competitive advantages, enhancing productivity and 
creating significant value by making better quality of 
decisions and optimized operations.  
H2: An increase in firm productivity is associated with the 
practice of a broad scope of BDA. 
III. 
EMPIRICAL STUDY 
A. Sample 
We tested these two hypotheses with a sample set of 
China’s publically listed retail firms. The reasons that we 
chose the retail industry are because this is an industry with a 
long history of investing and implementing data-intensive IT 
systems (e.g. POS, ERP, CRM and consumer panel studies) 
and retailers usually demand a clear justification for the return 
on IT investment. We chose China’s retail sector because of 
its enormous market size. The total sales of consumer goods 
in China in 2014 reached USD 4,099.906 billion, representing 
a growth of 12% [10]. Our final sample included 45 firms. We 
collected their financial data from their IPO prospectus and 
annual reports over 2012-2014. 
B. Analyses and Results 
Productivity is measured by DEA and MPI [8]. we took 
number of employee (hereafter A), management & 
administration expenses (B), marketing expenses (C), cost of 
sales (D), and inventory (E) as inputs and net revenues 
(hereafter 1), gross profits (2), net income (3) and market 
capitalization (4) as outputs. The productivity index was 
calculated with the averages of these inputs and outputs over 
2012-2014. We decomposed the MPI into two components—
technology change (i.e. technology frontier shift) and 
technology efficiency change (i.e. a measured of the diffusion 
of the best-practice technology in the sector). Then, we first 
calculated MPI, technology change and technical efficiency 
change with the Model ABCDE123 (i.e. number of employee, 
management & administration expenses, marketing expenses, 
cost of sales, and inventory as inputs and net revenues, gross 
profits, and net income as outputs) for the period 2012-2013 
and 2013-2014 respectively. Then, we took the geometric 
mean of these two periods as the measures. 
We measured whether a firm has implemented BDAS 
based on the answers of our interviews. BDAS Capability is 
measured with the Big Data and Analytics Maturity Model 
[11]. We developed a scoreboard of BDAS capability, which 
contains 16 dichotomous items (1 for have implemented a 
particular BDAS application in question, 0 for otherwise).  
The sum of these 16 items was used as the measure of a firm’s 
BDAS capability. 
(a) Descriptive Analytics Applications: 
1. 
Big data analytics infrastructure platform such as 
Hadoop, No SQL Database and/or Massively Parallel 
Processing Databases 
2. 
Data visualization applications or any business 
intelligence platforms for integrating and visualizing data 
from multiple sources, taking the raw data and presenting it in 
complex, multi-dimensional visual formats (e.g. reports and 
dashboards) to illuminate the information 
(b) Predictive Analytics Applications: 
3. 
Basic unsupervised machine learning clustering 
applications, such as k-means and A Priori association 
analysis 
4. 
Basic supervised machine learning classification 
applications, such as, k-Nearest Neighbours and decision trees 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

5. 
Regression-based supervised machine learning 
applications, such as, linear regression, logistic regression, 
generalized linear models and the exponential family 
6. 
Bayes 
statistics and 
kernel-based 
supervised 
machine learning applications, such as naïve Bayes, graphical 
models, support vector machines and Gaussian process 
7. 
Latent variable-based machine learning applications, 
such as mixture models, the EM algorithm, principal 
component analysis, singular value decomposition 
8. 
Advanced 
unsupervised 
machine 
learning 
applications, such as ANN, auto-encoder and deep learning 
9. 
Reinforcement machine learning applications, such 
as Markov decision and MCMC 
10. Time series and forecasting applications 
11. Natural language processing applications 
12. Computer vision applications 
(c) Prescriptive Analytics Applications:  
13. Linear 
optimization 
and 
sensitivity 
analysis 
applications  
14. Network analysis applications  
15. Nonlinear optimization applications  
16. Simulation-based decision making applications 
25 out of 45 retailers have scored 100 in full Model 
ABCDE1234. Among these 25, there are 14 retails that have 
implemented BDAS. Retailers that have implemented BDAS 
clearly achieved better productivity than their counterparts 
that have not in most DEA models, supporting H1.  
We then followed [8] to conduct PCA on these 30 DEA 
models in order to theorize the impact of BDAS on 
productivity in a parsimonious way and to reveal the 
similarities and differences that exist between firms in terms 
of the 30 DEA models in a two-dimensional plot. The first 
principal component accounts for 44.37% of the total variance 
while the second for 34.62% (i.e. in total 78.99%). Most 
models are loaded on Component 1, which can be associated 
with an overall measure of efficiency. We labelled the second 
component as “Management & Administration, Inventory and 
Marketing Efficiency”(see Table 1). 
We then calculated the weighted average of two 
components for each retailer by multiplying the factor loading 
of each DEA model on its productivity score. We plotted each 
firm on a two-dimension figure with the first component as 
the X-axis and the second component as the Y-axis (See Fig. 
1). It seems that most BDAS retailers achieved high overall 
efficiency and scattered along the X-axis while those non-
BDAS retailers achieved relatively high efficiency on 
management and administrative expense, marketing expense 
and inventory management and scattered along the Y-axis. 
We conducted an ANOVA analysis by comparing two 
components between two groups. The results suggest that the 
overall productivity (i.e. Component 1) of the BDAS retailers 
outperforms that of those without BDAS (F-score=9.228, 
p<0.01). However, there is no significant difference on 
Component 
2 
(F-score=0.118, 
p=0.67). 
Finally, 
we 
aggregated the scores of 30 DEA models into one factor and 
the result of the ANOVA analysis of this aggregated factor 
indicates that retailers with BDAS are at an advantage in 
achieving higher efficiency score (F-score=9.823, p<0.01). 
 
Figure 1: Visualization of DEA Results on Two Principal Components 
 
The MPI analysis shows that 23 out of 40 retailers have 
experienced productivity progress during 2012-2014. Among 
these 23, 11 are retails that have implemented BDAS. 
Company 29, who has implemented BDAS, has registered the 
highest improvement in MPI (1.442). It can be seen that the 
progress of MPI for this company was contributed by a 
significant increase in technology change (1.345) and in 
technical efficiency change (1.072). Company 39, who also 
has equipped BDAS, has experienced the largest increase on 
technology change (1.17). But its decrease in technical 
efficiency change (0.894) implies that this retailer has failed 
to conduct proper investment in organizational factors in 
accordance with its operation. The results of ANOVA 
analyses showed that on average, retailers with BDAS 
achieved better MPI (F-score=5.427,p<0.05) and technology 
change (F-score=4.780, p<0.05) than those without BDAS. 
But there is no significant difference in technical efficiency 
change. However, technical efficiency change is a measure of 
the deviations from the best practice frontier with the sample 
and it is not directly related to BDAS. So we can safely 
conclude that H1 is also supported by the MPI analyses. 
Finally, we then tested H2 by calculating the Spearman 
correlation coefficients between BDAS capability score with 
the aggregated DEA efficiency score and the MPI. Both are 
statically significant (0.689, p<0.01 for DEA and 0.359, 
p<0.05 for MPI). The relationships between these three 
measures were visualized by plotting a bubble chat (Figure 2), 
in which the aggregated DEA is the X-axis, the MPI is the Y-
axis and BDAS capability as bubble size. In Table 2, it is clear 
that retailers with high BDAS capability score concentrate 
around the upper-right corner, which means they achieve both 
high DEA and MPI scores. H2 is supported. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
In this study, we theorize how BDAS can help improve 
firm productivity through the automation and optimization 
effects. For the first time in the literature, our study 
empirically examines whether the implementation of BDAS 
has a significant impact on firm’s productivity and whether 
this contribution is influenced by the firm’s BDAS capability. 
Our findings provide solid evidence that permits an accurate 
appraisal of the impact of BDAS on firm productivity. 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

There is a general consensus that the spectacular 
popularity of BDAS in the past few years has opened up new 
opportunities for firms to re-engineering business processes 
and to improve their operation efficiencies. Under this context, 
the analysis of BDAS’s effects on firm productivity has been 
the subject of great attention. Our study complement to the 
long strand of research that has examined IT’s business value 
in general by revealing the productivity improvement benefits 
derived from BDAS. Our findings are in line with TOIP and 
RBV theory, implying that the big data analytics capability of 
an IT system helps firms develop key and unique resources 
and then better coordinate and resolve environmental 
uncertainty.  
Our findings are robust as our measure of productivity is 
calculated with 30 different combinations of multiple/single 
inputs and outputs DEA models. In addition, our analyses 
using the MPI approach provides in-depth information on 
whether BDAS triggers a firm’s technology change, which 
provides managerial implications on what kind of weakness 
in terms of productivity they should watch out for and remedy. 
As technology progress is one of the most important factors 
for 
future 
retailing, 
implementing 
effectively 
new 
technologies like BDAS can help give business an edge in the 
market place.     
Our study made another contribution by developing a 
measure of BDAS capability. Our findings suggest that only 
when the implementation of predictive as well as prescriptive 
big data analytics completed, the benefits from adopting big 
data start to surface. Descriptive analytics or business 
intelligence solutions have traditionally required a static, low-
dimensional data model for operational reporting. These 
solutions often are incapable to use streaming data that can 
provide operational intelligence. However, the emergence of 
multi-channel selling and fulfilment has increased the need for 
dynamic, high-dimensional data analytics to process 
streaming and massive datasets. Predictive and prescriptive 
analytics businesses can gain new operational insights by 
taking advantage of the unique capabilities of BDAS and by 
using the right model to process large volumes of unstructured 
as well as structured data.  
Our study provides strong managerial implications. One 
of highly productive firm in our sample has successfully 
deciphered the code of “Big Data Value”. With its website and 
mobile app clickstream data, this retailer can predict the sales 
of its cash cow products, as well as determine the price range 
and features that most customers want. Based on the patterns 
of clicks, it can also determine the popularity of a new product. 
Another sample firm massively collects social login data (e.g. 
size of friends on social networks, frequency of posting, 
number of likes received) of its on-line shoppers and 
combines with shopping history data. The retailer is able to 
successfully optimize its retargeting advertising on its website 
and mobile app while real-time pricing their products 
according to the utility value that the purchase may generate 
based on the preferences of the consumers.  
Finally, our study has some limitations. Firstly, it does not 
account for the effect of market power imperative, as the 
competitive strategy perspective suggests. Future research 
should extend our study by taking retail industry structure into 
account.  Secondly, although we used market capitalization as 
an output, our study does not consider a firm’s short-term 
stock market performance. One way to extend our research is 
to study what is the stock market reaction to a firm’s BDAS 
investment announcement. Third, our measure of BDAS 
capability is mainly based on self-reported data. We were 
unable to investigate the quality of each firm’s actual usage of 
the system. In-depth case study or longitudinal field research 
should be carried out to shed more light on how firms employ 
BDAS in a greater detail. Last but not least, our research is 
mainly took a technology-centric view on BDAS. It would be 
necessary in future works to examine how organization should 
change to accommodate automated and advanced analytics 
technology in order to improve firm’s performance.  
 
REFERENCE 
[1] 
Capgemini, “Big & Fast Data: The Rise of Insight-Driven Business,” 
Capgemini, Paris: Capgemini, 2015. 
[2] 
S. F. Wamba, S. Akter, A. Edwards, G. Chopin, and D. Gnanzou, “How 
‘big data’can make big impact: Findings from a systematic review and 
a longitudinal case study,” Int. J. Prod. Econ., vol. 165, pp. 234–246, 
2015. 
[3] 
Forbs, “Data Analytics Dominates Enterprises’ Spending Plans For 
2015,” Retrieved: 2016.09. 
[4] 
D. W. Jorgenson, M. S. Ho, and K. J. Stiroh, “A retrospective look at 
the US productivity growth resurgence,” J. Econ. Perspect., vol. 22, no. 
1, pp. 3–24, 2008. 
[5] 
C. Q. Romero and D. R. Rodríguez, “E-commerce and efficiency at the 
firm level,” Int. J. Prod. Econ., vol. 126, no. 2, pp. 299–305, 2010. 
[6] J. R. Galbraith, “Organization design: An information processing view,” 
Interfaces, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 28–36, 1974. 
[7] 
J. Barney, “Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage,” J. 
Manage., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 99–120, 1991. 
[8] 
C. Serrano-Cinca, Y. Fuertes-Callén, and Cecilio Mar-Molinero, 
“Measuring DEA efficiency in Internet companies,” Decis. Support 
Syst., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 557–573, 2005. 
[9] 
F. Tian and S. X. Xu, “How Do Enterprise Resource Planning Systems 
Affect Firm Risk? Post-Implementation Impact,” Mis Q., vol. 39, no. 
1, pp. 39–60, 2015. 
[10] Deloitte, “China Power of Retailing 2015,” Retrieved: 2016.09. 
[11] Oracle, “An Architect’s Guide to Big Data,” Retrieved: 2016.09. 
  
 
 
 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

 
Figure 2: The Visualization of the Correlation between DEA, MPI and BDAS Capability 
TABLE I: FACTOR LOADING OF 30 DEA MODELS                                                                TABLE II: MPI OF 45 FIRMS 
ON TWO PRINCIPAL COMPONENTS                           
Model
Component 1
Component 2
ABCDE1234
0.394
ABCDE1
0.383
ABCDE2
0.644
ABCDE3
0.814
ABCDE4
0.787
A1234
0.769
A1
0.336
A2
0.805
A3
0.914
A4
0.821
B1234
0.679
B1
0.689
B2
0.769
B3
0.644
B4
0.752
C1234
0.58
C1
-0.696
C2
0.836
C3
0.874
C4
0.733
D1234
0.871
D1
0.868
D2
0.868
D3
0.894
D4
0.763
E1234
0.52
E1
0.454
E2
0.609
E3
0.741
E4
0.685
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

