Association Control for Throughput Maximization and Energy Efficiency              
for Wireless LANs 
 
Oyunchimeg Shagdar, Suhua Tang, Akio Hasegawa, Tatsuo Shibata, and Sadao Obana 
ATR Adaptive Communications Research Laboratories, 
Hikaridai, Keihanna Science City, Kyoto, Japan 
{oyunaa, shtang, ahase, shibata, obana}@atr.jp 
 
Abstract—Because the access points (APs) and the stations 
(STAs) of a community network are deployed at the users’ 
desired places, the APs and STAs tend to concentrate in 
certain areas. A concentration of STAs often results in the 
AP(s) and STAs in that particular area suffering from severe 
congestion. On the other hand, a concentration of APs causes 
energy wastage. A proper association control can effectively 
alleviate congestion and improve network throughput. In this 
paper, we analytically formulate the throughput maximization 
problem and show that the existing association control schemes 
do not necessarily maximize throughput. Furthermore, while 
load balancing tends to use all the existing APs, sufficient 
performance can be achieved by utilizing fewer APs, especially 
in AP-concentrated areas. This enables lower energy 
consumption by putting unused APs in power-saving mode. To 
this end, we propose an association control scheme that aims at 
maximizing 
network 
throughout 
and reducing 
energy 
consumption. Using both computer simulations and testbed 
experiments, we confirm that the proposed scheme provides 
excellent performance and that it is feasible using the off-the-
shelf WLAN devices. 
Keywords- association control, throughput maximization, 
congestion alleviation, energy efficiency 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Due to the increasing popularity of WLAN technology, 
users (i.e., STAs) are often in the vicinity of one or more 
APs deployed at offices, school campuses, hotspot areas (e.g., 
cafes, train stations, airports), and individuals’ homes. Such a 
widespread deployment of WLAN triggered a launch of 
community networks, including FON [1], which are built 
exploiting user-owned APs. As community networks enable 
users to enjoy ubiquitous Internet access, it has the potential 
to play an important role in the future networking paradigm.  
The fundamental difference of community networks from 
e.g., enterprise wireless access networks is that the APs of a 
community network are deployed at the users’ (i.e., the 
owners of the APs) desired places and they are generally not 
movable in a systematic manner. APs are often concentrated 
in areas such as a residential street, and their distribution is 
highly non-uniform. Figure 1 shows a FON map for an 
approximately 600mx600m area in Tokyo (near Akihabara 
station) where 14 APs are installed in total. However, 8 APs 
are concentrated in a small area, approximately 1/8 of the 
overall area, in the upper left part of the map. In fact, the 
majority of these APs are deployed in a condominium 
building, which has residential homes, a café, conference 
spaces, and a fitness centre. The remaining 6 APs are 
installed in the rest of the overall area (approximately 7/8 of 
the overall area). STAs (i.e., users) are, on the other hand, 
expected to be concentrated in public places, such as cafes 
and train stations. It is clear that STAs and APs are not 
necessarily concentrated in a same area. A concentration of 
STAs often results in the AP(s) and STAs in that particular 
area suffering from severe congestion [2]- [6]. On the other 
hand, a concentration of APs causes energy wastage [7].  
Congestion can be effectively alleviated by proper 
association control. Indeed a large number of association 
control schemes are proposed for WLANs, mainly aiming at 
load balancing among cells under different definitions of 
load (e.g., load is defined as the number of nodes in [2], [3], 
channel condition in [4], and traffic rate in [5], [6]).  
In this paper, we analytically formulate the throughput 
maximization problem, and show that the existing schemes 
do not necessarily operate towards throughput maximization. 
Furthermore, while load balancing tends to use all the 
existing APs, the same or even improved network 
performance can be achieved by utilizing fewer APs 
especially in AP-concentrated areas. This provides a positive 
impact on energy efficiency since the unused APs can now 
be in power-saving mode. To this end, we propose an 
association control scheme that is to maximize network 
throughput and reduce energy consumption. We investigate 
the efficiency and feasibility of the scheme by both computer 
simulations and testbed experiments. 
 
 
Train station (Akihabara)
Condominium building
McDonalds
Circle1
Circle3
Circle2
Circle4
600m
600m
FON AP
 
 
Figure 1. A map showing locations of FON APs in 600mx600m area in 
Tokyo (the information is taken from maps.fon.com on July 20, 2010). 
 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

II. 
PROBLEM FORMULATION AND RELATED WORK 
The aggregate throughput of a DCF (Distributed 
Coordination Function) system is expressed as follows [8].  
                      
P T
P )
1(
P P E[P]
s
tr
tr
s tr
σ +
−
=
                       (1) 
Here, E[P] is the average data size, Ptr is the probability that 
there is at least one station transmits in the sensing range, Ps 
is the probability of a successful transmission. σ is the slot 
time and T is the average time required for transmission of a 
data (includes DIFS and etc.). The numerator of (1) 
corresponds to the successfully transmitted payload length 
and the denominator is the total time. The former and the 
latter components of the denominator are the time that 
channel is idle and busy (either due to successful or 
unsuccessful transmissions), respectively.  
Data transmission is successful if the frame is not 
collided and the frame does not contain errors (due to poor 
link quality). Thus letting Psc and Pse represent the priorities 
of the former and the latter events, respectively,  Ps= Psc×Pse. 
Psc (in what follows we call Psc as success probability) is 
expressed as 
n
1
n
sc
)
1(
1
)
n 1(
P
− τ
−
− τ
τ
=
−   
, 
      (2) 
where n is the number of nodes. τ is the channel access 
probability, which is determined by the contention window 
size (CW) and the probability that a node has a pending 
packet in its transmission queue [9]. Letting r≡Pse×E[P]/T, 
we rewrite (1) as   
P T
P )
1(
P T
r
P
s
tr
tr
tr
sc
σ +
−
× ×
=
          .                   (3) 
E[P]/T, the average frame transmission rate, is variable if 
rate adaptation is deployed at MAC, and it is fixed otherwise. 
If rate adaptation is deployed, the better the link quality 
(stronger RSSI), the higher is the selected transmission rate. 
Furthermore, if the rate adaption operates such that PER is 
minimized (i.e., Pse is maximized), the second component of 
(3), r, depends mainly on the selected transmission rate, i.e., 
r≈E[P]/T. The last component of (3) is the ratio of time the 
channel is determined to be busy to the total time. Letting 
ATR (air-time ratio) represent the last component, the 
throughput of a DCF system is a multiplication of Psc, r, and 
ATR: 
(r RSSI) ATR
P (n)
s
sc
×
×
=
.                             (4) 
Finally, the throughput maximization problem for a 
network that consists of multiple overlapping WLANs is the 
maximization of  
∑
=
=
N
i 1
is
S
 
  ,                                (5) 
where si is the throughput of cell i. It should be noted that 
overlapping cells, which operate under a same frequency 
channel, share the same Psc and ATR.  
In the traditional AP selection policy, a STA associates 
with the AP corresponding to the strongest RSSI. Thus such 
a scheme takes account of only the second component of (4), 
r. However, increasing r alone does not necessarily increase 
the total throughput, especially when STAs’ distribution is 
highly non-uniform. In such a scenario, it is possible that 
most of the STAs select a same AP (because they are closer 
to that AP). As it can be seen in (2), Psc decreases sharply 
with the increase of n (because the numerator of approaches 
zero and denominator approaches 1). Thus, in such a case, 
the throughput of the traditional scheme is poor because of a 
small Psc for the crowded cell(s) and likely a small ATR for 
the scarce cell(s). This suggests distributing STAs to the 
existing cells. Indeed several schemes are proposed to 
distribute the number of STAs among cells, and some of 
them take account of the link quality (RSSI in [2], and PER 
in [3]). A drawback of these schemes is that they do not 
consider ATR, the channel availability.  
Since DCF requires some idle slots for e.g., backoff 
procedures, ATR is upper-limited by a value smaller than 1 
(let ATRmax represent the saturation value). Furthermore, it 
has been recognized that ATR has an optimal value, ATRth 
(ATRth<ATRmax), where the channel utilization is maximized 
[10]. This means that Psc is maximized when ATR is equal to 
or smaller than ATRth.  
Reference [4] proposed to balance effective channel 
busy-time (i.e., time the channel is busy for successful 
transmissions) among cells. Because it does not discriminate 
the time corresponding unsuccessful transmissions and the 
idle time, [4] may suffer from such estimation errors. 
Moreover, because [4] ignores offered traffic volume, it 
might take a long time until load is balanced.  
ATR is also the ratio of the amount of bandwidth 
consumed for transmissions to the total bandwidth. Thus, an 
increase of the offered traffic volume (injected traffic) 
increases ATR until it reaches its saturation value (ATRmax). 
Further increase of the offered traffic, however, results in 
congestion (i.e., buffer overflow) that significantly hampers 
communication performance. Since a cell with a small ATR 
can accommodate additional traffic, the overall throughput 
can be improved by moving STAs from a congested cell to 
such a non-congested cell. References [5], [6] proposed 
schemes that balance traffic volume among cells. A 
drawback of the schemes is that they do not consider the fact 
that the overlapping cells operating under the same 
frequency channel share the same channel resource. 
Moreover, [4]-[6] do not consider the link quality (the 
second component of (2)), and thus they may force STAs to 
use links with poor quality, degrading the users’ throughput. 
To the best of our knowledge, none of existing schemes 
takes account of the overall of (4), thus they do not 
necessarily maximize throughput. To this end, we propose an 
association control scheme that takes account of the overall 
of (4). The direct target of the proposed scheme is 
maximizing the sum of the multiplication of the second and 
third components of (4), r and ATR, by taking account of 
RSSI, ATR, and the offered traffic volume. The success 
probability, Psc, is indirectly maximized by maintaining 
ATR smaller than ATRth. An important difference of the 
proposed scheme from the previous schemes is that because 
both the offered traffic and channel availability are estimated 
for each cell, the proposed scheme does not aim at load 
balancing. This enables the scheme to utilize fewer APs, 
providing a positive impact on energy efficiency. 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

III. 
PROPOSED SCHEME 
A user-owned AP is integrated into a community 
network by a common equipment/software program 
provided by the entity (e.g., FON [1]). Besides integrating 
users’ APs, the entity can play an important role for e.g., 
network management for better communication quality. 
Hence, community networks are centrally controllable and 
we expect that the members (i.e., the users) are cooperative 
to such a control. To this end, while a distributed mechanism 
can also be designed, we propose a centralized association 
control scheme due to ease of management and better 
performance [4]-[5], [7]. The proposed scheme aims at 
maximizing network throughput by a congestion alleviation 
mechanism and reducing energy consumption by a cell 
aggregation mechanism. For a large community network, the 
network can be divided into sub-networks, which are 
independently and separately controlled.  
Figure 2 shows the network architecture. Besides APs 
and STAs, the network has an information server (server) 
and control manager (manager). The server and manager can 
be physically separated or coexist in a same machine. APs 
and STAs periodically inform the server of information on 
link quality and so on. Periodically referring to the 
information, the manager triggers STAs’ handover for 
improved network throughput and/or energy efficiency.  
A. Estimation of  Channel Availability  and Offered Traffic 
STAs and APs measure RSSI, ATR, and the offered 
traffic volume, and inform the server of the information. The 
manager uses the information to estimate channel availability 
and traffic condition for each cell, and changes STAs’ 
associations. 
 
Frame Transmission Rate 
By periodically performing channel scanning, STAs learn 
the existence of the neighboring APs and the corresponding 
RSSIAP,STA. Such background scanning is supported by the 
off-the-shelf wireless LAN cards [11], and some efforts have 
been made for fast channel scanning [12]. Transmission rate 
for frame payload field is estimated from RSSIAP,STA and 
finally the frame transmission rate, rAP,STA (≈E[P]/T), for 
each pair of STA and AP is calculated. 
 
ATR 
For ease of implementation and without much loss of 
generality, ATR can be defined as the ratio of the channel 
busy time to the total time (the numerator does not contain 
inter-frame spaces (DIFS, SIFS)). In the proposed scheme, 
each AP measures ATR on its operating channel. Such a 
measurement can easily be made using the existing WLAN 
cards [4],[7],[13]. We empirically found that the appropriate 
values for ATRmax and ATRth are 0.6 and 0.58, respectively.  
 
Potential Throughput 
The manager estimates the maximum achievable throughput 
for each pair of STA and its neighboring AP (which is not 
the STA’s currently associated AP).  Let PTSTA,AP (potential 
throughput) represent the maximum achievable throughput 
for such a STA and an AP. As (4) shows, the throughput is a 
function of Psc, the estimated transmission rate (rAP,STA), and 
ATRAP.  
Status 
information
STA
AP
Corresponding 
node (CN)
Control manager
Information server
Internet
STA
AP
 
 
Figure 2. Network architecture. 
 
As discussed in the previous section, however, Psc can be 
maximized by ensuring ATR below ATRth. This enables PT 
be estimated from only rAP,STA and ATRAP. Thus the manager 
calculates PT for each STA and its neighboring AP as  



×
−
≥
=
otherwise
,
ATR ) r
ATR
(
ATR
ATR
,0
PT
AP,STA
AP
th
th
AP
AP,STA
　
　
　　　　　　　　
    .     (6) 
The upper equation is to not move the STA to the AP 
because ATRAP exceeds ATRth. Otherwise, the AP is a 
candidate destination AP for the STA and the maximum 
achievable throughput at the candidate cell is expressed as 
the lower equation. In our previous work [13], we confirmed 
that such an estimation of PT can be achieved with a high 
accuracy using the existing WLAN cards. 
 
Offered Traffic 
A STA can be moved to a neighboring AP, if it does not 
cause congestion at the neighboring cell. The condition can 
be checked by comparing the offered traffic volume for the 
STA and PTSTA,AP (to be discussed later). Letting 
EnqueueRateA,B be the rate at which packets destined to 
node B are inserted into the IP queue at node A, the offered 
traffic volume for a STA is defined as 
AP,STA 　
STA,AP
STA
EnqueueRate
EnqueueRate
OfferedRate
+
≡
  .    (7)  
If the WLAN is the bottleneck link of the end-to-end route, 
the OfferedRate is approximately equal to the traffic 
generation rate. 
B. Congestion Alleviation 
A cell is considered to be congested if  
ATR > ATRth
   . 
 
     (8) 
If the condition (8) is met for a cell, the manager checks if 
the aggregate offered rate exceeds the aggregate packet 
throughput for that cell, i.e.,   
　　
∑
∑
>
α
STAs
STA
STAs
STA
PacketThroughput
OfferedRate
.  (9) 
Here α(<1) is a system parameter to absorb rate fluctuation. 
PacketThroughputSTA is the sum of the rates at which packets 
are successfully transmitted on the uplink and downlink for 
the STA. The condition (9) indicates that one or more nodes 
in the cell are suffering from buffer overflow. It is possible 
that a cell satisfies (8) but not (9), in a case, when the cell 
does not have much traffic but the channel is congested due 
to the overlapping cells.  
A cell that satisfies both (8) and (9) becomes a target cell 
of congestion control. Letting APt be the AP of the target 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

cell, the manager selects STAs to move from APt to its 
neighboring cells. The association control is made based on 
the following policies: 
1. 
Moving STAs are selected such that the number of 
handovers is minimized.  
2. 
A STA should be moved only if it will not cause 
congestion at the destination cell.  
3. 
Among the candidate destination APs, the STA should 
be moved to the AP corresponding to the strongest 
RSSI. 
The more the handovers, the larger is the control overhead. 
Thus policy 1 is to minimize the number of moving STAs. 
To support this objective, we define “load” of a STA, as 
LoadSTA≡OfferedRateSTA/TxRateSTA,APt. Here TxRateSTA,APt 
is the rate used for transmissions of frame payload fields 
between the STA and APt. Obviously, the larger the offered 
traffic and/or the lower the transmission rate, the heavier 
loaded is the STA for APt. Due to policy 1, heavier loaded 
STAs are preferred to be moved from APt over lighter 
loaded STAs. For policy 2, a STA is moved to a 
neighbouring AP, APd, only if the condition (10) is met. 
OfferedRateSTA< PTSTA, APd 
 
    (10) 
In other words, the STA is moved to APd only if the 
destination cell can accommodate the offered traffic volume 
for the STA. Finally, among the candidate destination APs 
(i.e., the APs that satisfy (10) for the STA), the AP 
corresponding to the strongest RSSI is selected as the 
destination AP for the STA.  
When a STA, STAm, is selected to be moved from APt, 
the manager updates the aggregate offered rate (see (9)) for 
the target cell by decrementing it by OfferedRateSTAm. 
Moreover ATR for the destination cell and its overlapping 
cells (which operate using the same channel) is incremented 
by OfferedRateSTAm/rAPd,STAm. After updating the values, the 
manager checks if the target cell still satisfies (9). If it does, 
the manager selects the next moving STA.  
 
Discussion on TCP traffic 
TCP reacts to congestion and controls its rate based on 
AIMD algorithm. However such a rate change occurs in the 
order of RTT (milliseconds) which is much shorter than the 
control period at the manager (in order of seconds). 
Therefore we expect that the proposed scheme does not react 
to the AIMD-based rate fluctuation, but only the gradual 
change of the average rate. Hence, the proposed scheme and 
TCP can stably coexist. Moreover because TCP adjusts its 
traffic rate, OfferedRateSTA for STA might be largely 
changed due to the STA’s movement. However, it should be 
reminded that a STA is moved to a neighbouring cell only if 
the 
destination 
cell 
can 
accommodate 
the 
current 
OfferedRate for the STA (see (10)). Thus we expect that 
TCP throughput will be increased or maintained after the 
STA’s movement. Furthermore, since some amount of 
channel resource is released at the previous cell of the 
moving STA, STAs in that cell can now increase their rate.  
C. Cell Aggregation 
Since both of the offered traffic volume and the channel 
availability are known for each cell, load balancing among 
cells is not necessary. Indeed, if all the associated STAs of 
an AP can be moved to its neighboring cells without 
hampering the network throughput, such STA movements 
should be encouraged for energy efficiency, since the AP can 
now be in power-saving mode. Our scheme can provide such 
an association control based on the following policies: 
1. 
The target AP is an AP that is associated with 
preferably a few STAs, which can all be moved to the 
neighboring cells.  
2. 
To suppress channel interference, the target AP should 
have overlapping cells that operate using the same 
frequency channel. 
3. 
Policy 2 described in the previous subsection. 
4. 
Policy 3 described in the previous subsection. 
The manager triggers a handover only if destination APs are 
found for all the STAs of the target AP. A detailed protocol 
design for actually putting APs in power-saving mode is left 
for our future work. The main concern of such a protocol 
design is to ensure newly arriving STAs are covered by the 
network. For such a control, Wake-on-WLAN technology 
[14] can be used. 
D. Changing STA’s Association 
To change a STA’s association, the manager sends a 
control frame to the STA, indicating the destination AP and 
the corresponding channel information. Such a network 
directed association control can be supported by the 
upcoming IEEE 802.11v [15], which enables APs to 
explicitly request STAs to re-associate with an alternate AP. 
IV. 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
A. Simulation Evaluations 
Using Scenargie network simulator [16], we investigate 
the proposed scheme with and without cell aggregation 
capability. The performance of the proposed scheme is 
compared against:  
- 
Strongest RSSI: The traditional AP selection scheme.  
- 
LB(NumofSTAs): A load balancing scheme [2], which 
takes account of the number of STAs and RSSI.  
- 
LB(Traffic): A load balancing scheme [5], where load of 
a cell is defined by traffic rate.  
In each scheme, STAs initially associate with APs based on 
the strongest RSSI policy. In the proposed scheme, STAs 
inform the server of the measured information using a 160 
bytes packet. The manager checks the collected information 
in every 1s. 20-bytes of packets are used for handover 
requests and replies between the manager and moving STAs. 
α (see (9)) is set to 0.98.  
Performances of the schemes are investigated for the 
real-world scenario depicted in Figure 1, where 14 APs are 
non-uniformly distributed in a 600mx600m area. 8 APs are 
concentrated in the small area (around the condominium), 
the other 6 APs are installed in the remaining area as shown 
in the figure. The network operates using IEEE 802.11a [17], 
where 3 orthogonal frequency channels are available. 
Frequency channel allocation (to the APs) is made based on 
a simple graph coloring technique.  
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

STAs (users) can be anywhere, but it is natural to expect that 
users are especially attracted to the public places specifically, 
the train station, condominium building (for the café), and 
McDonalds in the target map. Thus, in our simulations, 40 
STAs are distributed in the circle-shaped areas centered at 
the 1) train station, 2) condominium building, 3) McDonalds, 
and 4) the center of the map, with a radius of 100m, 10m, 
10m and 300m, respectively (see Figure 1). The first three 
areas are set to create users’ concentration in the public 
places, while the last area is for uniform distribution of users 
in the overall area. Table I  shows the simulation scenarios, 
which have different number of STAs in each circle-shaped 
area. The smaller the scenario number, the more uniform is 
the STAs’ distribution.  
Figures 3 and 4 show the results of the simulations 
targeted at TCP and UDP traffic, respectively. In TCP 
simulations, STAs upload 5MB of file using FTP/TCP-
SACK. In UDP simulations, STAs have uplink and downlink 
CBR traffic generated at a random rate in the range of 
[0Mbps, 1.2Mbps]. 
As the figures a) show, for both the TCP and UDP traffic, 
the performance of Strongest RSSI scheme is inferior to the 
remaining schemes and the proposed scheme shows the best 
performance. The proposed scheme with the cell aggregation 
mechanism 
achieves 
around 
the 
same 
throughput 
performance as the scheme without cell aggregation 
especially for UDP traffic. The load balancing schemes have 
lower throughput than that of the proposed scheme, because 
they do not take account of the overall of (4).  
The figures a) show that, for any scheme, the throughput 
tends to be smaller when STAs’ distribution is less uniform 
(e.g., the throughput of S7 is smaller than that of S5). As 
discussed in Section II, the reason is clear for the strongest 
RSSI scheme (many STAs select the same AP). The reason 
for the remaining schemes is as follows. When STAs are 
highly concentrated around a particular AP, the schemes 
have to move some of the STAs to farther APs. This reduces 
the frame transmission rate, r, for the moving STAs, 
resulting in lower throughput compared to that of a scenario 
where STAs’ distribution is more uniform. Nevertheless, 
compared with the strongest RSSI scheme, the overall 
throughput is improved due to an increase of the 1st and 3rd 
components of (4).  Finally, S1 (where STAs’ distribution is 
uniform), however, does not show the largest throughput due 
to the non-uniform AP distribution. 
Figures 3b) and 4b) compare the number of active APs, 
i.e., the number of APs that actually serve for the users. As 
the figures show, the load balancing schemes use all the 
existing APs (except in scenario S7, where STAs are 
concentrated only at the train station). Strongest RSSI 
scheme, on the other hand, does not use many APs due to its 
simple AP selection policy. The proposed scheme without 
cell aggregation utilizes around the same number of APs as 
that of Strongest RSSI scheme. Finally, the scheme with cell 
aggregation utilizes the smallest number of APs. This is 
especially attractive because, compared to the existing 
schemes, the proposed scheme largely improves throughput 
while utilizing fewer APs. Our future work includes a study 
on how much energy reduction can be achieved by such an 
association control. 
 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION SCENARIOS (USER DISTRIBUTION) 
 
Circle1 
(station) 
Circle2 
(condominium) 
Circle3 
(McDonalds) 
Circle4 
(overall area) 
S1 
0 
0 
0 
40 
S2 
10 
10 
10 
10 
S3 
10 
20 
0 
10 
S4 
10 
20 
10 
0 
S5 
20 
10 
0 
10 
S6 
30 
0 
0 
10 
S7 
40 
0 
0 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Performance comparison for TCP traffic. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Performance comparison for UDP traffic. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Empirical results. 
0
10
20
30
40
0
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
Throughput [Mbps]
Time [s]
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
Throughput [Mbps]
Time [s]
a) Congestion alleviation
b) Cell aggregation
cell1
cell2
overall
w/o control
with control
w/o control
with control
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
Throughput [Mbps]
Scenarios
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
Number of active APs
Scenario ID
Strongest RSSI
LB(NumofSTAs)
LB(Traffic)
Proposed(w/o cell aggregation)
Proposed(with cell aggregation)
a) Aggregate throughput
b) The number of active of APs
Strongest RSSI
LB(NumofSTAs)
LB(Traffic)
Proposed(w/o cell aggregation)
Proposed(with cell aggregation)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
Throughput [Mbps]
Scenarios
a) Aggregate throughput
b) The number of active of APs
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
Number of active APs
Scenarios
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

B. Testbed Evaluations 
We implemented the proposed scheme in a wireless 
testbed 
and 
evaluated 
its 
throughput 
performance. 
Computers with Cent OS 5.5 (kernel 2.6.25-17) are used for 
STAs, APs, and the manager (note that the manager and 
server coexist in a same machine).  The APs, the manager, 
and a source computer (acts as a corresponding node (CN)) 
are connected to a 100Mbps Ethernet. The APs and STAs are 
equipped with 802.11a WLAN card made by NEC (Aterm 
WL54AG). We modified the Atheros device driver to enable 
measurements of ATR and PacketThroughput (see (9)). The 
packet transmission rate from the kernel to the device driver 
is monitored to measure EnqueueRate (see (7)). TCP is used 
for information collection at the server and for handover 
requests and replies. The testbed evaluations target scenarios 
that consist of 2 APs, AP1 and AP2, which use different 
frequency channels and are each initially associated with 3 
STAs. An experiment lasts about 200 s. Two scenarios 
(scenario1 and 2) are set to evaluate the congestion 
alleviation and cell aggregation mechanisms. In scenario1, 
CN transmits 15, 10, and 10 Mbps CBR traffic to the STAs, 
which are initially associated with AP1, and 1Mbps traffic to 
each STA initially associated with AP2. For scenario 2, CN 
transmits 1Mbps CBR traffic to each STA. To see the 
impacts of the proposed mechanisms, the manager is 
activated at app. 60 s for both the scenarios.  
Figure 5 shows the time series plots of the throughput for 
the scenarios. In Figure 5a), when the manager is not 
activated, the aggregate throughput is 22Mbps and packet 
loss ratio is app. 40%. Upon the activation of the manager, 
the STA with 15 Mbps traffic is moved to cell2. This 
association control maximizes the throughput (aggregate 
throughput is 38Mbps) and eliminates packet loss ratio. For 
scenario 2 (see Figure 5b)), as both the cells are lightly 
loaded, congestion is not an issue, thus the system shows 
6Mbps throughput and 0% of packet loss ratio even before 
the activation of the manager. Upon the activation of the 
manager, the cell aggregation is performed and all the STAs 
of cell2 are moved to cell1.  
Unfortunately, as it can be seen in the figure, it took app. 
6 seconds to complete the handover (without depending on 
the number of moving STAs). The 6 seconds are used for 1) 
MAC 
layer 
disassociation/association, 
2) 
IP 
route 
advertisement, 3) IP duplicate address detection, 4) MIP 
binding update, and 5) MIP binding acknowledgement. 
Among the operations, there was a software bug 
corresponding to 2) and we confirmed that by fixing this bug, 
handover time can be reduced down to 3 seconds. We are 
now working on this issue. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we analytically formulated the throughput 
maximization problem for WLANs and showed that the 
existing association control schemes do not necessarily 
maximize network throughput. Furthermore, since most of 
the existing schemes aim at load balancing among cells, they 
tend to use all the existing APs. However, sufficient network 
performance can be achieved by utilizing fewer APs, 
providing positive impact on energy efficiency. To this end, 
we proposed an association control scheme to maximize 
throughput and reduce energy consumption. The simulation 
results showed that compared to the existing schemes, the 
proposed scheme can provide much larger throughput while 
utilizing fewer APs regardless of traffic type and node 
density. The testbed experiment shows that proposed scheme 
is feasible using the off-the-shelf wireless LAN cards. Our 
future work includes a study on energy efficiency induced by 
the cell aggregation mechanism. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was performed under research contract of 
"Research and Development for Reliability Improvement by 
The Dynamic Utilization of Heterogeneous Radio Systems", 
for the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, 
Japan. 
REFERENCES 
[1] FON, www.fon.com 
[2] S. Sheu and C. Wu, “Dynamic Load Balance Algorithm (DLBA) for 
IEEE 802.11 Wireless LAN,” Tamkang Journal of Science and 
Engineering, vol. 2, no. 1, pp.45-52, 1999. 
[3] Y. Fukuda and Y. Oie, “Decentralized Access Point Selection 
Architecture for Wireless LANs,” IEICE Trans. Commun. vol. E90-B, 
no. 9, pp. 675-684, 2007. 
[4] F. Guo and T-C. Chiueh, “Scalable and Robust WLAN Connectivity 
Using Access  Point Array,”  IEEE DSN’05, pp. 288-297, 2005. 
[5] I. Jabri, N. Krommenacker, T. Divoux, and A. Soudani,”IEEE 802.11 
Load Balancing: An Approach for QoS Enhancement,” Springer, Int J 
Wireless Inf Networks, vol 15, pp.16-30, 2008.  
[6] H. Velayos, V. Aleo, and G. Karlsson, “Load Balancing in 
Overlapping Wireless LAN Cells,” IEEE ICC 2004, Vol. 7, pp. 3833-
3836, 2004. 
[7] A. J. Jardosh, K. Papagiannaki, E. M. Belding, K. C. Almeroth, G. 
Iannaccone, and B. Vinnakota, “Green WLAN: On-demand WLAN 
Infrastructures,” Springer, Mobile Networks and Applications, Vol. 
14, No. 6, pp. 798-814, Dec. 2008. 
[8] G. Bianchi, “Performance Analyis of the IEEE 802.11 Distributed 
Coordination Function,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Comm., 
vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 535-547, March 2000. 
[9] F. Daneshgaran, M. Laddomada, F. Mesiti, and M. Mondin, 
“Unsaturated Throughput Analysis of IEEE 802.11 in Presence of 
Non Ideal Transmission Channel and Capture Effects,” IEEE Trans. 
Wireless Comm. vol. 7, issue: 4, pp. 1276 – 1286, April 2008. 
[10] H. Zhai, X. Chen, and Y. Fang, “How well can the IEEE 802.11 
Wireless LAN suport Quality of Service,” IEEE Trans. Wireless 
Comm. Vol. 4., no. 6, pp. 3084-3094, Nov. 2005 
[11] http://madwifi.org/ 
[12] I. Ramani and S. Savage, “SyncScan: practical fast handoff for 
802.11 infrastructure networks,”  INFOCOM 2005, Vol.1, pp. 675-
684, 2005. 
[13] S. Tang,  N Taniguchi, O. Shagdar, M. Tamai, H. Yomo, A. 
Hasegawa, and et al., “Potential Throughput Based Access Point 
Selection,” IEEE APCC 2010. 
[14] IEEE 
802.11v: 
Wireless 
Network 
Management, 
http:://grouper.ieee.org/groups/802/11/Reports/tgv_update.htm. 
[15] N. Mishra, K. Chebroulu, B. Raman, and A. Pathak, “Wake-on-
WLAN,” ACM, WWW, pp. 761-769, 2006. 
[16] Scenargie, http://www.spacetime-eng.com 
[17] IEEE Computer society LAN MAN Standards Committee, Wireless 
LAN Medium Access Protocol (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) 
Specification, IEEE Std 802.11-1997, IEEE, 1997. 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

