Multicasting over OBS WDM  Networks
Pınar Kırcı
Computer Engineering Department
Istanbul University
Istanbul,Turkey
pkirci@istanbul.edu.tr
A. Halim Zaim
Computer Engineering Department
Ticaret University
Istanbul, Turkey
azaim@iticu.edu.tr
Abstract—In this study, we present a new protocol structure
for multicasting on OBS networks.
We investigate the
performance on Just Enough Time (JET) and Just In Time
(JIT) between multicast and unicast traffic. We examine
behaviors of data and control planes of the network. We also
study how to add and remove a client or a node from a
constructed multicast tree. The results show that our proposed
multicast protocol structure produces low multicast traffic join
request drop rates.
Keywords-OBS; multicast; JIT; JET; WDM network.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The number of Internet users continuously increases.
Internet traffic growth rates exponentially ascend; therefore,
there is a great bandwidth demand emerges in backbone
networks. The main reason of the growing number of
Internet users is the recent advances in networking. These
advances are for instance, video conferencing, distributed
games, HDTV, interactive distance learning and many more
multimedia real time
applications. These are multi
destination communication-based, most popular network
applications.
The bandwidth
need of these
multicast
applications may be met by optical networks and dividing
fiber into numerous channels with WDM technology. In
multicasting, the messages and data are transmitted from one
or more sources to a set of destinations in a multicast group
of a WDM network over a multicast tree. To construct a tree,
a route should be decided from source to all of the related
destinations, a wavelength should be assigned to the links
and also QoS should be provided. In WDM networks, for
multicast trees, delay and cost are the most important QoS
factors for network efficiency. In optical networks, Optical
Burst Switching
(OBS) is a good
solution for data
transmission since OBS combines the advantages of Optical
Packet Switching (OPS) and Optical Circuit Switching
(OCS). The first generation of optical networks was based on
OCS. The most important detail of the switching in OCS is
the construction of a lightpath between the source and
destination before data transmission. By the way, OPS is
presented as a good alternative for OCS since OPS is more
efficient for dynamic and bursty traffic transmissions.
However, today OBS seems as the best solution for data
transmission since OBS evolves the performance of WDM
on optical networks with bursty traffic [1], [2].
In this paper, we study a multicasting protocol for OBS
networks. In the network, communication of clients and the
source is
performed by join-request messages.
We
concentrate on how to avoid gathering of traffic crowd in
definite parts of the network by using thresholds at
intermediate switches with minimum join-request message
loss rates. Most of the multicasting protocols depend on a
source initiated structure. This type of structures produces
excessive message round trip times because of using
acknowledgement messages. In our study, a leaf initiated
structure is considered. In the protocol, a join-request
message notifies the source about the request, composes the
path and informs the switches without producing extreme
message round-trip times. In this protocol, the main aim is to
achieve the routing and bandwidth allocation of the network
by using less number of messages and message round-trip
times.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section
II, a brief overview of all optical networks, OBS and
multicasting is presented. In Section III, the proposed
protocol structure is introduced and the numerical results are
given. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section IV.
II.
MULTICASTING AND OBS
All optical networks with WDM transmissions include
many optical cross connects (OXCs). These OXCs connect
client networks over lightpaths or light trees. An optical
signal arrives at an OXC over an input fiber wavelength.
Then it is switched to the same wavelength over an output
fiber. However, the arriving signal can be switched to a
different wavelength over the output fiber by the help of the
converters. Optical switching has many advantages like
protocol transparency and less power consumption rates [4].
Figure 1.
OBS network structure  [7].
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

OBS is presented as a solution for great bandwidth
demand on Internet traffic. The network structure with OXCs
is presented in Fig. 1. The data packets are assembled into
bursts at the ingress node and transmitted by fiber optics on
the network in optical form. In the network, to arrange the
reservations for the coming burst, a control packet is sent
before the burst. Furthermore, in OBS networks there is a
definite time period between the control packet and the burst
which is called as offset. Separated data and control channels
are the most remarkable specialty of OBS networks. Data is
transmitted in optical form with optical switching but control
packets are transmitted in electronic form with electronic
switching in OBS networks [3], [6].
Other than OBS, another solution for increasing
bandwidth demand is multicasting. There are many multicast
applications in the literature according to the multipoint
destinations. Document distribution and on demand video
distributions are one to many type applications, which are
sent from only one source to many destinations. Many to one
applications are sent from more than one sources to a
destination like group polling and resource discovery. In
many to many, there are more than one sources and many
destinations as in multimedia conferencing and distributed
simulations [5].
III.
THE MULTICAST OPTICAL NETWORK DESIGN
We consider an optical WDM network with 14 node
NSFNET topology. The constructed network model is
composed of a source, an ingress switch, intermediate
switches, edge switches and clients. The nodes of the
networks are connected to each other by fiber links that carry
two wavelengths with 10 Gb/s capacity. In the network, all
of the nodes are multicast capable. In our study there is a
source and multiple destinations as clients. These clients
access the backbone network by edge switches. The
multicast sessions have different amount of multicast traffic
and different number of destinations. As distinct from the
source initiated multicast tree structures, we consider to
construct leaf initiated multicast trees for each of the
multicast sessions.
The multicast session begins with the video context
announcement with broadcasting to the clients then the join
requests are considered. If a client is interested in one of the
video contexts’ video then it sends a join request to the
connected edge switch. The edge switch sends this request to
the closest intermediate switch. The intermediate switch
controls both its timetable and threshold. If the threshold
value of the intermediate switch is not exceeding the
predetermined value, then the timetable is checked if the
intermediate switch will be available during the video
transmission time. If both of the conditions are ensured, join
request is accepted and transmitted to the next node but if
one of the conditions are not ensured, the join request is
rejected. Then the edge node sends a re_join_request
message to another closest intermediate switch. If none of
the intermediate switches accepts the join request, in that
case the join request is dropped. The threshold control takes
place at the intermediate switches, which are directly
connected with edge switches for preventing potential traffic
collisions. Besides, the clients whose join requests are
accepted have to send their keep alive messages on specific
time intervals to the source to notify that they are still alive
and when the video transmission starts, the bursts are sent
from source to the related clients.
JET-MCAST
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
1Day
7Day
14Day
Time
Join request Drop Rates
50-Join request
100-Join request
150-Join request
200-Join request
250-Join request
500-Join request
750-Join request
1000-Join request
Figure 2.
The multicasting on JET reservation protocol.
The main function of our protocol is multicasting the
bursts; for comparison, we also designed a unicast data
traffic. Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 present the results of our simulation.
JET-UCAST
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1Day
7Day
14Day
Time
Join request Drop Rates
50-Join request
100-Join request
150-Join request
200-Join request
250-Join request
500-Join request
750-Join request
1000-Join request
Figure 3.
The unicasting on JET reservation protocol.
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

JIT-MCAST
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1Day
7Day
14Day
Time
Join request drop rates
50-Join_request
100-Join_request
150-Join_request
200-Join_request
250-Join_request
500-Join_request
750-Join_request
1000-Join_request
Figure 4.
The multicasting on JIT reservation protocol
JIT-UCAST
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1Day
7Day
14Day
Time
Join request drop rates
50-Join_ request
100-Join_ request
150-Join_ request
200-Join_ request
250-Join_ request
500-Join_ request
750-Join_ request
1000-Join_ request
Figure 5.
The unicasting on JIT reservation protocol.
The join request drop rates in JET with multicast gives
better results. The drop rates change according to the time
periods and they decrease as the time periods increase.
Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 show the join request drop rates in JIT
reservation protocol. As the time period increases from one
day to fourteen days according to the increasing number of
join requests, the join request drop rates change with respect
to the variable traffic.
IV.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, a promising protocol structure for
multicasting is presented. We considered the drop rates of
join
requests according to definite
time periods. We
investigated the protocol performance on JET and JIT with
multicasting and unicasting. Our performance results show
that multicasting provides better drop rates than unicasting in
both of the reservation protocols. Furthermore, when we
compare the simulation results, the protocol structure gives
best values on JET with the least drop rates.
REFERENCES
[1]
J.P. Jue, W.H. Yang, Y.C. Kım and Q. Zhang, “Optical  packet and
burst  switched networks:a review,” IET Communications, vol. 3,
Issue 3, 334-352, 2009.
[2]
L. Xu, H.G. Perros and G. Rouskas, “Techniques for optical packet
switching and optical burst switching,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, 0163-6804-01, 2001.
[3]
J. Ramamirtham and J. Turner, “Time sliced optical burst switching,”
IEEE Infocom 2003, 0-7803-7753-2.
[4]
Y. Xin and G.N. Rouskas, “Multicast routing under optical layer
constraints,” IEEE Infocom, 0-7803-8356-7.
[5]
A.E. Kamal, “Algorithms for multicast traffic grooming in WDM
mesh networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, 0163-6804—06.
[6]
R.C.
Rajesh and V.M.
Vokkarane, “Dynamic load balanced
manycasting  over optical burst switched (OBS) networks,” 2009,
IEEE 978-1-55752-865-0.
[7]
T. Battestilli and H. Perros, “A Performance study of an optical burst
switched networks with dynamic simultaneous link possesion,”
Computer Networks, vol. 50, Issue 2, pp. 219-236, Optical Networks.
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

