An Analysis of Educational Big Data in University Using Mobile E-Portfolio System 
with Smart Concierge  
 
 Noriko Hanakawa  
Hannan University 
Department of Information Management 
Osaka, Japan 
Email:hanakawa@hannan.ac.jp 
Masaki Obana 
Osaka Institute of Technology 
Department of Information Science and Technology 
Osaka, Japan 
Email:obana@is.oit.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract—We have developed a new educational e-portfolio 
environment including not only conventional education data but 
also school life data in university. School life data means non-
lectures activities, such as job hunting, club activities, students’ 
communications. A most important feature of the e-portfolio 
environment is a school concierge named “HapiNan” in 
smartphone in order to navigate students’ school life. The school 
concierge asks some questions in a smartphone according to 
student situations. The smart concierge provides mobility and 
ubiquity of the educational e-portfolio environment. Our goal is 
to clarify influences of school life activities on university 
learning. From April to September 2013, a trial version of the 
system ran. From April 2014, freshmen in our university used 
the system. We have two phases in order to analyze e-portfolio 
data. In the first phase, fourth year students used the e-portfolio 
system. As a result, students’ job hunting problems are clear. (1) 
Job hunting time is 40hours per a week, (2) no relations between 
Grade Point Average (GPA) and job hunting success, (3) job 
hunting cost is large. In second phase, freshmen used the e-
portfolio system in the first year of education. We found that 
there was a relationship between GPA and lecture time as well 
as hobby time. In addition, there was no relation between GPA 
and home study time or part-time job time. The analysis results 
are valuable for school advisors and teachers in order to support 
freshmen’s school life. 
Keywords- e-portfolio; smartphone; SNS; GPA; school life; 
university education.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Educational e-portfolio is very important in Japanese 
universities. Of course, e-portfolio data has to accumulate in 
educational database. The educational records are study 
reports, examination results, lecture materials, lecture notes, 
and goals of lectures and achievement levels of lectures. The 
portfolio data is useful to improve students’ understanding 
levels and knowledge acquisition. Educational portfolio is 
becoming more popular and more useful [1] [2]. The 
efficiency of having an education portfolio is becoming 
clearer and clearer [7] [8]. 
However, in Japanese universities, students would like to 
support not only educational activities but also school life 
activities, such as club activities, job hunting, part-time job, 
and communication among students. Especially job hunting 
activities takes much time for the third and the forth year 
students. It is a serious problem in Japanese society because 
university students sacrifice their study time to hunt for job.  
In addition, school advisors and teachers can not fully 
understand students’ real problems that caused low Grade 
Point Average (GPA). Of course, we can forecast easily that 
GPA is low when study time at home is small. However, we 
cannot understand how the other students’ activities, such as 
part-time job and club activities influence GPA. Our goal is to 
clarify the influence of school life activities on university 
learning. 
Therefore, we have developed a new e-portfolio 
environment for supporting school life including various non-
educational activities. The most important feature of the e-
portfolio environment is a school concierge character called 
“HapiNan” who urge students to input usual activities 
information in students’ smartphone. For example, if a student 
does not input job hunting activities, the concierge asks the 
student “Hello, how is your job hunting?”. The concierge 
asking through the smartphone is useful in order for the 
student to continue to input data of school life into the e-
portfolio every day. In addition, the accumulated data of 
school life data is useful to analyze GPA. We clarify 
relationships between GPA values and school life data in e-
portfolio system. If we find causes that lead low GPA, for 
example too much time for part-time job, student advisors and 
teachers are able to give students advices on school life, 
especially part-time job. 
Section 2 shows related work, Section 3 explains functions 
of our e-portfolio environment. The trial application of the 
school life e-portfolio is shown in Section4, Section 5 shows 
summary and future research. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Various e-portfolios for university education have been 
proposed and applied. Olatz descriptively studied the 
undergraduate students’ perceptions, attitudes and behavior 
when using an e-portfolio to support their learning and 
assessment in practice based courses at two traditional 
Spanish universities [3]. As a result, the students had positive 
opinions and self-efficiency through the e-portfolio as a tool 
to manage their learning and assessment during a semester, 
especially from the second month of use.  
Chang studied to use e-portfolios to enhance university 
students' knowledge management (KM) performance [4]. The 
research results revealed that the experimental group 
outperformed the control group in the performances of overall 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

KM and five KM aspects (knowledge sharing, innovation, 
acquisition, application, and accumulation). This showed that 
e-portfolios significantly facilitated KM performance.  
Carol et al. developed an e-learning system that couples a 
blog with a learning e-portfolio [5]. They adapted the system 
to the first year course education. Because the e-portfolio 
system is based on web-blog system, massive blog data was 
accumulated in the system. Rodriguez et al. shows usefulness 
of e-portfolio in university professional education [6]. They 
claimed that (1) e-portfolio is a complementary tool for 
student's assessment, (2) e-portfolio is a perfect follow-up 
device to check student's competences development 
throughout their degree studies.  Other researches also claim 
there is a benefit of the e-portfolio system and data analysis. 
Shroff et al. analyzed students’ behaviors in examinations 
using e-portfolio system [7], and Alexiou et al. studied the 
benefits of the e-portfolio system in university education. [8]. 
These studies are conventional education e-portfolio 
systems. The usefulness and effects of educational e-portfolio 
have already been clear. Therefore, we try adding a new 
function of the school life e-portfolio to the conventional 
education e-portfolio in order to support the entire university 
school life for students. 
III. 
THE EDUCATION E-PORTFOLIO ENVIRONMENT WITH 
THE CONCIERGE 
A. Overview 
Figure1 shows an outline of the e-portfolio environment 
and usage image. The e-portfolio environment includes 
normal educational portfolio and school life portfolio. In 
lectures, students and teachers use the normal educational 
portfolio. On the other hand, when students do not take 
lectures, students use school life portfolio in smartphone. 
Students can input school life data anytime and anywhere. 
Therefore, a tool for inputting school life information is 
required. Because students are not compelled to input school 
life data, students may forget to input the data. For this reason, 
we included in the smartphone application the school 
concierge “HapiNan”. HapiNan is our university mascot 
character.  
B. A normal educational e-portfolio 
Figure 2 shows a web page of goals and achievement 
levels of lectures in the normal educational e-portfolio 
environment. The educational e-portfolio is a typical 
education portfolio having the following functions: 
(a) Accumulating  lecture materials 
(b) Accumulating lecture notes 
(c) Accumulating reports 
(d) Accumulating examination results 
(e) Accumulating attendance situation of lectures 
(f) Accumulating teachers’ comments 
(g) Accumulating GPA 
Similar to the conventional education e-portfolio system, 
our e-portfolio environment supports all functions of the 
conventional education e-portfolio system. 
C. A school life e-portfolio 
A school life e-portfolio is an original function in our e-
portfolio environment. The school life e-portfolio is like SNS 
(Social Network Service), such as Facebook (See Figure 3). 
Because the school life e-portfolio supports diary function the 
same way as Facebook diary function, students input their 
dairy activities to school life e-portfolio without a feeling of 
wrongness. 
The school life e-portfolio can collect the following data: 
(a) Time to take lectures in school 
(b) Time to study at home 
(c) Time to do extra-curriculum activities 
(d) Time to work on part-time job 
(e) Time to do hobby  
(f) Time to sleep 
School life portfolio 
• Job hunting activity 
• Club activities 
• Part-time job 
• Communication among students 
• Life management 
• …… 
 SNS like site 
How was your 
job hunting? 
Today, I took 
two interviews 
of companies. 
 
HapiNan 
Input school life data  
HapiNan selects a question based on 
accumulating data on portfolio database. 
Analyzing accumulating data including school life data 
Figure 1  An outline and usage image of the e-portfolio environment 
Normal education 
portfolio 
• Reports 
• Goal and achieve level of lectures 
• Examination results 
• Lecture materials 
• Lecture notes 
• ……….
Database 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

In addition, the school life e-portfolio includes special 
functions because students can easily input their dairy 
activities. The special functions are the following: 
(1) Dairy function like social network, such as Facebook 
(2) School concierge “HapiNan” in students’ smartphones 
(3) Time management function in usual life 
(4) Analyzing data of educational data and school life data 
The following sub-sections explain the above functions. 
1) Dairy function like social network, such as Facebook 
Time management function is an original function. The 
time management means that students report usual activities, 
such as job hunting time, home study time, part-time job time, 
and sleeping time. The time management function’s purpose 
is to understand each student situation in usual life. For 
example, when a student does not submit a reports by due day, 
a teacher may understand the reasons for the late submission 
might be due to, for example, the fact that the student spends 
a lot of time in a part-time job. Especially, in current Japanese 
society, job hunting in the third and fourth year students is 
very serious. Job hunting is a main activity in university on 
the fourth year instead of educational activities. Teachers and 
school staff support the serious job hunting activities. In the 
supporting activities of teachers and staffs, the time 
management function of the school life e-portfolio is useful. 
Figure 4 shows an image of time management function when 
students input the usual time in a web page. 
2) School 
concierge 
“HapiNan” 
in 
students’ 
smartphones 
The above functions, such as diary and time management 
required students input actions their usual activities every day. 
However, usual activity data is not inputted unless almost all 
students are forced. Students forget the input, or skip the input. 
Therefore, we prepared school concierge in students’ 
smartphone. The concierge name is “HapiNan”, this is our 
university mascot character. The HapiNan asks a question to 
a student based on data of the e-portfolio database (See Figure 
5). If a student was absent from a lecture, “Why are you absent 
from the lecture?”, HapiNan asks. Moreover, if a student does 
not report job hunting activities, “How is your job hunting?”, 
HapiNan asks. This way, students’ educational data and 
school life data are accumulated to the e-portfolio database. 
3) Time management function in usual life 
Dairy and usual life time management data are added on 
each student. Graphs of the data of each student are generated 
in the analyzing data functions (See Figure 6). In the web page 
of the graphs, teachers and staffs can input comments about 
the time management data. The function is a kind of 
communication tools between students and teachers. 
4) Analyzing data of accumulated educational data and 
school life data 
The e-portfolio system also has important analyzing 
functions. Figure 7 shows an example of results of the 
analyzing functions. The left side graph of the Figure 7 shows 
a relationship between home study time and examination 
results. The home study time is a kind of time management 
data of school life portfolio, examination results (GPA) is a 
kind of data of the educational portfolio. The right-side graph 
means success factors of job hunting activities. For example, 
students who spend a lot of time for part-time job can get 
Figure 2  A web page of goals and achievement 
levels of lectures in normal educational e-portfolio 
Goal and achievement levels of lectures 
Lecture 
Teacher 
Period 
Time 
2013 
Monday 13:10-14:40 
Student No 
Student name 
Search students 
Search results 
Student  
Goal 
Achievement level  
Figure 3 A web page of diary in school life e-portfolio 
Search 
Search results 
Home 
Logout 
System development 
Figure 4  An input function of the time management of school 
life e-portfolio 
Input support 
function of time 
management 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

earlier success of job hunting than students who get better 
examination results. Job hunting success data is recorded in 
school life portfolio, examination results are accumulated in 
educational portfolio. In this way, the analyzing functions of 
our e-portfolio environment can be clear the relationship 
between education data and usual life data.  
IV. 
 ANALYSIS OF E-PORTFOLIO DATA 
The trial version of the educational e-portfolio system has 
two phases. The first phase is from April to September 2013.  
Eleven students used the system in trial. After several 
functions improved according to the students advices, all 
freshmen used the e-portfolio system from April 2014 (second 
phase). The number of the new students is 1000 or more. In 
this section, at first, we show results of the trial in the first 
phase. Next, we show the results of all freshmen in the second 
phase. The data of the second phase was collected for six 
months, from April to September of 2014. 
A. The first phase results (trial phase)  
 We try adapting the school life e-portfolio to 11 students 
who are the fourth year students. They were doing job hunting 
activities. The accumulated educational data and school life 
data were analyzed. As a result, we found the following 
points: 
(a) Students spend 40 hours a week for job hunting, and 
students spend 100 hours a month in a job hunting peak 
period. 
(b) Correlation between examination results and success 
of job hunting is not strong.  
(c) The most important challenge in job hunting activities 
is high transport cost, such as train fee, or bus fee, and 
airplane fee. 
These results are derived from an analysis function of the 
e-portfolio system. (a) is derived from school life portfolio, (b) 
is derived from educational portfolio and school life portfolio. 
(c) is derived from the dairy function like SNS site of school 
life portfolio. In this way, because school life data is 
accumulated, students’ portfolio becomes more useful in 
university education. 
Figure 8 and Figure 9 show graphs of job hunting time 
success. These graphs are generated automatically in our e-
portfolio environment. Relationships between job hunting 
success and time spent on job hunting is shown in Figure 8. 
Figure 9 shows relationships between job hunting success and 
input rate of school life data to the e-portfolio system. 
“Student 2” spent a lot of time on job hunting. However, 
timing of job hunting success was late July of 2013. In contrast, 
although “Student 3” spent little time onjob hunting, timing of 
job hunting success was early April of 2013. In this way, 
students’ behaviors that are not only learning activities but 
also private life activities were clarified.  School advisors were 
able to give precise comments to each student. 
B. The second phase results (all freshmen) 
In second phase, 1296 freshmen in our university used the 
e-portfolio system from April 2014. The e-portfolio system 
was useful supporting the freshmen school life. Especially, 
school advisors and teachers use the system in the first year 
education. The education data and school life data of the e-
portfolio system were collected for six months. In addition, 
values of GPA of the freshmen were compared with data of 
school life in the e-portfolio system.  
Relationships between GPAs and school life data of all 
freshmen are shown in Figure 10. Because all freshmen did 
not input all school life data, missing data increased (See “No 
input” of Figure 10). Therefore, we eliminated the missing 
data from all school life data. 
As a result, we found the following:  
Figure 5  School 
concierge 
“HapiNsan” in a 
smartphone  
How is your last week? 
Home study enough 
Figure 6  A web page of total sum of time 
management and teachers comments  
Figure 8 Relationship between job hunting success time and 
job hunting time  
Figure 9 Relationship between job hunting success time 
and input rate 
Figure 7  Analysis results of educational portfolio data 
and school life data  
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

1) GPA has weak relationship with the number of input 
data 
2) GPA has weak relationship with time of taking lecture 
3) GPA has weak relationship with hobby time 
4) GPA has no relationship with part-time job 
5) GPA has no relationship with home study time 
 
The following subsections show the results of analysis of 
the data of the e-portfolio system. 
1) GPA has weak relationship with the number of input 
data 
“(1) Relationship of the number of input data” of Figure 
11 shows relationship between GPAs and the number of input 
data. Teachers and school advisors encouraged the freshmen 
to input school life data to the e-portfolio system. Diligent 
students input the school life data according to teachers’ and 
advisors’ suggestions. Of course, the diligent students had also 
good GPA values. A value of correlation between GPA and 
the number of input data is 0.336. Therefore, GPA has weak 
relation with the number of input data. 
2) GPA has weak relationship with time of taking lecture 
“(2) Relationship of lecture time” of Figure 11 shows 
relationship between GPAs and time of taking lectures. The 
earnest students also took many lectures. Naturally, the 
students that take many lectures get high score of GPA. A 
value of correlation between GPAs and time of taking 
lectures is 0.43.  Therefore, GPA has weak relationship with 
time of taking lectures. 
3) GPA has weak relationship with hobby time 
“ (3) Relationship of hobby time” of Figure 11 shows 
relationship between GPAs and hobby time. Hobby includes 
“playing with friends”, “watch TV”, “playing computer 
game”, “do sport”, and “reading books”. Usually, we think 
that GPA will become low if students spend a lot of time for 
hobby. However, correlation between GPA and hobby time 
is 0.36. That is, a student who spends much time for playing 
his hobby has good GPA. The relationship between GPA and 
hobby time was unexpected. 
4) GPA has no relationship with part-time job 
“(4) Relationship of part-time job time” of Figure 11 shows 
relationship between GPAs and part-time job time. School 
advisors and teachers often tell “your GPA will become low 
if you are absorbed in a part-time job. So, you should stop 
part-time job.”.  This phrase is repeated in a case of students’ 
consultation with school advisors. However, GPA has no 
relationships with part-time job time. Even if a student works 
176 minutes as part-time job per a day, the student has good 
GPA (3.6). School advisors and teachers have to change their 
advices regarding part-time job. 
5) GPA has no relationship with home study time 
“(5) Relationship of home study time” of Figure 11 shows 
relationship between GPAs and home study time. Of course, 
we expected strong correlation between GPA and home study 
time. That is, when a student hardly studies at home, his GPA 
Figure 10 Relationships between GPAs and the 
number of input data 
No input 
GPA 
Figure 11 Relationships between GPAs and the school life data 
(1) Relationship of the number of input data 
(2) Relationship of lecture time 
(3) Relationship of hobby time 
(4) Relationship of part-time job time 
(5) Relationship of home study time 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

becomes high. However, the analysis result is different from 
our expectation. GPA has no relationships with home study 
time. We think that quality of home study is more important 
than length of home study. 
C. Discussion of results of the analysis  
In second phase, the above 1) to 5) are important results 
of the analysis of the e-portfolio data. The targets of the 
second phase were freshmen in our university. The freshmen 
took the first year’s education, not professional education. 
Because of first year’s education data, the results of the 
analysis of the e-portfolio data are limited to the first year’s 
education. However, from the results, we encourage 
freshmen to spend sufficient time taking lectures, while at 
same time reserve sufficient time for hobbies. The amount of 
time spent on home study is not important. It is good to 
consider a part-time job.  
On the other hand, the first phase analysis of the e-
portfolio data focuses on job hunting activities of the fourth 
years’ students. The second phase analysis of the e-portfolio 
system focuses on the freshmen, and the first year’s education. 
These analysis targets were only same year students. The e-
portfolio system has an ability of all year students. Growth of 
a students during 4 years in university life can be recorded to 
the e-portfolio system.  In addition, there are many events that 
are not learning activities, for example, job hunting activities, 
club activities, and hobby activities. Table 1 shows school 
events that are not learning activities in our university.  
TABLE I.  
SCHOOL EVENTS  
Year 
Events of each year 
All years 
The first year 
Welcome sport events and party  
Fieldwork for making teamwork 
University 
festival, 
The second year 
Carrier-up guidance and program  
The third year 
Internship program 
Carrier-up program, 
The fourth year 
Job hunting  
 
The e-portfolio system accumulates learning data, such as 
GPA, lecture time, reports. Moreover, students’ school life 
data, such as part-time job, home study, sleeping time, hobby 
time is also important. The school events, such as university 
festival, internship program, job hunting are also supported 
to the e-portfolio system. Therefore, the e-portfolio system 
can show personal history with a GAP change, a school life 
data change, and school events (See Figure 12).  The personal 
records are important for university’s education. If school 
advisors found a decline of GPA of “Student A”, the advisors 
can check school life data of “Student A” (See “Second year” 
point of Figure 12). Advisors may find the intrinsic problems 
of the student in school life. In contrast, “Student A” can 
check by himself. During 4 years, he can review his school 
life. The review results may be useful to judge his important 
decisions, such as working style, job-change, in future.  
V. 
 SUMMARY 
We have developed an e-portfolio environment including 
normal conventional portfolio and school life portfolio. 
School life portfolio supports non-lecture school life, such as 
job hinting activities, part-time job, club, and communication 
among students. In addition, we developed a school concierge 
“HapiNan” in smartphone in order to support frequent inputs 
of students. We have two phases in order to analyze e-
portfolio data. In the first phase, fourth year students used the 
e-portfolio system. As a result, we observed the following (1) 
Job hunting time was 40 hours per a week, (2) there was no 
relations between GPAs and job hunting success, (3) job 
hunting cost was large. In the second phase, freshmen used the 
e-portfolio system in the first year of education. We found that 
GPA has relationships with lecture time and hobby time. In 
the future, we will develop a historical personal analysis tools 
of the e-portfolio data. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was partially supported by KAKENHI, 
Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research(C), 26330093, 2015. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Brian. von Konsky and O. Beverley, “The iPortfolio: Measuring 
uptake and effective use of an institutional electronic portfolio in 
higher education”, Australasian Journal of Educational Technology,  
Vol.28, No.1, 2012,  pp.67-90. 
[2]  P. Kim, C. Kee Ng, and G. Lim, “When cloud computing meets with 
Semantic Web: A new design for e-portfolio systems in the social 
media era”, British Journal of Educational Technology, Vol.41, Issue 
6, November, 2010,  pp.1018-1028. 
[3] O. Lopez-Fernandez and J. Luis Rodriguez-Illera, “Investigating 
university students’ adaptation to a digital learner course portfolio”, 
Computers & Education, Vol.52, Issue 3, April, 2009,  pp.608-616. 
[4] C. Chang, K. Tseng, C. Liang, and T. Chen, “Using e-portfolios to 
facilitate university students' knowledge management performance: E-
portfolio vs. non-portfolio”, Computers & Education, Vol.69,  
November, 2013, pp.216-224. 
[5] N.L. Carroll, R.A. Calvo, and L. Markauskaite, “E-Portfolios and 
Blogs: Online Tools for Giving Young Engineers a Voice”, 
Information Technology Based Higher Education and Training, 2006. 
ITHET '06. 7th International Conference on, July, 2006, pp.1-8. 
[6] S. Rodriguez-Donaire, B.A. García,  and S.O. del Olmo, “e-Portfolio: 
A tool to assess university students' skills”, Information Technology 
Based Higher Education and Training (ITHET), 2010 9th International 
Conference on, April, 2010, pp.114-124. 
[7] R. H. Shroff, C. C. Deneen, and E. M. W. Ng, “Analysis of the 
technology acceptance model in examining students' behavioural 
intention to use an e-portfolio system”, Australasian Journal of 
Educational Technology, Vol.27, No.4, 2011, pp.600-618. 
[8] A. Alexiou and F. Paraskeva, “Enhancing self-regulated learning skills 
through the implementation of an e-portfolio tool”, Procedia - Social 
and Behavioral Sciences, Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2010, pp.3048-3054. 
Figure 12 Personal record with GPA and e-portfolio school life 
data 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

