Energy Efficient Wireless Sensor Network System for Localization 
 
Sila Ozen 
Department of Computer 
Engineering 
Istanbul Technical University 
34469, Maslak, Istanbul, Turkey 
ozens@itu.edu.tr 
 
Ture Peken 
Department of Computer 
Engineering 
Istanbul Technical University 
34469, Maslak, Istanbul, Turkey 
peken@itu.edu.tr 
 
Sema Oktug 
Department of Computer 
Engineering 
Istanbul Technical University 
34469, Maslak, Istanbul, Turkey 
oktug@itu.edu.tr
 
Abstract—This paper introduces an enhanced overlapping 
connectivity-based 
localization 
technique. 
Constructed 
experiments showed that using the information obtained from 
closer anchor nodes in the communication range results in 
better position estimations. In this work, received signal 
strength indication (RSSI) measurements are used to estimate 
the distance of an anchor node to a mobile node. The optimal 
number of anchor nodes to be used in localization is 
determined empirically with the performed experiments. The 
enhanced localization technique is implemented on a wireless 
sensor network system consisting of GenetLab sensor nodes. 
Each node has MSP430 processor and TinyOS operating 
system deployed. In order to increase the energy efficiency of 
the wireless sensor network system, the anchor nodes are 
operated in active-state or semi-active state based on the 
position of the mobile nodes. It is shown that such an 
approach  enhances the energy efficiency of the system under 
various movement scenarios and network topologies.   
 
Keywords-sensor network;  localization; energy efficiency 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Wireless sensor networks have attracted great interest 
over 
the 
last 
decade. 
Low-cost, 
low 
power 
and 
multifunctional small sensor nodes have become available 
through the recent developments in electronics and wireless 
communications [1]. 
Accurate and low power localization of sensor nodes is 
crucial for many applications to work efficiently. Various 
localization techniques have been introduced so far. In 
general, localization techniques can be classified as 
measurement and non-measurement based techniques. 
Additionally, both of these classes are also divided into two 
sub classes as single-hop and multi-hop techniques. In 
measurement based techniques, localization is performed by 
using measured distance with the other anchor nodes using 
the techniques such as time of arrival (ToA), time difference 
of arrival (TDoA), and angle of arrival of signals (AoA) [2]. 
Non-measurement based localization techniques which are 
also called connectivity-based techniques do not use 
distance measurements. In the single-hop localization, only 
one-hop neighbors are considered for localization, whereas 
in the multi-hop localization, multi-hop distanced anchor 
nodes are participating. The connectivity-based single-hop 
localization techniques are easier to implement, more 
energy efficient than the other techniques and also less 
affected 
from 
the 
environment. 
Because 
of 
these 
advantages, in this work, we focus on one-hop distance 
localization techniques.  
The 
overlapping 
connectivity-based 
localization 
algorithm which is defined by Bulusu et al. [3] is taken as 
the reference point in our work. The overlapping 
connectivity uses the location information obtained from 
anchor  nodes to evaluate the location of a mobile node. The 
mobile nodes estimate their locations in x and y coordinates 
by taking average of obtained locations of the anchor nodes 
as shown in (1): 
 
1
1
....
...
(
,
)
,
i
ik
i
ik
est
est
X
X
Y
Y
X
Y
k
k






 





where Xest  and Yest denotes x-coordinate and y-coordinate 
estimates of the mobile node, Xi1......Xik and Yi1......Yik denote 
x and y coordinates of the k anchor nodes within the 
coverage area of the mobile node. The coverage area spans 
by the anchor nodes within one-hop distance to the mobile 
node.
In our work, the overlapping connectivity technique is 
improved by using some of the anchor nodes instead of 
using whole anchor set within the coverage area of a mobile 
node. The criteria for selecting an anchor node is based on 
the 
received 
signal 
strength 
indication 
(RSSI)  
measurements and the direction of the mobile node.  Using 
all of the anchor nodes in one-hop distance to calculate (1) 
gives rough estimates for localization as seen in simulation 
results. On the other hand, localization techniques based on 
only RSSI measurements can give erroneous results 
depending 
on 
environmental 
conditions. 
We 
have 
implemented overlapping connectivity localization method 
with a modification of using only a portion of the 
neighboring anchor nodes by using the RSSI measurements. 
Based on the results of our simulations we decide about the 
number of neighboring anchor nodes to be used in our 
calculations. Moreover, for considering energy efficiency, 
the anchor nodes are designed to work in two states: semi-
active state and active state. In the introduced system, the 
anchor nodes, which have a mobile node around, broadcast 
their location information periodically (in the active state). 
Otherwise, they switch to semi-active state.
Sensor node applications are highly vulnerable to the 
environmental 
conditions 
due 
to 
the 
wireless 
communication medium, special harsh conditions of the 
deployment terrains of the sensor nodes and their limited 
processing capabilities. Therefore, implementation of an 
algorithm for WSNs with a real testbed becomes more 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

important in order to get more realistic results likewise the 
testbed environment in our work. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
overviews the localization algorithms in WSNs. Section III 
describes the testbed employed. In Section IV, the suggested 
localization technique is described and the test results by 
using various topologies are given. In Section V, the energy 
efficiency of the employed WSN system is enhanced. 
Finally, Section VI concludes the paper. 
II. 
LITERATURE SURVEY 
Sensing an environmental stimuli 
is 
the 
main 
functionality of a WSN. The coupling location information 
is important for many WSN applications to process the 
sensed data. Therefore, the location accuracy is fundamental 
in many WSN applications. Energy and cost efficient 
localization techniques are important in WSN because of the 
sensor nodes’ limited processing capabilities. The location 
of a sensor node can be obtained from the global positioning 
system (GPS) or can be embedded to the sensor node at the 
deployment phase. GPS is not an efficient choice for 
determining the location because of the cost and energy 
restrictions. Furthermore, GPS is not compatible with 
indoor environments. Instead of using GPS, sensor nodes 
can find their locations with the help of some other nodes 
which know about their location.  
Measurement based localization techniques are based on 
ToA, TDoA, AoA and RSSI. ToA, TDoA and AoA have 
constraints imposed by hardware requirements. AoA needs 
directional antenna. ToA and TDoA require a slow signal 
transmission which can be estimated. Since RSSI does not 
need any additional hardware,  it is widely used.  
An RSSI-based localization algorithm using a single 
mobile anchor node is proposed in [4], in which authors 
employ un-located sensor nodes whose locations are 
determined by calculating beacon points according to 
beacon information taken from the mobile anchor node. 
Beacon points are chosen according to maximum RSSI 
points. It is claimed that the mobile node that is equipped 
with GPS, does not violate energy-constraint.  
Non-measurement based localization techniques are 
centroid 
algorithm, 
DV-hop 
algorithm, 
amorphous 
algorithm, APIT algorithm, etc. The most known non-
measurement based localization techniques are centroid 
algorithm and DV-hop algorithm. In centroid localization 
algorithm, the localization error is increased when number 
of anchor nodes are not sufficiently high or the deployment 
of the anchor nodes is irregular. Different centroid 
algorithms are proposed to improve location estimations. In 
[5], mobile nodes use the information of its cluster whose 
nodes are weighted according to received RSSI and 
weighted centroid localization (WCL) is executed. In [6], 
weighted centroid algorithm and RSSI value taken from 
unknown nodes for determining distances are combined and 
tested on 2D and 3D simulation environments. Location of 
unknown nodes are determined by anchor nodes which are 
located in the range of circle whose center is an unknown 
node. They weighted anchor nodes which  are in the defined 
circle by 1, rest of the anchor nodes are weighted by 0. 
Then, the relationship between localization error and the 
number of anchor nodes used in localization process is 
experimented and also it is observed that localization error 
is highly affected by the distribution of anchor nodes.  
Non-measurement localization techniques are cost and 
energy efficient but location error is much more than 
measurement localization techniques [5]. These algorithms 
usually do not try to optimize or minimize the location 
estimation errors while producing a reasonable estimation 
with a very low algorithm complexity. Therefore, the 
localization error is higher in these techniques compared to 
localization techniques using distance measurements. We 
propose combining measurement and non-measurement 
based localization techniques to get lower localization error. 
Additionally, dependency of localization error with respect 
to the number of anchor nodes and the deployment of 
anchor nodes are investigated. Localization error, as in [6], 
is tried to be decreased by using a determined percentage of 
anchor nodes in localization process. 
III. 
TESTBED EMPLOYED 
In this work, we implement a WSN environment at the 
Computer Network Research Laboratory of Istanbul 
Technical University. Sensor nodes, which are used in our 
work, consist of two modules: sensor-L and node-RF. 
Sensor-L module contains sensors and node-RF module has 
processor and RF communication units [7]. RF antennas, 
LEDs, EEPROM, power inputs for battery, 41 pin socket 
which is helpful for parallel and serial port connections are 
placed on the node-RF module of the sensor node. 
Accelerometer, temperature sensor, light sensor, magnetic 
field sensor are placed on the sensor-L part of the sensor 
node. These sensor nodes employ  TinyOS operating system. 
Programs for these sensor nodes are written in NesC 
programming language which is compatible with TinyOS 
operating system [8, 9]. In the sensor network system, 
anchor nodes are deployed according to a predefined pattern. 
They are used to route data and also the necessary 
information to localize the mobile nodes in the environment. 
Distance Vector Routing algorithm (DVR) is employed 
as the routing algorithm . Count-to-infinity problem is solved 
by defining a timer. If a node does not send any packet 
before the timer expires, it is considered as offline [10].  
 
 
Figure 1.  Node RF card and battery 
 
 
 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

A. Types of Sensor Nodes 
Anchor nodes- They have static locations, send routing 
packets to the neighboring anchor nodes and mobile nodes. 
Furthermore, they send localization packets which contain  
x-y coordinates periodically. Mobile nodes use their 
localization packets for localization. Additionally, the 
anchor nodes route data packets to the sink node. 
Mobile nodes- They move in the WSN. They determine 
their location using the packets sent by the neighboring 
anchor nodes. These nodes send their localization 
calculations to sink node periodically.  
Sink node- It is connected to computer with a serial port. 
It sends the obtained data packets to the computer. 
B. Types of Packets 
In order to manage the system and transmit data, the 
following packet types are employed. 
Routing Packets- Routing packets are sent by all of the 
nodes except the sink node. They are used to form the 
routing tables according to DVR. This routing packets 
include node id, next hops and  hop counts to other nodes.  
Localization Packets- Localization packets are sent by 
anchor nodes periodically. They include node id, X and Y 
coordinates.  
Mobile-to-sink Packets- Mobile-to-sink packets are sent 
by mobile nodes to report their location to sink node. These 
packets are routed to the sink by using DVR routing tables. 
These packets contain node id, source node id, destination 
node id (sink node id), X and Y coordinates. 
Data Packets- These packets are formed by the nodes in 
order to transmit the information related to the application to 
the sink node. 
The wireless sensor network environment employed is 
given in Fig. 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Wireless Sensor Network Structure 
IV. 
LOCALIZATION TECHNIQUE INTRODUCED 
Simulation results and testbed results are obtained. 
A. Enhancing The Precision Of Localization Estimates 
In this work, initially we study the effect of the number 
of neighboring anchor nodes used in the precision of the 
location estimates by simulation. Simulations are done using 
various topologies to find the necessary number of anchor 
nodes. One-hop distance is taken as 55 meters in the 
simulations. The distance between anchor nodes are 
changed between 20-50 meters. The anchor nodes are 
regularly placed as shown in Fig. 3. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Anchor Nodes Placement in a 500*500m2 region 
Mobile nodes move randomly. Simulations are based on 
three random paths with 100 discrete movements of the 
mobile node. Mobile nodes move in one of four directions 
(+x, -x, +y, -y) in time unit by random distances (between 
15m and 45m). A random 100-step movement scenario is 
given in Fig. 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Random movement of mobile node 
Simulations are repeated by changing the distance 
between anchor nodes. Average number of the anchor 
nodes, which are one-hop distance to mobile node, is given 
for different cases  in Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
CASES 
Case 
No 
Distance Between Anchors 
Average number of 
neighboring anchor 
node 
1 
20m 
≈23 
2 
30m 
≈10 
3 
40m 
≈5 
4 
50m 
≈4 
 
Above mentioned simulation scenarios are employed for 
location estimations by using the connectivity-based 
localization [3] first.  
Then we modified the localization technique by reducing 
the number of anchor nodes employed. Initially we dropped 
one anchor node, then two anchor nodes and so on. The 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

ones dropped selected according to the RSSI measurements. 
So the anchor nodes, which are far away, are not considered 
in the location estimates. 
It is shown in Fig. 6 that as the number of neighboring 
anchor nodes increases the error decreases. As we drop the 
anchor nodes that are far away from the mobile node. The 
results become more accurate except case 4, where the 
average number of neighboring anchor  nodes is four only. 
We may conclude that nearly two third of the 
neighboring far anchor nodes could be omitted with the 
concern that the number of considered anchor nodes should 
not be smaller than three. 
B. Testbed Results Obtained 
The localization technique is implemented on the 
wireless sensor networks using 7 and 17 nodes. Considering 
the number of neighboring anchor nodes and the directions 
given in Section III, three anchor positions are used for 
position estimations.  
Strength field in TOS_Msg struct of CC2420 module is 
used for RSSI measurement as below: 
 
RSSI value (dBm) = (int8_t) TOS_Msg->strenght-45  (2) 
 
 
 
 
Moreover, movement direction of mobile node is tried to 
be estimated. This is determined basically using the 
difference between previous two estimations of the mobile 
node. 
The snapshot of the environment for 17-node case is 
shown in Fig. 5. Here, every anchor node is located  30 cm  
far from each other. One hop is approximately 40 cm when 
output power ratio module is taken as  -25dBm. 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Test topology with 5 anchor nodes, 1 mobile node and 1 sink 
nodes 
The results for the x-y coordinate estimates for  7-node 
and 17-node topologies are given in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8, 
respectively. 
 
 
     
        
 
                                            (a) Case 1                                                                                                        (b) Case 2 
        
 
 (c) Case 3                                                                                        (d) Case 4 
Figure 6.  Error values for the cases studied
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

 
 
Figure 7.  Estimated x-y  coordinates and real x-y coordinates of mobile 
node (7 nodes) 
 
Figure 8.  Estimated x-y  coordinates and real x-y coordinates of mobile 
node (17 nodes) 
Average numbers of neighboring anchor nodes are 3-4 
in the 7-node topology and 7-9 in the 17-node topology. 
We get the best localization estimations when nearly two 
third of the neighboring far anchor nodes are omitted with 
the concern that the number of considered anchor nodes 
should not be smaller than three as explained in the 
previous sections. In the 7-node topology, the location 
estimations of the mobile node is calculated by using 
minimum number of anchor nodes (three anchor nodes). In 
the 17-node topology, two third of the neighboring nodes 
are omitted. Here, the location estimations of the mobile 
node is calculated by using three anchor nodes also. The 
17-node topology gives better estimations as expected.  
Environmental effects such as collisions and wifi 
networks disturb the efficiency of the results. However, 
despite of environmental conditions, our main assumptions 
are supported by the testbed results.  
 
 
 
V. ENHANCING THE ENERGY EFFICIENCY OF THE 
NETWORK DEPLOYED 
Energy efficiency is an important necessity for wireless 
sensor networks which have to work with energy 
constraint.  
In suggested localization technique, packets which 
carry localization information are sent by anchor nodes 
periodically. However, the mobile node can only get such 
packets from anchor nodes in its coverage area. Therefore, 
localization packets should not be transmitted by anchor 
nodes, if anchor nodes are not in the communication range 
of a mobile node. We call this as Energy Efficient WSN. 
Here, the anchor nodes work in two states: semi-active 
state, and active state. The anchor nodes having a mobile 
node 
around 
broadcast 
their 
location 
information 
periodically (in the active state). Otherwise they go into 
semi-active state in which anchor nodes only send 
routing/data packets as necessary. 
Anchor nodes keep IDs of all mobile nodes in the 
topology. It is not memory-consuming process even in 
large topologies. If an anchor node receives a routing 
package from a mobile node, it moves into the active state. 
Furthermore, a timer is set and  starts to count. When the 
timer expires, the anchor node changes its state from active 
to semi-active. 
Energy gain of the energy efficient WSN is determined 
by studying the decrease in the number of localization 
packets generated by the anchor nodes. Firstly, the power 
consumption to send localization packets is calculated as 
below [1]. 
 
Pct=  NT [PT (Ton+Tst)+PoutTon]                                (3) 
  
where PT denotes power consumption of CC2420 radio 
module when it is on transmission mode. This value is 
62.64 mWatt for CC2420 when output power is 0 dBm. Tst 
is start-up time of CC2420 which is given as 1 ms. Pout
   is 
output power of CC2420 which is taken as 0 dBm. Ton
   is 
time duration which CC2420 stays on transmission mode. 
It can be calculated as L/R, where L denotes packet size 
and R data rate which are 20 byte and 250 kbps, 
respectively. NT
   denotes number of activation of CC2420 
radio module as transmitter. When these values are placed 
in (3), Pct
 for 1 minute test duration becomes as seen in (4) 
where NT(5t) number of activation of CC2420 radio for 
transmission of localization packets in 5 seconds. The 
number of activations is evaluated from number of 
localization packets sent to the collector node in every 5 
seconds during 1 minute test duration.  
 
 
 
                                                                                         (4) 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

Power consumption during transmission of localization 
packets according to (4) is observed on two different test 
scenarios called Energy Efficient Localization in narrow 
region and wide region. Narrow region and wide region 
can be seen in Fig. 9. In the wide region scenario, the 
mobile node could move in overall region. In the narrow 
region scenario, the mobile node could move only a part of 
the region. 
We run the introduced localization technique on the 
sensor nodes firstly. Then, the energy efficient WSN with 
the  localization technique introduced is run on the sensor 
nodes by using both the wide area scenario and narrow 
area 
scenario. 
Power 
consumption 
considering 
transmission of localization packets is shown in Fig.10 for 
60 second period. Energy Efficient WSN system uses 15 
mWatt less power than the suggested localization 
technique during 1 minute test duration. Moreover, energy 
gain increases to 20 mWatt if the mobile node is moved in 
a narrow area. Because number of anchor nodes that send 
localization packets decrease in third test case.  
To sum up these results, using mobile nodes in a 
narrow area gives more energy efficient results. Using 
more mobile nodes in dedicated areas gives more energy 
efficient results. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
In this work, a range-free one-hop localization 
technique is improved by using the location information 
obtained from the closer neighboring anchor nodes. RSSI 
measurements are taken to determine the distance of the 
anchor nodes to a mobile node. An approach is introduced 
in order to use the location information coming from only 
some of the neighboring anchor nodes. Tests are done for 
various topologies. The system introduced is turned into a 
more energy efficient one by assigning two states to the  
 
 
(a) Narrow region 
 
(b) Wide region 
Figure 9.  Test topology with 8 anchor nodes, 1 mobile node, 1 collector 
node and 1 sink node 
 
 
Figure 10.  Power consumption comparison 
 
anchor nodes: active state and semi-active state. Due to the 
environmental effects the test environment scaled down. 
Currently, we are operating the network by using 50 
meter as the communication range of the sensor networks. 
Unfortunately, environmental effects are accumulating and 
disturbing the results. 
REFERENCES 
[1] I.F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and  E. 
Cayirci, "Wireless sensor networks: a survey", Computer 
Networks, vol. 38, January 2002, pp. 393-422, doi: 
10.1016/S1389-1286(01)00302-4. 
[2] G. Mao, B. Fidan, and B. D. O. Anderson, “Wireless Sensor         
Network Localization Techniques”, Computer Networks, 
vol. 51, July 2007, pp. 2529-2553, doi: 
10.1016/j.comnet.2006.11.018. 
[3] N. Bulusu, J. Heidemann, and D. Estrin, “GPS-less Low-
Cost Outdoor Localization for Very Small Devices”, IEEE 
Personal Communications, vol.7, October 2000, pp. 28-34, 
doi: 10.1109/98.878533. 
[4] Y. Zhu, B. Zhang, F. Yu, and S. Ning, “A RSSI Based 
Localization Algorithm Using a Mobile Anchor Node for 
Wireless Sensor Networks”, in: Computational Science and 
Optimization, CSO 2009, April  2009, pp. 123-126, doi: 
10.1109/CSO.2009.287. 
[5] H. Ahn and S. Rhee, "Simulation of a RSSI-Based Indoor 
Localization System Using Wireless Sensor Network", in: 
Ubiquitous Information Technologies and Applications 
(CUTE), December 2010, pp. 1-4, doi: 
10.1109/ICUT.2010.5678179. 
[6] L. Xu, K. Wang, Y. Jiang, F. Yang, Y. Du, and Q. Li, “A 
Study on 2D and 3D Weighted Centroid Localization 
Algorithm in Wireless Sensor Networks”, in: Advanced 
Computer Control (ICACC), January 2011, pp. 155-159, 
doi: 10.1109/ICACC.2011.6016388. 
[7] Genetlab Information Technology, "Sensenode –low power 
wireless sensor module–datasheet", December 2005. 
Retrieved June 2012, from 
http://www.genetlab.com/images/urunler/SENSENODE.pdf 
[8] P.Levis and D. Gay, "TinyOs Programming", July 2009. 
Retrieved June 2012, from 
http://csl.stanford.edu/~pal/pubs/tos-programming-web.pdf 
[9] C. F. Fok, "TinyOs Tutorial", 2006. Retrieved June 2012, 
from http://web.eecs.utk.edu/~xwang/ece455/tutorial.pdf 
[10] G. Meyer and S. Sherry, "Triggered Extensionsto RIP to 
Support Demand Circuits", RFC 2091, IETF Network 
Working Group, January 1997.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

