How is Big Data Transforming Operations Models in the Automotive Industry: A
Preliminary Investigation
Gary Graham
Leeds University Business School
Leeds, United Kingdom
e-mail: g.graham@leeds.ac.uk
Royston Meriton
Leeds University Business School
Leeds, United Kingdom
e-mail: r.meriton@leeds.ac.uk
Bethany Tew
Leeds University Business School
Leeds, United Kingdom
e-mail: bn15bjt@leeds.ac.uk
Patrick Hennelly
Institute for Manufacturing, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom
e-mail: pah70@cam.ac.uk
Abstract - Over the years, traditional car makers have
evolved into efficient systems integrators dominating the
industry through their size and power. However, with the rise
of big data technology the operational landscape is rapidly
changing with the emergence of the “connected” car. The
automotive incumbents will have to harness the opportunities
of big data, if they are to remain competitive and deal with the
threats posed by the rise of new connected entrants (i.e. Tesla).
These new entrants unlike the incumbents have configured
their operational capabilities to fully exploit big data and
service delivery rather than production efficiency. They are
creating experience, infotainment and customized dimensions
of strategic advantage. Therefore the purpose of this paper is
to explore how “Big Data” will inform the shape and
configuration of future operations models and connected car
services in the automotive sector. It uses a secondary case
study research design. The cases are used to explore the
characteristics of the resources and processes used in three big
data operations models based on a connected car framework.
Keywords - big data; automotive industry; business model;
operations model; connective capability
I.
INTRODUCTION
As today’s consumers are surrounded by connected
devices, such as smartphones and tablets, the idea of
connected cars is gaining in popularity. It is estimated that
by 2025, all new passenger vehicles will be connected
[2][4]. Yet, the connected car represents a major disruption
to the automotive industry’s traditional value creation
model. A connected car can be defined as: “a car that is
equipped with Internet access, and usually also with a
wireless local area network. This allows the car to share
internet access with other devices both inside as well as
outside the vehicle”[1]. These services are made possible by
a firm’s capacity to capture and leverage high volumes of
structurally diverse and
high-speed
data (“big
data”)
generated by the sensors and embedded electronics of
connected devices.
Two main service segments can be clearly distinguished
in the growing connected car market: i. integrated product-
services (to enhance the driver experience) and; ii. mobility
services (to offer alternative modes of transportation from
traditional private car ownership).
Furthermore, moving
into the service economy opens new streams of revenue for
traditional manufacturers [6] and big data will enable
superior value creation based on closer customer intimacy.
However it also opens up the automotive industry to
competitors from outside their traditional industry channel
who are more proficient than incumbents at leveraging big
data. In an industry unchanged in decades, these new
entrants are finding ways to innovate and meet diverse
customer needs for more information and mobility services,
configuring their business and operating models around big
data.
This work will help to identify from an operations
perspective how big data is re-shaping the provision of
products and services in the automotive industry, as it
evolves
towards
further
connectivity
and
autonomous
driving. Whilst different models continue to co-exist, it is
important for incumbents to understand how emerging
operations models are configured compared to traditional
models so that they can be proactive rather than reactive to
the big data-driven disruption of the automotive industry.
Big data is commonly hailed as the next frontier for
productivity, innovation and competition [3]. As a complex
and multi-faceted concept, it impacts on many things in
different ways. Therefore, to narrow the scope of the study,
big data is considered in terms of how it impacts on the way
in which resources and processes are managed within an
operation. This is justified because the way in which
resources and processes in an operation are managed has a
strategic impact on the organization [3]. It is therefore
valuable to look at the configuration of emerging operations
models to explore the impact of big data.
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

As operations models are dynamic and fast-changing, the
overall objective is to identify the characteristics of the
emerging
big
data-enabled
operations
models
in
the
automotive industry. To our knowledge, this topic has not
yet
been
theoretically
studied
from
an
operations
perspective and there is a need for work to fill this research
gap. A conceptual framework of emerging big data-
connected
operations
for
the
automotive
industry
is
developed, based on the literature, and the underpinning
concepts are examined through theory-guided case study
analysis.
II.
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
While moving to a consumer-centric service approach
based on big data has economic benefits, there are operations
challenges. The main challenge for incumbents is a shift in
the nature of value. Operations models must be able to
process information and customers more than raw materials.
The basis for all connected car services is information. With
customer value based on intangible services, each stage of
the transformation process is different; resource inputs and
process outputs have perishable value if not captured and
consumed in time. The transformation process is shaped by
new constraints, including a company’s capacity to capture,
analyze and leverage real-time big data in the operations
model [7]. The characteristics of the operation’s resources,
processes and capabilities are described in Figure 1. The
dotted line illustrates the scope of analysis in the case
studies. In contrast to traditional operations models that
predominantly
process
materials,
emerging
operations
models in the automotive industry process information (big
data) and customers. It is therefore proposed that big data
and customers are the dominant transformed resources, while
the dominant transforming resources comprise big data
analytics (to
extract insights
from the
real-time
data
captured)
and
vehicles
(to
physically
transport
the
customers).
Figure 1: Emerging big data-connected car framework
III.
RESEARCH METHOD
A multiple case study design was chosen to strengthen
conclusions drawn from the cases and to increase external
validity [8]. Three secondary cases were purposefully chosen
according to the logic of theoretical sampling. That is, cases
were selected based on the likelihood that they would
critically challenge the predicted theoretical findings. This
helps to confirm or advance the theoretical model. All the
case studies were chosen according to their varying degrees
of reliance on big data. As such, big data is the primary input
into the operations model. That is, all services in the cases
delivered
to
customers
rely
on
real-time
information
extracted from big data. The first two cases Uber and Drive
Now provide ride-hailing and car sharing services; the third
case Tesla offers over-the-air software updates for its
customers and customized services from: product design,
through to purchase, product performance monitoring and
after sales support. As their products diverge from the
traditional
offerings
of
the
automotive
industry,
their
operations models constitute “emerging” operations models.
IV.
FINDINGS
Uber and DriveNow are examples of pure mobility
services. Tesla is an example of a company using big data to
deliver services related to its manufactured product, namely
the owned electric vehicle. Despite these differences, several
trends emerged across the three case studies. The operations
outputs vary across the case studies. However, when
compared to traditional operations models delivering a
focused product, these emerging operations models have
been
designed
to
deliver
a
multi-variant
consumer
experience. For example, the operations outputs for Uber and
DriveNow are to meet an immediate and real-time demand
for flexible transport in urban environments.
In the case of Tesla, the service operations output is
multi-faceted because Tesla provides a service offering
based on a product, namely the vehicle that is sold to a
customer. Tesla’s service uses big data to understand,
maintain and also improve vehicle functionality in line with
customer expectations. It maintains vehicle functionality by
collecting diagnostic data on
individual
vehicles, and
improves vehicle functionality by aggregating driving data to
understand driving conditions and vehicle performance,
optimal locations are for charging stations. In terms of
outputs that are software-based, such as those mentioned in
the case studies, they are not constrained by time and space
in the same way as tangible outputs. Updates to the service
can easily be applied without physical presence or a mutually
agreed time. One particularly noticeable trend across all case
studies is therefore that of producing minimum viable
products. This means that instead of delivering perfected
products and services to customers, the company determines
what is the minimum viable level for the service to work,
produces that and then tweaks and perfects it based on how it
is used and perceived by customers. It illustrates the
importance of on-going relationships with customers, rather
than ending the interaction at the point of sale.
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

The concept of allowing customers to use unfinished
products is novel in the automotive industry. With feedback
loops and real-time monitoring enabled by big data, the
customer becomes part of the operations improvement
process. It enables companies eventually to deliver exactly
what the customers want. Tesla is a key example of this. Its
major
software
updates
(new,
improved
features)
are
released on a yearly basis, while minor updates (bug fixes)
are released on average every month.
The
hardware
suite
required
for
semi-autonomous
driving (named “Autopilot”) has been fitted into Tesla’s
vehicles since 2014. It includes forward-facing camera and
radar, 12 long-range 360-degree ultrasonic sensors, GPS and
electric braking system. Whenever vehicles are in manual
mode, Tesla crowd-sources the fleet’s driving data. Using so-
called “fleet learning technology”, Tesla uses these datasets
to train its driving algorithms which ultimately are what
drives the car when in Autopilot. The first version of
Autopilot was released by OTA software update in 2015, and
is still in beta mode today. This means that it is the driver’s
responsibility to remain alert at all times. While Autopilot is
engaged, signals are sent back to the Tesla HQ server
whenever a driver intervenes (i.e., by adjusting the steering
wheel or braking) or resumes control. Based on these
aggregated driving datasets, Tesla identifies where problem
areas are and is able to investigate and improve the software.
As the fleet learns, improvements can be noticed in days.
Uber is another example of a company producing
minimum viable products. Its underlying system architecture
was developed by many teams in any way possible as it
rapidly expanded in the first five years. The result was a
mixture of architectures and as it developed and customers
made known their preferences, new system architecture was
developed to support new service features. DriveNow was
established as a separate entity from its parents company
BMW to benefit from the agility of a start-up. It encourages
customer feedback and adapts its operations model to suit.
Across all case studies, customers are the predominant
transformed resource. This is in contrast to traditional
operations models which focus on transforming materials
into a product. Moreover, all services delivered to customers
in these emerging operations models rely on real-time
information extracted from big data. Although there are
differences between the models as to what information is
collected and analyzed, GPS positioning is captured in all
models. Not only does this help riders and drivers locate
each other / a suitable vehicle, but the GPS data generated
from usage also helps companies to understand customers’
popular routes and improve service provision.
While in traditional operations models, big data is used to
enhance visibility over existing processes, in emerging
operations models big data is one of the primary inputs
enabling the provision of the service. Because of this the
service operations of the case studies rely more heavily on
intangible inputs, namely information. The value of such
information is specific to time and space and if it is not
captured, it is lost.
In every case, the operations model is configured to
provide a flexible and convenient service. Inherent in the
provision of services is fluctuating demand [5]. With big
data, the companies in the case studies are able to monitor
supply and demand in real-time and even to identify
challenges ahead of time. They configure their capacity to
accommodate a certain level of demand fluctuation, but
importantly
they
also
directly
manage
capacity
by
influencing the levels of supply and/or demand. The
intangibility of services means that they cannot be easily
stored [5] and therefore customers are less likely to be
willing to wait for services than they are for a finished
product.
For Uber, flexible capacity is achieved by not employing
its drivers or owning a fleet of vehicles. Demand and supply
are managed by surge pricing. For DriveNow, service
capacity is constrained by the size and functionality of the
fleet; if customers do not find a car available in a suitably
close location, the service is of no value. Flexible service
provision is therefore enabled by deploying a large fleet and
a small team of service agents who check tyre pressures,
clean the cars and move them to more popular locations if
necessary.
Supply and demand are managed through incentives for
customers to park in optimal locations and fixed pricing. For
Tesla’s service delivery, flexible capacity is configured by
designing the vehicle from the ground up to ensure that
features can be updated safely via software updates over
time. However, Tesla also has to manage the constraints of
producing hard products vehicles and is constrained in the
usual way for the manufacturing side of its product-service.
Tesla vehicles contain over 3,000 purchased parts
sourced globally from over 350 suppliers. Tesla’s supply
chain is a “unique hybrid of the traditional automotive and
high tech industries” which means its pace is faster than
traditional automotive supply chains. If suppliers cannot
keep pace, software development and manufacturing is
brought in-house.
While other automakers plan their production layout to
keep it the same for several years to minimize costs, Tesla’s
production engineers move machines around frequently as a
learning exercise. The company uses Tableau visualization
software to monitor its production lines minute-by-minute.
In terms of its supercharger network capacity, Tesla decides
where to locate capacity by collecting and analyzing driving
data from its fleet. It takes into account route patterns and
local driving conditions. Each supercharger station is itself
connected to the Tesla network, both for monitoring and
maintenance purposes, but also to let customers know
availability via Tesla’s vehicle Navigation system.
By design, all the case studies have a reliance on
connectivity.
Without
connectivity
in
the
process
technologies, the big data cannot be created and captured.
Tesla has the most advanced configuration for connectivity
as its vehicles have been designed from the ground up for
connectivity. This enables OTA software updates for all
functional features of the car. The hard asset requirements of
the vehicle and the production efficiencies mastered by
incumbents mean that few new entrants could offer a viable
competitive threat to incumbent automakers in the traditional
arena.
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

However, in the new market, new entrants are using big
data to innovate entirely new operations models to deliver
new products and services based on a closer understanding
of customer’s on-going needs. They are defining the strategic
agenda for capturing, analyzing and leveraging big data in
their operations models. Free from the organizational
structures and investor commitments of the traditional
players, the new players are better able to address fluctuating
demand in the service area.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH
Our paper explored how big data could enable the
development of new operations models in the automotive
sector and also suggested how these models could be
evaluated across thematic categories of resources, processes
and capabilities. Further it aimed at setting out a new
research agenda that fuses and crosses the boundaries of
operations management and big data technology. As the
prominence of big data continues to develop and stakeholder
groups become increasingly knowledgeable and engaged,
there is considerable incentive for operations managers
across industry sectors to consider the opportunities and
challenges facing their processes and people, as well as the
tools
and
frameworks
they
deploy
for
strategic
and
operational decision making.
The opportunities are not only in improving efficiency
and effectiveness of their existing operations, but also in
transforming their operations models, and in some cases,
developing radically different new ones. They must become
more customer-centric and service driven in this big data
age. The automotive industry has evolved from Ford, to the
TPS and post-Fordism, but now in the second decade of the
twenty first century it is information and service not
production driving the operations model. This is information
driven automotive sector characterized by low inventory,
customization, dissolvable supply chains, leasing, joint
automotive/ICT ventures, Silicon Valley driven product R
and D, the delivery of shared services and pooled capacity.
For organizations developing new operations models, the
challenge is to build on and leverage the new digitized
infrastructures emerging with smart and intelligent cities, in
order to connect physical goods, services, and people
(offline), with real-time data driven processes (online), in
seamless O2O (online-to-online) operations. This requires a
re-design
of
long
run
operational
competencies
and
capabilities in order to respond to the rapidly changing city
environments.
Despite the importance of operations management to big
data implementation for both practitioners and researchers,
we have yet to see a systematic framework for analyzing and
cataloguing emerging operations models. As such, our
conceptual framework makes an initial contribution to
operations management theory in the big data context. This
research only used three ‘theory-guided’ cases studies to
illustrate the big data transformation of operations models.
Therefore much more in-depth analysis and more detailed
models are clearly needed to assist in the implementation of
big data initiatives and
facilitate
new innovations
in
operation management. Some of the changes that operations
and their connected supply chains face are revolutionary, and
this requires careful consideration from both a practical and
theoretical point of view.
REFERENCES
[1]
Bayerische
Motoren
Werke
AG,
2016.
Press
release.
https://www.press.bmwgroup.com/global/article/detail/T0258
269EN/bmw-group-driving-the-transformation-of-individual-
mobility-with-its-strategy-number-one-next.
[2] Gissler, A. 2015. Connected vehicle: succeeding with a
disruptive technology. Accenture strategy. [Accessed 11
August,
2016].
Available
from:
https://www.accenture.com/us-en/insight-connected-vehicle
[3]
Manyika J., Chui, M., Brown, B., Bughin, J., Dobbs, R.,
Rosburg, C. and Hung Byers, A. 2011. Big data: The next
frontier
for
innovation,
competition,
and
productivity.
McKinsey & Company: McKinsey Global Institute.
[4]
Mayer-Schönberger, V., and K. Cukier. 2013. Big Data. A
revolution that will transform how we live, work and think.
London: John Murray Publishing.
[5] Sasser, W. 1976. Match supply and demand in service
industries. Harvard Business Review. [Online]. [Accessed 7
July, 2016]. Available from: https://hbr.org/1976/11/match-
supply-and-demand-in-service-industries
[6] Slack, N. 2005. Operations strategy: Will it ever realize its
potential? GESTÃO & PRODUÇÃO. 12(3), pp.323-332.
[7] Slack, N. and M. Lewis. 2011. Operations Strategy. 3rd ed.
London: FT Prentice Hall.
[8] Yin, R. 2014. Case study research: design and methods. Fifth
edition. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

