The Impact of the Floorplan of Functional units on 3D Multi-core Processors 
 
Hyung Gyu Jeon 
School of Electronics and 
Computer Engineering, 
Chonnam National 
University 
Gwangju, Korea 
hggodman1108@gmail.com 
Hong Jun Choi 
School of Electronics and 
Computer Engineering, 
Chonnam National 
University 
Gwangju, Korea 
chj6083@gmail.com 
 
Jong Myon Kim 
School of Computer 
Engineering and 
Information Technology, 
University of Ulsan 
Ulsan, Korea 
jmkim07@ulsan.ac.kr 
 
Cheol Hong Kim 
School of Electronics and 
Computer Engineering, 
Chonnam National 
University 
Gwangju, Korea 
chkim22@jnu.ac.kr* 
 
 
Abstract— Interconnection delay is one of the most critical 
constraints in improving the performance of multi-core 
processors. In order to reduce the interconnection delay in the 
multi-core processor, 3D integration technology has been 
applied in designing multi-core processors. The 3D multi-core 
processor is composed of vertically stacked cores which are 
connected by through-silicon vias, leading to improved 
interconnection and power efficiency by reducing the physical 
wire length significantly. However, 3D multi-core processors 
have severe temperature problems caused by higher power 
density compared to 2D Multi-core processors. In this paper, 
we propose the thermal-aware floorplan schemes to solve the 
thermal problems in 3D multi-core processors by changing the 
location of functional units. According to our experimental 
results, the proposed floorplan schemes reduce the peak 
temperature by 12ºC on average with 3% performance gain. 
Keywords- Multi-core processor; 3D architecture; Temperature; 
Floorplan schemes  
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Continuing advances in semiconductor technology 
enables increasing clock frequency, leading to the improved 
processor 
performance. 
Unfortunately, 
the 
increased 
frequency causes high power consumption [1]. Therefore, 
performance and power efficiency should be considered 
together in designing up-to-date microprocessors [2-6]. To 
overcome the power constraints in single-core processors, 
multi-core processors have been widely used. In the multi-
core processors, the interconnection delay is regarded as one 
of the major constraints in improving the performance [7-9]. 
In 3D multi-core processors, multiple cores are stacked 
vertically and each core on different layers are connected by 
vertical through-silicon vias(TSVs) [10][11]. The 3D 
integration technology using TSVs can be a good solution in 
the multi-core processor because the 3D architecture has 
advantages in the perspective of performance and power 
efficiency over the 2D architecture [12]. For this reason, 
many researchers have focused on the 3D architecture in 
designing multi-core processors. However, one of the major 
problems in designing 3D multi-core processors is the 
thermal problem due to high power density. According to 
[13], the thermal problem is exacerbated in the 3D cases for 
mainly two reasons. First, the thermal conductivity of the 
dielectric layers between the device layers is very low 
compared to silicon and metal. Second, the vertically stacked 
multiple layers of active devices cause a rapid increase of 
power density. Therefore, in spite of various advantages of 
the 3D integration technology, it cannot be practical without 
proper solutions for thermal problems, because thermal 
problems have negative impact on the reliability of the 
processor [14]. 
Dynamic 
Thermal 
Management(DTM) 
techniques, 
which use dynamic frequency scaling(DFS), dynamic 
voltage scaling(DVS), clock gating, or computational 
migration, have been proposed to relieve the thermal 
problems of processors. DTM techniques keep the chip 
temperature under the given threshold, resulting in improved 
reliability [15]. Unfortunately, DTM techniques degrade the 
performance to reduce the temperature of the processor. In 
this work, we propose three thermal-aware floorplan 
schemes to alleviate the thermal problems of the 3D multi-
core processor with little performance loss. In our previous 
work, we investigated thermal-aware floorplan schemes and 
analyzed the impact of the floorplan on the processor 
temperature [16]. In this work, we present more efficient 
floorplan schemes compared to the schemes in [16][17], 
leading to better performance and energy-efficiency while 
solving the thermal problems of 3D multi-core processors. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II 
describes related work and Section III presents the proposed 
thermal-aware floorplan schemes. Section IV describes the 
simulation infrastructure and methodology and Section V 
describes our experimental results in detail. Finally, Section 
VI concludes this paper. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A. 3D multi-core processors 
Compared to 2D multi-core processors, 3D multi-core 
processors have benefits in improving the performance by 
reducing the wire length dramatically. There are several 
manufacturing technologies for 3D die stacking and 
alignment, such as wafer-to-wafer bonding, die-to-die 
bonding, die-to-wafer bonding [18][19]. In the wafer-to-
wafer bonding, electronic components are built on several 
semiconductor wafers and entire wafers are directly bonded 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

together, where under 1.5um misalignment is achieved 
without 
significant 
bonding 
defects 
after 
process 
optimization [20]. Improvement of alignment accuracy also 
can be expected, because no deformable adhesive material is 
included in the bonding interface. 
 
 
Figure 1.  2-die 3D IC 
 
B. Thermal Management techniques 
Researchers have proposed a large number of DTM 
techniques to solve the thermal problems in the processor. 
DTM techniques can be categorized into two different 
groups: One is software-based techniques such as energy-
aware task scheduling, OS-level task scheduling [21]. The 
other is hardware-based techniques, such as clock gating, 
dynamic frequency scaling (DFS), dynamic voltage scaling 
(DVS), instruction throttling, etc. Software-based techniques 
show lower performance degradation compared to the 
hardware-based techniques, but the cooling efficiency of 
software-based techniques is less effective than that of 
hardware-based techniques [22]. 
The existing DTM techniques for 2D multi-core 
processors have been used to prevent the case that the 
temperature of the chip exceeds the thermal limit supported 
by the cooling solution. However, high power density of 3D 
multi-core processors may require reactive DTM techniques 
to be engaged more frequently than the 2D multi-core 
processors, because the 3D architecture exacerbates the 
thermal 
problems 
in 
multi-core 
processors 
[23]. 
Unfortunately, DTM techniques incur performance overhead 
to control the temperature in the processor, resulting in 
performance degradation. Consequently, as DTM techniques 
are applied to the 3D multi-core processors, more 
performance degradation can be occurred compared to the 
2D 
multi-core 
processors. 
Therefore, 
the 
thermal 
management for 3D multi-core processors should be used to 
proactively and continuously optimize performance and 
temperature, instead of merely reacting to emergencies [16]. 
 
C. Floorplan Technology 
When designing up-to-date microprocessors, high 
performance, power efficiency, and thermal efficiency are all 
important design considerations. However, existing thermal-
aware studies, i.e. DTM, reduce the peak temperature in the 
processor by sacrificing performance. For this reason, recent 
researches have focused on the solutions for reducing the 
peak temperature in the processor with little effects on the 
performance. 
According to [17], the thermal-aware design techniques 
using floorplan scheme lead to peak temperature reduction 
with minimal performance degradation. Traditionally, 
floorplan schemes have been researched at the circuit-level 
[13]. However, as wire delay becomes the bottleneck of 
performance and thermal problems become critical issue, 
floorplan schemes have started to be looked at the 
architecture-level. 
In floorplan schemes, heat transfer from adjacent 
functional units is one of the most important factors that 
affect the temperature distribution of a chip. The temperature 
distribution depends on the functional unit adjacency 
determined by the floorplan of the processor. In other words, 
the temperature on the functional units is heavily affected by 
the heat transfer from adjacent functional units. 
 
III. 
PROPOSED THERAL-AWARE FLOORPLAN SCHEMES  
In this paper, baseline floorplan model is based on the 
Alpha21364(EV6) [23]. We assume a 90nm technology with 
a supply voltage of 1.5 volts. To implement 2-die staked 3D 
IC, we extend it to 2 layers in our experiments. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Baseline Floorplan of 3D Dual-core Processor - Baseline 
 
Figure 2 denotes the baseline floorplan of 3D dual-core 
processor, which is the target processor in this work. Each 
core of the baseline processor is Alpha21364. We stacked 
two cores vertically to configure the dual-core processor. In 
Figure 2, core-0 represents the core located far from the heat 
sink while core-1 denotes the core located near to the heat 
sink. Proposed three floorplan schemes are shown in Figure 
3 ~ Figure 5. The floorplan of core-0 is modified while the 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

floorplan of core-1 is fixed, since the temperature of core-0 
is higher than that of core-1 due to the different cooling 
efficiency. In this work, we implement a lot of experiments 
to find efficient floorplans for reducing the temperature. We 
describe only three efficient floorplan schemes owing to 
limited page. 
In the proposed floorplan schemes, hottest functional 
units are relocated to reduce the temperature without 
increasing area. Compared to the Baseline in Figure 2, 
relocated functional units in the proposed floorplan schemes 
can be summarized as follows: 
 
Floorplan I - IntReg, IntExec 
Floorplan II - FPMul, LdStQ, IntReg, IntExec, IntQ 
Floorplan III - FPAdd, LdStQ, IntQ, IntExec, IntReg 
 
First floorplan scheme (Floorplan I) swaps the location of 
IntReg with that of IntExec because the IntReg unit is one of 
the hottest units in the baseline floorplan. As shown in 
Figure 3, Floorplan I doesn’t change the location of other 
functional units. Second floorplan scheme (Floorplan II), 
shown in Figure 4, changes the location of FPMul, LdStQ, 
IntReg, IntExec and IntQ. As shown in Figure 5, third 
floorpaln scheme (Floorplan III) changes the location of 
FPAdd, LdStQ, IntQ, IntExec and IntReg. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Floorplan I 
 
Modifying the floorplan of the core affects the datapath 
in the processor, because the distance between functional 
units is determined by the floorplan. Data path is also 
considered in this work, because the floorplan in the 
proposed schemes is modified, significantly. We assume that 
the data path of Floorplan I is same to that of Baseline, since 
there is little difference between two floorplans. However, 
we changed the data path of Floorplan II and Floorplan III, 
because two floorplans have big difference compared to the 
Baseline. Especially, level 1 data cache latency related with 
LdStQ is increased compared to the Baseline, because the 
location of LdStQ is mainly changed in Floorplan II and 
Floorplan III. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Floorplan II 
 
 
Figure 5.  Floorplan III 
 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL METHODOLOGY 
In this section, we briefly describe the simulation 
infrastructure and thermal modeling. In order to determine 
the characteristics of the proposed schemes with respect to 
the baseline scheme, we perform applications selected from 
SPEC CPU2000 suite [24] using SimpleScalar [25] and 
Wattch [26]. SimpleScalar provides cycle-level modeling of 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

processor in detail and Wattch is used to obtain the power 
trace of processor. 
 
TABLE I.  
SYSTEM PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
Value 
Functional units 
4 integer ALUs, 
1 floating point ALUs 
1 integer multiplier/divider 
1 floating point  
1 multiplier/divider 
L1 Instruction Cache 
32KB, 4-way, 32byte lines, 
1 cycle latency 
L1 Data Cache 
32KB, 4-way, 32byte lines, 
1 ~ 2 cycle latency 
Unified L2 Cache 
256KB, 8-way, 64byte lines, 
12 cycle latency 
 
Table I shows the main processor and memory hierarchy 
parameters used in the simulation. In the up-to-date 
processors, DTM technique is applied to alleviate the 
thermal problems. Therefore, DTM techniques (initial 
temperature: 60ºC, instruction throttling starting at 80ºC, 
DVFS starting at 85ºC) are also applied to the simulated 
processor. 
 
TABLE II.  
BENCHMARK  
Benchmark 
Program 
IPC 
L2 Cache 
Miss Rates 
Peak Temperature 
in 2D Processor 
(℃) 
gcc 
2.48 
0.03 
78 
mcf 
2.73 
0.25 
81 
 
Table II shows benchmark programs used in our 
simulation. Generally, benchmark programs are divided into 
two categories: memory-bound programs and cpu-bound 
programs. We use both memory-boud program(mcf) and 
cpu-bound program(gcc) to anaylze the temperature of the 
processor with various kinds of benchmark programs. 
 
TABLE III.  THERMAL MODEL PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
Value 
TIM-0 
die-0 
TIM-1 
die-1 
Specific heat 
capacity(J/m3K) 
4.0e6 
1.75e6 
4.0e6 
1.75e6 
Thickness(m) 
2.0e-5 
1.5e-4 
2.0e-5 
1.5e-4 
Resistivity(mK/W) 
0.25 
0.01 
0.25 
0.01 
 
To evaluate the heat dissipation of 3D multi-core 
processors, especially inside each die, we use HotSpot 
Version 5.0 [27]. Hotspot is a modeling tool for developing 
compact thermal models. It can simulate the processor 
temperature in detail. And, HotSpot’s grid model is capable 
of modeling stacked 3D chips. HotSpot takes power trace as 
input and generates the steady state temperature according to 
each functional block. Power trace is generated by using 
Wattch. In order to have precise experiments, the 
configuration parameters and the layer parameters are 
obtained from the material properties in CRC handbook [28]. 
Thermal modeling configurations of 3D dual-core processor 
used in our experiments are shown in Table III. In the table, 
die-0 represents the die located far away from the heat sink, 
while die-1 denotes the die located near to the heat sink. 
 
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
In this work, we analyze the temperature and the 
performance according to the floorplan scheme for the 3D 
multi-core processor. In the results, notDTM and DTM 
represent the baseline floorplan without DTM technique and 
the baseline floorplan with DTM technique, respectively. 
Floorplan I, Floorplan II and Floorplan III represent the 
proposed floorplan schemes shown in Figure 3-5 with the 
DTM technique, respectively. 
 
A. Temperature 
We use the peak temperature of the processor instead of 
the average temperature because the major thermal problem 
is caused by the highest temperature. We assume that g and 
m represent the gcc and mcf applications obtained from 
SPEC CPU2000, respectively. In the graph, the first 
character denotes an application which is executed on the 
core-0 and second character denotes the application executed 
on the core-1. For example, the gm means that gcc is 
executed on the core-0 and mcf is executed on the core-1. 
The vertical axis represents the peak temperature of the 
processor. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Peak temperature of 3D Dual-core processor 
 
Figure 6 shows the peak temperature of the 3D dual-core 
processor according to each floorplan scheme. As shown in 
the graph, the temperature of the DTM is lower than that of 
notDTM. Our proposed three floorplan schemes reduce the 
peak temperature compared to the baseline floorplan.  
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

In the three proposed floorplan schemes, Floorplan II and 
Floorplan III show lower temperature than Floorplan I.  
According to our simulation results, compared to notDTM, 
DTM decreases the temperature by 6.22ºC on average 
(gg:3.42ºC, 
gm:5.16ºC, 
mg:7.28ºC, 
mm:9.0ºC) 
and 
Floorplan I decreases the temperature by 11.9ºC on average 
(gg:8.8ºC, gm:10.38ºC, mg:13.4ºC, mm:15.08ºC). Floorplan 
II and Floorplan III reduce the temperature by 13.27ºC and 
13.32ºC on average, respectively. Reduced temperature leads 
to higher reliability of the processor. 
 
B. Performance 
If the temperature on the processor exceeds the threshold, 
the DTM technique is activated, resulting in performance 
degradation. In the simulated 3D dual-core processor, the 
temperature of the core-1 is higher than that of the core-0. 
Therefore, the DTM is more frequently applied to core-1 
than core-0. Consequently, the performance degradation of 
the core-0 is more serious than that of the core-1. Figure 7 
shows total execution time of core-0 to analyze the 
performance according to each floorplan scheme. Each bar in 
the graphs is normalized to the execution time of notDTM. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Performance of 3D Dual-core processor 
 
We analyze the normalized performance according to 
each floorplan for 4 application combination such as gg, gm, 
mg and mm. For all cases, DTM shows the performance 
degradation by 22.89% compared to notDTM on average. In 
our simulation results, the first DTM technique, instruction 
throttling, is applied after 5.1% of the total execution time. 
Floorplan I, Floorplan II and Floorplan III degrade the 
performance by 5%, 2.19% and 2.2% on average compared 
to notDTM, respectively. Performance degradation in the 
proposed schemes is less than that of DTM, because the 
DTM technique is less frequently applied in the proposed 
schemes. Especially, even though Floorplan II and Floorplan 
III increase the latency for accessing the data cache(1 cycle 
→ 2 cycle) due to modified floorplan, the performance is 
improved by about 3% compared to Floorplan I. According 
to our analysis, it comes from the fact that performance 
improvement obtained from reduced temperature is larger 
than the performance loss due to increased latency. 
 
C. Energy consumption 
As described in [29], we can see the equation for 
calculating the leakage power related to the area and 
temperature. 
 
Pleak = α∙Area∙eβ(Tcurrent-T0)                                 (1) 
 
Ptotal = ∑Pleak                                                   (2) 
 
In the equation (1), the “α” and “β” represents a base 
leakage power and constant value which is changed by the 
technology, respectively. “Tcurrent” is current temperature and 
“T0” is temperature when the leakage power is base value. 
We can get the total leakage power by using the equation (2). 
As you can see in the equation, total leakage power 
decreases if “α” or “β” or “Area” or execution time becomes 
less. The proposed floorplan schemes reduce the execution 
time significantly compared to the traditional floorplan. 
Therefore, the proposed technique can reduce the leakage 
power consumption significantly. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we proposed thermal-aware floorplan 
schemes to solve the thermal problems in 3D multi-core 
processors. The proposed schemes reduce the peak 
temperature of the processor by adjusting the location of hot 
units to reduce the temperature increase due to heat transfer. 
According to our experiments, the proposed schemes reduce 
the temperature compared to the baseline scheme by 12.84ºC 
on average, leading to better reliability. Moreover, it reduces 
the performance loss due to the DTM technique significantly. 
The proposed floorplan schemes also show better power 
efficiency than the traditional floorplan scheme. Therefore, 
the proposed floorplan schemes can be a good solution for 
improving the performance, power-efficiency and reliability 
of 3D multi-core processors. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by Basic Science Research 
Program through the National Research Foundation of 
Korea(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science 
and 
Technology(2012R1A1B4003492) 
and 
MKE(The 
Ministry of Knowledge Economy), Korea, under the 
ITRC(Information Technology Research Center) support 
program supervised by the NIPA(National IT Industry 
Promotion Agency)(NIPA-2012-H0301-12-3005) 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Agarwal, M. S. Hrishikesh, S. W. Keckler and D. Burger, 
“Clock rate versus IPC: the end of the road for conventional 
microArchitectures,” Proc. the 27th International Symposium 
on Computer Architecture, Jun. 2000, pp. 10-14. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

[2] L. Xiang, J. Huang and T. Chen, “Coordinating System 
Software for Power Savings,” Proc. Future Generation 
Communication and Networking, Dec. 2008, pp. 13-15. 
[3] R. Palit, A. Singh and K. Naik, “An Architecture for 
Enhancing Capability and Energy Efficiency of Wireless 
Handheld Devices,” International Journal of Energy, 
Information and Communications. vol. 2, Nov. 2011, pp. 117-
136. 
[4] M. 
Chakraverty, 
S. 
Mandava 
and 
G. 
Mishra,  
“Performance Analysis of CMOS Single Ended Low Power 
Low Noise Amplifier,” International Journal of Control and 
Automation. vol. 3,Jun. 2010, pp. 45-52. 
[5] S. Banerjee, M. Mukherjee and J. P. Banerjee, “Bias current 
optimization of Wurtzite-GaN DDR IMPATT Diode for High 
Power Operation at Thz Frequencies,” International Journal of 
Advanced Science and Technology. vol. 16, Mar. 2010, pp. 
11-20. 
[6] H. Naqvi, S. Berber and Z. Salcic, “Energy Efficiency of 
Collaborative Communication with imperfect Frequency 
Synchronization in Wireless Sensor Networks,” International 
Journal of Multimedia and Ubiquitous Engineering. vol. 5, 
Oct. 2010, pp. 19-30. 
[7] J. W. Joyner, P. Zarkesh-Ha, J. A. Davis and J. D. Meindl, “A 
Three-Dimensional Stochastic Wire-Length Distribution for 
Variable Separation of Strata,” Proc. IEEE International 
Interconnect Technology Conference, Jun. 2000, pp. 7-9. 
[8] L. 
Yeh 
and 
R. 
Chy, 
“Thermal 
Management 
of 
Microelectronic 
Equipment,” 
American 
Society 
of 
Mechanical Engineering, 2001. 
[9] Z. Zhijun, L. R. Hoover, and A. L. Phillips, "Advanced 
thermal architecture for cooling of high power electronics," 
Components and Packaging Technologies, IEEE Transactions 
on, vol. 25, Dec. 2002, pp. 629-634. 
[10] S. W. Yoon, D. W. Yang, J. H. Koo, M. Padmanathan and F. 
Carson, “3D TSV processes and its assembly/Packaging 
Technology,” Proc. IEEE International Conference on 3D 
System Integration, Sep. 2009, pp. 28-30.  
[11] Zhu, C., Gu, Z., Shang, L., Dick, R.P., and Joseph, R. “Three-
dimensional 
chip-multiprocessor 
run-time 
thermal 
management,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design 
of Lntegrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 27, Aug. 2008, pp. 
1479-1492. 
[12] A. W. Topol, D. C. L. Tulipe, L. Shi, D. J. Frank, K. 
Bernstein, S. E. Steen, A. Kumar, G. U. Singco, A. M. Young, 
K. W. Guarini and M. Ieong, “Three-Dimensional integrated 
circuits,” IBM Journal of Research and Development, USA, 
2006. 
[13] J. Cong, G. J. Luo, J. Wei and Y. Zhang, “Thermal-Aware 3D 
IC Placement Via Transformation,” Proc. Asia and South 
Pacific-Design Automation Conference, Jan. 2007, pp .23-26. 
[14] R. Mahajan, “Thermal Management of CPUs: A Perspective 
on Trends, Needs, and Opportunities,” Invited talk given at 
the 8th International Workshop on Thermal INvestigations of 
ICs and Systems, 2002. 
[15] A. K. Coskun, J. L. Ayala, D. Atienza, T. S. Rosing and Y. 
Leblebici, “Dynamic Thermal Management in 3D Multicore 
Architectures,” Proc. Design, Automation & Test in Europe 
Conference & Exhibition, Apr. 2009, pp. 20-24. 
[16] D. O. Son, Y. J. Park, J. W. Ahn, J. H. Park, J. M. Kim and C. 
H. Kim, “Thermal-aware Floorplan Schemes for Reliable 3D 
Multi-core Processors,” Proc. International Conference 
ICCSA, Jun. 2011, pp. 20-23. 
[17] K. Sankaranarayanan, S. Velusamy, M. Stan and K. Skadron, 
“A 
Case 
for 
Thermal-Aware 
Floorplanning 
at 
the 
Microarchitectural 
level,” 
Journal 
of 
Instruction-level 
Parallelism, vol. 7, Aug. 2005, pp. 1-16. 
[18] P. Lindner, V. Dragoi, T. Glinsner, C. Schaefer and R. Islam. 
“3D Interconnect through aligned wafer level bonding,” Proc. 
the Electronic Components and Technology Conference, May. 
2002, pp. 1439-1443. 
[19] P. Morrow, M. J. Kobrinsky, S. Ramanathan, C. M. Partk, M. 
Harmes, V. Ramachandrarao, H. M. Park, G. Kloster, S. List 
and S. Kim. “Wafer-level 3D Interconnects via Cu bonding,” 
Proc. the 2004 Advanced Metalization Conference, Oct. 2004, 
pp. 331-336. 
[20] P. Leduca, F. de Crecy, B. Charlet, T. Enot, M. Zussy, B. 
Jones, J.-C. Barbe, N. Kernevez, N. Sillon, S. Maitrejean and 
D. Louisa. “Challenges for 3D IC Integration: bonding quality 
and Thermal management,” Proc. IEEE International 
Interconnect Technology Conference, Jun. 2007, pp. 21-212. 
[21] X. Zhou, Y. Xu, Y. Du, Y. Zhang and J. Yang, “Thermal 
Management for 3D Processors via Task scheduling,” Proc. 
the 2008 37th International Conference on Parallel Processing, 
Sep. 2008, pp. 9-12. 
[22] T. Pering and R. Brodersen, “Energy efficient voltage 
scheduling for real-time operating systems,” Proc. the 4th 
IEEE Real-Time Technology and Applications Symposium 
RTAS'98, Work in Progress Session, Jun. 1998, pp. 3-5. 
[23] R. E. Kessler. “The Alpha 21364 microprocessor,” IEEE 
MICRO, vol. 19, 1996 
[24] J. 
L. 
Henning, 
“SPEC 
CPU2000: 
Measuring 
CPU 
Performance in the New Millennium,” IEEE Computer, vol. 
33, Jul. 2000, pp. 28-35. 
[25] D. C. Burger and T. M. Austin. “The SimpleScalar tool set, 
version 2.0,” ACM Special Interest Group on Computer 
Architecrue Computer Architecture News, vol. 25, Jun. 1997, 
pp. 13-25. 
[26] D. Brooks, V. Tiwari and M. Martonosi, “Wattch: A 
Framework for Architectural-level Power Analysis and 
Optimizations,” 
Proc. 
the 
27th 
Annual 
International 
Symposium on Computer Architecture, Jun. 2000, pp. 10-14. 
[27] W. Huang, M. R. Stan, K. Skadron, K. Sankaranarayanan and 
S. Ghosh. “HotSpot: A Compact Thermal Modeling Method 
for CMOS VLSI Systems,” IEEE Transactions on VLSI 
Systems, vol. 14, May. 2006, pp. 501-513. 
[28] CRC 
Press, 
CRC 
Handbook 
of 
Chemistry. 
http://www.hbcpnetbase.com 
[29] A. K. Coskun, A. B. Kahng and T. S. Rosing, “Temperature- 
and Cost-Aware Design of 3D Multiprocessor Architectures,” 
Proc. Architectures, Methods and Tools, Aug. 2009, pp. 27-29. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

