A Cluster Head Election Method with Adaptive Separation Distance and Load 
Distribution for Wireless Sensor Networks 
 
Cosmin Cirstea, Mihail Cernaianu, Aurel Gontean,  
Applied Electronics Department 
 “Politehnica” University of Timisoara, Electronics and Telecommunications Faculty 
Timisoara, Romania 
cosmin.cirstea@etc.upt.ro, mihai.cernaianu@etc.upt.ro, aurel.gontean@etc.upt.ro 
 
 
Abstract— Cluster based wireless sensor networks have the 
advantage of reduced energy consumption and increased 
message delivery compared to the situations where no 
hierarchical communication is used. Cluster heads (CHs) play 
the important role of performing data gathering and 
aggregation from surrounding nodes and thus must be 
efficiently chosen. This paper describes a CH election 
algorithm for wireless sensor networks (WSNs) based on 
LEACH that uses adaptive separation distance and load 
distribution (LEACH-ASDLD) in order to enhance network 
lifetime and message delivery. The proposed algorithm 
considers the number of neighbors in the vicinity of each node 
as well as the expected packet size to be transmitted in electing 
the appropriate CH, thus distributing network load among key 
sensors within the network rather than evenly distributing the 
load among all nodes. Using adaptive separation distance 
determines the number of CHs per round and ensures their 
uniform spread over the observation area. In order to 
determine the importance of using adaptive separation 
distance combined with load distribution we have performed 
Matlab simulations and compared our algorithm with a 
minimum separation distance (MSD) algorithm entitled 
Improved 
Minimum 
Separation 
Distance 
(IMSD), 
an 
enhancement to MSD. Our simulations show that using the 
proposed algorithm can extend the lifetime of the network and 
provide increased message delivery by up to 15% depending 
on the simulated network and packet sizes. 
Keywords-clustering, 
adaptive 
separation 
distance, 
load 
distribution, wireless sensor networks 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Wireless sensor networks are intelligent networks 
comprised of hundreds, even thousands of nodes that 
collaborate to perform various sensing tasks. Their unique 
characteristics such as low cost, reduced size, low power 
consumption and rapid deployment make WSNs the best 
solution for numerous applications such as military 
surveillance, detection of chemical activity, environmental 
and healthcare monitoring, to mention just a few. Deploying 
such networks in dangerous and inaccessible environments 
allows for the extraction of information which would 
otherwise be very difficult if not impossible to obtain. 
However, due to the fact that sensor nodes are battery 
powered energy consumption at the node and network level 
is of high importance and represents a major challenge in 
the design of WSNs. Network lifetime is defined as the time 
elapsed until the first, half, or the last node in the network 
consumes its energy. To address the issue of energy 
efficiency at the network level, intelligent routing protocols 
are adopted which currently fall under two categories: flat 
routing protocols and hierarchical routing protocols. 
Flat routing protocols consider all nodes within the 
network as equal and routes are generated through feedback 
information instead of using a hierarchical management 
mechanism. The main advantage of this technique is that 
network traffic is evenly distributed among network nodes 
[1]. Flat routing protocols include techniques like gossiping 
and flooding [2], spin [3] and directed diffusion [4]. 
Hierarchical routing protocols divide the observation 
area (OA) into smaller areas named clusters and assign 
representative nodes entitled cluster heads (CHs) that 
manage the communication within nodes in the cluster and 
transmit the obtained data to the base station (BS) or to 
other CHs along the path to the BS. The way clusters are 
defined, how the CHs are elected and how the 
communication with the BS is performed, depends on the 
elected routing protocol. Several representative hierarchical 
routing protocols for WSNs are LEACH (Low-Energy 
Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy) [5], TEEN (Threshold 
sensitive Energy Efficient sensor Network protocol) [6], 
PEGASIS 
(Power-Efficient 
GAthering 
in 
Sensor 
Information Systems) [7] and others more recent that are 
mostly improvements to the previously mentioned ones. 
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section II 
provides a description of the LEACH [5], MSD [8] and 
IMSD [9] protocols and Section III describes the proposed 
algorithm LEACH-ASDLD. Section IV describes the 
experimental setup, as well as the obtained results and 
Section V presents conclusions and future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A. The LEACH protocol 
The 
Low-Energy 
Adaptive 
Clustering 
Hierarchy 
(LEACH) [5] is a cluster based protocol that reduces the 
energy consumption of the sensor network through several 
key features such as localized coordination and control for 
the CHs, local compression and randomized rotation of the 
CHs. The operation of LEACH is divided into rounds (a 
predefined interval of time during which cluster and inter-
cluster communication takes place) and each round begins 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

with a cluster set-up phase preceded by a steady-state phase 
where data transfer to the base station occurs. The set-up 
phase is organized as follows:  
The advertisement phase – each node individually decides 
if it becomes a cluster head based on a suggested percentage 
(P) of cluster heads determined a priori as well as based on 
the number of times the node has been cluster head so far. 
By choosing a random number between 0 and 1 the node (n) 
can elect itself as cluster head if this number is less than a 
threshold  ( ) calculated as follows [5]: 
 ( )   {
 
    (        
 )           
                                       
           (1)                             
where r is the current round and G is the set of nodes that 
have not been cluster heads in the last 
 
  rounds. 
After each round the probability of the remaining nodes 
must increase since there are fewer nodes eligible to become 
cluster heads. 
Cluster set-up phase – after the cluster heads have been 
elected, each of them informs neighboring nodes so that 
each node decides the appropriate cluster head to attend to, 
based on the received strength of the cluster head 
advertisement. 
Inter cluster communication – each CH creates a TDMA 
schedule and informs each node from the cluster when to 
communicate acquired data. To avoid interference with 
neighboring clusters, each CH also randomly chooses a 
CDMA code from a list of codes and informs all nodes in 
the cluster to use the given code. 
For simulation purposes the authors of LEACH [5] have 
chosen the first order radio model where the radio dissipates 
                to run the transceiver circuit,      
              for the transmit amplifier and     
        for data aggregation and fusion. CHs collect k-bit 
long messages from attending n nodes and compress the 
data using a compression coefficient c, thus resulting in c•n  
k-bit messages sent to the BS. A path loss coefficient,   
 , has been considered for each communication. All nodes 
have the same energy in the beginning,        . Thus 
the energy needed to transmit a k-bit long message over 
distance d is [5]: 
   (   )          ( )          (   ) 
   (   )                                 (2)                                                                                    
The energy required to receive a message is: 
   ( )          ( )                     (3) 
Also, the maximum communication range of sensor nodes is 
100 meters.                                
The steady-state (data transmission) phase – all nodes 
transmit sensed data to the elected CH according to the 
TDMA schedule they have received. After a certain time 
determined a priori the next round begins and the protocol 
resumes from the advertisement phase. 
One significant disadvantage when using LEACH is that 
electing CHs the way previously described does not provide 
an even distribution of the CHs among the OA. This 
downside has also been observed by the authors of the MSD 
protocol which have come up with a solution which we will 
further describe. 
B. The MSD and IMSD protocols 
Hansen et al. [8] argue that there should be a minimum 
separation distance between the CHs in order to provide an 
even distribution of the CHs throughout the network. In 
order to test the impact of using a minimum separation 
distance between the elected CHs the authors have devised 
an algorithm briefly described Figure 1 [8]. 
 
MSD = Minimum Separation Distance 
dc = Number of desired cluster heads 
energy(n) = Remaining energy for node n 
     
∑       ( )
                      
eligible = {n| energy(n) ≥ avg} 
assert (|eligible| ≥ dc) 
CD = {} 
while (|CH| < dc) 
          if Ǝn: n   eligible Λ (   m    CH, dist (m,n))   MSD 
 
add (n, CH) 
 
 
 
remove (n, eligible) 
          else 
              n   eligible 
              add (n, CH) 
              remove (n, eligible) 
          end 
end 
 
Figure 1. MSD algorithm proposed by Hansen et al. [8] 
Their algorithm is based on a variant of LEACH, 
LEACH-C (Centralized) meaning that the algorithm for the 
cluster head election is performed by the BS which informs 
each node in the network about the elected CHs for the 
current round. In turn, all nodes are obliged to inform the 
BS about their position information and current energy level 
each round. Based on this information the BS runs the 
algorithm and determines which nodes are eligible for 
becoming CHs for the current round by calculating the 
average energy remaining in the network. Only nodes with 
remaining energy above the average threshold become 
eligible for being CHs for that round. After determining the 
eligible nodes, CHs are randomly elected based on the 
minimum separation distance criterion until the desired 
number is attained. If this number cannot be obtained, 
random nodes are chosen from the remaining eligible nodes 
to perform the CH role. After the algorithm has been 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

successfully executed, the elected CHs are informed by the 
BS of their new status and clusters are formed. Until the 
next round when the process is repeated the network 
performs communication the same way as in LEACH. 
Simulations have been performed by the authors on a 
400x400 meter network and the results have shown that 
depending on the number of desired CHs, using the MSD 
protocol results in increased number of messages received 
by the BS with up to 80% when compared to LEACH. 
A more recent research by Chalak et al. [9] proposes an 
Improved MSD (IMSD) algorithm that solves the MSD 
issue when the desired number of CHs cannot be obtained 
without electing CHs that do not obey the minimum 
separation distance criterion. 
To solve this issue the authors claim that the smallest 
distance allowed between two distinct CHs is the minimum 
separation distance, which can be smaller than a desired 
separation distance but should not be larger. If the desired 
number of CHs cannot be obtained the minimum separation 
distance is reduced by a pre-defined percentage and the 
algorithm is implemented again until the number of CHs is 
obtained. Using this method improvements are obtained 
compared to the MSD algorithm in terms of network 
lifetime and overall packet delivery. 
Through simulations we have observed that by using 
either of these two algorithms the desired number of CHs is 
constantly maintained. An advantage of IMSD over MSD is 
that the CHs are more evenly spread over the entire area. 
The eligibility criterion employed by both algorithms gives 
network nodes equal possibilities to become CHs thus 
distributing the network load among all nodes. This 
practically means that the vast majority of nodes will remain 
without energy at about the same time. 
We consider that CHs should be elected also based on 
other criterions such as the number of neighboring nodes in 
the area defined by the separation distance and also based 
on the size of the packet with respect to the allowed 
maximum size as most WSNs are event driven and modify 
the transmitted packet size when an event occurs. As 
simulations presented in the next chapter show, choosing 
CHs this way can have significant impact on network 
lifetime and packet delivery. 
Using a centralized approach such as LEACH-C can 
introduce several disadvantages such as nodes that are far 
away from the BS will have difficulties in sending their 
status to the BS. If this role is assumed by the CHs for the 
current round it will induce further strain on those nodes. 
Either way using a centralized approach will result in 
increased overhead and communication latency. We consider 
that a local approach can be more suited as the energy 
consuming task of sending and receiving messages will be 
replaced by local computations thus reducing latency and 
overhead. Also a local approach will allow for scalability in 
situations where the sensor network is spread over larger 
areas that extend over the communication range of a node 
with the BS. 
III. 
PROPOSED ALGORITHM 
To address the previously mentioned issues we have 
developed the LEACH-ASDLD algorithm which we will 
further describe. 
LEACH-ASDLD is a round based protocol structured on 
3 layers of communication: 
 
Layer 1 represents a neighborhood reconnaissance 
procedure during which, in the first round nodes 
inform neighbors of their position information and 
in all other rounds nodes that remain without 
energy or newly added nodes inform neighboring 
nodes of their new status. 
 
Layer 2 is reserved for sensing and data gathering 
by network nodes which perform only intra cluster 
communications based on the TDMA/CDMA 
proposed schemes. 
 
Layer 3 is restricted to inter cluster head and 
cluster head to BS communication. 
The following assumptions are made about the network 
model: 
 
The network consists of 100 randomly deployed 
nodes. 
 
We have performed simulations on areas having 
sizes ranging from 50x50m to 200x200m with a 
variation step of 25x25m. 
 
We assume that knowledge of the observation area 
size is previously known. 
 
All nodes are homogeneous, with the same 
hardware and software architectures and the same 
battery power. 
 
Energy consumption constraints are as described in 
Section I at the description of the LEACH protocol. 
 
The network is noise and error free. 
 
Network nodes are synchronized (using an RT 
Clock for example). 
Based on these assumptions we will next provide a more 
detailed description about the proposed algorithm which can 
be divided into 4 steps. 
1) Neighborhood 
reconnaissance 
– 
each 
node 
broadcasts a message with its position if a localization 
device is present or a dummy message so that other nodes 
can calculate the distance between themselves and the 
sending node by using the received signal strength indicator 
(RSSI) method. This procedure is performed in a TDMA 
fashion previously defined and only during the first round. 
In all other rounds the time span for it is reduced and this 
time window will serve as advertisement space for nodes 
that do not have enough energy to perform their tasks any 
more or for newly added nodes to broadcast their position 
information. 
2) Cluster set-up phase – as the size of the OA is 
known, defining the separation distance between the CHs 
will actually determine the number of clusters that will be 
formed each round. Based on the desired number of clusters 
we have calculated the separation distance between the CHs 
using the following formula: 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

   √  
   
 
 
(4) 
For a given square OA of size LxL, the question posed is, if 
we want to fit N squares within the area, what is the side 
length of each square (SD). Where N is actually the desired 
number of CHs. 
Using the distance information obtained from Step 1, 
each node will calculate the ratio between the number of 
nodes within the separation distance and the number of 
neighbors in its range. Also each node will calculate the 
ratio between the expected packet size and the maximum 
allowed payload size which is 127 bytes according to the 
IEEE Standard 802.15.4 [10]. Each node calculates a 
threshold value using the following formula: 
 
    (
  
  ) (  
   
  ) (  
    
    ) 
      (5) 
 
where    is the remaining energy,    is the initial energy, 
    represents the number of nodes in the separation 
distance,    the number of nodes in the sensing range, 
    is the current payload and      is the maximum 
payload. 
The CH election phase is performed as follows. Initially 
each node is eligible for becoming a CH if it has enough 
energy to perform this task. Each node will generate a 
random number and set a timer according to it. The node 
with the smallest timer value will be the first advertised CH. 
Depending on the network size and node sensing range, 
several CHs can be elected throughout the OA. Nodes that 
are closer to a CH than the separation distance cannot 
advertise themselves as CH. Nodes that are farther than the 
separation distance are still eligible and the node with the 
smallest    will elect itself as CH also using a timer. The 
procedure is repeated until the entire OA is covered and 
there are no eligible nodes left. Using the smallest    value 
for electing CHs means that nodes with larger number of 
neighbors 
in 
the 
separation 
distance 
have 
higher 
probabilities of electing themselves CH. Using the described 
method can have a significant impact on the overall message 
delivery and network lifetime as we will show in Section 
IV. 
Steps 3 and 4, Inter cluster communication and The 
steady-state (data transmission) phases are performed the 
same way as specified by the LEACH algorithm (Section 
II). 
IV. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
In order to determine the impact of the proposed 
algorithm on the network lifetime and message delivery, we 
have performed several simulations in different scenarios 
which we will describe in the following subsections. 
A. Network lifetime 
As previously mentioned, using an algorithm as MSD [8] 
or IMSD [9], where the CHs are chosen based on the 
maximum amount of remaining energy, the overall load of 
the network is evenly distributed among sensor nodes, which 
means that the vast majority of nodes will remain without 
energy at approximately the same time. In LEACH-ASDLD 
cluster heads are elected with the minimum threshold value, 
thus straining nodes in key places of the network. To 
determine the impact of LEACH-ASDLD over the IMSD 
algorithm in terms of network lifetime we have performed 
several Matlab simulations on random distributed networks 
over areas with different sizes that range from 50x50 meters 
to 200x200 meters with a step of 25x25 meters and a desired 
number of 10 CHs for each simulation. The results can be 
seen in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. LEACH-ASDLD half nodes die vs. IMSD last node dies. 
If we consider the first node dies (FND) metric IMSD 
outperforms our proposed algorithm, however if we 
consider the half node dies (HND) metric, as we can see 
from Figure 2, our proposed algorithm outperforms IMSD 
as when half of the nodes have died in LEACH-ASDLD, the 
entire network of nodes using the IMSD algorithm has 
already depleted all its energy. We can observe that by 
stressing key nodes in the network LEACH-ASDLD 
provides extended monitoring time of the OA when 
compared to the IMSD algorithm which is actually desired 
in a WSN. 
An interesting behavior can be noticed in Figure 2. As 
mentioned in Section II, CHs serve the purpose of 
performing data aggregation and fusion operations. Also the 
maximum communication distance between sensor nodes is 
of 100 meters and the energy required to send a message is 
in direct correlation with the distance between the sender 
and receiver. Nodes send messages either directly to the BS 
or to the CHs, depending on which is closer. When both are 
within communication range, sending messages to the CHs 
can be more costly because of aggregation and fusion 
operations performed and this behavior can be noticed in 
Figure 2. This behavior can be avoided by electing the 
appropriate number of CHs per round depending on network 
size, however this optimization type is not of the purpose of 
this paper.  
B. Message delivery 
To determine the impact of the proposed algorithm on 
the overall message delivery of the network we have 
performed several simulations in different scenarios which 
we will further describe. 
1100
1150
1200
1250
1300
1350
1400
1450
Number of rounds 
Network size [m] 
LEACH-ASDLD
IMSD
     50x50       75x75     100x100   125x125   150x150  175x175   200x200 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

1) Different network sizes 
We have performed simulations on randomly deployed 
WSNs over square areas of different sizes ranging from 
50x50 meters to 200x200 meters with a variation of 25x25 
meters. The packet size has been considered static (200 
bits/packet) and each node sends a total of 20 packets per 
round. The number of desired CHs elected per round was 
10. The results can be seen in Figure 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. LEACH-ASDLD vs. IMSD – total number of packets sent 
for different network sizes 
As can be seen from Figure 3, there is an increase of 
packets sent in the network dependent on the size of the OA 
that ranges from 15% for the 50x50 meters network to 4 % 
for the 200x200 meters network. This however can be an 
issue of electing the correct number of CHs as can be seen 
in the next section. 
2) Different number of CHs 
Electing the optimum number of CHs is another 
important research direction in the field of WSNs but it does 
not represent the purpose of this paper. To determine the 
performance of the proposed algorithm we have performed 
simulations on a 100x100 meters network with a different 
number of CHs ranging from 3 to 10 and the obtained 
results can be observed in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4. LEACH-ASDLD vs. IMSD – total number of packets sent 
for different number of CHs 
We can see from Figure 4 that varying the number of 
CHs can have a significant importance over the message 
delivery of the entire network. Both protocols obtain the 
highest number of messages delivered for 3 proposed CHs 
and our proposed algorithm provides only a small 
improvement of 2% in terms of more messages transmitted. 
However as the number of CHs is increased LEACH-
ASDLD obtains better performance with a maximum of 
13% more packets for 10 elected CHs. 
3) Different packet sizes 
In order to determine the impact of the presence of an 
event in the network which would require an increase in the 
amount of communicated data we have spread the OA into 4 
quadrants, the same as in the Cartesian coordinate system. 
For a specified number of 300 rounds we have increased the 
packet size from 200 with a specified percentage (25, 50, 75 
and 100) in quadrants 2 and 4 while maintaining the OA at a 
fixed size of 100x100 meters. During our simulations we 
have observed that using the IMSD protocol when there is 
an increase in packet size, due to the election method of the 
CHs in which only nodes with remaining energy level above 
the network average are eligible for becoming CHs, the area 
in which the event takes place is left without any CH, which 
is not the case in LEACH-ASDLD. We have also noticed 
through simulation tryouts that increasing the number of 
CHs in these regions can lead to increased packet delivery 
as can be seen in Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 5. LEACH-ASDLD vs. IMSD – total number of packets sent for 
different packet sizes 
The number of CHs within a certain region can be 
increased by using an adaptive minimum separation distance 
with respect to the packet size. We have obtained the best 
results for the current network distribution by reduced the 
minimum separation distance with a percentage of 7 (for the 
250 bits packet) to 28% (for the 400 bits packet) with a step 
of 7%. However we have yet to find a direct correlation 
between optimum number of CHs and the number of nodes 
in the region/packet size. The obtained results show an 
increase in packet delivery that ranges from 7% for the 250 
bits packet size to 3% for the 400 bits packet size when 
comparing LEACH-ASDLD with IMSD. 
440000
460000
480000
500000
520000
540000
560000
580000
600000
620000
Total packets sent 
Number of cluster heads 
LEACH-ASDLD
IMSD
      3           4           5           6            7           8            9          10 
460000
480000
500000
520000
540000
560000
580000
Total packets sent 
Packet size [bits] 
LEACH-ASDLD
IMSD
          200              250                 300              350               400 
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
500000
600000
700000
Total packets sent 
Network size [m] 
LEACH-ASDLD
IMSD
  50x50      75x75     100x100    125x125   150x150  175x175  200x200 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper we have described a proposed algorithm 
based on LEACH, LEACH-ASDLD that considers adaptive 
separation distance between CHs based on the expected 
packet size and also performs the election of CHs using 
information about surrounding nodes. We have performed 
simulations in various network distributions and conditions 
which we have compared with an improvement to LEACH 
that also considers a separation distance between CHs, 
IMSD. 
Our simulation results have shown that further 
improvements can be obtained in terms of network lifetime 
and messages transmitted throughout the entire network. We 
have shown that using the proposed method in which key 
nodes are selected as CHs rather than evenly distributing the 
energy consumption throughout network nodes can provide 
extended network lifetime when using the HND metric. 
Also, the number of packets sent is increased by a factor of 
4 to 15% depending on network size, 2 to 13 % depending 
on the number of desired CHs and 3 to 7% in 
correspondence with the packet size. 
We have also argued that using a centralized protocol 
such as LEACH-C where network nodes have to inform the 
BS each round about their status can induce latency and 
overhead and also does not allow for scalability of the 
network. Our approach solves the problem of scalability by 
introducing a time slot in which newly added nodes but also 
nodes that do not have enough energy can inform 
neighboring nodes of their status. Using this local 
information approach expels the need for sending messages 
over long distances and reduces overhead. There are also 
several downsides to using our method such as it may 
require more time before all CHs are elected and also the 
number of CHs per round is not as stable as when using a 
centralized approach but will vary slightly (we have 
observed a maximum variation of   10% obtained for 10 
desired CHs). 
Future work includes determining a correlation between 
the packet size and the number of CHs (separation distance) 
as the size of the packet is increased. Also other metrics 
should be taken into consideration when electing the CHs 
such as packet frequency variation, expected throughput etc. 
The energy model used is incomplete and strictly refers to 
the send/receive of packets and data aggregation/fusion 
operations performed by cluster heads. This issue should 
also be improved and other energetic aspects should be 
taken into consideration such as the power consumed by the 
microcontroller in different working modes, energy for 
communication 
with 
peripheral 
devices 
(sensors), 
transceiver on/off etc.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by the strategic grant 
POSDRU 88/1.5/S/50783, Project ID 50783 (2009), co-
financed by the European Social Fund - Investing in People, 
within the Sectorial Operational Programme Human 
Resources Development 2007-2013. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Dai, X. Jing, L. Li, “Research and Analysis on Routing 
Protocols for Wireless Sensor Networks”, Proceedings of the 
IEEE International Conference on Communications, Circuits 
and Systems, pp. 407-411, 2005 
[2] J. N. Al-Karaki, “Routing Techniques in Wireless Sensor 
Networks: A Survey”, IEEE Wireless Communications 
Magazine, Vol 11, Issue 6, pp. 6-28, 2004 
[3] W. R. Heinzelman, J. Kulik, H. Balakrishnan,“Adaptive 
Protocols for Information Dissemination in Wireless Sensor 
Networks”, Proceedings of the 5th annual ACM/IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Mobile 
Computing 
and 
Networking, MobiCom '99, 1999 
[4] C. Intanagonwiwat, R. Govindan, D. Estrin, J. Heidemann, F. 
Silva, “Directed diffusion for wireless sensor networking”, 
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, Vol 11, Issue 1, pp. 
2-16, 2003 
[5] W. R. Heinzelman, A. Channdrakasan, H. Balakrishnan, 
“Energy-Efficient Communication Protocol for Wireless 
Microsensor Networks”, Proceedings of the 33rd Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, HICSS’00, 
2000 
[6] A. Manjeshwar, D. P. Agrawal, “TEEN: A routing protocol 
for enhanced efficiency in wireless sensor networks”, 
Proceedings of the 15th Parallel and Distributed Processing 
Symposium, San Francisco, IEEE Computer Science Society, 
2001. 
[7] H. S. Lindsey, C. Raghavendra, “PEGASIS: Power-Efficient 
gathering in sensor information systems”, In Proceedings of 
the IEEE Aerospace Conference 2002, pp. 1-6 
[8] E. Hansen, J, Neander, M. Nolin, and M. Bj rkman,  Energy-
efficient cluster formation for large sensor networks using a 
minimum separation distance", in The Fifth Annual 
Mediterranean Ad Hoc Networking Workshop, June 2006. 
[9] A. R. Chalak, S. Misra, M. S. Obaidat, “A cluster-head 
selection algorithm for Wireless Sensor Networks”, 17th IEEE 
International Conference on Electronic Circuits and Systems, 
ICECS’10, 2010, pp. 130-133. 
[10] IEEE 
Standard 
802 
for 
Information 
technology 
– 
Telecommunications and information exchange between 
systems – Local and metropolitan area networks – Specific 
requirements, Part 15.4 Wireless Medium Access Control and 
Physical Layer Specifications for Low-Rate Wireless Personal 
Area Networks, IEEE Computer Society, 2006, pp 298. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-239-4
EMERGING 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

