A Method for Custom Movement Generation in Wireless Mobile Network 
Simulation 
 
 
Hawra Alseef, John DeDourek, Przemyslaw Pochec  
Faculty of Computer Science 
University of New Brunswick 
Fredericton, Canada 
e-mail: {hawra.alseef, dedourek, pochec}@unb.ca 
 
 
Abstract—Random motion is often used in evaluating 
performance of Mobile Ad hoc Networks (MANETs). Mobility 
pattern of nodes significantly affects performance of MANETs. 
In the simulation of large mobile networks, automated 
movement generators are used, such as the setdest utility in ns2. 
In this paper, we investigate the modifications to the standard 
setdest generator that specifies the motions along straight-line 
paths. We propose and implement a new method for movement 
generation for the ns2 simulator that specifies the node 
movements along curved paths generated using simple fractals. 
The new generator was successfully tested with the ns2 
simulator. The results show that, in the random way point 
motion, only the node speed significantly affects MANET 
performance, and not the shape of the individual path segments 
taken by a node. 
 
Keywords-movement generator; network simulation; ns2; 
fractal path; setdest utility; MANET 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A Mobile Ad hoc Network (MANET) is a set of mobile 
devices that cooperate with each other by exchanging 
messages and forwarding data [1][2]. Mobile devices are 
linked together through wireless connections without 
infrastructure and can change locations and reconfigure 
network connections. During the lifetime of the network, 
nodes are free to move around within the network and node 
mobility plays a very important role in mobile ad hoc network 
performance. Mobility of mobile nodes significantly affects 
the performance of a MANET [2].  
Simulation is a commonly used evaluation tool for mobile 
networks. It allows for modelling existing networks as we as 
future networks. Using simulation, different network 
configurations working under different traffic load conditions 
and using different routing protocols can be quickly and 
easily modelled and evaluated. For mobile networks, if no 
other design constraints are present, random motion of the 
nodes is usually used. Using a common and specific random 
motion model allows to create the base condition for 
comparison between different network evaluations. 
ns2 is an open source simulator well suited for modelling 
wired and wireless networks [3]. It includes a motion 
scenario generator setdest designed to automatically generate 
random motion paths for a large number of nodes. This tool 
generates a random motion path for each node by selecting a 
random destination for the node and then moving the node 
towards this destination along a straight line. Once this 
destination is reached by the node, a new destination is 
randomly selected and, after an optional pause time, the node 
starts moving again to the new destination.  
In this paper, we propose to use the random motion 
generated by the ns2 setdest utility [3] to create a new 
trajectory for the mobile nodes. The waypoints are kept the 
same but the path followed by the node between two 
waypoints is no longer defined by one straight line segment, 
and is replaced by a fractal curve composed of a number of 
shorter line segments.  
In Section 2, we review different random movement 
models commonly used in simulation. Section 3 introduces 
properties of the Koch fractal. Section 4 describes the new 
movement generator based on generation of the node 
movement along a fractal path. Section 5 presents a study of 
two mobile networks: one with the conventional random 
movement and the other with the fractal movement. 
Conclusion is presented in Section 6. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Any model of a MANET requires a mobility model 
specifying the movement pattern of the nodes [4]. The most 
realistic models are trace driven but cannot be always applied 
because of their a posteriori nature. On the other hand, the 
synthetic models [5] are not trace driven but instead rely on 
assumptions about the node movement mode. Among these 
are the random (random-based) models where the nodes 
move randomly and without restrictions and where the 
destination and the speed are chosen randomly. 
There are many different types of random mobility 
models that are used in MANETs. The main ones are the 
Random Walk, the Random Waypoint, and the Random 
Direction. The Random Walk model [5] mimics the 
Brownian motion of particles found in nature. Each node 
travels in a straight direction for a specified time interval 
before randomly changing the speed and the direction, and 
then continuing for another time interval. In the Random 
Waypoint model [6], each node selects a destination within 
the simulation area and then follows a straight path to it; once 
the destination is reached the node may pause and then select 
a new destination (waypoint). In the Random Direction 
model [7], instead of selecting a random destination, the node 
selects a random direction and then moves along this 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

direction until it reaches the simulation area boundary where, 
possibly after a pause, it selects a new direction for the next 
move. 
The ns2 setdest utility generates the node movements 
following the Random Waypoint algorithm [3]. In the 
Random Waypoint Movement (RWP), each node moves 
from its randomly selected initial starting position towards 
the randomly selected at a randomly selected speed. Once at 
the target destination the node may pause for a randomly 
selected time, and then start the next random move. This 
process will be repeated until the end of the simulation by the 
ns2. One notable aspect of the RWP movement is that the 
nodes following this pattern tend to concentrate in the center 
region of the deployment area [8][9]. 
III. 
THE KOCH FRACTAL 
We propose to use fractals for the movement generation 
for mobile network simulation based on the RWP model. 
Instead of moving the nodes along a straight line between the 
waypoints, the nodes are moved along a fractal path. We 
selected the Koch fractal because, like a line segment, it has 
a defined starting and ending points, and because of the 
simplicity of its generating algorithm [10][11]. 
A. Construction of the Koch curve 
The construction of the Koch starts with a straight line 
that is then converted to the Koch fractal curve, Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Step 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Step 2. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Step 3. 
 
This process is then repeated for each of the 4 segments 
generated at the first iteration, leading to the curve shown in 
Figure 3. These steps can be applied repeatedly and 
eventually result in a complex shape. When the Koch curve 
generating algorithm is applied to an equilateral triangle it 
results in a closed curve called the Koch snowflake [11]. 
B. Properties of the Koch snowflake 
Number of Sides (n): for each iteration, every segment 
of the curve from the previous iteration will be converted to 
four segments in the following iteration. Since we begin with 
three sides, the formula for the number of sides in the Koch 
curve is: 
 
                                n = 3 * 4a                                     (1) 
 
where a indicates the number of iterations. For iterations 0, 1, 
2, and 3, the numbers of sides are 3, 12, 48, and 192 
respectively. 
Length of Sides (L): In every iteration, the length of a 
side is 1/3 the length of a side from the previous iteration. If 
we begin with an equilateral triangle with side length x, then 
the length of a side in iteration a is: 
 
                               L = x * 3-a                                     (2) 
 
For iterations 0 to 3, length = x, x/3, x/9, and x/27. 
 
Perimeter (p): The key features of the Koch curve lies in 
having the same length of all sides in each iteration, this leads 
to a perimeter, which is simply the number of sides multiplied 
by the length of a side: 
 
                                 p = n * L                                     (3) 
 
For the snowflake, from the previous formulas, we get: 
 
                     p = (3 * 4a) * (x * 3-a)                             (4) 
 
In the same manner, for the first 4 iterations (0 to 3) the 
perimeter is 3x, 4x, 16x/3, and 64x/9. We notice that, the 
perimeter increases by 4/3 times for each iteration, so we can 
rewrite the formula as 
 
                             p = (4/3)a * 3x                                (5) 
IV. 
CUSTOM MOVEMENT GENERATION WITH FRACTALS 
The main objective of this research is to implement a new 
method for movement generation in MANET simulation in 
ns2. Indeed, the standard way for movement generation is to 
use the setdest utility that generates a set of setdest commands 
that are then "executed" in the ns2 simulator. setdest 
commands generate a movement along a straight line 
between the current location and the designated destination 
point. This research aims at providing a new tool for 
modifying the simulation environment by modeling motion 
in wireless network simulations, specifically for generating 
movement files for ns2 simulation that specify the motion 
along curved (fractal) paths.  Typically, defining the node 
movements needs to be done ahead of the ns2 simulation. In 
general a curved path can be approximated by a series of short 
line segments, which determine the final shape of the curve. 
Therefore, a Java program was implemented that reads the 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

movement file with random movements generated, for 
example, by the setdest utility. Then, as each movement in 
the movement file is specified by a separate setdest 
command, we will replace each one of these setdest 
commands, each specifying a movement along a straight line, 
with a series of setdest commands specifying the movement 
along a curved path (fractal). Once the new movement file is 
generated the ns2 simulation can proceed in a standard way.  
 
 
 
Figure 4. The result of fractal transformation of a line segment AB. 
 
Let’s consider the original setdest command for the direct 
movement from A to B (Figure 4): 
 
$ns_ at T "$node_(#) setdest XB YB S" 
 
where T indicates the starting time at which the node starts 
moving towards the destination XB,YB at the specified speed 
S. While splitting the initial path (line segment AB) into four 
segments (AP, PQ, QR and RB) and defining the destination 
of each of the four moves is a simple geometry, the other 
setdest command parameters require careful consideration. 
More precisely, the need of updating the time and speed in 
the setdest commands arises when applying the fractal 
transformation. In order to make the fractal movements arrive 
at the final destination (point B) at the same time that the 
original straight movement would have arrived, we need to 
do the following modifications: 
 
$ns_ at TP "$node_(#) setdest XP YP Snew "  
$ns_ at TQ "$node_(#) setdest XQ YQ Snew "  
$ns_ at TR "$node_(#) setdest XR YR Snew "  
$ns_ at TB "$node_(#) setdest XB YB Snew "  
  
The four (fractal) movements should proceed sequentially, 
each having a starting time after the previous movement ends. 
To calculate the precise time of each move and the new speed 
we need to determine the new speed and the new starting time 
for each of the four new setdest commands. First, we need to 
calculate the time the node would take to travel from A to B 
at speed S along the original straight line path AB: 
 
             tAB = sqrt((XB – XA)2+(YB-YA)2)/S                  (6) 
 
then the start times for each move are calculated as: 
 
TP = T 
TQ = TP + tAB/4 
TR = TQ + tAB/4 
TB = TR + tAB/4                                      (7) 
and the new speed, due to the distance travelled increased by 
1/3, is: 
 
                          Snew = 4 * S / 3                                  (8) 
 
(Obviously, when the intermediate point Q would fall 
outside the predefined simulation region then the 
corresponding segment of the fractal path cannot be 
generated, as shown on Figures 5 and 6.) 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Trace of sample simple node movement. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Fractal movement generated from Figure 5. 
 
For example, consider the following movement statement 
taken from a movement file generated by the setdest utility:  
 
$ns_ at 0.400000 "$node_(0) setdest 100.00000000 
400.0000000 1000.02523710421"  
 
This line specifies that at time 0.40000s, node0 starts to 
move from the starting point (100,100) towards the 
destination (100,400) at a speed of 1000m/s (this can be one 
single random movement in a straight line). This single 
command in the movement file is then replaced by four new 
commands generating the movement along the path 
corresponding to the shape of the Koch fractal (one iteration 
of the Koch fractal generation algorithm). The four 
movements are listed below. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

$ns_ at 0.40000000 "$node_(0) setdest 100.00000 
200.00000 1333.366982805613"  
 
$ns_ at 0.474998107265 "$node_(0) setdest 
13.3974596215 250.0000 1333.36698280"  
 
$ns_ at 0.549996214530 "$node_(0) setdest 100.00000 
300.00000 1333.366982805613"  
 
$ns_ at 0.624994321795 "$node_(0) setdest 100.00000 
400.00000 1333.366982805613"  
V. 
EVALUATION OF MANET PERFORMANCE UNDER 
FRACTAL MOVEMENT 
We evaluated the performance of a sample MANET 
under different motion generation conditions. A MANET 
with the number of nodes ranging from 5 to 80 was simulated 
over the area of 800 by 800 meters with two fixed 
communicating stations at (100,500) and (700, 500). 
Constant Bit Rate (CBR) traffic was generated over the User 
Datagram Protocol (UDP) and routed with Ad hoc On-
Demand Distance Vector (AODV) (Table I). 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Parameters 
Simulator 
NS-2.33 
Channel Type 
Channel / Wireless Channel 
Network Interface Type 
Phy/WirelessPhy 
Mac Type 
Mac/802.11 
Radio-Propagation Type 
Propagation/Two-ray ground 
Interface Queue Type 
Queue/Drop Tail 
Link Layer Type 
LL 
Antenna 
Antenna/Omni Antenna 
Maximum Packet in ifq 
50 
Area (n * n) 
800 x 800 
Source Type 
(UDP) CBR 
Simulation Time 
100s 
Routing Protocol 
AODV 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Trace of complex random movement. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Fractal movement generated from Figure 7. 
 
Standard RWP movement was generated with setdest and 
then the standard movement was converted to the fractal 
movement using one step of Koch generating algorithm, as 
shown in Figures 7 and 8. Two scenarios were investigated: 
(i) low speed (10m/s), and (ii) high speed (30m/s). 
Figure 9 illustrates the difference in the number of packets 
received at the destination when using the original movement 
and the new fractal movement at low speed. It shows that 
most of the time the packet delivery for the fractal movement 
is higher than the original linear movement. Although the 
speed of the fractal path is higher than the original (because 
of the increased path length along the fractal curve between 
the original waypoints), we observed a higher number of 
packets delivered at the destination for the fractal movement 
at speed of 13m/s. However, applying the t-test for the 
comparison of two paired means representing the packets 
received in the linear motion and the fractal motion 
experiments with 25 nodes gives 8%, which indicates that the 
observed difference is not statistically significant. Also, 
comparing the average packet delivery across all node 
densities does not show a significant difference (t-test value 
49%). 
 
 
Figure 9. Throughput comparison at low speed 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

 
Figure 10. Throughput comparison at high speed. 
 
Figure 10 shows the packet delivery for linear and fractal 
motions at high speed. This time we observe a lower packet 
delivery for fractal motion recorded in most of the 
experiments. One possible explanation of lower performance 
with fractal motion is that the increase in movement speed of 
10m/s, from 30 to 40, results in more frequent link 
disconnections and consequently lower packet delivery. 
Applying the t-test for the comparison of two paired means 
representing the packets received in the linear motion and the 
fractal motion experiments with 25 nodes gives 32%, which 
indicates that the observed difference is not statistically 
significant. Also, comparing the average packet delivery 
across all node densities does not show a significant 
difference (t-test value 60%). 
Figure 11 illustrates the advantage of using lower speed 
in a network with linear motion. It shows that the packet 
delivery is consistently higher at low speed for almost all 
node densities. Applying the t-test for the comparison of two 
means representing the packets received in the linear motion 
and the fractal motion experiments with 20 nodes gives 4%, 
which indicates that the observed difference is statistically 
significant. The average packet delivery for all node densities 
is 3176 at high speed and 3497 at low speed,  
 
 Figure 11. Throughput comparison for linear motion 
 
Figure 12. Throughput comparison for fractal motion. 
 
and this difference in performance is statistically significant 
(t-test value 0.076%). 
Figure 12 illustrates the advantage of using lower speed 
in a network with the fractal motion. The packet delivery is 
consistently higher at low speed for all node densities. 
Applying the t-test for the comparison of two means 
representing the packets received in the linear motion and the 
fractal motion experiments with 20 nodes gives 1%, which 
indicates that the observed difference is statistically 
significant. The average packet delivery for all node densities 
is 3186 at high speed and 3553 at low speed, and this 
difference in performance is statistically significant (t-test 
value 1.7%). 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we presented a tool for transforming linear 
movements into fractal movements based on the Koch curve. 
The new tool reads a standard ns2 movement file, decodes 
each movement, and replaces it with a series of new 
movements forming a fractal curve, and then outputs a new 
movement file. The newly generated movement file satisfies 
the ns2 specifications and can be used in the ns2 simulator. 
Both standard movement files generated with setdest and new 
movement files generated with the new fractal tool were used 
in simulating a MANET with varying number of nodes (i.e. 
with different node densities). We compared the MANET 
performance in terms of packet delivery under two different 
motion scenarios and at different speeds. We observed 
marginally higher performance of MANET with fractal 
motion at low movement speeds. However, the statistical 
tests show that the difference observed in our limited 
experiments is not significant. We observed that the packet 
delivery is lower at higher speeds for both motion types, and 
after the application of the t-test for the difference of the 
means, we concluded that the observed lower packet delivery 
at higher speed is statistically significant.  
From our results, we conclude that only the node speed 
significantly affects the MANET performance, and not the 
shape of the path taken by a node. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

The work presented in this paper demonstrated a new 
experimental approach for investigating performance of 
mobile networks: applying transformations to the node 
movement paths. The future work on transforming the node 
movement paths will include using more than on iteration of 
the generating function of the Koch fractal, calibrating the 
node speed when it starts moving on the new curved path and 
testing if the new path generators reduce the tendency 
observed in the RWP model of clustering the nodes towards 
the center of the experimental area. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is sponsored and funded by the Ministry of 
Higher Education of Saudi Arabia through the Saudi Arabian 
Cultural Bureau in Canada. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Basagni, M. Conti, S. Giordano, and  I. Stojmenovic (Eds.), 
Mobile Ad Hoc Networking, New York, Wiley-IEEE Press, 
2001. 
[2] F. Bei and A. Helmy, A survey of mobility models in wireless Ad 
hoc Networks, University of California, USA, 2004. 
[3] H. Ekram and T. Issariyakul, Introduction to Network Simulator 
NS2, Springer, 2009. 
[4] N. Aschenbruck, E. G. Padilla, and P. Martini, "A survey on 
mobility models for performance analysis in tactical mobile 
networks", Journal of Telecommunications and Information 
Technology, vol. 2, 2008, pp. 54-61. 
[5] T. Camp, J. Boleng, and V. Davies, "A Survey of Mobility 
Models 
for 
Ad 
Hoc 
Network 
Research", 
Wireless 
Communication and Mobile Computing (WCMC): Special issue 
on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking: Research, Trends and 
Applications , vol. 2, no. 5, 2002, pp. 483-502. 
[6] J. Broch, D. A. Maltz, D. B. Johnson, Y.-C. Hu, and J. Jetcheva, 
"A performance comparison of multi-hop wireless ad hoc 
network routing protocols", Proceedings of the Fourth Annual 
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Mobile Computing and 
Networking (Mobicom98), ACM, October 1998, pp. 85-97. 
[7] E. M. Royer, P. M. Melliar-Smith, and L. E. Moser, "An Analysis 
of the Optimum Node Density for Ad hoc Mobile Networks", 
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on 
Communications(ICC), Helsinki, Finland, June 2001, pp. 857-
861. 
[8] C. Bettstetter, "Mobility Modeling in Wireless Networks: 
Categorization, Smooth Movement, and Border Effects", ACM 
Mobile Computing and Communications Review, vol. 5, no. 3, 
July 2001, pp. 55-67. 
[9] R. Alghamdi, Movement Generator for Mobile Network 
Simulation. Master’s Report, Faculty of Computer Science, 
University of New Brunswick, Fredericton, Canada, 2012. 
[10] G. Edgar, Measure, Topology, and Fractal Geometry, 2nd Ed., 
Springer 2008 
[11] Koch’s Snowflake, online, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki 
/Koch_snowflake, retrieved: May 2015. 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

