The Use of E-Portfolio to Develop Student’s Self-reflection in Pre-school 
The case of a Private Saida (Lebanon) High School 
Rouaa Chahine and Hassan M. Khachfe 
School of Education, and Business, Educational, and Medical Optimization Research Institute (BE-MORE) 
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
E-mail: 31730701@students.liu.edu.lb; hassan.khachfe@liu.edu.lb 
Abstract—This study presents electronic portfolio (E-portfolio) 
as a tool for reflection, and appraises in great depth its impact 
on students’ metacognition. The suggested simulation was 
empirically examined by investigating the nature, and 
composition of its framework using descriptive evidence from 
24 participants of students in pre-school along with their 
parents and 36 preschool teachers, 4 admission people and 1 
learning support assistant. Findings revealed students who 
used E-portfolio as tool of reflection had experienced a deeper 
understanding in learning by the action of realizing the point 
of strength and areas of improvement that played a role in 
student’s intrinsic motivation. They also showed that digital 
reflection is more effective in simple decision-making skills 
than traditional methods.  
Keywords- E-portfolio; interactive learning environment; 
self- reflection. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
As we are moving in time, developing teaching methods, 
strategies and tools have become a must. An Electronic 
portfolio (E-portfolio), perhaps one of the latest trends in 
education, is becoming essential for both teachers and 
students, since it carries within its pages a preview of the 
student’s or teacher’s challenges, strengths, and areas of 
improvement, and foremost, it is considered a main tool for 
reflection. For this, including E-portfolios in schools, as a 
tool for reflection became something that Houssam Edeen 
Hariri High School (HHHS) is seeking to have to accomplish 
their vision, mission and goals.  
In an overview of the school, HHHS is a private school 
that follows a holistic learning program, and places 
significant efforts in recruiting highly qualified teaching 
staff. It has been accredited as a Primary Years Program 
(PYP) in Saida, Lebanon. Since the topic of E-portfolio for 
students at schools is still gaining momentum and in the 
process of development in Lebanese schools, there is a need 
to investigate more about the relation between E-portfolio 
and self-reflection to find its efficacy. This study aims to 
analyze the impact of the use of E- Portfolio to develop 
student’s self-reflection in early years in the above-
mentioned school on the process of changes from traditional 
to E-portfolio.  The rest of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II presents a review of related literature about self-
reflection and E-portfolio in schools. Section III describes 
the methodology of the study. Section IV provides the results 
of the study, and the analyses of the results. Section V 
proposes recommendations based on the findings of the 
study. The acknowledgement and conclusions close the 
article. 
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
A review of self-reflection in the light of technology will 
be presented, and the following will be included: (1) 
definition of technology, portfolio as a mean of self-
reflection and E-portfolio, (2) process of change into 
technology, (3) Theory of Connectivism, (4) summary.  
There are many types as of portfolios: Showcase, 
cumulative, 
goal 
based, 
process, 
active, 
evaluation, 
electronic, and mini portfolios.  Many facilitators find the 
portfolio an accurate tool for assessing students especially 
those with disabilities since it shows the learning progress 
for each student. Portfolios also give students the opportunity 
to watch their progress and reflect on it, for example a 
learner would write “in this page you can find my areas of 
strength or the areas I need to improve.” This involves 
learners in the process of evaluating their progress [1].  
Other researchers suggested that traditional portfolios are 
not reflective of disabilities, and E-portfolios are way easier 
for all types of students equally [2]. E-portfolios allow the 
process of self-reflection to be more efficient. Using 
animations in E-portfolios has a significant effect in the 
process of self-reflection. Use of animations together with 
assessment methods and techniques will result in having the 
students actively participating in the process evaluation [3]. 
Also, it engages students and motivates them to use online 
communication tools [4]. Providing game-based learning 
engages the learners in an interactive-authentic problem-
solving situation that provides enjoyable and motivating 
learning experiences [5].  
Connectivism mentions learning as the ability to 
construct networks among education [6]. It is focused on 
connecting with people in a network in order to share 
experiences and specialized knowledge [6]. To support this 
process, current education has the goal of combining two 
effective tools that are meant by this change. The first tool is 
using Web 3.0 technologies for the learning platform in order 
to create user-centered learning and people [1]. The second 
tool is using well-defined website that is concerned in 
education objectives and outcomes between materials [8]. 
When using both tools, Connectivists will deliver 
communication networks consisting of experts for direct help 
and communication among learners.  
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-740-5
EMERGING 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

The challenge of such an approach is revealed by the 
evaluation of the effectiveness of this tool in the light of 
change [8]. 
In summary, considering the elements for change, the 
future effective goals, and the learners in the educational 
institution who need this reflection, the school will be able to 
achieve the expected success. Thus, checking the current 
situation for the school and checking on students’, teachers’ 
and parents’ needs and capacities will help on knowing how 
to move accordingly in less time that results in efficient 
change. 
III.
METHODOLOGY
The methodology is utilized to check the effectiveness of E-
portfolios as intervention or enhancement instrument in pre 
classes at private school at KG2 classroom in Lebanon. 
A.
Research Design  
The study applied an experimental design. Reference [9], 
“in an experiment the investigator controls the application of 
the treatment”. The experimental strategy permitted 
examination of the effectiveness and impact of using E-
portfolio to enhance the students’ self-reflection skills 
knowing that self-reflection is an important key concept 
according to the PYP and in the enhanced PYP self-
reflection must be integrated into all units of inquiry. The 
dependent variable in this study is: Utilizing E-portfolio as 
an intervention to prove students’ self reflection at pre-
school and develop reflection skills at this age. However, the 
independent variables are: education goal, social learning 
and environment, students' perception toward instruction, 
and evaluation. In this design, triangulation method offers 
the integration matter [8]. A descriptive quantitative research 
design was used.  
B.
Sample Size and Population 
The target population of the current study contained 
students at pre-school, in a private school in KG2C (3-4 
years old) from HHHS. One hundred fifteen participants 
were involved in the study (twenty four students, forty eight 
parents, forty one teachers, one learning support assistants 
and two school principals). 
The selected sample of study followed the stratified 
random sampling technique. Stratified random sampling is 
suitable methodology in order to make balanced, meaningful, 
comparisons between sub-groups in the population [10]. 
C.
Data Collection Tools 
In this study, the researcher prepared questionnaire to be 
filled by students, principals, teachers and parents 
investigating their perceptions. The researcher used 
questionnaire for teachers examining effectiveness of using 
E-portfolio as a teaching method in KG2 based and taken 
from the International Journal of E-portfolio. The 
questionnaire is divided into two sections. The first section 
consists of 8 questions about the impact of digital portfolio 
on teachers, spread among 5 action scale with numerical 
value for each answer as 1= Developing, 2= Basic, 3= 
Satisfactory, 4= Efficient, and 5= Proficient. The second 
section consists of 6 questions that form a reflection for 
teachers about the impact of E-portfolio on the process of 
teaching and learning, the teachers and learning support 
assistant are asked to choose between yes and no. This 
questionnaire helped in targeting the main points that the 
researcher has to focus on and made data collection process 
go smoother.  
Unlike 
teachers and 
learning 
support assistants’ 
questionnaire, the students’ questionnaire is made up of scale 
divided into 4 levels by which students will reflect on their 
journey of using E-portfolio derived from Marzano Scale on 
Teachers Pay Teachers website. This questionnaire was 
based on visuals which made learners engaged in the self-
assessment process. 
As for parents, they are asked to fill a questionnaire that 
the school always asks them to fill after each student led-
conference.  
All statistical analyses were carried out using the 
Microsoft Excel. The analyses that were examined in the 
study included: (1) Frequency Analysis to analyze the 
number of participants; (2) Descriptive Analysis to analyze 
the perceptions of participants towards the use of E-
portfolios 
and 
its 
effects 
on 
self-reflection 
and 
metacognition. 
The questionnaires selected were depending on how 
much each question is relevant to the case study itself and 
how much it reflects each teacher’s, parents’ and student’s 
concerns when thinking about technology and E-portfolio. 
IV.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
This section introduces data analysis. It analyzes 
teachers' questionnaires 
that 
show 
their perceptions 
regarding the impact of digital portfolios on their teachings 
and on students as well. Moreover, it analyzes parents' 
questionnaires concerning their children learning, and it 
analyzes students' questionnaires to assess their perceived 
self-reflection. Afterward, the research questions and 
hypotheses are shown to correlate with the effectiveness of 
the E-portfolio in enhancing students' reflection skills. 
Finally, correlations between results and two UN Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs): Goal 4 (Quality Education) and 
Goal 13 (Climate Action) are discussed [11]. 
A.
Results of Teachers' Questionnaires 
When teachers developed their own digital portfolios, 
they learned more about efficiently using technology, 
rethought of their existing teaching practices, and enhanced 
their lesson planning. In addition, teachers gained the ability 
to teach their students how to create a digital portfolio. The 
use of technology by students was a new interesting 
experience for them. This result demonstrates a shift in 
pedagogical practice through incorporating technology to a 
higher degree and enhancing teachers’ practices in having 
more timely communications with their students. The 
creation of digital portfolios engaged both teachers and 
students in a give-and-take process of learning. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-740-5
EMERGING 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

These results significantly indicate that teachers were 
able to express the efficient and motivational use of digital 
portfolios on students learning, academic standards, self-
assessment, and reflection skills. Also, our findings 
demonstrate that the development of digital portfolios by 
teachers positively impacted their students’ way and amount 
of learning as well as their relation with them. 
The relation between students and teachers is very 
critical since it is part of the reflection process that teachers 
use in order to guide curriculum and to assess individual and 
group understanding of concepts.  
TABLE II. 
RESULTS OF PARENTS’ QUESTIONNAIRE
Questions 
Yes 
No 
Frequency 
% 
Frequency 
% 
Did using a digital 
portfolio with your 
son/daughter reflect 
more knowledge on 
their taught materials? 
38 
79.2% 
10 
20.8% 
Did using a digital 
portfolio reflect how 
much your students 
learned? 
40 
83.3% 
8 
16.4% 
Do you think your 
son/daughter learned 
academic content 
standards differently 
through reflecting 
while using digital 
portfolios? 
38 
79.2% 
10 
20.8% 
Was using digital 
portfolios with your 
son/daughter 
important? 
41 
85.4% 
7 
14.6% 
Upon comparing parents’ answers to teachers’ answers 
of the same set of questions, it can be noticed that their 
answers were approximately matching. Hence, these results 
validated how the use of technology in digital portfolio made 
parent engagement efforts even more effective.  
Digital portfolios have been shown to push updates to 
parents rather than expecting them to check, and they were 
also proven to connect parents with what is actually 
happening in the classroom. This clearly emphasizes the 
positive impact of using a digital portfolio with their children 
on reflecting knowledge and learning.  
B.
Results of Students’ Questionnaire 
This is critical as self-reﬂection process does not only 
encourage students to think about their own thinking but also 
help them in developing their ability to know how to think. 
Portfolios give a mean for the students to monitor their 
achievements and in turn they become confident and 
motivated to take risks in the future [12]. Hence, there is a 
statistically significant relation for E-portfolio on the process 
of teaching and learning among preschoolers. Also, E-
portfolio correlates with students’ self-reflection skills like 
metacognition. 
TABLE III. 
RESULTS OF STUDENTS’ QUESTIONNAIRE
Self- reflection 
Frequency 
% 
I know what I am good at 
very well. I feel like I 
could talk about it for 
someone else.
1
4.2% 
I know my strength points 
pretty well. I remember 
every situation right after 
the question.
12
50% 
I feel like I am still 
discovering what I am 
good at. I still have some 
questions and am unsure 
sometimes.
8
33.3% 
I need to do Lots of tasks 
to know what do I know 
and what I don’t. I am not 
sure what to do most of 
the time. 
3
12.5% 
TABLE I. 
RESULTS OF TEACHERS’ QUESTIONNAIRE
Criteria 
Scale 
1
2
3
4
5
Knowledge about digital 
portfolios 
0% 
4.9% 
58.5%
24.4%
12.2%
Ability to create and use a 
digital portfolio 
26.8%
24.4%
48.8%
0% 
0% 
Ability to teach your students 
how to create a digital 
portfolio 
12.2%
63.4%
22% 
2.4% 
0% 
Ability to use and integrate 
technology 
0 
24.4%
36.6%
36.6%
2.4% 
Attitude towards using 
technology in the classroom 
0 
12.2%
12.2%
73.2%
2.4% 
Collaboration with other 
teachers in or outside your 
school in the use of 
educational technology 
0 
0 
0 
0 
100% 
Ability to coach/ support 
colleagues in the use of 
educational technology 
0 
12.2%
36.6%
48.8%
2.4% 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-740-5
EMERGING 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

C.
Discussion and Interpretation 
Most parents referred to E-portfolios as means of 
communication with their children in a way that connects 
home and school more deeply. Parents’ perceptions were 
divided; many parents found using E-portfolio is essential 
especially that they found how their children were leading in 
the student led conference and talking about each and every 
single activity independently. On the other hand, some 
parents argued the idea of having their children learning 
through technology with mentioning that it would be harmful 
of learners at that age. Throughout the survey, most parents 
reported many benefits of E-portfolios and the strongest 
benefits included being able to document progress and the 
promising digital aspect of portfolios in a reflective manner. 
Most parents also indicated that E-portfolios provided a 
glimpse into their child’s classroom, and they enjoyed the 
digital features of being able to hear and/or see as part of 
their perception toward E-portfolios implementation in the 
class. 
 As for teachers, their perceptions differed as the 
researcher is conducting the study; before starting to use the 
E-portfolio many teachers’ responses were negative and they 
mentioned that it wouldn’t affect the learning process for 
each learner then after applying E-portfolio they found how 
interactive, reflective and independent the students were and 
they found out how using E-portfolio reduces time teachers 
need to prepare and finish students’ portfolios so they were 
motivated to start applying E-portfolios in their classrooms 
with their students. Foremost, many teachers realized that 
learners are capable to do self-reflection at that age which 
made them motivated to start the procedure with their 
learners. 
Data collected from the teachers’ questionnaire showed 
that teachers clearly expressed subjective satisfaction from 
E-portfolios. A critical theme from teachers was conducting 
an authentic E-portfolio learning process using “real-life 
application of their learning” and “watching children take 
their work seriously”. As mentioned earlier, the collected 
data further show that E-portfolios impacted the teaching 
methods of the involved teachers. One important thing was 
that the teachers were able to have more insights toward each 
child through their selection of artifacts and their reflections 
on their work. Finally, through E-portfolios, teachers were 
able to have a strong view of children as capable learners 
whereby they described students as protagonists who have 
high engagement, reflection and ownership. Obviously, 
teachers viewed the creation and use of E-portfolios as 
positive teaching tools for their students and themselves. 
Learners were extremely excited; they asked about every 
single detail concerning their E-portfolio and they were 
responsible to show the best image about each learner’s 
profile in his/her E-portfolio. Implementing E-portfolio for 
students was a privilege that motivated the students in the 
process of learning and teaching.  In addition, students 
showed a deeper thinking concerning the provided content 
and themselves as learners. In particular, this finding is 
helpful because most empirical studies are limited to students 
at elementary schools rather than preschoolers. 
Overall, students, teachers and parents expressed 
subjective satisfaction to the use of E-portfolios. Hence, most 
parents, teachers, and students found E-portfolios effective 
for reflection.  
These results allowed the researcher to accept the 
following hypothesis: 

HA1: There is a statistically significant relation for 
E-portfolio on the process of teaching and learning 
among preschoolers. 

HA2: E-portfolio correlate with students’ self-
reflection skills like metacognition. 

Parents, teachers, and students find E-portfolio 
effective for reflection. 
Correlation between Results and the UN Sustainable 
Development 
Goals 
(SDGs), 
The 
UN 
Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) are considered as blueprints that 
lead to better achievements and more sustainable future for 
everyone.  
Two major SDGs that could be related to the current 
study are goals 4 and 13 as discussed below: 

Goal 4 "Quality Education" [11]: Our findings reveal 
that children at HHHS are receiving a well-qualified 
care and pre-primary education that develops their 
deep understanding about subject. Moreover, they 
learn how to reflect upon their learning experiences 
and progress which increases their self-confidence, 
responsibility and metacognition.  

Goal 13 "Climate Action" [11]: Since every single 
and even the smallest action can make a difference 
and lead to a change, we decided to undertake a 
correlation between the creation and use of digital 
portfolios and this SDG. Using digital portfolios will 
reduce the use of papers, and thus their production 
and their unfavorable effects on the environment. 
V.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The major focus of this study is to enhance the learning 
process in a digital context that requires new tools and 
methods, and E-portfolio is one of them. The current study 
discussed the potentials and merits of using digital portfolios. 
It is concluded that digital portfolios act as potent tools for 
assessing students’ work and progression, structuring 
learning and teaching processes, enhancing communication 
and collaboration, sharing experiences and resources, and 
finally for supporting the self-reflection and metacognition 
of students. Moreover, the use of E-portfolios led to an 
enhanced quality of teaching, played a key role toward a 
sustainable development, reduced the use of papers, their 
production and their unfavorable effects on the environment, 
which correlates with the sustainable development goal that 
combats climate change and its impacts. Moreover, the use 
of digital portfolios helps in overcoming the technical 
problems associated with storing and accessing information 
while creating hardcopy portfolios. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-740-5
EMERGING 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

A.
Recommendations 
Based on the review of the literature and the obtained 
findings of the current study, the accompanying pedagogical 
recommendations on some critical issues are suggested for 
future studies in order to bridge the existing research gaps:. 
a) More training and integration of activities regarding 
structural reflection, social interaction, and self-awareness 
could be involved in E-learning materials in order to 
increase students’ performance in self-monitor, self-
modification, and self-evaluation. 
b) Urge 
teachers 
to 
begin 
with 
introducing 
metacognitive strategies into the classroom . 
c) Embed E-portfolios as "long-term professional 
development tools" for both inservice and preservice 
teachers are recommended.  
d) Both private and public education departments 
should ensure the implementation of these tools within the 
teaching and learning processes. 
e) Increase the time apportioned in class for the use if 
E-portfolios and some sort of re-organization could be done 
to enable this new teaching method to take up enough time 
in the class  
f) Future research should examine and assess the 
differences between male and female students toward self-
reflection and metacognition. 
g) Articulate the concept of self-reflection and 
metacognition and encourage them among our students via 
E-portfolios. Ongoing efforts must ensure a sustainable 
dedication to effectively integrate E-portfolios to enhance 
student learning.  
B.
Limitations 
This study suffers from some limitations. First, the 
sample was limited to only one school (115 participants: 24 
students, 48 parents, 41 teachers, 1 learning support 
assistants, and 2 school principals). Thus, different results 
might be obtained if more teachers from different grade 
levels, schools, and areas were involved and studied. 
Secondly, our data is represented in the form of quantitative 
measures and relies only on descriptive statistics, which 
cannot confirm any statistical significance between data. In 
addition, the study sets self-report data, which is a type of 
data that in spite of speaking to the teachers’ and parents’ 
perceptions as participants, there was a limitation regarding 
the reliability of the collected data. It is also essential to 
report that the participants’ perceptions may be subjected to 
internal bias due to several factors. However, obtaining 
similar findings from teachers, parents and students 
minimizes the possibility of having unreliable data.  
C.
Implications  for Further Study in Lebanon 
There is an absence of similar studies in Lebanon and a 
deficiency in other Arab countries, which have close 
pedagogical environment. It was also noted that the 
implementation of E-portfolios was more concentrated in 
universities more than schools. However, there is a 
possibility of inequitable comparison due to differences in 
the studied students’ educational stages (preschoolers, 
primary education, secondary education, undergraduate, 
graduate), and the degree of pedagogical improvement 
between the other environments and cultures (USA, 
Malaysia, Taiwan, China, UK, and Turkey). These 
discrepancies would be better addressed in future research.  
REFERENCES
[1]
Barrett, H. “Authentic assessment with electronic portfolios 
using 
common 
software 
and 
Web 
2.0 
tools.” 
www.electronicportfolios.org/web20.html, 2012 
[2]
Driessen, EW., Overeem K., van Tartwijk J., van der Vleuten 
C.P., and Muijtjens A.M. “Validity of portfolio assessment: 
which qualities determine ratings?” Journal of Medical 
Education. vol. 40 no.9, pp. 862-6, 2006.  
[3]
Lewis, M. A., and Maylor, H. R., “Game playing and 
operations management education.” International Journal of 
Production Economics, vol. 105, pp. 134–149, 2007 
[4]
Barbera, E. “Mutual feedback in e-portfolio assessment: An 
approach to the netfolio system.” British Journal of 
Educational Technology, vol. 40, no.2, pp. 342–357, 2009. 
DOI:10.1111/j.1467-8535.2007.00803.x  
[5]
Barzilai, S. and Blau, I., “Scaffolding game-based learning: Impact on 
learning achievements, perceived learning, and game experiences”, 
Vol. 70, January 2014, pp. 65-79, 2014. 
[6]
Downes, S.,“Resources for distance education worldwide.” 
International Review of Research in Open and Distance 
Learning, 2007.  
[7]
Nicolay 
et 
al., 
“International 
Journal 
of 
Industrial 
Ergonomics, vol. 35, nb. 7, pp. 605-618,  2015 
[8]
Fetters, M. D., Curry, L. A., and Creswell, J. W., “Achieving 
integration 
in 
mixed 
methods 
designs-principles 
and 
practices.” Health Services Research, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 2134-
2156, 2015.  doi:10.1111/1475-6773.12117
[9]
Mosteller, F., and Youtz, C. “Quantifying Probabilistic 
Expressions”, Rejoinder. Statist. Sci. 5 (1990), no. 1, 32--34. 
doi:10.1214/ss/1177012251. 
[10] Gay, L.R., “Educational Research: Competencies for Analysis 
and Application. Columbus”, OH: Merrill Publishing 
Company, 1987. 
[11] Morton, S., Pencheon, D., and Squires, N. “Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), and their implementation: A 
national global framework for health, development and equity 
needs a systems approach at every level.” British Medical 
Bulletin, vol. 124, no. 1, pp. 81-90, 2017. 
[12] Bransford, J., Brown, A., and Cocking, R. “How People 
Learn: Brain, Mind, and Experience & School.” Washington, 
DC: National Academy Press, 2000. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-740-5
EMERGING 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

