The Efficacy of Using GeoGebra in Teaching Eighth Grade Mathematics
The Case of Two Nabatieh Area (Lebanon) Schools
Hasan Rizk and Hassan M. Khachfe
School of Education
Business, Educational, & Management Optimization Research Institute (BE-MORE)
Lebanese International University
Nabatieh, Lebanon
Email: hassarizk@yahoo.com, hassan.khachfe@liu.edu.lb
Abstract—The objective of this study is to investigate the effect
of the use of the GeoGebra program and the educational aids
on the achievement of both types of direct and deferred
learning in mathematics in the parallelogram and circle unit
for the eighth grade students. The study also compared the
results of the students who studied the parallelogram and
circle units of the eighth grade in the traditional method and
those who studied using the GeoGebra program and teaching
aids, in order to find out if there are statistically significant
differences in favor of the use of the GeoGebra program in
teaching. The study showed that the use of GeoGebra has led
to an increase in the level of students' achievement in
mathematics, in light of the studies that confirm the low level
of achievement in the subject of geometry, especially the
parallelogram and the circle units when taught in traditional
methods. The study also showed that the use of specialized
software contributes to the consolidation of concepts, facts and
generalizations in the long-term memory of the learner.
Keywords-GeoGebra; efficacy; mathematics; Lebanon.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The educational process aims to educate the members of
society according to its values, principles and philosophy.
The process of education is essentially a process of
communication, whose components are the sender or
teacher, the receiver or the student, the message or the
mathematical content, the means or the tool or variables
used to convey the message to the learners, and finally, the
feedback or action that the learner produces to reflect his/her
acceptance and understanding of the message [1].
Mathematics is one of the most difficult subjects learned
by students, because of its abstract nature. At the same time,
mathematics is becoming increasingly important as it is the
language of science. In order for a greater proportion of
learners to understand different mathematics subjects and
acquire
mathematical
skills,
reducing
their
level
of
abstraction makes them attractive and understandable.
Educational tools, in their different and varied forms, offer
mankind this great service that makes mathematics more
realistic and close to everyday life [2].
Most students believe that mathematics is not important
in their lives, and this led to the formation of negative
tendencies towards the study of the subject, in addition to
the lack of teachers' use of teaching aids in teaching
mathematical concepts [3]. Students at a global level suffer
from difficulties in learning abstract concepts. The most
important of these is the emphasis on descriptive aspects
and formal proof without attention to new mathematical
processes such as geometrical sense and the use of
technology in teaching geometry [4].
The middle schools in Nabatiyeh governorate lack the
use
of
technology-based
teaching
aids
and
computer
software in teaching mathematics, especially geometry
topics. Mathematics concepts, in general, and in the
mathematics of the eighth grade – specifically the units of
the parallelogram and the circle – in particular, are showing
more confusion, because of the emphasis on the abstract
side of teaching, without trying to engage educational tools
and
computer
software
to
simplify
the
students'
understanding of these concepts and instill them in their
minds. Such obstacles can only be overcome through
educational
means and
appropriate computer
software
designed to achieve the objectives of education.
Based on the recommendations of educational studies
related to this subject, and due to the lack of studies and
research on the use of GeoGebra and teaching aids in the
teaching
of
mathematics
in
grade
eight,
the
study
investigated the effectiveness of such a teaching aid on the
direct and deferred achievement of students in mathematics,
probed by a specific student sample and specific topics: the
parallelogram unit and the circle unit.
This paper is organized into four sections as follows:
Section 2 contains the literature review of the study. Section
3 investigates the methodology of the study. Section 4
discusses the findings and analyzes the data. We conclude
the paper in Section 5.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
The call for the use of teaching aids in education began
long time ago, and this is manifested through the role of
educators in advocating the use of educational means. Plato
considers that the role of the teacher is not based on the
imposition of science on students through external pressure,
but rather directing the latter with the discussion and the
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-680-4
EMERGING 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

questions he mentions. The Platonian educational system has
a significant educational status and emphasizes that its use in
the educational process achieves the educational goals
envisaged. Roso has demanded that the child's access to
reasonable things be via the means of concrete things, which
is known as experiential learning [3].
A.
Reasons for low student achievement in mathematics
Sbeitan reported that the world-renowned educational
scientist Kline highlighted in his famous book (Why Johnny
Cannot Add) his criticism of the traditional curriculum in
mathematics and the drawbacks that lead to low achievement
of students in mathematics. The most important points are
[5]:

Focusing on automation training and memorization,
since the goal of the traditional curriculum was to teach
arithmetic skills and the memorization of rules and theories
and providing them through training and repetition without
focusing on understanding and application.

The emergence of concepts, facts and processes
separate from each other.

Lack of consideration of accuracy and clarity of
expression, and lack of mathematical precision to be
provided in curricula and textbooks.

Inclusion of traditional curricula and books of some
useless topics that had lost its importance and value.

Avoidance of curricula, books and traditional books
of mentioning the mathematical proof except in geometry.

Lack of curriculum and textbooks to the element of
motivation and suspense.

Lack of books and curricula to keep abreast of
modern developments that meet the requirements of the
times and the needs of individuals and society.

The use of old methods that proved ineffective in the
teaching
of
mathematics,
and
the
reluctance
to
use
alternative methods.

Poor professional preparation of the teacher, so the
weakness of the teacher professionally is reflected on the low
level and achievement of the students in mathematics.
B.
Features and characteristics of the GeoGebra software
GeoGebra [6] is a program based on the scientific
standards of mathematics and the curricula adopted by most
Ministries of Education around the world, not a substitute for
them. Markus Hohenwarter developed the program along
with an international team of programmers (University of
Florida, Atlantic). It is designed in a way that enables the
student to develop a deep understanding of mathematical
theories and realities through practical application, and the
discovery of concepts himself. It is a collection of tools that
contribute to the achievement of the student's mathematical
skills, and includes all the aids necessary to make the
learning process easy and interesting, as the student builds on
his previous learning [7][8].
The themes common to GeoGebra and the Lebanese
curriculum are:
1-
Plane and space Geometry plan
2-
Statistics
3-
Algebra
4-
Coordinate systems
5-
Lines in the coordinate plane
6-
Functions
7-
Polynomials.
III.
METHODOLOGY
A.
Design of the study
The study is classified as descriptive quazi-analytical and
experimental approach. A commercially available statistical
package (SPSS, version 21 [9]) was used to analyze the data.
B.
Participants
The study sample consists of 34 students. The sample is
divided into two groups: the first group (A) consists of the
eighth grade students in one public school and the second
group (B) consists of the eighth grade students in another
public school, plus some 41 instructors of mathematics in the
schools of Nabatiyeh area. The researcher chose the sample
in a deliberate manner, so that the sample of the study is in
schools equipped with the means and tools necessary for the
study, such as educational tools, display screen and computer
laboratory that are well equipped and appropriate.
C.
Instrument
The researcher used the training material of the Circle
Unit and the Parallelogram Unit, the GeoGebra application, a
computer and a projector, tests of comprehension – both
direct and delayed – and a teachers’ survey.
D.
Experiments
The researcher used the training material of the Circle
Unit and the Parallelogram Unit, the GeoGebra application, a
computer and a projector, tests of comprehension – both
direct and delayed – and a teachers’ survey.
IV.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The current study aims to identify the effectiveness of the
use of the GeoGebra program in the direct and deferred
educational achievement of the eighth grade students in
Nabatieh Governorate, the extent of the use of the GeoGebra
program, and the compatibility of the curriculum and the
approved textbook with the use of the program and teaching
TABLE I. THE RESULTS OF THE DIRECT TEST ON
THE PARALLELOGRAM UNIT
Section (A) –
GeoGebra
Section (B) –
Traditional Method
Mean
Standard
Deviation
Mean
Standard
Deviation
12.88
3.71
10.00
3.98
aids.
To
achieve
this
goal,
the
researcher
prepared
educational tools and the use of the GeoGebra software,
where two groups of students were taught. The first one
studied the material using the GeoGebra program and the
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-680-4
EMERGING 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

second studied the same material in the traditional way. Then
the first group studied the rest of the experimental material
using the traditional method, and the second group studied
the same lesson using GeoGebra. Two tests (direct and
deferred) about the lessons that were explained to the
students were administered. After collecting the data and
processing it statistically using a commercially-available
program, the following results were drawn:
TABLE II. A COMPARISON BETWEEN THE DIFFERENT TEACHING
VARIABLES OF THE LESSON ON THE PARALLELOGRAM UNIT
Variable
Section (A) -
GeoGebra
Section (B) –
Traditional
Method
Nb of hours of
explanation
2
3
Nb of hours of
lesson preparation
3
1
% of students who
identified the lesson
properties during
explanation
73
<10
% of students who
passed the test of
learning outcomes
81.25
55
Drawing
competency
Weak
Good
Teaching method
Active and
stimulating, for the
student is a partner
in the teaching-
learning process
Slow and dull, for
the teacher is the
focus of the process,
rather than the
student
The results of the direct test of the two groups, after
explaining the parallelogram unit in Section (A) using the
GeoGebra and explaining the same lesson in Section (B)
using the traditional method, are shown in Table I.
Table II shows that the use of the GeoGebra program is
more activating and stimulating for the students than the
traditional method. This was demonstrated by the interaction
of the students with the teacher during the explanation. The
percentage of students who discovered the characteristics of
the lesson was 73% compared with less than 10 percent
when using the traditional method. Learning using the
GeoGebra program takes less time to communicate the
concept and objectives that the student is supposed to learn
than in the traditional way.
After the same direct evaluation of the two sections, the
success rate in Section A was 13 out of 16 (81.25 %),
compared with Section B (10 out of 18, or 55 %). This
shows that the result of the students' achievement in Section
(A), in which the lesson was explained by the use of the
GeoGebra program, is better than the result of the students'
achievement in Section B, in which the lesson was explained
using the traditional method.
TABLE III.
THE RESULTS OF THE DIRECT TEST
ON THE CIRCLE UNIT
Section (A) –
Traditional Method
Section (B) –
GeoGebra
Mean
Standard
Deviation
Mean
Standard
Deviation
9.66
4.11
11.74
3.52
In contrast, the amount of time it takes to prepare a lesson
with the use of the GeoGebra program is more than the
amount of time it takes to prepare the lesson without it. The
preparation of the lesson in Section (A) took three hours
versus one hour to prepare the lesson in Section B.
The observations during the experiment also revealed a
weakness in the skill of manual drawing of the students who
learned using the GeoGebra program (Section A), compared
with the students who learned without using the GeoGebra
program (Section B).
The results of the direct tests of the two sections, after
explaining the circle unit in Section (B) using GeoGebra, and
explain the same lesson in Section (A) in the traditional way,
are shown in Table III.
The results shown in Table IV prove that the use of the
GeoGebra program is more activating and stimulating for the
students than the traditional method. This was demonstrated
by the students' interaction with the teacher. The percentage
of students who discovered the characteristics of the lesson
was 65% (15 % when using the traditional method), as well
as learning using the program GeoGebra takes less time to
communicate the concept and objectives intended to provide
the student of education in the traditional way, where lesson
took one lesson with the use of the program GeoGebra
compared to two hours using the traditional method.
TABLE IV.
A COMPARISON BETWEEN THE DIFFERENT TEACHING
VARIABLES OF THE LESSON ON THE CIRCLE UNIT
Variable
Section (A) -
Traditional
Method
Section (B) –
GeoGebra
Nb of hours of
explanation
2
1
Nb of hours of
lesson preparation
1
2
% of students who
identified the lesson
properties during
explanation
15
65
% of students who
passed the test of
learning outcomes
56.25
72.22
Drawing
competency
Good
Weak
Teaching method
Slow and dull, for
the teacher is the
focus of the process,
rather than the
student
Active and
stimulating, for the
student is a partner
in the teaching-
learning process
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-680-4
EMERGING 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

After the same direct evaluation of the two sections, the
success rate in Section (A) was 9 out of 16 (56.25 %),
compared to Section (B) 13 out of 18 (72.22 %).
This shows that the result of the students' achievement in
Section (B) in which the lesson was explained by using the
GeoGebra program is better than that of the students in
Section A, in which the lesson was explained using the
traditional method.
In contrast, the amount of time it takes to prepare a lesson
with the use of the GeoGebra program is more than the
amount of time it takes to prepare the lesson without it. The
preparation of the lesson in Section A took one hour,
compared to two hours to prepare the lesson in Section B.
Two weeks after the completion of the either unit
explanation, another test was carried out to assess the level
of achievement of the two sections in order to compare the
results of this test with the results of the direct test conducted
immediately upon completion of the unit explanation. This is
to determine whether education using the GeoGebra program
has a positive effect on deferred comprehension. The
experiment clearly proved (data not shown) the marked
superiority of the marks obtained by the students who
studied the material using GeoGebra, over their peers who
studied the same material – either unit – by the traditional
method. The mean of deferred parallelogram test was 12.98,
even higher than the average of the direct test of 12.88. The
increase of 0.115 indicates – however modest – that teaching
using the GeoGebra program has a positive effect on
deferred learning.
V.
CONCLUSION
The paper sheds light on the use of a specific computer
application as a teaching aid in mathematics, in order to
ameliorate the students’ understanding of the parallelogram
and circle units, taught in grade eight in the Lebanese
curriculum. There was a clear difference in the learning
statistics between the students who studied the units of the
circle and the parallelogram using the GeoGebra program
and the students who studied the same units using the
traditional method, both on the scale of direct and deferred
testing, in favor of the GeoGebra. This indicated that the use
of technology made it easier on the students to grasp
otherwise hard concepts.
This was manifested by the test
results based on the learning outcomes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The researchers would like to extend their gratitude to the
schools and instructors who were involved in this study and
who made it possible.
REFERENCES
[1]
M.S. Ali, “Educational Technology and Teaching Aids,”
Cairo, Egypt, Al-Fikr Al-Arabi, 2005.
[2]
F. Mokdadi, “Educational tools in school mathematics,” Al-
Amal Printing, Irbid, Jordan, 2001. Available online at
https://platform.almanhal.com/Files/2/85345,
[Retrieved
November, 2017].
[3]
H. Mazen, “Means and Technologies of Teaching and
Learning,” Cairo, Egypt, Al-Ilm Wla-Iman, 2009.
[4]
A. S. Metwally et al., “Effectiveness of designing a computer-
based training program to enable the behavioral objectives of
Arabic
and
mathematics
students
in
the
faculties
of
education,” Egypt. J. Math. Ed., vol. 10 (5), May 2007. [In
Arabic].
Available
online
at
http://ecmeducation.blogspot.com/p/blog-page_24.html,
[Retrieved November, 2017].
[5]
F. Sbeitan, “The Weak Scholastic Learning,” Amman, Jordan,
Al-Manhal, 2010
[6]
M. Hohenwarter et al., “GeoGebra 4.4,” 2013. Available
online at
http://www.geogebra.org, [Retrieved October,
2017].
[7]
T. Adolph, “Problems of Teaching Learning of Geometry in
Secondary Schools in Rivers State, Nigeria,”
Rivers State
University of Science and Technology, Nkpolu , Port
Harcourt
,
Nigeria,
2012.
Available
online
at:
https://www.stir.ac.uk/research/hub/publication/25092,
[Retrieved: January, 2018].
[8]
Y. Zengin, H. Furkan, and T. Kutluca, “The Effect of
Dynamic
Mathematics
Software
GeoGebra
on
Student
Achievement inTeaching of Trigonometry,” Pocedia –Social
and
Behavioral Sciences,
vol. 31, pp. 183-187, 2011.
Available
online
at
www.sciencedirect.com,
[Retrieved:
December, 2017].
[9]
M. Norusis, “SPSS 17.0 guide to data analayis,” Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentic Hall, 2009.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-680-4
EMERGING 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

