Dynamic Node Movement Control in a Mobile Medium Ad hoc Network 
Hanin Almutairi, John DeDourek, Przemyslaw Pochec  
Faculty of Computer Science 
University of New Brunswick 
Fredericton, Canada 
e-mail: {hanin.almutairi, dedourek, pochec}@unb.ca 
 
 
Abstract—A Mobile Ad hoc Network (MANET) is a network of 
wireless mobile devices capable of communicating with one 
another without any reliance on a fixed infrastructure. A Mobile 
Medium Network is a set of mobile forwarding nodes 
functioning as relays for facilitating communication between the 
users of this Mobile Medium. The performance of the Mobile 
Medium depends on the Mobile Medium node density, 
distribution and movement. In the proposed dynamic node 
movement, the movement is determined based on whether the 
node is on a forwarding path for a data flow or not.   Simulation 
results show that slowing down the speed of mobile nodes when 
they are forwarding significantly affects the delivery rates in 
Mobile Medium networks. For networks with a few forwarding 
nodes dispersed in a large region reducing the mode movement 
speed by 50% results in an approximately 20% improvement in 
the delivery ratio, with even higher improvements possible at 
lower speeds. 
 
Keywords-mobility models; Mobile Medium; self-organizing 
mobile network; M2ANET; SMMANET; MANET; AODV; 
DSDV; ns2 simulation 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A Mobile Ad hoc Network (MANET) is a set of mobile 
devices that cooperate with each other by exchanging 
messages and forwarding data [1][2]. A Mobile Medium Ad 
hoc Network (M2ANET) proposed in [3] is a particular 
configuration of a typical MANET where all mobile nodes 
are divided into two categories: (i) the forwarding only nodes 
(shown in black in Figure 1) forming the so called Mobile 
Medium, and (ii) the communicating nodes (shown in red in 
Figure 1), mobile or otherwise, that send data and use this 
Mobile Medium for communication. The advantage of this 
M2ANET model is that the performance of such a network is 
based on how well the Mobile Medium can carry the 
messages between the communicating nodes and not based 
on whether all mobile nodes form a fully connected network. 
An example of a M2ANET is a cloud of autonomous drones 
released over an area of interest facilitating communication 
in this area. The movement of nodes in a M2ANET can be 
predefined by the user, selected at random or purposefully 
controlled for the best performance. When the mobile nodes 
select themselves their movement we refer to such a network 
as a Self-organizing Mobile Medium Ad hoc Network 
(SMMANET). Recently, a number of projects that match the 
M2ANET model have been announced; they include Google 
Loon stratospheric balloons [4] and Facebook high altitude 
solar powered planes [5] for providing Internet services to 
remote areas, and the Swarming Micro Air Vehicle Network 
(SMAVNET) project where remote controlled planes are 
used for create an emergency network [6]. 
 
 
Figure 1. ns2 simulation screen of a M2ANET 
 
Controlling the movement of the forwarding nodes 
forming the Mobile Medium is a problem in deploying 
M2ANETs. Random movement, while easy to implement, 
suffers from the difficulty of how to keep nodes in a sufficient 
density over the area of interest where the communication 
infrastructure is to be supplied by means of a Mobile 
Medium. A Mobile Medium with low mobile node density 
suffers from frequent disconnections and rerouting, resulting 
in a low delivery ratio. In this paper, we propose a solution 
for controlling the movement of the Mobile Medium nodes 
for M2ANET (SMMANET) deployments. The solution is 
based on the following observation: In a typical M2ANET 
only a few (if any) mobile nodes are actively forwarding the 
network traffic for a given flow at any given time. The longer 
the forwarding path is maintained the better the delivery ratio. 
We therefore propose to slow down the movement of the 
nodes that are actively forwarding data in the M2ANET. The 
new approach is then compared against the standard Random 
Way Point (RWP) movement. 
In Section II, we present background on Mobile Medium 
networks and mobility patterns. The new movement pattern 
based on changing the speed of mobile nodes that happen to 
be on the forwarding path for a flow is discussed in Section 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

III. Simulation experiments of this movement under different 
scenarios are in Section IV. Finally, we present the 
experimental results in Section V, followed by the conclusion 
and future work. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
A MANET is comprised of interconnected mobile nodes, 
which make use of wireless communication links for multi-
hop transmission of data. They offer distinct advantages over 
infrastructure based networks and are versatile for some 
particular applications and environments. There are no fixed 
or prerequisite base stations or infrastructures; therefore, their 
set up is not time consuming and can be done at any time and 
in any place. MANETs exhibit a fault-resilient nature, given 
that they are not operating a single point of failure and are 
very flexible. The deletion and addition of new nodes, 
forming new links are a normal part of operation of a 
MANET [1][7][8]. A group of nodes can facilitate 
communication between distant stations by forming a Mobile 
Medium, as introduced in [3].  
Many mobility models have been proposed for recreating 
the real world application scenarios of MANETs. A mobility 
model attempts to mimic the movement of real mobile nodes 
that change speed and direction with time. There are two 
main types of mobility models currently used in simulation 
of MANETs [2][9]: trace and synthetic. A trace uses actual 
node movements that have been observed in a real system. In 
the absence of traces, synthetic mobility models can be used. 
The synthetic models attempt to realistically mimic the 
movements of mobile nodes in mobile networks [2]. The 
categorization of synthetic models is based on interactions 
between the nodes and the environment in a mobile network 
[2]:  we can distinguish between individual node movements 
and group node movements. Based on specific mobility 
characteristics these models can be further classified into four 
categories: models with temporal dependency, models with 
spatial dependency, models with geographic restriction, and 
random models [2]. In the mobility model with temporal 
dependency the movement of a mobile node is affected by its 
movement history. A node’s current movement is affected by 
past movement such as in the Gauss Markov Model and the 
Smooth Random Mobility model [2]. In mobility models 
with spatial dependency, the mobile nodes tend to travel into 
a group and are interdependent one on another. The 
movement of a node is affected by surrounding nodes in 
group mobility such as in the Reference Point Group Model 
[2]. One implementation of a group mobility model uses the 
attraction/repulsion principle to maintain the connections 
between the mobile nodes: when nodes get too close (e.g., 
signal strength is high) they select the next move with a 
preference in the opposite direction to the incoming signal 
and conversely, when the signal gets weak, they turn back 
[10]. Another class is the mobility models with geographic 
restriction. There, the mobile node movement is limited to 
certain geographical areas, such as streets or freeways, as for 
example in the Pathway Mobility Model and the Obstacle 
Mobility Model [2].  
In simulation, a random mobility is often used as a 
reference case scenario, mostly because of the relative ease 
of implementing it in a simulator. One of these popular 
models is the Random Way Point (RWP) model available in 
ns2 [11]. Nodes are moved in a piecewise linear fashion, with 
each linear segment pointing to a randomly selected 
destination and the node moving at a constant, but randomly 
selected speed. 
III. 
DYNAMIC MOVEMENT CONTROL IN MOBILE MEDIUM 
Recall that the Mobile Medium is a particular type of a 
mobile network that is used for providing communication 
services to mobile or stationary users. It consists of a cloud 
of mobile nodes whose sole function is to forward data. Users 
of this Mobile Medium connect to it by establishing a link to 
one of its nodes and then send data to other users connected 
through this medium (Figure 2). Our interest here is to assure 
the best delivery ratio for the data sent form one user to 
another through the Mobile Medium. 
 
Figure 2. Nodes on the forwarding path 
We start with a common reference scenario where a 
number of Mobile Medium nodes move in a restricted region 
(a rectangle) in random directions according to the RWP 
model. The two user stations (nodes) that wish to 
communicate are placed in the same region, remain stationary 
and send data one to another through the Mobile Medium 
(Figure 2). Because the Mobile Medium nodes move in and 
out of range of the communicating stations the connections 
break and the routing path changes, affecting the delivery 
ratio.  
The Dynamic Movement Control in Mobile Medium is an 
attempt aimed at reducing the (number of) changes in the 
routing path during the data transfer between the users. 
Normally, the nodes in the RWP model move in random 
directions and at random speeds independent of whether they 
are forwarding packets or not. The faster they move the 
quicker they get out of range and the sooner the connection 
path breaks. In the proposed Dynamic Movement Control for 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

the Mobile Medium, the nodes that forward data are slowed 
down. Note that this decision to slow down does not require 
any global information or location data; it is solely based on 
the forwarding status of the node. The easiest way to 
determine if the node is in the forwarding state is to check if 
it had forwarded a data packet recently: for example, for the 
scenario with a Constant Bit Rate (CBR) traffic source a node 
would maintain its forwarding status, and move at a reduced 
speed, for at least the time defined by the inter packet interval 
of the CBR source. For other scenarios, like the exponential 
traffic sources, multiples of the average inter packet interval 
can be used for determining the forwarding status 
maintenance period for a node. In the ns2 simulation we used 
the actual path determined by the simulator to determine 
which nodes are in the forwarding state.  
The evaluation of the proposed Dynamic Movement 
Control for Mobile Medium was performed in the ns2 
simulator. The simulator is implemented in c++ and each 
simulation is controlled by an Object Oriented Tool 
Command Language (OTCL) script. Unfortunately, the 
OTCL scripting language does not provide any access to the 
routing information used in the simulation. To access the 
routing information used by the Ad hoc On-Demand Distance 
Vector (AODV) protocol we modified the  
 
  void forward (aodv_rt_entry *rt, 
         Packet *p, double delay); 
 
function in aodv.cc, and to get routing for the Destination-
Sequenced Distance Vector (DSDV) the function  
 
void forwardPacket (Packet *p); 
 
in dsdv.cc was modified.  
IV. 
SIMULATION EXPERIMENT 
A set of simulation experiments was conducted to 
evaluate the proposed Dynamic Movement Control for the 
Mobile Medium networks. Each simulation of a network 
consists of a different number of nodes roaming (RWP 
movement, average speed 4 m/s) in a square 1000 x 1000 
meters. The node transmission range is 250m. The link data 
rate is 1 Mbps. Every packet has a size of 512 bytes. The 
buffer size at each node is 50 packets. Data packets are 
generated following a Constant Bit Rate process [11]. The 
source and destination nodes are stationary and located at 
coordinates (50, 400) and (950, 600). The summary of the 
simulation parameters used in ns2 is shown in Table 1. In 
each experiment, the designated source node transmits to one 
designated destination node for 500 seconds. For each node 
density and speed, the experiment is run three times and the 
average delivery ratio is reported. 
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Parameters 
Simulator 
NS-2.34 
Channel Type 
Channel / Wireless Channel 
Network Interface Type 
Phy/WirelessPhy 
Mac Type 
Mac/802.11 
Radio-Propagation Type 
Propagation/Two-ray ground 
Interface Queue Type 
Queue/Drop Tail 
Link Layer Type 
LL 
Antenna 
Antenna/Omni Antenna 
Maximum Packet in ifq 
50 
Area (n * n) 
1000 x 1000m 
Source node location 
(50, 400) 
Destination node location 
(950, 600) 
Source Type 
CBR over UDP 
packetSize_ 512 
interval_ 0.05 
Simulation Time 
500 s 
Routing Protocol 
AODV and DSDV 
A. AODV performance 
Reducing the speed of the forwarding nodes running the 
AODV routing protocol results in an improved delivery ratio 
for all but the very low node density (5 nodes over 
1000x1000m region) scenario, Fig 3. The networks with a 
very few nodes in the Mobile Medium, i.e., with 5 and 10 
nodes, as expected show very low delivery ratio. Under 
normal operating conditions for the Mobile Medium, with 20 
or more mobile forwarding nodes, the performance improves 
gradually. Networks with a large number of nodes, more than 
30 in a 1000x1000m area, as expected work well at any node 
speed with delivery ration ranging from 75% to almost 100%.  
The most interesting case is the network with a moderate 
number of nodes, 20 nodes over the area 1000x1000m. This 
scenario demonstrates best the benefits of the Dynamic 
Movement Control for Mobile Medium networks. In this 
scenario the delivery ration is very low 30% for nodes moving 
at the original speeds, but the performance improves 
significantly to 85% when the speed is reduced to 10% of the 
original speed.  
The benefits are the highest in the low to medium range of 
node densities, 10 to 20 nodes moving in a 1000x1000m 
region, as depicted in Figure 4.  
B. DSDV performance 
DSDV performance improvement is similar to AODV: 
low improvements at low node densities (5 to 10 nodes) and a 
gradual improvement with the reduction of the speed of the 
forwarding nodes at higher node densities, as shown in 
Figures 5 and 6. In our experiments, the overall delivery ratio 
is lower for DSDV than for AODV. This is a common 
situation for the DSDV protocol when used in the ad hoc 
networks with a dynamically changing topology [12] and can 
be attributed to the proactive nature of the DSDV protocol 
where distributing the routing information to all the nodes and 
detecting a valid route can take a considerable time. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

 
Figure 3. AODV delivery ratio. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Delivery ratio for AODV at three speeds: no change, with 50% 
reduction and zero. 
 
Figure 5. DSDV delivery ratio 
 
 
Figure 6. Delivery ratio for DSDV at three speeds: no change, with 50% 
reduction and zero. 
 
Figure 7. Time to detect the first path, for two different protocols. 
 
In our experiments, no routes were detected in networks 
with 5 nodes and it took approximately 80 seconds to detect 
the first route in the networks with 20 or more nodes running 
DSDV, which is considerably slower than the path detection 
delay observed for the AODV protocol, see Figure 7. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed a new node movement control 
paradigm for a self-organizing MANET network. The 
approach is particularly attractive for M2ANETs where the 
goal is to create a Mobile Medium out of mobile forwarding 
nodes, and use this Mobile Medium to facilitate data 
communication between other users. The new mobility 
control mechanism is based on slowing down the nodes that 
are on the forwarding path for a flow. The performance of the 
M2ANET/SMMANET increased significantly with the 
lowering of the speed of the nodes actively forwarding the 
data, with a higher relative improvement for the networks 
with moderate node densities. The improvements were 
observed in the networks running two different routing 
protocols AODV and DSDV.  
Based on our results, we suggest further testing self-
organizing M2ANET/SMMANET networks using different 
experimental scenarios. In particular while our experiments 
involved two stationary communicating nodes it might be 
more realistic for some application scenarios to model them 
as mobile. Combining the attraction/repulsion mechanism 
proposed in [10] with the new Dynamic Control may also 
result in further improvement of the performance of a 
SMMANET. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is sponsored and funded by the Ministry of 
Higher Education of Saudi Arabia through the Saudi Arabian 
Cultural Bureau in Canada. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Basagni, M. Conti, S. Giordano, and  I. Stojmenovic (Eds.), Mobile 
Ad Hoc Networking, New York, Wiley-IEEE Press, 2001. 
[2] F. Bei and A. Helmy, A survey of mobility models in wireless Ad hoc 
Networks, University of California, USA,2004. 
[3] J. DeDourek and P. Pochec, “M2ANET: a Mobile Medium Ad Hoc 
Network”, Wireless Sensor Networks: Theory and Practice, WSN 2011, 
Paris, France, Feb. 2011, pp. 1-4.  
N
1 
N
1 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

[4] H. Hodson, "Google's Project Loon to float the internet on balloons", 
New Scientist, October 2013.  
[5] J. Brustein, "Facebook’s Flying Internet Service, Brought to You by 
Drones", Bloomberg Businessweek, March 4, 2014. 
[6] A. Jimenez Pacheco, et al., "Implementation of a Wireless Mesh Network 
of Ultra Light MAVs with Dynamic Routing", IEEE GLOBECOM 2012, 
3rd International IEEE Workshop on Wireless Networking & Control for 
Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles 2012, Anaheim, California, USA, 2012. 
[7] D. P. Agrawal and Q. A. Zeng, Introduction to Wireless and Mobile 
Systems, Thomson Engineering, 2010, 1591-1596. 
[8] S. K. Sarkar, T. G. Basavaraju, and C. Puttamadappa,  Ad Hoc Mobile 
Wireless Networks, Principles, Protocols, and Applications, Auerbach 
Publications Taylor & Francis Group, 2007. 
[9]  N. Aschenbruck, E. G. Padilla, and P. Martini, "A survey on mobility 
models for performance analysis in tactical mobile networks", Journal of 
Telecommunications and Information Technology, vol. 2, 2008, pp. 54-61.   
[10]  N. Alsalmi, J. DeDourek, and P. Pochec, "Self-organizing Mobile 
Medium Ad hoc Network", The Fourth International Conference on Mobile 
Services, Resources, and Users MOBILITY 2014, July 20 - 24, 2014 - Paris, 
France, pp. 38-42. 
[11] H. Ekram and T. Issariyakul, Introduction to Network Simulator NS2, 
Springer, 2009. 
[12] S. Mohapatra and P. Kanungo, "Performance analysis of AODV, DSR, 
OLSR and DSDV Routing Protocols using NS2 Simulator", Procedia 
Engineering (International Conference on Communication Technology and 
System Design 2011), v. 30, 2012, pp. 69-76. 
 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

