A Multimedia Capture System for Wildlife Studies
Kim Arild Steen
Department of Engineering,
Aarhus University
Faculty of Science and Technology
Dalgas Avenue 2, Aarhus, Denmark
KimA.Steen@agrsci.dk
Henrik Karstoft
Department of Engineering,
Aarhus University
Faculty of Science and Technology
Aarhus, Denmark
hka@iha.dk
Ole Green
Department of Engineering,
Aarhus University
Faculty of Science and Technology
Aarhus, Denmark
Ole.Green@agrsci.dk
Abstract—This paper presents a system for video and audio
recording of wildlife geese in their natural environment. The
system enables remote controlled recording, and is designed
for an outdoor environment. The recordings lasted 1 month,
where 4-5 hours of geese video and audio were succesfully
captured. Data recorded using the system is a part of ongoing
research to design a method for automatic recognition of animal
behaviour and species based on audio and video recordings.
Automatic recognition could potentially lead to systems capable
of reducing habituation.
Keywords-video; audio; recording; wildlife surveillance; re-
mote
I. INTRODUCTION
In modern society, we often experience unwanted en-
counters between groups of animals and human activities,
such as in agricultural ﬁelds or at airports. This can be a
costly affair and often inﬂicts damages both to the animals
as well as humans. In the case of agricultural ﬁelds, visual
and acoustic stimuli may be used as mechanisms for scaring
away unwanted animals. However, these methods often have
limited success rates, as the animals habituate to the stimulus
[2].
Recently, computer technology has been applied for char-
acterising animal behaviour using computer vision for track-
ing animal trajectories [6][8] and audio processing for recog-
nition of animal vocalizations [1][5][7]. These approaches
may lead to systems capable of recognizing speciﬁc species
and behaviours, and scare off the animals before they inﬂict
damage or get hurt. In [2] different approaches to scaring off
animals is reviewed, such as guard animals, gas exploders
and distress calls, with the latter showing good results.
In the process of linking wildlife animals vocalizations
with speciﬁc behaviour, a system for recording video and
audio data in a wildlife setting is presented. Wildlife
surveillance systems have been previously described [3][4];
however, these systems are designed for speciﬁc scenarios.
Likewise, the present system is speciﬁc to the context of
video and audio recording of wildlife birds foraging in
agricultural ﬁelds. The system described in [3] support both
audio and video recording in a harsh environment (humid
environment), however the data recorded is used for manual
inspection and not research regarding automatic recognition.
The system has been used for video and audio recording
of wildlife geese foraging in agricultural ﬁelds. The main
purpose of this system is to record and store images and
audio of geese as they land, eat and ﬂee. The data provided
by the system will be used in further research regarding au-
tomatic recognition of geese behaviour. Geese were chosen
in this study, as they inﬂict much damage in agriculture, and
they are very vocal.
The structure of this paper is as follows: In Section II
the requirements for the system is presented followed by a
description of the system in Section III. The implemented
infrastructure is presented in Section IV and preliminary
results, using the system, are presented in Section V. The
discussion in Section VI follows up on the results and
experience gained while using the system. The paper ends
with a conclusion in Section VII.
II. SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
Agricultural ﬁelds are wide open spaces, implying windy
conditions during wildlife recordings. Wind reduction is
therefore necessary to preserve the quality of the audio
recordings, and can be accomplished for instance through
use of a casing. Furthermore, the remote location of agricul-
tural ﬁelds reduces access to power grids. Consequently the
consideration of a power source and power consumption is
important, as the system requires a standalone power source.
Barnacle geese are highly mobile with ﬂight speed up to
20 m
s [9], and the video recording equipment needs to provide
adequate frame rates to capture their movements. It is not
desirable to reduce the image quality or add computations by
adding compression, as this could degrade performance of
later image processing and potentially cause ﬂuctating frame
rates, as compression time could be affected by information
in the images.
As it is impossible to pinpoint in advance where the geese
will land and eat, video and audio recordings need to be
inspected during the study. Consequently remote access is
an important system requirement, to avoid frightening the
geese during inspection.
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

A further system requirement is a minimum uptime long
enough to capture video and audio as the geese return to
the location, to avoid interference caused by installation of
the system. An uptime of 36 hours has been chosen, as
the geese are likely to return to the same location because
of the availability of food, however it is not certain that
they will return the same day. Therefore, a harddrive with
a large enough capacitiy, must be chosen to ensure no loss
of data.
To summarize the most important requirements for a
multimedia capture device for wildlife studies:
• Reduction of wind noise in the audio recording equip-
ment
• Standalone power source (limitations to power con-
sumption)
• Adequate frame rates (20−30 frames per second (fps)),
due to the mobile animals
• Remote access, to monitor the recording without scar-
ing off the animals
• Minimum uptime of 36 hours
• High harddrive capacity (> 1 TB), due to the long
uptime and no compression
III. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
The requirements, speciﬁed above, led to the system
setup, described in this section and illustrated in Figure 1.
The power source needs to be standalone, and two
soultions were considered: car batteries and solar panels.
The power produced by a solar panel is dependent on the
weather, and, as sunlight is not garanteed on the west coast
of Denmark, risks downtime. Another risk of solar panels
is to scare off or interfere with the animals’ behaviour,
because of their shiny surface. Car batteries, were therefore
chosen as the power source, as they are reliable, however
they eventually run out and need to be replaced and
charged. To aviod unnecassary power consumption, the
system is set to stand-by during the night and automatically
restarted the next morning.
The lifetime of average car batteries are highly reduced
when they are drained, which would be the case in the
system setup. Deep cycling batteries are therefore preferable,
as they are designed to cope with this kind of treatment.
The system is a work in progress, and it was chosen to use
DC/AC converters, as a part of the power source, for more
ﬂexibility. This ensures easy expansion if other equipment
were to be used at a later stage, however it also introduces
a loss in efﬁciency. The chosen converter has an efﬁciency
of 90%.
The overall power consumption of the system is 60 W,
and with a 90% efﬁciency. The minimum uptime must be
36 hours, which requires batteries of approximately 200 Ah
(two 95 Ah were chosen), however this is derived from the
System components
Component
Details
Battery
12 V
Deep Cycling
DC/AC converter
Sine wave
converter
uEye Camera UI-1245LE-C
Lens: 6 mm
640 x 480
Harddrive
3 TB
3G connection
5 MB
Sennheiser MKE 400 Microphone
Shotgun
Asus Eee Laptop
1.6 Ghz
1 Gb memory
Table I
TABLE OF SYSTEM COMPONENTS USED IN THE SETUP
worst case power consumption scenario and without the
planned stand-by hours.
To preserve quality in the audio recording a directional
shotgun microphone, with wind reduction ﬁlter was chosen.
For the connection, a 10 m long multiple shielded audio
extension cable is being used, which enables different
placement of the microphone.
The high frame rates are provided by the chosen camera,
which enables 20 − 30 fps depending on the resolution
of the image. The camera uses a global shutter, which
reduces blurring caused by movements. It is powered via
the USB connection, which is also used for data transfer.
The recorded images are not compressed, which requires
a high capacity harddrive. The SSD technology would be
preferable, because of the low power consumption, however
due to dollar/GB, this was not chosen for the system.
For remote connection, a 3G connection was chosen.
Due to lack of coverage, this solution can potentially lead
to loss of connection, however the location chosen for the
recording had good 3G coverage. A lack of coverage would
not be vital for the recordings, however remote access
would be affected. A list of the speciﬁc items used in this
setup can be seen in table III.
IV. INFRASTRUCTURE AND DATA DESCRIPTION
The main purpose of the system is to record and store
large amounts of data. In Figure 2 an overview of the data
ﬂow and connections are shown. With a frame rate of 20
fps, an image is captured from the camera and stored on the
external harddrive. Meanwhile an audio ﬁle is saved on the
harddrive every 5 minutes. This is accomplished by a loop-
recording software, which increments ﬁlenames and records
while storing the ﬁles. The audio recordings were done with
a sample rate of 44.1kHz and 16 bit resolution, which is
the default settings of the loop-recording software.
The images captured from the camera, are stored as the
raw bayer pattern. This reduced the ﬁle size (from 900 kb to
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

Figure 1.
Block diagram of the system
300 kb) and the CPU load as image encoding is not being
done. The demosaic and encoding of the captured images is
done ofﬂine in the analysis fase of the research.
The USB 2.0 protocol used for data transfer offers a
theoretical maximum rate at 60 MB/s. The image capture
requires 6 MB/s, which lies within the speciﬁcations. The
audio ﬁle is saved every 5 minutes, and does not affect the
ongoing audio recording. This means that a transfer rate of
approximately
50
(60·5) ≈ 0.2 MB/s would be sufﬁcient for
storing the audio.
The 3G internet connection is used for remote access and
uploading ﬁles to an FTP-server. The purpose of the ﬁle
transfer is to monitor the video recording, and as the images
are not encoded it is not possible to view the images on
the surveillance system laptop. The newest captured image
is being uploaded every hour, and accessed from another
laptop in the laboratory.
Figure 2.
Overview of the infrastructure of the system setup, including
description of data
The dataﬂow and software considerations are summarized
here:
• An image is captured every 1/20 second and saved on
the external hdd
• Every
ﬁve
minutes
an
audio
ﬁle
(.wav
ﬁle)
is
saved on the external hdd using loop recorder (see
www.looprecorder.de)
• Every hour a batch script uploads the newest image to
an ftp server
• At sunset, the system is set to stand-by, and at sunrise
the system wakes up again (3G connection is automi-
cally started to enable remote access)
With a frame rate of 20 fps and chosen audio encoding
(.wav ﬁles), the system records a data rate of approximately
22 GB/hour.
V. RESULTS
The described system was used for recording wild life
geese over a period of one month, where the only down-
time was due to replacement of batteries. Over 4.5 hours
of geese audio and video, capturing landing, eating and
ﬂeeing, were succesfully recorded. During the recordings,
the weather conditions were diverse, including storms and
sunny weather, and the system and the recordings were not
affected.
The power supply used for the setup was car batteries,
and with two 95 Ah batteries, the system was able to run for
approximately three and a half days. This was accomplished
by putting the system to stand-by every night.
During
the
recording,
the
average
CPU
load
was
45 − 50%, with a peak load of 70%. The memory load was
constantly on 40%. If processing of the signals were to be
implemented, the system has to be upgraded, however this
was not the scope of the system at hand.
In Figure 3 an example of the recorded audio is shown.
The geese vocalizations are clearly visible in the shown
waveform, as they appear with high amplitude in the
recordings. Visual inspection of the recorded video also
verify this, as the geese were standing close to the
microphone. Recordings of the three desired behaviours
were present in the recorded data (both video and audio).
The waveform shown in Figure 3 was recorded on a wind-
less day, however some noise is present in the recording.
This is due to the ampliﬁcation of the audio signal in the
built-in sound card in the laptop.
Figure 3.
A sample waveform of the recorded audio while geese were
foraging. The vocalizations are easily detected, as they appear with high
amplitude
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

VI. DISCUSSION
As mentioned in the results section, the chosen laptop
cannot be used if processing of the recorded audio or
video were to be done, which will be a part of further
development of the system. A laptop with more memory
and a faster CPU is desirable. Other limitations with the
chosen laptop, are the frame rate and resolution of the
images. The camera supports both higher frame rates and
higher resolution, and a faster laptop could increase both
without over-burdening the CPU.
The overall power consumption was reduced by setting the
system to stand-by at nighttime. Another approach could
be to trigger the recording, and only record when animals
are present. This was not chosen as a loss of usefull data,
due to potential trigger errors, could delay the further
research. However a suggested modiﬁcation could be to use
a computer vision approach to trigger the recording.
The microphone used in the experiment, was a directional
shotgun microphone. Another approach could be parabolic
microphones, which are directional and amplify the sound
before the digitizing of the audio. This was not used in this
recording due to the physical size of the microphone.
Some noise is present in the recordings, even on windless
days. This is due to the low quality sound card in the laptop,
and an external sound card or a microphone ampliﬁer could
provide a better quality recording, however the vocalizations
were clear in the recordings. A spectrogram analysis of the
recorded vocalizations have shown that all information in
the geese vocalizations is within 10 kHz, which means that
sample rate could be reduced, which is preferable if more
processing were to be performed in the system.
The remote access allowed for adjustments of audio
and video recording, however aperture could not be
adjusted as this must be done manually. Adjustments were
not made during the recordings, as it was hard to verify
the image quality on the remote access, which was mainly
used to verify the presence of geese.
The
recorded
data
contained
examples
of
the
three
desired behaviours: land, eat and take off. Automatic
behaviour recognition research, based on these recordings,
could lead to a system capable of reducing habituation,
as scaring mechanism could be targeted towards speciﬁc
behaviours or species.
Even though the system was used for a speciﬁc scenario,
it is applicable to other wildlife studies where audio and
video material is essential. It is designed to cope with
different weather conditions and the remote access makes
it possible to verify recordings.
VII. CONCLUSION
Based on the described system setup, it was possible
to record geese in order to analyze the link between
their vocalizations and behaviour. The geese quickly grew
accustomed to the setup, and only two days after the
installation of the system, the geese landed and foraged.
Data provided by the described system is a part of
ongoing
research
to
automatically
recognize
animal
behaviour based on audio and video recordings. The results
of this research are to be tested using a modﬁcation of the
descibed system, where both audio and video processing
will be a part of the system.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Morten Laursen for contributing
to the overall design, and I would also like to thank Esben
Rasmussen and Claus Andersen for support in developing
the imaging capture software.
REFERENCES
[1] Seppo Fagerlund.
Bird Species Recognition Using Support
Vector Machines. EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal
Processing, 2007:1–9, 2007.
[2] Jason M Gilsdorf, Scott E Hygnstrom, and Kurt C Vercauteren.
Use of frightening devices in wildlife damage management.
Integrated Pest Management Reviews, 7(1):29–45, 2002.
[3] Roman Gula, J¨orn Theuerkauf, Sophie Rouys, and Andrew
Legault.
An audio / video surveillance system for wildlife.
European Journal of Wildlife Research, 56(5):803–807, 2010.
[4] Andrea M. Kleist, Richard A. Lancia, and Phillip D. Doerr. Us-
ing Video Surveillance to Estimate Wildlife Use of a Highway
Underpass. Journal of Wildlife Management, 71(8):2792–2800,
2007.
[5] C Lee, C Chou, C Han, and R Huang. Automatic recognition
of animal vocalizations using averaged MFCC and linear
discriminant analysis. Pattern Recognition Letters, 27(2):93–
101, January 2006.
[6] Maja Mateti´c, Slobodan Ribari´c, and Ivo Ipˇsi´c.
Qualitative
Modelling and Analysis of Animal Behaviour. Applied Intel-
ligence, 21(1):25–44, July 2004.
[7] Vlad M Trifa, Alexander N G Kirschel, Charles E Taylor, and
Edgar E Vallejo. Automated species recognition of antbirds
in a Mexican rainforest using hidden Markov models.
The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 123(4):2424–31,
April 2008.
[8] D. Tweed and A. Calway. Tracking multiple animals in wildlife
footage. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference
on Pattern Recognition, pages 24–27. IEEE Comput. Soc,
2002.
[9] S Ward, C M Bishop, a J Woakes, and P J Butler. Heart rate and
the rate of oxygen consumption of ﬂying and walking barnacle
geese (Branta leucopsis) and bar-headed geese (Anser indicus).
The Journal of experimental biology, 205(Pt 21):3347–56,
November 2002.
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-174-8
EMERGING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Emerging Network Intelligence

