Micro-CI: A Critical Systems Testbed for Cyber-
Security Research 
William Hurst, Nathan Shone, Qi Shi 
Department of Computer Science 
Liverpool John Moores University 
Byrom Street 
Liverpool, L3 3AF, UK 
{W.Hurst, N.Shone, Q.Shi}@ljmu.ac.uk 
Behnam Bazli 
School of Computing 
Staffordshire University 
Beaconside 
Stafford, ST18 0AD 
Behnam.Bazli@staffs.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— A significant challenge for governments around the 
globe is the need to improve the level of awareness for citizens and 
businesses about the threats that exist in cyberspace. The arrival 
of new information technologies has resulted in different types of 
criminal activities, which previously did not exist, with the 
potential to cause extensive damage. Given the fact that the 
Internet is boundary-less, it makes it difficult to identify where 
attacks originate from and how to counter them. The only solution 
is to improve the level of support for security systems and evolve 
the defences against cyber-attacks. This project supports the 
development of critical infrastructure security research, in the 
fight against a growing threat from the digital domain. However, 
the real-world evaluation of emerging security systems for 
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems is 
impractical. The research project furthers the knowledge and 
understanding of Information Systems; specifically acting as a 
facilitator for cyber-security research. In this paper, the 
construction of a testbed and datasets for cyber-security and 
critical infrastructure research are presented.  
Keywords—Critical Infrastructure, SCADA, Testbed, Security 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Interconnected control systems such as SCADA (Supervisory 
Control and Data Acquisition) monitor and govern public 
infrastructures, such as power plants and water distribution 
networks [1]. A constant assessment of the security of working 
control systems is necessary to ensure critical infrastructures 
are secured against external cyber-threats. However, this 
assessment process can impact the availability and performance 
of the control system. These types of environment require 
constant service provision and any disruption can be costly, and 
impact upon the end-users. For that reason, alternative 
approaches to assessing the security of automated control 
systems are needed.  
Non-virtualised physical testbeds are costly and inaccessible, 
and are often location constrained [1]. As such, modern 
education and research for control system security is becoming 
increasingly reliant on virtualised labs and tools [2]. Any 
learning or research undertaken using these tools, however, is 
based around the limitations and characteristics of such tools, 
as well as any assumptions made by their developers. 
Additionally, the accuracy of data resulting from emulations 
and models may be further decreased if used outside of their 
intended usage scenario. It is for that reason that projects such 
as SCADAVT propose testbed frameworks for cyber-security 
experimentation, based on a simulation approach [1].  
A virtualised approach offers significant cost savings and a 
self-paced and active approach to learning. However, it also has 
several key limitations including: no hands-on experience, no 
real-world training with specific equipment and no experience 
in identifying and interpreting incorrect or uncharacteristic data. 
Simulation is effective at representing “correct” behaviour. 
However, critical infrastructure systems need to be protected 
against situations where they are exposed to extreme abnormal 
events. Unfortunately, in such circumstances, systems do not 
always behave in the way expected or respond in the same 
consistent manner. Similarly, it is therefore difficult to 
accurately model how a system’s erratic behaviour might 
cascade and impact other parts of the infrastructure. 
The research presented in this paper provides an ideal 
solution. The practical element involved in the Micro-CI 
project introduces a level of realism that is difficult to match 
through simulation alone. It allows for the advantages of both 
physical and virtual tools to be combined, and some of these 
are discussed below. 
 
Pedagogical benefits: The Micro-CI approach offers 
students and researchers hands-on experience and first-
hand knowledge of the unpredictability of a system under 
attack or stress. It will also help them to refine their 
problem solving and practical skills. 
 
Cost effectiveness: The Micro-CI project has been 
designed to be as cost effective as possible. For example, 
at the time of writing, we estimate that at the time of 
writing, the design presented in this paper can be replicated 
at low cost. 
 
Portability: As the project components are on a 
miniaturised bench top scale, it enables them to be packed 
away, stored and transported with ease. Projects can still 
be moved and/or stored whilst partially assembled. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

 
Platform independency: The Micro-CI project does not 
require any specific requirements, dependencies or 
operating systems to interact with the testbeds developed. 
Additionally, it is not tied or restricted by any licencing 
model, so it can be used on an infinite number of different 
machines, without incurring additional costs. 
In this paper, the architecture for the Micro-CI testbed, 
which replicates a water distribution plant, is outlined. Both the 
physical design and construction of the testbed are detailed. A 
case study and evaluation, in which cyber-attacks are launched 
against the water distribution plant, are also presented.  
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 
2 presents a background discussion on testbed and critical 
infrastructure modelling. Cyber-security and cyber-threats are 
also highlighted. Section 3 presents the approach used to 
construct the Micro-CI testbed and a case study of the impact 
of an attack on the system. The resulting data is evaluated in 
Section 4. Finally, the paper is concluded and the future work 
is highlighted in Section 5. 
II.  BACKGROUND 
As automation grows in all areas of critical infrastructures [4], 
increased pressure is put on control systems to oversee and 
monitor operations at all times. A central control unit has the 
job of governing the behaviour of a vast system, ensuring the 
infrastructure is run smoothly and automated efficiently [7]. 
A. Control Systems 
Centralised control systems enable operators to control 
components from remote locations without physically needing 
to be there [5]. The requirement of operators having to travel to 
distant locations has been replaced by carefully designed user 
interfaces that allow the operator to interact with the system. 
The interfaces are often comprised of off-the-shelf components 
constructed to a specification suitable for the type of 
infrastructure being used [6]. The use of off-the-shelf 
components is a cause for concern, as the technology used in 
infrastructures is readily available for anyone to use, which can 
make them more vulnerable to attack [6]. 
A typical modern control system consists of a network of 
sensors acquiring data, which are used to control devices using 
programmable logic controllers (PLC). They are typically 
composed of three parts, the master terminal unit (MTU), 
remote terminal units (RTU) and the communication links. The 
MTU acquires data and sends instructions between various 
components such as a Human Machine Interface (HMI), 
databases for storing past information, workstations for 
engineers and business information systems for industrial 
applications. RTUs are essentially PLC devices that automate 
the actions ordered by the master terminal unit. The 
communication 
links 
are 
responsible 
for 
proficient 
communication and usually consist of fibre optics, microwave, 
telephone lines, pilot cables, radio or satellite. 
Figure 1 provides a simplified illustrative overview of a 
control system, whereby the RTU provides the communication 
link between various components of the infrastructure and the 
MTU, which is linked to the graphical user interface. 
Production UI
MTU
RTU
RTU
Plant Components
 
Figure 1 Control System Overview 
At this stage, the SCADA system is typically software that 
enables the operator to interact with the MTU and observe the 
on-going activities in the infrastructure [10]. Other approaches 
to control system construction can include a DCS (Distributed 
Control System) layout, which tends to have no central 
controller but is operated by various control components 
working together to decide the required action [8], [9]. 
However, the Micro-CI testbed detailed in this paper follows 
the traditional centralised control system structure for the 
purposes of simplicity and replicability. 
B. The Cyber Threat 
Control system data is coded in protocol format to exchange 
information with components and RTUs. The protocol formats 
provide automation and send information back to the control 
user interface to deliver a status of system operations. 
Communication protocols are designed for real-time operation 
[11]. Two examples of industrial control network protocols 
include Modbus (Modicon Communication Bus) and DNP3 
(Distributed Network Protocol). They are commonly used in 
modern day critical infrastructures and able to match the 
specific requirements of the system. However, they are 
susceptible to disruption and security breaches [11]. One of the 
most common methods of attack is the Distributed Denial of 
Service (DDoS) attack, where systems are sent large volumes 
of traffic that is intended to make the system fail by overloading 
it. This attack is effective. It is a challenge to distinguish 
between good and bad requests, making attacks problematic to 
block [13]. 
Often cyber-attacks are specifically targeted at individual 
parts of infrastructures. For example, various attacks are 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

designed with the precise intention of disrupting or infiltrating 
SCADA systems [12]. One such attack is known as a Process 
Network Malware Infection (PNMI), which involves injecting 
a worm into the process network. The process network is often 
used for hosting the whole of the SCADA where 
communication is conducted through protocols like ModBus or 
DNP3 [12]. Another common technique is the Man in the 
Middle attack (MITM) [14] where false commands or system 
instructions and fake responses are inserted into the system. Not 
only can a MITM attack be used to cause disruption; it can also 
be used to provide a way of eavesdropping; making it important 
to use authentication protocols to ensure the confidentiality and 
integrity of the communications [15]. 
C. Related Projects 
The growing cyber-threat has led to a switch in research 
focus from physical protection to digital infrastructure security 
measures. However, this cyber-security research is hampered 
by a lack of realistic experimental data and opportunities to test 
new theories in a real-world environment [16]. For that reason, 
projects such as SCADAVT, have developed simulation-based 
testbed, which builds upon the CORE emulator, for building 
realistic SCADA models [1].  
In their approach, Almalawi et al., develop a framework to 
construct a water distribution system [1]. The testbed consists 
of SCADA components, including the Modbus/TPC slave and 
master, and the Modbus/TPC HNI server. Functioning together, 
the testbed employs the use of the dynamic link library (DLL) 
of EPANET to simulate the water flow within the system. The 
testbed combines the use of existing techniques to produce a 
novel testbed application. The system tested through a case 
study involving a DDoS attack to demonstrate that convincing 
data-construction is possible. Software-based simulation data, 
such as this approach, is often used to test theoretical cyber-
security systems; however, data constructed through emulators 
is inherently lacking in realism and a hands-on learning 
experience is missed. 
In addition to the aforementioned water distribution testbed 
approach, there are several existing proposals for critical 
infrastructure testbed architectures, which focus on specific 
systems, such as electricity substations [17]. However, our 
long-term goal is not to constrain our testbed to a single role, 
but to adopt a modular approach; whereby new critical 
infrastructure roles can be integrated at a later stage. This would 
make it suitable and useful to a wider audience. Specifically, 
the proposed system focuses on a water distribution plant; 
however, the design is extendable and testbeds can be extended 
to incorporate other infrastructure types, such as an 
ecologically-aware power plant. 
This project provides research opportunities for the testing 
and development of security enhancements in a real-life 
scenario. As such, the aim of the research is to have a practical 
output; a fully working critical infrastructure testbed. The goal 
is to demonstrate the suitability of the datasets generated by the 
Micro-CI testbed, which can also provide a benchmark for 
future comparison against those created by industry-standard 
software. 
III. APPROACH 
The Micro-CI project addresses the lack of both access to 
experimental data and the hands-on experience needed to 
properly understand the challenges involved in an era of 
growing digital threats. As such, the intended output of this 
project is to support the construction of a bespoke bench-top 
testbed for data generation; consisting of a model critical 
infrastructure and control system. The testbed will be used for 
cyber-security research purposes and testing new experimental 
methods for enhancing the level of security in cyber-critical 
systems, specifically those under current exploration by the 
investigators. In this section, an outline of the architecture of 
the Micro-CI project is presented. 
A. System Design 
The design displayed below in Figure 2, presents a 
rudimentary water distribution plant. The specification is 
modest, meaning there is scope for future expansion; yet is 
sufficient in size to produce realistic infrastructure behaviour 
datasets for research purposes. As illustrated in the diagram, 
there are two reservoir tanks, which are fed by two pumps 
moving water from external sources. The remote terminal unit 
(RTU) is used to monitor the outgoing flow rate and water level, 
to dynamically adjust the pump speed ensuring adequate 
replenishment of the reservoir tanks. However, vulnerabilities 
exist in the system, meaning that it is possible for an external 
source to cut off the water supply or flood the reservoir tanks. 
This can be achieved by switching off or speeding up either of 
the pumps used to control the water flow. 
 
Figure 2. Water distribution plant testbed architecture 
B. Practical Micro-CI implementation 
The practical implementation of the testbed includes the 
following physical components: an Arduino Uno Rev. 3 as the 
RTU, two 12v peristaltic pumps as the water pumps, two liquid 
flow meters, two water level sensors, two amplification 
transistors, diodes, resistors and an LCD.  
In the schematics shown in Figure 3, potentiometer symbols 
have been used in place of sensors; this is due to the limited 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

symbols available in the blueprint software. As the maximum 
output of the Arduino is only 5v, transistors amplify this to the 
12v required by the pumps. Lastly, the diodes are used to ensure 
the current can only travel in one direction, thus preventing 
damage to the Arduino. The hardware specification used is 
modest, meaning there is scope for future expansion; yet is 
sufficient in size to produce realistic infrastructure behaviour 
datasets for research purposes. 
 
Figure 3. Physical wiring schematics 
The construction is displayed in Figure 4. For the purpose of 
this experiment, the Arduino board remains connected to a PC 
via a USB cable (although this could be replaced with a network 
connection for similar experiments). The system is also inactive. 
 
Figure 4. Testbed Construction 
Through this USB connection, a serial connection is 
established to supply a real-time data feed, which is recorded 
and preserved by the PC (as illustrated in Figure 3). The metrics 
collected in this instance include: Water level sensor1/2 
readings, Flow meter1/2 readings and Pump1/2 speeds. These 
readings are taken from each sensor every 0.25 seconds (4Hz) 
and written to the serial data stream. 
To examine the quality of the data produced by the Micro-
CI implementation, a dataset was recorded over the period of 1 
hour. During this time, the testbed was operating under normal 
parameters (i.e. no cyber-attacks were present). 
Essentially, this means that the pump speeds are configured 
to slowly continue filling the tanks at a controlled speed until 
full (even if no water is being used) and to cover the current 
rate of water consumption (if possible). The outflow (water 
being consumed) is a randomly applied value within a specific 
range (to make usage patterns more realistic). In this instance, 
the water source pipe is 60% smaller than the outflow pipes, 
which allows for a more accurate representation and to enable 
water tank starvation in case of overload. A sample of the data 
collection process is displayed in Figure 5, which shows the 
Arduino Serial Monitor.  
 
Figure 5. Example Serial Data Stream 
The datasets produced by the testbed are evaluated in the 
following section, as a demonstration of their applicability in a 
critical infrastructure research setting. 
IV. EVALUATION 
Similar to the SCADAVT project, this testbed is evaluated 
through the demonstration of a Distributed Denial of Service 
attack [1]. The effect of a DDoS attack in comparison with 
normal behaviour of the testbed is evaluated.  
A. Data Construction 
As such, for the first part of this case study, data for the water 
distribution plant is recorded whilst operating under normal 
conditions. This enables the building of a behavioural norm 
profile for the system. Within the testbed, during the DDoS 
attack, only intermittent readings from the sensors are received, 
forcing it to make drastic (and therefore uncharacteristic) 
changes to the pump speeds, rather than gradual as when 
operating normally.  
A small sample of the data obtained at 00:10.5 in run time is 
shown in Table 1. There is no significant variation present in 
the data. All the metrics maintain consistent trends in operation.  
Within Table 1, C1 to C6 denote the system components 
used for data collection. As such, C1 and C2 denote the water 
level in tank 1 and 2 correspondingly; C3 and C4 signify the 
water levels in tank 2 and 3; C4 represents the water flow from 
tank 2; C5 denotes the speed of pump 1 and C6 indicates the 
speed of pump 2. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

TABLE 1. NORMAL PHYSICAL TESTBED DATA SAMPLE 
Sample(t) 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
C5 
C6 
00:10.5 
65.0 
69.9 
47.3 
55.4 
81.9 
85.1 
00:10.7 
65.0 
69.9 
39.4 
48.5 
74.1 
78.8 
00:11.0 
65.0 
69.9 
39.4 
53.4 
74.1 
83.1 
Table 2 represents the distribution of values for each of the 
components over the 1 hour simulation. The unique value, max, 
min, median, mean and standard deviation of the values are 
demonstrated. 
TABLE 2. DISTRIBUTION VALUES FOR NORMAL DATA 
Assessment 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
C5 
C6 
unique (est.) 
23.00 
4.00 
55.00 
52.00 
51.00 
53.00 
min: 
65.00 
69.99 
34.82 
44.86 
68.91 
74.83 
max: 
66.14 
70.19 
38.19 
47.96 
72.91 
77.92 
median: 
65.59 
70.09 
36.86 
46.69 
71.30 
76.64 
mean: 
65.58 
70.07 
36.72 
46.54 
71.14 
76.50 
std: 
0.328 
0.063 
0.691 
0.694 
0.772 
0.695 
B. Attack Data Construction 
The DDoS attack on the system, which is launched against 
the RTU’s communications channel, results in intermittent 
sensor readings. Whilst no new values are readily available, the 
RTU continues to maintain the previous pump speed. As before, 
Table 3 represents the distribution of values for each of the 
components over the 1 hour simulation during the cyber-attack 
scenario. The unique value, max, min, median, mean and 
standard deviation of the values are again demonstrated. 
TABLE 3. DISTRIBUTION VALUES FOR ATTACK DATA 
Assessment 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
C5 
C6 
unique (est.) 
25.00 
7.00 
52.00 
51.00 
58.00 
59.00 
min: 
65.00 
69.89 
34.91 
44.69 
56.42 
56.84 
max: 
66.18 
70.02 
38.16 
47.98 
85.05 
91.45 
median: 
65.69 
69.99 
36.86 
46.69 
71.64 
75.51 
mean: 
65.62 
69.99 
36.71 
46.54 
72.07 
74.88 
std: 
0.36 
0.015 
0.689 
0.705 
6.832 
7.327 
Whilst under attack, the testbed continues to function, 
service is disrupted and the output is visible in the dataset 
constructed. For example, the min and max values from C5 are 
considerably different. This change is data is identifiable in a 
visual comparison of the pump speeds.  
Figure 6 presents a two feature scatter plot of the normal and 
abnormal operation of the two testbed pumps. Pump speed 2 is 
displayed along the y-axis with pump speed 1 detailed on the 
x-axis. 
 
Figure 6. Scatter Plot for Normal and Abnormal Operation of Pumps 
Variance can be seen in the clustering of the data. The colour 
indicates the grouping. The normal behaviour of pump shows a 
deviation in the operational speed to adjust for water flow 
changes and maintaining the water level in the tanks. This is 
displayed in the red circles, distributed throughout Figure 6. 
Within the attack data, the RTU’s communications channel is 
unable to maintain active communication the water levels 
meaning that pump 2 is unable to adjust efficiently to match the 
tank water levels. This is reflected in the small data cluster in 
the centre of Figure 6.  
C. Discussion 
Current anomaly detection systems function by identifying a 
deviation from established patterns within given datasets. For 
example, in the case of network security, algorithms compare 
network flow with historical flows and outliers in the datasets 
are subsequently identified. Threats are marked as an anomaly. 
Supervised learning algorithms are generally employed to learn 
about the threats and establish patterns of attack behaviour, 
which are labelled as signatures. This allows for the detection 
of novel attacks. Based on the above evaluation, we envision 
that this testbed would be ideal for training and research which 
focuses on anomaly and signature-based detection. Specifically, 
this testbed offers the following benefits: 
 
Normal/Abnormal dataset construction: Normal datasets 
can be constructed to act at the established pattern of 
system behaviour. Abnormal dataset can be constructed to 
act as deviation from normal patterns of behaviour. This 
can allow for experimentation with novel detection 
algorithms. Both types of data are needed for the core 
functionality for how anomaly detection practice is done.  
 
Diverse application: The testbed is applicable to a range of 
CI scenarios and cyber-attack types. The above evaluation 
focuses on DDoS on a water plant; however, Denial of 
Service, Signature Injection, are further examples of attack 
scenarios which can be implemented for dataset 
construction. The main components of the system, for 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

example the pumps, can also be altered to change the CI 
infrastructure type.  
V. CONCLUSION 
As previously discussed, one of the aims of this project is to 
devise a testbed, which is suitable for cyber-security training 
and research. It is our belief that the use of real-life data is more 
suitable for cyber-security research, than that of simulation 
only. One of the most effective aspects of the Micro-CI testbed 
is its expandability; meaning that in future work the scale of the 
testbed can be expanded to incorporate additional components 
and sensors. 
However, as with all solutions, there are some drawbacks to 
our approach. The first is that the use of low cost hardware 
reduces the level of accuracy that can be achieved. For example, 
the Arduino Uno uses an ATMega microcontroller, which is 
only capable of recording 4-byte precision in double values. 
This can present problems if precision is a crucial part of the 
research being undertaken. However, this can be mitigated by 
purchasing more expensive hardware. Another limitation is that 
in comparison to simulation software, the practical approach 
may require a greater level of improvement to students’ 
skillsets (which is not a detrimental attribute), and a longer 
initial 
construction 
time, 
to 
accomplish 
a 
working 
implementation. 
One of the main challenges for governments around the 
globe is the need to improve the level of awareness for citizens 
and businesses about the threats that exist in cyberspace. The 
arrival of new information technologies has resulted in different 
types of criminal activities, which previously did not exist, with 
the potential to cause extensive damage to internal markets. 
Society is becoming increasingly reliant upon critical 
infrastructure systems, which is forcing them to become more 
accessible and interconnected, in a short space of time. When 
this is combined with the growing sophistication of cyber-
attacks, this poses a considerable physical and digital security 
threat. Hence, critical infrastructure security is a key area of 
much-needed research that is under-supported. We hope that 
Micro-CI will provide a cost-effective, yet realistically accurate 
tool for future cyber-security research and learning. In our 
future work, we will compare the results from Micro-CI against 
existing industry-specific simulation software. We will also 
make the datasets available for cyber-security and critical 
infrastructure research. In addition, the construction design and 
instructions will be made available to other researchers. 
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to thank the UK Academy for 
Information Systems (UKAIS) as the funding body for this 
research project (http://www.ukais.org.uk/). 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Abdulmohsen., Z. Tari., I. Khalil., and A. Fahad., SCADAVT-A 
framework for SCADA security testbed based on virtualization 
technology, Proceedings of the 38th IEEE Conference on Local 
Computer Networks (LCN), pp639-646, 2013 
[2] L. Topham, K. Kifayat, Y. A. Younis, Q. Shi and B. Askwith, Cyber 
Security Teaching and Learning Laboratories: A Survey, Information & 
Security: An International Journal, vol. 35, 2016. 
[3] D. Lewis, The pedagogical benefits and pitfalls of virtual tools for 
teaching and learning laboratory practices in the Biological Sciences, 
HE Academy, 2014 
[4] L. H. de Melo Leite, L. de Errico, and W. do Couto Boaventura, Criteria 
for the selection of communication infrastructure applied to power 
distribution automation, Proceedings of the IEEE PES Conference on 
Innovative Smart Grid Technologies (ISGT Latin America), pp. 1–8, 
2013. 
[5] O. Gerstel, AControl Architectures for Multi-Layer Networking: 
Distributed, centralized, or something in between? Optical Fiber 
Communications Conference and Exhibition (OFC), pp 1-16, 2015. 
[6] C. Esposito, D. Cotroneo, R. Barbosa, and N. Silva, Qualification and 
Selection of Off-the-Shelf Components for Safety Critical Systems: A 
Systematic Approach, Proceedings of the Fifth Latin-American 
Symposium on Dependable Computing Workshops, pp. 52–57, 2011. 
[7] V. Urias, B. Van Leeuwen, and B. Richardson, Supervisory Command 
and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system cyber security analysis using a 
live, virtual, and constructive (LVC) testbed, Proceedings of the IEEE 
Military Communications Conference, (MILCOM), pp. 1–8, 2012. 
[8] Z. Liu., D. Li., L. Yun., and S. Xu., An assessment method for reliability 
of distributed control system, Proceedings of the IEEE International 
Conference on Information and Automation, pp. 1300-1304, 2015. 
[9] H. Fayyaz Abbasi., N. Iqbal., M. Rehan, Distributed Robust Adaptive 
Observer-Based Controller for Distributed Control Systems with 
Lipschitz Nonlinearities and Time Delays, Proceedings of the 13th 
International Conference on Frontiers of Information Technology (FIT), 
pp. 185–192, 2015. 
[10] J. Adrian Ruiz Carmona., J. César Muñoz Benítez and J. L. García-
Gervacio., SCADA system design: A proposal for optimizing a 
production line, Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Electronics, Communications and Computers (CONIELECOMP), pp. 
192-197, 2016. 
[11] R. Gao and C. Hwa Chang, A scalable and flexible communication 
protocol in a heterogeneous network, Proceedings of the 13th 
International Conference on Computer and Information Science (ICIS), 
pp 49-52, 2014. 
[12] Y. Zhang., L. Wang., Y. Xiang and C. Ten, Inclusion of SCADA Cyber 
Vulnerability in Power System Reliability Assessment Considering 
Optimal Resources Allocation. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 
Vol:PP, No 99, pp 1-16, 2016. 
[13] Q. Yan., F. R. Yu., Q. Gong., and J. Li., Software-Defined Networking 
(SDN) and Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) Attacks in Cloud 
Computing Environments: A Survey, Some Research Issues, and 
Challenges, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, Vol. 18 No. 1, 
pp. 602–622, 2015. 
[14] A. Sahi Khader., and D. Lai., Preventing man-in-the-middle attack in 
Diffie-Hellman key exchange protocol, Proceedings of the 22nd 
International Conference on Telecommunications (ICT), pp. 204–208, 
2015. 
[15] R. Divya., and S. Muthukumarasamy., An impervious QR-based visual 
authentication protocols to prevent black-bag cryptanalysis, Proceedings 
of 9th IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Control 
(ISCO), pp. 1–6, 2015. 
[16] T. Benzel, R. Braden, D. Kim and C. Neuman, Experience with DETER: 
a testbed for security research, in Proceedings of the 2nd International 
Conference on Testbeds and Research Infrastructures for the 
Development of Networks and Communities, 2014.  
[17] Z. L. H. Wei, G. Yajuan, and C. Hao, Research on information security 
testing technology for smart Substations, in Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Power System Technology (POWERCON), 
pp. 2492–2497, 2014. 
[18] M. Ficco, G. Avolio, L. Battaglia, and V. Manetti, Hybrid Simulation of 
Distributed Large-Scale Critical Infrastructures, Intell. Netw. Collab. 
Syst., pp. 616–621, 2014.
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-509-8
EMERGING 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

