Securing Indirect Communication for Advanced Metering Infrastructure in Smart 
Grid 
 
Mustafa Saed 
Electrical and Computer Engineering 
University of Detroit Mercy 
Detroit, USA 
email: saedma@udmercy.edu 
Kevin Daimi and Nizar Al Holou 
College of Engineering and Science 
University of Detroit Mercy 
Detroit, USA 
email: {daimikj, alholoun}@udmercy.edu
 
 
Abstract— Smart grid will soon be a reality.  As a result of 
connecting the traditional power grid to networks, all the 
vulnerabilities related to information technology will be inherited 
by the smart grid.  Hence, the smart grid must be protected 
against various cyber-attacks.  An essential component of the 
smart grid is the Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI). In an 
attempt to protect smart meters’ communication with the 
collector, two security schemes based on PKI are introduced in 
this paper.  The security requirements of confidentiality, 
integrity, and nonrepudiation are analyzed with respect to these 
schemes. 
Keywords— AM; Direct Connection; Smart grid; Security 
I. INTRODUCTION 
   Smart grids utilize bidirectional communication with 
consumers to facilitate an information-driven style to indirect 
energy control and management.   To this extent, they deploy 
large scale smart meters at consumer’s sites for bidirectional 
real time communication using existing network protocols 
[17].  The smart grid characterizes the new trends of the 
current power grid nationally and internationally.  It emerged 
in response to environmental changes, improved energy 
efficiency, and reduced pollution emissions [15].   The smart 
grid, which is supported by information technology and 
intelligent control, relies on six components, namely; power 
generation, 
transmission, 
transformation, 
distribution, 
consumption and dispatching [11].  Smart grid refers to the 
next generation power grid, which upgrades the electricity 
distribution and management by encompassing a scalable and 
ubiquitous two-way communication infrastructure to enhance 
control, efficiency, reliability and safety [19] [24].  It is, 
therefore, no surprise that many countries are considering it as 
the future direction of the classical power grid [10] [16] [18]. 
   Incorporating the Internet in the smart grid will widely open 
the door for various security attacks traditionally associated 
with the Internet.   Undoubtedly, Smart Grid systems will 
significantly improve efficiency and reliability but at the 
expense of possibly introducing new vulnerabilities.  Hence, 
smart grid utilization should meet rigorous security 
requirements [14].  Cyber-security, as a vital challenge of the 
smart grid transformation, must be enforced right at the 
beginning and not glued when attacks take place [1].  To reach 
full customer trust and to ensure excellent permanence of the 
current power supply, all components of smart grid 
communication network need to be extremely secure to satisfy 
confidentiality requirements [22].  Vulnerabilities are 
expected in power transmission networks, power grid, 
SCADA system access points and zone management [4] [6] 
[8].  To eliminate vulnerabilities or at least minimize their 
impact, strong security measures must be put in place. 
   Within the smart grid, the AMI plays a major role.  It uses 
bi-directional communications between consumers and the 
utility, and requires robust communication network to take 
into account a large number of devices, small data burst 
transmission, 
high-level 
of 
reliability, 
and 
changing 
propagation conditions [13] [20].  Formerly, Automatic Meter 
Reading (AMR) was used for automatically collecting energy 
consumption and status data from metering devices and then 
transferring that data to a central database system for billing 
and further analysis. To allow for additional data to be read, 
stored, and transmitted to servers, and to control the metering 
devices remotely,   The AMI proved to be the solution [12].  
Advanced Metering Infrastructure includes the components 
responsible for measuring, collecting and analyzing energy 
usage.  It consists of the Meter Data Management (MDM) 
system, communication network, access points, and the end 
points.  The end points connect to smart meters, and other 
display and control end devices [3] [9] [23].  AMI is the only 
part of the smart grid in which all line segments and 
substations are visible [5]. 
   Based on the importance of AMI and the vital role that it 
plays within the smart grid, it is very demanding that the AMI 
must be protected from various possible cyber-security 
attacks.   The following security requirements must be 
enforced: 
confidentiality, 
integrity, 
availability, 
and 
nonrepudiation [7].   Consumers do not want others to know 
how much energy they are consuming or how it is being used 
(confidentiality). Meter readings and control commands 
should not be modified while they are being transferred 
(integrity).  The availability of meter reading is critical for 
utilities and consumers.  It is also critical that sending and 
receiving components and devices cannot deny sending 
information 
including 
readings 
and 
commands 
(nonrepudiation).    There are a number of possible attacks on 
AMI components including denial of service, device 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

tampering, snooping, impersonation, wormhole, black hole 
and routing attacks.  Therefore, AMI demands a reliable and 
secure communication approach between the smart meters and 
consumer equipment [2]. 
   Vaidya et al [21] stressed that many of the available 
schemes for both single-path and multipath routing are not 
suitable for meshed AMI network.  Consequently, they 
introduced a security mechanism for multipath routing based 
on Elliptic Curve Cryptology (ECC), digital signature, and 
Message Authentication Code (MAC) for such an AMI 
network.  Their approach allows the Certificate Authority to 
do a lot more work than they should normally do (issuing 
certificates) including controlling the nodes’ creation of public 
and private key.  Nodes (smart meters) are doing a number of 
computations despite their known limited computing power.  
This also tends to slow the system.  Furthermore, a smart 
meter sends it information to all the neighboring smart meters.  
This provides attacker the opportunity for attacking more than 
one goal (smart meter) as they all have the information of the 
source meter.  The neighboring nodes, acting as as 
intermediate nodes, will do even more calculations and 
broadcast the results.  This means all other nodes (smart 
meters) have now the information.  Again, there are many 
nodes that the attacker can try and many nodes will be 
affected.  An interesting security protocol for AMI 
communications in smart grid where the smart meters are 
interconnected through wireless network was introduced by 
Yan et al [25].   The paper indicated that the Public Key 
Infrastructure (PKI) is not desirable and relied on symmetric 
key cryptology.  However, the number of symmetric keys 
used is large (2n, where n is the number of nodes) and 
comparable to the number of keys should the PKI has been 
followed.  Symmetric keys are normally used for large 
messages.  Furthermore, smart 
meters have limited 
capabilities, and therefore, verifying the MAC by the 
successor node is time consuming and should have been left to 
the collector.  The paper did not specify what will happen 
when the two MAC’s are not equal.  This implies that the 
integrity of a meter’s reading is not handled correctly.   
   This paper proposes two schemes for securing the indirect 
meter-to-collector communications.  Both schemes are based 
on PKI.  Unlike the work of Vaidya et al [21], this paper 
allows each node to send the encrypted, authenticated, and 
signed reading of a smart meter to its successor only (just one 
node).  The successor cannot tell the reading of the 
predecessor node.  If a node is attacked, readings of other 
nodes will not be affected.  The paper also avoids the need for 
a certificate authority by allowing the collector node to take 
care of issuing certificates to all smart meters under its 
authority.  Furthermore, nodes do not waste time performing 
lengthy calculations.  In contrast to the approach of Yan et al 
[25], PKI provides stronger encryption using public and 
private keys.  It is clear how the keys are created/recreated and 
exchanged.  The messages (readings) are small indicating PKI 
is the convenient way here.  The verification of the hash 
functions is carried out by the collector, which has more 
powerful computing capabilities.  If the computed hash 
function is not equal to the received hash function for a smart 
meter’s reading, the collector will reject that reading and 
inform the substation of a possible attack on that smart meter.  
Therefore, the integrity of a message (reading) is handled 
correctly. Furthermore, this paper adds anonymity to the 
meters by using anonymous IDs, and adds confusion to the 
order of readings of smart meters using a PRNG.  
   The AMI architecture used for this scheme will be 
introduced, and the security of the schemes will be analyzed.  
The reminder of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
introduces the AMI architecture.  Section III deals with the 
process of secure reading collection.  The analysis of AMI 
communication security is presented in Section IV.  Finally, 
the paper is concluded in Section V. 
II. AMI ARCHITECTURE 
   AMI networks are responsible for connecting a substantial 
number of devices needed to collect readings from smart 
meters.  As this paper is concerned with securing smart meters 
to collector communication, only this part of the AMI 
architecture will be introduced.  
   There are two ways of connecting smart meters to 
connecters; direct and indirect connections.  In direct 
connection, smart meters directly communicate with collectors 
to transfer readings and exchange information and commands.  
For indirect (or indirect) connection, one or more smart meters 
are directly connected to the collector.  The rest are either 
connected to the nearest smart meters that have direct 
connection with the collector or through a series of smart 
meters until the one directly connected to the collector is 
reached.  The collector is responsible for collecting readings 
from all smart meters within its coverage area (network).  
Coverage area could include both direct and indirect 
connection. 
   An example of an indirect connection is presented in Figure 
1 to clarify the connection.”  In this figure, smart meters SM0 
and SM6 are directly connected to the collector C.  Other 
smart meters are either directly connected to SM0 and SM6 
(SM1 and SM7), or through other smart meters (for example 
SM3, SM4, SM5, SM8, SM9).  Collectors are connected a 
substation.  The substation is extremely important to the 
efficient functioning of an electric utility since it contains a 
large quantity of significant information needed for the 
successful operation and management of the smart grid.   
Securing the direct smart meter-to-collector connection is 
easier than the indirect connection because it only needs one 
level of security connection with collector only.  For indirect 
smart meter-to-collector connection, two levels of security are 
needed.  First, the inter-meter connections must be secured, 
and then the direct connection with the collector.  The 
collector will collect all the readings.  If there is a problem 
with a reading or a missing reading due to an attack or any 
physical reason, the collector will report that to the substation, 
which will inform the management of the utility company. 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

 
 
Figure 1. Smart meter-collector indirect connection 
III. SECURE READING COLLECTION PROCESS 
   Two approaches for the indirect communication between 
smart meters and collector will be introduced below.  In both 
approaches, anonymous ID’s (A-ID’s) for the smart meters are 
used.  To create anonymous ID’s, each smart meter XORs the 
current ID (real one initially and then anonymous) with the 
output of a true random number (TRN) generated by a ring 
oscillator, Ti [26].  Any other true random value can be used 
instead of or in addition to the one generated by the ring 
oscillator.  In other words, A-IDi = IDi XOR Ti for the first A-
IDi, and A-IDi = Previous A-IDi XOR Ti for subsequent A-
IDi’s.  Table I presents the notations used in these approaches. 
   In the first approach, the collector C should have initially 
received all the public keys and IDs of the smart meters.  On 
the other hand, the smart meters, SM’s, should have the public 
key of the collector using any secure process.  Furthermore, 
the predecessor and successor nodes for each smart meter are 
identified during installation and configuration of each smart 
meter.  The node directly connected to the collector has no 
successor.  The nodes at the end of the connection have no 
predecessors.  Note that the scheme will be applied to the 
upper part of Figure 1 to observe how smart meters SM0-SM5 
securely send their readings to the collector C.  The readings 
for smart meters SM6-SM9 at the lower part of the figure will 
be collected using the same approach. 
   Each smart meter, SMi, replaces its real IDi with an 
anonymous one, A-IDi, appends IDi to it and encrypts both 
with the public key of collector, PUc, before sending the 
resulting message, E(PUc, A-IDi || IDi), to C through the 
indirect connection (Figure 2). The collector, C, creates 
certificates for each smart meter, SMi.  It appends A-IDi to the 
public key of each smart meter, PUi, and the period of validity 
PRV, and then encrypts PUi||A-IDi||PRV with its private key, 
PRc to get the certificate for each smart meter (CRi = E(PRc, 
PUi||A-IDi||PRV) since all smart meters have the public key 
PUc of the collector.  The CRi is further encrypted with PUi. 
Having done that, C then attaches A-IDi to the resulting 
message and forwards E(PUi, CRi) || A-IDi to smart meters via 
SM0.  Certificate creation is depicted in Figure 3 for both the 
collector and smart meter.  
   Every SMi checks the A-IDi.  If it is its ID, it decrypts E(PUi, 
CRi) with its private key PRi to get its certificate.  Otherwise, 
it will forward the message to adjacent smart meters to do the 
same until all smart meters receive their certificates.   
 
 
 
Figure 2. Creating and sending anonymous ID 
   Each SMi XORs its reading, Ri, with the TRN produced by 
the ring oscillator, Ti, concatenates the resulting message with 
Ti and the hash function of the reading H(Ri).  The resulting 
message will be encrypted with PRi to get Xi = E [PRi, Mi || 
H(Ri) || Ti], where Mi  = Ri XOR Ti.  To enable the collector to 
recognize the source meter’s reading, A-IDi is attached to Xi 
and both encrypted with PUc to get Yi = E(PUc, Xi || A-IDi).  
The XOR operation is used to obscure the reading of the meter.  
Ti is needed to allow the receiver to XOR it with Mi to get Ri.  
Having done that, Ri will be hashed and compared to H(Ri). 
 
Figure 3. Creating and sending certificates 
   The predecessor and successor nodes exchange certificates 
to authenticate each other.  On successful authentication, the 
predecessor smart meter encrypts its Yi with the public key 
PUi-1 of the successor, and forward E[PUi-1, Yi] to the 
successor.  The receiving successor decrypts the received 
message with its private key PRi-1, prepends or appends its 
own Yi-1 and encrypts the two (Yi || Yi-1, or Yi-1 || Yi, for 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

example) with its successor’s public key.  This process will 
continue until all Yis have been concatenated at SM0.  Using 
Figure 1 above, we should have Y = Y5 || Y4 || Y3 || Y2 || Y1 || 
Y0 or any other ordering.  SM0 sends Y to C.  Any missing Yi 
indicates a problem, possibly an attack, within that meter.  If 
this occurs, the collector will reject the received message and 
report to the substation to investigate the issue. 
   The decision on whether to append or prepend Yi is based 
on pseudorandom number generator (PRNG), which generates 
pseudorandom bit stream.  Yi-1 is prepended if the 
pseudorandom bit is ‘0’ and appended if the bit is ‘1’.   This 
will obscure the order of Yi’s and make it hard to relate the 
Yi’s to their smart meters.  To illustrate this, Figure 4 is 
provided. 
   The collector, C, uses its PRc to decrypt Y.  Then, based on 
the A-IDi, it uses the appropriate PUi to decrypt each Yi to 
obtain Mi || H(Ri) || Ti for each smart meter. It XORs Mi with Ti 
to get the reading Ri.  It later finds the hash function of Ri and 
ensures it is equal to the received hash function H(Ri) to 
guarantee the integrity of the reading, Ri. Figure 5 illustrates 
the meter readings collection process.  To simplify Figure 5, Z 
= Y5 || Y4 || Y3 || Y2 || Y1 (order is based on PRNG’) is used. 
   Note that smart meter 5, SM5, has no predecessor, and 
therefore, no PRNG’ unit exists.  Only smart meters SM4-SM1 
have it because they have predecessors (smart meters 
connected to them, as depicted in Figure 1).  Once the order of 
Yi’s is decided, the result is encrypted with the public key of 
the next meter, PUi-2, and forwarded to the next smart meter, 
SMi-2.  The PRNG for SM0 is not followed by encryption as in 
Figure 4 because it is forwarding directly to the collector. 
 
TABLE I. NOTATIONS USED 
Symbol 
Meaning 
C 
Collector 
SMi 
Smart meter i 
SM0, SM6 
Smart meters directly connected to C 
PUC , PRC 
Public & private keys of collector 
PUi , PRi 
Public & private keys of smart meter i 
|| 
Concatenation 
E 
Encrypt 
 
Send to 
Ri 
Reading of smart meter i 
H(Ri) 
Hash function of reading Ri 
Ti 
TRN from Ring Oscillator for smart meter i 
PRV 
Period of validity 
ID 
Identification 
IDC 
ID of collector 
IDi 
ID of smart meter i 
A-IDi 
Anonymous ID for smart meter i 
CRi 
Certificate of smart meter i  
 
   After a predefined number of readings or when the validity 
period PRV of the certificate expires, new keys for both 
collector and SM’s will be generated and exchanged.  The 
collector will use its old PRc to encrypt the new PUc and then 
encrypt the result with the old PUi and attaches A-IDi prior to 
sending it to SMi.  The A-IDi will allow each smart meter to 
tell if the message is intended for it. The smart meter in 
question, SMi, will decrypt this message to get the new public 
key of the collector.  At the other side, each smart meter 
generates new A-IDi, PUi and PRi, appends the new A-IDi to 
the new PUi, encrypts the resulting message with the old PRi 
and then with the new public key of the collector, PUc.  Finally, 
the old A-IDi is attached before sending it to the collector.  The 
collector will apply the required series of decryptions to get the 
new A-IDi and PUi of each smart meter.  Note that the old A-
IDi is added to allow the collector to recognize each smart 
meter.  Furthermore, new certificates will be generated and 
forwarded to the smart meters as mentioned above.  This is 
detailed in Figure 6 below.  New keys, certificates, and 
anonymous IDs are also created and exchanged when an attack 
is anticipated or has already occurred. 
 
Figure 4. PRNG operation 
   An alternative approach is used if the creation and storage of 
certificates are not desirable due to computing power and 
memory limitations.  For each adjacent smart meter pair, the 
collector sends the predecessor the public key of the successor 
encrypted with the public key of the predecessor, and sends the 
successor the public key of the predecessor encrypted with the 
public key of the successor.  In both cases, the A-IDi is 
attached to allow smart meters to capture messages belonging 
to them.  Apart from replacing the certificate with the collector 
providing the public keys for the predecessors and successors, 
the rest is exactly as in the first approach. 
IV. AMI COMMUNICATION SECURITY ANALYSIS 
   The security of the above schemes is analyzed with respect 
to confidentiality, integrity, and non-repudiation.  Although 
hash functions can help with intrusion and virus detection, 
availability cannot be satisfied by cryptology alone (schemes 
above), and therefore, it will not be part of the analysis. 
 
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

 
 
 
Figure 5. Meter readings collection process 
 
 
 
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

 
Figure 6. Exchanging new keys, IDs, and certificates 
 
 
A. Confidentiality 
   Confidentiality ensures that the message sent can only be 
disclosed to the authorized parties.  This implies that 
authorization restrictions are in place to ensure personal and 
information confidentiality. 
   Consumers definitely do not like others to intrude on their 
confidentiality in terms of energy quantity used or how it was 
used.  They need assurance that no unauthorized disclosure of 
the transferred information will take place. 
   The proposed protocols ensure that confidentiality is met 
through four levels.  First and most important, the message 
that is forwarded to the next smart meter or directly to the 
collector in the case of SM0 is encrypted with the public key 
of the collector (Yi = E(PUc, Xi || A-IDi)).  Only the party that 
has the private key (collector), PRC, can decrypt this message.  
In fact, because the contents of Xi are encrypted with PRi, and 
then Xi is encrypted with PUc, authentication and digital 
signature are also taken care of.   
   In addition, the replacement of real IDs with anonymous 
ones will make it hard to relate a reading to a particular smart 
meter.  Furthermore, the use of pseudorandom number 
generator (PRNG) introduced further hardship in judging the 
link between the reading and smart meter.  Finally, readings 
are XORed with a random value that modifies the actual 
reading.  This will make it very hard for attackers to extract 
the actual reading. 
B. Integrity 
   Customers and utilities need an assurance that the data 
received is exactly as sent.  This assurance guarantees that the 
data received has not been subject to any modification, 
insertion, deletions, or replay on its way to its destination.  
This is referred to as data integrity.  
    Message authentication is a technique used to ensure the 
integrity of the message. With regards to smart meter-to-
collector communication, meter readings messages and 
commands should arrive exactly as they left the source that 
issued them.   
   The reading, Ri, in the proposed schemes has its integrity 
fulfilled through the use of cryptographic hash function, 
H(Ri).  Upon receiving the message, the collector extracts Ri 
and find its H(Ri).  It then compares the computed H(Ri) with 
the received one.  Any mismatch indicates the message has 
been modified.   Further guard to ensure the integrity of the 
message was carried out by using digital signature. The hash 
value, H(Ri), is encrypted with the private key of each smart 
meter (Xi = E [PRi, Mi || H(Ri) || Ti]).  Only the receiver with 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

the public key of the smart meter, which is the collector, can 
decrypt the hash value. 
C. Nonrepudiation  
   Non-repudiation guarantees that the sender cannot deny it 
sends the information, and the receiver cannot deny it receives 
it.  No smart meter can deny its reading because the reading 
and its hash value are encrypted with the private key of smart 
meter (Xi = E [PRi, Mi || H(Ri) || Ti]).  Provided the key was 
not compromised, no party but the smart meter knows its own 
private key.   
    In a similar analysis, the collector cannot deny it sent each 
smart meter its certificate [(CRi = E(PRc, PUi||A-IDi||PRV)] 
because it is encrypted with its private key and no other party 
knows its private key.  Furthermore, the use of hash functions, 
H(Ri), is used for nonrepudiation of the origin (dispute 
resolution). 
V. CONCLUSION 
   Smart meter-to-collector communication plays a critical role 
within the Advanced Metering Infrastructure.   Protecting them 
against possible cyber-attacks is a vital requirement.  To 
contribute to this effort, two cryptographic protocols based on 
PKI were introduced.  One of these protocols involved using 
certificates issued by the collector.  Only the indirect 
communication of smart meters with the collector was 
investigated.  Securing such a connection is harder than the 
direct one because readings have to travel through other smart 
meters before reaching the collector.  The introduced schemes 
satisfied the security requirements; confidentiality, integrity, 
and nonrepudiation. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. M. Amin, “Smart Grid Security, Confidentiality, and Resilient 
Architectures: Opportunities and Challenges,” IEEE Power and Energy 
Society General Meeting, San Diego, CA, 2012, pp. 1-2. 
[2] 
V. Aravinthan, V. Namboodiri, S. Sunku, and W. Jewell, “Wireless 
AMI Application and Security for Controlled Home Area Networks,” 
IEEE Power and Energy General Meeting, San Diego, CA, 2011, pp. 1-
8. 
[3] 
M. Chebbo, “EU Smart Grids Framework: Electricity Networks of 
Future 2020 and Beyond”, IEEE Power Engineering Society General 
Meeting, Tampa, FL, 2007, pp. 1-8. 
[4] 
G. Chen, Z. Y. Dong, J. H. David, G. H. Zhang, and K. Q. Hua, “Attack 
Structural Vulnerability of Power Grids: A Hybrid Approach Based on 
Complex Networks,”  Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its 
Applications, vol. 389, 2010, pp. 595-603. 
[5] 
S. Choi, S. Kang, N. Jung, and I. Yang, “The Design of Outage 
Management System Utilizing Meter Information Based on AMI 
(Advanced Metering Infrastructure) System,” in Proc. the 8th 
International Conference on Power Electronics, Shilla Jeju, Korea, 2011, 
pp. 2955-2961. 
[6] 
S. Clements and H. Kirkham, “Cyber-security Considerations for the 
Smart Grid,” IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting, 
Minneapolis, MN, 2010, pp. 1-5. 
[7] 
F. M. Cleveland, “Cyber Security Issues for Advanced Metering 
Infrastructure (AMI),” IEEE Power and Energy General Meeting- 
Conversion and Delivery of Electrical Energy in the 21st Century, 
Pittsburgh, PA, 2008, pp. 1-5. 
[8] 
G. N. Ericsson, “Cyber-security and Power System Communication: 
Essential Parts of a Smart Grid Infrastructure,” IEEE Transactions on 
Power Delivery, vol. 25, no. 3, 2010, pp. 1501-1507. 
[9] 
D. G. Hart, “Using AMI to Realize the Smart Grid,” IEEE Power 
Engineering Society General Meeting, Pittsburgh, PA, 2008, pp. 1-2. 
[10] A. Ipakchi and F. Albuyeh, “Grid of the Future,” IEEE Power and 
Energy Magazine, vol. 7, no. 2, 2009, pp. 52-62. 
[11] X. Jin, Y. Zhang, and X. Wang, “Strategy and Coordinated 
Development of Strong and Smart Grid, in Proc. the 2012 IEEE 
Conference on Innovative Smart Grid Technologies – Asia (ISGT Asia), 
Tianjin, China, 2012, pp. 1-4.  
[12] I. Joe, J. Y.  Jeong, and F. Zhang, “Design and Implementation of AMI 
System using Binary CDMA for Smart Grid,” in Proc. the Third 
International Conference on Intelligent System Design and Engineering 
Applications, Hong Kong, 2013, pp. 544-549. 
[13] J. H. Khan and J. Y. Khan, “A Heterogeneous WiMAX-WLAN 
Network for AMI Communications in the Smart grid,” in Proc. the IEEE 
third International Conference on Smart Grid Communication 
(SmartGridComm), Tainan, Taiwan, 2012, pp. 710-715. 
[14] A. R. Metke and R. L. Ekl, “Smart Grid Security Technology,” in Proc. 
IEEE Conference on Innovative Smart Grid Technologies (ISGT), 
Gaithersburg, MD,  2010, pp. 1-7. 
[15] X. Miao, X. Chen, X. Ma, G. Liu, H. Feng, and X. Song, “Comparing 
Smart Grid Technology Standards Roadmap of the IEC, NIST, and 
SGCC,” in Proc. 2012 China International Conference on Electricity 
Distribution (CICED 2012), Shanghai, China, 2012, pp. 5-6. 
[16] R. O'neill, “Smart grid sound transmission investments,” IEEE Power 
and Energy Magazine, vol. 5, no. 5, 2007, pp. 104-102. 
[17] Y. Simmhan, A. G. Kumbhare, B. Cao, and V. Prasanna, “An Analysis 
of Security and Confidentiality Issues in Smart Grid Software 
Architectures on Clouds,” in Proc. IEEE 4th International Conference on 
Cloud Computing (CLOUD 2011), Washington, DC, USA, 2011, pp. 
582-589. 
[18] H. Tai and E. Hogain, “Behind the Buzz: Eight Smart-Grid Trends 
Shaping the Industry,” IEEE Power and Energy, vol. 7, no. 2, 2009, pp. 
96-97. 
[19] U.S. 
Department 
of 
Energy 
(DOE), 
Available: 
www.smartgrid.gov/the_smart_grid, [retrieved: April, 2015].  
[20] U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), “The Smart Grid: an Introduction,” 
Available: http://energy.gov/oe, [retrieved: April, 2015]. 
[21] B. Vaidya, D. Makrakis, and H. Mouftah, “Secure Multipath Routing for 
AMI Network in Smart Grid,” in Proc. IEEE 31st International 
Conference on Performance Computing and Communications (IPCCC), 
Austin, TX, 2012, pp. 408-415. 
[22] M. Wagner, M. Kuba, and A. Oeder, “Smart Grid Cyber Security: A 
German Perspective,” in Proc. International Conference on Smart Grid 
Technology, Economics and Policies (SG-TEP), Nuremberg, 2012, pp. 
1-4. 
[23] J. Wang and V. C. M. Leung, “A Survey of Technical Requirements and 
Consumer Application Standards for IP-based Smart Grid AMI 
Network,” in Proc. the International Conference on Information 
Networking (ICOIN), Barcelona, 2011, pp. 114-119. 
[24] Y. Yan, Y. Qian, H. Sharif, and D. Tipper, “A Survey on Smart Grid 
Communication 
Infrastructures: 
Motivations, 
Requirements, 
and 
Challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 15, no. 
1, 2013, pp. 5-20. 
[25] Y. Yan, Y. Qian, and H. Sharif, “A Secure and Reliable In-network 
Collaborative 
Communication 
Scheme 
for 
Advanced 
Metering 
Infrastructure in Smart Grid,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Communications 
and Networking Conference (WCNC), Cancun, Quintana Roo, 2011, pp. 
909-914. 
[26] P. Schaumont, “True Random Number Generation,” Circuit Cellar, no. 
268, 2012, pp. 52-58. 
 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-422-0
EMERGING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence

