Electric Vehicle Route Assistance Using Forecast on Charging Station  
Marie Nestor Mariyasagayam and Yuichi Kobayashi 
Information and Communication Technologies Lab. 
Hitachi Europe SAS - ERD - Sophia Antipolis 
Valbonne, France 
 e-mail: marienestor.mariyasagayam@hitachi-eu.com, yuichi.kobayashi@hitachi-eu.com 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a method to provide route 
assistance for electric vehicles by forecasting availability of 
charging spots in a charging station. The method uses location 
and reachability information of other electric vehicles along 
the route in order to estimate charging spot occupancy ratio at 
the charging station. By using such information, a risk factor 
for charging at a station along a planned route of an electric 
vehicle is calculated. The risk factor is continuously monitored, 
and when risk becomes high, a new route based on other 
charging stations located along the route is proposed to the 
driver. By dynamically monitoring travel routes based on 
charging station capacity and population of electric vehicles 
around the charging station, a prediction can be made about 
the availability of charging stations. Thus, in order to have 
faster 
travel 
times, 
electric 
vehicle 
drivers 
can 
be 
opportunistically advised to take appropriate routes with less 
crowded charging stations. 
Keywords-Electric 
Vehicle; 
Charging 
Station; 
Route 
Assistance; Telematics Service 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Electric Vehicle (EV) enables pollution-free and 
noiseless driving. But, they come at a cost when compared to 
vehicles with combustion engine: the range (distance) of 
driving [1]. The actual distance traveled by an electric 
vehicle without recharging its battery is relatively lesser 
when compared to driving distances of vehicles based on 
gasoline. It was one of the prime reasons for electric vehicles 
to lose the race when they were already deployed in the 19th 
century, even before vehicles with internal combustion 
engines came into consumer market [2]. 
In the 21st century, with growing interest from 
consumers, and policy makers, the EV market is beginning 
to see growth again. EV manufacturers are at their initial 
stages of deploying fully electric vehicles. Many efficient 
battery usage mechanisms [3], [4] are being developed in 
order to increase the range of an EV, and on-going 
collaborative research efforts [5] aim at improving charging 
station infrastructure in order to have faster charging. 
Nevertheless, a level of incertitude still exists about 
destination reachability [6], especially when routes involve 
longer distances, or even shorter routes which are troubled 
by traffic incidents such as traffic jam, road blockade, etc. 
In the current scenario, one of the solutions prime to the 
successful deployment of electric vehicles on a large scale is 
to providing route assistance services taking into account 
charging stations along the traveling route. It helps to extend 
the actual range of an EV by planned stopovers for charging 
at a charging station along a travel route. As charging 
infrastructure deployments are rapidly growing, routing EVs 
via charging station has gained considerable importance in 
the recent years [7], [8], and has become a prime factor for 
wide-spread the deployment of electric vehicles. 
At present, the number of electric vehicles is not so large 
compared to vehicles based on combustion engines [9]. 
Soon, this number is seen to increase steadily [10]. When the 
numbers of EVs increase on a route, the probability for an 
EV to find a spot immediately, upon its arrival at a charging 
station decreases. Also, there is high potential for a charging 
station to remain fully occupied due to increased demand for 
charging. Thus an EV driver may encounter one or more 
combination of the following problems: 
 
The EV driver may be made to wait in order to get 
charged due to queuing of electric vehicles at a charging 
station. Depending on the vehicle type, battery 
requirements, and charging infrastructure capabilities, 
present fast-charging infrastructure services require any- 
where between 10 to 60 minutes [11] for a full battery 
re-charge. Thus, when compared to gasoline stations, the 
order of waiting time is relatively higher for an EV 
driver to get re-charged at a charging station. It can 
ultimately lead to additional delay in the driver’s 
planned journey, in case there is a necessity for re-
charging along the travel route. 
 
Increased charging demand at one station can lead to 
gradual overloading of subsequent charging stations 
along the route because drivers tend stop for charging at 
the subsequent stations when charging is not possible at 
the current station. As a result, an EV driver may not be 
able to find a suitable charging station at all for a 
considerable length of the planned route.  
 
It might also happen that the driver can be charged at a 
higher price per unit of electric power, e.g., a charging 
station may propose to charge EVs using their stand-by 
power during times of overloading and power shortage. 
This may not be appreciated by drivers who are 
concerned about cost-factor. 
Apart from EV drivers, simultaneous charging demand 
from large number of electric vehicles on a particular section 
of route can lead to breakdown of conventional power grid. 
Field tests [12] and results based on analytical framework 
[13]  show current grid architecture is unable to cope with 
peak charging demands especially when large numbers of 
EVs try to charge simultaneously via several charging 
stations controlled by a particular grid. This can disturb 
smooth functioning of electric power distribution and 
operation. However, to tackle such problems, large-scale 
research collaboration [14] are on-going to demonstrate 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

power grid operational stability and address issues such as 
power voltage, surplus electricity and frequency fluctuation.  
Taking into account the above-mentioned problems, to 
provide route assistance to an electric vehicle through a 
charging station that is susceptible to overloading by 
surrounding electric vehicles becomes risky for destination 
reachability of the EV driver. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
presents the prior works that are relevant to the subject of 
electric vehicle route assistance. Section III describes the 
overall system architecture. Section IV introduces the 
parameters necessary for risk factor calculation. Section V 
provides a set of rules for deciding whether to re-route over 
other optimal paths. Example calculations are provided in 
Section VI. Section VII identifies a set of features relevant to 
electric vehicle route assistance mechanisms, and provides a 
comprehensive list of availability of such features in the 
route assistance methods discussed in prior works. Section 
VIII shows a simple evaluation of the proposed method. 
Finally, Section IX provides concluding remarks and further 
extension for future work.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
At present, route assistance services are generally 
performed independently for each electric vehicle [7], [15], 
[16], taking into account a navigation route from a start 
location to a destination location traveled by the electric 
vehicle, considering location of charging stations along the 
travel route. 
Kobayashi et al. [7] proposed a route search method 
which calculates routes with stop-overs at charging stations 
according to the available range of EVs. This is done to have 
extra battery charge when current remaining charge is not 
enough to reach the destination. Eisner et al. [15] considered 
a mathematical model for optimal routing of EVs using 
battery capacity constraints in order to have energy-efficient 
routing. This method exploits energy recuperation capacity 
of EVs during deceleration phases or when going downhill 
along the travel route. It has been observed through 
experiments that such mathematical model gives rise to 
several optimal paths especially considering battery 
constraints. An optimal routing method [16] based on energy 
consumption rather than just using shortest route to 
destination is proposed. The method takes estimated the 
energy consumption of vehicle when traveling along 
different routes towards a chosen destination, and selects the 
most economical route in terms of energy consumption. By 
selecting most economical routes, the necessity to re-charge 
at a charging station can decrease or at least the number of 
stop-overs along the route can be decreased relatively. 
Nevertheless, in order to have extended range and when 
distance to destination is longer than actual range possible 
with current battery level of an EV, re-charging remains 
inevitable. Thus a viable option is to calculate routes such 
that there are charging stations near-by in case there will be a 
need for re-charging. 
There are other route search algorithms not specific to 
electric vehicles, but can be eventually applied to EVs as 
well. Faez et al. [17] proposed a route search algorithm based 
on real-time traffic information provided by a sensor network 
consisting of road side terminals. Having real-time traffic 
information gives an idea of how long a vehicle can stay in a 
particular route segment under current traffic conditions. 
Services for EV route assistance can use such information to 
estimate how long an EV will approximately take, in order to 
travel a section of the road under actual traffic conditions. 
Kono et al. [18] proposed a route search system which uses 
information such as real-time traffic information and 
geometric information such as inclination of the route, then 
calculates optimum route in terms of not route distance but 
gas consumption by avoiding congested points or ascending 
slope. Such idea can be applied to electric vehicle, by 
making EVs to take routes that have relatively lesser 
ascending slopes or can be coupled with the idea presented 
by Eisner et al. [15] to increase the range of an electric 
vehicle. 
In the prior works, it can be observed that route planning 
for electric vehicles is typically based on the shortest 
distance to the charging stations or by selecting route that 
consumes least amount of electric power. There is no 
account of other EVs planning to use the same charging 
station, nor is the actual availability of charging spot in a 
charging station, upon the arrival of an EV, considered. 
When many EVs are planning to use the same charging 
station, and if route plans are made without considering such 
information, it is highly likely that one or more EV users 
may suffer due to problems mentioned in Section I. 
This paper presents a method to enable route assistance 
to an EV user, by taking into account the population of other 
electric vehicles in the vicinity of a charging station, and also 
by predicting the availability of charging spots in the station.  
III. 
 OVERALL SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
The overall system is illustrated in Fig. 1. It consists of the 
following components: 
1. A service center. 
2. Charging stations. 
3. Traffic centers. 
4. Electric vehicles. 
Service center: This is the main component that 
provides route assistance service to the electric vehicles. It is 
connected to the traffic centers, charging stations and electric 
vehicles through a communication network, and can 
exchange data with them through the network. The service 
center contains one or more servers that are used to provide 
the service. For the purpose of description, the “server of the 
service center” will be known as “server” in the rest of this 
document. The service center has access to the location 
information of the charging stations. It can either store such 
information in a database, or can request for update from the 
traffic centers or directly from the charging station. The 
service center has also location information about electric 
vehicles, which is received from the traffic centers and/or 
directly 
from 
the 
electric 
vehicles 
through 
the 
communication network.  
It is important to note that privacy and data protection 
remain an open issue, and there are claims [19] that location 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

sensing methods are a threat to privacy of the driver 
participating in the service. Several debates and related 
developments are taking place at different levels through 
industry-academia partnership projects [20], [21]  and 
government reforms [22] in order to address issues related to 
privacy and data protection. Until proper consensus is 
reached at all levels, this work assumes that such issues can 
be handled using known privacy-preserving [23], [24] or 
service subscription by having consent of the participating 
entities, etc.  
Charging station: It contains one or more charging 
spots. A charging spot is used by an electric vehicle to 
charge its battery. The charging station provides information 
to the server through the communication network about 
current charging conditions such as maximum number of 
charging spots, currently occupied spots, rate at which 
charging is being carried out at a particular charging spot, the 
current battery level of the electric vehicle, the maximum 
battery charge capacity or the intended level of charging at 
the charging spot. Such information is used by the server to 
estimate availability of charging spots for other electric 
vehicles reaching the charging station.  
Traffic center: This component manages road traffic 
related information collected from roadside sensors and/or 
vehicles through communication network. It is capable of 
providing road traffic related information to the server 
through the network. The traffic related information consists 
of collection of localization data, speed, direction of travel, 
estimated traveling time between geographic locations, and 
location of charging stations. Such information is used by the 
server to estimate the time required by an electric vehicle to 
reach a particular charging station, under actual traffic 
conditions. In addition, location information of electric 
vehicles along the route, and status of their battery charges 
are also provided by the traffic center to the server. This 
additional information is used by the server to predict 
likelihood of occupying a charging spot at a charging station 
by other electric vehicles. 
Electric vehicles: These are the beneficiaries of the route 
assistance service provided by the service center. They are 
connected to the network by wired or wireless means. From 
the electric vehicle, the service center can receive location 
information, status of battery charge, and intended travel 
route or destination. With help of such information, the 
server identifies charging stations that are located along the 
travel route of the electric vehicle. 
IV. 
FORECASTING OF CHARGING STATION AVAILABILITY 
The principle idea behind the route assistance method is 
to associate a risk factor (RF) for charging at a charging 
station (CS) along the travel route. The RF is calculated 
based on charging station availability (i.e., absence or 
presence of charging spots), a time-to-reach factor calculated 
based on travel duration of other electric vehicles along the 
route to reach the charging station, and a ratio between the 
EV population traveling towards the charging station and the 
total EVs within a perimeter of the charging station. The 
server uses the current position of the ego-EV (i.e., the 
electric vehicle to which the route assistance service is 
offered) to calculate a risk factor for charging at the next 
intended charging station. For its calculation it uses data 
from the charging station, the electric vehicle and the traffic 
center.  
 
 
Figure 1.Overall System Architecture. 
 
Figure 2 shows the flowchart of the route assistance 
process. In order to calculate the risk factor for charging at a 
particular station, the server needs to compute the following 
parameters: 
 
Charging station capacity (PCAP) 
 
EV population (EVPOP and EVPOP-EGO) 
 
Time-To-Reach Factor (TTRF) 
In addition to the above factors, the server calculates the 
following factors that are used during the re-route decision 
making process: 
 
Free Charging Spots (FCS) 
 
Minimum Queueing Time (MQT) 
The use of above parameters and the method by which they 
are calculated are shown from sections IV-A to IV-E.  
A. Charging Station Capacity(PCAP) 
With the help of location information received from the 
vehicle, the server can identify the nearest charging station 
along the traveling direction (S1) from its database. The 
server then queries the following information from the 
charging station (shown in steps S2 and S3 of Fig. 2): 
 
Maximum number of charging spots (FC) 
 
Currently occupied spots (OC) 
Subsequently, the charging station capacity PCAP (S4) can 
be calculated using (1): 

PCAP = OC / FC.

PCAP is inverse to the risk factor for charging. For values 
approaching towards 1, the availability of a charging spot in 
a charging station decreases. Hence, the risk factor for 
charging at a charging station for an EV increases.  
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

B. Estimation of EV Population 
With the help of the location information of the charging 
station, a perimeter is constructed. The perimeter is a 
midway-distance between the next charging station and the 
previous charging station (example available in Section VI). 
The server gets information of the number of EVs that are 
present within the perimeter (step S5), along with their 
respective location and moving direction. It then calculates 
the EVs that are located within the perimeter EVPOP and the 
number of EVs traveling towards the charging station of the 
ego-vehicle (EVPOP-EGO) in step S6. The population of 
electric vehicles has a direct effect on the charging spot 
availability at a charging station. If more vehicles travel 
towards the charging station, the risk that the charging 
station can get occupied is also higher. EVPOP-EGO is the 
actual number of electric vehicles that travel in the direction 
of the charging station. The value EVPOP is used as a 
weighting factor when calculating the risk factor.  
C. Time-To-Reach Factor (TTRF) 
The server receives information about traffic conditions 
from the traffic center (step S7). It contains current traffic 
information of vehicles, speed of the traffic flow and the 
status of the route (accident, road works, etc.) along the 
traveling direction of the electric vehicle. The data is used to 
calculate the instantaneous travel time along a certain section 
of the planned route. This is equivalent to the time duration 
that an EV can take to reach a charging station along its route 
depending on the existing traffic conditions. Also, with the 
input received in step S5 on the location information of other 
EVs, the server estimates the time taken by other vehicles 
located within the perimeter and driving towards the location 
of charging station. This time taken to reach is called as 
“Estimated Time-to-Reach” (ETR). An average and the 
standard deviation of the ETR are calculated. Then a Time-
To-Reach Factor (TTRF) is given using Table I. 
TABLE I.  
A MAPPING OF TTRF VALUES FOR DIFFERENT ETREGO 
VALUES BASED ON MEAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF ETR VALUES OF 
EVS. 
ETREGO value 
TTRF 
ETREGO ≤μ- 3σ 
1/7 
μ- 3σ < ETREGO ≤μ- 2σ 
2/7 
μ- 2σ < ETREGO ≤ μ- σ 
3/7 
μ- σ < ETREGO ≤ μ+σ 
4/7 
μ+σ < ETREGO ≤μ+ 2σ 
5/7 
μ+2σ < ETREGO ≤ μ+3σ 
6/7 
ETREGO > μ+ 3σ 
1 
 
The logic of the table is such that for higher ETR values, 
a higher TTRF value is chosen, i.e., vehicles which are far 
away from the charging station have lower probability 
(higher risk) to find a charging spot because of other vehicles 
which may be closer to the charging station. For lower 
values of ETR, a lower value of TTRF is selected, which in 
turn provides a lower risk factor: vehicles closer to the 
charging station. This time factor is used as a simple measure 
of likelihood of occupancy of a charging spot in a charging 
station. Within the perimeter of a charging station, the more 
time it takes for an ego-EV to reach the charging station, the 
higher is the probability for a charging spot to be occupied 
by another electric vehicle, traveling in the direction of the 
charging station, and ahead of the ego-EV. 
D. Free Charging Spots (FCS) 
The server receives information about the number of 
charging spots occupied (S61 of Fig. 3). The information 
contains current charging station information and conditions 
such as: 
 
Number of charging spots (N). 
 
Rate of charging at Nth charging spot (RN). 
 
Maximum charge required by EV (ChmaxN) at Nth 
charging spot. 
Figure 2. Route Assistance Process 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
Current charge level in EV (ChcurrN) at Nth 
charging spot. 
 
 
Figure 3. Estimation of Free Charging Spots (FCS) and Minimum Queuing 
Time (MQT). 
 
With the above information, the server estimates a 
liberation time for each charging spot at the station. 
Liberation time (LT) is an estimate of the time duration until 
which a charging spot will be occupied by an electric 
vehicle. It is the ratio of the charge required by an electric 
vehicle to the rate of charging provided by the charging spot. 
The calculation procedure is shown from steps S62 through 
S69 of the flowchart in Fig. 3. 
E. Minimum Queueing Time (MQT) 
Assume that a charging station consists of N charging 
spots, and their respective liberation times are LT1, LT2, 
LT3… LTN. Let X be the total number of spots that have 
liberation time (i.e., they become free) less than the arrival 
time of the ego-vehicle (i.e., ETREGO), and Y be the number 
of spots that have liberation time greater than ETREGO. 
                     
MQT = min {LT1 , LT2 , LT3 , . . . LTY } − ETREGO
(2) 
 
 
For the ego-vehicle to queue at the time of its arrival, 
X=0. In order to estimate how long an electric vehicle has to 
wait just after its arrival at the charging station, a set of 
liberation times that have values greater than ETREGO have to 
be formed. From this set, a minimum value is selected. The 
difference between the minimum value and the ETREGO 
gives an estimate of the minimum queuing time. 
F. Risk Factor (RF) 
The risk factor is calculated using parameters obtained in 
Sections IV-A, IV-B and IV-C. Equation (3) is used to 
calculate the risk factor. 
 
RF = PCAP −EGO ∗ (EVPOP-EGO /EVPOP) ∗ TTRF 
(3) 
 
RF value lies between 0 and 1, where 0 means no risk 
and 1 means maximum risk. This can also be expressed in 
terms of percentage. The risk factor associated with the 
charging station is continuously monitored, and when the 
risk factor exceeds a given threshold, decision making 
process is initiated (details in Section V).  
V. 
DECISION TO RE-ROUTE 
This section presents a set of conditions that need to be 
checked after the risk factor goes beyond a determined 
threshold and before advising a new route to the driver. This 
is the last step (S12) of the route assistance process shown in 
Fig. 2. The flowchart of the decision making process is 
shown in Fig. 4.  
The server assumes a threshold factor for risk (RFTH ). If 
the calculated risk factor is greater than threshold, a decision 
to re-route using new charging station is based on the 
following conditions (step S12 of Fig. 2): 
1. The server estimates the number of electric vehicles 
that will reach the current charging station before 
ego-EV. If this number is greater than the estimated 
free charging spots, then it can be known whether 
there will be any immediate spot for charging at the 
arrival of the ego-EV. 
2. The location of subsequent charging station CSNEW 
in the traveling direction of the ego-EV is identified 
(S84). The current battery level of the EV is used to 
check reachability to the newly identified charging 
station in S85. A new time to destination is 
calculated via CSNEW. From this it can be known 
whether the electric vehicle is able to reach the new 
charging station if proposed.  
3. Then it is checked whether the sum of MQT and 
time to destination via current charging station, is 
greater than the new time to destination via charging 
at CSNEW (and its MQTNEW if required). From such 
comparison, it can be known whether passing by 
new charging station is faster than by just using the 
current charging station (even though it involves a 
minimum waiting time). This condition check is also 
used to void routing vehicles through CSNEW, when 
waiting times at CSNEW are larger than the current 
station (i.e., already many vehicles are being queued 
at CSNEW).  
 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
Figure 4. Deciding to re-route. 
When conditions 1, 2 and 3 are true, the user is informed 
of new route by the server through the communication 
network. 
VI. 
ROUTE ASSISTANCE SERVICE EXAMPLE 
In this section, an example of route assistance service is 
shown along with a sample calculation for risk factor using 
four electric vehicles: ego-EV, EV1, EV2 and EV3 as shown 
in Fig. 5. Only vehicles ego-EV, EV1, EV2 are moving in the 
direction towards the charging station CS2, which is the 
charging station being targeted by ego-EV. 
 
 
Figure 5. Example calculation of Time-To-Reach Factor (TTRF) 
 
Assume ETR of ego-EV, EV1 and EV2 are 10, 20 and 30 
minutes respectively, in order to reach CS2. Then the TTRF 
value for ego-EV can be calculated according to explanation 
in Section IV-C and Table I as follows: 
TTRF = 3/7 
(4) 
where, μ = 20, σ = 8.16, μ − 2σ < ETREGO ≤ μ – σ 
Assume that CS2 has 3 charging spots out of which 2 are 
occupied by EVs for charging, then charging station 
capacity calculated according to (1) as follows: 
PCAP −EGO = 2/3 
(5) 
EVPOP = 4 
(6) 
EVPOP −EGO = 3 
(7) 
 
 
Then, the risk factor calculated according to (3) will 
evaluate to 
RF = 0.214
(8) 
In other words, the risk percentage for charging at CS2 for 
the ego-vehicle is about 21% when it reaches the charging 
station in 10 minutes.  
In the example used, the time to arrival of EVEGO (10 
minutes) < EV1 (20 minutes) < EV2 (30 minutes). Table II 
gives risk percentages calculated for all vehicles charging at 
CS2 for various power capacity levels (PCAP) at the charging 
station. 
TABLE II.  
RISK PERCENTAGE OF EVEGO EV1 AND EV2 FOR VARIABLE 
PCAP VALUES AT CHARGING STATION CS2 
Vehicle 
PCAP = 0 
PCAP  = 1/3 
PCAP  = 2/3 
PCAP = 1 
EVEGO 
0% 
11% 
21% 
32% 
EV1 
0% 
15% 
28% 
43% 
EV2 
0% 
18% 
35% 
54% 
 
Assuming a threshold of 50% for risk, the server does not 
initiate any route re-calculation neither for EVEGO nor for 
EV1. But, when EV2 is considered, for the case when PCAP-
EGO is 1 (i.e., when all charging spots are occupied at CS2), 
the risk percentage is more than 50%. So, for EV2, the server 
identifies a subsequent charging station along the travel 
route, and re-calculates route towards the destination using 
the newly identified charging station. Then a decision is 
made whether to propose this new route to the EV2 driver 
based on the following conditions (as explained in Section 
V): 
1. Can EV2 reach the next charging station with 
the current battery capacity (i.e., whether 
vehicle able to reach newly chosen charging 
station)? 
2. If the estimated number of available charging 
spots at CS2 are more than the number of 
electric vehicles reaching the charging station 
before EV2 (i.e., whether vehicle is unable to 
have a free charging spot upon arrival)? 
3. Whether passing via another charging station is 
faster than passing via current station, taking 
into account the minimum queuing time 
required? 
When the above conditions evaluate to true, the new 
route is advised to the driver. 
VII. SUMMARY OF FEATURES RELATED TO EV ROUTE 
ASSISTANCE 
This section summarizes a list of features that are 
relevant to electric vehicle route assistance, and the 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

advantage of using such features in optimizing route search 
for electric vehicles. Table IV shows a listing of the features, 
their corresponding advantage in optimization of route 
search for electric vehicles, and their availability in the 
method M1 described in this paper, and other methods M2 
[7], M3 [15] and M4 [16] presented in the prior works under 
Section II. From Table IV, it can be observed that some 
features are also used for route assistance of non-electric 
vehicle as well, and hence are not new. But, given a limited 
range of electric vehicles, these features have much more 
impact, and a stronger role to be play while providing route 
assistance. In general, the features used for optimization 
target mainly two metrics for efficient route assistance: (i) 
travel time and (ii) energy consumption. Methods 1 and 2 
focus on the first metric in order to minimize travel time 
when passing by charging stations. Methods 3 and 4 focus on 
the second metric in order to minimize energy expenditure 
while traveling along a route. For a given a set of routes, 
methods 3 and 4 prioritize route selection based on the 
estimate of the total amount of energy spent while traveling 
along the route. When battery level in an EV is such that 
there is enough range to reach destination, methods 1, 2, 3 
and 4 can be conveniently used for route assistance of the 
electric vehicle. When several routes are available with 
enough battery range for each route, methods 1 and 2 can 
provide the shortest route towards destination, whereas 
methods 3 and 4 can select the route with lowest energy 
consumption. 
On the other hand, when routes are similar (i.e., in terms 
of energy consumption), and when the distance to destination 
is longer than range that could be achieved with current 
battery level of an EV, there is no option left, but to re-
charge. In such situation, it is advantageous to consider route 
navigation passing by charging stations. As previously 
mentioned in the introductory section, the order of waiting 
times in a charging station are relatively larger for an EV 
when compared to vehicles based on combustion engines. 
When charging is imminent to continue an onward journey, 
route planning via charging stations becomes a viable option. 
By forecasting and continuous monitoring of the charging 
stations along the route, drivers can be advised to take 
different optimal routes in order to pass by charging stations 
with lower or zero waiting time. 
VIII. EVALUATION OF THE PROPOSED METHOD 
This section evaluates the proposed route assistance 
method using travel time and energy consumption metrics. 
For the purpose of a simple hypothetical evaluation, consider 
Fig. 6. There are three possible routes to a destination D 
from start position S of an electric vehicle. They are: 
 
Route 1: SC1D 
 
Route 2: SC2D 
 
Route 3: SC3D 
C1, C2 and C3 are the charging stations that are located 
along the routes. Routes 1 and 2 partly include passage via 
hilly areas where the energy expenditure for a vehicle can 
become higher when compared to traveling over a flat plain. 
Each of the routes is divided into segments based on the 
location of charging stations. Traveling via each segment on 
a particular route will incur a certain amount of energy 
expenditure (E), segment travel time (ST), charging time 
(CT) and queuing time (QT) in a charging station. 
 
Figure 6. Evaluation of proposed method using energy expenditure and 
travel time metrics 
 
The total travel time for each route is equivalent to the 
sum of the segment travel times, charging times and the 
queuing times at the charging station. 
 
Travel Time TT = ∑ STn + ∑ CTx, + ∑QTx
(9) 
 
where ‘n’ is the number of segments and ‘x’ is the 
number of charging stations. 
The energy expenditure for each route can be calculated 
by summing up the individual energy expenditures of each 
segment for that particular route. 
 
Energy Expenditure EE = ∑ En
(10) 
 
Using (9) and (10), the total travel time and the energy 
expenditure for each of the routes are calculated respectively 
for the case presented in Fig. 6, and are shown in Table III. It 
is assumed that the initial available charge (Bs) is at least 
enough to reach a charging station along the given route. In 
this evaluation, time is expressed in minutes and energy 
expenditure in kWh. Two cases are considered: Case A: 
Without knowledge of QT; Case B: With knowledge of QT. 
TABLE III.  
EVALUATION RESULT BY PROPOSED METHOD. 
Case 
Route 
# 
QT 
(min) 
TT 
(min) 
EE 
 (kWh) 
A 
When QT = 0 or 
no queuing time 
is considered 
1 
0 
80 
8 
2 
0 
82 
8 
3 
0 
110 
7 
B 
When QT is 
considered 
1 
5 
85 
8 
2 
2 
84 
8 
3 
5 
115 
7 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Considering case A, methods M1 and M2 will select 
route 1 (i.e., the route with the least travel time) and methods 
M3 and M4 will select route 3 (i.e., the route with least 
energy consumption). 
Considering case B, since method M1 is aware of the 
queuing time at the charging stations, it will select route 2, 
method M2 will still select route 1 because it does not have 
knowledge about the queuing time at the charging stations, 
and methods M3 and M4 will select route 3.  
Thus by knowing queuing time in addition, the proposed 
method is able to provide a more optimal route in terms of 
travel time. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented a method to provide route 
assistance for electric vehicles taking into account the 
availability of a charging station and other EVs that are 
susceptible to use the charging station. An approaching 
charging station, along the route of an electric vehicle, was 
associated with a risk factor for charging based on: EV 
population within a perimeter of the charging station, 
estimated arrival times of the EVs to the charging station, 
and the availability of charging spots in the station. By 
continuous monitoring of the estimated risk factor, 
alternative routes or charging stations were advised to the 
EV driver when risk percentage to charge at a station became 
greater. This was done to reduce delay in the EV driver’s 
journey when a stopover is required for getting charged. 
Thus, by predicting risk percentages for charging at a station, 
EV drivers can be advised to take alternative routes that have 
lesser risk percentages, and which are comparatively faster 
for destination reachability. In Section I, the pros and cons of 
electric vehicle were discussed and route assistance via 
charging stations were shown as a promising approach to 
speed-up the deployment of EVs on a large scale. Some of 
the problems that an EV driver can encounter while driving 
via charging station were also discussed. Existing methods 
for route assistance were discussed as prior works in Section 
II. Section III showed the overall architecture needed to 
realize the route assistance service. The parameters necessary 
for calculating risk factor, and the decision making process 
for new route selection were explained in Section IV, and 
Section V, respectively. In Section VI, exemplary risk factor 
calculation, and the conditional checks that were required to 
re-route an electric vehicle were shown. For the reader’s 
digest, a tabular summary of features that are used in 
optimization and their advantages were presented in Section 
VII. Observing the list of features, two principal metrics 
were identified for route assistance of EVs: travel time and 
energy consumption. EV route assistance methods can use 
these two metrics to trade-off and optimize route search for 
electric vehicles. Based on the two metrics, a simple 
evaluation of the proposed method was shown in Section 
VIII.  
A detailed comparison of the proposed method with other 
route assistance methods using real time data is reserved for 
future work.  
TABLE IV SUMMARY OF FEATURES RELATED TO EV ROUTE ASSISTANCE AND THEIR AVAILABILITY IN DIFFERENT METHODS 
(O: AVAILABLE; X: NOT AVAILABLE) 
Feature 
Advantage 
M1 
M2  
[7] 
M3 
[15] 
M4 
[16] 
Charging spot availability 
Enables to predict if an EV requires queuing when reaching a charging 
station, and eventually choose stations without any queues in order to 
minimize travel delay. 
O 
X 
X 
X 
Queuing time in a charging 
station 
Minimize queuing delay in a charging station (when queuing cannot be 
avoided). When several charging stations are present along the route of an 
EV, this feature allows selecting the charging station with least amount of 
queuing time. 
O 
X 
X 
X 
Shortest travel time to charging 
station (including time to charge) 
Allows having faster route towards destination. 
O 
O 
X 
X 
Real-time traffic information 
Enables to estimate extra energy consumption due to idle times and traffic 
incidents (e.g., traffic jam) along the route, and thereby allows predicting 
charging necessity or route diversion according to situation. 
O 
X 
X 
X 
Include routes based on lesser 
EV population 
Allows route traveling via possibly less-crowded charging stations, and as a 
result an EV may find a charging spot easily upon its arrival at a station 
along the travel route which is sparsely populated with EV traffic. 
O 
X 
X 
X 
Shortest path to charging station 
Allows having lesser total traveling distance at the end of the journey, in 
case a vehicle has to deviate from its route in order to find a charging 
station, when no suitable charging station is available along the route. 
X 
O 
X 
X 
Battery range check 
Enables appropriate selection of charging stations (for methods M1 and 
M2) or selection of appropriate route segment (for method M3) when 
multiple routes with several charging stations are available towards a 
destination. 
O 
O 
O 
X 
Use descending routes 
EVs can recuperate energy by using downhill slopes to augment battery 
charge in order to extend their range. 
X 
X 
O 
O 
Avoid ascending routes 
Driving uphill on a steep road requires higher power from the engine, which 
increases vehicle energy consumption. By avoiding such routes, energy 
consumption can be reduced. 
X 
X 
O 
O 
Select lowest energy 
consumption  route 
When several routes are possible towards a destination, selecting a route 
with lowest energy consumption can reduce demand for re-charging. 
X 
X 
O 
O 
 
 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

REFERENCES 
[1] J. Larminie and J. Lowry, “Electric vehicle technology 
explained,” Wiley, 2012. 
[2] E.H. Wakefield, “History of the Electric Automobile,” The 
Society of Automobile Engineers, SAE International 
Publishing, 1994. 
[3] N. Kutkut, H. Wiegman, D. Divan, and D. Novotny, “Design 
considerations for charge equalization of an electric vehicle 
battery system,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, 
1999, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 28–35. 
[4] L. Lam and R. Louey, “Development of ultra-battery for 
hybrid-electric vehicle applications,” Journal of power 
sources, vol. 158, no. 2, August 2006, pp. 1140–1148. 
[5] NissanNews.com. (September) GE, Nissan sign R&D 
agreement to fast track broader adoption of electric cars. 
http://www.nissan-global.com/EN/. Retrieved: January 2013 
[6] T. Franke, I. Neumann, F. Bühler, P. Cocron, and J. Krems, 
“Experiencing range in an electric vehicle: Understanding 
psychological 
barriers,” 
Applied 
Psychology: 
An 
International 
Review, 
2011, 
doi: 
10.1111/j.1464-
0597.2011.00474.x 
[7] Y. Kobayashi, N. Kiyama, H. Aoshima, and M. Kashiyama, 
“A route search method for electric vehicles in consideration 
of range and locations of charging stations,” in IEEE 
Intelligent 
Vehicles 
Symposium 
(IV), 
Baden-Baden, 
Germany, 2011, pp. 920–925. 
[8] J. Ferreira, A. Silva, and J. Afonso, “EV-Cockpit–Mobile 
Personal Travel Assistance for Electric Vehicles,” Advanced 
Microsystems for Automotive Applications, Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 247–257, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-
21381-6_24 
[9] U. Eberle and R. von Helmolt, “Sustainable transportation 
based on electric vehicle concepts: a brief overview,” Energy 
& Environmental Science, 2010, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 689–699. 
[10] M. Tran, D. Banister, J. Bishop, and M. McCulloch, 
“Realizing the electric-vehicle revolution,” Nature Climate 
Change, 2012, vol. 2, no. 5, pp.328–333. 
[11] C. Botsford and A. Szczepanek, “Fast charging vs. slow 
charging: Pros and cons for the new age of electric vehicles,” 
The 
International 
Electric 
Vehicle 
Symposium 
and 
Exposition, EVS24, Stavanger, Norway, May 2009, pp. 1-9. 
[12] W. Kempton, et. al, “A test of vehicle-to-grid (V2G) for 
energy storage and frequency regulation in the PJM system,” 
Results from an Industry-University Research Partnership, 
University 
of 
Delaware, 
Pepco 
Holdings, 
Inc 
PJM 
Interconnect, and Green Mountain College, November 2008. 
[13] J. Taylor, A. Maitra, M. Alexander, D. Brooks, and M. 
Duvall, “Evaluation of the impact of plug-in electric vehicle 
loading on distribution system operations,” In Power & 
Energy Society General Meeting, July 2009, PES'09, IEEE, 
pp.1-6, doi: 10.1109/PES.2009.5275317 
[14] Hitachi Press Release, “U.S. and Japan Companies 
Collaborate on Smart Grid Project in Hawaii -  Hitachi to 
Serve as Project Leader”, May 17, 2011.  
http://www.hitachi.com/New/cnews/110517b.html. Retrieved: 
January 2013. 
[15] J. Eisner, S. Funke, and S. Storandt, “Optimal route planning 
for electric vehicles in large networks,” in Proc. 25th Assoc. 
Advancement Artificial Intell. Conf., San Francisco, CA,  
August, 2011. 
https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/AAAI/AAAI11/paper/vie
w/3637/4005. Retrieved: January 2013. 
[16] A. 
Artmeier, 
J. 
Haselmayr, 
M. 
Leucker, 
and 
M. 
Sachenbacher, “The optimal routing problem in the context of 
battery-powered electric vehicles,” in Workshop: CROCS at 
CPAIOR-10, Second International Workshop on Constraint 
Reasoning 
and 
Optimization 
for 
Computational 
Sustainability, Bologna, Italy, June 2010. 
[17] K. Faez and M. Khanjary, “Utospf: A distributed dynamic 
route guidance system based on wireless sensor networks and 
open shortest path first protocol,”. ISWCS’08. IEEE 
International Symposium on  Wireless Communication 
Systems, 2008,  pp. 558–562. 
[18] T. Kono, T. Fushiki, K. Asada, and K. Nakano, “Fuel 
consumption analysis and prediction model for eco route 
search,” in 15th World Congress on Intelligent Transport 
Systems and ITS America’s Annual Meeting, New York, 
November 2008, pp. 1-9. 
[19] B. Parno and A. Perrig, "Challenges in securing vehicular 
networks." In Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks 
(HotNets-IV), College Park, MD USA, November 2005,  pp. 
1-6. 
[20] SeVeCom (Secure Vehicular Communication)  
http://www.sevecom.org/. Retrieved: January 2013 
[21] PRESERVE: Preparing Secure V2X Communication Systems 
http://www.preserve-project.eu/. Retrieved: January 2013 
[22] European Commission, “How will the EU’s reform adapt data 
protection rules to new technological developments?”, 
January 2012. http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-
protection/document/review2012/factsheets/8_en.pdf 
Retrieved: January 2013 
[23] P. Papadimitratos, L. Buttyan, T. Holczer, E. Schoch, J. 
Freudiger, M. Raya, Z. Ma, F. Kargl, A. Kung, and J-P. 
Hubaux. “Secure vehicular communication systems: design 
and architecture,” Communications Magazine, IEEE, 2008, 
vol. 46, no. 11, pp. 100-109. 
[24] R. Lu, X. Lin, H. Zhu, P. H. Ho, and X. Shen, “ECPP: 
Efficient conditional privacy preservation protocol for secure 
vehicular communications,” In INFOCOM 2008, The 27th 
Conference on Computer Communications,  IEEE, 2008, pp. 
1229-1237.
 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

