MAC Performance Evaluation in Low Voltage PLC
Networks
Mehdi Korki†, Hai L. Vu∗, Chuan Heng Foh‡, Xiao Lu‡, and Nasser Hosseinzadeh†
∗ Centre for Advanced Internet Architectures, Faculty of ICT, Swinburne Univ. of Technology
† Faculty of EIS, Swinburne Univ. of Technology, Melbourne, VIC 3122, Australia
‡ School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{mkorki, hvu, nhosseinzadeh}@swin.edu.au; {aschfoh, luxi0007}@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract— Power line communication (PLC) system refers
to the use of power distribution networks for communication
purposes. In this paper, we investigate the performance of the
low voltage (LV) power lines for smart grid applications involving
data transfer in a speciﬁc narrow, low frequency band. We pro-
pose an analytical approach to obtain the line’s transfer function
and conduct simulation to determine the performance of the
LV PLC system in terms of bit error rate. We then evaluate the
performance of the medium access control protocol (MAC) for the
LV PLC network taking into account its physical characteristic
and performance limitation. We show by simulation that packet
loss in this network can be signiﬁcant even with a light trafﬁc
condition due to the noisy channel, and the goodput declines
sharply once the individual transmission rate is high enough
to congest the network. We also show that the channel errors
can be reduced by adjusting the MAC parameters to allow the
retransmissions recouping losses.
Keywords-Low voltage power line communication; medium
access control protocol; performance evaluation; orthogonal fre-
quency division multiplexing
I. INTRODUCTION
The efﬁciency, safety and reliability of the electricity trans-
mission and distribution system can be much improved by
transforming the current electricity grids into an interactive
(customers/operators) service network or smart grid. Further-
more, smart grid aims to take advantage of the existing power
distribution networks to provide value-added services such as
network management and control, broadband Internet access
or intelligent home where devices are communicating via the
electricity wires.
The electrical power system network is comprised of high
voltage (HV), medium voltage (MV) and low voltage (LV)
transmissions lines. The different transmission lines carry
different power levels over different distances using various
gauge aluminium conductors steel reinforced cables for elec-
tric distribution. The power transmission lines are known to
be non-ideal for communication purpose due to noise and
unpredictable impedance and attenuation, which vary with
time, frequency and location. Despite that fact, power line
communication (PLC) has been using in the past to send
control signals within the electricity grid [1]. Recent develop-
ment of more sophisticated modulation (e.g. spread spectrum
or multiple carrier modulation) and stronger error correction
schemes has overcome earlier obstacles and enabled PLC at
speeds comparable to other wired communication mediums.
Due to its pervasive nature, PLC now becomes a real contender
for an alternative infrastructure in providing services that
require data communication.
In particular, advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) is one
of the smart grid applications that recently attracts consider-
able interest from both industry and the research community.
It is because AMI provides consumers with the ability to
use electricity more efﬁciently and at the same time enables
utilities to monitor and repair their network in real time.
Early version of AMI has already been implemented (e.g.
in part of Victoria, Australia [2]) using wireless technologies
to collect meter readings remotely and automatically. In this
paper, we investigate the use of LV transmission line as
a medium for data communication between electric meters
and the substation as a data concentrator point located on
different parts of the distribution network. The recommended
frequency band for communication in the AMI application is
a narrow, low frequency band between 9 and 490 kHz [3].
Although the choice of LV line for AMI communication is
natural as it connects pole-mounted transformers to individual
homes associating with the electric meter, its characteristic and
network performance from the medium access control point of
view are not well understood in the literature. It is because the
majority of the work in this area was focusing on indoor PLC
network and at the high frequency band applicable for high-
speed broadband access [4]. Note that if the PLC is to be
extended beyond substation transformers to the MV network,
data transmission should then bypass those transformers that
have a great impact on PLC in the frequency range of interest.
To this end, our contributions is twofold. We ﬁrst describe
in this paper an analytical model that enables us to obtain the
transfer function of the LV PLC lines at the above speciﬁed
frequency band for generic distribution networks (i.e., includ-
ing outdoor transmission lines). Based on the obtained transfer
function, we then investigate the performance of the LV PLC
network as a data communication medium via simulation
in terms of bit error rate (BER) versus the signal to noise
ratio (SNR). Another major contribution of this paper is the
evaluation of a medium access control (MAC) protocol for the
LV PLC network based on our understanding of its physical
characteristic and performance limitation. Both contributions
are useful in designing and optimizing the PLC performance
135
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

under different load conditions and network conﬁgurations.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we describe the low-voltage power line system and study its
physical layer characteristics as well as its communication
performance. In Section III, we introduce the MAC protocol
for the considered LV PLC system, and conduct simulation
experiments to evaluate its performance in Section IV. Finally,
some important conclusions are drawn in Section V.
II. LOW-VOLTAGE (LV) POWER LINE
In this section, we ﬁrst outline our approach to study the
characteristic of the LV power lines via its transfer function.
We then study the performance of the PLC system in terms
of bit error rate (BER) and their resistance to noise using the
proposed transfer function and existing known noise models.
Results obtained in this section are essential for the design of
the medium access control (MAC) protocol of the PLC system.
The proposed MAC and its performance will be discussed in
later sections.
A. LV line characteristic
Data transmission over power lines suffers from various
frequency-dependent reﬂections and attenuation caused by the
cable material and network branching, and is getting worst
as the length of the lines increases. There have been several
techniques in the literature to model the power lines in attempt
to describe the channel behaviour either in time or frequency
domains.
Typical time-domain model such as a multipath propagation
model is based on superposition of reﬂected signal on differ-
ent paths within a PLC network. Model parameters of this
multipath propagation approach can be calculated using a so-
called echo model [1] that assumes the backward reﬂection
from impedance discontinuity is negligible. Moreover, the
model becomes intractable when there are multi branches
connecting to the same joint. Alternatively, the parameters can
be retrieved from measurements of the network in question,
which requires little computation and is easy to implement.
The latter, however, is not ﬂexible as measurements must be
carried out for every networks and conﬁgurations.
In the frequency-domain the transfer function of the PLC
system is modeled as a product of simpler transfer functions
from several cascading blocks constituting the network. In
particular, a so-called transmission matrix or scattering matrix
of the building block (e.g. two-wire transmission line block) is
computed before its transfer function is determined. The trans-
mission matrix describes the relationship between the voltage
(V) and current (I), while the scattering matrix gives that of
the incident and reﬂected waves. As a result, both incident
and reﬂected waves will contribute in the transfer function
obtained from transmission matrix. This model is scalable
as the network complexity increases and can better describe
the network behaviour as a function of physical parameters.
The model parameters can again be obtained from the actual
measurements, but can also be derived from eigen analysis of
network matrices or the lumped-element circuit transmission
line model [4]. In this paper, we will utilize the approach
of the transmission matrix where the model parameters are
determined based on the lumped-element circuit transmission
line model. It is because the lumped-element circuit is accurate
in the 9-490 kHz frequency range recommended for the AMI
application where its length is much smaller than the circuit’s
operating wavelength [5].
To this end, two line parameters, i.e., the propagation
constant γ and the characteristic impedance Z0 of the lumped-
element circuit model, can be given as
γ =

(R + jϖL)(G + jϖC),
(1)
Z0 =

R + jϖL
G + jϖC ,
(2)
where ϖ is the angular frequency, R, L, C, G are resistance,
inductance, shunt capacitance, and shunt conductance of a unit
length (m) of the transmission line. The same method as in [4]
can be used to determine R, L, C, G physical parameters.
A typical topology of the residential power lines is shown
in Fig. 1, which can be considered as a composition of many
suitable simpler networks (building blocks) as depicted in the
same ﬁgure.
Fig. 1.
Illustration of a PLC system.
In Fig. 1, the relation between the sending-end quantities
(V1 and I1) and receiving-end quantities (V2 and I2) is written
as

V1
I1

=

A
B
C
D
 
V2
I2

=
 cosh(γl)
Z0sinh(γl)
1
Z0 sinh(γl)
cosh(γl)
 
V2
I2

(3)
where l is the length of the transmission line. The 2 × 2
transmission matrix in (3) is called the ABCD matrix from
which the transfer function (H) can be derived
H =
ZL
AZL + B + CZLZS + DZS
,
(4)
where ZL, ZS are load and source impedances of the single-
branch transmission line, respectively.
The overall ABCD matrix of the network shown in Fig. 1
consisting of multiple single-branch transmission lines, each
136
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

has different cable length and cable type and is described by
the ith ABCD matrix, is then given as
A
B
C
D

=

i
Ai
Bi
Ci
Di

.
(5)
The overall transfer function is then obtained as in (4) where
ZL, ZS are load and source impedances of the PLC network.
Based on a typical single-phase low voltage power line
in Australia [2], the solid lines in Fig. 1 represent single-
phase bare overhead aluminium conductor steel reinforced
(ACSR) cables with the length of approximately 100 meters
between two power poles. The dashed lines represent the
branch copper cables with PVC insulations. The ACSR cables
have a 431.2 mm2 cross-sectional area and the copper cables
have a 10 mm2 cross-sectional area. As a result, the transfer
functions of the power line channel over 9 kHz ∼ 490 kHz
for the transmission pairs (X to Y and X to Z in Fig. 1) are
depicted in Fig. 2. Here we set Zs = 50 Ohm and ZL is
modeled as in [6].
It can be seen that the derived transfer functions do not
have signiﬁcant multipath effects as we expect in this band of
frequency. The strong attenuation notches at about 124 kHz are
mainly caused by the impedances of the branch loads inside
the residential properties.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
x 10
5
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
Frequency (Hz)
Amplitude (dBuV)
 
 
From X to Y
From X to Z
Fig. 2.
Transfer function of the LV lines.
B. LV PLC System Performance
Having derived the transfer function, herein we study the
performance of the single-phase LV PLC network in terms of
BER using multicarrier simulation. In particular, OFDM (or-
thogonal frequency division multiplexing) modulation scheme
is used in our simulation to investigate the BER that can be
TABLE I
PLC PHY PARAMETERS
Parameter
Value
Modulations for carriers
DQPSK
Total raw data rate
42.9 kbps
Coding scheme
1/2 rate convolutional code
Number of data subcarriers
96
achieved via this system. Table I shows the parameters used in
the simulation. To simulate a realistic PLC network, both white
Gaussian noise (AWGN) and impulsive noise [7] are used in
the simulation. The impulsive noise is the Middleton’s class
A and is characterized by the impulsive index α and the ratio
Γ between the background noise power and impulsive noise
power. In our simulation we chose α = 0.1 and Γ = 0.1. The
performance results are shown in Fig. 3 for both AWGN and
impulsive noises, respectively.
0
5
10
15
20
25
10
−6
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
SNR (dB)
BER
 
 
X to Y with AWGN only
X to Y with AWGN+Impulsive
X to Z with AWGN only
X to Z with AWGN+Impulsive
Fig. 3.
BER vs. SNR for LV PLC system.
It can be seen in Fig. 3 that the BER is acceptable between
point X and Y given the signal to noise ratio (SNR) is above
13 dB as recommended in [8] even in the presence of the
AWGN or impulsive noises. For the SNR above the 15 dB,
however, the BER is not improved when the impulsive noise
is present. More importantly, at the same SNR (i.e. around 13
dB) the BER between point X and Z is very high suggesting
that direct communication between them is not feasible.
III. THE MAC PROTOCOL FOR LV PLC NETWORKS
Given the uniqueness in the physical layer of the LV PLC
system, a new data link solution for reliable data exchanges
in LV PLC network is necessary. There has been a number
of research in the literature dealing with design of a MAC
protocol for a PLC system [9]. Majority of the research work
focuses on indoor PLC and the carrier sense multiple access
with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA) protocol is the most
popular choice for networking in the PLC environment. For
example, Lee et al. in [11] presented an analytical work
where the CSMA/CA protocol is used for an indoor PLC
home network. Kim et al. in [10] later proposed a multihop
PLC MAC protocol called Korea Standard power line MAC
protocol (KS-MAC). The protocol KS-MAC standard uses the
CSMA/CA protocol and considers multihop relaying operation
again in an indoor PLC home network.
An outdoor PLC network has obvious differences in phys-
ical layer characteristics, and hence it warrants an investiga-
tion on the design of a MAC protocol and its performance.
A popular solution has been proposed for the outdoor LV
PLC environment by the PRIME Alliance Technical Working
Group [12]. In this environment, the CSMA/CA protocol is
137
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

used in the MAC sublayer for the access of the common
broadcast channel, and switching nodes are introduced to
perform packet forwarding for different subnetworks.
Given the popularity of the CSMA/CA protocol for PLC
networks, in this paper, we also consider use of CSMA/CA
MAC protocol with layer-2 switching for our proposed LV
PLC system. Similar to the common CSMA/CA channel
access strategy, whenever an AMI station1 is ready for trans-
missions, it ﬁrst senses the medium to ensure that the channel
is idle. If the channel is sensed idle for a guard period known
as distributed interframe space (DIFS), then it transmits its
packet. Otherwise, it performs a backoff which reschedules
the transmission at a later time.
Herein the common binary exponential backoff (BEB) is
adopted for our protocol design. During the backoff process,
a discrete backoff counter is chosen uniformly in the range
[0, CW −1], where CW is called the contention window. The
backoff counter is decremented by one for every ﬁxed time
period called a slot where the channel remains idle. It is frozen
when a packet transmission is detected on the channel, and
reactivated after the channel is sensed idle again for a guard
period. The guard period is equal to a DIFS if the packet was
received error-free, and equal to the extended interframe space
(EIFS) if an error occurred. A station performs its transmission
when its backoff counter reaches zero.
When a packet transmission is performed, the sender is ex-
pected an immediate positive acknowledgement (ACK) replied
by the receiver. The sender may wait for a predeﬁned short
interframe space (SIFS) time period for the ACK to arrive.
If such an ACK is received within the EIFS period, the
packet is said to be transmitted successfully. Otherwise, the
transmission is unsuccessful and another backoff for this
packet transmission is initiated. For each packet the CW
is initialized to CWmin and doubles after each unsuccessful
transmission until it reaches CWmax, after which it remains
constant until the packet is either successfully received or a
retry limit is exceeded and the packet is dropped.
Since we have established in Sec. II that a transmission can
only reach its one-hop neighbours in this network, any end-
to-end transmission beyond one hop relies on intermediate
stations to forward packets. We propose the use of layer-2
switching approach where any end-to-end transmission is per-
formed within the data link layer. In particular, a station whose
transmission is addressing to its intended receiver outside of
its one hop range must explicitly select one of its neighbours
to forward the packet. If there are two or more neighbours
that can reach the intended receiver, the sender may randomly
select one per packet basis. The one hop transmission for the
packet sending/forwarding is performed using the CSMA/CA
mechanism with BEB as described above. Given that the
targeted communication network is a tree-like topology where
the substation is the headend, our packet forwarding solution
assumes that each station has knowledge about its neighbours.
1In this paper, the AMI station refers to a device consisting of a smart meter
and a transceiver that enables communication between stations and with the
headend substation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AMI station 
 
Headend 
 
Power pole 
Fig. 4.
The considered topology.
This information can be established during a network ini-
tialization procedure. For example, a particular broadcast-tree
construction may be used for this purpose.
Speciﬁcally, in the initialization procedure, the headend
ﬁrst broadcasts an INIT control message to its immediate
neighbours. Each neighbour station then rebroadcasts the
message after a backoff. Each station also associates the
source of the received INIT message as its upstream neighbour
and exchange the neighbour list with them. The initialization
procedure completes when the INIT messages propagate to
the farthest station from the headend. To achieve conver-
gence, neighbour lists are periodically exchanged between
neighbours. As the topology change in the PLC network is
infrequent, the impact of the time required for the initialization
procedure on the overall performance of the operation is
negligible. Finally, a similar operation is used for joining of a
newly activated station by broadcasting a JOIN message.
IV. MAC PERFORMANCE EVALUATION AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we present simulation results of the proposed
LV PLC network. For our experiments we use the ns-2
simulator [13] with appropriate modiﬁcations to the MAC
module enabling the broadcast in PLC networks. Table II
presents the system parameters used in the network and Fig. 4
depicts our considered topology. Each AMI station is attached
to a power pole, and each power pole is 100 meters away
from its neighbouring power pole. We consider a smart grid
scenario where sensing data from each AMI station transmits
to the headend. The sensing data may include information of
the meter reading and projected power usage. The headend
may also broadcast some small amount of information such
as utility rates to all stations. The BER of the LV PLC channel
is set to be 10−4 in our simulation. The parameter settings of
our proposed MAC protocol are given in Table II.
In our simulation experiments, we consider that each AMI
station generates a Poisson trafﬁc with a particular arrival rate
where the destination is the headend. The signals generated
by each transceiver are broadcast on the common power line.
However, these signals have limited traveling range. They can
only reach AMI stations connected to the neighbouring power
poles. Beyond this range, the signals appear as AWGN noise
and cannot be detected properly as indicated in Sec II.
We ﬁrst focus on the uplink transmission potential of the
138
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1.2
 1.4
 1.6
 1.8
 2
Goodput (Kbps)
Offered Load (Arrival Rate in Kbps)
Goodput
Fig. 5.
Illustration of system goodput versus arrival rate.
system. In this setup, all stations except the headend generate a
Poisson trafﬁc stream addressing to the headend. We measure
the goodput of the system, which describes the rate of useful
information successfully received at the headend. We present
the goodput performance of the system for a range of source
arrival rates. As illustrated in Fig. 4, given a total of 11 AMI
stations in the network, the total amount of generated trafﬁc
is 11 times the source arrival rates.
In Fig. 5, we present the system goodput for a range of
offered load measured by the arrival rates. As observed from
the results, the system offers transmission capability up to
7 kbps. This peak performance occurs when each station
generates 0.8 kbps of trafﬁc volume. With 11 stations, the
total amount of trafﬁc generated is 8.8 kbps and around
1.8 kbps of trafﬁc suffers loss. This represents a delivery ratio
of around 79.5%. These packet losses are mainly due to the
noisy channel even with a retry limit of 7. When the arrival rate
increases beyond 0.8 kbps, network congestion occurs where
system goodput declines signiﬁcantly. This is because with
more trafﬁc, transmission collisions intensify which leads to
more packet losses.
We further investigate the end-to-end packet transmission
delay in this setup. This measure provides critical information
for the quality of service (QoS) design of the smart grid appli-
cation. In Fig. 6, we depict the end-to-end packet transmission
delay as a function of the arrival rate representing the load
of the network. We show separately the transmission delay
for different numbers of hops. As can be seen, the stations
that are farther away from the headend incurs relay and thus
TABLE II
PLC MAC PARAMETERS
Parameter
Value
MAC Header size
26 bytes
Payload size
100 bytes
Slot
20µs
SIFS
10µs
DIFS
50µs
Retry Limit
7
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
Delay (s)
Offered Load (Arrival Rate in kbps)
One Hop
Two Hop
Three Hop
Four Hop
Fig. 6.
Illustration of end-to-end transmission delay versus arrival rate for
CWmin = 32.
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
Goodput (kbps)
Offered Load (Arrival Rate in kbps)
Goodput
Fig. 7.
Illustration of system goodput versus arrival rate with presence of
downlink broadcast trafﬁc.
the delay is higher. The transmission delay turns large at
around 0.8 kbps of arrival rate indicating reaching of network
congestion. Besides, due to the relatively low physical data
rate and multihop transmission requirement, the end-to-end
transmission delay for stations farther away from the headend
exceeds 1 second, which indicates that the system may not be
able to support delay sensitive applications.
In the next experiment, we include the downlink transmis-
sion and measure the uplink and downlink throughput. In
this setup, the headend broadcasts a Poisson trafﬁc stream
to all AMI stations in the network. The packet arrival rate
of the headend is the same as that of an individual AMI
station. For the downlink broadcast trafﬁc, it is considered
successful and contributes to the goodput measure when all
stations have received the packet. The system goodput results
are shown in Fig. 7. We ﬁrst observe the drop in the maximum
goodput from just over 7 kbps to around 5 kbps for the cases
without and with downlink broadcast trafﬁc, respectively. With
the presence of the downlink trafﬁc, the network congestion
appears when each AMI station generates Poisson trafﬁc
beyond 0.5 kbps. This indicates the high impact of downlink
broadcast trafﬁc.
139
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1.2
 1.4
 1.6
 1.8
 2
Goodput (Kbps)
Offered Load (Arrival Rate in Kbps)
CWmin=8:
CWmin=16:
CWmin=32:
CWmin=64:
CWmin=128
CWmin=256:
CWmin=512:
Fig. 8.
Illustration of the inﬂuence of CWmin parameters on the system
goodput.
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
Delay (s)
Offered Load (Arrival Rate in kbps)
One Hop
Two Hop
Three Hop
Four Hop
Fig. 9.
Illustration of end-to-end transmission delay versus arrival rate for
CWmin = 512.
In the ﬁnal experiment, we study the inﬂuence of CWmin
parameters on the system goodput. In Fig. 8, we show the
system goodput performance versus arrival rate for a range
of CWmin values while CWmax is maintained at 1024. As
can be seen, with a larger CWmin value which indicates a
less aggressive backoff, a lower packet loss rate is observed.
This can be determined by slopes of the goodput curves in
their increasing region. The extreme setting of CWmin = 512
achieves 7 kbps when the individual arrival rate is just above
0.6 kbps representing almost 100% of delivery ratio or no
packet loss. Conversely, the setting of CWmin = 32 achieves
7 kbps when the individual arrival rate is 0.8 kbps representing
around 79.5% of delivery ratio. However, a large setting
of CWmin which combats packet loss effectively introduces
longer retransmission delay and thus lengthens the end-to-end
transmission delay. This is illustrated in Fig. 9 where the end-
to-end transmission delay is longer than that reported in Fig. 6
for the setting of CWmin = 32.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed an analytical model to
obtain the transfer function of a low voltage power line and
conducted simulation to determine the performance of the LV
PLC system in terms of bit error rate. We found that there is no
signiﬁcant multipath effects in the band of frequency speciﬁed
for AMI applications. This suggests that the popular multipath
propagation model may not be suitable for modeling LV lines.
Furthermore, we have observed that the BER is acceptable for
communication between adjacent AMI stations as long as the
SNR is above 13 dB, but that can not be carried out to stations
that are further away in the network.
We have also designed the MAC protocol that is suitable
for communication required for the smart grid applications in
LV PLC networks such as AMI application. Via simulation,
we have shown that packet loss in the LV PLC network can be
signiﬁcant even with a light trafﬁc condition due to the noisy
channel, and the goodput declines sharply once the individual
transmission rate is high enough to congest the network. We
have demonstrated that the channel errors can be reduced
by adjusting the MAC parameters (i.e. CWmin) to allow the
retransmissions recouping losses.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Gotz, M. Rapp, and K. Dostert, “Power Line Channel Charac-
teristics and Their Effect on Communication System Design,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, pp.78-86, Apr. 2004.
[2] S. Bannister and P. Beckett, “Enhancing Powerline Communications in
the ‘Smart Grid’ using OFDMA,” Proc. of Australasian Universities
Power Engineering Conference, 2009.
[3] J. Bausch, T. Kistner, M. Babic, and K. Dostert, “Characteristics of
Indoor Power Line Channels in the Frequency Range 50-500 kHz,”
Proc. of IEEE International Symposium on Power Line communications
and Its applications, pp. 86-91, 2006.
[4] H. Meng, S. Chen,Y.L Guan, C. L. Law, P. L. So, E. Gunawan, and T.
T. Lie, “Modeling of Transfer Characteristics for the Broadband Power
Line Communication Channel,” IEEE Trans. Power Delivery, vol. 19,
no. 3, pp.1057-1064, 2004.
[5] D. M. Pozer, Microwave Engineering, Third Edition, New York, Wiley,
2005.
[6] G. Marubayashi, S. Tachikawa, “Spread Spectrum Transmission on
Residential Power Line,” Proc. IEEE International Symposium on
Spread Spectrum Techniques and Applications, vol.3, pp.1082-1086,
1996.
[7] N. Andreadou and F. N. Pavlidou, “Modeling the Noise on the OFDM
Power-Line Communications System,” IEEE Trans. Power Delivery,
vol. 25, no. 1, pp.150-157, Jan 2010.
[8] D. Cooper, and T. Jeans, “Narrowband, Low Data Rate Communica-
tions on the Low-Voltage Mains in the CENELEC Frequencies-Part I:
Noise and Attenuation,” IEEE Trans. Power Delivery, vol. 17, no. 3,
pp.718-723, July 2002.
[9] S. Galli and O. Logvinov, “Recent Developments in the Standardization
of Power Line Communications within the IEEE,” IEEE Communica-
tions Magazine, vol. 46, no. 7, pp. 64-71, July 2008.
[10] M.-S. Kim, D.-M. Son, Y.-B. Ko, and Y.-H. Kim, “A simulation
study of the PLC-MAC performance using network simulator-2,” Proc.
IEEE International Symposium on Power Line Communications and Its
Applications, pp. 99-104, 2008.
[11] K.-R. Lee, J.-M. Lee, W.-H. Kwon, B.-S. Ko, and Y.-M. Kim, “Per-
formance evaluation of CSMA/CA MAC protocol in low-speed PLC
environments,” Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Power Line
Communications and Its Applications, pp. 179-184, 2003.
[12] The PoweRline Intelligent Metering Evolution (PRIME) ALLIANCE,
Jan. 2011, http://www.prime-alliance.org/
[13] The network simulator ns-2, Jan. 2011, http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns/
140
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

