Planning of Sustainable Urban Districts based on Smart Micro-Grids Concept:
A Case Study in Brazil
Cesare Pica, Tania Leites, Franco Tumelero
Sustainable Energy Center
CERTI Foundation
Florianópolis/SC, Brazil
e-mail: cqp@certi.org.br; tnl@certi.org.br, ftu@certi.org.br
Ricardo Trentin
Telecom Department
CELESC
Florianópolis/SC, Brazil
e-mail: ricardogt@celesc.com.br
Abstract — The work presented in this paper is based on
two converging trends worldwide: an increasing interest
in sustainable solutions for urban districts and an
increasing integration of distributed energy resource in
the electric power system. The aim of this work is to
analyze, adapt and combine existing methods used for
power
system
planning
in
one
easy-of-implement
methodology
suitable
for
rapid-planning
of
the
deployment of distributed energy generation in urban
districts. This paper also presents preliminary results of
the application of the methodology for the case of a
sustainable urban district in Brazil. The work is based
on
the
concept
of
smart
micro-grids,
which
are
considered as building blocks of the “macro” smart grid
and a potential solution for massive integration of
distributed generation in the electric power system.
Keywords – Micro-Grids; Sustainable Energy; Urban District
I.
INTRODUCTION
As an important part of the Smart Grid deployment,
Distributed Generation (DG) based on alternative energy
resources and installed near the consumption has become
increasingly interesting, from both technical and economic
points of view. The benefits expected from DG applications
include, for example, increase of power quality and energy
supply reliability, reduction of power losses in transmission
and distribution networks, reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions, flexibility to choose between different energy
sources (according with local environmental and commercial
conditions), and creation of business opportunities for small
and medium entrepreneurs. Due to these benefits, a massive
insertion of DG connected to the power distribution network
is expected in the near future.
On the one hand, this picture is very motivating; but, at
the same time, it generates concerns with the possibility of a
large amount of DG units, may cause negative impacts to the
electrical system, as stability problems, protection, and
technical and commercial relationship with a new kind of
consumer /producer.
A promising solution to this concern arises with the
concept of micro-grids. A micro-grid is defined as an
integrated system, consisting of an interconnected set of
distributed generators, different types of loads and smart grid
technologies. In general, a micro-grid has one (or few) point
of connection to the grid, and it is controlled by strategies of
energy management that makes micro-grid introduce itself to
a utility system as a single customer, consumer and producer,
"well behaved".
Micro-grids are regarded as building blocks of the
"Macro" Smart grid, enabling the deployment of smart grid
gradually / modular (blocks), and promoting the coordinated
integration of distributed generation without affecting the
system and propose new commercial arrangements interest
of the distributor and its customers. In Figure 1, the concept
of micro-grid is represented differently, highlighting some
potential applications, such as, commercial and industrial
districts, campus and technology parks, urban districts and
rural locations that require better security and energy
efficiency, and quality sustainability in energy supply.
Figure 1.
Examples of micro-grids applications.
Some technical characteristics of micro-grids:

They have two main modes of operation: connected
mode and islanded mode. In case of the island mode,
the DG inside micro-grid should be able to maintain
the local loads, mainly the critical load
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies


Enable better management of the integration of
distributed generators (including those dispatchables,
non-dispatchable, intermittent) and energy storage.

Provide customers (consumer / producer) inside the
micro-grid with improved energy service: better
power quality, energy efficiency, optimizing the use
of local energy resources, supply security.

They enable the provision of ancillary services to the
distribution network (main grid), while micro-grid is
operating in connected mode.
It is estimated that by 2017, more than 4,7 GW of micro-
grid will be operating in the world, with a total cumulative
investment of over $ 17 billion [1].
There are already some known cases of worldwide
applications of micro-grids, as: a campus in the city of
Sendai (Japan); a pilot system installed in a laboratory of the
Institute of Solar Energy Technology – ISET (Germany); a
remote system placed in the north of British Columbia
(Canada) and a neighborhood of vacation homes near to
Amsterdam, in which homes are equipped with roof mounted
photovoltaic systems (Holland). Since the results of these
earlier application cases are showing the feasibility of micro-
grids, the next step shall be the scale-up and increasing
number of micro-grid installations as part of the electric
power system.
A potential application of micro-grids should arise with
the development of Sustainable Urban Districts (or Smart
Cities/Communities), such as the solutions planned to be
implemented in Masdar City (Arab Emirates) and Tianjin
Eco City (China) [2]-[5]. In general the objective of a micro-
grid in a Smart City/Community should be to locally provide
energy with high level of power quality, energy efficiency
and reliability, taking advantage of local energy resources
(including solar, wind and urban residues) and, at the same
time, promoting environmental and socio-economic benefits.
The work presented in this paper has been realized in this
context of micro-grids deployment in Sustainable Urban
Districts. Specifically, the urban district considered in this
work, is an Innovation and Tech Park (named Sapiens Park)
which nowadays is under construction in Florianópolis,
southern Brazil. This district/park is located in an urban
environment that requires more intelligent, practical and
sustainable solutions, whether from the point of view of
energy generation, power consumption, as well as the
rational use of water, treatment and reuse of waste and local
socioeconomic development.
The main objectives of this work are: (i) study of micro-
grid solutions suitable for urban districts; (ii) analyze, adapt
and combine existing methods and tools used for power
system planning in one easy-of-implement methodology
suitable for rapid-planning of the deployment of distributed
energy generation in urban districts and (iii) pilot application
of the methodologies, for the planning of a real micro-grid,
to be implemented in Sapiens Park (Figure 2) as a model of
sustainable urban district and living laboratory/showroom for
demonstration and dissemination of innovative technologies.
The sections presented in this paper are organized
according to the steps of the methodology used for planning
micro-grids for sustainable urban districts. In Section II,
methods and information about the characterization and
growth projection of electrical loads are presented. Section
III shows content regarding the identification and projection
of energy resources available locally. In Section IV, a
roadmap micro-grid technologies is briefly presented. In
Section V, the paper presents preliminary results about the
project of the micro-grid to be implemented in Sapiens Park.
These
results
include
simulations,
analysis
for
the
optimization of renewable energy generation and additional
information about the urban district. Finally, Section VI
presents conclusions and comments about future works.
Figure 2.
Sapiens Park Overview
II.
ELECTRICAL LOADS CHARACTERIZATION AND
DEMAND GROWTH PROJECTION
The Step 1 adopted for the planning of the micro-grid has
been the characterization of local loads, presented in the
urban district, and the projection of energy demand growth.
The study of the demand growth should be realized for both
systems: the urban district (where the micro-grid is intended
to be implemented), but also for the region in which the
district is inserted, in order to allow analysis about the
impact that the micro-grid should have in the region and
vice-versa. The following subsections present the methods
for the study of both systems: the region (Method of Trends
Extrapolation) and the urban district (Method of Land Use)
A.
Method of Trends Extrapolation
The method of trends extrapolation, selected in this work
because its practical application, is based on a study of
demand forecasting, conducted by Brazilian researchers
[5]. Initially, it is necessary to collect a set of information,
comprehending:

Population growth in the region.

Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in the region.

Price index for consumer durables.

Data regarding electricity rates.

Per capita consumption of electricity in the region.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

From this set of data (historical), it is possible then to use
an
econometric
analysis
tool.
The
result
should
be
determining consumption and demand for electricity in a
considerably large area, in which the urban district is
inserted. In the case of the project, this region refers to the
northen of the island of Florianópolis.
B.
Method of Land Use
The Land Use Method is designed to regions of smaller
geographical area (as the Sapiens Park – Sustainable Urban
District considered as model of urban district in this work),
allowing
a
more
detailed
energy
consumption
characterization and projection.
The method takes into account the rate of occupation of
the land in relation to parameters such as, example, activity
type
of
building,
architectural
and
constructions
characteristic, socioeconomic parameters, kind of installed
loads, climatic characteristic, etc. A simplistic way of
applying the Method of Land Use is based solely on energy
intensity (kWh/m²), ie, the average consumption (kWh) per
unit area (m²), which is dependent on the type of final energy
use/building (ie. industrial plants, commercial buildings,
restaurants, schools, hospitals, etc.).
In this work, the Energy Plus software has been used as
platform for the study of load characterization and growth
projection at Sapiens Park [6]. The study resulted in very
detailed information, providing for example forecasts of
energy demand by economic sector/activity and load curves
during the period analyzed.
In Figure 3, daily power demand curves are show,
considering the status of Sapiens Park in 2015 and 2030. In
Figure 4, the share of different types of loads in Sapiens Park
is presented.
Figure 3.
Predicted demand for Sapiens Park on 2015 and 2030.
Figure 4.
Share of different types of loads in Sapiens Park.
In Figure 5, it is shown the projected demand (peak
demand) of both systems: the region (at the substation that
supply energy to the region where Sapiens Park is located)
and the urban district (Sapiens Park). Among other important
conclusions resulted from this step of the methodology, it
was possible to verify that in 2018, the demand of Sapiens
Park added to the demand of the region will exceed the
capacity of the existent substation that supply all the region.
Therefore, it is worth to consider the application of a micro-
grid with local DG in the Sapiens Park. The micro-grid
would guarantee energy supply to the district, while at the
same time it would allow utility postpone investments with
additional infrastructure to increase the supply capacity.
Figure 5.
Predicted Demand for North Island Substation and Sapiens Park
over the years.
III.
IDENTIFICATION AND PROJECTION OF AVAILABLE
ENERGY RESOURCES
The Step 2 of the methodology for micro-grid planning
aims to identify the available resources that could be used for
energy generation. The identification is firstly realized by
collecting information about the energy sources available
locally, for example: wind (speed, direction, etc.), solar
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

(radiation, daily curve, climate, etc.), urban residues (amount
of waste and sewage, forecasts, population, etc.).
In order to quantify the energy resources available in the
urban districts, it is necessary to make use of local weather
stations (for solar and wind resources), and a survey of water
quantity and waste production (for questions related to
sewage and solid waste, respectively).
Once
the
potential
of
the
energy
resources
were
calculated (in terms of radiation/m2, wind speed and
direction, etc.) the next task is to determine the potential in
terms of power and energy production (watts and watts per
hour, respectively). This task can be accomplished by
calculating
power/energy
production,
considering
the
utilization
of
commercially
available
technologies
for
electricity
generation
[2]-[10].
Besides
the
type
of
technologies, it is important also to consider other particular
features of the local. For instance, the micro-grid at Sapiens
Park should respect the park constructive issues, such as the
height limit of 25 meters to the buildings in the region, which
prevents the use of large wind turbines.
For the conditions of Sapiens Park the following
technologies have been chosen for the determination of the
potential of local generation: polycrystalline silicon modules,
vertical axis wind turbines and generation systems for urban
solid
waste
and
sewage,
composed by digesters and
generator group. Table 1 presents the potential for the
electricity generation of Sapiens Park as well as indicators to
compare the technical feasibility of using different sources of
renewable energy in the region.
TABLE I.
RESUME OF ANNUAL ENERGY RESOURCES POTENCIAL IN
SAPIENS PARK
Generation Type
Maximum
Capacity
[MW]
Amount of
Energy Generated
[ MWh]
Capacity
Factora
Productivityb
Wind
19.98
26.838
0,09
1344
Solar
Roofs
0.31
432
0,29%
0,16
1395
Lakes
7.71
10.749
7,13%
Parking
5.24
7.303
4,84%
Common
Area
94.83
132.298
87,74%
Urban Solid Waste
0.02
125
0,66
5808
Urban Sewage
0.33
1.897
0,66
5808
a. The Capacity Factor (FC) reflects the annual capacity of a system to produce energy has operated
at their rated power for 24 hours per day.
b. The Productivity reflects how many energy can be produce for each kW installed.
From Table 1 it is possible to realize that Sapiens Park
has a great potential of local energy generation, highlighting
the numbers found for the potential of photovoltaic systems.
IV.
TECHNOLOGIES ROADMAP
Based on the information of the Step 1 (characterization
of energy demand) and Step 2 (identification of energy
resources), presented respectively in Sections II and III, the
aim of the Step 3 described in this Section is to analyze
different types of technologies that could be used for the
implementation of the micro-grid in the urban district. This
Section evaluate existing solutions and the solutions to come,
based on trends of cost reduction, efficiency improvement,
market acceptance, life cycle, etc. The consolidation of the
knowledge gained in this Step can be summarized into three
themes:

Distributed Generation based on Renewable Energy

Solutions for Smart Grids

Storage Devices and New Technologies.
Figure 6.
Overview of important themes presents in micro-grids.
TABLE II. TRENDS IN DISTYRIBUTED GENERATION BASED ON
RENEWABLE ENERGT.
Photovoltaic
Energy
 Cost savings of up to 60% in 2030
compared to the current scenario.
 Efficiency increasing of thin film
technologies, CIS / CIGS, and
monocrystalline silicon.
Wind Energy
 Improvement in the manufacturing
process of wind turbines with
increased lifespan and capacity factor.
 New solutions for harnessing wind
power through mini and micro wind
turbines, with emphasis on the vertical
axis wind systems.
Energy
harvesting from
Solid Urban
Waste and
Sewage
 Use of decentralized biodigesters in
urban districts for the available
volumes of sewage and organic part of
municipal solid waste.
 More feasible solutions for gasification
and other advanced technologies.
Wind
Solar
EVs
Control
Storage
Smart Grid Solutions
Solid Waste
and Sewage
Dispatchable
Generation
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

TABLE III. TRENDS IN SOLUTIONS FOR SMART GRIDS
Electric System
Topologies
 Improved reliability of energy supply
should be achieved through more
flexible topologies, including mesh
networks, and new approaches to
energy distribution, as in the case of
Microgrids.
AC and CC
Power Systems
 Increase the use of energy directly
into direct current, which points to a
trend of DC power distribution.
Aerial and
Underground
Distributions
Systems
 Increased adoption of underground
networks, due to the context of urban
forestry and visual pollution. Note to
reduced costs of these systems, and
already existent technologies allow
easy control and maintenance.
Protection
 More autonomy and intelligence with
application of so-called "adaptive
protections," which fit the real-time
operation of electrical systems.
Communication
Infrastructure
 Implementation of an effective
communication and advanced
metering infrastructure.
 Complete replacement of all legacy
infrastructure for measuring smart
meters, multi meters in the same
residence given greater “energy
education”, and demand response
features.
 Adoption of media and protocols that
ensure interoperability between
systems, including IEC61850 LV
networks.
Control and
Automation
 Implementation of solutions for
demand response and demand side
management
 Distributed control and dispatch
centers distributed generation.
 Trend of use of Multi-agents systems
for distributed control
 Dissemination of advanced
distribution automation.
TABLE IV. TRENDS IN STORAGE DEVICES.
Batteries
 Greater use of sodium-sulfur batteries
(NaS) batteries and lithium in
solutions integrated with the electrical
grid, as well as in stationary electric
vehicles.
Flywheels
 It is expected that the market begin to
see the advantages of flywheels and
provide greater feasibility for the
technology, which provides high
initial cost but a low cost of
maintenance and ability to operate in
very adverse conditions.
Supercapacitors
 Reduced costs will facilitate the
application of supercapacitors in
solutions in which they want high
power density with fast dynamics
V.
ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF THE MICRO-GRID FOR THE
SUSTAINABLE URBAN DISTRICT
This Section refers to Step 4 of the methodology for
micro-grid planning. It starts with the creation of possible
scenarios
for
micro-grid
implementation,
defining,
for
example, the amount of renewable energy it is desired to
generate locally at the urban district, the price of energy
negotiated with the main utility etc. In the pilot application in
Sapiens Park, the scenarios are related to the installed
capacity of each source, and are established for short,
medium and long terms (respectively 2015, 2020 and 2030).
For 2015, the scenarios consider to attend 10%, 20% or 30%
of energy consumption. But in 2020 the initial scenario
becomes with the optimal solution in 2015 and the others are
kept and so on (Figure 7).
Figure 7.
Solution Problem Description.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Based on the proposed scenarios, the next task is to
specify the technologies to be used (supported by the
roadmap created in Step 3) and other technical and economic
parameters, and then simulate the system in order to find the
best solution for the micro-grid deployment (ie, mix of
energy resources, technologies to be adopted, amount of
local generation, commercial relationship with the main
utility, etc.). In this work, the software Homer Energy has
been used. The software Homer Energy [17] seeks to assist
in determining the more viable technically and economically
solution to attend the local loads in the years 2015 to 2030.
With the results of the consumption and demand for
electricity over the years compared with the technology
roadmap in terms of efficiency and cost of systems for
electricity generation, it is possible to create enhanced
simulation scenarios. One of the results obtained with Homer
Energy can be seen in Figure 8, where the optimal solution is
identified in 2015. It is possible observe the presence of main
grid and photovoltaic systems in the optimal solution. The
system in question has an installed capacity of 170kW and
has a share of 10% of all energy produced in that year.
Figure 8.
Homer Energy window with the viable solutions based on Total
NPC
In Figure 6, the first line show the optimal solution based
on the less Total Present Cost of Micro-grid (Total NPC) that
is R$53.871,788 for proposed problem.
Besides the costs
related to the power grid and renewable sources, this cost are
composed of annual real interest, project life, cost of the
system and another economics variable. The best way to
represent the distribution cost of this project is shown in
Figure 9 that related Capital, Replacement, Savage and
Operating costs over the years.
It is important to emphazise that Homer Energy has a lot
of ways to present the results, including reports generation,
comparing the investing in micro-grids with the benefits to
stakeholders.
As other years are simulated, other generation sources
can be found most viable than those chosen for 2015
simulation. This work is currently in time to implement
scenarios adjustment in order to allow further studies and the
creation
of
a
computational
platform
for
investment
evaluation and quantification of benefits (to the local
distributor, urban district and investors), so that it can be
replicated to any urban district to submit interest in making
use of renewable sources for electricity generation.
Figure 9.
Homer Energy window with the Cash Flow based on optimal
solution considering the Total NPC
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presented a methodology for planning the
deployment of micro-grids in sustainable urban districts.
Also,
the
work
includes
a
pilot
application
of
the
methodology, considering an urban district located at
Florianópolis, southern Brazil.
The methodology has been subdivided in four main
Steps: (1) characterization and growth projection of electrical
loads, (2) identification and projection of available energy
resources, (3) technology roadmap and (4) design and
simulations of technical and economic aspects of the chosen
solutions for the micro-grid. The Step 4 is currently under
development, but earlier results of the pilot application have
shown that the methodology and the chosen computational
tools are worthy for the objective of sustainable urban
district planning, and could be applied in the context of other
applications
of
micro-grid
(industrial
and
commercial,
districts, institutional campus, others) .
Parallel to this work, a project to implementing a pilot
plant composed by renewable energy resources is currently
under development. The pilot plant will include photovoltaic
panels, small wind system, microturbine and batteries,
totalizing approximately 100kW. The main objective of this
new project is to develop, implement and evaluate control
strategies for the optimal use of renewable resources and
supply of priority loads in Sapiens Park.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by CELESC Distribution, in the
context of R&D Programme coordinated by the Brazilian
Electric Energy Regulatory Agency (ANEEL).
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

REFERENCES
[1]
Pike Research, 2012 [retrieved: March, 2013]. Available:
http://www.pikeresearch.com/newsroom/worldwide-revenue-
from-microgrids-will-reach-17-3-billion-by-2017
[2]
M.
Barnes,
J.
Kondoh,
H.
Asano,
J.
Oyarzabal,
G.
Ventakaramanan, R. Lasseter, N. Hatziargyriou, and T.
Green, “Real-World MicroGrids-An Overview”, in System of
Systems
Engineering,
SoSE
2007.
IEEE
International
Conference on, pp. 1-8.
[3]
N. Hatziargyriou, H. Asano, R. Iravani, and C. Marnay,
“Microgrids:
An
Overview
of
Ongoing
Research,
Development, and
Demonstration Projects”, Power and
Energy Magazine, IEEE DOI - 10.1109/MPAE.2007.376583,
vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 78-94, 2007.
[4]
Masdar City, 2011; Abu Dhabi [retrieved: November, 2012].
Available: http://www.masdar.ae/en/home/index.aspx
[5]
Eco-City,
2011;
China.
[retrieved:
November,
2012].
Available: http://www.tianjinecocity.gov.sg/
[6]
M. L. Siqueira and H. Holanda. “A Demanda Setorial por
Energia Elétrica no Pós-Racionamento de 2001: Previsões de
Longo Prazo para o Nordeste Brasileiro”, X Encontro
Regional de Economia, Fortaleza, Brazil, 2005.
[7]
NREL, “Commercial Reference Building Models of the
National Building Stock”, United States, February, 2011.
[8]
C.
Ronaldo
dos
Santos.
“Wind
Energy
to
Produce
Electricity”, Eletrobrás, Rio de Janeiro, 2009.
[9]
A.
Ricardo, “Solar Energy” Published by: Artliber.São
Paulo, 2002.
[10] Comcap, “Physical Characterization of Municipal Solid
Waste in Florianópolis”, Final Report . Florianópolis 2002.
[11] S.
P.
Chowdhury,
P.
Crossley,
and
S.
Chowdhury,
“Microgrids and Active Distribution Networks”. Institution of
Engineering and Technology, 2009.
[12] G. D. N Veslasco, A. M. L. P. Lima, and H.T. Z. do Couto .
“Analysis of the comparative costs of different networks of
power distribution in the context of urban forestry”. Forestry
Research Society, 2006.
[13] EWEA,
2011
[retrieved:
November,
2012].
Available:
http://www.ewea.org/fileadmin/ewea_documents/documents/
publications/statistics/Stats_2011.pdf
[14] A. A. Bittencourt. Dissertation in electrical engineering
entitled “Protection of feeders adaptive power distribution
considering distributed generation”. Federal University of
Santa Catarina, 2011.
[15] Y. Yan,
Y. Qian, H. Sharif, and D. Tipper. “A Survey on
Smart
Grid Communication Infrastructures: Motivations,
Requirements and Challenges”. Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, IEEE PP, no. 99 (2012): pp. 1–16.
[16] D. Connolly, “A Review of Energy Storage Technologies for
the integration of fluctuating renewable energy”, University
of Limerick, 2010.
[17] F. A. Farret and M. G. Simões, “Integration of Alternative
Sources of Energy”, Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
2006.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

