Handling Role-based Access Control in the Digital Grid  
 
Steffen Fries, Rainer Falk 
Corporate Technology 
Siemens AG 
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: {steffen.fries|rainer.falk}@siemens.com 
Chaitanya Bisale 
Energy Management 
Siemens AG 
Nuremberg, Germany 
e-mail: {chaitanya.b}@siemens.com
 
Abstract—The operation of the digital energy grid, as one of 
the critical infrastructures, has to cope with the need to control 
of increasingly fluctuating demand and generation of energy, 
and also to ensure the reliable transmission and distribution of 
centrally and decentrally generated energy. Control is 
accomplished by utilizing a communication infrastructure in 
parallel to the actual power system infrastructure with 
connections to the physical world by sensors and actuators. In 
the past, this control communication network was mostly 
isolated from other communication networks, but is connected 
more and more with external systems to support innovative 
cross-system services. Increasingly, this open connectivity 
exposes the digital grid to cyber attacks. Therefore, access to 
resources 
like 
the 
communication 
connections 
or 
communicated data needs to be protected to ensure a reliable 
operation. Legislation and operational best practice guidelines 
have taken this into account and provide the necessary 
framework for defining specific communication security 
requirements. From the technical perspective, different 
security counter measures exist to cope with the given 
requirements, but it has to be ensured that these technical 
means are not only provided technically, but are in fact applied 
correctly in operation. Usability of security is essential to 
support the correct application of technical security measures. 
This paper reviews the requirements for role-based access 
control (RBAC), as well as currently targeted technical 
approaches to achieve RBAC in the digital grid. The goal is to 
provide more insight into the existing application of RBAC 
mechanisms and to identify gaps for future enhancements. 
Proposals to address the identified gaps are described, which 
are 
intended 
to 
be 
brought 
to 
the 
International 
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) to enhance the security 
standard IEC 62351 for power system automation.  
 
Keywords–security; user and device authentication; role-
based access control; substation automation; digital grid; cyber 
security; critical infrastructure; IEC 62351 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Critical Infrastructures (CI) are technical installations that 
are essential for the daily life of the society and the economy 
of 
a 
country, 
and 
also 
globally. 
Typical 
critical 
infrastructures in this context are the power grid, 
telecommunication, healthcare, transportation, water supply, 
just to state a few. 
Digital Grids as one example of CI and especially their 
cyber security has gained more momentum over the last 
years. The increased threat level becomes visible, e.g., 
through reported attacks on critical infrastructure, but also 
through reactions in legislation, which explicitly require 
specific protection of critical infrastructures and reporting 
about serious attacks. There is a clear trend towards 
increased connectivity and tighter integration of systems 
from Information Technology (IT) in common enterprise 
environments with the Operation Technology (OT) part of 
the automation systems in the energy and industrial domains 
to provide enhanced services. This requires security 
measures to avoid negative effects of the formerly isolated 
OT. IT security in this context evolves to cyber security to 
underline the mutual relationship between the security and 
physical effects. 
Cyber security measures typically comprise technical and 
organizational measures. Operators of CI need to maintain 
their systems by complying to an Information Security 
Management Framework while also coping with regulatory 
requirements. This requires technical support in the 
deployment environment. Such technical requirements relate 
to authentication and access control, or to secure and reliable 
communication for example. Within this paper, the focus is 
placed on access control, or more specifically on Role-based 
Access Control (RBAC).   
RBAC is already a proven concept in IT systems. It is 
realized by many (operating) systems to control access to 
system resources. RBAC for the power automation 
environment is already considered in several requirements 
standards, guidelines, and also in regulatory requirements. 
Beside the requirements supporting this functionality, 
technical standards ensuring interoperability have been 
developed [5][8]. 
This paper targets the discussion of RBAC in general and 
focuses on the selected target scenario of the digital grid as 
depicted in Figure 1 below. Section II provides an overview 
of requirements from guidelines, standards, and regulations 
targeting access control specifically. Section III provides an 
overview of several state-of-the-art approaches for RBAC, 
while Section IV discusses the basic RBAC concept 
currently deployed in the digital grid. The identified 
shortcomings are addressed in Section V with first solution 
proposals that are intended to be brought to standardization. 
Section VI concludes the document. 
Note that this paper addresses first ideas to tackle 
identified gaps in RBAC in the Digital Grid domain. Further 
investigation is necessary.  
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-556-2
ENERGY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
Figure 1. Overview Digital Energy Grid as Example for Critical Infrastructures  
II. 
EXAMPLES OF DOMAIN-SPECIFIC 
GUIDELINES/STANDARDS/REGULATIONS   
As outlined in [1] for secure communication, a variety of 
security requirements exist for digital grids. An overview of 
the most relevant standards, guidelines, and regulations is 
shown in Figure 2 below. 
 
Figure 2. Examples for sources for security requirements for digital grid 
Starting from the top in Figure 2, guidelines are available 
from the National Institute for Standards and Technology 
(NIST) of the U.S. through the “Guidelines for Smart Grid 
Cyber Security” in NIST IR 7628 [2] or the Report of the 
Smart Grid Coordination Group addressing the European 
Mandate M/490 [3], which explicitly recommend the support 
of RBAC in the context of system configuration, operation, 
and maintenance. Specifically for Germany and Austria, the 
BDEW White Paper [4] guideline has been published, 
addressing RBAC in the context of user management.  
This white paper was one main source for developing 
ISO 27019:2013 [5] as a domain-specific profile of the 
Information Security Management System defined in ISO 
27002 [6]. Both ISO documents address requirements for an 
operator regarding the handling of information security and 
require support for RBAC. Similar requirements can also be 
found in IEC 62443-2-1 for industrial environments. IEC 
62443-3-3 [7] goes one step beyond by specifically defining, 
which foundational security requirements can be technically 
addressed with RBAC, without prescribing a specific 
technical solution. IEEE 1686 [8] is even more specific here, 
as it defines a minimum number of roles and also the 
associated rights. The last standard to be mentioned is IEC 
62351-8 [9], providing specific technical means for binding 
RBAC information to entities in access tokens and to utilize 
them in communication. The latter can already be used to 
address some of the requirements stated before. 
From a regulatory perspective, examples are provided 
through the American NERC-CIP [10], the German IT-
Security Act [11], and the IT security catalogue of the 
German network regulator group BNetzA, and the French 
ANSSI [12]. They all require security measures to support 
reliable grid operations, which are mapped to processes and 
organizational means, but they also need the technical means 
to operate the infrastructure appropriately. The following 
section elaborates technical means to address these 
requirements. 
III. 
STATE OF THE ART APPROACHES SUPPORTING RBAC 
Security administration is simplified through the use of 
roles and constraints to organize subject access levels. 
RBAC in general can reduce costs within an organization, as 
it accepts that changes in roles and responsibilities of 
(especially) employees occur more frequently than the 
changes in the rights within roles. The basic idea of RBAC is 
to define roles according to responsibilities within the 
business organization. Permissions required to perform the 
duties of a role are assigned to the respective role. A subject, 
i.e., typically human user, is assigned roles according to his 
business responsibilities. This helps to achieve separation of 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-556-2
ENERGY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

duty by ensuring that a user is assigned only the roles 
according to his responsibilities, and possesses only the 
permissions required to fulfill his duties. Restrictions can be 
placed to prevent a single subject from being assigned to 
roles having a conflict of interest. RBAC also includes the 
concept of temporary roles to realize dynamic separation of 
duty: Over time, a subject may act in different roles. At any 
point in time, the subject only possesses the permissions of 
the currently active role or roles. 
The general concept of RBAC is shown in Figure 3, 
which is the enhanced approach explained in [9]. As shown, 
the role separates the subject from the permissions. The 
permissions define certain rights on objects, like read or 
write operations on specific objects (e.g., files). The role 
itself bundles a set of permissions, which can be assigned to 
users. This subject assignment enables separation of duty, 
which is necessary to also support auditing of actions. 
Additionally, constraints may further be used to either 
restrict roles or to enable special handling in situations like 
emergency cases. Examples of constraints required in digital 
grids specifically are: 
- Area of Responsibility or scope allows restricting the 
effectiveness of an issued RBAC token, e.g., to an 
organizational unit or a geographical location or area. 
- Operational constraints allow a local augmentation of 
the associated rights if the (hosting) object detects or is 
informed about specific circumstances. As an example, 
an Engineer may not be allowed to perform certain 
actions, e.g., on a protection relay, in an emergency case.  
 
Figure 3. General concept for RBAC  
The separation of the assignment of subjects-to-role and 
role-to-rights enables a flexible and centralized management 
of subject-to-role assignment that tends to be dynamic. At 
the same time, it can be combined with a well-defined role-
to-permission-assignment that has more static character.  
Figure 4 illustrates the concept of RBAC on a user base. 
In the upper part, the subject-role-right association is shown. 
Here “Tom” is assigned the role “Engineer”. Acting in this 
role “Tom” is entitled to “view” and “control” objects. 
Objects may include status values or switching objects. It 
also shows the dynamic and static assignments between 
subjects, roles and rights. The example illustrates that 
granting the right ”view” to “Mary” can be added by 
assigning the role “Engineer” to “Mary” without changing 
the associated rights on objects. 
 
Figure 4. Basic RBAC concept applied in Digital Grids  
To allow a subject to act in a distinct role, authentication 
is often a precondition, ensuring that the subject is who it 
claims to be and that it is entitled to act in this role. For this 
there already exist various solutions, often relying on a three-
party-model, in which an identity and access server issues 
some form of security tokens or tickets to provide 
authorization information. Examples are Kerberos [13], the 
security assertion markup language (SAML) [14], OAuth 2.0 
[15], and OpenID Connect [18]. Also domain specific 
approaches like X.509 certificate enhancements in IEC 
62351-8 [9] for power automation have been standardized, 
which will be briefly introduced in the following. While they 
all rely on a security token mechanism, they differ, e.g., in 
the communication relations for the token exchange 
(protocols), the token format, the underlying cryptographic 
algorithms and the target application use cases. 
A. Kerberos 
Kerberos v5, specified in RFC 4120 [13], is a three-party 
system and protocol to be used for network authentication. In 
this system there exists a trusted third party, to which all 
participants authenticate as shown in Figure 5.  
 
Figure 5. Kerberos authentication and authorization  
This trusted third party grants tickets upon request to 
allow access to specific services or resources. Kerberos relies 
on symmetric cryptography for the authentication and also 
the ticket protection and binding and uses ASN.1 for the 
encoding. Kerberos is widely used and part of common 
operating system like Windows. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-556-2
ENERGY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

B. Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) 
SAML 2.0 was defined by OASIS in [14] and is an XML 
based protocol to exchange authentication and authorization 
information between a client, an identity provider (the 
SAML server) and the service provider. The SAML server 
uses so called SAML assertions to provide statements or 
claims about the client. Three types can be roughly 
distinguished: authentication, assertions, and authorization. 
Especially the latter allows realizing RBAC. SAML builds 
on assertions symmetric and asymmetric cryptography. 
Hence, SAML assertions are security tokens utilizing XML 
signatures and XML encryption to protect the contained 
information. For the authentication at the identity provider, 
SAML does not require a specific method and thus may be 
used with username/password combinations or X.509 
certificate based authentication or others. SAML is often 
used in Single-Sign-On solutions and federation scenarios. It 
may be used also in open authorization (OAuth 2.0) for the 
token realization, as described in the following subsection. 
C. Open Autorization (OAuth 2.0)  
The OAuth 2.0 framework is specified in RFC 6749 [15] 
and defines an authorization method for accessing a 
resource. Since OAuth 2.0, this framework can be used with 
various applications and protocols, whereas the original 
OAuth was bound to the HTTP protocol. OAuth 2.0 also 
relies on tokens, which are requested by a user agent, issued 
by an authorization server and verified at the resource server. 
The tokens may be provided by reference or by value. OAuth 
2.0 defines the handling of the security tokens (access 
token), as well as the format but allows for an own definition 
of the token content. Beside the pure request of access 
tokens, a client may request for a token for a specific scope. 
The supplied tokens are provided according to the bearer 
model or the proof-of-possession (PoP) or holder of key 
(HoK) model. Bearer token can be used to get access to an 
associated resource without demonstrating possession of a 
cryptographic key. In contrast, the PoP/HoK token model, 
requires the proof of possession of a corresponding 
cryptographic key in order to utilize the token, as defined in 
RFC 7800 [16]. Note that according to [17], plain OAuth 2.0 
is intended for authorization. It may support authentication, 
e.g., in the combination with OpenID Connect (see next 
subsection). OAuth addresses typical Web-based access 
scenarios.  
D. OpenID Connect  
OpenID Connect is a security protocol to offload user 
authentication from a server hosting a resource to a trusted 
third party. It is defined by the OpenID Consortium. The 
core is specified in [18]. It utilizes the OAuth 2.0 protocol 
flows to obtain ID tokens, which are encoded as JSON web 
token (JWT, see also [19]). These ID tokens contain 
assertions about authenticated users from an authorization 
server. Optionally, access tokens as defined in OAuth 2.0 can 
be 
utilized 
to 
retrieve 
asserted 
user 
authorization 
information. OpenID Connect is used for web-based clients 
and also native clients in a variety of applications.  
E. Digital Grid specific X.509 Certificate Enhancements 
Another option to support RBAC has been taken in IEC 
62351-8 [9] for power system automation. This standard 
relies on the authentication based on X.509 [20] certificates 
and corresponding private keys. In digital grids protocols 
like TLS are applied, which utilize X.509 key material.  
 
Figure 6. X.509 certificate enhancements (adopted from [9]) 
IEC 62351-8 leverages the option to enhance the ASN.1 
structure of X.509 certificates with a specific extension. This 
extension carries information about the roles and constraints 
and can be added to X.509 public key certificates or X.509 
attribute certificates as shown in Figure 6. The flexibility of 
attribute certificates can be leveraged in use cases, in which 
the user to role association is rather dynamic. User-bound 
public key certificates typically have a longer validity, while 
attribute certificates may have a much shorter validity and 
are only valid in conjunction with the associated public key 
certificate. Via the corresponding private key it can be 
proven, that a user may act in a certain role. As this approach 
is defined as an extension, protocols utilizing X.509 key 
material can directly leverage the approach. Note that for the 
token issuer, i.e., a certification authority, enhancements are 
likely to be necessary to support the RBAC extension. 
IV. 
RBAC SPECIFICS IN THE DIGITAL GRID 
As shown in Figure 6, for power systems supporting IEC 
62351-8, an extension for carrying role information in X.509 
certificates has been standardized, which may belong to a 
user, a device, or an application. This approach can be 
directly applied in use cases, in which protocols utilizing 
X.509 key material like Transport Layer Security (TLS, RFC 
5246) are used. Moreover, this approach also supports 
application layer authentication and authorization, which can 
be required, if the communication link spans multiple hops. 
In both cases, beside the certificate validation it also involves 
the verification of the relying party that the applicant entity is 
entitled to utilize the X.509 certificate by checking the 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-556-2
ENERGY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

possession of a corresponding private key. This involves 
asymmetric cryptography for digital signature generation and 
verification. Compared to pure symmetric cryptography 
based approaches, this is costly. Hybrid methods addressing 
this establish a session, in which a X.509 certificate is 
involved in the negotiation of a symmetric session key, 
which is used in (different) security services to protect the 
session. The whole session is then executed in the context of 
a specific user, having an assigned role. As substation 
automation protocols like IEC 61850 utilize a session based 
approach for the transport or the application connection, this 
concept is immediately applicable. Note that for the 
generation of a digital signature, access to the private key is 
necessary. This private key needs to be protected 
accordingly, as it is necessary as proof, that the user is 
authorized to act in a certain role via the corresponding 
certificate. For devices or applications this protection may be 
achieved with secured memory or specific hardware modules 
that allow operation but not exporting of the private key. For 
a service technician, this protection will most likely be 
offered by a security token like a smart card or similar.  
Current installations in digital grids often utilize a 
different concept by performing a local form of RBAC 
depending on the environment. Communication between 
entities in a control center for instance is performed based on 
either locally or centrally associated users to permission 
groups. This ensures that the local execution of commands 
can only be done if the appropriate permissions are granted, 
but does not necessarily provide a remote entity to verify 
who is going to perform a dedicated operation. This 
information may be necessary for audit purposes, and a 
complete audit trail would require having the complete chain 
from the remote point to the executing entity to comprehend 
the specific action. The approach described in IEC 62351-8 
supports also a local audit trail through the capability to 
connect identity and access information in the access token. 
In substations, the local physical access may already be 
sufficient to get access to communicating entities. 
While the approach utilizing X.509-based access tokens 
has its merits, it is not immediately applicable in all use 
cases. Also, one has to keep in mind that the infrastructure of 
the power grid has grown over many years and that the 
lifetime of installed devices is long, reaching 20-25 years. 
Two examples are used here to show potential shortcomings.  
1. In substation automation, field devices often feature a 
local human-machine-interface (HMI) handled by a 
service technician. These field devices typically do not 
feature a local interface for a smart card, but only a small 
screen and a number keyboard pad allowing entering a 
personal identification number (PIN) or a passcode. 
Hence, RBAC information cannot be provided directly, 
but may be fetched by the field device.. 
2. As outlined in [21] web-based services based on XMPP 
are specified for the integration of decentralized energy 
resources (DER) into the digital energy grid. These 
services may leverage already existing technologies that 
support RBAC, such as OpenID Connect or OAuth 2.0 
instead of building a parallel infrastructure for handling 
X.509 based RBAC.  
Proposals are discussed in the next section for both 
examples.  
V. 
PROPOSALS FOR RBAC ENHANCEMENTS 
In the following, solutions are proposed for handling 
RBAC in legacy devices and in upcoming web-based 
applications building on consistent RBAC information. The 
real-world applicability of these proposals has to be 
evaluated. 
A. Enabling RBAC on local HMI of legacy devices 
As noted, a variety of devices may not feature an 
appropriate interface to interact with a X.509 credential of a 
service technician. Despite the missing local interface, these 
devices may be enabled to work with the X.509 credentials. 
One approach to be used here is the fetching of the X.509 
credential from a trusted third party utilizing the local login 
and password of the service technician. Once the service 
technician provides his login credentials, the field device 
may query a central repository for the corresponding X.509 
certificate 
also 
providing 
the 
login 
credentials 
for 
verification. This X.509 certificate needs to be enhanced 
with the RBAC extension defined in IEC 62351-8 and can 
then be verified by the field device. The verification of the 
corresponding private key is neglected here, as the X.509 
certificate is rather used as an assertion by the third party. By 
already relying on X.509 certificates with RBAC extensions, 
this approach may be used as a migration path without 
involving device local asymmetric cryptographic operations.  
The central repository may generate the credentials on 
demand or they may be provisioned with the X.509 
certificates. In either case, the certificates may have a rather 
short lifetime, which simplifies the revocation handling on 
the field device. This approach has been considered in IEC 
62351-8 with the focus on Lightweight Directory Access 
Protocol (LDAP) [22]. While LDAP support is typically 
available in control centers, it is not too widespread in 
substations. Protocols like the Remote Authentication Dial In 
User Service (RADIUS) [23] are rather used.  
If one would want to use RADIUS out-of-the-box, access 
information can be provided as RADIUS allows extensions 
using vendor specific attributes. The drawback is the 
limitation of this field to effectively 250 bytes. As X.509 
certificates are typically larger (even if used with shorter 
ECDSA key instead of the larger RSA key), this field can 
only be used to transmit a subset of the RBAC information. 
A necessary subset is proposed as: 
BEGIN-VENDOR IEC 
ATTRIBUTE RoleID  
 
1 integer 
ATTRIBUTE roleDefinition 2 string 
ATTRIBUTE AoR  
 
3 string 
ATTRIBUTE revision  
 
4 integer 
ATTRIBUTE ValidFrom  
 
5 string 
ATTRIBUTE ValidTo 
 
6 string    
END-VENDOR IEC 
The semantic of the parameter would be the same as in 
IEC 62351-8 and would support also a later processing of 
other token formats containing the same information. As 
RADIUS has some shortcomings, like missing message 
integrity or confidentiality or the application of the weak 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-556-2
ENERGY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

MD5 hash algorithm, it is recommended to use TLS 
according to [24] to protect the message exchange between 
field devices and the RADIUS server. As stated above, this 
approach is intended to support migration in restricted use 
cases without changes or enhancements to RADIUS itself.  
B. Supporting RBAC in web service scenarios  
Integration of DER into the digital grid will be supported 
with IEC 61850-8-2 [25]. Here XMPP is used to enable the 
connection of field devices (DER controller) to the control 
site using a publish-subscribe infrastructure.  While in [25] 
the application of session-based end-to-end RBAC in 
conjunction with X.509 credentials is enabled, further 
services offered by the publish-subscribe infrastructure may 
utilize a message-based approach and may require an end-to-
middle RBAC approach. Applications could be presence 
monitoring, notification, or discovery of resources, which 
may be utilized by a virtual power plant operator. Here the 
application of OpenID Connect is envisioned, which would 
need to map the existing access token information to the 
access token format in the OpenID Connect context. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK 
This paper described the general concept of role-based 
access control and its usage within the digital energy grid. 
Ongoing standardization work for using RBAC for energy 
control networks has been described. This paper discussed 
role-based access control in the digital grid, starting from an 
analysis of requirements in regulation and standardization. It 
provided an overview about existing technical approaches 
from other domains and discusses the specifics of the digital 
grid, the target domain. Two exemplary gaps have been 
identified for the incorporation of legacy devices and for 
future DER devices for which first solution sketches have 
been provided. The feasibility of these proposals is to be 
investigated from a security assessment point of view, as 
well as from an implementation point of view. Hence, at the 
time of writing, a proof-of-concept implementation was not 
yet available, but is envisioned as the next consequent step. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Fries and R. Falk, “Ensuring Secure Communication in 
Critical Infrastructures,” Proceedings IARIA Energy 2016, 
June 
2016, 
ISBN: 
978-1-61208-484-8, 
page 
15-20, 
https://thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=energy_2016_1
_30_30060, [retrieved: March. 2017]. 
[2] NIST IR 7628, “Guidelines for Smart Grid Cyber Security,” 
Sep. 
2014, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.7628r1, 
[retrieved: March. 2017]. 
[3] SGIS “Smart Grid Information Security,” Dec. 2014, 
ftp://ftp.cencenelec.eu/EN/EuropeanStandardization/HotTopic
s/SmartGrids/SGCG_SGIS_Report.pdf, [retrieved: 
March. 
2017]. 
[4] BDEW White paper “Requirements for Secure Control and 
Telecommunication Systems,” BDEW, Feb. 2015  
[5] ISO TR 27019: Information security management guidelines 
for process control systems used in the energy utility industry 
on the basis of ISO/IEC 27002, March 2013 
[6] ISO/IEC 27002:2005  Information technology – Security 
techniques – Code of practice for information security 
management, June 2005.  
[7] IEC62443-3-3:2013, “Industrial communication networks – 
Network and system security – Part 3-3: System security 
requirements and security levels,” Edition 1.0, August 2013. 
[8] IEEE 1686, “IEEE Standard for Intelligent Electronic Devices 
Cyber Security Capabilities,” Dec. 2013. 
[9] ISO/IEC 62351-8, “Role-based access control for power 
system management,” June 2011. 
[10] NERC, 
North 
American 
Reliability 
Corporation, 
http://www.nerc.com/pa/Stand/Pages/CIPStandards.aspx, 
[retrieved: March. 2017]. 
[11] German 
IT 
Security 
Law, 
July 
2015, 
http://www.bgbl.de/xaver/bgbl/start.xav?startbk=Bundesanzei
ger_BGBl&jumpTo=bgbl115s1324.pdf, (German), [retrieved: 
March. 2017]. 
[12] ANSSI Technical Note, Recommandations de sécurité 
concernant l’analyse des flux HTTPS, October 2015, 
http://www.ssi.gouv.fr/uploads/IMG/pdf/NP_TLS_NoteTech.
pdf (French) [retrieved: March. 2017]. 
[13] C. Neuman, T. Yu, S. Hartman, and K. Raeborn,  “The 
Kerberos Network Authentication Service (V5),” RFC 4120, 
July 
2005, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4120, 
[retrieved: 
March. 2017]. 
[14] S. Cantor, J. Kemp, R. Philpott, and E. Maier, “Assertions and 
Protocols for the OASIS Security Assertion Markup 
Language (SAML) V2.0,” March 2005, http://docs.oasis-
open.org/security/saml/v2.0/saml-core-2.0-os.pdf, [retrieved: 
March. 2017]. 
[15] D. Hardt, “The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework,” RFC 
6749, 
October 
2012, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749, 
[retrieved: March. 2017]. 
[16] M. Jones, J. Bradley, H.Tschofenig., “Proof-of-Possession 
Key Semantics for JSON Web Tokens (JWTs),” RFC 7800, 
April 2016, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7800, [retrieved: 
March. 2017]. 
[17] J. 
Richter, 
“User 
Authentication 
with 
OAuth 
2.0,” 
https://oauth.net/articles/authentication/, [retrieved: March. 
2017]. 
[18] J. Bradley et al., “OpenID Connect Core 1.0 incorporating 
errata set 1,” November 2014, http://openid.net/specs/openid-
connect-core-1_0.html, [retrieved: March. 2017]. 
[19] M. Jones et al., “JSON Web Token (JWT) Profile for OAuth 
2.0 Client Authentication and Authorization Grants,” May 
2015, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7523, [retrieved: March. 
2017]. 
[20] D. Cooper et al., “Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure 
Certificate and Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile,” 
RFC 5280, May 2008, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280, 
[retrieved: March. 2017]. 
[21] S. Fries, R. Falk, H. Dawidczak, and T. Dufaure, 
“Decentralized Energy in the Smart Energy Grid and Smart 
Market – How to master reliable and secure control,” 
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 
9 no 1& 2, ISSN: 1942-2679, pg. 65-75, Sep. 2016. 
[22] J. Sermersheim, “Lightweight Directory Access Protocol 
(LDAP): 
The 
Protocol,” 
RFC 
4511, 
June 
2006, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4511, [retrieved: March. 2017]. 
[23] C. Rigney et. al., “Remote Authentication Dial In User 
Service 
(RADIUS),” 
RFC 
2865, 
June 
2000, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2865, [retrieved: March. 2017]. 
[24] S. Winter et al, “Transport Layer Security (TLS) Encryption 
for 
RADIUS,” 
RFC 
6614, 
May 
2012, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6614, [retrieved: March. 2017]. 
[25] ISO 61850-8-2: Communication networks and systems for 
power utility automation, Part 8-2: Specific Communication 
Service Mapping (SCSM) – Mapping to Extensible 
Messaging Presence Protocol (XMPP), Work in Progress 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-556-2
ENERGY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

