Sensors for Smart Grids 
Smart Grids Technologies 
 
 
Francisc Zavoda 
Electric Equipment Expertise (EEE) 
Research Institute of HQ (IREQ) 
Varennes, Canada 
e-mail: zavoda.francisc@ireq.ca  
 
Chris Yakymyshyn 
 FieldMetrics, Inc 
Seminole, Florida, USA 
e-mail: yakymyshyn@fieldmetricsinc.com  
 
 
Abstract—The Smart Grid will enable the customers to actively 
decide their energy choices and to accommodate their 
generation and storage options. The same grid will provide 
higher reliability and consistent power quality, which are 
required by our digital economy, by optimizing the use of 
assets and the grid operation. The future power grids will come 
into reality by enabling intelligent communication across 
sensing, measurement, and control layers that are embedded 
into the existing power systems. This paper discusses the 
results from tests performed on two sensors, a combined 
voltage and current sensor and an optical voltage sensor.  
Keywords-Smart Grid; Distribution Automation; Volt & VAR 
Control; Fault Location; Power Quality; monitoring; sensor; 
accuracy, magnitude, phase angle. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Smart Grid will enable the customers to actively 
decide their energy choices and to accommodate their 
generation and storage options. The same grid will provide 
higher reliability and consistent power quality, which are 
required by our digital economy, by optimizing the use of 
assets and the grid operation. The future power grids will 
come into reality by enabling intelligent communication 
across sensing, measurement, and control layers that are 
embedded into the existing power systems. 
Smart 
distribution 
systems 
will 
increasingly 
be 
dependent on monitoring of the system conditions for both 
real time management and improved maintenance strategies 
[1]. Integrated distribution monitoring systems will require 
various types of sensors and transducers to help understand 
system conditions and respond to disturbances affecting it.  
Voltage and current monitoring will be critical for a large 
number of applications [2].  Specific sensor requirements 
will include support for: 
• 
Advanced voltage control functions for voltage 
optimization, voltage reduction, Volt/VAR control, 
• 
Load 
current 
monitoring 
for 
reconfiguration 
strategies, asset management and fault location 
applications, 
• 
Protection and reconfiguration applications (fault 
current monitoring, coordination of protection 
characteristics, etc.), 
• 
Waveform acquisition for fault location and other 
diagnostic applications including incipient fault 
detection and location, 
• 
Harmonic monitoring for power quality assessments 
and other diagnostic applications. 
Nowadays, several manufacturers offer performing 
sensors to improve network performance. 
The paper is divided into several sections. Section II 
discusses the need for new sensors. Sections III and IV 
describe optical sensor techniques. Section V describes the 
details of the sensors that were tested. Section VI describes 
the test methods used. Section VII presents the test results. 
Section VIII provides conclusions. 
II. 
SMART GRID AND SMART DISTRIBUTION 
Today, advances and falling prices of the communication 
and control technologies, allow their embedding into 
distribution grid and use for grid monitoring and remote 
control 
of 
major 
distribution 
equipment, 
(switches, 
capacitors banks, reclosers and voltage regulators), thus 
replacing the old Distribution Automation (DA), consisting 
mainly in automatic operation of medium voltage (MV) 
equipment. 
A better knowledge of what is happening in the power 
system is crucial for an improved distribution grid 
management. New technologies such as sensors, IEDs, 
software and telecommunication can provide data required 
by smart distribution applications to improve the power 
system efficiency through utility’s business needs. It is a 
necessary feedback loop to improve the distribution system 
performance.  
The new way of thinking and operating the Smart Grid 
created the premises for an integrated distribution monitoring 
system, based on sensors and Intelligent Electronic Devices 
(IED) capable of providing accurate and reliable data 
required by new smart distributed applications. 
III. 
SENSORS  
For Smart Grid and Smart Distribution (SD) applications, 
vendors propose new “Smart Sensors”, which can work 
autonomously, when equipped with a communication 
interface, or in combination with IEDs. Among them, 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

voltage and current optical sensors offer a number of major 
advantages, but the speed of their integration into the grid 
depends on price reduction.  
  
IV. 
OPTICAL SENSORS 
Conventional methods to monitor overhead electrical 
lines use iron core instrument transformers, which are not 
easy to mount because of their significant size and weight, 
and can present safety constraints to personnel as well as to 
the interconnected equipment. The physical hazards 
associated with conventional iron-core devices, when 
coupled with the complexity of installation, have typically 
precluded their use within medium-voltage distribution 
systems. 
The Optical Sensors [3] represent a significant 
improvement 
over 
conventional 
iron-core 
instrument 
transformers or Rogowski coils. These sensor devices are 
positioned for use in switchgear, power distribution, 
electronics and medium voltage applications (< 37 kV) 
where the conventional current and voltage transformers may 
be undesirable due to space and weight concerns. 
A. Optical Current Sensor (OCS) 
The technology used by optical current sensors is based 
on the Faraday effect. When a linearly polarized light travels 
through a transparent material that is exposed to a magnetic 
field, its plane of polarization rotates (see Figure 1). In 
sensor systems that exploit the Faraday Effect, a sensor 
assembly is placed into a magnetic field. By monitoring the 
rotation of the incident polarization state, a direct 
measurement 
of 
the 
magnetic 
field 
intensity, 
and 
consequently the associated current, can be inferred. 
 
Figure 1.  Faraday effect (source Wikipedia) 
 
Currently, there are several types of optical current 
sensors on the market, which use radically different 
technologies.  
Some of them use either bulk optical crystals or long 
lengths of optical fiber, coiled around a current-carrying 
conductor. When an optical path completely encircles a 
conductor, as is the case of coiled optical fiber sensors, a 
numerical integration can be performed about the optical 
path that directly relates the Faraday rotation to the current 
flowing through that optical path. The measurement 
sensitivity is dependent on the number of optical fiber turns 
around the conductor being monitored. 
The sensors utilizing bulk glass take advantage of the 
Faraday Effect exhibited by the bulk glasses [4]. The sensor 
can be fabricated from materials, which are more sensitive to 
the influencing magnetic field than those used in coiled 
optical fiber sensors. 
Fiber optic magneto-optic field sensors [5] use 
ferromagnetic materials more sensitive than materials used in 
simple fiber optic cable or bulk-optic crystals. The 
straightforward result is that the sensor requires much 
smaller Faraday rotator to measure a given magnetic field 
strength, and offers versatility in physical size and the range 
of measurement properties. 
B. Optical Voltage Sensor (OVS) 
The OVS technology [6] is based on the Pockels effect. It 
is used to make Pockels cells, which are voltage-controlled 
wave plates (see Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2.   Half wave plate (source Wikipedia) 
 
When a steady electric field is applied to certain electro-
optic materials, their refractive indices change, roughly in 
proportion to the strength of the applied field. The Pockels 
effect occurs only in noncentrosymmetric optical crystals, 
such as lithium niobate or gallium arsenide. In combination 
with a polarizer, Pockels cells can be used as an extremely 
fast shutter that can respond in nanoseconds. In sensor 
systems that exploit the Pockels effect, a sensor assembly is 
placed into an electric field. When polarized light is 
projected through the Pockels cell that is in this voltage field, 
the state of polarization of the light traveling in the crystal is 
rotated. From the measured polarized light rotation the 
voltage across the crystal can be determined. 
V. 
SENSORS UNDER TEST 
Both sensors used in this study, the MetPod [7] and the 
Optical Voltage Transducer (OVT), were rated for 25kV 
class operation. Prior to frequency response testing, the 
prototype devices passed dielectric type testing [8,9]. This 
included a dry AC withstand test at 50 kV for 1 minute, 
followed by BIL testing of 15 full wave impulses (1.2 x 50 
microseconds) at 150 kV peak, along with two or more chop 
wave impulses (1.2 x 3 microseconds) at 175 kV peak. Both 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

polarities were applied in the BIL tests. Thermal cycling was 
performed in an insulating temperature chamber while the 
device was energized with high voltage, or simultaneously 
with high voltage and moderate current. The thermal ramp 
rate was kept at <30 ºC/hour to allow the unit under test to 
thermally equilibrate with the ambient temperature in the test 
chamber. 
 
1) MetPod/Combined Voltage & Current Transducer 
(CVCT)  
The MetPod (see Figure 3) is a self-powered sensor 
solution that combines a voltage sensor, a current sensor and 
a power supply to provide output signals suitable for 
interfacing with IEDs. As shown in Figure 3, the MetPod 
uses a hollow core composite silicone polymer insulator to 
support a high voltage conductor. The opposite end is tied to 
neutral. An optical fiber carries digitized current and voltage 
data from the MetPod to an interface module, where it is 
converted back to either low voltage signals or 120V and 1A 
signals suitable for interfacing with a variety of power 
quality measurement devices. 
 
 
Figure 3.  MetPod sensor 
 
The current sensor approximates Ampere’s law by 
integrating the spatial magnetic field around a closed path 
that encircles the high voltage conductor using a plurality of 
point sensors. This approach generates a sensor output that is 
independent of: conductor position within the sensor 
window; conductor size; current density distribution within 
the conductor; or magnetic field perturbations caused by 
adjacent phases or nearby ferrous objects. The use of an air 
core permits an open slot on one side of the current sensor 
that allows installation without breaking an existing high or 
medium voltage conductor.  
The voltage sensor uses a precision impedance divider 
collinearly located near a second impedance string that 
supplies AC current to an integrated power supply. Because 
of the relatively low impedance of the voltage divider (<10 
Megohms at 60 Hz), and the electrostatic shield provided by 
the second impedance string, the voltage measurement is 
insensitive to external electric field perturbations caused by 
adjacent phases, pollution or ice on the insulator surface, etc. 
The hollow insulator is pressurized to 15 psi with dry 
nitrogen gas. 
At the high voltage end of the MetPod, two 24-bit A/D 
converters digitize and interleave the sensor signals, while 
providing a signal bandwidth of 20 kHz. The single digital 
stream is coupled onto a conventional multimode fiber and 
transferred out of the neutral end of the MetPod. The analog 
signals that are reconstructed at the interface module have a 
fixed group delay of approximately 650 microseconds 
relative to the high voltage conductor. Due to the interleaved 
sampling, the relative phase error between the voltage and 
current signals is <0.2 degrees at 60 Hz. 
As declared in the sensor’s technical specification, the 
voltage and current measurements meet 0.3% accuracy or 
better over a temperature range of -20 ºC to +60 ºC. The 
current sensor’s rated current range extends from 200 A to 
10,000 A. In all cases, the current sensor is not damaged by 
currents with crest values as high as 20,000 A. 
2) Optical Voltage Transducer (OVT) 
 
 
Figure 4.  OVT sensor 
 
The OVT (see Figure 4) has the same physical footprint 
as the MetPod. A collimated light source located at the high 
voltage end is circularly polarized before passing through an 
aperture. The optical beam then passes through one or more 
optical crystals located along the length of the hollow core 
insulator. Each electro-optic crystal modulates the state of 
polarization of the light in direct proportion to the voltage 
drop across that crystal. Provided the modulation depth is 
kept small, the final state of polarization is a linear sum of 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

the modulation imparted by each crystal along the vertical 
optical beam path. This provides an excellent approximation 
to the line integral of the electric field between high voltage 
and neutral, which is the definition of potential difference. 
The polarization-modulated optical beam is sampled by two 
photodiodes fed by the orthogonal outputs of a polarizing 
beamsplitter. The two detected signals undergo separate 
normalization and temperature compensation prior to being 
differenced to create the final output signal. Differencing 
removes common-mode noise that may arise from a variety 
of sources. The analog signal is digitized and transferred 
onto standard multimode tele-communications optical fiber. 
The resulting sensor system operates within a factor of 2 of 
the shot noise limit, with a signal bandwidth of >20 kHz. 
A co-located impedance string feeds the integrated power 
supply to energize the light source at the high voltage end, 
and a second power supply at the neutral end to power the 
optical receiver electronics and digitizer.  
The OVT provides 0.3% accuracy from 80% - 120% of 
rated line voltage, over a temperature range of -20 ºC to +60 
ºC. The system bandwidth is >20 kHz. 
VI. 
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
The measurement of the harmonic response of the 
MetPod and the OVT was performed using two separate 
setups.  
A. Voltage Measurement Setup 
As shown in Figure 5, the MetPod voltage response and 
the OVT response were evaluated by applying a harmonic 
tone superimposed on a 60 Hz carrier signal. One arbitrary 
waveform generator (HP 33120A), operating at 60 Hz, was 
used to phase-lock a second HP 33120A operating at a 
harmonic of 60 Hz. The amplitude of each generator was 
independently adjustable. The two sinusoids were combined 
and amplified by a 2400W power amplifier, which drove the 
secondary winding of a 300:1 Potential Transformer. The 
high voltage signal was applied to the device under test 
(DUT), and monitored using a reference divider having a 
bandwidth of >100 kHz. The low voltage output of the 
interface module was amplified by a precision amplifier with 
a gain of G=20. An identical amplifier was used to amplify 
the output of the reference divider. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Schematic diagram of test setup used for harmonic response of 
the MetPod Voltage sensor and the OVT 
The outputs of the interface module and the reference 
divider were fed into a power quality analyzer (Arbiter 
Systems 931A) with a maximum frequency of 3 kHz, or the 
50th harmonic. The reported amplitude and phase are 
relative to the fundamental component present. Data were 
recorded by adjusting the harmonic amplitude to be 2% - 
10% of the fundamental amplitude. The 60 Hz fundamental 
was kept constant at 14 kV. The amplitude error was 
typically +/- 0.05%, while the phase error was typically +/- 
0.2 degrees.  
B. Current Measurement Setup 
The current response of the MetPod was measured by 
providing external 8VDC power to the MetPod through an 
auxiliary power input port that was installed for these tests. 
This allows the current sensor to be functional without 
having to apply high voltage to activate the power supply. A 
sine wave from an arbitrary waveform generator was 
amplified by a 2400W power amplifier, which then drove the 
primary winding of a 122:1 turns ratio, 22 kVA transformer. 
The transformer secondary was connected to a short length 
of stranded copper cable that formed 5 turns through the 
MetPod current sensor slot. An open-loop split-core sensor 
(LEM series HBT-200, 50 A/V, 50 kHz bandwidth) was 
used as the reference. The optical fiber output of the MetPod 
was coupled to the interface module to provide a low voltage 
reconstruction of 5 times the current in the conductor. The 
multiple turns were used to maintain adequate signal to noise 
ratio while operating the test setup at relatively low 
conductor currents (at high frequencies, the conductor 
current was <10 A).  
The MetPod and reference signals were monitored with 
an HP 3478A true RMS multimeter, and phase angle was 
measured with a Krohn-Hite 6500 phase meter. The 
magnitude error with this test setup was typically +/- 0.5%, 
while the phase angle error was typically +/- 0.2 degrees. 
The phase error was extracted from the raw phase 
measurement by subtracting a baseline phase delay caused 
by the group delay of the optical fiber link. The delay 
resulted in a phase angle offset in degrees that is given by -
0.23f, where f is the harmonic frequency in Hz. For example, 
the phase offset is -13.8 degrees at 60 Hz. 
VII. TEST RESULTS 
Results from the tests performed on above sensors are 
presented below. In all cases, the reported magnitude error or 
ratio is a relative to the magnitude of the measured harmonic. 
Since the harmonic signal amplitude in many cases is only a 
few percent of the fundamental signal, the reported errors are 
<0.1% of the total applied signal (fundamental + harmonic). 
 
A. Voltage Measurement of OVT 
The results for the OVT are shown in Figure 6 
(amplitude) and Figure 7 (phase angle).  
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
 
Figure 6.  Amplitude response of OVT voltage sensor versus frequency 
 
The OVT voltage sensor maintains 1% or better accuracy 
over the entire range of frequencies tested, up to 3 kHz or the 
50th harmonic. The phase angle does not exceed 10 degrees 
lag at the 50th harmonic. The phase response can be modeled 
as a second-order low-pass system response with a 
bandwidth of 18 kHz. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Phase response of OVT voltage sensor versus frequency 
 
 
Figure 8.  Amplitude response of MetPod voltage sensor versus frequency 
B. Voltage Measurement of MetPod 
The magnitude response versus frequency of the MetPod’s 
voltage sensor using the 120 Vrms output from the interface 
module is shown in Figure 8, and the phase angle response is 
shown in Figure 9. The MetPod voltage sensor maintains 
better than 5% accuracy up to 1.8 kHz or the 30th harmonic 
of 60 Hz. The phase error remains less than 30 degrees at the 
30th harmonic. The response indicates an overall 3 dB 
voltage sensor bandwidth of approximately 3.2 kHz. The 
bandwidth is currently limited by the interface module, and 
could be increased to the bandwidth of the digital optical 
link, or 20 kHz, if desired. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Phase response of MetPod voltage sensor versus frequency 
 
C. Current Measurement of MetPod 
The magnitude response versus frequency of the 
MetPod’s current sensor is shown in Figure 10, and the 
phase angle in Figure 11. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Amplitude response of MetPod current sensor versus frequency. 
 
The magnitude accuracy of the current sensor remains 
within 5% at 4 kHz, which is the 66th harmonic of 60 Hz. 
The phase error remains within +/- 5 degrees up to 6 kHz, or 
the 100th harmonic.  
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
Figure 11.  Phase angle versus frequency for MetPod current sensor 
 
The MetPod current sensor frequency response was also 
evaluated by comparing the response with a reference CT 
(Ritz extended range, 0.15% from 1% - 150% Inom, 1000:5) 
using the Arbiter 931A power quality analyzer. In this case, 
the applied voltage was purely fundamental 60 Hz at 14 kV, 
whereas the current was 100% at the harmonic frequency 
being tested. The response is shown in Figure 12. 
 
 
Figure 12.  MetPod current sensor amplitude response versus harmonic 
frequency 
 
The frequency response remains within 2% out to 2100 
Hz, the highest frequency tested in this configuration. 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS 
Optical sensors are proving their value, especially in 
applications where accurate measurement over wider 
dynamic range is required, or where ability to retrofit, and 
improved safety are of main concern. They are suited for the 
advanced functionality of leading-edge protective relays and 
meters and for compatibility with digital communications in 
modern substations. Signal processing inside the current and 
voltage electronics of the sensor is inherently digital in 
nature and is accessible in a format consistent with IEC 
standards such as IEC 61850-9-1. 
The intrinsic insulating properties of the non-conductive 
optical fiber allow the optical transducer to be used on 15 kV 
systems as well as 460 V systems. Because the optical 
sensors monitor the external electric or magnetic fields, they 
do not burden the generating system, resulting in savings by 
eliminating the electrical losses and production of heat 
within the monitoring system. The use of optical sensors 
brings several significant advantages such as: 
• 
Reduced substation costs (combined VTs and CTs 
are suitable for both metering and protection). 
• 
Reduced installation and commissioning costs (the 
sensor’s lighter weight has a direct impact on 
foundation size, ease of equipment installation, and 
transportation and handling). 
• 
Improved operating performance: 
• 
Accuracy over a wide dynamic range, 
• 
Intrinsically safe, no ferroresonance or open-circuit 
secondary concerns. 
• 
Reduced maintenance and overhaul costs including 
reduced end of life disposal costs (no oil or SF6). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by the Dept. of Energy 
SBIR Phase III Xlerator Program under contract DE-
OE0000529. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
F. Zavoda, “Advanced Distribution Automation (ADA) Applications 
and Power Quality in Smart Grids,” CICED 2010, Nanjing, China, 
September 2010, pp. 1-7. 
[2] 
B. K. Duncan and B. G. Bailey, “Protection, Metering, Monitoring 
and Control of Medium Voltage Power Systems,” IEEE Transactions 
on Power Delivery, Vol. 40, No. 1, January/February, 2004, pp. 33-
40. 
[3] 
Handbook for Electricity Metering, 10th Edition, 2002 (Edison 
Electric Institute), pp. 381 – 391. 
[4] 
T. W. Cease and P. Johnston , “A Magneto-Optic Current 
Transducer,”  IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 5, April 
1990, pp. 548 – 555. 
[5] 
J. Blake, P. Tantaswadi, and R. T. de Carvalho, “In-line Sagnac 
Interferometric Current Sensor,” IEEE Transactions on Power 
Delivery, Vol. 11, January 1996, pp. 116 – 121. 
[6] 
C. P. Yakymyshyn, S. Weikel, P. Johnston, and M. Brubaker, “362 
kV Optical Voltage Transducer- Final Report,” ESEERCO Research 
Report EP91-04, December, 1998. 
[7] 
M. A. Brubaker, P. J. Hamilton, and C. P. Yakymyshyn, , “Clamp-On 
Untethered Power Interface Pod”, U. S. Department of Energy, SBIR 
Grant Number DE-FG03-01ER832228/A002, Phase II Final Report, 
August, 2004. 
[8] 
IEEE Standard Requirements for Instrument Transformers, IEEE Std. 
C57.13-1993. 
[9] 
IEC 60044-7, Instrument Transformers, Part 7: Electronic Voltage 
Transformers, 1992-12. 
 
 
 
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

