Developing Methods for the Detection of High Impedance Faults in Distribution
Power Grids
Tomasz Nowicki
IBM Watson Research Center
1101 Kitchawan Road
Yorktown Heights NY 10598, USA
Email: tnowicki@us.ibm.com
Grzegorz ´Swirszcz
IBM Watson Research Center
1101 Kitchawan Road
Yorktown Heights NY 10598, USA
Email: swirszcz@us.ibm.com
Mark Yao
IBM Watson Research Center
1101 Kitchawan Road
Yorktown Heights NY 10598, USA
Email: markyao@us.ibm.com
Abstract—High Impedance Faults are known to be extremely
hard to detect. At the same time the efﬁcient detection of
them is very important to electric power providers. One of
the challenges belonging to a Smart Grid paradigm is how
to use new data not available before to improve methodology
of High Impedance Fault detection. In the paper we describe
our experiences, insights and lessons learnt from actual ﬁeld
experiments. A series of experiments was conducted that
simulated most common High Impedance Faults. The data
was recorded at 256 samples per cycle at 4 stations located
at different places on a feeder. We describe the experiments,
the process of acquiring the data and how we used it. Also, we
discuss challenges we encountered and what we have learned
in the process.
Keywords-High Impedance Fault; PMU; sensors; time series;
experiments;
I. INTRODUCTION
”High Impedance Faults (HIFs) on distribution systems
create unique challenges for the protection engineer. HIFs
that occur do not produce enough fault current to be de-
tectable by conventional overcurrent relays or fuses.” [10].
The difﬁculty in detecting High Impedance Faults is due
mainly to two facts. Firstly they generate weak signal, very
often resembling a change in the load caused by a legitimate
usage. Secondly many diverse phenomena with very diverse
physical properties are classiﬁed as HIFs. A downed line
on a non-conducting surface (continuous ﬂow), tree branch
tapping on a wire (erratic, random series of faults depending
on a wind of a high frequency), cracked insulator that causes
HIF whenever water ﬁlls the cracks due to humidity (very
weak ﬂow, semi random nature, low frequency) are very
different events all falling into the category of HIFs.
At the same time HIFs pose a threat to human life, to the
equipment and can lead to high costs for the provider if not
detected in time. Thus developing methods of detection of
HIFs is an item of high priority. Many years of experience
show that it is practically impossible to detect HIFs using
conventional methods and on the level of substations. There-
fore HIF detection ﬁts perfectly as an essential component
into the Smart Grid paradigm.
Currently HIFs are often detected using methods like
breakers tripping, readout from meters at the substation
(human) or a phone call from someone who noticed a
fault. Needless to say, accuracy of those methods is highly
insufﬁcient and not acceptable in a modern power grid. The
concept of Smart Grid provides an access to data that was not
available neither in such quantity (number of measurement
points, sampling rates), nor quality (accuracy of in situ
sensors, resolution, time stamps, cross validation) nor in
data management (transmission, preprocessing). This data
can be used for HIF detection. As with every new paradigm
this leads to new challenges. There is no sufﬁcient textbook
knowledge about how to use readouts of multiple sensors
on the level of multiple samples per cycle to detect faults.
Industrial standards how to use such new data are not yet
established and the users are not yet trained. There are
several approaches to model HIFs using neural networks,
wavelets, Fourier transforms [2], [9], [3], [6], [8], [7] none
of these models being satisfactory nor becoming a standard.
Often such models are only partially validated by simula-
tions and not ﬁeld experiments. In general HIFs are not yet
sufﬁciently well understood and characterized neither from
theoretical nor practical point of view. Advances in physics
and establishing technological methodology and procedures
require experiments and HIF detection is not an exception.
We had a unique opportunity to actually be able to
perform a series of ﬁeld experiments that provided us with
real (not simulated) data. In this paper we describe our
experiences, insights and the lessons we have learnt.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we
describe the setup of the experiments we performed, the
equipment used and how the data was recorded. In Sec-
tion III we discuss the outcomes of the experiments. Finally,
in Section IV we present our insights and conclusions from
the work we did.
II. EXPERIMENTS
The experiments were performed thanks to a collaboration
with a customer of IBM - a major electric energy provider.
In this section we present an overview of what was done
114
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

Figure 1.
Experiment site and 4 recording stations.
focusing on the general setup, equipment used, experiments
performed and data collection and transmission.
A. Experiment setup
The experiments were performed on a lateral that was
under construction and its end was in a remote location that
could be easily secured. That way safety measures were met
and generated faults did not cause interruption in the delivery
of the electric power. The main feeder was leading to a
residential area, thanks to which the requirement of having
HIFs generated on top of a real load was met.
The feeder had a standard 4-wire conﬁguration with
grounded neutral wire. A wire was connected to phase B
that was used to generate various types of faults. Due to
security reasons experiments could not be 100% realistic -
for example throwing a powered wire on the ground would
pose too much danger for the crew. What was done instead -
there was a switch installed on phase B before the wire used
for the experiments. All the time except for when the trials
were done the switch was in an ”off” position. The wire
was secured in a position like on a block of concrete or on
wet grass. Then the switch would be moved to ”on” position
and the fault would be generated. See IV for insights and
remarks related to the inﬂuence of that aspect of a setup on
the data.
There were four recording stations named 101, 102, 103
and 104 (see Fig. 1) located on the main feeder.
Figure 2.
Experiment setup.
Station 101 was located downstream from the experiment
site, stations 102, 103 and 104 were upstream. The distances
from the experiment site to recording substations were
experiment site ↔ station 101 = 2.38 miles,
experiment site ↔ station 102 = 2.07 miles,
experiment site ↔ station 103 = 3.66 miles,
experiment site ↔ station 104 = 5.44 miles.
The signal was sampled 256*60 times per second. On each
of four wires both current and voltage were recorded making
a total of 8 channels recorded per station.
B. Equipment used
Each of four sampling stations selected along the distribu-
tion feeder had following hardware equipments and devices
installed on the electric pole:
- Four pre-calibrated Lindsey Current & Voltage sensor
for 3 line phase plus neutral line.
- Sensor wire terminator and power supply (for RTU)
with enclosure.
- Intelligent RTU with following components in a
weather proof enclosure.
Key hardware components and their functions within each
intelligent RTU were
- High speed A/D board A 16-Bit Analog I/O board was
selected for its compatibility with underlying system
board and for its high speed data sampling rate to meet
experiment requirement. This I/O board can provide
250,000 samples per second maximum sampling rate
and, most importantly, 1024-sample FIFO for reduced
interrupt overhead.
- GPS A GPS card was used to provide high resolu-
tion reference-time signal to synchronize all distributed
RTU in time. Time synchronization was a critical data
collection requirement to allow accurate time coordi-
nation for later data analysis and modeling. In the
115
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

Figure 3.
Data Collection Application.
experiment, the resolution of time stamp for the data
record was set to micro-second.
- Wiﬁ Card At the time of setting up the experiment
there was no wide area communication link between
RTU and workstation that would conﬁgure and control
the RTU and the test site. Once the RTU was mounted
at pole top, the communication interface available to
control and conﬁgure the RTU was through either
wired serial line communication with system termi-
nal program or through Wiﬁ communication through
socket-based application program. The capability of
control/conﬁguration of RTU at runtime was critical to
the experiment. For example, we turned on the data
collection process through Wiﬁ network at each RTU
location only when the experiment had been ready to
be conducted so the data storage would not overﬂow.
- Storage card An 8 GB USB storage card was used as
a local storage for all data collected during the experi-
ment time. Given the rate of data collection (256x60x8
samples/per second), the storage had a capacity to
accommodate 4-5 hour time window of experiment.
The RTU system was an ultra-low power, high-performance,
single board computer based on the 520 MHz PXA270 pro-
cessor. The PXA270 was an implementation of the Intel XS-
cal micro architecture, combined with a comprehensive set
of integrated peripherals, including interrupt controller, real
time clock and various serial/USB interfaces, and network
interfaces. Fig. 3 displays the software stack installed for
each of 4 intelligent RTUs. The data collection application
was implemented in JAVA programming language. Once the
experiment setting was ready, the application initialized and
conﬁgured A/D board and on timer (through GPS module)
based on pre-loaded conﬁguration ﬁle, started the data
collection process through hardware interrupt setting and
serialized the data with pre-deﬁned format to storage ﬁles.
The application could be started, stopped and reconﬁgured
through local Wiﬁ communication interface.
C. Experiments performed
Experiments were performed in 9 categories correspond-
ing to 9 most common types of High Impedance Faults.
1) Concrete Drops
2a) Sand Drops (Dry Sand)
2b) Sand Drops (Wet Sand)
3) Asphalt Drops
4) Grass/Soil Drops (note: grass and soil were very wet)
5) Capacitor Switching (Operate capacitor to see switch-
ing transient)
6) Tree Taps
7) Axial Pinhole Insulator (salt water sprayed into pinhole
drilled in the insulator)
8) Dirty Insulator (Observations: No obvious activity, no
sound)
It should be noted that Experiment 5) consisted of switching
capacitor banks on and off, therefore it was not a simulation
of a HIF but of a legitimate activity that is know to be a
source of false positives.
In each of the categories 10 trials were planned to be
performed, but in numerous cases less trials were done
because of observed phenomena of the sort of:
Too high current ﬂow that was causing breakers to trip
(in case of wet soil and grass).
Difﬁculty in conducting the experiment and safety
issues (in cases of Tree Tap, Axial Pinhole Insulator).
No observed activity (Dirty Insulator).
High repeatability (Capacitor switching).
Every trial was described by (manually) recording:
TRIAL NO: (for example 1)
Start Time: (for example 9:59:19)
Finish Time: (for example 9:59:30)
Arcing Visible: Y/N
Observations: (for example Small arc on surface)
D. Data recording and transmission
RTUs were recording the data in a custom-designed
format (see Table I). The data for each channel was recorded
in an interleaved way. This format was used for recording
purposes. For working with the data we designed a format
basing on .wav standard. Pure .wav format was not sufﬁcient
for our purposes as it does not contain information about
timestamps containing information about when the data was
recorded. We used a format DataStream that consisted of
.wav ﬁles and a text ﬁle .cfg containing metadata such as
time of the beginning of recording, time of recording end,
Station ID, Phase, Current/Voltage and possible comments
and remarks. Each DataStream could be built of one or
multiple .wav ﬁles.
One of the main challenges we were facing was the proper
synchronization of the equipment. For most part the use of
GPS was the solution, but there still remained an issue of
mapping the experiments happening to timestamps recorded
in the data (see IV). We used a two-way approach. Our ﬁrst
source of data were manually made notes by an engineer.
We used his handwatch that was synchronized with GPS
116
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

Table I
RTU RECORDING FORMAT
Block
Field
Size
Comment
Header block
sample station id
4 byte
Data collection
station unit id
sample size
2 bytes
Data sample unit size,
in number of bytes,
for each data sampling.
2 bytes for this project
sample edian
2 bytes
1 for little and
0 for big endian
chan start num
2 bytes
Starting data
channel number
chan end num
2 bytes
Ending data
channel number
chan scan rate
4 bytes
Data channel
scan rate in Hz.
Each scan converts
all channel data
speciﬁed by start and
end channel number
chan time interval
4 bytes
Time interval between
each channel data
in micro-seconds
(default 4 micro-sec)
time stamp sec
4 bytes
Time stamp in sec
when ﬁrst data
scan happened
time stamp usec
4 bytes
Time stamp
in micro-seconds
for when ﬁrst data
scan happened
Data block
<start chan data>
. . .
<end chan data>
<start chan data>
. . .
<end chan data>
timers before the experiments to properly record times and
short descriptions of each experiment (see II-C). The second
source of data was a video recording of the experiments with
a timestamp of the recording embedded in each frame. We
did not want to rely on any of those sources solely. The
reason was that if something went wrong with one of them
the experimental data would lose most of it’s value without a
way of identifying its portions corresponding to experiment
versus the ones corresponding to faultless state of the feeder.
Luckily we ended up having two good sources of that data,
nevertheless we are convinced that having redundant sources
of information is the right approach if possible.
It is worth mentioning that the manual way of recording
experiments turned out to be surprisingly accurate. It also
Figure 4.
Current and voltage waveforms recorded on Phase B at stations
101, 102, 104 and 104 respectively (top to bottom).
could not have been eliminated completely as we needed
not only times but also descriptions of experiments.
III. AFTER THE EXPERIMENTS
A. Experimental data
A primary database of labeled waveforms was created,
organized into 4 main folders corresponding to 4 recording
stations. It contained over 200 ﬁles. A consistent naming
convention for the ﬁles was used and they were arranged by
phase, type (Voltage/Current) and time.
A secondary database of labeled waveforms was made of
1720 waveﬁles in 261 subfolders. Files in .wav format were
accompanied by conﬁguration ﬁles containing metadata.
A list of experiment descriptions (from handwritten notes)
was used to generate DataStream objects. The format has
been deﬁned that can be used as an input by the code
to populate data structures appropriately, namely .cfg ﬁles
for storing metadata of the analytics/development modules
allowing the access to multiple waveﬁles as a continuous
data stream (compare II-D).
Over 12 Gigabytes of data have been collected corre-
sponding to over 3.5 hours of experiments.
B. ...and what we did with it
With the amount of data we were facing standard
tools for manipulating and visualizing time series were
inadequate (Compare lesson eleven in IV). Envisioning
upcoming paradigm of Smart Grid and related challenges
we have developed a platform called Time Series Analytics
Workspace (TSAW).
TSAW is a software environment for working with multiple
large-size time series. It combines various visualization
tools (see Fig.s 4, 6), manipulation utilities allowing various
117
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

Figure 5.
ROCs obtained on the experimental data using novel algorithms.
ways of working with the data and powerful analytics
inbuilt. TSAW has been designed and built with broad array
of applications in Smart Grid related projects in mind, not
limited to the scope of HIF detection.
Thanks to working with the data using TSAW numer-
ous properties of HIFs were understood. 6 new invention
disclosures (see [4], [5]) were ﬁled related to the work
done and innovative algorithms were created based on the
knowledge acquired. The performance of the algorithms
was evaluated using the standard metric - AuC (see for
example [11]). Performance efﬁciency yielding AuC of
0.924 has been achieved using anomaly detection combined
with false positive elimination algorithm. (see Fig. 5).
IV. LESSONS LEARNT
The ﬁrst lesson learnt would be the conﬁrmation of how
great the importance of real experiments is. This was very
much expected, but we still ﬁnd this insight to be of an
extreme value.
The second lesson we learnt was that the choice of recording
data format was not the best possible. In one of the ﬁles
one of the AD converter drivers inserted one 0 sample
at the beginning of data. As the data was recorded in an
interleaved fashion this lead to shifting of channels - the
ﬁrst channel became the second etc., so for example current
of phase A was being recorded where the data for voltage of
phase B should have been. This was discovered when gluing
waveforms coming from different ﬁles showed discontinuity.
Enhancing the recording format with markers containing the
information about the data being recorded inside the channel
and/or writing each channel to a different ﬁle might be a
good idea to be considered.
Third lesson learnt was that data recording can be more efﬁ-
cient and economic if a remote communication was available
between the test site and all RTU data recording station.
The total time of data recording time for the experiment
lasted about 4-5 hours, while each experiment conducted
was only lasted about 5-10 minutes. Most of data recorded
was within non-experiment time window and was irrelevant
to the later data analysis and wasted storage space. The
non-experimental data also added additional work to the
post experimental work since experimental data need to
be allocated by time ﬁltering out these non-experiment-
data. All these disadvantages can be resolved if a remote
communication to each RTU was available from the test
site so that each experiment can recorded separately with
different time reference point. It is with pointing out though
that some amount of non-experimental data is as important
and the experimental data, as it allows to train models
properly providing a baseline for true negatives.
Lesson four - installation of physical RTU units should meet
following requirements:
a) Security: the unit should be sealed with a secure lock
and installed at certain height to prevent any theft and
unwanted access. The installation height should be also
convenient enough so that unit could be physically
reached by the experimenter for different purposes such
as physical repair or removal if the USB data storage
after experiments.
b) Weather proof: one of RTU was damaged due to
leakage of rain after the experiment and this can be
prevented if enclosure is well sealed.
Lesson ﬁve - the cost of installation of sensor and RTU can
be high. With a crew of 2 workers, it took 1.5 full days to
install and test 4 units of RTU and wire them to the pre-
installed sensors.
Lesson six - our experiments conﬁrmed that real (not only
simulated) experimental data is essential to progress in
physics in general and to get an understanding of the nature
of HIFs in particular. Smart Grid and access to the readouts
of meters capturing what phenomena accompany real events
will provide whole new universe of knowledge that will
clarify many unknowns and misconceptions about HIFs.
Thanks to the access to the real data we were able to
determine that on a contrary to a common belief that phase
shifts should accompany HIFs it is not the case. We have
established that not only this is not true in most cases, but
also that the occurrence of phase shift provides an excellent
tool for eliminating false positives [5].
Lesson seven - if we knew the exact setup of experiments
ahead of time we could have attached a device to the switch
starting/ending each trial (see II-A to increase the accuracy
of recording experiments beginnings/endings (as compared
to the handwatch we used).
Lesson eight - even best experiments are still only experi-
ments (compare II-A) and need to be treated as such. They
cannot either replace or be replace by a real data from the
Smart Grid. The beneﬁt of experimental data is having the
full information of what happened and exact timestamps of
118
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

what happened. The drawback is that experiments cannot
be 100% realistic for numerous reasons such as for example
the fact that due to related hazard it would not be feasible
to break a wire and make it fall on the ground, which is
one very common scenario of HIF occurring. Such data
will become available once Smart Grid starts becoming a
reality. Also, equipment used during experiments (like the
switch) generates a signal of its own that is not present in a
real life scenario. All those aspects have to be taken under
consideration while working with the data and building
models.
Lesson nine - it would have been of a great value to have had
a sensor station installed also on the lateral and closer to the
experiment site. It was not possible during our experiments
due to technical reasons and we had at out disposal only
the HIF-generated signal mixed with a strong signal on the
main feeder. Once Smart Grid becomes a reality such data
will become available and we are very thrilled about the
prospect of working with it.
Lesson ten - our experiments show consistency with the
results of a paper [1] about determining the direction to a
ﬂicker source. At the Fig. 6 the ﬁrst two rows are current and
voltage at phase B recorded at station 101 which was located
downstream from the experiments. Both current and voltage
change in the same direction when the fault is generated.
The last two rows are current and voltage at phase B
recorded at station 102 which was located upstream from the
experiments. Their perturbations have different directions, as
described in [1].
Lesson eleven - tools for visualization of the data need to
be be developed. With numerous sensors generating streams
of data the need for an ability to display the readouts in a
human-readable manner becomes essential. The challenge
is to develop means of efﬁciently visualizing enormous
amounts of data, orders of magnitude above what a typical
software is able to handle effectively. TSAW (see III-B) is
an example of such tool that allowed us to work effectively
with the data.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Ron Ambrosio, Charlie
Arteaga and members of the crew at the experiments site
for their work and help with this project.
REFERENCES
[1] P. G. H. Axelberg and M. H. J. Bollen, An Algorithm
for Determining the Direction to a Flicker Source, IEEE
Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol.21, NO. 2, April 2006.
[2] C. Benner and P. Carswell and B. Don Russell, Improved
algorithm for detecting arcing faults using random fault
behavior. Electric Power Systems Research 17.1, 49 — 56,
(1989)
Figure 6.
Effect of direction to the source on current and voltage - top to
bottom: I at 101, V at 101 (downstream), I at 102, V at 102 (upstream).
[3] T. M. Lai and L. A. Snider and E. Lo Wavelet transform based
relay algorithm for the detection of stochastic high impedance
faults. Electric Power Systems Research, 76.8, 626 — 633,
(2006)
[4] T. Nowicki and G. Swirszcz, A Method for Detecting High
Impedance Faults on Distribution Systems using Method of
Deviation from a Local Model, preprint 2010.
[5] T. Nowicki and G. Swirszcz, Detecting and Eliminating False
Positives in High Impedance Fault Detection on Distribution
Systems, preprint 2010.
[6] R. Patterson, Signatures and software ﬁnd high impedance
faults. IEEE Computer Applications in Power, 8.3, 12—15
(1995) (updated 2002)
[7] B. D. Russell, Computer relaying and expert systems: New
tools for detecting high impedance faults Electric Power
Systems Research, 20.1, 31—37, (1990)
[8] A. R. Sedighi and M. R. Haghifam and O. P. Malik and
M. H. Ghassemian High impedance fault detection based on
wavelet transform and statistical pattern recognition IEEE
Transactions on Power Delivery, 20.4, 2414—2421, (2005)
[9] A. R. Sedighi and M. R. Haghifam and O. P. Malik, Soft
computing applications in high impedance fault detection in
distribution systems. Electric Power Systems Research 76.1-3,
136—144, (2005),
[10] J.
Tengdin
et.
al.,High
Impedance
Fault
Detection
Technology
Report
of
PSRC
Working
Group
D15,
http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/td/dist/documents/highz.pdf
[11] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Receiver operating characteristic
119
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

