Energy Management Policy with Demand Respond Method for a Smart Home
Win Thandar Soe, Cécile Belleudy
Department of Electronics
Laboratoire d’Electronique, Antennes et Télécommunications (LEAT), Université Côte d’Azur
Nice, France.
e-mail: win-thandar.soe@unice.fr, cecile.belleudy@unice.fr
Abstract—The increasing energy consumption increases the
underlying environmental impacts. Hence, designing a more
efficient energy management system is a vital research topic to
address. A more innovative system for energy management makes
energy consumption smarter and more efficient and reduces
electricity bills. Several researchers proposed different home
energy management systems with only grid supply as the source of
energy. This study proposes a new online energy management
approach that takes into consideration renewable energy sources
coupled with battery autonomy. It is based on a novel architecture
for collecting information on the energy consumption in a smart
home via a wireless sensor network. In this approach, the first step
is to identify the load type of each appliance based on its
consumption. The second step consists in defining an energy
management policy that utilizes the energy provided by the battery
using a demand response method. These results show a reduction
in the electricity bill for a smart home.
Keywords- demand response; energy management; load
profile; smart plug network.
INTRODUCTION
I.
In recent years, as the world’s energy consumption has
increased alarmingly, energy management systems have a
critical role to contribute to the efficiency of modern smart
homes. Many electrical devices used in homes do not
optimize energy consumption, or to automatically or semi-
automatically turn ON or OFF. From the electrical point of
view, we can determine the total power consumption for a
home, however, we cannot identify and observe the energy
consumption of the different devices. To collect data from
and manage the consumption individual appliances, smart
plugs must be attached to each appliance. The plug then
sends information to a gateway to be visualized on a
dashboard.
This
collection
data
firstly
identifies
the
appliance
depending
on
its
consumption.
Using
this
classification, we will design an energy demand response
system that reduces the required energy from the grid by
using renewable energy to power one class of appliances.
The process of energy modeling and management in the
smart home is based on three concepts:

Energy harvesting [1][2]: local power resources,
battery autonomy/charge, energy harvesting profiles
according to the geographical climatic position,

Home energy consumption [3][4]: classification and
daily usage of appliances, lifestyle, load profiles
during
the
day,
time
shifting,
prediction
and
estimation of load analysis,

Novel functionalities in Home Energy Management
(HEM) approach [1][2][5]: integration of renewable
energy sources and efficient battery management
based
on
data
collection
and
load
profile
classification, peak shaving energy management.
The aim of this article is to describe the load profile
classification and the peak shaving energy management.
This paper is organized as follows: First, Section II gives an
overview of the related work. Section III describes a novel
infrastructure for energy management system that classifies
home appliances according to their power consumption. In
Section IV, we propose and discuss an innovative energy
management approach for a smart home that uses renewable
energy sources to decrease the energy obtained from the
grid. In Section V, we present the results of our preliminary
experiments which are obtained by using our energy
management approach. Finally, in Section VI, we conclude
the paper and give some future work.
STATE OF THE ART
II.
Electricity is the most inconstant and widely used form
of
energy.
Therefore,
electricity
generation
and
consumption demand are growing globally. It is evident that
among many other sources, the electricity generation is
currently the largest single source of greenhouse gas
emission, which is considered a significant contributor to
climate change [6]. To mitigate the consequences of climate
change, the current electrical system needs to undergo
adjustments. The solution to these problems is not only in
generating electricity more cleanly but also in optimizing
the use of the available generating capacity. To achieve such
optimization, the smart home could be an alternative. The
intelligent control system inside a house introduces the
concept of the smart home. Smart home technology
provides an optimal alternative to its use for their security,
comfort and energy saving as well. Previous studies have
introduced
different
methods
of
home-based
energy
management system; however, most of these methods have
considered grid supply. In the smart home environment,
there are two primary methods to modify home energy
consumption; total energy reduction with a price-based
option and peak demand shedding or shifting method of
Demand Response (DR) activities.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

A. Problem Description
To fulfil the requirement of exceeding demands of
energy consumption, different energy sources are installed
in France. According to the study made in December 2016
[6] out of total capacity of 130 GW, approximately 48.3%
installed energy is taken from nuclear sources, 35% is
obtained from renewable energy sources and the fossil fuels
and
thermal
energy
sources
contribute
only
16.7%.
Following the increased CO2 emission in 2016, the nuclear
power generation decreased due to the closure of several
plants to conduct tests at the request of French nuclear
safety authority. The energy generation from renewable
sources covered nearly 20% of demand in France [6].
According to statistics presented by [6], the residential
sectors are one of the main energy consumers which
accounts approximately for 36% of the total French energy
consumption.
Seasonal
variation
and
weather
patterns
reflect the energy consumption in France; for example, the
use of energy is different during days of the week and time
of day. France is the most temperature sensitive country in
Europe. The demand for electric heating is higher in winter
than in summer. Temperature below 15°C ultimately causes
higher energy consumption. Similarly, the demand for
user’s activity is higher on weekdays than on weekends.
Energy consumption is one of the indices in determining
the levels of development of a nation. The availability of
energy supply to all sectors of life in any country causes the
shortage of all kinds of energy, particularly electricity which
is
badly
needed
for
economic
development.
Energy
Management System (EMS) has been in existence in the
energy sector for several decades. EMS also has age-long
application
as
a
vital
role
in
the
residential
sector.
Monitoring, controlling and optimizing the flow and use of
energy are the key functions of energy management system
[7]. HEM system also takes part in an essential role in
performing residential demand response methods in the
smart environment. It affords a homeowner the ability to
automatically perform smart load controls based on utility
programs, customer’s preference and load priority.
B. Demand Response Approach
According to Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
[8], demand response is defined as: “Change in electric use
by demand-side resources from their normal consumption
patterns in response to changes in the price of electricity, or
to incentive payments designed to induce lower electricity
use at times of high wholesale market prices or when system
reliability is jeopardized”. Time-of-Use (TOU) pricing is
one of the price-based options under the classification of the
U.S. Department of Energy [9].

TOU pricing: a rate with different unit prices for
usage during different blocks of time, usually defined
for a 24-hour day. TOU pricing provides an incentive
to shift loads from higher priced (On-peak) to lower-
priced (Mid-peak) or (Off-peak) periods.
For example, Ontario Electricity TOU price periods [10]
based on the schedule shown in Figure 1 follow: (i) Off-
peak: 6.5 cents per kWh, (ii) Mid-peak: 9.5 cents per kWh,
(iii) On-peak: 13.2 cents per kWh. TOU rates are typically
reflected in the user’s energy bill. In this study, we don’t
consider this price-based option.
Figure 3. TOU Schedules and Rates [10]
Several HEM systems are based on different methods,
such as load shifting, peak shaving etc.

Load Shifting: a technique is used in demand-side
management shown in Figure 2. It can be shifted the
demand for a high power consumption of home
appliances at different times within an hour or within
a day when the price is lower.
Boynuegri et al. [1] have proposed HEM algorithm using
load shifting method for the smart home. This algorithm
includes
the
predefined
criteria
which
combine
grid
ON/OFF situation, multi-rate electricity tariffs and the State
of Charge (SoC) of batteries for all smart home platform
with/without renewable energy sources.

Peak Shaving: a method which decreases total energy
consumption, reduce the cost of electricity bill from
the electricity grid due to the usage of renewable
energy sources and shifting the higher power load to
the night where the electric price is lower [5].
The procedure of peak shaving method is shown in
Figure 3. Al-Saedi [5] presented the smart home peak
shaving energy management system with a wired network
that connects the house applications to a personal computer
via USB port using K8055 interface board. Based on the
peak shaving method in [5], the proposed policy with
wireless network manages the household loads according to
their preset priority and fixed the total household power
consumption under a certain limit.
ENERGY MANAGEMENT INFRASTRUCTURE AND LOAD
III.
CLASSIFICATION
The home automation system has been used for the
remote control of devices in the home since the 1990s and
Figure 1. Load Shifting
Figure 2. Peak Shaving Procedure
Power (W )
Time (h)
0
24
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

has formed the basis of the smart home building comfort
[8]. A smart home system is divided into three main parts: a
communication
network,
intelligent
control
and
home
automation [11]. The communication network can be
created
by
wire,
wireless
or
mixed
communication
technique between sensors and actuators. Many existing,
well establishment home automation systems are based on
wired communication. At present, the evolution and benefits
of wireless technologies, such as Wi-Fi, wireless system are
used every day and everywhere. The intelligent control
intends to manage and monitor the entire house by internet
services. Home automation that connects to the relevant
smart components by using Home Area Network (HAN).
Wireless sensor network system for smart home enables
easy EMS construction. In next section, we described data
collection and control architecture in the future smart home.
Base on the principle of energy management infrastructure,
we collected the data from home appliances by using the
smart plug and classified the load.
A. Data Collection and Control Architecture in Smart
Home
The smart home is a technology integration for greater
comfort, autonomy, reduced cost, and energy saving as well.
Figure 4 schematically illustrates the data collection and
control architecture in the future smart home.
Figure 4. Data Collection and Control Architecture in Future Smart Home
In our proposed smart home, there are two supply
sources for the household appliances: one source comes from
the power grid and other from the renewable energy source,
such as solar energy via battery. In this model, household
appliances
relate
to
an
intelligent
control
system
to
communicate to the database and to manage the energy by
Wireless Personal
Area
Network
(WPAN), the
smart
sensors, the actuators and the smart plugs. The system can
operate both in grid parallel mode and in stand-alone mode.
All appliances are plugged into the wireless-enabled smart
plugs. Thus, energy and power consumption for each
appliance is monitored and stored in a distant location.
Similarly, we can identify load profile of appliance by using
the smart plug. Moreover, the smart plug can turn appliances
ON/OFF remotely based on the commands from the central
control. For example, the activation time of the appliances
can be shifted if necessary.
To realize first measurements and validation of the
proposed approach, we decide to use Fibaro smart plug [12].
The wireless communication protocol is Z-Wave technology.
Fibaro smart plug is a bi-directional wireless system: current
sensing and remote control. This plug has one function to
check its status whether they are active or not. Each Fibaro
network has its own unique network identification number
(home ID), which allows identifying the different appliances
and their activities. After Fibaro system is switched on, the
location of its individual components is automatically
updated in real-time through status confirmation signals
received from devices operating in a mesh topology network.
The unique feature of this smart plug is real-time energy
consumption measuring through color changing, crystal LED
ring.
B. Home Energy Management Database Structure
Information from energy harvesting (EH), state of the
battery charge (Eb), power and energy of each appliance (Ec)
are collected and stored in the database. This collection is
based on smart suitable sensors and actuators. Weather
information,
forecast
or
current,
are
derived
from
OpenWeatherMap service. The user activity is depending on
the occupant’s action plan and we propose to classify the
underlying consumption according to load profile presented
in next section. To achieve that, real-time consumption
gathered by using smart plugs with proposed wireless
communication technology. Energy management policy
work on the database that contains real-time and prediction
values by slot time. Slot time has been defined as part of a
day according to the user activity. This slot time is to predict
energy consumption and harvesting to propose a schedule of
the usage of the battery according to energy sources status.
The aim is to avoid energy harvesting loss, peak power, and
prevent the outage. Figure 5 shows the principles of the
proposed energy management infrastructure in a smart home.
Figure 5. Principle of Energy Management Infrastructure
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

C. Data Collection from Smart Plugs
Fibaro smart plugs (Figure 6), which use a Z-Wave
communication protocol, are in charge to collect power and
energy consumption for the different home appliances.
Real-time consumptions of appliances during each slot-time
are collected and stored with Domoticz home automation
application. This application allows visualizing and stored
load profile for each appliance depending on the user’s
activity. On this base, our approach consists in determining
a suitable classification of these load profiles with the aim to
facilitate energy management.
Figure 6. Installation to collect data from Fibaro Smart Plug
D. Load Profiles and Classification
The load profile is the variation in power consumption
of an electrical load with time. The load profile is a specific
concept in a smart home system that can vary depending, for
example, on the user activity, season and weather condition
etc. Appliances are drivers of residential power demands.
Figure 7 demonstrates the aggregated load profiles of
different appliances in a typical day. Our aim is to propose a
suitable classification of these profiles to facilitate the
energy management. As power consumption prediction is
the main base for efficient energy management, the periodic
load must be clearly identified and quantified. So, the
proposed
classification
of
loads
is
the
following:
intermittent load, phantom load, and continuous load [13].
Figure 7. Aggregated Power Demand of Appliances in a Typical Day
1)
Intermittent Load: The power consumption occurs
occasionally or at a regular interval when an appliance is
ON state. An appliance only operates a fraction of 24-hours
periods depending on the user’s activity. If the home
appliances are active at a regular interval, these appliances’
power consumption can be predictable but can present some
variations which must be estimated with the confidence
interval and degree. This load can be delayed eventually
when the consumption of an appliance is lower than the
total power consumption during peak hours or not enough
energy.
2)
Phantom Load: The phantom load or standby power
also called wasted power occurs when the appliance is
plugged into the socket and is not active (OFF/Idle states).
In this state, the power consumption of home appliance is
low almost zero. This function can define as a phantom
load. After a while, this small amount of consumption tooks
effect for the electricity bill.
3)
Continuous Load: The certain appliances operate
continuously or semi-periodically during a 24-hours period.
The consumption can be variable according to appliance
consumption mode. The characterization of each power
mode must be done. This kind of load is highly predictable.
We defined a classification based on three kinds of load
that can be combined to characterize the global power
consumption. Each appliance is viewed as a combination of
loads: one of the two main loads (continuous or intermittent
load) and the phantom load which represents the small
amount of power consumed in idle mode. Each load is
defined by different parameters:

Phantom Load: duration, the period with an interval
of confidence, average maximum power. (Figure 8)

Intermittent
Load:
duration
with
degree
of
confidence,
the
regularity
with
an
interval
of
confidence, average maximum power. (Figure 9)

Continuous Load: average duration, the period with
an interval of confidence, average maximum power.
(Figure 10)
Figure 8. Measurements and Interpretation of Phantom Load
Figure 9. Measurement and Interpretation of Intermittent Load
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Figure 10. Measurement and Interpretation of Continuous Load
An
automatic
detection
of
the
load
has
been
implemented for real-time identification of data collected on
the smart plugs. The first day for identification is needed.
For instance, the home electricity usage of television at OFF
state is represented in Figure 8. Where we analyzed the
measurement and interpretation of the phantom load.
Similarly, the intermittent load during a day as an example:
Electric Kettle (ON state) is shown in Figure 9. The load
profile of a refrigerator as an example of the continuous
load is presented in Figure 10.
ENERGY MANAGEMANT POLICY
IV.
In this paper, we propose an energy management policy
using the peak-shaving method. The energy management
policy is based on the different interval of time on which the
schedule of battery charge, harvested energy and power
consumption
of
appliances
is
built.
On
this
basis,
decision/action to reduce energy consumption from the grid
are determined. The next subsections present the different
parameters used and the proposed HEM policy concepts.
A. Analysis of Measurement
The energy management policy considers different
sources of energy like grid and energy harvesting. To
quantify the last quoted energy source, weather conditions
are needed, and real-time and forecast data can get from
web service or data center as like OpenWeatherMap service.
Energy management can be based weather condition and
occupants’ action, real time or predictable. The associated
parameters are:

Weather
condition
(real-time
and
forecasted):
Sunny hours per day and its irradiance, external
temperatures (maximum, minimum),

Kinds of the day: weekday/ weekend or holiday,

Occupant’s activity according to day: go to work or
school at daytime or stay at home or not at home
for the whole day based on the user’s activity,
prediction and motion detector.
By e-learning, different profile activity per day like
wake up, small activity, lunch, non-activity, dinner, night,
etc., are identified. This schedule is built at first on
prediction and actualize on real time.
B. Proposed Home Energy Management Policy
In each time interval, the proposed HEM policy starts by
gathering information, which includes the status (ON/OFF)
and the power consumption of all appliances (watt, W), load
priority (level) with its associated duration and the usable
energy of the battery. A preliminary schedule is built based
on the different prediction. When the decision is made, the
HEM sends control signals to change the selected appliance
status. In our study, we consider the three cases depending
on the battery and electricity supply.
In the following, small appliances are defined by the fact
that they can be powered by the battery. We assume that the
customer fixes a priority for small appliances if he accepts
to delay or not their activation. According to the level of
energy in the battery and the expected energy consumption
as described in Table I, different cases are feasible: (b =
battery, g = grid)
TABLE I.
SUMMARY OF PROPOSED HEM POLICY
Case 1: If the total energy consumption of small
miscellaneous appliances [Ecs (τ)] is lower than the usable
energy of the battery [Eb, usable (τ)] plus the total harvested
energy [EH (τ)] for and during a time interval, all small
appliances are powered by the battery. The HEM will force
the status of small miscellaneous appliances [As,i (i=
1,2,3,…,n)] to be “ON”. Assume that the state of the charge
of the battery (SoC) is greater than equal to 70% condition.
No action is taken from the grid.
Case 2 (a): If [Ecs (τ)] is greater than [Eb, usable (τ)] plus
[EH (τ)], some small appliances can be delayed or powered
by the battery. In this state, SoC assumes between 70% and
50% condition. HEM will perform the lowest priority load
to turn OFF and determine primarily the highest priority
load to turn ON. To keep the total power consumption under
the usable energy of the battery, some of the lowest priority
load will delay for the next time interval until enough
energy of the battery.
Case 2 (b): If [Ecs (τ)] is greater than [Eb, usable (τ)] plus
[EH (τ)] and SoC condition assumes between 50% and 25%
condition, some small appliances will be powered by the
battery and others by the electricity grid. In this case, the
supply source for home appliances can be dual. With the
performance of automatic transfer switch, some of the
highest priority load will shift to use electricity supply due
to the insufficient energy of the battery.
Case 3: If [Ecs (τ)] is greater than [Eb, usable (τ)] plus [EH
(τ)] at the SoC condition is below 25%, all appliances will
Case
Conditions
b
g
Load Priority
1.
Ecs (τ) < [ Eb, usable (τ) + EH (τ)]
SoC condition ≥ 70%
*
All
small
appliances are ON
2.
(a) Ecs (τ) > [Eb, usable (τ) + EH (τ)]
50% ≤ SoC condition ≤ 70%
*
From the highest
to
lowest
(with
delay)
(b) Ecs (τ) > [ Eb, usable (τ) + EH (τ)]
25% ≤ SoC condition ≤ 50%
*
*
From the highest
to lowest
3.
Ecs (τ) > [Eb, usable (τ) + EH (τ)]
SoC condition < 25%
*
All appliances are
ON
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

be power from the grid to be more efficient energy and keep
the usage of battery charge.
The proposed policy calculates the power of selected
appliances and it will define state of each appliance either it
is active or inactive. If the total power of these appliances
exceeding the power limits, the use of this policy classifies
the appliances and prioritize them in ascending order.
PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENTS
V.
To process HEM, we recognize and identify different
home appliances when coupled with smart plugs and
monitor the progress at first day. We have collected data
from appliances, such as quality of prediction and degree of
confidence and classify different kinds of loads in our
database. Table II describes the preliminary results of
selected home appliances. We discussed the different
parameters of appliances and defined in section III. The
experimental time for each appliance was 24 hours. Quality
of prediction is denoted by numbers from 0 to 5 indicating
from lower (0) to high (1) priority. (C = Continuous Load,
P = Phantom Load, I = Intermittent Load)
TABLE II.
RESULTS FROM PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENTS OF
DIFFERENT KIND OF LOADS
These preliminary tests have been made to support home
appliances for standard size family and this proposed HEM
system allows approximately 28% reduction in total grid
energy consumption. These results could be extended to
larger HEM systems to provide and prove the energy
efficiency of this proposed approach.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
VI.
To measure the energy consumption in the smart home
and analyze their features, we propose a data collection
architecture base on smart plugs and the definition of three
types of load. The aim is to improve the prediction of the
energy consumption which is estimated at intervals of time
that compose a day. According to these different load
profiles, we propose to modify the functionality of the
energy management policy for a smart home to integrate
with renewable energy sources with the aim to optimize the
use of the battery. Although much demand response
methods are widely implemented by commercial and
industrial side, nowadays it is enabled in the residential
sector. Depend on the user activity and current electricity
policy, to integrate peak shaving method with the smart
appliances for the smart home. The goal of our research is to
solve outage of electricity from the grid, to seek energy
from the local power resources and reducing of electricity
bill by using per month.
Base on the above conditions, the next step of work is to
validate our approach with wider experiments. The second
aim is to couple the energy management policy and a
simulation framework which will represent the sensor
network in charge to identify the load activity. The final aim
is to provide a tool to realize a conjoint architecture
exploration on suitable wireless sensor network and energy
management policy in the smart home.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge by the mobility
funded by Erasmus Mundus Mobility with Asia (EMMA) in
the framework of EU Erasmus Mundus (Action 2). We also
express
our
gratitude
to
Laboratories
d’Electronique,
Antennes et Télécommunications (LEAT).
REFERENCES
[1]
A. R. Boynuegri, B. Yagcitekin, M. Baysal, A. Karakas, and M.
Uzunoglu, “Energy management algorithm for smart home with
renewable energy sources,” 2013, pp. 1753–1758.
[2]
A. Saha et al., “A Home Energy Management Algorithm in a Smart
House Integrated with Renewable Energy,” p. 6.
[3]
T. Zhu, A. Mishra, D. Irwin, N. Sharma, P. Shenoy, and D. Towsley,
“The case for efficient renewable energy management in smart
homes,” in Proceedings of the Third ACM Workshop on Embedded
Sensing Systems for Energy-Efficiency in Buildings, 2011, pp. 67–72.
[4]
M. Pipattanasomporn, M. Kuzlu, and S. Rahman, “An Algorithm for
Intelligent Home Energy Management and Demand Response
Analysis,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 2166–2173,
Dec. 2012.
[5]
F. A. T. Al-Saedi, “Peak shaving energy management system for
smart house,” Int. J. Sci. Eng. Comput. Technol., vol. 3, no. 10, pp.
359–366, 2013.
[6]
“2016 Annual Electricity Report: Bilan électrique 2016.” [Online].
Available:
http://bilan-electrique-2016.rte-france.com/mon-bilan-
electrique-2016-en/. [Accessed: 05-Mar-2018].
[7]
M. Amer, A. M. El-Zonkoly, A. Naamane, and N. K. M’Sirdi,
“Smart Home Energy Management System for Peak Average Ratio
Reduction,” Ann. Univ. Craiova Electr. Eng. Ser., vol. 38, pp. 180–
188, 2014.
[8]
D. Wight et al., “2010 Assessment of Demand Response and
Advanced Metering - Staff Report,” Fed. Energy Regul. Comm., vol.
2, pp. 1–117, 2011.
[9]
Q. Qdr, “Benefits of demand response in electricity markets and
recommendations for achieving them,” US Dept Energy Wash. DC
USA Tech Rep, no. 2, pp. 1–122, 2006.
[10] “Electricity rates | Ontario Energy Board.” [Online]. Available:
https://www.oeb.ca/rates-and-your-bill/electricity-rates.
[Accessed:
05-Mar-2018].
[11] O. Elma and U. S. Selamoğullari, “A home energy management
algorithm with smart plug for maximized customer comfort,” in
Electric Power and Energy Conversion Systems (EPECS), 2015 4th
International Conference on, 2015, pp. 1–4.
[12] “Wall
Plug
|
FIBARO
Manuals.”
[Online].
Available:
https://manuals.fibaro.com/wall-plug/. [Accessed: 13-Oct-2017].
[13] W. T. Soe, I. Mpawenimana, M. Di Fazio, C. Belleudy, and A. Z. Ya,
“Energy Management System and Interactive Functions of Smart
Plug for Smart Home,” Int. J. Electr. Comput. Energ. Electron.
Commun. Eng., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 884–891, 2017.
Plug
No.
Appliances
C
P
I
Quality of
Prediction
(Regular)
(Irregular)
1.
Refrigerator
*
*
5
2.
Light
*
*
4
3.
PC, Laptop
*
*
3
4.
Multimedia
*
*
2
5.
Coffee
Maker
*
*
1
6.
Charger
*
*
0
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

