Business Model Considerations for a Solution to Optimize  
and Diagnose Solar Panel Installations 
 
Lasse Berntzen 
Saeed Teimourzadeh 
Paula Anghelita 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
EPRA Electric Energy Co. 
ICPE SA 
Horten, Norway 
Ankara, Turkey 
Bucharest, Romania 
email: lasse.berntzen@usn.no 
email: saeed@epra.com.tr 
email: p.anghelita@icpe.ro 
Qian Meng 
Viorel Ursu 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
ICPE SA 
Horten, Norway 
Bucharest, Romania 
email: qian.meng@usn.no 
email: vio.ursu@icpe.ro 
 
 
Abstract — This paper describes the business model 
considerations for an Internet of Things (IoT) solution to 
diagnose and optimize solar panel installations. The solution 
consists of a sensor platform and a cloud-based service. The 
sensor platform collects information about the position and 
orientation of the solar panels, the solar radiation, the ambient 
temperature and humidity, and the temperature of the solar 
panels. The cloud-based service receives the collected data 
together with data from the inverter. An algorithm analyzes the 
data and makes recommendations about possible adjustments 
and malfunctions. Users are offered recommendations through 
a web-based interface. The focus of this paper is the business 
model considerations. How can the solution create value for the 
manufacturer and stakeholders in the solar panel business? The 
solar panel value chain is examined to see where the solution can 
be bundled with other business activities. 
Keywords-solar panels; photovoltaic energy; testing; business 
model; IoT; cloud-based service. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Prosumers are energy consumers that also produce energy. 
The produced energy can be used, stored for later 
consumption, or sold to the grid. A smart meter keeps track of 
the energy flow between the prosumer and the grid. Fig. 1 
shows a prosumer connected to the grid through a smart meter. 
The prosumers have solar panels on their rooftops to produce 
their own energy. 
The most popular technology for small-scale renewable 
production is solar panels. However, solar panels are only 
effective during the daytime, with a peak output when the 
solar radiation is the highest. A solar panel needs to capture as 
much radiation as possible. Therefore, the characteristics and 
the orientation/positioning of the solar panel are critical 
factors for the efficiency of energy production. The output of 
the solar panels also depends upon the surface temperature of 
the solar panel. High temperature dramatically decreases 
photovoltaic output. 
To face this challenge, a collaborative effort of teams from 
three countries with different climatic conditions, ICPE SA 
from Romania, EPRA Electric Co. from Turkey, and the 
University of South-Eastern Norway joined their efforts in the 
project Cloud-based analysis and diagnosis platform for 
photovoltaic (PV) prosumers to develop a solution to optimize 
and diagnose solar panel installations. The solution was 
named Dr. Solar since it diagnoses the solar panel installation. 
The solution, including the algorithms used for optimization, 
is described in detail in [1]. Section 3 provides an overview of 
the solution and the sensor platform used.  
 
 
Figure 1.  The prosumer 
This paper aims to discuss possible business models for 
the Dr. Solar solution. Section 2 briefly introduces the Internet 
of Things. Section 3 describes the Dr. Solar solution. Section 
3 discusses business models in general, while Section 4 
considers business models for the Dr. Solar solution. Section 
6 presents the results, while Section 7 provides a conclusion 
and ideas for future work. 
II. 
INTERNET OF THINGS 
The Internet of Things (IoT) refers to devices connected to 
the Internet. The connection to the Internet opens new 
opportunities. IoT devices can collect information from 
sensors and control the environment through actuators. The 
network makes it possible to process information at a remote 
location. Fig. 2 shows a couple of IoT devices connected to an 
IoT service through the Internet. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

A cloud-based service processing data reduces the need 
for local processing capacity in the IoT device. The cloud-
based service also makes it easier to replace or tune the 
algorithms used. 
. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Internet of Things 
One of the typical IoT applications in the energy sector is 
monitoring power output and related parameters, such as 
voltage, current, and consumption. Such monitoring can 
support short- and long-term planning of operations as well as 
the future development of the power grid. Monitoring may 
require real-time or close to real-time data transmissions. 
Real-time requirements may influence the design of the IoT 
architecture. The value of IoT lies in the data the sensors 
provide and how the data is interpreted. A cloud-based service 
can analyze sensor data and provide decision-making 
information 
III. THE DR. SOLAR SOLUTION 
This section describes the solution and the sensor 
platform. 
A. The Solution 
Dr. Solar is an IoT solution developed to assess the 
performance and operation of photovoltaic systems. The 
solution consists of three main subsystems, shown in Fig. 3. 
The first subsystem is the Dr. Solar sensor platform 
containing sensors and data loggers. The Dr. Solar sensor 
platform acts as the data acquisition system for the Dr. Solar 
solution. The sensor platform collects and uploads data to the 
cloud-based service using a GSM-based mobile router. A 
router is necessary since the solar panels are usually not placed 
within the range of an existing Wi-Fi network. The sensor 
platform is configured to collect data every 5 minutes for three 
consecutive days, ideally when solar radiation exceeds 600 
W/m2. The sensor platform and the inverter provide data at 
five-minute intervals polled by the cloud-based analytics 
service for the time interval between 10:00 am to 2:00 pm. 
More details on the sensor platform will be discussed later. 
The second subsystem is the inverter which converts the 
generated DC power by the solar panels into AC power. 
Within this process, the inverter collects and provides data 
concerning energy production. The prototype of the Dr. Solar 
solution uses a Huawei inverter SUN2000L-3KTL model to 
demonstrate the functionality.  
The third subsystem is a cloud-based analytic service that 
contains assessment algorithms and engines. The engines 
within the cloud-based service acquire inputs from the Dr. 
Solar sensor platform and the inverter to perform two main 
tasks: 
 
1. Performance 
evaluation 
which 
is 
called 
asset 
management service in Dr. Solar solution. The main 
objective of the asset management service is to evaluate 
the performance of the solar panels and perform a health 
check. The solution provides information about the 
problem and possible reasons to the customer if any 
malfunction is observed. 
2. Performance enhancement which is called optimum 
decision support in the Dr. Solar solution. The optimum 
decision support service's main objective is to evaluate 
the solar system's operating conditions and develop an 
optimal operation schedule to reduce the customer's 
electricity bill. The optimum decision support considers 
user preferences and uses these together with the data 
from the inverter. The optimum decision support does 
not rely on the Dr. Solar sensor platform and can be done 
after the unit is removed from the installation. 
 
Figure 3.  The Dr. Solar solution 
The Dr. Solar solution provides a user-friendly web 
interface to investigate monitoring results for asset 
management and optimum decision support. 
B. The Sensor Platform 
The Dr. Solar sensor platform is the hardware component 
of the solution, including sensors for data acquisition and 
submission to a dedicated cloud-based analysis and diagnosis 
platform. The sensor platform is compact, autonomous, and 
collects data regarding: 
• 
Direct solar radiation level in the plane of the 
photovoltaic generator (solar panel). 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

• 
Ambient temperature and humidity, as well as solar 
panel temperature. 
• 
Geographical location and specific installation angles 
(the inclination and the azimuthal deviation of the 
solar panel from the southern direction). 
The sensor platform is easy to mount onto the solar panel 
installation, and a prosumer can install the unit without expert 
help. 
The architecture of the IoT sensor platform is shown in 
Fig. 4. The different parts communicate through signals and 
protocols to collect sensor information.  
 
Figure 4.  The architecture of the sensor platform 
From the sensor platform, the data is transferred through 
web get-type procedures to the remote subsystem residing in 
the cloud. 
 
 
Figure 5.  The physical construction of the sensor platform 
Fig. 5 shows the physical construction of the sensor 
platform, while Fig. 6 shows how the sensor platform is 
mounted on a solar panel. 
IV. IOT BUSINESS MODELS 
A business model is the underlying knowledge of a 
venture or the core logic for generating value in a venture 
[2][3]. Research has tried to establish a more unified business 
model by using it as a new analytical unit with a system-level, 
holistic approach to explain how a company creates value 
through its activities [4]. A holistic approach includes the role 
of the market, the customer, and the systematic and integrated 
approach to business model innovation processes [5]. 
Considering the relationship between explicit needs and 
extended value chain, a business model is defined as a 
mechanism to comprise the framework/mode/logic of profit-
seeking and business structure to make a profit [6]. 
 
 
Figure 6.  The sensor platform mounted on a solar panel 
A business can expand its value creation by increasing its 
activities upstream, downstream, or both. In our case, the 
industrial partner, ICPE, delivers solar panel installations. 
Upstream activities would be producing solar panels, while 
downstream activities may be operating and maintaining the 
solar panel installations. The Dr. Solar box represents 
downstream value creation. 
IoT opens new opportunities for business models. 
Gassmann, Frankenberger, and Csik [7] conceptualized the 
business model by four central dimensions: the who, the what, 
the how, and the value. Who is the target customer or 
segment? What do we offer to the customer (value 
proposition)? How do we deliver our goods and services 
(value chain)? And finally, how do we generate value 
(revenue model)? The conceptualization is shown in Fig. 7. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Central dimensions of a business model [7] 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
Sinclair [8] presents five classes of business models and 
shows the evolution over time, called the business model 
continuum. The first class is called the product business 
model, where a product is sold to the customer. IoT can 
provide 
added 
value 
through 
new 
features, 
better 
performance, reduced cost, and increased accuracy. The 
second class is the product-service business model. Here, the 
relationship between the producer and the customer creates 
added value. The relationship can incorporate training, 
predictive maintenance, and smart services.  
TABLE I.  
REVENUE MODELS 
Business 
Model Class 
Description 
Revenue Model 
Product 
The customer buys the 
hardware unit and gets 
access to the service for 
free.  
Revenues come from the 
sale of the hardware unit. 
Product/ 
service 
The customer buys the 
hardware unit and 
subscribes to a service. 
Revenues come from the 
sale of the hardware unit 
and the subscription fee. 
Service 
The customer rents the 
hardware unit or 
subscribes to a service, 
and the service provider 
owns the hardware. The 
model facilitates long-
term relationships with 
the customer. 
Revenues come from the 
rent or subscription fee 
only. 
Loan 
The customer loans the 
hardware unit and uses 
the service for free. It is 
used to add value to 
other sales 
Revenues come from 
other sources, e.g., 
increased sales of solar 
panels and associated 
hardware or 
advertisements on the 
web platform. 
Freemium 
The product is installed 
for free. Functionality is 
unlocked by 
subscription.  
Revenues come from 
subscriptions. However, 
the freemium model has 
become popular in many 
segments, but in our case, 
the unit cost may be too 
high to gamble on 
whether customers are 
subscribing or not. 
 
Service/ 
outcome 
A partnership is created 
between the 
manufacturer and a 
stakeholder in the solar 
panel value chain 
Revenues come from 
profit sharing, where the 
manufacturer receives its 
part from the profits 
generated by the 
partnership. 
Outcome 
The product is installed 
as part of a total system 
of solar panels and the 
inverter 
Revenues come from a 
close partnership with 
stakeholders responsible 
for the whole power 
generation process. 
 
The third class is the service business model, where the 
customer pays per hour of use, per time used, or volume 
collected. The producer owns the product. The customer 
subscribes to a service. The last two classes focus on the 
outcome. The outcome is about solving the customer's 
problem. The fourth class is the service-outcome business 
model. In this case, the producer installs the necessary 
products to solve a problem. The monetization can be a share 
of the value generated by the producer's systems. The outcome 
business model is when the producer and customer establish a 
close partnership that solves the problem for the customer. 
In addition to the five classes proposed by Sinclar [8], we 
added loan and freemium. Lending out the hardware unit 
makes it possible for customers to increase the value of their 
installations and incentivizes them to choose the manufacturer 
offering such a service. Freemium [9] implies that essential 
services are free, while more advanced functionality requires 
the customer to pay.  
A review of business model literature by Osterwalder, 
Pigneur, and Tucci [10] showed broad diversity of 
understandings, usages, and places in the firm. Creating value 
is an important factor. However, Chesbrough [11] and 
Spencer [12] discuss open business models where many 
partners participate in the innovation process. Additionally, 
some marketing researchers are studying co-creation and co-
production, in which the client participates in developing the 
primary offering. 
The approach used by Gassmann, Frankenberger, and 
Csik [7] will now be combined with the classes of business 
models offered by Sinclar [8] to discuss viable business 
models for the Dr. Solar solution. 
V. DR. SOLAR BUSINESS MODEL CONSIDERATIONS 
The value proposition for the Dr. Solar solution is 
optimizing and diagnosing the solar panel installation. By 
using Dr. Solar, the user can improve energy production and 
be alerted about possible malfunctions in the installation. 
The revenue model is about creating value for the different 
stakeholders. Building on the classes proposed by Sinclar [7], 
we present seven alternatives for creating revenues. The 
revenue models are shown in Table I. 
As to the selling behavior, there are two options. The Dr. 
Solar solution can be sold separately or bundled with other 
products, as shown in Table II. 
TABLE II.  
STAND-ALONE OR BUNDLING 
Stand-
alone 
Dr. Solar is offered to customers with existing solar panels 
Bundle 
Dr. Solar is bundled with other products, e.g., inverter 
and/or solar panels. 
 
The installation of solar panels involves different 
stakeholders, as shown in Fig. 8. These stakeholders may 
bundle the Dr. Solar solution with their own products or 
activities.  
 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
 
Figure 8.  Stakeholders 
 
TABLE III.  
STAKEHOLDERS 
End customer 
The end customer would typically use Dr. Solar to 
diagnose and optimize its photovoltaic 
installation.  The end customer would typically 
loan the Dr. Solar. 
Installer 
The installer can use the Dr. Solar unit to improve 
the installation and achieve a competitive 
advantage. The installer typically buys and uses 
the hardware unit for all installation products. 
Retailer 
The retailer of solar panels and other photovoltaic 
equipment can offer Dr. Solar on loan or as a 
service.  The retailer could get a competitive 
advantage from bundling with other products. 
Distributor 
The distributor could offer Dr. Solar as a product 
or service to downstream retailers and installers. 
Manufacturer 
The manufacturer of solar panels and other 
photovoltaic equipment could offer Dr. Solar as 
an added value to distributors, retailers, and 
installers. 
Aggregator 
The aggregator organizes a group of prosumers. 
The aggregator could buy Dr. Solar and lend it 
out to its prosumers. 
 
The stakeholders' use of the solutions is described in Table 
III, and the bundling opportunities are shown in Fig. 9. 
VI. RESULTS 
After considering different potential business models, the 
chosen alternative was to regard Dr. Solar as an added value 
to photovoltaic installations. The sensors unit, equipped with 
high performances sensors, is too expensive to be 
permanently installed on the photovoltaic systems on-site. It 
is enough to stay installed for only a few days to collect 
relevant data in one site and then send it to a new installation 
where the photovoltaic system needs to be assessed. 
Therefore, the intention is to lend the sensor platform to 
customers installing photovoltaic systems to diagnose and 
optimize their installation.  Providing this technical solution 
as a service will obtain a competitive advantage in the market. 
Bundling with other services may be viable to help create 
business relationships with other solar panel value chain 
actors. 
The data collected may also be used for value creation. 
Collecting data from many solar panel installations may be 
used for analysis on a larger scale. The results can be used to 
gain further insight into optimizing photovoltaic energy 
production.  
 
 
Figure 9.  Bundling 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The Internet of Things creates new opportunities for 
innovative business solutions. Dr. Solar is a solution 
consisting of an IoT sensor platform and a cloud-based service 
that analyzes sensor data and data from the inverter to 
optimize and diagnose photovoltaic energy production. This 
paper focuses on presenting possible business models for 
deploying the solution in the marketplace. The cost of the 
sensor platform prohibits permanent mounting to smaller solar 
panel installations. Therefore, moving the sensor platform 
from one installation to another is necessary. The solution 
creates value for the customers by optimizing and diagnosing 
the installation. However, it is also essential to generate 
revenues. Several revenue models have been considered. The 
solar panel installation ecosystem consists of many actors. 
Bundling is one way of generating revenues. 
Dr. Solar is not the final solution; further developments 
can be done. The application of the solution developed within 
the PVADIP-C project can be customized to answer further 
different needs of photovoltaic systems users. 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

The project did not try to minimize the costs. The 
components used are all considered high quality. The sensor 
platform price can be reduced by selecting cheaper 
components. Selecting other materials for the casing could 
also bring down the cost. 
With lower sensor platform costs, a permanent Dr. Solar 
unit may be considered for larger photovoltaic installations. 
The project has only considered solar panels with a fixed 
position. The solution provides recommendations on optimal 
positioning and orientation of the solar panels. However, 
dynamic positioning can increase energy production. 
Dynamic positioning is relatively expensive, but enhancing 
the solution to support the solar panels' real-time positioning 
would be straightforward. The sensor platform must then be a 
permanent part of the solar panel installation. 
Some of the ideas from Dr. Solar could be used for other 
types of renewable energy. The sensors would differ, but the 
overall architecture with a sensor platform and a cloud-based 
service for diagnosis and optimization could also be used for 
wind or geothermal energy. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was part of the project "Cloud-based analysis 
and diagnosis platform for photovoltaic (PV) prosumers." 
supported 
by 
the 
Manu 
Net 
scheme 
(Grant 
no. 
MNET20/NMCS-3779) and funded through the Research 
Council of Norway (Grant no. 322500), UEFISCDI -
Executive Agency for Higher Education, Research, 
Development and Innovation Fund (Contract no. 215/2020), 
and TÜBİTAK ARDEB 1071 Program - Support Program for 
Increasing Capacity to Benefit from International Research 
Funds and Participation in International R&D Cooperation 
(Project no. 120N838) 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Berntzen, S. Teimourzadeh, P. Anghelita, Q. Meng, and V. Ursu, "A 
Sensor-based Unit for Diagnostics and Optimization of Solar Panel 
Installations," 19th European Mediterranean & Middle Eastern 
Conference on Information Systems. Lecture Notes in Business 
Information Processing. Springer, 2023 (To be published) 
[2] S. M. Shafer, H. J. Smith, and J. C. Linder, "The Power of Business 
Models," Business Horizons, vol 48(3), 2005, pp. 199-207. 
[3] M. Malmstöm, "Typologies of Bootstrap Financing in Small 
Ventures," 
Venture 
Capital: 
An 
International 
Journal 
of 
Entrepreneurial Finance, vol. 16(1), 2014, pp. 27-50. 
[4] I-H. S. Kim, "Dynamic Management View: Logic of Profit Seeking 
Based on Adaptation to Technological Change and Needs Evolution 
Through Needs-Focused Innovation," Technology Analysis & 
Strategic Management, vol 29(10), 2017, pp. 1225–1242. 
[5] B. Wirtz and P. Daiser, "Business Model Innovation: An Integrative 
Conceptual Framework," Journal of Business Models, vol.  5(1), 2017, 
pp. 14–34. 
[6] I-H S. Kim, T-Y. D. Ku, and B-Y. M. Lee, Business model schema: 
business model innovation tool based on direct causal mechanisms of 
profit, Technology Analysis & Strategic Management, vol 32(4), 2020, 
pp. 379-396. 
[7] O. Gassmann, K. Frankenberger, M. Csik, ”Revolutionizing the 
Business Model,” In: O. Gassmann and F. Schweitzer (Eds.), 
Management of the Fuzzy Front End of Innovation, Cham: Springer, 
2014, pp. 89-98. 
[8] B. Sinclar, IoT Inc., New York: Mc Graw Hill, 2017 
[9] B. K. Panda, "Application of business model innovation for new 
enterprises. A case study of digital business using a freemium business 
model." Journal of Management Development, 39(4), 2020, pp. 517-
524. 
[10] A. Osterwalder, Y.  Pigneur, and C. L.  Tucci, "Clarifying Business 
Models: Origins, Present, and Future of the Concept," Communications 
of the Association for Information Systems 16 (1), 2005, pp. 1-25. 
[11] H.W. Chesbrough, "Business model innovation: Opportunities and 
Barriers," Long Range Planning, vol. 43, 2010, pp. 354– 363. 
[12]  B. Spencer, "Business Model Design and Learning: A Strategic 
Guide," Business Expert Press, 2013. 
 
 
 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

