GREASE Framework
Generic Reconﬁgurable Evaluation and Aggregation of Sensor Data
Matthias Vodel, Rene Bergelt, and Wolfram Hardt
Dept. of Computer Science
Chemnitz University of Technology
Chemnitz, GERMANY
Email: { vodel | berre | hardt }@cs.tu-chemnitz.de
Abstract—The proposed research work represents a generic,
energy-efﬁcient concept for the synchronised logging, pro-
cessing and visualisation of any kind of sensor data. The
concept enables a chronological coordination and correlation of
information from different, distributed sensor networks as well
as from any other self-sufﬁcient measurement systems. Based
on the achieved relation between the several sensor sources, the
information quality can be increased signiﬁcantly. Therefore,
the system-wide description of the monitoring scenario and
each data set is realised in XML. Accordingly, the aggre-
gated, heterogeneous sensor information are convertible into
multiple output formats. Dependent on the application speciﬁc
requirements for the visualisation, we are able to consider
additional meta-information from the test environment to
optimise the data representation. The deﬁnition of advanced
data fusion techniques and pre-processing mechanisms allows
a selective data ﬁltering to shrink the network load. To
evaluate of basic usability requirements and the efﬁciency of
the proposed concept, an automotive sensor network represents
a capable test system for the proposed framework. Within
the demonstrator, the available on-board measurement systems
were extended by high-precision sensor nodes, which establish
wireless sensor network topology. Afterwards, the correlated
measurement information were converted and visualised for
several professional data analysis tools, e.g., jBEAM, Google
Earth, and FlexPro.
Keywords-Data Aggregation; Data Fusion; Data Synchronisa-
tion; Heterogeneous Wireless Sensor Network; Sensor Actuator
Systems.
I. INTRODUCTION
Actual research projects in the ﬁeld of wireless sensor
networks operate on different, proprietary hardware plat-
forms and contain multifaceted types of sensors. Currently,
each measurement scenario consists of several application-
speciﬁc and independent operating processes for the data-
collection, -storage and -analysis.
It does not exist any uniform synchronisation techniques
between the autonomous sensor systems. Accordingly, a
detailed and target-oriented post-processing of the data sets
within a shared knowledge base is not feasible. In conse-
quence, we are not able to create unique relations between
the different measurement information. Due to these missing
relations, it is very hard to create a common primary index
for the given, heterogeneous sensor platforms.
Wissensbasis
Sensornetz 1
Sensornetz 2
Sensornetz 3
Sensornetz 4
Sensorsystem 5
Sensorsystem 6
Figure 1. GREASE - A synchronised data-processing framework allows an
efﬁcient integration of different, autonomous sensor networks.
To
solve
this
problem,
we
present
GREASE
-
a
Generic Recon-ﬁgurable Framework for the Evaluation and
Aggregation of heterogeneous Sensor Data (see Figure 1).
In order to introduce this integrated data processing concept,
this paper is structured as follows: After this introduction,
section II provides an overview about heterogeneous, dis-
tributed sensor environments, the data processing ﬂow and
respective challenges. The proposed GREASE framework
is introduced in Section III, including conceptual funda-
mentals, basic requirements, system parameters, and the top
level structure (Section IV). Accordingly, Section V provides
implementation details of the GREASE software architecture
as well as the overall application ﬂow within the frame-
work. Section VI speciﬁes the application scenarios with
all integrated components and the environmental conditions.
The respective data analysis is described and discussed in
Section VII. Finally, the paper concludes with a summary
and an outlook for future work in this research project.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

II. RELATED WORK
During the last two decades, a couple of commercial tools
for the measurement data recording and monitoring were
developed. Unfortunately, most of them have functional or
conceptual restrictions. Some of the vendors offer exclu-
sive, hardware-speciﬁc analysis tools, which require special
devices, predeﬁned product series or vendors. Other sensor
systems do not have any special software tools for extracting
the measured data sets. There is no support for further post-
processing steps.
In consequence, LabView from National Instruments [1],
jBEAM from AMS [2] or FlexPro [3] offer multiple features
to enhance the restricted vendor tools, which only provides
a small set of general data recording an handling functions.
These applications allow the interpretation of ofﬂine data
from data bases or ﬁles as well as the live analysis of
a given data source. Both jBeam and LabView operates
platform-independent and all of these related tools sup-
port a lot of established data formats and communication
interfaces. Especially jBeam, which integrates the ASAM
standard (Association for Standardisation of Automation and
Measuring Systems) [4], enables an easy and modular ex-
tension with user-deﬁned components. Furthermore, FlexPro
includes a lot of additional visual plugins and represents a
complete visualisation framework for the given measurement
data.
The very high system requirements of all the related
software applications represent a critical disadvantage. Ac-
cordingly, these tools are not capable for resource-limited
data recording environments. Thus, such frameworks have
to be used in a second data processing step on dedicated
workstations with sufﬁcient hardware components. Hence,
small and energy saving hardware system, which are used
exclusively for collecting and storing multiple data from dif-
ferent sensor sources, are not able to use the data aggregation
[5] and visualisation features of these software frameworks.
Due to these circumstances, most of the ongoing sensor
system projects use proprietary software solutions to organ-
ise and synchronise the collected measurement data [6]. In
fact, there are many critical compatibility problems between
such software tools. In consequence, modiﬁcations of the
measurement scenario or the system conﬁguration take a lot
time and bind important resources. In conclusion, the user
wants a universal software tool for collecting and analysing
the entire pool of sensor information in an application-
speciﬁc and resource-efﬁcient way. Automated or semi-
automated data visualisation techniques represent further
essential requirements.
III. CONCEPT
We are now looking for generic utilities and standards
to route information from different sensor systems into
a common data processing unit in a synchronised way,
considering scenario-speciﬁc conﬁguration schemes and sen-
sor parameters. Hereby, synchronised time stamps for the
heterogeneous sensor data sets are very important to allow
correct correlations in the common knowledge base. Fur-
thermore, such utilities allow us to deﬁne user-speciﬁc data
analysis procedures during the measurement runtime and
advanced data fusion techniques [7][8][9] to shrink the data
volume directly within the sensor nodes.
 
 
 
 
Data Processing
Data Measurement
Data Storage
Data Analysis
Figure 2. GREASE - Integrated data processing ﬂow for heterogeneous
measurement topologies.
To provide such features, GREASE represents a software
framework based on a capable and lightweight data manage-
ment concept, which is able to bypass the already mentioned
disadvantages. It combines advanced sensor network conﬁg-
uration features with resource-efﬁcient operating parameters.
GREASE integrates the entire data processing ﬂow in an
efﬁcient way, including all stages like the data measurement,
the data processing, data storage and ﬁnally data analysis
tasks. Figure 2 illustrates this ﬂow.
The concept focuses on resource-limited systems and has
to be feasible for a wide variety of application scenarios.
Thus, the primary objective is a dynamic and ﬂexible
processing environment, which is adaptable to modiﬁca-
tions in the conﬁguration or in the analysis requirements.
Furthermore, the data processing core has to be separable
into two spatial, chronological and platform-speciﬁc operat-
ing modes. All components for the data measurement are
working within the ﬁrst mode. All relevant modules for
the data analysis as well as possible visualisation plugins
operate independent within the second mode. Based on this
requirement, we are able to map different data processing
functions to predeﬁned conﬁguration scenarios. In contrast,
other related software tools do not separate the data handling
process into different phases in an efﬁcient way.
GREASE deals with a standardised data transport and
deﬁnable synchronisation parameters for collecting informa-
tion from several distributed sensor components. Accord-
ingly, changes in the data analysis process have no effects on
the components of the data recording. This feature provides
signiﬁcant beneﬁts, especially for complex sensor systems
or inaccessible measurement environments.
In addition, all GUI (Graphical User Interface) actions,
which are accessible by the user, also have to be executable
and controllable in an automated or semi-automated way.
This feature represents another important difference to other
related software tools, which not provide any script-based
operating mode without GUI. But especially for continuous
maintenance-free sensor measurement scenarios, the script-
ing of user-deﬁned activities is essential.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

All central requirements for an synchronised data logging,
processing and visualisation framework, specially in the ﬁeld
of heterogeneous sensor network systems can be summarised
as follows:
• Synchronisation of different, autonomous sensor sys-
tems
• Modular extension with plugins and an easy modiﬁca-
tion / adaptation
• Using XML ((Extensible Markup Language) as com-
mon data exchange format instead of proprietary data
types
• Ofﬂine and live data analysis from ﬁles, network ﬁle
systems or databases
• Graphical User Interface for conﬁguration and mainte-
nance
• Automated or semi-automated data analysis and data
representation mechanisms
Based on the proposed concept, the developed framework
act as coordinator between application-speciﬁc components.
The framework itself operates as a generic coordinating unit
and includes no application-speciﬁc logic.
IV. STRUCTURE
As already mentioned, the structure of the proposed
concept is divided into two operating modes. The ﬁrst
one encapsulates the data recording, synchronisation and
correlation. A second mode processes the data analysis and
generates a user-deﬁned representation of the information
sets. Due to the modular operating concept, the sensor net
framework is completely independent from the given sensor
conﬁguration. Therefore, the environment uses an end-to-
end communication design, called the hourglass architec-
ture, which enables maximum interoperability between the
several components. It means, that multiple sensor units
and corresponding data processing units are connected by
a dedicated SensorController. The sensor controller ensures
a speciﬁc, universal mapping of the sensor information into
a predeﬁned format (see Figure 3). For the data output, the
SensorLogReader component provides different modules for
the information representation. The result is a very high
diversity on both data input and data output components. In
contrast, the binding middle part shows a strict uniformity.
Professur Technische Informatik
Prof. Dr. Wolfram Hardt
Sensornet-Framework
Aufbau des Frameworks
•
Modularisierung sowohl der Datenaufnahme- als auch der 
Datenauswertekomponenten
•
Nutzung von Datenbus-Konzepten
Zielsetzung • Aufbau des Frameworks • Komp. für BMW-Daten
Figure 3. Sensornet framework structure. The separation into two operation
modes for the data collecting (left) and data analysis (right) is described.
This structure fulﬁls the central requirement of a separated
data processing core for gathering and analysing the sensor
measurements. Hereby, the common XML representation of
the entire scenario is essential and allows us to transfer
the information for any kind of application. All internal
and external parameters of the environment as well as
special meta-information regarding the measurement scheme
are correlated together with the data sets. Accordingly,
researchers are able to reconstruct the whole test scenario
with synchronised data, time stamps and a detailed system
conﬁguration. The reuse factor, for instance in the ﬁeld of
automotive testing scenarios, increases substantially.
Furthermore, we have the ability to modify existing sensor
conﬁguration in a time efﬁcient way. The structure allows us
to add or remove single components without changing the
data ﬂows within the overall monitoring system. In principle,
it is also possible to create a direct interconnection between
data collecting and visualisation. This increases the runtime
signiﬁcantly and reduces the used resources. But without the
common XML representation, is not possible to capture the
entire measurement scenario in a reusable way.
V. IMPLEMENTATION & APPLICATION FLOW
To enable a platform-independent operation, the proposed
concept was implemented in Java. Thereby, the resulting
framework is also able to include external components,
which are written in another programming language. A
precondition is the common interface speciﬁcation within
the SensorController. To provide such a feature, the proposed
framework implementation contains a central core library,
which encapsulates the entire data processing logic. This
library can also be used for the development of further
modules. The communication between the SensorController
and the SensorLogReaders with its set of modules uses
predeﬁned protocols. All of these protocols are designed as
generic as possible to allow a universal usage. This ﬂexibility
also simpliﬁes the integration of third party modules and
ensures the compatibility during further developments [10].
Due to the fact, that the sensor conﬁgurations and all kinds
of scenario parameters are also transmitted within the XML
representation, possible enhancements for customer-speciﬁc
applications can be done in an easy way.
Regarding to the application ﬂow, the initialisation of the
SensorController starts with loading a application-speciﬁc
conﬁguration ﬁle. This ﬁle contains all information for the
actual project as well as the structure of all corresponding
SensorReader components. Accordingly, the SensorCon-
troller loads and activates all necessary sensor components
and starts the data recording. Each SensorReader mod-
ule operates simultaneous as a dedicated thread. When a
SensorReader receives a data set, one SensorDataObject
will be generated, which is predeﬁned by the framework
conﬁguration scheme. Additional meta-information, for ex-
ample physical measurement units or special indicators, are
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

also included. Afterwards, the SensorController receives the
respective signal for the completed object. The object will
be transmitted. During the following data processing, the
controller analyses all correlations to information from other
SensorReaders. Finally, the correlated and classiﬁed data set
will be stored as an XML data structure.
If the SensorLogReader is reading and analysing an XML
log ﬁle in a reverse process, each data set will be converted
into a predeﬁned, framework-conform object and accord-
ingly provided to the data analysis components. The data
sets can be reused for multiple representation or visualisation
output formats. An essential advantage of this framework
system is the fact that the data source is not restricted to local
log ﬁles. Also data base systems or network ﬁle systems can
act as data input for further analysis and post-processing
steps.
In respect of the communication tasks in the sensor
environment, we also have to discuss security features. Due
to the fact, that GREASE focuses on research & devel-
opment environments, we actually do not consider further
security aspects for the distributed handling and storage of
the sensor data. Within the different development stages of a
given system, engineers design and implement complex test
environments for getting valid and high-quality measurement
results. Accordingly, the risks, which result from general
communication threats are negligible. Anyway, we actually
cooperate with related German car manufacturers in regards
to this weak point. Several research projects focus on the
development of advanced, energy-efﬁcient security features
for embedded, resource-limited sensor network topologies.
In this context, the main challenge is the maintenance of a
lightweight software architecture, which provides stable and
ﬂexible modules for diversiﬁed application scenarios. Here,
advanced security mechanisms have a direct impact on the
data throughput and the resource consumption. Accordingly,
our goal is to ﬁnd a good trade-off between runtime perfor-
mance and security capabilities within GREASE.
VI. APPLICATION SCENARIOS
The proposed concept was developed to manage several
sensor net scenarios at our computer engineering depart-
ment. To clarify functional aspect of the implemented frame-
work, we describe the data processing ﬂow by a real-world
automotive measurement system [11]. For this monitoring
scenario, the existing sensor components of a given research
vehicle were upgraded with high-deﬁnition sensor nodes.
These nodes are placed at predeﬁned positions to monitor the
entire environment and provide independent measurement
data about the current temperature, light intensity as well as
the acceleration in two axes and the magnetic ﬁeld strength.
Thus, the established wireless sensor network provides
meta-information about the measurement environment and
external parameters. Figure 4 illustrates the measurement
scenario.
The wireless sensor communication infrastructure is based
on the IEEE 802.15.4 and ZigBee [12][13]. Additionally,
mobile sensor nodes are worn by the passengers. In order
to realise localisation features for these nodes, they are
equipped with nanoPAN ultra-low power network interfaces
[14], which provide RSSI-based (Received Signal Strength
Indication) distance information. Both communication tech-
nologies are using the 2.4 GHz frequency spectrum for
the data transmission. A multi-interface, multi-standard data
sink is able to handle both communication standards simulta-
neously. Robust communication stacks with adapted layer 2
and layer 3 protocols minimise interference-based inﬂuences
on the communication behaviour.
In addition, we integrated a high-resolution GPS (Global
Positioning System) sensor, which enables the correlation
between absolute positioning information, speed, altitude
and the available on-board vehicle data.
GPS
Sensor
Node
Sensor
Node
Sensor
Node
Sensor
Node
Sensor
Node
Sink
Figure 4. Measurement system - All data from the sensor nodes and the
GPS module are transmitted to the data sink in the vehicle, represented by
the proposed framework.
By providing a synchronised knowledge base of all sensor
information, a detailed analysis of speciﬁc driving situations
and the driver behaviour is possible. Thereby, the GPS data
allows a veriﬁcation of these situation based on available
track information. Accordingly, we are able to calculated
and predict driver proﬁles. The results are used to adjust
and to optimise the characteristics of the entire vehicle, for
instance, the engine management system or the suspension
dynamics. Furthermore, an analysis of the wear measuring
quantity provides interesting statements about the vehicle
lifetime.
For this measurement environment, special SensorReader
modules for the data sink communication interfaces were
implemented. Incoming data from the sensor topologies are
classiﬁed and converted into abstract data objects, which are
transmitted to the controller. Another SensorReader module
implements features for the GPS data input. Thereby, the
NMEA 0183 (National Marine Electronics Association 0183)
protocol for the positioning data is required. Accordingly,
all kinds of GPS hardware, which supports the NMEA
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

protocol and the serial port as communication interface, are
supported.
For the synchronisation of the several sensor data, one
speciﬁc SensorReader has to be predeﬁned during the ini-
tialisation of the measurement scenario.
In our exemplary case, the system provides a high-
resolution GPS unit. Besides positioning information, this
sensor also provides an accurate time signal. In consequence,
the given time stamps from the GPS sensor represent the
global synchronisation master. Thereby, the framework is
not restricted for using a time stamp as master index.
Especially for the integration of multiple, autonomous sensor
systems and a missing central scheduling entity, a user-
deﬁned choice for the synchronisation master provides im-
portant beneﬁts.
VII. DATA ANALYSIS
For post-processing the collected data, two data analysis
components were implemented. The ﬁrst one is an export
module, which prepares the sensor data sets for the storage
in a given database system and accordingly transmits the
chosen information. A second module is responsible for con-
verting the sensor data with dedicated visualisation plugins,
e.g., for Google Earth. Hence, the data output of this module
is a KML representation of all correlated sensor information.
Figure 5 describes the data ﬂow.
Fahrerprofile, welche wiederrum 
der Optimierung der Fahrzeug-
charakteristik dienen. Abbildung 
3 verdeutlicht schematisch den 
Aufbau des Messszenarios. Ne-
ben dem GPS-Empfänger befin-
den sich im Fahrzeug fünf Sen-
sorboards an strategischen Positi-
onen. Alle Informationen fließen 
in einer gemeinsamen Datenbasis 
zusammen. 
Für das Auslesen der Sensor-
boards wurde ein herstellerspezi-
fisches SensorReader-Modul im-
plementiert, welches über den 
seriellen Port ankommende Daten 
klassifiziert und als abstrahierte Datenobjekte an den Controller übergibt. Gleiches gilt für ein 
separat implementiertes Modul für den GPS-Sensor, welches alle NMEA2 standard-konformen 
Geräte [6] unterstützt. Zur Synchronisation der Daten wird während der Versuchsinitialisierung 
ein ausgewählter SensorReader als Master definiert. Da der GPS-Sensor neben den reinen Posi-
tionsdaten auch ein exaktes Zeitsignal liefert, repräsentiert dieser im vorgestellten Szenario den 
globalen Taktgeber (Master) des Systems.  
Das Framework synchronisiert dabei nicht zwingend auf Basis eines Zeitsignals. Der Taktgeber 
des Systems ist durch den Anwender frei definierbar. Dies ist besonders für die Integration au-
tarker Sensoriksysteme ohne eigene Scheduling-Mechanismen interessant.  
 
 
Abbildung 4 Anwendung des Frameworks auf das beschriebene Szenario. 
 
Auswertung 
Für die Auswertung der ermittelten Daten wurden zwei Auswertekomponenten geschaffen. Da-
bei handelt es sich einerseits um ein Exportmodul, welches die Sensorwerte für die Einspeisung 
in die zentrale Datenbank vorbereitet und anschließend überträgt und andererseits um eine zwei-
te Komponente, die die Informationen für Google Earth aufbereitet. Dabei dienen die in die Da-
tenbank übertragenen Datensätze nicht nur der Archivierung, sondern können ihrerseits wieder 
in einen SensorLogReader eingespeist und somit durch andere Auswertemodule weiterverarbei-
tet werden. Die Auswertemodule müssen dabei nicht angepasst werden.  
 
2NMEA 0183……  National Marine Electronics Association 0183 - Standard für die Kommun-
kation zwischen Navigationsgeräten untereinander und mit Computern 
Abbildung 3 Versuchsaufbau - Die Daten der Sensorboards und des 
GPS-Sensors laufen in der Datensenke des Versuchs-
fahrzeuges zusammen. 
Figure 5. Application scenario of the proposed framework.
Within Google Earth, an additional 3D altitude track
extends the visualised measurement curves (represented in
Figure 6). The entire data processing ﬂow integrates all
proposed features for the data recording, handling and visual
representation. All developed components are as generic as
possible. This also includes a high compatibility level for
both hardware and software environments [15][16].
Figure 6. Data visualisation in Google Earth.
Figure 7. Data visualisation in FlexPro.
Other commercial software tools, e.g., FlexPro, or jBeam
(see Figure 7, are able to import these information for the
database for advanced, sectoral data post-processing tasks.
Therefore, a dedicated CSV (Comma Separated Values)
export module ensures a universal exchange interface.
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The proposed research work described the implementation
of a comprehensive data processing environment for hetero-
geneous sensor systems. The basic concept provides generic
structures for many further research projects in the ﬁeld of
novel data aggregation and data fusion techniques. For an
easy data collecting and data analysis process, we are now
able to synchronise and correlate the single data sets also
on resource limited and embedded computer systems. The
result is a common and extensive knowledge base, which
integrates all information sources into complex data sets.
In comparison to other related software tools, the pro-
posed framework fulﬁls essential requirements for a ﬂex-
ible usage, a resource-efﬁcient runtime behaviour as well
as a automated or semi-automated operating mode. The
presented framework is used for several wireless sensor
and actuator network projects at the Chemnitz University
of Technology. We developed a standardised process for
monitoring and archiving data from a heterogeneous sensor
network topology in a synchronised way. Besides storing
basic information from the sensor data sets, the system
also integrates meta-information from the environment to
increase the reuse factor of the measurement scenario. The
universal XML data representation and a modular plugin
system ensure a generic usage for all kind of sensor scenario.
Multiple data input and output interfaces provides a high
level of compatibility to other software tools and data
formats.
Regarding the presented automotive application scenario,
the proposed framework enables correlations between the
measured sensor data from the test track and speciﬁc
driver proﬁles. Accordingly, these information allow dy-
namic adaptations of the driving parameters within the
vehicle. This offers novel and interesting possibilities to
optimise a vehicle for the speciﬁc characteristics of its driver.
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

REFERENCES
[1] National Instruments. LabView. http://www.ni.com/labview/,
2010. [Online, retrieved: January, 2012].
[2] AMS GmbH.
jBEAM.
http://www.jbeam.de/german/
produkte/jbeam.html, 2010.
[Online, retrieved: January,
2012].
[3] Weisang. FlexPro. http://www.weisang.com/, 2010. [Online,
retrieved: January, 2012].
[4] ASAM Consortium.
Association for Standardisation of
Automation and Measuring Systems. http://www.asam.net/,
2010. [Online, retrieved: January, 2012].
[5] L. Krishnamachari, D. Estrin, and S. Wicker. The impact of
data aggregation in wireless sensor networks. In Proceedings
of the 22nd International Conference on Distributed Com-
puting Systems Workshops, pages 575–578. IEEE Computer
Society, November 2002.
[6] M. Vodel, M. Lippmann, M. Caspar, and W. Hardt.
Dis-
tributed high-level scheduling concept for synchronised, wire-
less sensor and actuator networks. Journal of Communication
and Computer, 11(7):27–35, November 2010.
[7] V. Gupta and R. Pandey. Data Fusion and Topology Control
in Wireless Sensor Networks.
WSEAS Trans. Sig. Proc.,
4(4):150–172, 2008.
[8] H. Qi, S. S. Iyengar, and K. Chakrabarty. Distributed Sensor
Fusion - A Review Of Recent Research.
Journal of the
Franklin Institute, 338(1):655–668, 2001.
[9] H. Qi, X. Wang, S. S. Iyengar, and K. Chakrabarty. Mul-
tisensor Data Fusion In Distributed Sensor Networks Using
Mobile Agents. In Proceedings of International Conference
on Information Fusion, pages 11–16, August 2001.
[10] A. Brown. Component-Based Software Engineering. Wiley-
IEEE Computer Society Press, 1996.
[11] M. Vodel, M. Lippmann, M. Caspar, and W. Hardt.
A
Capable, High-Level Scheduling Concept for Application-
Speciﬁc Wireless Sensor Networks.
In Proceedings of the
World Engineering, Science and Technology Congress, pages
914–919. IEEE Computer Society, June 2010.
[12] IEEE Computer Society.
Part 15.4: Wireless medium
access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) spec-
iﬁcations for low-rate wireless personal area networks
(WPANs). http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/download/802.
15.4-2006.pdf, 2007. [Online, retrieved: January, 2012].
[13] Zigbee Alliance.
Zigbee speciﬁcation.
http://www.zigbee.
org/en/spec download/zigbee downloads.asp, 2007. [Online,
retrieved: January, 2012].
[14] Nanotron Technologies. Nanotron’s transceiver enables iso
compliant real time locating systems. In The International
Organization for Standardization and the International Elec-
trotechnical Commission, volume 24730-5:2010. New stan-
dard for Real Time Locating Systems (RTLS), April 2010.
[15] M. Vodel, W. Hardt, R. Bergelt, and M. Glockner. Modulares
Framework fr die synchronisierte Erfassung, Verarbeitung und
Aufbereitung heterogener Sensornetzdaten. In Proceedings of
the Dresdner Arbeitstagung Schaltungs- und Systementwurf,
pages 67–72. Fraunhofer Institute for Integrated Circuits, May
2010.
[16] M. Vodel, R. Bergelt, M. Glockner, and W. Hardt. Synchro-
nised data logging, processing and visualisation in heteroge-
neous sensor networks. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Data Engineering and Internet Technology.
Springer, March 2011.
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

