The Many Faces of Real-Time Scheduling Applied to Power Load Management
Tullio Facchinetti
Dipartimento di Ingegneria Industriale e dell’Informazione
University of Pavia, Italy
e-mail: tullio.facchinetti@unipv.it
Abstract—In the ﬁeld of power systems there is an active
research on methods to limit the peak load of power demand.
Recently, a new approach to the automatic management of
electric loads has been proposed, which is based on scheduling
techniques derived from real-time computing systems. The
research on real-time scheduling encompasses several aspects,
including scheduling algorithms and analysis techniques, that
may suitably be adapted to the management of sets of power
loads. This paper overviews background concepts on real-time
scheduling, and fosters their possible application to the power
load management, with special focus on peak load reduction.
Several issues regarding the power load management and
possible solutions based on real-time scheduling are considered.
Due to the wide scope of the proposed methodologies, only the
indication of their applicability is provided in this paper. For
more complex scenarios, references to previous related works
are provided when available.
Keywords-Modeling; Real-time systems; Power system control;
Scheduling; Smart Grid; Demand-Side Management; Direct
Load Control; Load Shedding.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Smart Grid is the emerging technology in the ﬁeld
of electric power management, generation, distribution and
usage. Its architecture combines the power distribution in-
frastructure with a digital communication network. Load
balancing is a key challenge addressed by the Smart Grid [1].
Peak load conditions are generated by the simultaneous
request of electricity by many users. Such situations may
bring to severe consequences, arising technical and eco-
nomic issues for both suppliers and users [2]. Therefore, an
appropriate load management targeted to obtain predictable
load conditions would lead to remarkable beneﬁts.
This paper describes the potentials of a new methodology
based on real-time scheduling to manage the predictable
activation/shedding of power loads. The background idea
is to establish an analogy between real-time computing
systems and power systems, in order to use real-time mod-
eling, scheduling and analysis methodologies to coordinate
the activation of a set of loads. The goal is to delineate
the characteristics of a general framework where different
types of loads, physical constraints, system dynamics and
objectives can be merged to allow system-wide real-time
optimization of the peak load. For this purpose, electric
loads are described using timing parameters derived from the
real-time scheduling research domain. In this way, existing
Figure 1.
Overview of the smart distributed coordination infrastructure
enabling the advanced control features based on real-time scheduling
envisioned in the paper.
well-known real-time scheduling algorithms can be applied
to predictably activate/shed each load, while guaranteeing
given constraints on the underlying physical process associ-
ated with the electric load.
There are several relevant motivations to investigate the
application of real-time scheduling techniques to power
systems. Some of the most important beneﬁts include:
• the predictable behavior of real-time systems, that can
be a-priori guaranteed in a mathematically strong form;
• the availability of several modeling and control method-
ologies that can be adapted and applied to the load
management;
• the automatic derivation of load priorities based upon
the characteristics of both the load and the underlying
physical process;
• the possibility to manage large sets of loads, thanks to
powerful scheduling policies with low computational
complexity;
• the availability of efﬁcient heuristics and optimization-
based methods to deal with more complex cases.
The aim of this paper is to shed the light on the chances
offered by the application of real-time scheduling techniques
to the coordination of power loads. In particular, the paper
illustrates and categorizes the available approaches in the
ﬁeld of real-time systems that can be suitably applied to the
management of electric loads. Therefore, each technique is
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

brieﬂy described and its possible application to the manage-
ment of power loads is suggested.
Fig. 1 shows the infrastructure suitable for the imple-
mentation of the proposed management system. Schedul-
ing decisions are taken at the centralized control station
and dispatched to the smart metering and control devices
installed within the smart building. Such decisions trigger
the activation/shedding of smart devices within the building.
During the conﬁguration, the smart meter collects conﬁgura-
tion parameters from the controlled devices, and send them
to the control station. At run-time, it measures the power
usage and collect other interesting values and provides the
information to the control station. In this scenario, loads
belonging to different buildings can be coordinated in an
aggregated manner to boost the balancing effect.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II provides
a short introduction to basic concepts related with real-
time scheduling. A generalization of the applicability of
real-time scheduling techniques is presented in Section III.
Section IV discusses scheduling-based works related with
smart power management. Characteristics and features of
real-time scheduling techniques suitable to electric loads
management are described in Section V. Finally, Section VI
concludes the paper.
II. NOTIONS OF REAL-TIME SCHEDULING
Real-Time Systems (RTSs) are studied in the domain
of computing systems to allow the timely execution of
concurrent processing tasks on one or more processors [3].
The peculiarity of a RTS is its strong relationship with the
physical system under monitoring and control. Moreover, a
distinguishing feature is the analysis of system properties
typically based on the evaluation of worst case conditions,
in order to achieve the desired behavior in every possible
situation. This fact makes RTSs especially suitable for
critical applications, such as in automotive systems, avionics,
factory automation, and process control (e.g., chemical or
nuclear plants).
In the traditional system model a set of computing tasks
are required to be executed on one processor. Since only one
task can use the processor at any given time, a scheduling
algorithm assigns the use of the processor to the task having
the highest priority. Differently from other approaches, the
priority of tasks is not explicitly set by the system designer
using some empirical assessment. Instead, it is automatically
inferred by the scheduling algorithm based on values of
timing parameters used to describe the task.
The simplest and most investigated system model in RTSs
consists of periodically activated tasks. Each task τi becomes
ready for the execution at the request time ri, which is an
integer multiple of the period Ti, i.e., the k-th instance of
τi (called job) is released at time kTi. The job duration
is at most Ci time units. The parameter Ci is referred
to as Worst-Case Computation Time (WCET). A relative
0
10
15
20
25
5
time
duration
request
absolute
time
deadline
relative
deadline
period
τ1
τ2
τ3
Ti
Di
Ci
ri
Figure 2.
Example of concurrent scheduling of 3 tasks by EDF. Each task
is described by the tuple (Ti, Di, Ci). Task parameters are τ1 = (5, 4, 2),
τ2 = (6, 2, 1) and τ3 = (10, 7, 3).
deadline Di is associated with the task τi. A deadline Di
means that the k-th job must complete no later than Di
time units after the release time, i.e., it must execute in
the time frame [kTi, kTi + Di), where di = kTi + Di
is the absolute deadline of the k-th job. Often, relative
deadlines are assumed equals to the period, i.e., a job must
terminate before the next period. In this case, the task
model is said having implicit deadlines. The scheduling
algorithm controls the proper execution of each task within
its period time frame. For instance, the Earliest Deadline
First scheduling algorithm (EDF) assigns the highest priority
to the task having the earliest absolute deadline. This model
is suitable in several concrete applications. For instance,
control applications require a periodic sensor sampling and
actuator driving.
The example in Fig. 2 shows the schedule generated for 3
tasks by the EDF algorithm. The task τ3, e.g., have a period
of T3 = 10 time units and a computation time C3 = 3. Each
job must complete no later than D3 = 7 time units after the
release time. Notice that, as allowed in typical RTSs, the
third job of τ3 is interrupted at time t = 24 after 2 time units
and resumed later for being completed. This interruption is
called preemption, and it plays an important role to let all
tasks to meet their deadline. Preemptions can represent an
important issue when real-time techniques are applied to the
management of electric loads, as will be discussed later.
The periodic task model has several attractive properties.
A very interesting one is the possibility to deﬁne a ﬁgure
called utilization, deﬁned as U = P
i Ci/Ti. The utilization
represents the load of a processor, being the percentage of
computing time required by all tasks. A remarkable use
of the utilization is for the so-called schedulability test.
A schedulability test is a condition that, whether satisﬁed,
guarantees that every task will meet its timing constraints,
i.e., the execution of every job terminates before the deadline
in every possible situation (i.e., considering worst case
conditions). This test can be used to obtain a-priori guar-
antees on the scheduling process. For example, when the
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

1
2
3
load
load
load
(a) on/off control
time
P
(b) real−time schedule
time
P
Figure 3.
Comparison between (a) a traditional on/off control method and (b) a coordinated load activation. The picture shows the comparison between
the achieved peak loads. The time-base is 5 minutes.
preemptive EDF scheduling algorithm is used, and implicit
deadlines are considered, timing constraints are guaranteed
iff U ≤ 1. The schedulability test formulation depends
essentially on the adopted system model, task model and
scheduling algorithm.
III. REAL-TIME SCHEDULING FROM COMPUTING TO
POWER SYSTEMS
The problem of using real-time scheduling methods for
managing sets of power loads is related with the modeling
of electric loads behaviors in terms of timing parameters
such as periods and deadlines – as introduced in Section II.
In practice, it is necessary to determine the value of timing
parameters to obtain the desired behavior of the modeled
load. The derivation of timing parameters enables the appli-
cation of real-time scheduling algorithms for the automatic
management of loads activation/shedding. Moreover, real-
time analysis methods can be used to a-priori determine the
expected system behavior and to assess its performance.
The periodic model described in Section II can be easily
adapted to model power loads. For instance, a HVAC (Heat-
ing, Ventilation and Air Conditioning) may be periodically
activated for 5 minutes (WCET) every 30 minutes (period)
to maintain the desired temperature within a room. The
measurements carried out in [4] conﬁrm the periodic nature
of such type of loads. Load 2 depicted in Fig. 3 is an example
of a load having such timing parameters.
The schedule represented in Fig. 2 can thus be re-
considered from the load management viewpoint. The 3
depicted tasks may represent the corresponding number of
air-conditioners whose activation is periodically scheduled.
Each load is characterized by a speciﬁc power demand
when active. Fig. 3.b shows this application. In the ﬁgure,
the schedule is completed by the time-line representing the
instantaneous power consumption. The scheduling action au-
tomatically eliminates the simultaneous activation occurring
in case of absence of coordination. This allows to obtain a
peak load that is equal to the power consumed by the most
power-consuming load. The activation pattern generated by
the real-time schedule is compared with the one produced
by a classical on/off hysteresis controller (Fig. 3.a). The
controller is used to regulate the variation of a physical
quantity (e.g., the temperature) in order to limit its variation
within a predeﬁned range. It works by switching on the
system when a range threshold is exceeded and keeping
the system active until the lower threshold is reached. This
control scheme leads to a behavior that can be approximated
with a strictly periodic activation of the load, as in Fig. 3.a.
The result is the absence of coordination among loads,
leading to higher peak loads.
Clearly, this is a simpliﬁed example. For instance, the
values of timing parameters need to be related to the physical
variables of interest (internal/external temperatures, room
insulation, open doors/windows, etc.). However, the goal of
this paper is precisely to illustrate how such factors can be
integrated in the model and accounted during the system
functioning.
On the other hand, this approach is able to seamlessly
manage large sets of heterogeneous loads. In fact, once a
load is modeled in terms of timing parameters, its activation
can be scheduled in coordination with other loads by an
algorithm such as EDF. The type of loads that may be
fruitfully managed by this approach include refrigerators,
HVACs, air compressors, pumps, battery charge/discharge
(e.g., in electric vehicles), lighting, and household appli-
ances.
IV. RELATED WORKS
The techniques described in this paper can be seen as
viable heuristics to face the problem of peak load reduction
of power demand, as well as methods to reduce the overall
electric energy demand. While there is an extended literature
on power systems addressing the problem of peak load
limitation and load balancing in general, in this paper we will
focus on scientiﬁc results related to scheduling approaches
applied to power management.
In [5] scheduling techniques are applied to the control
of on/off smart loads in the Smart Grid. Several control
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

approaches are presented, including a priority-based and a
round-robin scheduling schemes. An efﬁcient heuristic to
handle large sets of heterogeneous loads is presented in [6].
The problem is formulated as an optimization problem,
and a ﬂexible and efﬁcient heuristic is developed to solve
the problem. In [7] there is an accurate physical modeling
of several kind of loads to be incorporated into a home
energy management (HEM) system. The modeling is used to
propose a priority-based control scheme to achieve a bound
on the peak load of power demand.
Recently, the notion of Real-Time Physical System (RTPS)
has been introduced to indicate a general class of systems
where the variation of a physical value is determined by the
schedule generated by a real-time scheduling policy [8]. This
approach is behind the ideas described in this paper. The
mentioned work addresses systems with linear dynamics,
thus having an exponential behavior in the time domain,
under timing and physical constraints. In [9] an optimization
method is proposed to reduce the peak load when the
activation of multiple loads at the same time is allowed,
which is a common situation in large systems. However,
the system model does not consider constraints on the
state variable. In [10], constant dynamics were considered
without feedback on the state variable. The concept of RTPS
in absence of constraints on the physical variables (user
requirements) is introduced in [11]. The paper provides a
statistical evaluation of the beneﬁt of using RTPS against
the case of absence of explicit load control. Finally, in [12]
RTPS are extended with a feedback scheme for the man-
agement of electric load in presence of uncertainties on the
values of modeling parameters. The contribution of these
papers is to provide the relationship between the variation of
physical variables (temperature, air pressure, battery charge,
etc.) and the timing parameters adopted to model the related
load.
V. REAL-TIME CONCEPTS AND LOAD MANAGEMENT
This section introduces some of the most highly inves-
tigated issues in the ﬁeld of Real-Time Systems. Their
applicability and usefulness to the management of power
loads is described, outlining their beneﬁts.
A. A-priori guarantees
A peculiar feature of results developed in the ﬁeld of
RTSs is their strong theoretical background. This means
that the vast majority of results, including analysis method-
ologies, characteristics of scheduling algorithms and their
performance, are mathematically proved. The mathematical
strength of the real-time scheduling analysis includes the
derivation of schedulability tests for many task and system
models [3]. Tests are based on the timing parameters of
tasks. Under adequate assumptions, if the test is passed
then the system will behave as expected in every possible
condition. In this way, schedulability tests provide a mathe-
matically proved a-priori guarantee on the system behavior.
Such guarantees can be extended to the peak load gener-
ated by a load set, thus resulting in physical processes that
perform as expected while achieving an upper bound on the
peak load of required power. This approach is used in [9]
to determine a worst case bound of the peak load.
B. Scheduling algorithms
The scheduling algorithm encapsulates the policy that
determines the sequence of activation of tasks/loads. In
practice, it sets the actual priority of a task based on its
timing parameters. At any given time, the task with the
highest priority is selected for execution, while the remaining
tasks are delayed. The study of scheduling algorithms is
a central argument in the research on real-time systems,
and several algorithms covering a wide range of scheduling
problems variants are available.
This
concept
has
a
relevant
relationship
with
power/energy
systems.
Load
shedding
techniques
are
often based on explicit speciﬁcation of load priorities
required to select the sheddable ones. The main advantage
of real-time techniques is that the priority selection is not
left to the system designer. Instead, it is deterministically
based
on
timing
and
physical
requirements that
are
translated into the timing constraints associated with tasks.
C. Aperiodic activities
Aperiodic activities are those tasks that need to be sched-
uled “on demand”, i.e., without a ﬁxed periodic activation.
In the domain of electric loads management, examples of
aperiodic tasks include TVs, elevators and ovens. In general,
such loads must be activated after a user request without
delay. In [7], this type of loads is said critical.
There are several approaches to integrate aperiodic tasks
in a schedule. When such tasks need to coexist with periodic
activities, the common solution is to use a server that
periodically serves the execution of aperiodic requests. In
this way, aperiodic requests can nicely be incorporated in a
schedule made by periodic tasks. Other solutions exist. For
example, in the gravitational task model a set of aperiodic
activities need to be executed at precise time instant [13].
The gravitational model allows to minimize the offset of a
task execution with respect to the desired time instant.
D. Online and ofﬂine scheduling
Most scheduling approaches in the ﬁeld of RTSs are
developed as online algorithms. An online algorithm dynam-
ically generates the scheduling decisions at run-time, i.e.,
while the system is actually working. This approach has the
strong beneﬁt to allow a timely and ﬂexible management
of faulty conditions, such as overloads. The possibility to
use online scheduling algorithms comes at the price of
imposing simplifying assumptions on the system model.
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Therefore, complex constraints can not be easily managed
by online algorithms. For this purpose, ofﬂine scheduling
is conceived as an optimization process that is performed
before the actual system working, to a-priori allocate the
required resources [3]. This method extends the potential of
real-time scheduling, at the price of less run-time ﬂexibility
and higher computational complexity.
Similar considerations apply to loads management. Sim-
ple cases can be efﬁciently managed by online algorithms,
while more complex situations, in terms of constraints,
can beneﬁt of off-line solutions. For example, the complex
interplay between energy demand and energy production
from renewable sources may require a costly computation
to satisfy the imposed economic constraints.
E. Hard/soft task models: worst-case vs average cases
Almost all RTSs models are based on the assignment of
deadlines to the task to be scheduled, as stated in Section II.
When a process terminates its activity after the assigned
deadline the correct system behavior may be jeopardized.
Regarding the achievement of deadlines, real-time systems
are either classiﬁed as hard or soft. While the former do
not tolerate the violation of any deadline, in latter systems
missing deadlines are allowed. Examples of hard systems are
safety critical applications (e.g., avionics, automotive, etc.),
while soft systems are found in the multimedia (non-critical)
domain [3].
The concept of hard/soft systems can be easily extended
to load management. Beside timing constraints, there are
often physical requirements associated with the activation
of a load. While in some cases the missing of a physical
constraint is not allowed, in many cases the imposed physical
constraints can be sometimes violated to account for special
situations. For example, consider the room temperature regu-
lated by an HVAC that is required to remain within the range
18 − 20◦C. A missed deadline may cause the temperature
to temporarily reach 21◦C without considerably affect the
user comfort. In other cases the worst case conditions need
to be achieved, since they are the potential source of power
provisioning disruption (black outs) [2].
F. Scalability to large systems
The set of loads to be controlled in a realistic scenario
can be composed by a large number of devices. Scalability
issues may arise in large networks. In RTSs many useful
techniques, including scheduling algorithms and analysis
methodologies, have linear or polynomial computational
complexity. Thus their application can suitably ﬁt to large
load sets. This section illustrates the approaches that can be
leveraged to face the management of large load sets.
1) Multiprocessor scheduling: In RTSs, multiprocessors
are those systems that allow to execute more than one task
at any given time, since each task runs on a different proces-
sor [14]. Multiprocessors can clearly manage a larger num-
ber of tasks with respect to uniprocessor systems. However,
in computing systems the number of processors is imposed
by the computing platform (i.e., it is a system constraint).
Therefore, the typical goal is to provide an answer to the
question: “Is the considered task set successfully schedulable
by the available processors?”, where a successful schedule
is the one that satisﬁes the timing constraints of every task.
The application of real-time scheduling to the load man-
agement is inherently close to the multiprocessor scenario.
The number of loads can be large, thus the simultaneous
activation of two or more loads can hardly be avoided.
However, the number of simultaneously activated loads is
not a system constraint in this case. Instead, the reduction
of unnecessary simultaneous activations is the objective of
the approach based on real-time scheduling. Therefore, the
above question can be translated to “What is the maximum
number of simultaneous activated loads?”. The ﬁnal goal is
to determine the resulting peak load in the worst case. The
resulting value can be used to either determine the size of a
new infrastructure or to verify the suitability of the schedule
to the power constraints imposed by an existing system (e.g.,
to check whether contractual limits are satisﬁed).
2) Hierarchical scheduling: A typical method to manage
large systems is to identify a hierarchy in the system
components. In RTSs the hierarchical scheduling is used to
aggregate heterogeneous scheduling policies in a predictable
manner [15]. A schedule generated at a higher level can
contain a sub-schedule, whose formal properties inﬂuence
and can be used to analyze the overall system behavior.
The modeling of power infrastructure can be straightfor-
wardly organized in a hierarchical manner. The hierarchy
starts from electric loads/devices at a lower level and grows
into aggregated levels as apartments/houses, buildings, dis-
tricts and cities. The idea is that a predictable schedule
guaranteed at lower levels, and thus a predictable power
load, allows to achieve predictable aggregated power loads
at higher levels. This approach has huge potentials in the
management of large and heterogeneous power systems.
G. Approximated scheduling
The estimation of the value of relevant parameters to char-
acterize a physical process is often affected by some degree
of uncertainty. The uncertainty can derive from incomplete
knowledge of the process, from simpliﬁed assumption to
obtain simpler models, etc.
In RTSs, an approach to deal with uncertainties is the
so-called probabilistic scheduling. It allows to incorporate
the uncertainty regarding physical and timing parameters
in the system model. For this purpose, the common tim-
ing parameters such as periods and execution times are
expressed by stochastic variables. The stochastic nature of
timing parameters is used to derive probabilistic guarantees
on the system behavior [16].
The possibility to incorporate a sufﬁcient degree of uncer-
tainty in the model is essential in the practical applicability
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

TABLE I
A RESUME OF THE PROPOSED REAL-TIME METHODOLOGIES AND THEIR
APPLICATION TO POWER LOAD MANAGEMENT.
Feature
Application to power load management
A-priori guarantees
To determine useful system properties
(e.g., the peak load) from timing param-
eters without the need of simulations
Scheduling algorithms
To coordinate the intelligent activation
of power consuming devices, avoiding
unnecessary simultaneous activations
Aperiodic activities
To efﬁciently manage the concurrent
activation of periodic loads and ape-
riodic ones (e.g., ovens, dishwashers,
washing machines)
Online/ofﬂine scheduling
To deal with mixed complex application
constraints (ofﬂine) and dynamic adap-
tation of system requirements at run-
time (online)
Hard/soft task models
To integrate both critical (hard) loads
and less urgent (soft) ones
Multiprocessor scheduling
To manage the activation of two or
more loads at the same time, when this
condition can not be avoided (e.g., in
large load sets)
Hierarchical scheduling
To coordinate a large power system that
is decomposed into a set of sub-systems
organized in a hierarchical manner
Approximated scheduling
To cope with modeling uncertainties
introduced in the modeling of power
loads and systems
of the scheduling approach to energy systems, where the
exact value of physical parameters are always affected by
errors and/or approximations. Robust scheduling methods
are then required to cope with such issues and achieve
reliable results under uncertain conditions.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This paper has suggested the applicability of some exist-
ing real-time scheduling approaches with explicit indication
of their possible applications to power loads management.
In particular, basic concepts of real-time scheduling have
been introduced to allow the subsequent coverage of more
advanced topics in connection with power management.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Fazeli, E. Christopher, C. Johnson, M. Gillott, and
M. Sumner, “Investigating the effects of dynamic demand side
management within intelligent smart energy communities of
future decentralized power system,” in Innovative Smart Grid
Technologies (ISGT Europe), 2nd IEEE PES Int. Conf. and
Exhibition on, dec. 2011, pp. 1–8.
[2] D. Novosel, M. M. Begovic, and V. Madani, “Shedding light
on blackouts,” Power and Energy Magazine, IEEE, vol. 2,
no. 1, pp. 32–43, jan-feb 2004.
[3] G. Buttazzo, Hard Real-Time Computing Systems: Pre-
dictable Scheduling Algorithms and Applications.
Springer,
2011.
[4] G. Koutitas and L. Tassiulas, “A delay based optimization
scheme for peak load reduction in the smart grid,” in Proceed-
ings of the 3rd International Conference on Future Energy
Systems: Where Energy, Computing and Communication
Meet.
ACM, 2012, p. 7.
[5] G. Koutitas, “Control of ﬂexible smart devices in the smart
grid,” Smart Grid, IEEE Transactions on, vol. PP, no. 99, pp.
1–11, 2012.
[6] T. Logenthiran, D. Srinivasan, and T. Z. Shun, “Demand
side management in smart grid using heuristic optimization,”
Smart Grid, IEEE Transactions on, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–9,
2012.
[7] M. Pipattanasomporn, M. Kuzlu, and S. Rahman, “An al-
gorithm for intelligent home energy management and de-
mand response analysis,” Smart Grid, IEEE Transactions on,
vol. PP, no. 99, p. 1, 2012.
[8] M. Della Vedova, M. Ruggeri, and T. Facchinetti, “On real-
time physical systems,” in Proceedings of the 18th Inter-
national Conference on Real-Time and Network Systems
(RTNS), November 2010, pp. 41–49.
[9] T. Facchinetti, E. Bini, and M. Bertogna, “Reducing the
peak power through real-time scheduling techniques in cyber-
physical energy systems,” in Proceedings of the First Inter-
national Workshop on Energy Aware Design and Analysis of
Cyber Physical Systems (WEA-CPS), April 2010, pp. 18–25.
[10] T. Facchinetti and M. L. Della Vedova, “Real-time modeling
and control of a cyber-physical energy system,” in Proceed-
ings of the First International Workshop on Energy Aware
Design and Analysis of Cyber Physical Systems (WEA-CPS),
April 2010, pp. 10–17.
[11] M. L. Della Vedova, E. Di Palma, and T. Facchinetti, “Electric
loads as real-time tasks: an application of real-time physical
systems,” in 7th International Wireless Communications and
Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), July 2011, pp.
1117–1123.
[12] T. Facchinetti and M. L. Della Vedova, “Real-time modeling
for direct load control in cyber-physical power systems,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, special issue on
Information Technology in Automation, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 689–
698, November 2011.
[13] R. Guerra and G. Fohler, “A gravitational task model with
arbitrary anchor points for target sensitive real-time applica-
tions,” Real-Time Systems, vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 93–115, 2009.
[14] R. I. Davis and A. Burns, “A survey of hard real-time
scheduling for multiprocessor systems,” ACM Computing
Surveys, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1–44, Oct. 2011.
[15] J. Regehr, A. Reid, K. Webb, M. Parker, and J. Lepreau,
“Evolving real-time systems using hierarchical scheduling
and concurrency analysis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Real-
Time Systems Symposium, dec. 2003, pp. 25–36.
[16] A. Burns, S. Punnekkat, L. Strigini, and D. Wright, “Prob-
abilistic scheduling guarantees for fault-tolerant real-time
systems,” in Dependable Computing for Critical Applications
7, 1999, nov 1999, pp. 361–378.
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

