A Framework for Power Consumption Analysis of Green Cellular Networks with
Separated Control and Data Base Stations
Yun Won Chung
School of Electronic Engineering, Soongsil University, Seoul, Korea
Email: ywchung@ssu.ac.kr
Abstract—In conventional green cellular network, network
functionalities of Base Stations (BS) for network access and
data service are tightly coupled. Although this joint control
and data signaling approach is reasonable for homogeneous
cellular networks, it is not appropriate for heterogeneous
cellular networks with small cells overlaying macro cell, and a
separated control and data signaling approach was proposed
in the literature, where a macro cell is mainly responsible
for control signaling to provide network access and a small
cell is mainly responsible for data service. Although a detailed
description of user equipment state transitions was provided
previously, state transitions of a macro cell BS and a small
cell BS have not been covered to the best of our knowledge.
In this idea paper, we propose state transition diagrams for
both the macro cell BS and the small cell BS, and present a
framework for power consumption analysis of green cellular
networks with separated control and data BSs.
Keywords-power consumption, green cellular network, state
transition diagram, base station
I. INTRODUCTION
Recently, interest on green cellular networks has been
increased and the basic idea of green cellular network is
to turn off power consuming components of unnecessary
Base Stations (BSs), especially during late night. To this
end, numerous works on reducing power consumption of
BSs of cellular networks have been carried out actively [1]
[2]. In these works, it is generally assumed that network
functionalities of BSs for network access and data service
are tightly coupled and BSs manage both control signaling
for network access and data signaling for data service.
Although the joint control and data signaling approach
is reasonable for BSs in homogeneous cellular networks, it
is not appropriate for heterogeneous cellular networks with
small cells overlaying macro cell, since the joint approach
is not efﬁcient to deal with the issues such as high control
overhead for growing trafﬁc, lack of ﬂexible topology adap-
tation accommodating trafﬁc variations, and large control
signaling overhead and frequent handovers [3]. To address
these issues, a separated control and data signaling approach
has been proposed in the literature [3][4]. In the separation
approach, a macro cell is mainly responsible for control
signaling to provide network access and a small cell is
mainly responsible for data service. By separating network
access and data service functionalities, a small cell BS can
be put into sleep mode or turned off in order to reduce power
consumption when there is few active mobile users under the
coverage of a small cell BS, while idle mobile users under
the coverage of a small cell BS can be served by a macro
cell BS.
Xu et al. [3] separated network layer as control network
layer and data network layer. The control network layer is
responsible for supporting network access for mobile users
and providing low rate data services. On the other hand, the
data network layer is responsible for providing high rate data
services. By doing this, transmission component of small
cell BSs can be turned off if there is no requirement for high
rate data service from any mobile users under the coverage
of small cell BSs, and power saving can be achieved. In
order to verify the support of the all the User Equipment
(UE) activities in the separation approach, a state transition
diagram for UE, which consists of detached, idle, c-active,
and d-active states was proposed [3]. In c-active state, UE is
served by control network layer and low rate data service is
provided by a macro cell BS. In d-active state, UE is served
by both control network layer and data network layer, and
high rate data service is provided by a small cell BS.
Although a detailed description of UE state transitions
was provided previously [3], state transitions of a macro
cell BS and a small cell BS have not been covered to the
best of our knowledge, which are essential for analyzing
the power consumption of a macro cell BS and a small cell
BS in the functionally separated cellular networks. In this
idea paper, we propose state transition diagrams for both
the macro cell BS and the small cell BS, and present a
framework for power consumption analysis of green cellular
networks with separated control and data BSs.
II. PROPOSED IDEA
In this idea paper, we deﬁne states for both the macro
cell BS and the small cell BS, and propose state transition
diagrams for the macro cell BS and the small cell BS. In
each state of the state transition diagram, BS consumes
different power and power consumption of a BS can be
derived by calculating the weighted sum as follows:
PBS =
X
i
Prob(i) × Pi,
(1)
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

off
sleep
idle
S1
SCs
Figure 1. State transition diagram for a small cell BS.
where Prob(i) denotes the steady state probability of state i
and Pi denotes the power consumption of state i. Therefore,
deﬁning the state of a macro cell BS and a small cell BS
and modelling the state transition diagram appropriately are
essential to analyze the power consumption of the macro
cell BS and the small cell BS.
Figure 1 shows a state transition diagram for a small cell
BS which supports high rate data service from UE under the
coverage of a small cell only area. In idle state, a small cell
BS is ready for providing high rate data services to UEs and
it moves to S1 state after accepting high rate data service
from a UE. If another high rate data service is accepted, the
state moves to S2, and similar transition occurs from Si−1
to Si until i reaches to CS, which is deﬁned as the total
number of data channels of a small cell BS. In idle state,
if there is no high rate data service request from any UE
until the expiration of idle timer, the state moves to sleep
state and the small cell BS turns off some of components
related with data transmission to save power. In idle state,
if there is high rate data service request from UE, it moves
to S1 state. In sleep state, if there is high rate data service
request from UE, it moves to S1 state. Although a small cell
BS ﬁrstly moves to idle state and stays there temporarily for
the preparation of data service, and then moves to S1 state
in this case, we assume a direct transition from sleep state
to S1 state for simple analysis. In sleep state, if there is no
high rate data service request until the expiration of sleep
timer, the state moves to off state for more power saving.
The transition from off state to S1 state can occur if there
is any high rate data service request, with the support of a
macro cell BS, and the detailed algorithm of turning on the
small cell BS in off state when a high rate data service is
requested from UE is not covered in this idea paper since it
is beyond the scope of this paper.
Figure 2 shows a state transition diagram for a macro cell
BS which supports low rate data service from UE under the
coverage of a macro cell and high rate data service from UE
under the coverage of a macro cell only area. Total number
of CM channels are assumed in a macro cell BS, where
it is assumed that one channel is required for a low rate
data service and h channels are required for a high rate
data service. Total number of LM low rate data channels
are reserved for low rate data service and total number of
HM high rate data channels are reserved for high rate data
(0,0)
(LM,0)
(1,0)
(0,1)
(i,j)
(0,HM)
(LM,HM)
(1,1)
(LM,1)
(1,HM)
Figure 2. State transition diagram for a macro cell BS.
service, for simplicity. In the state transition diagram for a
macro cell BS, there is no power saving state such as off and
sleep state since the macro cell should support the network
access for all the UEs under the coverage of a macro cell
and thus awake all the time. In state(i,j) i denotes the number
of low rate data service and j denotes the number of high
rate data service; the following transitions occur depending
on the events:
• (i,j) −→ (i+1,j): an arrival of low rate data service;
• (i,j) −→ (i-1,j): a departure of low rate data service;
• (i,j) −→ (i,j+1): an arrival of high rate data service;
• (i,j) −→ (i,j-1): a departure of high rate data service.
Since the power consumption of a BS consists of base
power consumption (a) and trafﬁc load proportional power
consumption (bρ), that is, a + bρ [1], we can obtain the
power consumption of each state by calculating trafﬁc load
ρ using the channel occupied. For example, trafﬁc load of
state (i, j) for a macro cell BS can be deﬁned as i+hj
CM , where
h denotes the number of required channels for a high rate
data service. Then, the power consumption of the macro cell
BS and the small cell BS is obtained as the weighted sum
of power consumption of each state with the weight of the
steady state probability of each state, as in eq. (1).
III. FUTURE PLAN
In our future work, we will derive the steady state
probability of each state based on a detailed probability dis-
tributions of transition events between states which depend
on mobility and trafﬁc characteristics of UE, cell layout,
call admission control scheme, etc. Power consumption of
the macro cell BS and the small cell BS in the separation
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

approach will be derived and compared with that of the joint
approach. Then, an efﬁcient power saving scheme will be
drawn for a macro cell BS and a small cell BS, based on
an interworking between them. Finally, an integrated power
saving scheme which considers the power consumption of
UEs as well as BSs will be proposed and analyzed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by Basic Science Research
Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea
(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future
Planning (NRF-2014R1A1A1037728).
REFERENCES
[1] L. Budzisz, F. Ganji, G. Rizzo, M. A. Marsan, M.
Meo, Y. Zhang, G. Koutitas, L. Tassiulas, S. Lambert,
B. Lannoo, M. Pickaet, A. Conte, I. Haratcherev, and
A. Wolisz, “Dynamic resource provisioning for energy
efﬁciency in wireless access networks: a survey and an
outlook,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 2259-2285, 2014.
[2] J.
Wu,
Y.
Zhang,
M.
Zukerman,
and
E.
K.
Yung
“Energy-efﬁcient
base
stations
sleep
mode
techniques in green cellular networks: a survey,”
IEEE
Communications
Surveys
&
Tutorials,
DOI:10.1109/COMST.2015.2403395 (to appear)
[3] X. Xu, G. He, S. Zhang, Y. Chen, and X. Xu, “On
functionality separation for green mobile neteworks:
concept study over LTE,” IEEE Communications Mag-
azine, vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 82-90, 2013.
[4] Y. Kishiyama, A. Benjebbour, T. Nakamura, and H.
Ishii, “Future steps of LTE-A: evolution toward inte-
gration of local area and wide area systems,” IEEE
Wireless Communications, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 12-18,
2013.
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

