A Survey on Smart Grid Technologies in Europe
Luca Ardito, Giuseppe Procaccianti, Giuseppe Menga, Maurizio Morisio
Dipartimento di Automatica ed Informatica
Politecnico di Torino
Torino, Italy
e-mail: name.surname@polito.it
Abstract—The old electricity network infrastructure has
proven to be inadequate, with respect to modern challenges
such as alternative energy sources, security, electricity demand
and energy saving policies. Moreover, ICT technologies devel-
opment seems to have reached an adequate level of reliability
and ﬂexibility in order to support an entirely new concept
of electricity network - the Smart Grid. In this work, we
try to give a deﬁnition of what a Smart Grid is. Moreover,
we will analyse the state-of-the-art of Smart Grids, not only
in their technical details, but also in their management and
optimization.
Keywords-smart grid; renewable energy; grid intelligence;
energy efﬁciency; energy storage;
I. INTRODUCTION
Over the past 50 years, electricity networks evolved from
the ”local grid” networks of the beginning of the century, to
interconnected electric grids, based on generating stations
of notable scale (1000-3000 MW) distributing power to
major load centres, which divided energy to a large number
of individual consumers. The generating stations, or power
plants, were built in order to provide massive amounts of
energy, due to the nature of power generation technologies
in use (hydroelectric, coal, oil, and gas). By the end of the
20th century, however, this model proved to be unreliable
and inadequate. First of all, the demand forecast techniques
and the data processing technologies could not efﬁciently
provide the desired energy at the desired time; thus, power
distribution was based upon rough average classiﬁcations.
Moreover, the emerging environmental issues and the geopo-
litical interdependence of power sources limited the devel-
opment of economies of scale. The main challenges that a
modern electricity network has to face are: [1]
• Privacy issues between energy suppliers and customers
• Security threats from cyber attack
• National goals to employ alternative power generation
sources
• Signiﬁcantly more complexity in maintaining stable
power with intermittent supply
• Conservation goals that seek to lessen peak demand
surges during the day so that less energy is wasted in
order to ensure adequate reserves
• High demand for an electricity supply that is uninter-
rupted
• Digitally controlled devices that can alter the nature of
the electrical load and result in electricity demand that
is incompatible with a power system that was built to
serve an analog economy.
These challenges require the development of an intelli-
gent, self-balancing, integrated electric network that makes
use of the modern ICT techniques to manipulate and share
data. The Smart Grid technology tries to answer these needs.
In this survey, we propose an overview of the main aspects
of Smart Grids development and implementation. In Section
II, we give some deﬁnitions of the smart grid concepts, from
different points of view. In Section III, we will analyse the
management process of the Smart Grid. In Section IV, we
will review its technical aspects. In Section V, we will see
how a Smart Grid can be optimized. In Section VI, some
conclusions are given.
II. WHAT IS A SMART GRID?
The Smart Grid is a complex system, and can be described
in various ways. Here, we report two different deﬁnitions.
The ﬁrst one sums up the ”European” view of the Smart
Grid:
”A Smart Grid is an electricity network that can intelligently
integrate the actions of all users connected to it - generators,
consumers and those that do both - in order to efﬁciently
deliver
sustainable,
economic
and
secure
electricity
supplies. A Smart Grid employs innovative products and
services
together
with
intelligent
monitoring,
control,
communication, and self-healing technologies. Smart Grids
development must include not only technology, market
and
commercial
considerations,
environmental
impact,
regulatory framework, standardization usage, ICT and
migration strategy, but also societal requirements and
governmental edicts.” [2]
The second one, written in the Statement of Policy on
the Modernization of Electricity Grid of the United States
Government [3], characterizes the Smart Grids by means of a
list of achievements. The most relevant are: the use of digital
information to improve reliability, security and efﬁciency;
integration of distributed resources and generation; ‘smart’
technologies for metering, communication and automation;
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

deployment of energy storage technologies (i.e., electric
vehicles).
According to [4] it is clear that both deﬁnitions combine
two dimensions: kWh and bytes. It is not argued the key
role of ICT in developing a smart grid, and both view-
points recognize the growing role of renewable technolo-
gies, distributed generation and energy storage. In addition,
both visions are focused on efﬁciency, but with different
objectives: the U.S. deﬁnition is more energy intensive (and
therefore less efﬁcient) than the European one, which sets
mandatory targets mainly in energy consumption reduction.
The main differences consist in current and future business
models: on the European side, unbundling and retail com-
petition will be predominant; on the contrary, the U.S. side
will be predominantly characterized by vertically-integrated
monopolies. As a result, the European vision will lead to a
greater complexity in the deﬁnition of business cases, and
in a redesign of the industry value chain.
III. BUSINESS MANAGEMENT
The development of a Smart Grid does not involve replac-
ing the existing electricity network. Such a process would
be impossible for technical and economical reasons. Instead,
the Smart Grid development is an enhancement of the
existing network, by means of implementing new services
and features, while maintaining, as much as possible, the old
physical infrastructure. We have to deﬁne what functions a
Smart Grid must provide. According to the United States
Department of Energy’s Modern Grid Initiative report, [3]
these functions are:
• Self-healing
• Consumer Participation
• High Quality Power
• Support for different types of storage and generation
• Higher efﬁciency
The Smart Grid Technology also changes radically the En-
ergy Market scenario: new actors may arise, such as Energy
Retailers and Traders, Distributed Generation operators, and
so on [5] (see Figure 1).
Figure 1.
Overview of transactions within the electricity market. [5]
In [6], authors describe three elements as the ”pillars” of
the Smart Grid. Those elements are:
• Smart Customer: the set of technologies that enable
consumers to observe and control their consumption
• Smart Utility: the utility that implements monitoring,
control and pricing, and demand response
• Smart Market: an economically efﬁcient market struc-
ture to integrate technology, decision making and in-
formation
Authors also identify Real-Time Pricing (RTP) as a funda-
mental tool to realize the Smart Market, because it provides
consumers with a transparent way to control their energy
bill, and utilities with a rate ﬂexibility that allows them
to increase their competitivity and implement Demand-Side
Management.
In this new scenario, the roles of producer and consumer
get closer. The consumer is now able to produce energy,
through distributed renewable energy sources. This new
emerging entity is called the prosumer, which is discussed
in [7]. Authors deﬁne it as an economically motivated entity
that:
1) Consumes and produces power
2) Operates a small or large power grid, thus transports
electricity
3) Optimizes the economic decisions regarding its energy
utilization
The prosumer may not be strictly a physical entity, but rather
a combination of components: energy sources, loads, an
electric grid, controls to operate his system, and a market,
or other economic decision making system.
This new market must be supported through a manage-
ment system that takes into account these new ﬁgures. An
example of a strategic approach for a complete energy man-
agement system is BEMI (Bidirectional Energy Manage-
ment System). [8] BEMI is an energy management system
designed for installation at Low Voltage grid connection
points. Its main task is to optimize the so-called Controllable
Distributed Electrical (CDE) units, which means locally
connected loads or generators. This optimization is done
accordingly to consumption and generation tariffs, set by
an energy service provider through a Pool-BEMI system.
BEMI supervisions the CDE unit switching and operation,
and also provides grid costumers complete information about
the variable tariffs, energy cost and device schedules. The
BEMI System is shown in Figure 2.
Another project worth to be mentioned is SmartGen [9],
an Italian project driven by several industries and two differ-
ent research institutes (University of Bologna and Genova).
This project aims at ﬁnding and implementing industrial
solutions for Smart Grid management. The authors propose
the deﬁnition of a DMS (Distribution Management System)
for each portion of the grid, able to control and optimize
power ﬂows, distributed generation and load balancing. The
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Figure 2.
BEMI System in the liberalized energy market. [8]
base function of a DMS can be divided into:
• Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA);
• Control Stations
The SCADA system provides speciﬁc monitoring and real-
time control operations, in an automated way, while the
Control Stations allow human operators to interact with the
system.
IV. TECHNOLOGY
In this section, we will review some technical aspects of
the implementation of a Smart Grid and its features.
A. Distributed Generation
Distributed generation (DG) is a driving factor for the
Smart Grid implementation. Its integration in the energy
network proved to bring many beneﬁts [10] for customers,
energy efﬁciency, and network operation itself. This integra-
tion is enabled through a number of different technologies
[11], some of which are discussed in this survey:
• Advanced Metering Infrastructure (see Section IV-B)
• Energy Storage Systems (see Section V)
• Advanced Distributed Management Systems (see Sec-
tion III)
In [11], authors provide a methodology for integration of DG
in a Smart Grid Network. It is based upon the connection
of a distributed generator with a feeder, combined with an
Automatic Voltage Control (AVC) system and a Dynamic
Line Rating (DLR) function. In their study, they also provide
an economic feasibility study, as a series of steps, which may
be extended to a general project involving DG technologies.
The deﬁned steps are:
• Deﬁne the installation, operation and maintenance costs
of the project
• Deﬁne additional ﬁnancial parameters like electricity
rates, discount rates, inﬂation rate, etc.
• Quantify additional beneﬁts brought to the network, in
terms of a premium to the electricity rate per output
unit
• Evaluate externalities, such as Greenhouses gases
(GHG) reduction, to add them as a beneﬁt
• Calculate the economic parameters internal rate of
return (IRR) and net present value (NPV) to evaluate
the feasibility of the project.
B. Metering
In order to efﬁciently implement a Smart Grid, a smart
metering infrastructure is essential. Traditional metering
devices, provided by energy distribution companies for their
customers, typically measure energy consumption only in
terms of total energy consumed, thus not giving any informa-
tion about when and how it is consumed. This information
can lead to a more intelligent energy provision, ﬁnely tuned
to suit speciﬁc customer needs - and optimizing energy dis-
tribution over all the network. In this context, it is impossible
not to cite AMI (Advanced Metering Infrastructure). AMI
features include [12] [13]:
• Two way communication to the electric meter to enable
information interchange
• Self registration of metering points
• Auto-conﬁguration after a failure in communications
• AMI system interconnection to utility billing, outage
management systems, and other applications
In [12], the authors name the integration between Smart Grid
and AMI as AGI - standing for Advanced Grid Infrastruc-
ture. The AGI has the following enhancements [12]:
• Outage: Improved Customer Service
Utilizing the AMI infrastructure, a utility can know
when an outage occurs. The AMI system can notify
the trouble call system automatically, facilitating rapid
crew deployment and reduced outage times.
• Loss Detection: Improved Network Operation
By connecting information nodes at key points of the
medium voltage distribution lines and distribution trans-
formers, it is possible to directly calculate the system
technical and non-technical losses. This enables better
tracking and efﬁciency on the distribution network.
• State Estimation: Integration of Renewable Sources
By utilizing information from the customer site,
medium voltage lines, and transformers, accurate load
models can be computed allowing accurate load estima-
tion on the distribution grid. This information is critical
to understanding the impact and beneﬁt of connecting
renewable energy sources to the distribution grid.
Also in [14], a more detailed view of the AMI infrastructure
is given.
An open issue regarding metering is determining power
consumption of ICT equipment. According to [15], ICT
technologies have a relevant impact over power consump-
tion. Thus, the problem of ﬁnding precise models and ﬁgures
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

to calculate and estimate this consumption has become a
priority for the professionals of the sector. In [16], authors
expose a case of study regarding the analysis of power
consumption data from a data center, in a time period of
about a year. The analysis was mostly focused on servers,
which represent the main ICT power consuming device in
these structures (if we exclude cooling and illumination).
This work has shown that, undoubtedly, software has a
relevant impact over servers’ power consumption (up to
10%). This means that, in order to correctly forecast ICT
power consumption, many factors have to be considered,
such as the usage proﬁles of the equipment.
C. Forecasting
Forecasting is a key functionality of a Smart Grid system.
Through forecasting, the Grid is able to balance loads,
optimize power distribution and handle failures. The main
problem of forecasting, in a modern electricity network, is
given by the Renewable Energy Sources (RES). The energy
produced by RES can vary, and its variation depends on
several parameters (climate conditions, source plant location,
etc.) In this sense, their contribute in terms of energy can
be difﬁcult to predict, because the variables to observe are
too many. In this sense, it is worthy to cite the work of
Bertani et al. [17], where is presented a central dispatcher
with the following functions: short-term forecast of the
power produced by renewable energy sources (RES), short-
term load forecast and day-ahead load proﬁle prediction,
distribution system state estimation, day-ahead economic
dispatching and on-line scheduling of the optimal distributed
resources’ operating conditions. The forecast algorithm was
based on a neural network. The results can be seen in Figure
3.
Figure 3.
Example of forecasted vs. measured global radiation. [17]
D. Communication
A key issue for successfully realizing the future-oriented
energy system is integrating information and communication
on an Internet-based infrastructure,able to provide access
to energy information in a simple, quick and economic
way. This is because energy providers, either centralized
or decentralized, need a constant ﬂow of real-time updates
regarding the energy demands, in order to provide the precise
amount of energy needed. Optimization of energy consump-
tion is based on integrated and near-real-time electronic
communication between producers and loads on all levels
of the grid.
This infrastructure will also be proﬁtable for consumers.
In fact, by developing intelligent end devices, customers will
be able to monitor their actual power consumption in real
time, and consequently they can optimize the usage of their
devices in order to reduce costs. [18]
An example of integration between the Smart Grid and
the ICT is a solution proposed in [19]. In modern energy
distribution systems, generation and demand need to be
always matched in real-time. This means that the modern
grid is a real-time distributed system, thus it needs a precise
synchronization between its devices. Modern grid infras-
tructures realize several functions, such as protection test-
ing, fault detection, load balancing and scheduling through
synchronization. The authors propose a solution based on
the implementation of the Network Time Protocol (NTP)
over 802.11 networks along with an optimisation technique
to reduce the energy usage of a common Wireless Sensor
Network (WSN) synchronisation protocol. [19]
The Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) provides con-
cepts particularly suitable for an energy distribution network.
In fact, it decouples functionalities from implementation,
integrating them through message exchange protocols in a
dedicated Service Bus. Moreover, it is not needed to develop
interfaces between every application: each application only
needs to be interfaced to the integration platform.
The only issue of the SOA is ﬁnding the correct semantics
for data. Without open interface deﬁnitions and a standard
semantic structure for message exchange, it is not possible
to realize an efﬁcient energy network.
Web Services are especially useful in the context of Smart
Houses. An Energy-Aware Smart House is a residential
building equipped with a Smart Metering system (see Sec-
tion IV-B) able to measure and control in real-time the
power consumption of every electrical device installed. In
[20], a Web-Oriented Application Framework for embedded
devices is presented. The framework is based on a RESTful
architecture.The embedded devices represent sensor nodes,
which may provide all sort of information (power consump-
tion, for instance). This solution has shown a response time
for querying each device lower than 60 ms, even with high
workload.
The suitability of Web Service architectures for the Smart
Grid/Smart Houses is also stressed in [5].
V. OPTIMIZATION
In this section, we will present how a Smart Grid network
can be optimized through new technologies and approaches.
A. Agents
A Smart Grid is, by itself, a decentralized network, where
intelligence is distributed across several devices. These de-
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

vices may have to take autonomous decisions, in order to
react quickly and efﬁciently to changes in energy demands,
faults, and such events.
Thus, the Software Agents paradigm may provide a way
to implement a system like that. In fact, in this paradigm,
it is possible to design a distributed system with speciﬁc
functionalities through the cooperation of autonomous, in-
telligent components.
In [21], authors present a Multi-Agent System (MAS)
simulating a Smart City. The simulated entities were:
• Houses
• Appliances (Single devices, of different classes, in-
stalled into a house)
• Vehicles (Electric Vehicles able to store energy into
batteries)
• Cities
• Power Stations
The system was implemented using JADE (Java Agents
Development Environment). Each entity was represented
by a software agent. Then, an energy controller agent is
able to act in order to balance power demand and power
generation (for example, turning off some devices when
power consumption is too high). In Figure 4 are shown
the results of the balancing activity. The proposed scenario
involved 300 houses evenly divided into three cities, and a
total of 3840 appliances.
Figure 4.
Consumption and generation chart [21]
MAS are often associated to electronic markets, com-
puting frameworks for distributed decision making based
on microeconomics and Game Theories. By applying this
paradigm to the energy distribution networks, we can make
use of the already developed techniques and methodologies
to realize the so-called Market-Based Control.
Several works following this idea have been proposed.
In [22], for example, a complex multi-agent architecture is
presented, composed of different components: : the Problem
Formulator and Attributes Evaluator (PROFATE), the Sce-
narios Builder, the Electricity Market Multi-Agent System
(EMMAS), the Decision Making Assistant (DMA).
Of these components, the most interesting is without any
doubt the EMMAS. In order to forecast market prices, both
at medium and long-term, accurate simulation models are
needed, able to react to structural changes. The EMMAS
realizes these models, by means of a complex taxonomy of
software agents that represent every actor in the transaction
process
Another example of a MAS designed for controlling
energy networks is PowerMatcher.
”The Power Matcher is a general-purpose coordination
mechanism for balancing demand and supply in clusters
of Distributed Energy Resources. These ’clusters’ might
be electricity networks with a high share of distributed
generation or commercial trading portfolios with high levels
of renewable electricity sources, to name a few.
Within a PowerMatcher cluster, the agents are organized
into a logical tree. The leafs of this tree are a number of
local device agents and, optionally, a unique objective agent.
The root of the tree is formed by the auctioneer agent, a
unique agent that handles the price forming, i.e., the search
for the equilibrium price. In order to obtain scalability,
concentrator agents can be added to the structure as tree
nodes.” [23]
B. Energy Storage
Another aspect that can substantially improve the efﬁ-
ciency of a Smart Grid is the energy storage. Basically, it
is the problem of keeping energy available directly on the
grid, in storage components efﬁcient enough to avoid energy
losses. In cases of energy production peaks, when there is
an overproduction of energy, having a distributed storage
system can increase the overall efﬁciency.
An agent-based solution is exposed in [24]. Basically, they
propose a game-theoretic framework, that analyses the Nash
equilibrium of an electricity network, and develops learning
strategies for agents that dynamically adapt to the energy
market. As regards storage devices, they embrace the so-
called Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G) view, where the unused energy
is stored in the batteries of electric vehicles (EVs) or Plug-in
Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEVs). Since this solution can
raise problems of peaks in energy demand, a Multi-Agent
System is adopted in order to optimise usage and storage
of electricity. In particular, the proposed system models a
situation where each device is represented as an intelligent
software agent, and every agent can try to ”buy” the needed
amount of energy at every time, meanwhile learning which
is the most proﬁtable amount of energy to buy, according
to the speciﬁc usage. The authors claim that, implementing
their solution, a single consumer may save up to 13% on
his electricity bill. [24]
C. Unit Commitment Problem
One of the key objectives of a Smart Grid architecture is
dispatching energy from all the available sources in order to
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

meet the electric load. In other terms, there is a problem
of coordination between energy demand and generation.
This problem has been formalized under the name of Unit
Commitment. Unit commitment (UC), also known as pre-
dispatch, is the problem of scheduling the production of
energy by generation units of a power system. The objective
is to minimize total production costs, while observing several
operating constraints. Thus, UC is a complex mathematical
problem, based on both integer and continuous variables.
In order to solve this problem, an optimized algorithm is
needed, because complete enumeration of all the possible
solutions would require excessive computation time. [25] For
this survey’s purposes, we analysed two possible solutions,
which involve different approaches for solving the Unit
Commitment Problem. In [26], authors propose a solution
based on Adaptive Dynamic Programming (ADP).
The solution presented by the authors focuses on a spe-
ciﬁc family of ADP: the Heuristics Dynamic Programming
(HDP).
”The implementation is divided into action network,
critic network and model network. The function of action
network is to determine the feasibility region of operation
of the power systems and to detect the emergency state with
corresponding violations under different contingencies. The
function of critic network is for post-optimization process,
evaluation and assessment of control options during contin-
gencies. And the function of model network is to read power
system parameters and obtain distribution function for state
estimation of measurement errors inherent in data, ascertain
and improve accuracy of data. The aim of all these kinds of
methods is to approximate the cost-to-go function which is
relative to the output of critic network.” [26]
Another approach for the UC problem is presented in
[27], where the authors introduce a solution using Genetic
Algorithms (GAs).
The application of the GAs to the UC problem included
encoding each solution with a simple binary alphabet. At
ﬁrst, a number of initial binary-coded solutions (genotypes)
are produced randomly to form the initial population. Then,
a ﬁtness value is given to each solution, calculated as a
sum of penalties for violating certain problem constraints.
Afterwards, a new offspring genotype (new solution) is
produced by means of the two basic genetic operators:
crossover (combining different solutions by mixing their
binary codes) and mutation (modifying randomly chosen bits
of the offspring genotypes. The above procedure is repeated
until a new set of genotypes is produced, which is considered
as the new generation of solutions. The new generation
totally replaces the parents. By also implementing some
adjustments to the ﬁtness calculation, the GA technique has
proven to converge in the order of hundreds of generations.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we surveyed the Smart Grid project from dif-
ferent points of view, analysing the efforts that the scientiﬁc
community is making to implement this infrastructure. We
presented complete management solutions, communication
systems, and different kinds of optimization techniques.
One of the facts that this survey has shown is that, from
a technological point of view, there are plenty of solutions
already available. Several management systems have been
tested and are ready for deployment. However, another fact is
evident: although many different standards exist, especially
for data communication and protocols, few of them have
been widely accepted for application in energy distribution
networks. To give an idea of the problem, below some of
the standard communication protocols are listed:
• Application Level:
– IEC TS62351 (data and communication security)
– IEC 62443 (safety)
– IEC 61968 (integration of applications into elec-
tricity supply facilities)
• Transport Level:
– IEC 61850 (Station automation)
– IEC 62055 (Electric Meter)
– ISO/IEC 14543-3(KNX)
• Communication Media Level:
– IEC 60255 (Protection Installation)
– IEC 81334 (PLC)
This can be an issue, because one of the keys to an efﬁcient
energy network is interoperability between different energy
providers. A partial solution can be using Web Services
and system integration techniques, but there has to be a
standard deﬁnition for data structures and models in order
to enlarge the scope of the network. The biggest obstacle
to standardization, and in general to Smart Grid implemen-
tation in Europe, from our point of view, is given by the
complex situation of the European energy market, where
regulated and liberalized regimes still coexist. In regulated
markets, the main grid operator establishes a monopoly
business, that does not allow consumers to choose among
different technologies, as regards, for example, metering
services, forecasting, and so on. Also, energy retailers,
although present on the territory, are not able to assume
their innovative role in the Future Energy Market depicted in
Section III, in terms of demand response, consumer services
and network operation.
As far as it concerns the research activity, what should
be done is embracing a common view of the problem,
focusing on interoperability and supporting the creation
and afﬁrmation of technology standards. In this way, the
development of solutions and optimization techniques can
be immediately followed by ﬁeld testing and deployment,
speeding up the overall infrastructure realization process.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

REFERENCES
[1] Smart Grid Working Group - Energy Future Coalition, “Chal-
lenge and opportunity: Charting a new energy future, ap-
pendix a: Working group reports,” 2002.
[2] Smart Grids European Technology Platform, “Smartgrids -
strategic deployment document for european electricity net-
works of the future,” Apr. 2010.
[3] US Government, Approved by US Congress in December
2007, “Energy independence and security act - sec. 1301 -
1308,” 2007.
[4] R. Bigliani, “Why smart grids are different in europe and
the u.s.” 2009. [Online]. Available: http://http://idc-insights-
community.com/posts/f2c76f6bec
[5] C. Warmer, K. Kok, S. Karnouskos, A. Weidlich, D. Nestle,
P. Selzam et al., “Web services for integration of smart
houses in the smart grid,” in Grid-Interop - The road to an
interoperable grid, Denver, Colorado, USA, Nov. 2009.
[6] R. Tabors, G. Parker, and M. Caramanis, “Development of
the smart grid: Missing elements in the policy process,” in
System Sciences (HICSS), 2010 43rd Hawaii International
Conference on, Jan. 2010.
[7] S. Grijalva and M. Tariq, “Prosumer-based smart grid ar-
chitecture enables a ﬂat, sustainable electricity industry,” in
Innovative Smart Grid Technologies (ISGT), 2011 IEEE PES,
Jan. 2011.
[8] J. Ringelstein and D. Nestle, “Application of bidirectional
energy management interfaces for distribution grid services,”
in CIRED, 2009.
[9] A. Borghetti, C. Nucci, M. Paolone, A. Morini, F. Silvestro,
and S. Grillo, “Generazione diffusa, sistemi di controllo e
accumulo in reti elettriche,” AEIT, no. 11/12, 2010.
[10] P. Daly and J. Morrison, “Understanding the potential beneﬁts
of distributed generation on power delivery systems,” in Rural
Electric Power Conference, 2001, 2001.
[11] R. Hidalgo, C. Abbey, and G. Joos, “Integrating distributed
generation with smart grid enabling technologies,” in Inno-
vative Smart Grid Technologies (ISGT Latin America), 2011
IEEE PES Conference on, Oct. 2011.
[12] D. Hart, “Using AMI to realize the smart grid,” in Power and
Energy Society General Meeting - Conversion and Delivery
of Electrical Energy in the 21st Century, 2008 IEEE, July
2008.
[13] A. Weidlich and S. Karnouskos, “Integrating smart houses
with the smart grid through web services for increasing en-
ergy efﬁciency,” in 10th IAEE European Conference, Energy,
Policies and Technologies for Sustainable Economies, Vienna,
Austria, Sep. 2009.
[14] S. Karnouskos, P. G. da Silva, and D. Ilic, “Assessment
of high-performance smart metering for the web service
enabled smart grid era,” in ICPE, S. Kounev, V. Cortellessa,
R. Mirandola, and D. J. Lilja, Eds.
ACM, 2011.
[15] The Climate Group, “Smart 2020: Enabling the low carbon
economy in the information age,” GeSi, Tech. Rep., 2008.
[16] A. Vetro’, L. Ardito, M. Morisio, and G. Procaccianti, “Moni-
toring it power consumption in a research center: Seven facts,”
in Proceedings of ENERGY 2011, The First International
Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT
Energy-aware Technologies.
Mestre, Italy, 2011.
[17] A. Bertani, A. Borghetti, C. Bossi, O. Lamquet, S. Massucco,
A. Morini et al., “Management of low voltage grids with high
penetration of distributed generation: concepts, implemen-
tations and experiments,” in Proceedings of CIGRE, 2006,
cIGRE, Paris, 2006.
[18] BDI, “Internet of Energy - ICT for Energy Markets of the
Future,” 2010.
[19] J. Shannon, H. Melvin, R. O’Hogartaigh, and A. Ruzzelli,
“Synchronisation challenges within future smart grid infras-
tructure,” in Proceedings of ENERGY 2011, The First Inter-
national Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications
and IT Energy-aware Technologies.
Mestre, Italy, 2011.
[20] A. Kamilaris, A. Pitsillides, and V. Trifa, “The smart home
meets the web of things,” IJAHUC, vol. 7, no. 3, 2011.
[21] S. Karnouskos and T. N. de Holanda, “Simulation of a smart
grid city with software agents,” in Proceedings of the 2009
Third UKSim European Symposium on Computer Modeling
and Simulation, ser. EMS ’09. Washington, DC, USA: IEEE
Computer Society, 2009.
[22] E. Gnansounou, S. Pierre, A. Quintero, J. Dong, and
A. Lahlou, “A multi-agent approach for planning activities in
decentralized electricity markets,” Knowl.-Based Syst, vol. 20,
no. 4, 2007.
[23] J. K. Kok, M. J. J. Scheepers, and I. G. Kamphuis, “In-
telligence in electricity networks for embedding renewables
and distributed generation,” in Intelligent Infrastructures, ser.
Intelligent Systems, Control And Automation: Science and
Engineering.
Springer Netherlands, 2010.
[24] P. Vytelingum, T. D. Voice, S. D. Ramchurn, A. Rogers,
and N. R. Jennings, “Agent-based micro-storage management
for the smart grid,” in Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems:
volume 1 - Volume 1, ser. AAMAS ’10, 2010.
[25] D. Zhang, L. G. Papageorgiou, N. J. Samsatli, and N. Shah,
“Optimal scheduling of smart homes energy consumption
with microgrid,” in Proceedings of ENERGY 2011, The First
International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communi-
cations and IT Energy-aware Technologies.
Mestre, Italy,
2011.
[26] J. Momoh and Y. Zhang, “Unit commitment using adaptive
dynamic programming,” in Intelligent Systems Application to
Power Systems, 2005. Proceedings of the 13th International
Conference on, Nov. 2005.
[27] S. Kazarlis, A. Bakirtzis, and V. Petridis, “A genetic algorithm
solution to the unit commitment problem,” Power Systems,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 11, no. 1, Feb 1996.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

