EnAware: A Comprehensive and Scalable Energy Management and Awareness Solution
Ant´onio Santos, Carlos Resende, Rui Marques, Andr´e Costa Lima
Fraunhofer Portugal AICOS
Email: {antonio.santos, carlos.resende, rui.marques, andre.lima}@fraunhofer.pt
Abstract—The raising costs of energy and the increasing con-
sumer awareness with regards to their ecological footprint
poses new challenges to the industry. In a domestic context,
consumers demand energy efﬁcient products and solutions that
can be seamlessly integrated and easy to use. The EnAware
project, developed by Fraunhofer Portugal AICOS, EFACEC,
EFAPEL and Bosch Termotecnologia, addresses these challenges
by developing an ecosystem of interconnected smart devices.
This ecosystem is composed of a smart energy meter, several
smart devices and a home server. The household power meter
and the home server communicate via the ModBus protocol
over Power Line communication (PLC). Examples of the smart
devices are smart sockets, smart switches or heat pumps. The
devices communicate with the home ZigBee wireless network
using the Home automation proﬁle, which guarantees the smooth
integration of third party products into the environment. The core
of the EnAware system is the home server, which orchestrates
the different devices and provides the user interface. The main
differentiating factors of this solution are a set of features focusing
on raising awareness on energy consumption and the scalability
provided by having the service running on an OSGi platform.
Keywords-Energy Awareness; Energy Monitoring; Smart Grids;
Domotics; Smart Homes.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, it is a common understanding that energy is a
precious resource and its cost has been dramatically increasing.
People use energy that comes from various sources and over
time there have been countless social, political and mainly
environmental consequences related to the use of energy. One
of the main reasons for the recent environment degradation is
the unconscious and unsustainable use of energy, which leads
to dangerous carbon emissions to the atmosphere. The snow
ball effect continues since it is proven that the climate changes
are mainly due to these emissions. Unfortunately, humankind
is on the end side of all this process, since we are the ones
that suffer from the massive and devastating consequences of
extreme climatic phenomena.
The recent increase of these climatic phenomena has been
leading to several energy awareness campaigns. These cam-
paigns aim not only at improving the Earth environment, but
also at saving costs to the end user. However, these campaigns
can only have a signiﬁcant impact if the target audience can
measure the effect of the change of behaviour and therefore
be motivated to continue this change in order to optimize
energy consumption even further. To effectively support these
campaigns, energy management and monitoring solutions are
effective tools, which should achieve the goal of providing the
user with energy consumption reports that can easily provide a
clear view of the energy consumption for a given period, either
in a global perspective or by equipment or even aggregated
by house divisions. This idea goes the same direction as the
main standard management axiom stating that ”you cannot
manage what you cannot measure”. Every energy management
system must provide the means and results for an ongoing
motivation and even education, so that the user may keep his
behaviour over time. It must be stressed that usually it takes
a long time to actually start enjoying the beneﬁts of energy
efﬁciency improvements, whereas the costs associated with
them are immediate and most of the times large.
Having all these ideas and concepts in mind, Fraunhofer
Portugal AICOS (Assistive Information and Communication
Solutions) (FhP), in a joint collaboration with Bosch Termotec-
nologia S.A., EFAPEL (Empresa Fabril de Produtos El´ectricos,
S.A.) and EFACEC, has enrolled in a project whose main goal
is to develop a complete energy management system, with a
strong energy awareness component. The system is composed
of a central device (a home server in the form of a micro-PC),
a smart meter developed by EFACEC, a heat pump provided
by Bosch and Zigbee-enabled devices (smart plugs, switches,
etc.) developed by EFAPEL. EFACEC role is to provide
solutions for integrating all domestic side components with the
power network, under the perspectives of Network Operation
(SCADA/DMS), of Demand Side Management (DSM) and
of supply of new services for the consumers. Its role will
impact mainly at the level of Demand Response, speciﬁcally
at Smart Metering level (smart meter, data concentrator and
head-end). Bosch Termotecnologia S.A. role is to provide
efﬁcient, innovative and sustainable solutions for sanitary hot
water, integrating demand response functionality. The role of
EFAPEL is to provide domestic Intelligent Electronic Devices,
as components for home automation, capable of local metering,
improving demand response. Finally, the role of FhP is to
provide human computer interaction solutions, namely for the
home server, which will integrate all domestic data, interfacing
the smart meter and all home components, improving demand
response.
This paper describes the overall solution, starting with an
introduction in Section I, followed by a detailed review of the
state-of-the-art in Section II. The architecture is extensively
described in Section III and some initial results are revealed
in Section IV. Finally, there is room for conclusions and future
work in Section V, being the last Section of the document (VI)
just for acknowledgements.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
Energy Management and Home Automation systems are
currently somehow easy to ﬁnd in the market. However, the
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

currently available products usually do not pack these two
features in the same bundle and miss some of the intelligence
and interoperability that would allow them to reach optimal
results. The interoperability issue is even more severe as it
usually means using proprietary communication protocols that
limit the user to the products from a restricted group of
manufacturers; in what it takes to the Energy Management
features, most of the products usually do not take too serious
the Energy Awareness topic, missing strong and effective data
analysis and mining subsystems that would allow providing
suggestions, automated actions, etc., that raises the user’s
energy awareness levels and reinforces his motivation and
engagement in changing his energy consumption behaviour.
The systems provided by Wattvision [1], PowerWatch [2],
Tendril [3] and Blue Line Innovations [4] are examples of
Energy Management systems, with no focus on Home Au-
tomation or Energy Awareness features. This set of systems
are capable of processing the energy measurements from the
household smart meter or measuring the energy consumption
of appliances with metering capabilities, and showing them,
through a user friendly interface, to the user. However, the in-
terpretation of the data is completely up to the user. Efergy [5]
is another example of an Energy Management system with
no major Energy Awareness abilities, but with support for
remotely controlled smart sockets.
On the other hand, the systems from Vivint [6], Honey-
Well [7] and TaHomA [8] are Home Automation oriented sys-
tems that are not capable of measuring energy consumptions.
Savant [9] and Alarm.com [10] systems merge Home
Automation and Energy Management features into a single
product. However, they are only capable of processing energy
measurements from appliances, therefore they have no support
for household smart meters. Additionally, and except for the
activity pattern feature from [10] that can alert the user to his
energy consumptions, either when he is at home or away, there
is also no major focus on Energy Awareness and no energy
data mining intelligent components.
Regarding Energy Awareness systems, AlertMe [11] is
capable of pre-processing the measured consumption data, but
has no Home Automation capabilites, having control only over
smart meters and heating systems.
With a different perspective, Cloogy [12] is an Energy
Management, Home Automation and Energy Awareness sys-
tem. However, it is not developed with interoperability in mind,
lacking the support to open communication standards and is
only able to interface with Cloogy devices. The same happens
with DEHEMS [13], a Framework Project 7 (FP7) project that
use ”current cost” devices [14] [15] and focus an important part
of its work on HCI and on system intelligence [16].
Finally, Energy@Home [17] is a Home Automation and
Energy Management system supporting the ZigBee Home
Automation standard, providing Energy Awareness features,
i.e., it is a system that comprises all the aforementioned
technologies. When compared to the EnAware system, it differs
in the way the system intelligence is used. For example,
while Energy@Home, along with the load shift dependent on
demand response and ﬂoating tariffs, is more focused on the
distance between the current consumption and the contracted
power, or the current total energy cost and a predeﬁned
maximum value [18], the EnAware system is more focused on
ﬁnding usage patterns and providing suggestions (for instance,
suggesting scenes, detecting standby devices, etc.), as well as
providing scheduling and rules support based, for instance, on
actions on devices or on energy consumption levels.
EnAware, the energy management solution presented in this
document, aims at raising energy consumption awareness and
provides an innovative modular design that enables the easy
inset of new features.
III.
ARCHITECTURE
Energy management technologies are evolving quite fast
and there are a lot of standards, protocols, platforms and
frameworks that need to be considered in order to achieve
some pre-deﬁned goals. The mindset behind the design of this
solution was set in order to come up with a modular prototype
that could easily be adapted to most of the scenarios. The core
services were thought to be ﬂexible enough and the peripheral
modules to be replaceable or easily adapted. At the end, the
system should be easy to set up and use, without compromising
the grand objective: reduce energy consumption.
A. Home Server
1) Technical Details: To minimize the impact of having
extra equipment at home, the Home Server was designed
to run on the smallest device that could be able to meet
the requirements of the project. Therefore, the choice fell on
CuBox [19]. CuBox is an ARM based micro computer with
an approximate power consumption of 3 W, an ARMv7 CPU
running at 800 MHz, and 1 GB of RAM. These processing and
power consumptions characteristics, although quite limited,
were found to be enough for the project. However, the CuBox
lacks on the communication interfaces needed by the EnAware
service, namely ZigBee for the communication with the HAN
devices; PLC for the communication with the power meter;
and Wi-Fi so it can connect wirelessly to the home gateway
(recent versions of CuBox have better speciﬁcations, including
integrated Wi-Fi). To overcome these issues, three external
devices were considered:
• A ZigBee to USB adaptor developed by EFAPEL and
Bosch, connected to one of the available USB ports of
the CuBox.
• The Linksys PLWK400 [20] was used for the PLC
communication with the power meter;
• And the Belkin F7D1102az [21] Wi-Fi to USB adaptor,
connected to the other available USB port of the CuBox.
Regarding the operating system, the choice ended up on
ArchLinux AMR, a lightweight, ﬂexible and minimalist Linux
based operating system for ARM architectures. The EnAware
service was developed in Java, due to its multi-platform
deployment and its association with the OSGi [22] standard,
which was used as the development framework. Opting for
OSGi as the development framework was due to all the
beneﬁts it offers - lightweight, modularity, easy multi-platform
deployment and reusable components with a dynamic life-
cycle. Several implementations of this standard exist, however
the choice fell over Equinox, the reference implementation of
the OSGi framework, which implements all of the mandatory
and most of the optional features of the OSGi R4 speciﬁcation.
This OSGi speciﬁcation describes a dynamic module system
for Java. These modules are called bundles and are possible to
be installed, uninstalled, updated, started and stopped without
interrupting the rest of the service or the Java VM.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Figure 1: EnAware Service Architecture
2) Client Application: The EnAware client application is a
typical AJAX web application built upon a Fraunhofer AICOS
internal Javascript framework based on the Dojo Javascript
Toolkit, HTML5 and CSS. The EnAware web server (Jetty)
has a Java Servlet for each data class and the client-server
interaction follows the REST architecture (Fig. 1).
The design and implementation of the user interface aimed
at meeting two main challenges. One was to provide simple
interaction with all the available features and also a minimalis-
tic but informative visualization of a potential large amount of
data provided by the smart devices. The other was to have a
responsive user interface, which adapts to several hardware
platforms, and which might have diverse screen sizes and,
at the same time, mouse or touch-based interaction. Web
browser based applications are ideal for the latter challenge,
as all the target platforms include a web browser and allows
for multiple clients to be able to use the system without
any per-client software requirements and installation. It is
not a simple process to have an application that addresses a
multitude of platforms, but not being restricted to a particular
system is worth the challenge. When compared with more
targeted applications, some compromises have to be made, for
example, in interaction responsiveness. An effort was made
toward minimizing these shortcomings and take advantage of
what web-based applications can provide.
There is also some minimal care about security. The web
portal is protected with a simple login mechanism.
The user interface has six main pages (Fig. 2). The
”Home”, or landing page, contains a chart displaying the
current total consumption (based on the consumptions read
from the household smart meter), as well as the latest system
notiﬁcations and other shortcuts. The ”Consumption” page
allows the user to have a detailed view about all the collected
consumptions. Several time intervals can be visualized, from
a single day to a whole year, and the consumptions can also
be aggregated by house division or by device. The ”Devices”
page allows the user to control the devices’ status. Most of the
devices can only be turned on or off, but some, like window
blinds and light dimmers, can be controlled with a slider. In
the ”Scenes” page, the user can activate a scene or add new
ones (not to be confused with Zigbee scenes, although they
Figure 2: EnAware User Interface
share the same purpose). Scenes act like shortcuts for device
usage patterns. For instance, in the morning the user might
frequently pull several windows’ electrical blinds up and turn
on the radio and the corridor light. Running a Scene executes
those actions in one step. Scenes can be conﬁgured manually
but the system will also automatically send recommendations
when it detects frequent patterns. In the ”Goals” page, the user
is able to set a monthly consumption goal and check its status.
Finally, ”Messages” is a very simple page where the user can
check all the system’s notiﬁcations.
3) Core Service & Data Analytics: The EnAware service
shares an event-driven architecture, where all the events are
managed and distributed to all modules through an event bus.
Most of the analysis performed have immediate results as
the system receives data from the devices (stream mining),
except cases in which the analysis requires data from an
extended time period (for instance, Energy Efﬁciency Rating
and Goals) and immediate results do not make sense. The
analytic services were divided into three categories - Energy
Measurement Aggregation, Behaviour Analysis and Energy
Efﬁciency Rating.
The aggregation service was created mainly for perfor-
mance reasons. Device measurements are aggregated into
categories, to which they belong as they arrive to the system.
Those categories are Timespan (day, week, month and year),
House Division, Device and Total. This is an alternative to
doing that aggregation when the data is requested. As a simple
example, if the whole consumption from the kitchen is needed,
that data is already pre-processed, so there is no wait for the
whole measurements to be collected and processed.
The behaviour analysis category includes several distinct
services - Device Consumption Anomaly (DCA), Goal and
Scene. Within the DCA service, summary statistics are com-
puted in a stream-like fashion to evaluate if a device is
having an unusual consumption behaviour or some particu-
lar behaviour the user may be interested in detecting. One
of such behaviours is if a device is standby-capable. The
importance of detecting standby-capable devices comes from
its non-negligible contribution to the overall consumption.
According to IEA projections [23], by 2020, 10% of total
appliance electricity consumption in the OECD could be for
standby consumption, although there is a ongoing process
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

to force the manufacturers to limit the standby consumption
of their equipment to 1W (European Commission Regulation
1275/2008), being this limit lowered to 0.5W four years after
the regulation inure. By detecting standby-capable devices and
the most likely hours for them to be in standby mode, the
system is able to suggest the user a schedule to turn them off.
Other behaviours captured by this service are unusually high
consumptions, devices which are on or off during an unusual
schedule and devices which are on for an unusual amount of
time. When such anomaly is detected, a notiﬁcation is sent
to the user and a relevant action upon the related devices is
suggested.
The Goal service simply provides means to estimate if the
energy consumption cost goal set by the user can be met, based
on current and past energy consumption behaviour. The Scene
service runs an implementation of the Frequent Pattern Growth
algorithm, which allows the system to learn which devices are
used within the same time interval. Based on this information,
Scenes are suggested to the user, which can then be accepted
and available for activation.
The Energy Efﬁciency Rating service estimates the energy
efﬁciency class of devices based on European regulations.
Knowing the efﬁciency class of the household appliances
is another important input for energy awareness. A recent
study [24] pointed out that changing to the market’s more
efﬁcient appliances or the elimination/mitigation of standby
consumption can reach up to 48% in savings. This efﬁciency
estimation follows the European regulation as close as possi-
ble, but it was found that it is not feasible to strictly apply the
energy efﬁciency calculation formulas due to their numerous
parameters like, for example, dimensions or certain technical
differences within the same type of appliance, which cannot
be derived from the information available to this system. Even
if the system would ask the user to ﬁll in these parameters,
some would require a detailed knowledge about the appliance’s
features, something that most users do not share. Energy
efﬁciency is estimated by sampling the average consumption
for some time period and extrapolating to the expected time
period of each device class. Some device category’s formulas
might require the device’s consumption over a year assuming
a well deﬁned usage pattern (e.g., Television, 4 hours per
day during 365 days) and others for a speciﬁc operation
(e.g., Washing Machine, standard washing program under full
load). Nevertheless, a more detailed discussion on how this
estimation is done is out of the scope of this document.
B. Zigbee Communication stack
The ZigBee technology is currently applied in several ﬁelds
of the industry, e.g., health care, energy, retailing services
or indoor automation to provide improved mechanisms and
simplicity to ease the remote control and monitoring of activ-
ities or entities. The wide industry support is mainly due to
the many standards developed by the members of the ZigBee
Alliance to target custom applications. To achieve the goals
of EnAware and meet its speciﬁcations, the Home Automation
(HA) public application proﬁle is used to communicate with
all devices across the Home Area Network (HAN). The HA
proﬁle collects the required cluster set, which is a collection
of commands and attributes that together deﬁne a controllable
interface for a speciﬁc functionality, from the ZigBee Cluster
Library (ZCL) for the EnAware application domains: energy
metering, HVAC, switch and level control capabilities.
1) Devices: EFAPEL designed several smart devices, each
with a ZigBee radio, in conformance with the ZigBee Standard
and the HA proﬁle to integrate the required functionalities.
The single and dual-channel devices support one and two
actuators or endpoints, respectively, in which independent
home appliances can be wired to. The level control devices
are capable of producing a variable output to control home
appliances susceptible to level and limit control such as, e.g.,
window shades/blinds or dimmable light ﬁxtures. EFAPEL has
also designed a Zigbee-enabled panel with 4 programmable
buttons, that is typically installed on the walls and can be
used to deﬁne and trigger ZigBee Bindings (ZB), i.e. rules in
the EnAware context, to control multiple devices at the same
time. EFAPEL devices ﬁrmware also provide support for task
scheduling, but do not support ZigBee Scenes (ZS). At the time
of this writing, EFAPEL devices operate as ZigBee Routers
(ZR), which means that they can communicate with each other
by forwarding data. Further developments on device design
will include devices backed by batteries that operate as ZigBee
End Devices (ZED). With regards to the metering capabilities,
EFAPEL devices, due to technical limitations, are not capable
of obtaining consumption readings of independent channels on
dual-channel devices; each reading is always, given an instant
of time or time window, the combined consumption of both
channels.
The Bosch heat pump version, developed within the
EnAware project scope, is an efﬁcient, innovative and sustain-
able solution for sanitary hot water production, which inte-
grates seamlessly into smart energy technology by providing
an integrated energy management system module. Common
to the intelligent devices used in the project, the Bosch heat
pump is equipped with a ZigBee radio, being capable of
reporting energy consumption, reacting to demand response
requests and adapt its energy storage conditions according to
the energy cost. By using the HA proﬁle, that gives support for
the generic features through the mandatory standard clusters
and the HVAC clusters - allowing, e.g., temperature set point,
operation mode, water heating program - some additional
proprietary clusters are used to support the heat pump smart
energy integration enabling such features as: power load de-
ballasting, load shedding, time shifting and dynamic load
adjustment in function of the current tariff. Through these
integrated functionalities, ﬁne-grained control over the heat
pump consumption, at any time of the day, is attained while
keeping uncompromised comfort levels.
2) Home Area Network (HAN):
The typical HAN in
EnAware, depicted in Fig. 3, consists of several smart devices
that talk only with the root network node, the ZigBee Coor-
dinator (ZC), in case of ZEDs or with each other in case of
ZRs for data relaying. The ZC is a USB dongle, developed
by Bosch, using the ZigBee TI EMK [25], based on the TI
CC2531 SoC, that is plugged to the home server and is ﬂashed
with a customized ﬁrmware developed by EFAPEL. EFAPEL
additionaly designed a user-friendly case with a button for the
USB dongle. The setup procedure of adding a new device
to the HAN means unplugging the ZC from the home server,
place it very close to the desired device and pressing the button
to pair with it. The ZC will work at lower power mode when
pairing with a device, otherwise it will pair with undesired
devices that belong to networks in the neighbourhood. When
the ZC is again connected to the home server, the list of the
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

HAN devices will be automatically updated.
Figure 3: EnAware Home Area Network
3) Software layer: The ZigBee OSGi bundle is built in
a modular fashion, consisting of four independent layers each
implementing a bidirectional interface that enables layer cross-
ing throughout the hierarchy. The modular architecture allows
to easily extend the implementation to make the interoperabil-
ity with other proprietary protocols possible, and to create new
types of frames straight from factory methods. Data frames
are exchanged with the ZC over a proprietary manufacturer
protocol, developed by EFAPEL, on top of a serial-over-USB
protocol. To accomplish this, the RXTX open source library
API [26] was used as a broker to load and conﬁgure an
operating system-speciﬁc native library implementation, that
controls the access to the serial link.
The top layer of the hierarchy is the ZigBee service itself,
that directly interfaces with the EnAware System core (ES).
The messages, which are objects that encapsulate the content
of a protocol frame, received from the ZC are processed
here, its data extracted and passed on to the ES. Likewise,
commands from the ES are assembled into manufacturer-
dependent messages and fed to the lower layers. Layer two,
the messaging layer, is responsible for managing both syn-
chronous and asynchronous message exchanging. The protocol
speciﬁes commands that expect an acknowledge response for
validation, and thus requiring synchronization, and others that
do not. Moreover, consumption readings, for instance, are
asynchronous messages because of their sporadic behaviour.
Layer three, the data layer, extracts the payload from the
message, builds a manufacturer-dependent frame and converts
it to a byte buffer. Furthermore, it assembles messages by
parsing raw bytes. Layer four, the serial layer, reads chunks of
bytes from the serial connection data stream buffer and passes
them on to the data layer.
C. Power Metering
One important part of the Home System architecture is its
interface with the household smart power meter (called Energy
Box), which was developed by EFACEC speciﬁcally for this
project. The Energy Box is a smart meter developed having in
mind the requirements of smart grids and related technology.
Its communication interface is based on the ModBus protocol
and uses the TCP [27] frame format.
The Home Server uses the Jamod library [28] (a Java
library that supports all the variations of the ModBus protocol)
to implement all the communication with the Energy Box,
being able to retrieve the total energy consumption, the max-
imum contracted power and the smart grid demand response
events, sending then all this data to upper software layers of
the EnAware service for appropriate processing.
An important issue in the interface between the Home
Server and the Energy Box is the communication medium.
The Energy Box, as any other regular power meter, is usu-
ally installed outside of the house, possibly in a basement
located several meters away from the Home Server. In these
conditions, the use of wireless communication protocols is not
appropriate, due to the interference and communication range
issues that would arise. However, using wired communication
may face other difﬁculties. Some buildings do not offer the
needed infrastructures and therefore modiﬁcations would need
to be done in order to install the link between these two com-
ponents. To overcome these issues, EnAware uses the power
line as the communication medium between the Home Server
and the Energy Box. More precisely, from the available range
of Power Line Communication (PLC) protocols, EnAware uses
HomePlug AV [29], a PLC communication protocol developed
having the home environment in mind.
D. Scalability
The discussion around the scalability of the system must
be done in several dimensions. Due to the limited resources
of the Home Server, the load scalability is therefore restricted
and, although not yet identiﬁed but certainly high, there is
a limit on the number of monitored devices and the related
consumption report period. This can of course be resolved by
using a more powerful server, thanks to the multi-platform
characteristic of the EnAware service. In what it takes to
functional scalability, the modular design of the EnAware
service allows easy integration of new functionalities, which
can be implemented as OSGi bundles, possibly being added
or removed at any time. This means that not only the system
can safely and quickly expand in features but also can easily
widen the support for new devices.
IV.
PERFORMANCE AND RESULTS
Although the project roadmap includes some ﬁeld trials,
at the time of this writing they did not start yet so it is not
possible to reveal some interesting results at this time, namely
quantitative data regarding energy savings.
The system, mainly the Home Server, has been subject to
intensive stress tests in order to assess its performance and
stability. Due to its speciﬁcations, the Home Server is quite
sensible in terms of CPU usage and memory consumption.
The stress tests are composed of several energy consumption
readings (30 devices reporting each 5 seconds) and GUI
operations per second made by dummy devices. Thanks to
a remote monitoring subsystem, we were able to follow to
evolution of these indicators and, although they quickly reach
the limits of CPU and memory capacity, they kept quite stable
over time and the Home Server has been able to run smoothly
without any interruption. The major overhead found is related
to the persistence layer. The use of JPA with an H2 embedded
database is found to be heavy for such a low-power server
and if the number of events to be processed is unusually
high, the system easily reaches its processing limit. Also, if
the number of objects in the database is extremely large, the
analytics subsystem also demands a lot of CPU and memory.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

These issues, under extreme circumstances, may have impact
on user experience while using the web portal since some
lag and longer response times will be noticed. Since new
versions of CuBox are currently available, which feature better
speciﬁcations, it is expected that the EnAware service can
support a higher throughput of events.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
As mentioned in this document, EnAware, apart from being
an ordinary energy monitoring and management tool, has a
special focus on energy awareness by implementing some
features in a way that would allow the user to not only have a
clear, detailed and intuitive view of the energy consumption,
but also to be continuously engaged in optimizing it, reducing
costs and helping our planet. Also, the beneﬁts of using the
OSGi model, like the support for pluggable data analysis
engines, are characteristics that distinguish EnAware from the
currently available energy management systems.
Some ideas and features were already identiﬁed as future
work. They can easily be added to the system by taking advan-
tage of using an OSGi model. Top priority goes to completing
the support for smartgrids, namely the support for smart tariffs
and demand-side management. There is the need to widen
the array of supported Zigbee devices, also adding support
for more Zigbee proﬁles and more home automation features.
Also, the service is in need of a better user management
system, enabling a multi-level access control system that could
allow, for instance, having some users restricted to just being
able to control a subset of devices or house divisions. The
concept of rules is also targeted for expansion, adding support
for rules having the energy consumption as trigger. Although
the system provides a web portal that can be accessed by any
web-enabled device (Desktop/Laptop or any mobile device),
it is planned the integration of an LCD display that will be
somehow connected to the home server and is also available
to display a quick view of the overall energy consumption, as
well as some alerts or messages.
VI.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Fraunhofer Portugal team would like to acknowledge
all the support and intensive work from the all the partners
in the consortium, as well as the ﬁnancial support from
COMPETE/QREN/EU.
REFERENCES
[1]
Aerodyno Inc. wattvision - real-time energy monitoring sensors and
software for business and homes. http://www.wattvision.com/ [Re-
trieved: 12-2013].
[2]
PowerWatch. Powerwatch - home energy management system hems.
http://powerwatch.com/ [Retrieved: 12-2013].
[3]
Tendril. Changing the way world uses energy - tendril. http://www.
tendrilinc.com/ [Retrieved: 12-2013].
[4]
Halifax.
Power
cost
monitor
-
electricity
usage.
http://www.
bluelineinnovations.com/ [Retrieved: 12-2013].
[5]
Efergy Technologies Limited. Home of energy monitors, energy meters
and electricity monitors. http://efergy.com/ [Retrieved: 12-2013].
[6]
Vivint, Inc. Home automation, home security and solar energy systems.
http://www.vivint.com/en/ [Retrieved: 12-2013].
[7]
Honeywell International Inc. Honeywell - global technology leader
in energy efﬁciency, clean energy generation, safety & security, and
globalization. https://honeywell.com/Pages/Home.aspx [Retrieved: 12-
2013].
[8]
Somfy Systems, Inc. Tahoma home automation system - affordable
home control by somfy. http://www.somfytahoma.com/ [Retrieved: 12-
2013].
[9]
Savant Systems LLC. Home automation control systems - commercial
building automation and intelligent control. http://www.savantsystems.
com/ [Retrieved: 12-2013].
[10]
Alarm.com. About alarm.com - interactive security systems, home alarm
monitoring. http://www.alarm.com/about/about alarm.aspx [Retrieved:
12-2013].
[11]
AlertMe. Alertme. https://www.alertme.com/ [Retrieved: 12-2013].
[12]
ISA - Intelligent Sensing Anywhere, S.A.,. Cloogy. http://www.cloogy.
com/en/ [Retrieved: 12-2013].
[13]
DEHEMS Project. Dehems. http://www.dehems.eu/ [Retrieved: 12-
2013].
[14]
Current Cost. Current cost - reducing your energy bills so you can live
a greener life. http://www.currentcost.com/ [Retrieved: 12-2013].
[15]
J.
Cooper.
D5.3
meter
and
network
plan.
http://www.dehems.
eu/cms/wp-content/uploads/2009/10/dehems deliverable d53.pdf [Re-
trieved: 12-2013].
[16]
K.-M. Chao, N. Shah, A. Matei, T. Zlamaniec, W. Li, C.-C. Lo,
and Y. Li, “Intelligent interactive system for collaborative green
computing.” in CSCWD, W. Shen, J.-P. A. Barth`es, J. Luo, P. G.
Kropf, M. Pouly, J. Yong, Y. Xue, and M. P. Ramos, Eds.
IEEE,
2011, pp. 690–697. [Online]. Available: http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/
cscwd/cscwd2011.html#ChaoSMZLLL11
[17]
Energy@home. http://www.energy-home.it [Retrieved: 12-2013].
[18]
Energy@home. Energy@home - use cases. www.energy-home.it/
Documents/Technical%20Speciﬁcations/Energy@Home%20Use%
20Cases v 1 2.pdf [Retrieved: 12-2013].
[19]
SolidRun. Cubox. http://www.solid-run.com/cubox [Retrieved: 12-
2013].
[20]
Linksys. Linksys plwk400 - powerline av wireless network extender
kit. http://www.linksys.com/en-mea/products/powerline/PLWK400 [Re-
trieved: 12-2013].
[21]
Belkin International,Inc. N150 micro wireless usb adapter. http:
//www.belkin.com/uk/support-product?pid=01t80000002K6MVAA0
[Retrieved: 12-2013].
[22]
OSGi Alliance. Osgi alliance. http://www.osgi.org/Main/HomePage
[Retrieved: 12-2013].
[23]
International Energy Agency, Cool Appliances: Policy Strategies
for Energy-Efﬁcient Homes, ser. Energy Efﬁciency Policy Proﬁles
Series.
OECD,
Organisation
for
Economic
Co-operation
and
Development, 2003. [Online]. Available: http://books.google.pt/books?
id=tSpPAAAAMAAJ
[24]
ECEEE 2009 Summer Study : Act! Innovate! Deliver! Reducing energy
demand sustainably.
European Council for an Energy Efﬁcient
Economy (ECEEE), 2009.
[25]
“TI CC2531 Evalutation Module Kit,” Texas Instruments product. http:
//www.ti.com/tool/cc2531emk [Retrieved: 12-2013].
[26]
T. Jarvi et al. RXTX Library. http://rxtx.qbang.org [Retrieved: 12-2013].
[27]
Modbus-IDA.org.
Modbus
messaging
on
tcp/ip
implementation
guide
v1.0b.
http://www.modbus.org/docs/Modbus Messaging
Implementation Guide V1 0b.pdf [Retrieved: 12-2013].
[28]
jamod team. Java modbus library (jamod). http://jamod.sourceforge.net/
[Retrieved: 12-2013].
[29]
HomePlug Powerline Alliance, Inc. Homeplug av white paper. http:
//www.homeplug.org/tech/whitepapers/HPAV-White-Paper 050818.pdf
[Retrieved: 12-2013].
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

