A Matrix Model For An Energy Management System Based On Multi-Carrier 
Energy Hub Approach 
 
Diego Arnone, Massimo Bertoncini,                
Giuseppe Paternò, Alessandro Rossi 
Research and Development Laboratory 
Engineering Ingegneria Informatica S.p.A. 
Palermo, Italy 
e-mail: diego.arnone@eng.it, massimo.bertoncini@eng.it, 
giuseppe.paterno@eng.it, alessandro.rossi@eng.it 
 
 
Mariano Giuseppe Ippolito,  
Eleonora Riva Sanseverino, Gaetano Zizzo 
Dipartimento di Energia, Ingegneria dell’Informazione e 
Modelli Matematici (DEIM) 
Università degli Studi di Palermo 
Palermo, Italy 
e-mail: marianogiuseppe.ippolito@unipa.it,  
eleonora.rivasanseverino@unipa.it, gaetano.zizzo@unipa.it 
 
Sandra Elizabeth Jenkins 
Engineering Systems Division, Technology and Policy Program ‘14 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology  
Cambridge, MA, USA 
e-mail: sandjenkins@gmail.com  
 
Abstract—The INGRID FP7 European co-funded project 
studies several methodologies concerning hydrogen production 
and storage, aiming to provide services to electricity system 
operators for suitably balancing electrical supply and demand. 
In such a context, the problem of integrating different carriers 
into a single multi-hub optimiser represents a challenging topic 
for the research. This paper depicts the Energy Management 
System (EMS) of the plant which will be developed and built as 
a prototype of the INGRID system. The approach followed for 
the EMS design and development takes the cue from the 
matrix model presented in the rest of the paper, as well as the 
general optimisation problem formulation and the algorithm 
selected for its solution. 
Keywords-hydrogen solid-state storage; multi-carrier energy 
hub; matrix modelling; multi-objective optimisation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Last two decades have been characterized by the 
restructuring of vertically integrated energy systems towards 
liberalized markets, and by the increase of small distributed 
generation technologies and non-traditional energy carriers. 
At the same time, information and communication 
technology (ICT) equipment, like SCADA devices, data 
acquisition centres and control systems, have been the focus 
of development in order to provide better services for energy 
systems and devices. Furthermore, the growing awareness of 
the impacts of pollution has led to increased interest in 
sustainability, and environmentalism within governmental 
organizations, 
following 
the 
concept 
of 
sustainable 
development in order to increase “green” energy sources and 
reduce the emission of CO2 in the atmosphere.  
These changes in the energy systems, especially in 
electric power grids, are forcing the system operators, i.e., 
Distribution Service Operators (DSOs) and Transmission 
Service Operators (TSOs), to manage and operate their 
networks in new ways. Thus, it seems reasonable for future 
development on innovation within the existing infrastructure, 
to reuse it as much and as long as possible, by means of 
studying and designing new energy technologies and 
facilities. The INGRID FP7 European co-funded project [1]-
[6] is studying several solutions concerning hydrogen 
storage, aiming to suitably balance electrical supply and 
demand. The proposed integrated approach for the INGRID 
system involves combining a solid-state high-density 
hydrogen storage system with advanced solutions for smart 
distribution grids, electrical power grids and methane 
pipeline networks. A concrete demonstrator will be 
implemented in Troia (Puglia, Italy), which will operate as 
an implementation and proof of concept of the overall 
INGRID system. 
The possibility of planning and operating this kind of 
hybrid systems bridges both technical and economic 
demands, such as DSO requests, ancillary services, and, 
above all, price signals from energy markets. 
In Section II, the structure of the INGRID system and its 
components are defined; in Section III, the concept of multi-
carrier energy hub is introduced and adapted to the INGRID 
system structure; Section IV, depicts the proposed matrix 
model for the INGRID system and the related equations; 
Section V, is focused on the control algorithm chosen for the 
EMS implementation; in Section VI, the conclusions are 
given. 
II. 
THE INGRID PROJECT SYSTEM 
A. System structure and working conditions 
The structure of the system proposed inside the INGRID 
Project is composed by a Renewable Energy Source (RES) 
power generation plant (PV and/or windmill), an Electric 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Vehicle Recharge Station (EVRS), a Water Electrolyser 
(WE) with its AC/DC conversion device, a Fuel Cell (FC) 
with its DC/AC conversion device and an innovative 
Hydrogen Solid-state Storage System (HSS). This grid is 
connected to the Medium Voltage grid (MV, 20 kV) and the 
Low Voltage grid (LV, 0.4 kV). Figure 1 shows the block 
diagram of the system [5]. 
 
Figure 1. Block diagram of the INGRID system. 
One of the most particular features of this system is the 
brand new hydrogen storage technology based on 
magnesium 
hydride, 
which 
offers 
several 
practical 
advantages: it adsorbs and desorbs hydrogen at a constant 
pressure, the high-temperature metal hydride and the low 
temperature metal hydride have similar dissociation 
pressures (a feature that allows the process to be self-
regulating), and the hydrogen solid-state storage has the 
capability to store more hydrogen per mass unit than gas and 
liquid storage forms [17][18]. 
The WE can absorb electric power both from the MV 
grid and RES plant. The hydrogen produced by the WE may 
be sent either to the hydrogen market or to the methane 
distribution network (as considered in [19]), forming a so 
called “Open Loop” (OL). Otherwise, the hydrogen may be 
used to re-obtain electricity by means of the FC, in order to 
create a “Closed Loop” (CL). The EVRS can be supplied 
either from the internal RES plant, or directly from the MV 
grid or the FC generator; the EVRS is managed by an 
Intelligent Dispenser (ID). These power flows are outlined in 
Figure 1. The possibility of providing ancillary services 
directly to the LV grid, by means of the internal RES and/or 
the FC is being experimented. 
A key aspect of the INGRID system is the close 
collaboration with the DSO for the general balance of the 
grid. For example, the DSO may request a power injection in 
the MV or LV feeder to facilitate their system operations. 
This could include delivering ancillary services, as well as 
balancing the consumption and generation of power, 
especially when the risk of power reverse flow occurs to the 
TSO network (very common in regions characterized by 
huge levels of RES production). In all these cases, an 
INGRID based plant would respond according to the 
availability of power and storage capacity, to fulfil the 
incoming requests, while keeping in mind its own strategic 
objectives. This goes beyond the already existing storage 
systems mainly composed of devices directly controlled by 
the network operators, and promotes a new form of 
collaboration and negotiation between the plant and the 
DSO, as well as the energy market. 
B. INGRID demonstrator 
The INGRID Project comprises the design and 
development of a demonstrator prototype, which is planned 
to be deployed in Troia (Puglia, Italy). The WE maximum 
rated power is equal to 1152 kW, the FC nominal power is 
90 kW, the hydrogen storage capacity of the CL tank is equal 
to 25 kg of hydrogen, while the OL tanks has a total 
capability of 900 kg of hydrogen (450 kg in use, 450 kg as 
reserve). The CL storage system has better performances 
than the OL, because of its technological features, e.g., 
specifically the Phase Change Material (PCM) and the heat 
management unit, that allow higher efficiency if the stored 
energy is effectively used within few hours. Otherwise, the 
more capacious yet less efficient OL tanks can be used 
instead.  
The prototype will be connected to a MV primary 
substation (150 kV/20 kV) and will absorb electricity from 
the electric grid as a flexible load from 0.365 to 1.2 MW. As 
a variable generator (0-90 kW), the plant will be connected 
to a low voltage power line. The main difference between 
traditional auxiliary storage systems, entirely controllable by 
the DSO, and the proposed one is that the INGRID system is 
intended to collaborate with DSO, rather than being directly 
commanded, to optimize its power consumption and 
generation according to several possible custom strategies, 
(e.g., to maximise the economical incoming of the plant, to 
minimise the carbon emissions, to follow the DSO profile, 
etc., or a combination of several strategies). For this reason, 
the multi objective optimisation can represent a promising 
approach to address the problem.    
III. 
MULTI-CARRIER ENERGY HUB 
As reported in the introduction, the development of 
modern energy systems is focused on defining  hybrid 
structures involving various energy carriers. Therefore, this 
paper presents a hybrid and integrated multi-carrier energy 
system. The multi-carrier energy hub is defined as a “hybrid 
energy system which interfaces between energy producers, 
consumers and the transportation infrastructure” [7]. In 
Figure 2, an example of a possible multi-carrier energy hub 
is shown. 
 
 
Figure 2. Example hub with gas turbine, heat exchanger, gas tank and heat 
storage [7]. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
Figure 3. Flow chart of the proposed INGRD system. 
 
[
 
 
 
 
 LH2
Le,LV
Le,ID
Le,MV]
 
 
 
 
 
=
[
 
 
 
 
 
(1-f)vηRηWE(1-q)cF
(1-f)vηRηWE(1-q)
eOL
0
(1-f)vηRηWEηFCηIzqcF
(1-f)vηRηWEηFCηIzq
0
eCLz
(1-f)[vηRηWEηFCηI(1-z)q+(1-v)]cF
(1-f)[vηRηWEηFCηI(1-z)q+(1-v)]
0
eCL(1-z)
fcF
f
0
0
]
 
 
 
 
 
∙
[
 
 
 
 
 Pe,MV
Pe,RES
ĖOL
ĖCL ]
 
 
 
 
 
 . 
(1) 
 
 
G. Andersson et al. [7]-[11] have proposed a matrix 
modelling approach for the entire hybrid system, even with 
storage devices inside. Through this model, the conversion 
and storage stages of multiple energy carriers may be 
represented generally and comprehensively. Furthermore, the 
matrix-based approach is appropriate to use in the 
formulation of optimisation problems and allows easy 
implementation 
of 
complex 
optimisation 
algorithms. 
Accordingly, a model of the INGRID hybrid system using 
the approach briefly explained above (whose complete 
description is available in the referenced works) is proposed 
in the next section. 
IV. 
MATRIX-BASED MODEL FOR INGRID SYSTEM 
The system proposed by the INGRID Project can be 
modelled through the matrix-based approach introduced in 
the previous section: the final aggregate instantiation is a 
multi-carrier energy system that involves both electricity and 
hydrogen; this model also permits dealing with storage 
devices, and so it is perfectly suitable for the system 
purposes. 
A graphical representation is depicted, in terms of a flow 
chart reporting all the devices working in the INGRID 
system, in Figure 3. 
In this flow chart, the different “Pi” denote the input 
carriers of the system, which are the electric powers coming 
from the MV grid and RES internal to the plant; the different 
“Lj”, in their turn, denote the output carriers considered as 
loads. These are: (i) the possible electric power injection in 
the MV feeder; (ii) the hydrogen flow toward  the specific 
market, (iii) the electric power sent to the LV grid and (iv) 
the electric power used for supplying the EVRS through the 
ID. The WE and the FC are considered, respectively, with 
their AC/DC and DC/AC conversion devices. Eventually, the 
HSSs, for both OL and CL, are modelled by their own 
blocks. 
The flow chart presents dispatching factors whenever a 
flow line splits in two different paths (cf. “f”, “v”, “q” and 
“z” in Figure 3). These factors allow the definition of the 
amount of energy sent to one process or another. All of them 
can assume a value between 0 and 1. 
For instance, the factor “q” fixes how many kilograms of 
hydrogen per second flow in the OL or in the CL tanks.  
The relationships between different energy carriers can 
be directly deduced by the flow chart and can be expressed 
through a matrix equation (1). 
In this matrix model, each device is represented by its 
instantaneous efficiency “ηi”; the storage system contribution 
is represented by the parameters “eOL” and “eCL”, that can be 
seen as the forward or reverse energy efficiencies of the 
whole storage system, depending on their working state: 
 
 
eOL= 
{
 
 -eOL
+
1
eOL
⁄ -
        
charging
discharging
 
(2)
 
eCL= 
{
 
 
-eCL
+
1
eCL
⁄ -
∙ ηFCηI        
charging
discharging
 . 
(3)  
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

These parameters will be multiplied by Ėα (where α = 
OL, CL) that corresponds to the internal flow of the device, 
assumed to be the time derivative of the stored energy. 
The “cF” coefficient allows the model to provide the 
possible plant configurations, depending on the DSO 
requests: (i) for the plant as a power consumer, and (ii) for 
the plant as a power producer when a possible power 
injection into the MV feeder is requested by the DSO. When 
cF=1 and f=0, the entire system is supplied both by the grid 
and the RES plant; if cF=0 and f≠0, the power produced by 
the internal RES plant is enough to supply the INGRID 
system and also to send power to the MV grid (e.g., if f=0.4, 
the 40% of the RES power is sent to MV grid and 60% is 
sent to the storage systems). Finally, the system equations for 
both the described conditions can be derived;  
 if cF=1 and f=0: 
 
LH2= (Pe,MV+Pe,RES)vηRηWE(1-q)+ĖOLeOL 
(4.1) 
 
Le,LV= (Pe,MV+Pe,RES)vηRηWEηFCηIzq+ĖCLeCLz (4.2) 
Le,ID= (Pe,MV+Pe,RES)[vηRηWEηFCηI(1-z)q+(1-v)]+ 
 
+ĖCLeCL(1-z) 
(4.3) 
 
Le,MT=0; 
(4.4) 
 if cF=0 and f≠0: 
 
LH2=Pe,RES(1-f)vηRηWE(1-q)+ĖOLeOL 
(5.1) 
 
Le,LV=Pe,RES(1-f)vηRηWEηFCηIzq+ĖCLeCLz 
(5.2) 
 
Le,ID=Pe,RES(1-f)[vηRηWEηFCηI(1-z)q+(1-v)]+ 
 
 
+ĖCLeCL(1-z) 
(5.3) 
 
Le,MV=Pe,RESf. 
(5.4) 
V. 
MULTI-OBJECTIVE OPTIMISATION ALGORITHM FOR 
EMS STRUCTURE 
By means of the proposed matrix-based model, the 
operating conditions of the INGRID system can be simulated 
and, thus, all the energy flows of each carrier of the system 
can be calculated. The INGRID EMS has to indicate the 
most suitable configuration of all the devices, sending an 
optimal working set-point to the local control units of each 
device. 
The logic control criteria are defined by the EMS in order 
to meet one or more objectives, which are expressed by one 
or more functions depending on the operating conditions of 
the system. The most common objective functions [15], 
which the optimisation problems are referred to, are: 
• 
the total generation cost of the whole supplied 
power; 
• 
the energy losses in the grid; 
• 
the total polluting emissions of the system. 
This kind of problem can be solved with multi-objective 
optimisation, which optimises several objective functions 
simultaneously. In such a kind of problem, there is not a 
unique optimal solution, but a set of suitable solutions fitting 
the user’s goals; these are approximated solutions that can be 
very near to the ideal solution of an optimisation problem. 
Assuming that fi(X) are k different objective functions, 
the multi-objective problem is defined [16] as minimizing 
the vector of functions: 
  
F(X)=[f1(X), …, fk(X)]T 
(6) 
which is subject to a set of inequality constraints, defined as: 
 
gi(X)≤0 
i=1, …, m 
(7) 
and a set of equality constraints, defined as: 
 
hj(X)=0 
j=1, …, p. 
(8) 
The decision variables are the numerical values which 
are expected to be chosen, as solutions, by the multi-
objective optimisation. They are the independent variables of 
the objective functions and are used to minimise them; they 
are represented as the vector: 
 
X=[x1, …, xn]T 
X. 
(9) 
where  is a n-dimensional vector space and represent 
the set of the feasible region of X. 
The INGRID system EMS relies upon the optimisation of 
a costs-benefit objective function [5] which refers to the 
purchase of electrical energy from the MV grid and to the 
sale of the produced hydrogen, the provision of ancillary 
services to the LV grid and the supply of the ID. A second 
fundamental objective function refers to the collaboration 
with the DSO: one of the goals of the system is following the 
power consumption profile requested by the DSO (which, in 
turn, is calculated by the DSO for overall grid system 
balancing) in order to achieve an economic discount on the 
energy acquisition price. Indirectly, this goal connects the 
contribution of the plant to the stability of the whole smart 
grid. A third possible objective function can involve the 
reduction of Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions, which is still 
under investigation. 
Some of the problem’s inequality constraints are fixed by 
the electrical power and hydrogen minimum/maximum rated 
values. Other constraints are related to the state of the 
storage devices, in order to avoid the production of hydrogen 
when the HSSs are not able to store it. The only equality 
constraint on the system is defined by the total produced 
hydrogen volume during the optimisation time horizon. 
Such multi-objective optimisation can be resolved 
through heuristic algorithms [12]-[14], because of the non-
linear nature of the objective functions. Previous works of 
the INGRID Project [5][6] have tested some heuristic 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

algorithms, such as Generalized Reduced Gradient (GRG), 
Simulated Annealing (SA) and Tabu Search (TS) towards a 
simplified formulation of the optimisation problem, which 
have been used to deal with a mono-objective function 
related to the economic benefits for the system owner. 
The appointed algorithm in order to manage the control 
issue of EMS is the Non-dominated Sorting Genetic 
Algorithm-II (NSGA-II) [13][14]. The algorithm is based on 
Pareto-dominance 
and 
Pareto-optimality, 
which 
are 
fundamental concepts in multi-objective optimisation. A 
solution X ∈ Ω is said to be Pareto-optimal with respect to Ω 
if and only if there is no X’ ∈ Ω for which 
 
v=F(X')=[f1(X'), …, fk(X')]T 
(10) 
dominates 
 
u=F(X')=[f1(X'), …, fk(X')]T. 
(11) 
A vector 
 
u=[f1(X'), …, fk(X')]T 
(12) 
is said to dominate another vector 
 
v=[f1(X'), …, fk(X')]T 
(13) 
(denoted by u ⪯ v) if and only if u is partially less than v, 
i.e., 
 
∀i∈{1,…, k}, ui≤vi ∧ ∃i∈{1,…, k}:ui<vi. 
(14) 
Therefore, the Pareto-optimal Set, P*, is defined as: 
 
P*≔{X∈ |¬∃ X'∈ F(X')⪯F(X)}. 
(15) 
 Some recent papers [19]-[26] have proved that the 
NSGA-II is quite efﬁcient, especially in the ﬁeld of power 
distribution operation and planning. 
This genetic algorithm separates and orders the 
population (the set of whole individuals) following a 
criterion based on non-dominance: individuals which are not 
dominated by any other individual are labelled with a higher 
rank; individuals that do not dominate any other individual 
have a lower rank. By means of a Binary Tournament 
Selection, individuals with the best rank are chosen to be the 
parents of the next generation. Following the analogy with 
the biological phenomena, crossover and mutation actions 
are performed on the selected elements, through a Simulated 
Binary Crossover and Polinomial Mutation [14]. Now, the 
parent and the child population are mixed and only the best 
N individuals are chosen for the next generation, where N is 
the population size. This is one of the most important 
features of the NSGA-II, called “elitism”, which avoids 
possible losses of valuable solutions. 
The algorithm results are an entire population of Pareto-
optimal solutions. An important component of the EMS in 
INGRID will be its Decision Support System (DSS). This 
subsystem allows the set-point configuration of all devices of 
INGRID system to be chosen. Such a choice can be done 
either manually by a human operator who supervises the 
plant, or automatically by a decision maker algorithm which 
autonomously sets the operating configuration, choosing it 
from the feasible solutions provided by optimisation 
algorithm. The DSS will be designed once the demonstrator 
infrastructure is physically realised. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, the problem of managing a multi-carrier 
energy hub has been discussed. The problem arises when 
other products, such as hydrogen, are used to store and later 
re-use the electrical energy flowing from the network, 
virtually decoupling the electrical side from the other. The 
concept analysed in depth, which will be implemented on a 
test site in the INGRID FP7 project, is a very promising 
approach for extending the concept of a multi-carrier energy 
hub to include other industrial intermediate products in 
process industry. This paper, in particular, has introduced the 
possibility to use multi-objective optimisation approaches to 
solve the problem in a more complete way, finding solutions 
that provide the fulfilment of other objectives than just the 
costs minimization. In the future, a comprehensive study will 
be performed on the economical sustainability of the entire 
system, exploiting the results of the implementation of 
algorithms over the multi-objective function optimisation. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is part of the INGRID project, co-funded by 
the European Commission within the FP7 Framework 
Programme. Authors thank the members of the INGRID 
Consortium as well as the European Commission for 
supporting any project dissemination activities. This work 
reflects only the authors’ views. The Commission is not 
liable for any use that may be made of the information 
contained therein. 
REFERENCES 
[1] INGRID (High-Capacity Hydrogen-Based Green-Energy 
Storage Solutions for Grid Balancing) EU FP7 Project: 
http://www.ingridproject.eu/ [retrieved: January, 2015]. 
[2] D. Arnone et al., “An ICT-based Energy Management System 
to Integrate Renewable Energy and Storage for Grid 
Balancing,” ACM e-Energy ‘13, May 2013, pp. 259-260, 
doi:10.1145/2487166.2487196. 
[3] A. Rossi, D. Arnone, M. Bertoncini, and D. Moneta, “Sistema 
di gestione energetico innovativo con stoccaggio a idrogeno 
per l’integrazione di fonti rinnovabili a supporto del 
bilanciamento della rete,” AEIT 2013, October 2013. 
[4] D. Arnone et al., “Energy Management in a Smart Grid-
integrated Hydrogen-based Storage - Electric Grid balancing 
when integrating large-capacity Renewable Energy sources,” 
IARIA ENERGY 2014,April 2014, pp. 86-89. 
[5] R. Proietto et al., “Mixed Heuristic-Non Linear Optimisation 
of Energy Management for Hydrogen Storage-based Multi 
Carrier Hub,” IEEE International Energy Conference 
(ENERGYCON), 
May 
2014, 
pp. 
1019-1026, 
doi:10.1109/ENERGYCON.2014.6850550.  
[6] R. Proietto et al., “A Novel Heuristics-Based Energy 
Management System For A Multi-Carrier Hub Enriched With 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Solid Hydrogen Storage,” ACM e-Energy ’14, June 2014, pp. 
231-232, doi:10.1145/2602044.2602081. 
[7] M. Geidl, “Integrated Modeling and Optimisation of Multi-
Carrier Energy System,” Swiss Federal Institute of 
Technology (ETH), Power Systems Laboratory, Zurich, 
Switzerland, 2007. 
[8] G. Andersson and M. Geidl, “A modelling and optimisation 
approach for multiple energy carrier power flow,” Power 
Tech, 
2005 
IEEE 
Russia, 
June 
2005, 
pp. 
1-7, 
doi:10.1109/PTC.2005.4524640. 
[9] M. Geidl, G. Koeppel, P. Favre-Perrod, B. Klöckl, G. 
Andersson, and K. Fröhlich, “The energy hub - A powerful 
concept for future energy systems,” Third Annual Carnegie 
Mellon Conference on the Electricity Industry, March 2007, 
pp. 1-10. 
[10] M. Arnold and G. Andersson, “Decomposed electricity and 
natural 
gas 
optimal 
power 
flow,” 
Power 
Systems 
Computation Conference (PSCC), July 2008, pp. 1-7. 
[11] M. Arnold, R.R. Negenborn, G. Andersson, and B. De 
Schutter, “Multi-area predictive control for combined 
electricity and natural gas systems,” Proceedings of the 
European Control Conference 2009, August 2009, pp. 1408-
1413. 
[12] N. Kokash, “An introduction to heuristic algorithms,” 
University of Trento, Department of Informatics and 
Telecommunications, Italy, 2005. 
[13] K. Deb, S. Agrawal, A Pratap, and T.A. Meyarivan, “Fast 
elitist non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm for multi-
objective 
optimisation: 
NSGA-II,” 
Lecture 
Notes 
in 
Computer Science, vol. 1917, pp. 849-858, September 2000. 
[14] A. Seshadri, “A Fast Elitist Multiobjective Genetic 
Algorithm: NSGA-II,” 2008, http://www.mathworks.com 
[retrieved: January, 2015]. 
[15] M.G. Ippolito, M.L. Di Silvestre, E. Riva Sanseverino, G. 
Zizzo, 
and 
G. 
Graditi, 
“Multi-objective 
optimized 
management of electrical energy storage systems in an 
islanded network with renewable energy sources under 
different design scenarios,” Energy, vol. 64, no. 1, January 
2014, pp. 648-662, doi:10.1016/j.energy.2013.11.065. 
[16] C.A. Coello, D.A.V. Veldhuizen, and G.B. Lamont, 
“Evolutionary 
algorithms 
for 
solving 
multi-objective 
problems,” New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, 
2002. 
[17] D. N. Harries, M. Paskevicius, D. A. Sheppard, T. E. C. Price, 
and C. E. Buckley, “Concentrating solar thermal heat storage 
using metal hydrides,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 100, 
February 
2012, 
pp. 
539-549, 
doi:0.1109/JPROC.2011.2158509. 
[18] M. Fruchart and D. Jehan, “McPhy-Energy’s Proposal for 
Solid State Hydrogen Storage Materials and Systems,” 
Journal of Alloys and Compounds, vol. 580, 15 December 
2013, 
April 
2013, 
pp. 
343–348, 
doi:doi:10.1016/j.jallcom.2013.03.266. 
[19] D. Haeseldonckx and W. D’haeseleer, “The use of the 
natural-gas pipeline infrastructure for hydrogen transport in a 
changing 
market 
structure,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Hydrogen Energy, vol. 32, no. 10-11, August 2007, pp. 1381-
1386, doi:6:5738e59. 
[20] B.F. Hobbs and F.A.M. Rijkers, “Modeling strategic 
generator behavior with conjectured transmission price 
responses 
in 
a 
mixed 
transmission 
pricing 
system: 
formulation,” IEEE Transaction Power Systems, vol. 19, June 
2004, pp. 707-717, doi:10.1109/PES.2004.1373030. 
[21] R.P.J. Benvindo, A.M. Cossi, and J.R.S. Mantovani 
“Multiobjective short-term planning of electric power 
distribution systems using NSGA-II,” Journal of Control, 
Automation and Electrical Systems, vol. 24, issue 3, June 
2013, pp 286-299, doi: 10.1007/s40313-013-0022-5. 
[22] B. Tomoiaga, M. Chindris, A. Sumper, A. Sudria-Andreu, and 
R. Villafaﬁla-Robles, “Pareto optimal reconﬁguration of 
power distribution systems using a Genetic algorithm based 
on NSGA-II,” Energies 6, no. 3, March 2013, pp. 1439-1455, 
doi:10.3390/en6031439. 
[23] H. Xianchao and G.A. Taylor, “Service restoration of 
distribution systems based on NSGA-II,” Universities power 
Engineering conference (UPEC), September 2010, pp.1-6. 
[24] D. Buoro, M. Casisi, A. De Nardi, P. Pinamonti, and P. Reini, 
“Multicriteria optimisation of a distributed energy supply 
system for an industrial area,” Energy, vol. 53, September 
2013, pp. 128-137, doi:10.1016/j.energy.2012.12.003. 
[25] S. Özyöna, H. Temurtas, B. Durmus, and G. Kuvat, “Charged 
system search algorithm for emission constrained economic 
power dispatch problem,” Energy, vol. 46, issue 1, October 
2012, pp. 420–430, doi:10.1016/j.energy.2012.08.008.  
[26] S. Wu, Z. Yu, X. Feng, G. Liu, C. Deng, and K.H. Chu, 
“Optimisation of reﬁnery hydrogen distribution systems 
considering the number of compressors,” Energy, vol. 62, 
December 
2013, 
pp. 
185–195, 
doi:10.1016/j.energy.2013.09.041. 
 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

