Ubiquitous Smart Grid Control Solution 
based on a Next Generation Network as Integration Platform
 
Robin Acker, Nicolas Buchmann, Thorsten Fugmann, Christopher Knöll, Maximilian Porzelt  
and Michael Massoth 
Department of Computer Science  
Hochschule Darmstadt University of Applied Sciences  
Darmstadt, Germany  
e-mail: nextfactor@h-da.de, michael.massoth@h-da.de 
 
Abstract—This paper describes the architecture of an 
ubiquitous control solution for smart grids, distributed process 
control nodes, home automation and wide-area measurement 
systems. The proposed architecture is based on a next 
generation network as control and integration platform. Every 
network entity, like sensors, actors or process control nodes, 
has a Session Initiation Protocol Uniform Resource Identifier 
and presence status. The real-time, two-way information and 
process control communication between the network entities 
on the one side, and the grid and process control network 
operators or facility manager and house owners on the other 
side, will be realized via the Session Initiation Protocol and 
Presence Service. The main achievement of this paper is a 
detailed system design with a description of the used 
components and a first prototype implementation. 
 
Keywords - KNX; Home Automation; Next Generation 
Network; Presence Service; SIP. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The current mega trend leads to smart cities and a more 
intelligent way of energy management. Every part of those 
cities, such as traffic control or smart grids is connected with 
each other and can be controlled from central points. Smart 
grids are intelligent electricity networks where suppliers and 
consumers are connected via a digital bidirectional 
communication. As a part of smart cities, smart buildings 
(facilities or houses) play an important role in this intelligent 
city management. The facility manager or owner can 
remotely monitor and control his house or facility where-
ever and whenever he or she likes. A Smart Home should 
enable interaction with its owner, including the ability to 
monitor the status and control of home appliances and 
devices remotely from anywhere in the world. Such devices 
may consists of alarm systems, keyless access control, 
smoke detectors, light, heat, water or other energy 
management systems, medical devices, and all types of 
sensors, e.g., room, door, window or security surveillance, 
monitoring and control, statistics and remote metering to 
every automated system and appliance in the home. 
A. Requirements 
Smart grids, distributed process control networks, home 
automation and wide-area measurement systems should be 
able to identify and respond to man-made or natural 
disruptions. Grid and process control network operators 
should be able to isolate affected areas and redirect electric 
power flows around the damaged facilities. Facility manager 
and house owners should be able to react on abnormal 
energy consumption.  
One of the most important issues is smart state 
monitoring of the power grids, which is basis of control and 
management of smart grids and distributed process control 
networks in order to avoid or mitigate the system-wide 
disruptions like blackouts. A real-time, two-way information 
and process control communication is essential key.  
B. Purpose and Relevance 
The purpose of this paper is to sketch a new approach 
and draft of a mobile ubiquitous home and facility control 
solution based on the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) and 
Presence Service, to realize a near-real-time push solution. 
The described draft uses the advantages of the IP Multimedia 
Subsystem (IMS) to remotely monitor and control Home 
Automation Systems via a mobile device using open source 
licensed software. The IMS is standardized next generation 
network architecture to deliver IP-based multimedia (voice, 
video, and data) services across fixed and mobile networks.  
According to Infonetics Research, the worldwide IMS 
equipment vendor revenue has reached US$ 426 million in 
2009. The IMS equipment market, including IMS core and 
IMS application servers, continues to grow strong and 
healthy to US$ 1.44 billion in 2014 [11]. This promising 
forecast shows the business opportunity and relevance of the 
proposed draft for ubiquitous home control service. 
C. Structure of the Paper 
Following this introduction, Section 2 describes related 
work and further interesting projects suitable for this 
concept. In Section 3 and 4, an overview of the general 
approach is given. The components of a possible system 
design are discussed in Section 5. Section 6 details the 
system design. A view over the possible security functions is 
given in Section 7. Section 8 concludes the paper and gives 
an outlook of future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Smart Home Control is, of course, not such a new topic. 
Many companies and institutions are working on solutions 
for energy efficient management for buildings. But there are 
only a few who try to build a complete concept with open 
standards. Most systems focus on the inside or outside 
system of the building only. This means that the goal is to 
build a solution either for the management of actors and 
sensors, or to develop a good communication solution for 
existing bus systems.  
173
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

The new idea is to connect the technology of Next 
Generation Networks (NGN) with Smart Home Control. The 
next step is to use SIP, with all its benefits, as the main 
communication protocol and connect it with a bus system 
standard (like KNX [15]) for the sensors and actors. Some 
approaches to this topic already exist.  
For example, Schulzrinne et al. described how ubiquitous 
computing could be integrated into home networks [12]. For 
his approach he prefers SIP. Another approach was done by 
an IETF Working Group. The idea is based on the 
assumption that in the future every building is equipped with 
a full featured IP network. Therefore, SIP will be used for 
home control [8].  
Another approach was made by the HomeSip project 
team [7][13][14]. Its goal is to create a SIP-based Home 
Control System. The important parts of the system are the 
SIP proxy and the SIP sensor network gateways. The SIP 
proxy is the central part for communication. The sensor 
network gateways are embedded Linux systems which are 
used to control the sensor networks and connect them with 
the SIP proxy. So, SIP should be used for communication 
between the sensor networks, the SIP proxy and the mobile 
controlling devices, like mobile phones or smartphones. All 
information from and to the sensor networks are transported 
via SIP. 
III. 
CONCEPT 
The big advantage and unique selling point of the IMS is 
the Presence Service which enables the control and 
integration platform to accept, store and distribute presence 
information about SIP identities. With this feature every 
sensor and actor, connected to the KNX bus which is 
described in Subsection 5.C., gets its own address (i.e., SIP 
URI) to log on to the service. After the registration the 
device can set its own current status, like “deactivated” or 
“active”. The sent KNX telegram is mapped to a SIP request 
and sent to the Presence Server. Now the user can monitor 
and even change the current settings on his mobile device. 
IV. 
OVERALL SYSTEM DESIGN 
The advantages of Next Generation Networks are used to 
build a communication platform between mobile devices and 
an intelligent building with a Home Automation solution. As 
depicted in Figure 1, a so-called “Gateway” interconnects 
the NGN core network and the Smart Home.  
With the used standards a full near-real-time push 
solution for Home Automations status messages should be 
realized.  
To interconnect the two architectures a special gateway 
(Bridge) is needed. The gateway manages connections 
between the SIP-based NGN and the single appliances of the 
Home Automation System. One significant function of the 
IP Multimedia Subsystem is the Presence Server, throughout 
it is possible to represent different Home Automation 
appliances as “users” to the Presence Server. Each “user” 
can set its own current status. Thus it is possible to register a 
mobile device at the SIP network, and in this way at the 
Presence Server. Hence, the status information of the 
different Home Automation appliances (i.e., the users) can 
be viewed on a mobile device. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1:  Overall system design (high level) 
 
The gateway is responsible for updating the status 
information at the Presence Server. For example, any time a 
sensor in the Home Automation System changes its status, 
an update has to be sent by the gateway. 
In order to control appliances in the Smart Home, such as 
switching lights on or off, a message must be sent by the 
mobile device to the specific Home Automation component. 
Therefore, a SIP message is generated and sent to the 
gateway, which forwards the information to the Home 
Automation System. 
V. 
COMPONENTS 
The following section introduces the components which 
are needed for the proposed concept. 
A. Next Generation Network Core 
To set up the NGN Core networks, we evaluated two 
Solutions to guarantee, that the Signaling Gateway is able to 
work with different NGN platforms. 
The IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) [1] is a control 
architecture based on the standardized SIP [2] designed by 
the wireless standards body 3rd Generation Partnership 
Project (3GPP). It aims to standardize access to different 
networks. Therefore, all communication is based on the 
Internet Protocol (IP).  
As lightweight solution to realize the NGN Core, a SIP 
Server with a Registrar and a Presence Service could be 
used. A common SIP server can also provide all the 
functionality which are needed to set up a SIP-based 
communication platform.   
SIP is a signaling protocol for controlling multimedia 
communication. It can be used to create, modify, or 
terminate a multimedia session which can exist between two 
(unicast) or multiple parties (multicast). 
With the Session Description Protocol (SDP) [3] 
properties of multimedia streams are described. SDP is used 
by SIP for negotiation regarding media codecs, transport 
protocols, and transport addresses. 
SIP for Instant Messaging and Presence Leveraging 
Extensions (SIMPLE) [4] describes a presence and instant 
messaging protocol suite based on SIP.   
Instant messaging enables users to communicate in near-
real-time by text. For the Presence Service, a User Agent 
(UA) has to register at a Presence Server. The server acts as 
a Presence Agent. It stores the status of the UA. Other users 
174
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

(subscribers) 
can 
subscribe 
to 
the 
UA’s 
presence 
information. Every time when the UA changes its status, the 
subscribers will be notified near-real-time by the Presence 
Agent. 
B. Sipdroid 
Sipdroid 2.0 [5] is a VoIP client for the mobile operating 
system Android. The program is capable of establishing 
VoIP calls and sending messages over the network. The 
Protocol used is SIP. 
C. KNX 
KNX [9] is an open standard for Home Automation in 
intelligent buildings. In December 2003 KNX became 
European standard (CENELEC EN 50090, CEN EN 13321-
1 and 13321-2). At the end of 2004 it was decided that the 
“European Norm” (EN 50090) should become international 
standard. In November 2006 the KNX protocol became 
ISO/IEC standard (ISO/IEC14543-3). The high interest in 
China led to adoption of the ISO/IEC 14543 standard to the 
Chinese norm (GB/Z 20965). Additionally for the US market 
there is the US standard (ANSI/ASHRAE 135). 
KNX is the only open, internationally acknowledged 
standard for Home Automation and Intelligent Building 
Control. 
The KNX standard is administrated by the KNX 
Association and supports the following communication 
media: Twisted pair wiring, powerline networking, radio, 
infrared and Ethernet (EIBnet/IP or KNXnet/IP). 
KNX was invented in response to the following 
shortcomings: In conventional home installations, the control 
line and the powerline are not detachable. For example, 
normal lights are controlled by giving them energy or 
turning the energy off. Complex control mechanisms are 
hard to implement. 
One of KNX’s main features is that it detaches the 
control line from the power line. KNX is a dedicated control 
bus over which every connected device can exchange 
information with other devices. Devices of different 
manufacturers can communicate with each other if they 
fulfill the KNX standard and are certified by the KNX 
Association. 
KNX devices are divided into “actors” and “sensors”. An 
actor can be, for example, a device which can open or close a 
window or a device which controls the sunblind. Sensors can 
be polled for physical status information. For example a 
window’s status can be open or closed, or a sensor for 
outdoor temperature can report back the temperature.  
Many complex scenarios are possible. For example, with 
the help of an outdoor temperature sensor and sunlight 
intensity sensor a sunblind actor could control the sunblind 
depending on the data which the sensors deliver. Another 
scenario would be an actor for controlling an awning, 
combined with a wind strength sensor which would pull up 
the awning if the wind is to strong. 
How the actors and sensors communicate with each other 
is specified in the KNX standard. 
The KNX bus works with a 9.6 kbit/s transfer rate which 
is enough for more than 60,000 connected devices to the 
KNX bus.  
Every device connected to the KNX network can be 
addressed with a unique 16-bit address, depicted in Figure 3. 
A KNX bus can theoretically have a maximum of 65,536 
devices. 
 The topology of the KNX bus is based on lines. [10] In 
Figure 2 there is only one single Backbone Line. Up to 15 
Main Lines can be connected to the Backbone Line, which 
are numbered from 1 to 15. The Backbone Line is Main Line 
0. Main Lines are connected to the Backbone Line via 
Backbone Couplers. The Backbone Couplers belong to the 
Main Lines and not to the Backbone Line. A Backbone 
Coupler always has the Device-number 0.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: KNX bus topology 
 
The hierarchical subordinates to the Main Lines are the 
lines. Every Main Line can have up to 15 lines which are 
numbered like the Main Lines from 1 to 15. A Main Line 
always has the line number 0. Just as Main Lines are 
connected with Backbone Couplers to the Backbone Line, 
Lines are connected to the Main Lines via Line Couplers. 
A Line Coupler has the device number 0. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: KNX address scheme 
  
As depicted in Figure 3 the 16-bit Address is divided into 
3 different fields: 4 Bits for addressing the Main Line, 4 Bits 
for addressing the appropriate line and 8 Bits for addressing 
the specific device. For example 3.8.10 addresses the 10th 
device connected to line number 8 at Main Line 3. 
Accordingly 0.0.4 addresses the 4th device directly 
connected to the Backbone Line. Consequently 4.0.10 
addresses the 10th device connected to the 4th Main Line. 
 In conclusion, every line can have up to 255 devices, 
because device 0 is always the coupler. As seen in Figure 2, 
not only the lines are able to have connected devices, the 
Main Lines and the Backbone Line can respectively have up 
to 255 connected devices. By subtracting the reserved 
coupler addresses from the theoretical maximum of 65,536 
devices, a maximum of 61,455 end devices are possible, 
which can be connected to a single KNX bus installation. 
D. Calimero 
Calimero 2.0 is a collection of Java APIs that form a high 
level framework for communication with a KNX/EIB 
175
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

installation with the use of KNXnet/IP. The framework helps 
build high level applications which need to communicate 
with the KNX bus systems for remote access and control. It 
can receive/decode KNX messages and send/encode its own 
KNX messages. 
 
E. Signaling Gateway 
The signaling gateway, depicted in Figure 4, is the main part 
in this concept. This software service connects the KNX bus 
to the IMS network.  
As already mentioned, with a KNXnet/IP device, KNX 
telegrams could be transferred to the IP network. The whole 
telegram is packed into the payload of an UDP packet and is 
sent over the network. Thus, one function of the signaling 
gateway is to receive these IP packets sent by the KNXnet/IP 
device. Further, the information contained in the telegram 
has to be extracted. This could consist of sensor values or 
other status messages of different Home Automation 
appliances. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 4: Connection interfaces of the signaling gateway 
 
The KNXnet/IP device is also able to receive IP packets 
sent via the IMS from the IP network and forward the 
containing telegram to the KNX bus. Thus, in order to 
control appliances which are associated with the bus 
installation the signaling gateway has to have the ability to 
generate KNX telegrams. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Message flow 
 
With the open source Java Framework Calimero, it is 
possible to parse and generate KNX telegrams. This 
framework will be used in the signaling gateway to handle 
communication with the KNX bus.  
Once the information of the telegram is filtered, the 
status change must be transmitted to the Presence Server 
located in the IMS. This brings out the second main function 
of the signaling gateway: The connection to the IMS. The 
signaling gateway registers every appliance of the KNX bus 
installation as a "user" at the Presence Server. To set the 
status of a user, a SIP message must be sent through the IMS 
network. This message flow is depicted in Figure 5. To view 
the current status of a part of the Home Automation System 
the mobile device just has to subscribe to the Presence 
Server.  
 
If a user wants to control an appliance of the Home 
Automation System, a SIP message is sent from the mobile 
device to the signaling gateway. Further, the information in 
the SIP message body, depicted in Figure 6, must be mapped 
into a KNX telegram. This body is optional and can include 
e.g. SDP, SOAP, XML or ASCI. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: SIP message structure 
 
VI. 
TECHNICAL FEASIBILITY  
The intention of this concept is to use the advantages of 
the IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) and Presence Service in 
order to control Home Automation Systems, like the KNX 
bus installation, with a mobile device. KNX was chosen 
because it is the only open, internationally acknowledged 
standard for Home Automation and Intelligent Building 
Control. 
A. Requirements 
First of all, the IMS network infrastructure is needed, 
including the IMS core and application servers, as shown in 
Figure 7. The IMS core has the main functions of the IP 
Multimedia Subsystem like proxies and a user registration 
server. The application server in this case provides a 
Presence Service. The so called Presence Server handles a 
list of “users” and their own current statuses. Further, a 
mobile handset is needed that is capable of communicating 
with the IMS. To accomplish this, a special SIP User Agent 
176
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

is required. In the next step a Home Automation System 
must be installed. In this concept the KNX automation 
system is used, also depicted in Figure 7. With this 
internationally standardized bus installation, it is possible to 
build up huge and powerful automation systems to control 
and monitor many different components in a building. With 
KNXnet/IP devices, status and control messages (telegrams) 
of the KNX bus can be transferred to IP networks. The most 
important part of this concept is the signaling gateway 
between the IMS network and the KNX bus installation 
This software service provides the main functions for the 
communication between a mobile device and the Home 
Automation appliances.  
B. Overview 
The KNX bus installation implements the network 
connections and the addressing scheme for the different 
actors and sensors. Actors are appliances which can perform 
different actions, for example switching lights on or off. 
They provide a switching state and can receive telegrams  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from physical switches, sensors or software tools. Sensors 
are appliances which can detect different conditions like 
temperature or brightness. They are capable of sending 
telegrams to specific actors or software tools.  
With the functions of the Presence Service of the IMS 
every sensor and actor of the KNX bus can be built up into a 
single “user” (entry in the Presence Service list). Therefore, 
each sensor or actor gets its own SIP address (URI) to 
register at the Presence Server. Every device which is 
registered to this service can set its own current status. 
Mainly this function is used to realize a service of messenger 
applications to set their own status in the contact list to “Not 
Available”, for example. In this concept we use the Presence 
Service to provide a list of all sensors and actors connected 
to the Home Automation System. Thus, every appliance sets 
its own status. For example the status of the temperature 
sensor may be 20.0°C. 
Now it is possible for the user to get a list of his 
appliances displayed on his mobile device. For this purpose 
an SIP client is needed. Every SIP client also has a SIP URI 
to be identifiable in the IMS network. Making it possible to 
register to the Presence Server in order to view the list of 
appliances connected to the KNX bus installation. 
With this system design a full push solution can be 
realized. The list of Home Automation appliances is updated 
automatically in real time. So there is no need to update the 
status of every single device manually. 
This feature enables the ability to use the mobile device 
as a full alarm and critical state indicator. Thus, a push 
solution in mobile home control would give some whole new 
ways to use it. 
The second step is to control different actors of the Home 
Automation System. To do this the user has to choose the 
specific actor and the operation which should be performed 
on the mobile device. The information is packed into a SIP 
message and sent through the IMS to the signaling gateway. 
The signaling gateway runs a user authentication to ensure 
the message was sent by an authorized mobile device. As 
shown in Figure 8, the information of the actor and the 
specific action of the SIP message is packed into a UDP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Detailed system design of the ubiquitous smart grid (home) control and integration platform prototype 
 
packet and sent to the KNXnet/IP. Further, the KNXnet/IP 
device generates KNX telegram out of the UDP packet 
information and passes it to the bus installation. When the 
actor has performed the switching operation, the new status 
is sent to the Presence Server. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: KNX telegram flow 
VII. SECURITY 
For a concept like this where communication over 
untrusted networks takes place, a strong security concept is 
important. To find a solution, the focus must set on two 
problems: The first is, of course, a secure connection 
177
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

between the components. But on the other hand we have to 
think of the bandwidth usage and the computational 
workload. This is very important for mobile devices. 
Therefore, one possible solution would be Multimedia 
Internet Keying (MIKEY) [6]. MIKEY is a key management 
solution for multimedia scenarios (e.g., SIP). The benefits 
are the simplicity, the low extra bandwidth consumption, the 
low computational workload and the time efficiency. So it is 
a well matching enhancement for the proposed concept to 
ensure an acceptable security level. 
On the other hand KNX telegram security is also a must, 
due to local attacks on the KNX Bus. EIBsec is the common 
security extension for KNX [16]. The main goal of EIBsec is 
to protect the control network against local attacks. Services 
for providing a secure data transmission and authentication 
are included. The authentication mechanism allows verifying 
the identities of the involved communication partners 
including all sensors and actors. After proving the identities 
of the involved devices, the data are transmitted through a 
secure channel which guaranteed data confidentiality, 
integrity and freshness. The main advantage of EIBsec is that 
management services as well as the exchange of group 
messages can be secured. Another important feature of 
EIBsec is the compatibility to standard KNX protocol. 
VIII. ACTUAL STATUS OF THE PROTOTYPE 
The actual prototype consists of a full addressed and 
configured KNX bus system with different kinds of sensors 
and actors like weather station, dimmers and digital/analog 
switches for lighting and power outlets. To communicate 
with the Signaling Gateway a KNX Net/IP device is also part 
of the KNX bus system. The Signaling Gateway is 
implemented as a converged application for a Glassfish 
Server. The application is based on the Sailfin (CAFE) 
extension and the Calimero 2.0 KNX-API, which provides 
functions to interact with the KNX bus. Sailfin offers the 
basis of a full featured Presence Service and SIP Call 
Control Functions. It is possible to connect the Signaling 
Gateway with an NGN core (e.g. Open IMS core) as an 
application server. With a standard SIP user agent for mobile 
devices (e.g. Sipdroid) it is possible to communicate with the 
Signaling Gateway to get status information of the KNX 
devices. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presents a full concept of a ubiquitous home 
control solution, using the advantages of the IP Multimedia 
Subsystem, to realize a near-real-time push solution. 
Our approach to the topic of Smart Home Automation is 
a different one. Instead of developing new commands for 
SIP or evolving a new kind of appliance, our approach only 
uses standards. 
The achieved advantages are enormous. Many buildings 
all over the world already have a system to manage their 
buildings. Furthermore, an increasing amount of companies 
convert their network infrastructure to SIP (mostly because 
of VoIP). With our approach these two technologies can 
easily work together. The economical and ecological 
advantages are obvious: The system of the building can be 
managed remotely. A facility manager is able to manage 
more buildings, because he or she does not need to be at a 
single building most of the time. The ecological aspect of a 
smart home consists of enormous amounts of saved energy. 
In future work, the first point is to create an own client 
for remote building control. It has to be platform 
independent, so it could be used on every mobile platform.  
Next thing is to look at other bus-systems which are 
available. Maybe it is possible that the approach shown in 
this paper could also be used for other bus-systems. 
Finally, new approaches to remote building control have 
to 
be 
checked. 
For 
example 
SIP 
extensions 
for 
communicating with networked appliances [8].  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been performed within the “Smart Home 
Control und Sensornetzwerke” project, which is partly 
funded by the “Zentrum für Forschung und Entwicklung” 
(ZFE) at the Hochschule Darmstadt - University of Applied 
Sciences, Darmstadt. Additionally the authors would like to 
acknowledge the support of the Albrecht JUNG GmbH & 
Co. KG by their contribution of KNX actors, sensors and 
other KNX home automation devices. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  J. Soininen (Ed.), “Transition scenarios for 3gpp networks,” IETF, 
RFC 3574, Aug. 2003. 
[2]  J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, G.Camarillo, A. Johnston, J. Peterson, 
R. Sparks, M. Handley and E. Schooler, “SIP: session initiation 
protocol,” IETF, RFC 3261, Jun. 2002. 
[3]   M. Handley, V. Jacobson, and C. Perkins, “SDP: session 
description protocol,” IETF, RFC 4566, Jul. 2006. 
[4]  SIP for Instant Messaging and Presence Leveraging Extensions 
(SIMPLE). IETF Working Group. 
[5]  sipdroid, http://sipdroid.org 10.12.2010. 
[6]     J. Arkko, E. Carrara, F. Lindholm, M. Naslund, and K. Norrman,                           
“MIKey: multimedia internet keying,” IETF,  RFC 3830, Aug. 2004. 
[7]  HomeSIP 
Project, 
http://www.enseirb.fr/cosynux/HomeSIP/ 
10.12.2010.   
[8]  S. Moyer, D. Marples, S. Tsang, J. Katz, P. Gurung, T. Cheng, A. 
Dutta, H. Schulzrinne, and Roychowdhury, “Framework draft for 
networked appliances using the session initiation protocol,” IETF, 
Internet Draft, expired Dec. 2001. 
[9]  KNX Association, “KNX logical topology faq,” 2005. 
[10] KNX Association, “KNX system specifications,” 2009. 
[11] Infonetics Research, “IMS equipment and subscribers report”, Mar. 
2010. 
[12] H. Schulzrinne, X. Wu, and S. Sidiroglou, and S. Berger, “Ubiquitous 
computing in home networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, 
vol. 
41, 
Nov. 
2003, 
pp. 
128-135, 
doi: 
10.1109/MCOM.2003.1244933. 
[13] B, Bertran, C. Consel, P. Kadionik, and B. Lamer, “A sip-based 
Home Automation platform: an experimental study,” Proc. 13th 
International Conference on Intelligence in Next Generation 
Networks, 2009 (ICIN 2009), IEEE Press, Oct. 2009, pp. 1-6, doi: 
10.1109/ICIN.2009.5357075.  
[14] C. Bertran, C. Consel, W. Jouve, H. Guan, and P. Kadionik, “SIP as a 
universal communication bus: a methodology and an experimental 
study,” 
Proc. 
2010 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
In 
Communications (ICC 10), IEEE Press, Jul. 2010, pp. 1-5, doi: 
10.1109/ICC.2010.5502591. 
[15] KNX Association , http://www.knx.org/knx-standard/standardisation/ 
10.12.2011. 
[16] Granzer, Kastner, Neugschwandtner “EIBsec: A Security Extension 
to KNX” KNX Scientific Conference 2006 
178
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

