Multi-objective Optimization of Energy Hubs at the Crossroad of Three Energy 
Distribution Networks 
 
Diego Arnone, Massimo Bertoncini, 
Giuseppe Paternò, Alessandro Rossi 
Research and Development Laboratory 
Engineering Ingegneria Informatica S.p.A. 
Palermo, Italy 
e-mail: diego.arnone@eng.it, massimo.bertoncini@eng.it, 
giuseppe.paterno@eng.it, alessandro.rossi@eng.it 
Mariano Giuseppe Ippolito, 
Eleonora Riva Sanseverino 
Dipartimento di Energia, Ingegneria dell’Informazione e 
Modelli Matematici (DEIM) 
Università degli Studi di Palermo 
Palermo, Italy 
e-mail: marianogiuseppe.ippolito@unipa.it, 
eleonora.rivasanseverino@unipa.it
 
 
Abstract—This paper provides a multi-objective optimization 
framework aimed at the management of a multi-carrier energy 
system involving both electricity and hydrogen. Using the 
concept of the multi-carrier hub, the proposed system has been 
modelled in order to define completely every energy flow inside 
the plant. After that, a heuristic multi-objective optimization 
algorithm, the Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II, 
has been implemented for the energy management of the plant, 
taking into account simultaneously three different objective 
functions related to economic and technical goals. This 
optimization process provides the set point defining the working 
configuration of the plant for a daylong time horizon. The 
communication framework between the energy management 
system, the real plant and the monitoring tool has been 
developed too, using the Open Platform Communications 
(OPC) protocol for the data exchange. This has been presented 
along with the Decision Support System (DSS) provided by the 
optimizer and the Human Machine Interface (HMI) of the 
Supervisory 
Control 
And 
Data 
Acquisition 
(SCADA) 
monitoring the plant. All the presented applications are going to 
be deployed on a real plant demonstrator. 
Keywords-multi-carrier hub; multi-objective optimization; 
energy management system; OPC protocol; hydrogen storage. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Today, multi-carrier energy hubs are a concrete reality for 
the energy distribution networks management, enabling the 
interconnection between these energy infrastructures by 
means of several energy devices able to convert, store and 
buffer various forms of energy. In the view of remodeling and 
restructuring energy infrastructures, especially electrical ones, 
multi-carrier hubs could represent an innovative and cutting-
edge technology for the design and realization of a new 
hybrid, 
flexible 
and 
interoperable 
distribution 
grid 
framework. 
The concept of multi-carrier hubs was introduced by G. 
Andersson and et al. [1][2], defined as “units where multiple 
energy carriers can be converted, conditioned and stored; such 
a system represents an interface between different energy 
infrastructures and/or loads”. They faced the problem from 
many points of view, proposing a graphic model and a 
complete matrix model able to correctly represent every 
device in the system and its operation. This research laid the 
foundation for the systematic study of multi-carrier hub 
framework in several energy grid domains. In the last two 
years, many researchers have addressed the challenge of 
multi-carrier hub. Besides the modelling criteria, which are 
mostly based on G. Andersson studies, many authors faced the 
issues of the control and management of a multi-carrier hub. 
These tasks are very frequently addressed by means of 
heuristic optimization 
processes, e.g., 
multi-objective 
optimization [3], fuzzy logic systems [4], multi agent systems 
[5] or an effective combination of two of them [6]. Another 
significant topic related to the operational issues of a multi-
carrier hub is the management of the dynamic behaviour of 
two or more energy carriers that must be controlled as a whole 
inside the multi-carrier structure. Most of these studies 
focused on the interaction between electricity and thermal 
energy, because of the great difference between the time 
scales of these energy carriers [7][8]. Finally, some studies 
proposed a widespread usage of the multi-carrier hub concept 
over a city/district level in order to create a unique 
interoperable energy distribution network by connecting 
different energy infrastructures through two or more multi-
carrier hubs properly located [9][10]. 
The present paper proposes an Energy Management 
System (EMS), based on a multi-objective optimization 
process, which is able to perform the management, 
scheduling, control and monitoring tasks of a multi-carrier 
system. This system involves two energy carriers, electricity 
and hydrogen, and interconnects a Medium Voltage (MV) 
electrical distribution grid, a Low Voltage (LV) electrical 
distribution grid and the methane/natural gas network for 
hydrogen delivery. It also integrates Renewable Energy 
Sources (RES) in the management of electrical power flows. 
The structure of such a system roughly consists of a Water 
Electrolyser (WE), connected to the MV grid and able to 
produce hydrogen, an innovative Hydrogen Solid-state 
Storage System (HSS), installed on two different channels, 
and a Fuel Cell (FC), connected to the LV grid, that absorbs 
hydrogen from one of the HSSs. The research performed on 
this system is part of the European co-funded INGRID project 
(7th Framework Programme) [11][12]. In Figure 1, the block 
diagram of an INGRID system instantiation is shown. 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
Figure 1.  INGRID plant block diagram detailed with electricity and 
hydrogen flows. 
The present paper is structured as following. In Section II, 
the INGRID system structure and operation are described and 
analyzed. In Section III, the energy management framework 
and its optimization process are depicted, along with the 
Objective Functions (OFs) and constraints. Section IV shows 
the communication framework and the EMS interaction with 
the monitoring tools, whilst Section V shows the optimization 
results and the EMS Graphic User Interface (GUI). In Section 
VI, the conclusions are given. 
II. 
INGRID PROJECT SYSTEM 
A. INGRID project 
The INGRID project aims at contributing to balance 
supply and demand of different energy carriers. The main goal 
of this project is to handle the very large amount of power 
generated by RES systems, installed on MV distribution grid, 
by absorbing electric power, which is used to produce and 
store hydrogen [11]. In this way, an INGRID plant can prevent 
grid technical issues and power reverse flow phenomena. The 
electric energy absorbed by the WE is converted in hydrogen 
that is stored into two different storage systems belonging to 
two different channels: the Open Loop (OL) channel, in which 
the hydrogen is stored and then sent to the methane pipeline 
network, and the Closed Loop (CL) channel, in which the 
stored hydrogen is employed to supply the FC. The FC, in its 
turn, generates electric power for LV balancing services. 
The EMS here proposed is tailored on the INGRID project 
demonstrator, which is being deployed, set up and will operate 
in Troia (Puglia, Italy). 
B. INGRID EMS overview 
The EMS of the INGRID system consists of several 
different components. 
The core of the EMS is the Energy Supply and Demand 
Matcher (ESDM), which is in charge of scheduling tasks over 
24 hours, performed by means of the optimization process. 
The flexibility of the optimization allows the user of the plant 
to properly choose even a shorter time horizon. It provides the 
power absorption and generation profiles for all the devices 
inside the system. 
The data related to the forecasted power profiles of RES 
production and the prevision of price profiles are evaluated by 
a simulation tool that provides the EMS with these 
initialization data. Moreover, in order to meet the balancing 
strategy of the Distribution Service Operator (DSO), the grid 
operator sends to the EMS a suggested power consumption 
profile for MV grid and a suggested power generation profile 
for LV grid before the optimization process. 
The EMS is also responsible of the monitoring of the 
entire plant by means of a specific tool developed in WinCC® 
[13] environment. The monitoring tool consists of an 
integrated HMI, that collects all the equipment operational 
parameters, as well as the alarms, and a communication 
framework which adopts the OPC protocol [14]. In Section 
IV, the monitoring tool is depicted. 
At the end of the optimization process, a DSS allows the 
human operator to interact with the EMS and choose the most 
suitable working configuration for the plant. The DSS 
therefore selects a fixed number of optimized solutions and 
provides the user with a Graphical User Interface (GUI) 
through which these solutions can be displayed, compared and 
then adopted. These tools are shown in Section V. 
III. 
MULTI-OBJECTIVE OPTIMIZATION FRAMEWORK 
A. Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGA-II) 
The optimization process is implemented by means of an 
evolutionary algorithm, the Non-nominated Sorted Genetic 
Algorithm II (NSGA-II) [15][16]. Such an algorithm allows 
to simultaneously optimize two or more objective functions 
simulating the biological phenomenon of the evolution. The 
NSGA-II offers good performance in terms of convergence, 
as well as scalability, as it is shown by adding a new third 
objective function to the original optimization framework. 
The total complexity of the algorithm is O(mN2), where m is 
number of the objective functions and N is the size of the 
considered population. 
This algorithm has been already tested and acknowledged 
in previous studies on the field of smart grid and electrical 
network management [17][18][19]. Moreover, its efficacy has 
been evaluated by comparing it with previous studies [20] that 
have addressed INGRID plant optimization task by means of 
mono-objective heuristic optimization processes, such as 
Tabu Search and Simulated Annealing. 
Such a kind of optimization process offers a set of 
solutions, which is the population front resulting from the last 
generation. The DSS will help the user of the INGRID EMS 
to properly choose the most suitable solution. 
B. EMS optimization 
The optimization carried out by the ESDM module aims 
at scheduling all the electric power and hydrogen flow profiles 
inside the plant while optimizing two or more objective 
functions which are strictly related to the operational 
conditions of the system equipment. 
The three INGRID system parameters selected for being 
optimized by the NSGA-II are the hydrogen flow in OL 
channel, the hydrogen flow in CL channel and the electric 
power generated by the FC. It worth noting that the sum of OL 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

and CL hydrogen flows defines the power consumption of the 
WE through the efficiency of this device. In this way, all the 
significant parameters of the plant are managed, since OL 
hydrogen flow is directly linked to the State of Charge (SoC) 
of the HSS installed in this channel and thus to the hydrogen 
produced to be sold. Similarly, the CL hydrogen flow is 
responsible of the SoC of the HSS in the CL channel, which 
in its turn provides the generation availability of the FC. The 
complete definition of these physical quantities, achieved by 
implementing the multi-carrier hub model [21], allows to set 
three objective functions strictly related to them. 
The first objective function is based on economic criteria. 
It addresses the maximization of the daily revenues deriving 
from the sale of hydrogen to the hydrogen market and 
balancing services to the LV grid. It can be defined by roughly 
considering the purchase cost of the input energy carriers, i.e. 
electricity from MV grid, and a sale price of the output energy 
carriers, i.e. electricity to LV grid and hydrogen to its proper 
market: 
 
OF1= ∑
- {
[(Pe,WE(ti)-Pe,RES(ti))cgrid(ti)]+
-[LH2(ti)pH2+Le,LV(ti)pANC(ti)]}
24
i=1


where: 
 
Pe,WE is the electric energy consumption of the WE 
during a time step, [kWh]; 
 
Pe,RES is the electric energy generated by the internal 
RES system during a time step, [kWh]; 
 
LH2 is the amount of produced hydrogen to be sent to 
the H2 market during a time step, [kg]; 
 
Le,LV is the electric energy produced by the FC 
injected into the LV grid during a time step, [kWh]; 
 
cgrid is the energy purchase price from MV grid, 
[€/kWh]; 
 
pH2 is the hydrogen sale price, [€/kg]; 
 
pANC is the electrical energy sale price to the LV grid 
for balancing services, [€/kWh]. 
The second objective function is instead related to the 
smart grid philosophy adopted by the INGRID system: one of 
the most significant goal is to support DSOs on coping with 
power flows imbalances mainly caused by the huge amount of 
power produced by RES installed on MV distribution grid. In 
order to avoid RES generation curtailments, a very expensive 
and deplorable practice, the DSO estimates a power 
consumption profile that fits its technical contingencies and 
should be followed by the INGRID system. The EMS is 
therefore asked to accomplish this goal without constraining 
system operation to a fixed power value: actually, the WE is 
not forced to absorb the electric power suggested by the DSO, 
but its power consumption depends on the optimization 
strategy, that takes into account DSO. This has been 
implemented by means of a technical objective function 
aiming at minimizing the distance between the DSO power 
profile and the real power absorption of the INGRID system: 
 
OF2= ∑
[
(Pgrid,MV(ti)-PDSO(ti))
1000
]
2
24
i=1
  
(2) 
where: 
 
Pgrid,MV is the total power absorbed from the MV grid, 
[kW]; 
 
PDSO is the power consumption suggested by the 
DSO, [kW]. 
This objective function as been designed as a numeric 
quadratic index in order to address suitably the distance 
between the two power profiles. 
The evaluation of daily economic revenues takes also into 
account the level of compliance of the INGRID plant with this 
curve: if the plant manages to satisfy DSO within a small 
range around the suggested profile, a price discount for energy 
purchase is considered. 
In this paper, a third objective function is introduced in 
order to manage the power injection of the FC in the LV 
distribution grid. As seen above, the request of a power 
profile, either a generation or a production one, is not 
considered as a constraint but as a suggested behaviour to 
fulfil network operators strategy. LV power profile is 
evaluated to exploit the availability of the INGRID CL storage 
system for, e.g., balancing services and for electric vehicle 
recharge programs. This third objective function is shaped as 
the second one, being a numerical index that stands for the 
distance between the power generation request and real power 
produced by the FC: 
 
OF3= ∑
[
(PFC(ti)-PLV,dem(ti))
1000
]
2
24
i=1
 
(3) 
where: 
 
PFC is the power produced by the FC available for LV 
balancing services, [kW]; 
 
PLV,dem is the power demanded by DSO, [kW]. 
For the sake of simplicity, the constraints of the 
optimization problem are just described. These constraints are 
mainly inequality ones. They are related to the maximum and 
minimum rated power of the WE and FC, the maximum and 
minimum hydrogen flow of the OL and CL channels, the 
capacity of the two HSSs. Other technical constraints are due 
to the power variation limits imposed by the WE and FC. 
Actually, the delta power between two time stamps cannot be 
larger than a fixed value. Finally, the new hydride technology 
of HSSs needs particular conditions and procedures for the 
absorption and desorption tasks, which are taken into account 
by means of operational constraints. 
As already stated, the requests of power profile at the MV 
and LV grid interface are not handled as equality constraints 
but by means of two different objective functions, so these 
profiles are followed according to the optimization criteria. 
This is one of the most innovative concept proposed by the 
INGRID project. 
IV. 
COMMUNICATION FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING 
TOOL INTEGRATION 
In this section, the communication framework among the 
EMS, the monitoring tool and the real plant devices are 
outlined. In Figure 2, all the modules of this framework and 
their interconnections are shown. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
Figure 2.  INGRID communication framework. 
The OPC server has a central role in this structure since all 
the data are exchanged through the OPC protocol. In order to 
start the optimization process for the desired time horizon, the 
EMS reads the initialization data and the current plant 
configuration from the server. The data pertaining the device 
are synchronized to the Programmable Logic Controller 
(PLC) of each device inside the plant, and is also employed 
for the monitoring tasks handled by WinCC®. In its turn, the 
EMS performs the optimization and provides the system with 
the set points for the each time stamp over the entire time 
horizon. These set points, chosen from a continuous domain, 
are written in the OPC server and then are used by the 
monitoring tools, as well as from the PLCs of the real plant as 
an input for the real devices. 
The optimization framework is able to cope with 
deviations of the real plant configuration from the set points 
suggested by the EMS or with errors in forecasted data. In this 
case, the optimizer performs a new optimization in real-time, 
starting from the data of the current configuration and/or the 
new forecasted profiles; the time horizon can be set 
considering only the remaining hours of the day. 
The monitoring tool is a component developed on purpose 
for the INGRID project, which collects and integrates all the 
set points, operational parameters and the alarms regarding the 
plant equipment. In Figure 3, its HMI is shown. The HMI is 
part of the SCADA of the plant, which can be used for the 
general control of the plant. The EMS, by means of the DSS, 
can access the SCADA to perform its optimization. Human 
intervention is always prioritised, as it can be expected. 
The HMI is currently implemented as a demo, since the 
OPC server is interfaced by simulation drivers. 
V. 
RESULTS AND GRAPHIC USER INTERFACE 
As mentioned in the previous sections, the optimization 
process schedules the set points of the plant equipment for a 
user defined time horizon. These set points are selected by the 
algorithm in order to achieve the best values of the OFs, thus 
the suggested plant configuration should allow high economic 
revenues, a good MV profile following and a good LV profile 
following. Nevertheless, the algorithm provides an optimized 
solution front, made by a number of suitable solutions equal 
to an entire population. Each of these solutions implies 
different values of the OFs, so it is important to properly 
choose the best solution that fits the user’s current goal. 
A DSS has been realized in order to ease this task: it 
automatically selects the three solutions that allow to reach the 
best value of the first OF (OF1 best), the best value of the 
second OF (OF2 best) and the best value of the third OF (OF3 
best). They are clearly outlined by the GUI of the optimizer 
application, shown in Figure 4. This GUI displays some 
initialization data and the starting plant configuration, all the 
optimized energy flow profiles inside the plant for the three 
solutions selected by the DSS, the price profiles and the 
forecasted profiles of RES. The real plant data are not 
available yet, since the demonstrator plant is still under 
construction; so, the initialization profiles and the starting 
plant configuration are supposed among those representing a 
possible and effective operating condition. 
 
Figure 3.  The HMI of the SCADA of the plant developed in WinCC® environment. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
Figure 4.  The Graphic User Interface (GUI) of the optimizer application developed in MATLAB® environment. 
In particular, the last two rows of the GUI show the power 
consumption of the WE (P WE), the hydrogen flow on OL 
channel (H2 OL), the hydrogen flow on CL channel (H2 CL) 
and the power produced by the FC (P FC). All these data are 
provided for the OF1 best solution (blue lines), OF2 best 
solution (red lines) and OF3 best solution (green lines). 
The last two charts of the last column show the graphic 
comparison between the two power profiles requested by the 
DSO, both for MV and LV grid, as well as the actual power 
absorption by the INGRID plant from MV grid and the power 
injected on LV grid. For the sake of clarity, they are shown 
again in Figure 5. It is possible to notice how INGRID plant 
manages to approximately follow the requests of the DSO. It 
worth noting that the best adherence to the MV profile request 
is achieved by means of the OF2 best solution, whilst the best 
adherence to the LV profile is achieved by means of the OF3 
best solution. In these two graphs, the OF2 best curve (red) 
and the OF3 best curve (green) are compared to the OF1 best 
curve (blue), in order to show how OF1 best solution does not 
allow to respond to DSO profile suggestions (purple). 
The human operator of the plant, once examined these 
solutions, has to choose the one that fits better the current 
operational contingencies of the plant. Depending from 
economic advices or grid technical issues, the human operator 
can be oriented on adopting a solution instead of another one. 
On this purpose, the DSS provides the user with a GUI that 
allows to choose one of the proposed solutions, making it the 
current desired plant configuration. In Figure 6, this GUI is 
shown. Using this interface, the user can accurately analyze 
the power profiles of the WE and FC, selecting them from the 
pop-up menu, for the three solutions selected by the DSS. The 
numerical values of the three OFs are displayed, too. Once 
selected the desired solution, the user is asked to click on the 
“OK” button to make it effective and to send all the 
configuration data to the OPC server to be synchronized to the 
PLCs controlling the plant devices. 
 
Figure 5.  The graphic comparison between: MV grid DSO profile and 
INGRID plant power consumption for OF2 best solution; LV grid DSO 
profile and INGRID plant power generation for OF3 best solution. 
 
Figure 6.  Graphic User Interface (GUI) of the DSS developed in 
MATLAB® environment.  
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper proposes the EMS for a multi-carrier energy 
system that involves both electricity, as well as hydrogen and 
interconnects three different energy distribution networks, 
providing them flexibility and balancing services. 
The first part of the present study addresses the structure 
of the proposed system and the concept of multi-carrier hub. 
After that, the EMS structure is explained, along with all its 
modules. In particular, the optimization framework and its 
multi-objective algorithm are shown and analyzed. This 
multi-objective optimization process provides very good 
results and allows to implement very complex management 
criteria driven by different objective functions. In future 
studies, this kind of approach can be used for the optimization 
tasks of other smart grid or microgrid implementations, e.g., 
for the management of a district level and/or a building level 
power flows scheduling. 
The last two sections explain how the data obtained by 
means of the optimization process are exchanged by this 
application and the plant equipment and how they are 
employed for defining the real plant configuration, as well as 
for monitoring purpose. The OPC protocol has been chosen in 
order to ease the communication with the industrial devices. 
Today, other protocols, such as IEC61850 and OpenADR, are 
under investigation for allowing a more flexible negotiation 
framework between the figures asking for a service, like the 
DSO in this study, and the systems in charge of fulfilling 
them. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is part of the INGRID project, co-funded by the 
European 
Commission 
within 
the 
FP7 
Framework 
Programme. Authors thank the members of the INGRID 
Consortium, as well as the European Commission for 
supporting any project dissemination activities. This work 
reflects only the authors’ views. The Commission is not liable 
for any use that may be made of the information contained 
therein. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Andersson, F. Frö hlich, T. Krause, and A. Vaccaro, 
“Multiple-energy carriers: modeling of production, delivery, 
and consumption,” Proc. 2011 IEEE, Feb. 2011, vol. 99, pp. 
15-27, doi:10.1109/JPROC.2010.2083610. 
[2] M. Geidl, “Integrated modeling and optimisation of multi-
carrier energy system,” Ph.D. dissertation, Power Systems 
Laboratory, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), 
Zurich, 2007. 
[3] A. Shabanpour-Haghighi and A. Reza Seifi, “Multi-objective 
operation management of a multi-carrier energy system,” 
Energy, 
vol. 
88, 
pp. 
430-442, 
Aug. 
2015, 
doi:10.1016/j.energy.2015.05.063. 
[4] K. Kampouropoulos, F. Andrade, E. Sala, and L. Romeral, 
“Optimal control of energy hub systems by use of SQP 
algorithm and energy prediction,” 40th Annual Conference on 
Industrial Electronics Society (IECON 2019) IEEE, Nov. 2014, 
pp. 221-227, doi:10.1109/IECON.2014.7048503. 
[5] S. Skarvelis-Kazakos et al., “Multiple energy carrier 
optimisation with intelligent agents,”, Applied Energy, vol. 
167, pp. 323–335, Apr. 2016, doi:10.1016/j.apenergy. 
2015.10.130. 
[6] L. M. Ramírez-Elizondo and G. B. Paap, “Scheduling and 
control framework for distribution-level systems containing 
multiple energy carrier systems: Theoretical approach and 
illustrative example,” International Journal of Electrical Power 
& Energy Systems, vol. 66, pp. 194-215, Mar. 2015, 
doi:10.1016/j.ijepes.2014.10.045. 
[7] Z. Pan, Q. Guo, and H. Sun, “Interactions of district electricity 
and heating systems considering time-scale characteristics 
based on quasi-steady multi-energy flow,” Applied Energy, 
vol. 167, pp. 230–243, Apr. 2016, doi:10.1016/j.apenergy. 
2015.10.095. 
[8] M.H. Shariatkhah, M.R. Haghifam, M. Parsa-Moghaddama, 
and P. Siano, “Modeling the reliability of multi-carrier energy 
systems considering dynamic behavior of thermal loads,” 
Energy and Buildings, vol. 103, pp. 375-383, Sep. 2015, 
doi:10.1016/j.enbuild.2015.06.001. 
[9] M. Moeini-Aghtaie, A. Abbaspour, M. Fotuhi-Firuzabad, and 
E. Hajipour, “A Decomposed Solution to Multiple-Energy 
Carriers Optimal Power Flow,” IEEE Transactions on Power 
Systems, vol. 29, pp. 707-716, Mar. 2014, doi:10.1109/ 
TPWRS.2013.2283259. 
[10] R. Niemi, P.D. Lund, and J. Mikkola, “Urban energy systems 
with smart multi-carrier energy networks and renewable 
energy generation,” Renewable Energy, vol. 48, pp. 524-536, 
Dec. 2012, doi:10.1016/j.renene.2012.05.017. 
[11] INGRID (High-Capacity Hydrogen-Based Green-Energy 
Storage Solutions for Grid Balancing) EU FP7 Project: 
http://www.ingridproject.eu/ [retrieved: January, 2016]. 
[12] G. Paternò et al., “Smart Multi-carrier Energy System: 
Optimised Energy Management and Investment Analysis,” 
Proc. IEEE Energycon 2016, in press. 
[13] SCADA System SIMATIC WinCC - HMI Software – 
Siemens: http://w3.siemens.com/mcms/human-machine-interface/en/ 
visualization-software/scada/pages/default.aspx [retrieved: January. 
2016]. 
[14] OPC Fundation: https://opcfoundation.org/ [retrieved: January, 
2016]. 
[15] C.A. Coello, G.B. Lamont, and D.A. Van Veldhuizen, 
Evolutionary algorithms for solving multi-objective problems, 
2nd ed., New York, Springer, pp. 5-29/91-94, 2007. 
[16] K. Deb, S. Agrawal, A Pratap, and T.A. Meyarivan, “A fast 
elitist non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm for multi-
objective optimisation: NSGA-II,” Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, vol. 1917, pp. 849-858, Sep. 2000. 
[17] R.P.J. Benvindo, A.M. Cossi, and J.R.S. Mantovani, 
“Multiobjective short-term planning of electric power 
distribution systems using NSGA-II,” Journal of Control, 
Automation and Electrical Systems, vol. 24, pp 286-299, Jun. 
2013, doi:10.1007/s40313-013-0022-5. 
[18] B. Tomoiaga, M. Chindris, A. Sumper, A. Sudria-Andreu, and 
R. Villafaﬁla-Robles, “Pareto optimal reconﬁguration of power 
distribution systems using a Genetic algorithm based on 
NSGA-II,” 
Energies 
6, 
pp. 
1439-1455, 
Mar. 
2013, 
doi:10.3390/en6031439. 
[19] D. Buoro, M. Casisi, A. De Nardi, P. Pinamonti, and P. Reini, 
“Multicriteria optimisation of a distributed energy supply 
system for an industrial area,” Energy, vol. 53, pp. 128-137, 
Sep. 2013, doi:10.1016/j.energy.2012.12.003. 
[20] D. Arnone et al., “Mixed heuristic-nonlinear optimisation of 
energy management for hydrogen storage-based multi carrier 
hub,” 
Proc. 
IEEE 
International 
Energy 
Conference 
(ENERGYCON 2014), May 20144, pp. 1019-1026, doi: 
10.1109/ENERGYCON.2014.6850550. 
[21] G. Paternò et al., “A matrix model for an energy management 
system based on multi-carrier energy hub approach,” Energy 
2015 IARIA, May 2015, pp. 18-23, ISBN:978-1-61208-406-0. 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

