When Privacy Protection Meets Non-Intrusive Load Monitoring: Trade-off Analysis
and Privacy Schemes via Residential Energy Storage
Sangyoung Park
Smart Mobility Systems
Technische Universit¨at Berlin
Einstein Center Digital Future
Berlin, Germany
Email: sangyoung.park@tu-berlin
Andrea Cominola
Smart Water Networks
Technische Universit¨at Berlin
Einstein Center Digital Future
Berlin, Germany
Email: andrea.cominola@tu-berlin.de
Abstract—Non-Intrusive Load Monitoring (NILM) algorithms are
actively being researched to disaggregate the electricity usage of
a whole household into the contribution of individual appliances.
While understanding the usage patterns of individual appliances
can be beneﬁcial for ﬂattening the peak demand, reducing the
electricity bill, and improving the energy usage efﬁciency, NILM
algorithms raise privacy concerns. Residential energy storage
could be used to relieve such concerns by modifying the monitored
electricity proﬁle. However, residential energy storage systems
are yet costly, and hence assessing the ﬁnancial overhead of
privacy protection techniques is important. In this paper, we
provide motivational examples and early results on how much
residential energy storage would be required to fool a state-of-
the-art NILM algorithm. Our preliminary results on the trade-
off between NILM accuracy and privacy protection indicate that
some intuitive approaches that require a signiﬁcant amount of
battery capacity are not necessarily the most effective in reducing
the disaggregation accuracy.
Keywords–Privacy; Non-Intrusive Load Monitoring; smart me-
ter; energy storage.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Smart meters are becoming an essential component in
smart grids because they allow high-resolution, real-time mon-
itoring of electricity generation/consumption and communica-
tion of the pricing information [1]. Smart meter information is
key for utility companies to provide information for the design
and implementation of demand side management strategies and
better cope with ﬂuctuating electricity demands [2]. This re-
sults in more effective matching of the electricity demand and
generation. In addition, smart meter information is expected
to also bring beneﬁts to electricity consumers, as it provides
them with more transparent billing information and enables a
better control over their electricity usage [3].
Motivated by the need to provide demand management
programs with better understanding, models, and forecasts of
electricity demand with high spatial and temporal resolution,
there have been recent rapid advances in the development
of Non-Intrusive Load Monitoring (NILM) algorithms. NILM
algorithms allow automatic decomposition of the aggregated
electric load measured by a smart meter at the household
level into the electricity usage patterns of individual appliances
(e.g., fridge, air conditioning system, etc.) [4]. One digital
AC monitor, i.e., a smart meter, measuring the single-phase
power into a household instead of individual sensors for each
appliance, sufﬁces to provide a low cost and non-intrusive
solution. The information on electricity demand obtained via
NILM algorithms can be used to support consumption-based
feedback programs and customer segmentation for demand
management, ﬂatten the peak demand, identify faulty appli-
ances, and provide hints on the effectiveness of demand side
management programs [5].
However, NILM algorithms inherently generate privacy
concerns. Besides detailed information on electricity usage
behaviors, sensitive private information such as how many
people are present in a home at a given time, absence of
a resident, or even gender and age information could be
potentially estimated using NILM algorithms [6][7]. What is
even more of a concern is that, from the user side, it would be
impossible to detect whether or not a NILM algorithm is being
used by the utility provider or a third-party unless explicitly
communicated. Resolving the existing trade-off between the
expected beneﬁts of coupled smart metering-NILM systems
and the privacy challenges that they include is thus key
to facilitate the development of privacy-aware smart meter
deployments.
A potentially effective way of alleviating the privacy con-
cerns is to physically modify the electricity proﬁle seen by
the smart meters [8]. This can be achieved by the use of a
residential energy storage. Existing commercial products, such
as Tesla Powerwall [9] or Encharge from Enphase [10], are
primarily designed for the purpose of compensating the ﬂuc-
tuating power generation of the rooftop solar arrays. However,
their marketability is still being carefully evaluated as it is
highly dependent on the battery purchase cost, depreciation
cost due to aging as well as the local electricity cost. Hence,
using a residential energy storage for privacy protection could
harm the return-on-investment unless it is properly sized and
utilized.
In this paper, we investigate the cost-effectiveness of the
potential usage of a residential energy storage for privacy
protection against NILM algorithms. We ﬁrst perturb the
electricity signal seen by the single-point smart meter of
a sample household to simulate different privacy protection
scenarios. These scenarios include the superimposition of
simple Gaussian noise on the smart meter signal, or a ﬂattened
signal due to the usage of residential energy storage (i.e.,
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-788-7
ENERGY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

batteries) of different size and cost. We then investigate the
trade-off between privacy protection and NILM capabilities by
analyzing how the performance of a state-of-the-art NILM al-
gorithm changes in scenarios determined by increasing privacy
protection. The contributions of this paper can be summarized
as follows.
•
We analyze the accuracy and effectiveness of the
NILM algorithm over modiﬁed household consump-
tion proﬁles using residential energy storage (i.e.,
batteries).
•
We analyze the trade-off between different privacy
protection schemes and the battery size needed to
implement them.
•
We provide recommendations on how to effectively
use residential energy storage to protect the privacy
of electricity users against NILM algorithms.
The ultimate goal of this paper is not to condemn the detailed
investigation of household energy demand at the end use level,
which can be very important to provide demand management
programs, or also coordinated water-energy conservation/peak
shifting programs. Rather, we aim to foster the conversation
about the privacy implications of NILM and to set the basis for
a wider discussion about the conﬂicting trade-off of demand
management programs in terms of technical feasibility, overall
economic and environmental beneﬁts and social acceptance.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
summarizes the related works on the usage of an energy stor-
age in the residential sector and NILM. Section III describes
the system setup and experimental settings for the NILM
algorithm used in this study. Section V analyzes some early
experimental results. Section VI concludes the paper.
II.
RELATED WORKS
The development of smart energy grids and the uptake of
smart metering devices have fostered many recent research
efforts in two potentially conﬂicting directions, i.e., (i) elec-
tricity demand modeling at the end use level, and (ii) privacy
protection.
On the one hand, the increased availability of smart me-
ter data at the household level and recorded with sub-daily
sampling resolution has fostered the development of NILM
algorithms for electricity demand modelling at the end use
level, following the 1992 seminal study by Hart [11]. NILM
algorithms thus aim at estimating the electricity consumption
(or consumption pattern) of each appliance contributing to the
aggregate electricity proﬁle recorded by a single-point smart
meter, installed at the household level. Given the aggregate
household electricity consumption Yt caused by N appliances
and recorded by the single-point smart meter at time t, NILM
algorithms estimate the non-metered consumption yi
t of each
individual appliance i, where
Yt =
N
X
i=1
yi
t + et
(1)
and et is the measurement noise. This process is non-intrusive,
as the installation of multiple sensors at the appliance level is
avoided. In the last two decades, several NILM algorithms have
been proposed in the literature: optimization-based methods
(e.g., integer or sparse optimization [12]); pattern recognition
methods, which model the temporal structure of electricity
signals (e.g., methods based on Markov Models [13]); hybrid
methods [14]; and unsupervised algorithms [15]. More recent
approaches primarily exploited deep neural networks (e.g., [4])
and explored the potential of transfer learning to generalize
and transfer NILM algorithms among different domains [16].
The above methods have been extensively tested and cross-
compared on benchmark data sets [17][18] and with widely
adopted performance metrics [19].
On the other hand, the state-of-the-art literature includes
approaches for privacy protection that use a residential energy
storage to modify the usage pattern of appliances and human
activities [8][20]. These studies often target ﬂattening out,
i.e., water-ﬁlling, the household electricity proﬁle for privacy
protection. However, this usually results in an extensive use of
the storage requiring a large capacity and leads to accelerated
aging, thus rendering the solution impractical. An alternative
approach to privacy protection consists of randomizing the
household electricity proﬁle by adding, for instance, Gaussian
noise [21]. However, the lack of a precise deﬁnition of privacy
has limited so far the possibility to come up with a cost
effective and general solution. Most previous works made use
of the concept of signal “ﬂatness” to quantify the privacy level
of a modiﬁed electricity signal, and formulate it by proxy
indicators, including the sum of Root Mean Square (RMS)
error, the mutual information [22], or the entropy [23] between
the original and the modiﬁed proﬁle. However, such metrics
are only weakly linked to the people’s perception of privacy as
it is hard to grasp the feeling of how much private information
can be extracted by just ﬂattening the electricity proﬁle.
In this paper, we aim neither at introducing a comprehen-
sive deﬁnition of privacy in the residential electricity sector,
nor at proposing new NILM algorithms. Rather, here, we
explore the inﬂuence of different privacy schemes on the
accuracy of state-of-the-art NILM algorithms. The different
privacy schemes are generated by perturbation of the house-
hold electricity signal as caused by operation of a residential
energy storage device. Thus, we measure privacy protection as
the ability of a residential energy storage to alter the household
electricity signal seen by the smart meter and hamper accurate
identiﬁcation of end use electricity consumption via NILM
algorithms. Such an approach entails that trade-offs between
the privacy scheme deﬁned by the usage (and thus size and
cost) of the residential energy storage and the accuracy may
emerge. The ultimate goal of this paper is, thus, to analyze
this trade-off and come up with recommendations to foster the
identiﬁcation of cost-effective solutions for privacy protection
in the residential electricity sector, as well as contributing
to the overall discussion on the beneﬁts and challenges of
the advanced metering and analytics tools characterizing the
ongoing digitalization of the utility and house sectors.
III.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
A. Residential Electricity System
Figure 1 shows the system setup of the sample household
considered in this study. A smart meter monitors the whole
household energy consumption and communicates the value
to the utility provider. The utility provider makes use of the
smart meter information for demand side management. The
utility provider could run NILM algorithms with the consent
of the residents or there could be a third-party acting on its own
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-788-7
ENERGY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

initiative, potentially malicious, running NILM algorithms. In
the household, there are a number of electricity appliances,
such as washing machines, TVs, ovens, heat pumps, HVAC,
dryers, etc. Optionally, the house includes a battery storage
at home connected to the low-voltage AC network through a
bidirectional DC/AC converter. The storage resembles products
like Powerwall from Tesla (13.5 kWh) [9] or Encharge from
Enphase (3.5 kWh and 10.5 kWh) [10]. There could be
multiple purposes of installing the storage such as leveraging
the electricity price difference over time, stabilizing the local
low distribution grid by participating as a primary control
reserve, etc. In this work, we exploit the presence of a battery
storage for its additional function of privacy protection, as it
can be used to modify the electricity signal seen by the smart
meter, thus hiding the actual electricity usage of individual
appliances.
Battery 
storage
DC/AC
Low-voltage
distribution
Smart 
meter
Household 
appliance 1
Household 
appliance 2
…
Utility provider
3rd party
NILM
Figure 1. Electricity system setup for the sample household.
B. Sparse NILM algorithm
In this paper, we rely on state-of-the-art NILM algorithms
to explore the inﬂuence of different privacy schemes via
residential energy storage on NILM capabilities.
Speciﬁcally, we adapt the open source NILM algorithm
proposed by [13], a computationally efﬁcient algorithm for
online real-time NILM based on a super-state Hidden Markov
Model (HMM) and a modiﬁed Viterbi algorithm that efﬁciently
manages the sparsity in HMM matrices (the original code used
in [13] is available on GitHub at [24]). In short, the algorithm
follows the following sequential process. First, the data sub-
metered at the level of individual appliance are analyzed to cre-
ate probability mass functions for each appliance and identify
its load states. Second, a super-state HMM is created by com-
bining the individual load states identiﬁed in the previous step.
This builds the actual NILM model. Finally, the super-state
HMM model is combined with a sparse Viterbi algorithm to
perform NILM and disaggregate the observed aggregate smart
meter load into the estimated contribution of each appliance.
The Viterbi algorithm is a dynamic programming algorithm
that is usually used to estimate the most likely sequence of
hidden states associated with a measured output of a process
modelled with HMM. The modiﬁed Viterbi algorithm proposed
in [13] exploits the high rate of zero-probability terms in the
HMM matrices, thus avoiding unnecessary computations and
efﬁciently returning a solution. The resulting sparsity-based
NILM algorithm has been demonstrated to outperform other
state-of-the-art NILM algorithms. Moreover, it can handle
disaggregation with data sampled with low-frequency (e.g., 1
min), while many other algorithms require higher frequencies,
and is scalable, i.e., can handle a large number of super-
states [13].
We assess the NILM performance of the sparsity-based
NILM algorithm under different privacy-protection scenarios
according to two performance metrics, i.e., (i) the Finite-State
F-score (FS-fscore) and (ii) the Mean Absolute Percentage
Error (MAPE). The FS-fscore was ﬁrst introduced in [19] as an
alternative to conventional F-score to account for inaccuracies
in non-binary classiﬁcation and is formulated as follows:
FSi = 2 × PCi × RCi
PCi + RCi
(2)
where RCi and PCi are the recall and precision, respectively,
formulated for each appliance i in order to take into account
the classiﬁcation inaccuracy RCi = T Pi−inacci
T Pi+F Ni
and PCi =
T Pi−inacci
T Pi+F Pi . The inacc term can be deﬁned, for each appliance
i, as:
inacc =
H
X
t=1
ˆxi
t − xi
t

Ki
(3)
where ˆxi
t and xi
t are the estimated and observed states of
appliance i at time t, H is the considered time horizon, Ki is
the number of states of appliance i, TPi, FPi, and FNi are
the number of true positive, false positive, and false negative
events, respectively. Overall, the FS-fscore metric evaluates
how good a NILM algorithm is in classifying the operating
states of the considered appliances. MAPE is formulated as
follows, for appliance i:
MAPE = 1
H
H
X
t=1

yi
t − ˆyi
t
yi
t

(4)
where the notation is consistent with the variables previously
deﬁned in this paper. After calculating the FS-fscore and
MAPE performance metrics for each appliance, we compute
their average value across appliances to assess how affected the
NILM performance is on average, for each privacy protection
scheme.
Figure 2. (Upper) Residential electricity proﬁle example with usage of
individual appliances shown [17], (Lower) Battery State-Of-Charge (SOC)
for day-wise water-ﬁlling of a battery capacity of 15.04 kWh.
C. AMPds Dataset
To simulate the electricity consumption of the different
appliances included in the sample household of Figure 1 and
train the sparse NILM algorithm, we used the appliance-level
data included in the AMPds dataset [17]. The AMPds dataset
contains electricity, water, and natural gas measurements at
one minute intervals for 2 years of monitoring. The data
was collected at a house in Canada, where a family of three
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-788-7
ENERGY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

live. In this study, we considered the original version of the
dataset, which includes data for 19 appliances monitored over
a period of 1 year [25]. Electricity was measured with 1 Hz
frequency, and 21 loads including a furnace, a fridge, a heat
pump, a clothes dryer, TVs, a wall oven, etc., which makes
it suitable for developing and evaluating NILM algorithms. In
the trade-off analysis presented in this work, we considered an
increasing number of appliances in the AMPds - from 3 to 10
- selected based on their ascending total electricity usage over
the 1-year time series.
IV.
PRIVACY PROTECTION SCHEMES
One way to protect privacy is to completely ﬂatten out the
usage proﬁle like water-ﬁlling strategy. However, water-ﬁlling
strategy could be prohibitive due to the high usage of battery.
For example, to completely ﬁlter out the whole house energy
consumption reported in the AMPds dataset shown in Figure 2
(top) over a year, a battery of usable capacity 15.04 kWh has
to be used. Assuming a battery system cost of 700 USD/kWh
including the pack and the electronic equipment, this would
result in more than 10,000 USD for purchasing the battery
system. Assuming a lifetime of 10 years, which is equivalent
to the warranty period of Tesla Powerwall, this would roughly
equate to 1,000 USD/year solely for protecting privacy. There
are other factors that add to cost, such as sub-optimal exploita-
tion of Time-Of-Use (TOU) tariffs and accelerated aging due
to repeated cycle charge/discharge. Such factors, however, will
be left as future works, and we focus on the required capacity
in this work. Next, we present various methods to modify the
original electricity consumption proﬁle to protect the privacy
against the Sparse NILM algorithm presented in Section III-B.
M1: Add Gaussian noise to the whole duration of the
proﬁle. The method is intended to make the proﬁle hard to
analyze regardless of the time of use and appliance usage
patterns. We control the intensity of the noise to see the
impact. Larger noise leads to reduced accuracy of the NILM
algorithms. However, it also involves more usage of the battery
capacity. The upper graph in Figure 3 shows such an example.
We have introduced a Gaussian noise with a standard deviation
of 3 A. The mean of the noise over the long term is of course
zero, but temporary increase and decrease in cumulative energy
from the battery is inevitable, as can be seen from Figure 3.
We observe that a naive implementation of M1 requires an
unnecessarily large battery capacity, so we periodically reset
the SOC of the battery to a pre-deﬁned level. The usage pattern
can still be modiﬁed while efﬁciently making use of the battery
capacity.
M2: Add Gaussian noise only when a particular appliance
of interest is used. For M2, we add noise only to time
slots where a particular appliance is being used. We test this
scheme in order to ﬁnd out whether we can selectively hide the
usage proﬁle of an appliance, which will be using less battery
capacity compared with M1.
M3: Water-ﬁlling for a particular appliance of interest.
For M3, we see whether hiding the usage pattern by ﬂattening
out the appliance proﬁle while it is being used is effective in
reducing the accuracy of the NILM algorithm. Figure 4 shows
how it modiﬁes the proﬁle. In the modiﬁed proﬁle, the load
looks rectangular rather than preserving all the “shapes” of the
consumption. Because the load is averaged, the peak becomes
lower than the original proﬁle.
Figure 3. Original (upper) and modiﬁed (middle) whole household electricity
consumption using privacy protection scheme M1, and the corresponding
battery energy level (lower) over two days.
Figure 4. Original (upper) and modiﬁed (middle) proﬁle of the clothes dryer
using privacy protection scheme M3, and corresponding battery proﬁle
(lower) over two days.
M4: Spread-out the electricity consumption of a particular
application. What can be seen from Figure 4 is that the
appliance, which draws signiﬁcant current, is still very visible
to the human eye in the overall proﬁle. Hence, we also attempt
to modify the peak value with the support of a battery in
varying degrees. Therefore, we explore M4, which reduces the
size of the peak and spreads out the electricity consumption
evenly among all time slots.
M5: Erase an appliance’s consumption. This is similar to
M4, but completely erases an appliance’s usage proﬁle from
the whole household energy consumption by charging the
battery storage. An equivalent amount of energy is discharged
over the whole period of time just like M4.
M6: Day-wise water-ﬁlling for the whole electricity con-
sumption proﬁle. Finally, M6 performs a water-ﬁlling tech-
nique, which results in a ﬂat proﬁle seen by the smart meter.
However, doing this for a whole year, i.e., ﬂat proﬁle for a year,
is prohibitive because of the seasonal variations in electricity
consumption, which mandates the use of an excessively large
capacity battery, i.e., tens of kWh of battery capacity over the
course of two years just for introducing the Gaussian noise
of 6 A standard deviation. Therefore, we investigate day-wise
water-ﬁlling, which means the smart meter will see a ﬂat
proﬁle within a day, but varying electricity proﬁle among days.
We evaluate the reduction in disaggregation accuracy and
the required battery capacity, and hence the cost, for each
method to provide an insight into developing cost-effective
techniques.
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-788-7
ENERGY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

V.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we present the FS-fscore and MAPE ob-
tained for NILM under the different privacy protection schemes
detailed in the previous section. The overall evaluation pro-
cedure is shown in Figure 5. For the sake of analysis, we
have preprocessed the AMPds dataset and prepared 8 sets
of the Whole Household Energy (WHE) consumption proﬁle.
Each set reconstructs the WHE proﬁle using the top 3, 4,
· · ·, 10 appliances, sorted by increasing contribution to the
whole household energy consumption. Generally speaking, the
disaggregation accuracy is expected to decrease when there are
more appliances to disaggregate. Hence, we varied the number
of appliances to assess the effectiveness of the NILM algorithm
in all cases. We build the NILM models from the preprocessed
WHE proﬁles. Then, the proﬁle modiﬁcation algorithms from
Section IV are applied to simulate different privacy protection
schemes. The modiﬁed proﬁles serve as inputs to the sparse
Viterbi algorithm, which estimates the most likely sequence
of hidden states (i.e., appliance states). Finally, the NILM
performance is assessed by FS-fscore and the MAPE metrics.
AMPds
#Appl.: 3
…
#Appl.: 4
#Appl.: 5
#Appl.: 10
Trained models
Preprocessing
SparseNILM
Sparse Viterbi 
algorithm
Input profiles
#Appl.: 3, M1
#Appl.: 3, M2
…
Modified profiles
#Appl.: 10, M6
FS-fscore, MAPE
Figure 5. Overall evaluation procedure of NILM under different privacy
protection schemes.
Figure 6 shows the FS-fscore and MAPE averaged across
all appliances versus the required battery capacity of the
modiﬁcation algorithm. The required battery capacity varies
Figure 6. Mean FS-fscore (top) and MAPE (bottom) of the sparsity-based
NILM algorithm across all appliances, privacy protection schemes, and their
required battery capacity.
Figure 7. FS-fscore (top) and MAPE (bottom) of the cloths dryer (appliance
of interest) vs required battery capacity of the proﬁle modiﬁcation methods.
The number of appliances is 5 for all the results. Marker color varies for
each proﬁle modiﬁcation method (M1-M6). Marker size is proportional to
the noise level of each method (the higher, the more noisy).
from 0 kWh to 12 kWh depending on the six modiﬁcation
methods. M6 requires the most amount of battery capacity
as it aims at a completely ﬂat proﬁle. The sizes of markers
correspond to the number of appliances and the colors of
markers correspond to the privacy protection scheme. It can
be seen that, overall, a larger number of appliances leads
to slightly less accurate disaggregation within each method.
The privacy protection schemes M1 and M2 require the least
amount of battery capacity as Gaussian noise is relatively small
and averages out over a long period of time, as can be seen
from Figure 2. The most noticeable point is that both FS-
fscore and MAPE do not dramatically change for methods
M3 to M6.This might be due to the fact that the trained NILM
algorithm can still provide accurate estimates for the status of
most of those appliances that operate in a very limited range,
or that fall within the range seen by the smart meter, and thus
the average performance is still good in terms of FS-fscore.
However, the majority of MAPE values are between 0.5 and
1.2, indicating that the different privacy protection algorithms
can successfully hamper the identiﬁcation of detailed appliance
proﬁles. Overall, the two most cost-effective methods to protect
privacy against the considered sparsity-based NILM algorithm
appear to be, in this speciﬁc sample case, M1 and M2. The
more battery capacity is utilized for M1 and M2, the worse
FS-fscore and MAPE become. The FS-fscore drops almost
to 0.4 when a battery capacity of around 2 kWh is used for
obfuscating the original proﬁle. Other methods require much
more battery capacity, but they do not necessarily result in
a larger drop in NILM accuracy, as far as the FS-fscore is
concerned.
Figure 7 shows the FS-fscore and MAPE for a particular
appliance of interest, in this case, the clothes dryer, instead
of the mean of the metrics across all appliances. For the
sake of illustration, only the results obtained for the NILM
experiments including 5 appliances are reported. The marker
size corresponds to the magnitude of proﬁle modiﬁcations, in
each privacy protection scheme. For M1 and M2, it is the
standard deviation of the Gaussian noise. For M4, it is the
amount of change in the mean of the appliance. For those
methods not requiring different proﬁle modiﬁcation magnitude,
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-788-7
ENERGY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

the marker sizes are depicted as the smallest. In this graph,
it is clearly visible that the disaggregation accuracy is lower
for larger Gaussian noise with M1. Surprisingly, M5 and M6,
which completely hide an appliance’s proﬁle, do not have a
profound impact on the metrics of this appliance. This might
be due to the dominance of the clothes dryer proﬁle over other
appliances. When Gaussian noise is imposed on the aggregate
signal, this speciﬁc proﬁle becomes harder to identify, but,
in the other cases, a guess from the sparsity-based NILM
algorithm for this speciﬁc appliance is still accurate. Another
noticeable thing is that M2, which is dedicated to modifying
the appliance’s record, has nearly no impact on the metrics,
while M1 degrades the performance of the sparsity-based
NILM algorithm the most. Such an observation motivates
further systematic research on the topic, including a sensitivity
analysis on how these results change for different NILM
algorithms and with different performance metrics.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we investigated the effectiveness of a number
of heuristic algorithms making use of a residential battery
storage in preserving privacy against a NILM algorithm. Most
of the prior works are based on the water-ﬁlling technique,
i.e., ﬂattening out the consumption proﬁle as much as possible.
However, they require a signiﬁcant amount of battery storage
while the amount of privacy protection is hard to quantify.
Therefore, we focus on the accuracy metrics of a NILM algo-
rithm and quantify the effectiveness of the proﬁle modiﬁcation
methods. Our preliminary results indicate that some intuitive
methods do not necessarily lead to a signiﬁcant reduction
in the disaggregation performance of the NILM algorithm,
even though they require signiﬁcant battery capacity. This
points towards further systematic research tailored to providing
protection against NILM algorithms while minimizing the
battery cost overhead.
Also, the cost analysis in this paper is restricted to battery
capacity. A holistic cost analysis incorporating the electricity
bills under ﬂexible pricing policy, the interplay with the rooftop
solar arrays (when available), and the impacts of different
battery usage schemes on battery aging rates should be per-
formed. Finally, future research should look at better linking
the battery capacity to the speciﬁc appliance (or appliances)
that a customer would like to hide for privacy protection, if
some are more privacy-sensitive than others.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors acknowledge the support of the Einstein Center
Digital Future (Berlin, Germany).
REFERENCES
[1]
F. Tounquet and C. Alaton, “Benchmarking smart metering deployment
in the EU-28,” European Commission, Final Report, 2020.
[2]
A. Mohsenian-Rad, V. W. S. Wong, J. Jatskevich, R. Schober, and
A. Leon-Garcia, “Autonomous demand-side management based on
game-theoretic energy consumption scheduling for the future smart
grid,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 320–331,
2010.
[3]
S. S. S. R. Depuru, L. Wang, V. Devabhaktuni, and N. Gudi, “Smart
meters for power grid — challenges, issues, advantages and status,” in
IEEE/PES Power Systems Conference and Exposition, 2011, pp. 1–7.
[4]
J. Kelly and W. Knottenbelt, “Neural nilm: Deep neural networks
applied to energy disaggregation,” in ACM International Conference
on Embedded Systems for Energy-Efﬁcient Built Environments, 2015.
[5]
H. Cao, C. Beckel, and T. Staake, “Are domestic load proﬁles stable
over time? an attempt to identify target households for demand side
management campaigns,” in IEEE Industrial Electronics Society Con-
ference (IECON), 2013, pp. 4733–4738.
[6]
A. Molina-Markham, P. Shenoy, K. Fu, E. Cecchet, and D. Irwin,
“Private memoirs of a smart meter,” in ACM Workshop on Embedded
Sensing Systems for Energy-Efﬁciency in Building (BuildSys), 2010.
[7]
P. McDaniel and S. McLaughlin, “Security and privacy challenges in
the smart grid,” IEEE Security Privacy, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 75–77, 2009.
[8]
L. Yang, X. Chen, J. Zhang, and H. V. Poor, “Cost-effective and privacy-
preserving energy management for smart meters,” IEEE Transactions
on Smart Grid, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 486–495, 2015.
[9]
“Powerwall — Tesla,” 2020, URL: https://www.tesla.com/powerwall
[accessed: 2020-07-09].
[10]
“Install Solar Backup Battery - EnsembleT M Technology — Enphase,”
2020, URL: https://enphase.com/en-us/ensemble-technology-enphase-
installers [accessed: 2020-07-09].
[11]
G. W. Hart, “Nonintrusive appliance load monitoring,” Proceedings of
the IEEE, vol. 80, no. 12, pp. 1870–1891, 1992.
[12]
D. Piga, A. Cominola, M. Giuliani, A. Castelletti, and A. E. Rizzoli,
“Sparse optimization for automated energy end use disaggregation,”
IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, vol. 24, no. 3, pp.
1044–1051, 2015.
[13]
S. Makonin, F. Popowich, I. V. Baji´c, B. Gill, and L. Bartram,
“Exploiting HMM sparsity to perform online real-time nonintrusive load
monitoring,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 2575–
2585, 2016.
[14]
A. Cominola, M. Giuliani, D. Piga, A. Castelletti, and A. E. Rizzoli,
“A hybrid signature-based iterative disaggregation algorithm for non-
intrusive load monitoring,” Applied Energy, vol. 185, pp. 331–344,
2017.
[15]
R. Bonﬁgli, S. Squartini, M. Fagiani, and F. Piazza, “Unsupervised
algorithms for non-intrusive load monitoring: An up-to-date overview,”
in 2015 IEEE 15th International Conference on Environment and
Electrical Engineering (EEEIC).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 1175–1180.
[16]
M. D’Incecco, S. Squartini, and M. Zhong, “Transfer learning for non-
intrusive load monitoring,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 11,
no. 2, pp. 1419–1429, 2019.
[17]
S. Makonin, B. Ellert, I. V. Bajic, and F. Popowich, “Electricity, water,
and natural gas consumption of a residential house in Canada from 2012
to 2014,” Scientiﬁc Data, vol. 3, no. 160037, pp. 1–12, 2016.
[18]
J. Z. Kolter and M. J. Johnson, “Redd: A public data set for energy
disaggregation research,” in Workshop on data mining applications in
sustainability (SIGKDD), San Diego, CA, vol. 25, no. Citeseer, 2011,
pp. 59–62.
[19]
S. Makonin and F. Popowich, “Nonintrusive load monitoring (NILM)
performance evaluation,” Energy Efﬁciency, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 809–814,
2015.
[20]
G. Kalogridis, Z. Fan, and S. Basutkar, “Affordable privacy for home
smart meters,” in IEEE International Symposium on Parallel and
Distributed Processing with Applications Workshops, 2011, pp. 77–84.
[21]
E. Liu and P. Cheng, “Achieving privacy protection using distributed
load scheduling: A randomized approach,” IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 2460–2473, 2017.
[22]
A. Pr¨obstl, S. Park, S. Steinhorst, and S. Chakraborty, “Cost/privacy
co-optimization in smart energy grids,” in Design, Automation Test in
Europe Conference Exhibition (DATE), 2019, pp. 872–877.
[23]
S. McLaughlin, P. McDaniel, and W. Aiello, “Protecting consumer
privacy from electric load monitoring,” in Conference on Computer and
Communications Security (CCS), 2011, pp. 87–98.
[24]
S. Makonin, The super-state hidden Markov model disaggregator
that
uses
a
sparse
Viterbi
algorithm
for
decoding.,
2018
(accessed
August
17,
2020).
[Online].
Available:
https://github.com/smakonin/SparseNILM
[25]
S. Makonin, F. Popowich, L. Bartram, B. Gill, and I. V. Baji´c, “Ampds:
A public dataset for load disaggregation and eco-feedback research,” in
2013 IEEE Electrical Power & Energy Conference.
IEEE, 2013, pp.
1–6.
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-788-7
ENERGY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

