Situation Analysis of Electric Vehicles, Renewable Energy and Smart Grids for 
Sustainable Urban Mobility in Five European Regions 
 
Kamilė Petrauskienė, Jolanta Dvarionienė, 
Daina Kliaugaitė, Giedrius Kaveckis 
Institute of Environmental Engineering 
Kaunas University of Technology 
Kaunas, Lithuania 
e-mail: kamile.petrauskiene@ktu.edu 
jolanta.dvarioniene@ktu.lt  
 
Julie Chenadec 
Green IT Amsterdam Region 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands 
 
Leonie Hehn 
Barcelona Chamber of Commerce 
Barcelona, Spain 
 
Abstract—Urban electric mobility and renewable energies 
are innovative and smart technologies that can significantly 
contribute to reducing greenhouse gas emissions and increase 
energy efficiency. In order to increase their integration, the 
INTERREG EUROPE “EV ENERGY“ project was initiated 
by five European countries (Italy, Lithuania, Spain, Sweden 
and the Netherlands). The project partners shared their 
mobility policies in order to learn how to overcome obstacles 
for the implementation of sustainable urban mobility. This 
research project comprises a situational SWOT analysis of 
electric vehicles, renewable energy and information and 
communication technologies. The greatest weakness that 
most countries encounter is the high price of electric vehicles 
and the lack of a developed charging infrastructure, however, 
a high number of private initiatives and an increasing 
people’s awareness are promising. 
Keywords-electric vehicles; renewable energy; smart grids; 
mobility; situation analysis. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Transport systems have a significant impact on the 
environment, accounting for 33.1 percent of the total 
energy consumption in 2015 [1]. Furthermore, the 
transport sector has the biggest oil demand at the European 
level, as two-thirds of the final demand for oil comes from 
transport. Road transport accounted for 54 percent of the 
final demand for petroleum products in 2014 [2]. 
According to Eurostat, all the sectors, except fuel 
combustion in transport and international aviation, 
contributed to the overall greenhouse gas emission 
reductions from 1990 to 2015. In 2015, transport emission 
rose for the second consecutive year. Besides, the average 
share of energy from renewable sources in transport 
increased from 1.4 percent in 2004 to 6.7 percent in 2015 
[3]. 
Electrification of road transport has become a major 
trend and two of the most important technologies in 
European countries are Electric Vehicles (EVs) and 
Renewable Energies (REs). There is a spectrum of EVs 
technology, such as hybrid electric vehicles, battery 
electric vehicles and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles [4]. 
EVs can significantly reduce global and local emissions 
and are part of the future vision for global mobility.  
Additionally, EVs are not only used for mobility, but 
also for energy services, including: energy back-up 
services, EVs participating in energy market, vehicle 
delivering energy to home/street/grid/city applications,  
 
 
 
 
variation in EV charging connected to local energy 
sources, accelerated storage of electricity in EV and/or 
electric public transport, implementing renewable energy 
sources for EV and/or electric public transport [5]. 
In the framework of the INTERREG EUROPE “EV 
ENERGY” project, an innovative approach was used to 
develop a framework of policies and experiences where 
energy, mobility and smart grids will work together. The 
project consists of partners from five European countries: 
Italy, Lithuania, Spain, Sweden and the Netherlands. The 
partners recognized a need to share technical and practical 
experience to learn how other institutions overcome the 
difficulties for the implementation of sustainable mobility. 
Interregional exchange and cooperation is necessary in 
order to achieve a better framework of policies, making it 
possible to develop more sustainable cities [5]. 
The main objective of this paper is to conduct the 
situation analysis of EVs, RE and Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICT) for sustainable urban 
mobility in five European regions.  
II. METHODOLOGY 
The study area of the current research comprises five 
European regions: Italy (Lazio region), Lithuania, Spain 
(Barcelona), Sweden (Stockholm) and the Netherlands 
(Amsterdam and Flevoland). The situation analysis was 
performed in each project partners’ region by using 
Strengths, 
Weaknesses, 
Opportunities 
and 
Threats 
(SWOT) matrix, based on the inventory of good practices 
and mobility policies in each region. All the partners were 
actively involved in the data collection process. To ensure 
harmonisation of information and data collection, 
templates for the inventory of good practices and mobility 
policies were prepared and spread among the partners. The 
good practices and mobility policies were analysed on the 
city/regional, national and the EU scale. Additionally, the 
inventory was based on the three pillars approach 1) EVs; 
2) REs; 3) ICT. Information and data were obtained by 
analysing 
secondary 
resources: 
bibliography, 
laws/regulations, relevant sites, public reports, national 
and international standards. In addition, focus groups 
meetings gathering policy makers, researchers and 
business representatives were held in each project 
partner’s countries. What was collected within the 
inventory of good practices and policies contributed to the 
SWOT analysis. 
 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
This part of the paper presents features of EVs, 
renewable energy and smart grid-ICT sectors integration 
as SWOT analysis in 5 European regions. The most 
important features are presented in Table I. 
TABLE I. MAIN FEATURES OF SWOT ANALYSIS IN FIVE REGIONS [5] 
 
STRENGTHS 
WEAKNESSES 
OPPORTUNITIES 
THREATS 
Italy 
- Kyoto rotation fund grants 50 
million euro to support 
sustainable mobility.  
- Exclusion of EVs users from 
motor vehicle tax for 5 years. 
- Increasing production of 
renewable energy. 
- High purchase price of EVs and 
their batteries. 
- Government lacks a clear 
legislative basis and national/ 
regional financial instruments.  
- High motorization rate in Rome 
(9 vehicles per 10 inhabitants) 
causes high pollution, noise and 
congestion. 
- According to new 
construction regulations, new 
housing must have e-charging 
infrastructure.  
- Government initiated the 
National Infrastructure Plan to 
develop a recharging system in 
Italy. 
- Most of e-charging network is 
not developed.  
- Strong dependence on 
traditional energy sources (oil 
products) 
Lithuania 
- Vilnius city allowed EVs to 
use bus and taxi lanes.  
- Parking EVs is free of charge.  
- High purchase price of EVs and 
their batteries.  
- Lack of vehicle taxation 
mechanisms encourages people to 
use second-hand vehicles. 
- Rejuvenation of a national car 
pool and reduction of 
dependence on oil products.  
- Opportunities for business 
and science in developing a 
new market and increasing car 
sharing competitiveness, 
additional subsidies and 
support mechanisms. 
- Political decisions are lagging 
and are a way behind other EU 
states. 
- No single body responsible 
for e-charging infrastructure 
development. 
- High risk that second-hand 
EVs will be more expensive 
than fuel powered cars. 
Spain 
- Financial support for the 
development of e-charging 
infrastructure. 
- Lots of sunny days in Spain - 
a great potential of 
photovoltaic solar electricity. 
- E-charging infrastructure lacks  
developed electrical networks and 
corridors, adequate power supply 
and maintenance that is more 
consistent.  
- EVs and hybrids take only 0.4 
percent of the market. 
- Growing investments and 
decrease of the photovoltaic 
energy price increase the 
number of EVs owners. 
- Promising initiatives of e-
charging infrastructure, 
lowering Barcelona’s energy 
dependence on imported 
energy. 
- Lack of facilitating 
regulations, standards, training 
and framework for 
implementation, various 
barriers for public access to e-
charging stations. 
- Limited control mechanisms 
to store surplus energy and 
generate additional during high 
demand. 
Sweden 
- Subsidies and tax reduction 
for EVs. 
- The power grid used for e-
charging network is more or 
less already developed and is 
powered by mostly renewable 
energy. 
- High purchase price of EVs and 
their batteries.  
- Companies expect high return, 
and the value of used EVs is low. 
- Good potential of light EV.  
- The costs of EVs can be 
shared between partners. 
- People are eager to produce 
their own energy and use it on 
their own mobility. 
- Additional tax if charging at 
the workplace and no parking 
benefits.  
- Budgets of municipalities too 
small to finance high costs of 
EVs and their infrastructure. 
The Netherlands 
- Part of MRA Elektrisch 
programme (20 000 EVs by 
2020). 
- Culture of close public-
private cooperation. 
- Complexity of integrated energy 
projects. 
- Need of multi-stakeholder 
cooperation. 
- Modern energy network.  
Spacious cities. 
- Awareness of need for 
integrated energy systems. 
-Unstable national EV policies. 
- Large part of PV in rural 
areas. 
- Lack of awareness toward 
EVs. 
- Limited infrastructure.  
 
IV. CONCLUSION 
One of the main weaknesses is the high purchase price 
of EVs and their batteries. Another weakness is the lack of 
cooperation between stakeholders: municipalities, business 
enterprises, research and public bodies. Although some of 
the regions have already developed an e-charging network, 
further development is required. However, a developed e-
charging network does not encourage people to change 
their ordinary fuel-powered vehicles, mainly because of the 
high EVs purchase price. On the other hand, countries are 
adjusting their policies and starting a number of initiatives, 
which might increase the use of EVs and integration of 
renewable energy, e-charging infrastructure and ICT.  
Additionally, the use of EVs has another vision as 
energy storage. As REs have been increasing their weight 
in the energy mix year after year, EVs’ batteries can be 
used to store locally produced RE, and give it back to the 
 
 
city during the hours of highest demand. This shows how 
the addition of EV to a household equipped with solar 
panels can greatly reduce the reliance on the grid. Such 
and similar cases present good practices and innovative 
policy making through regions, help other cities to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions and save money in mobility and 
energy systems. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is a by-product of research during our work 
in the project “EV ENERGY” – “Electric Vehicles for City 
Renewable Energy Supply” (Project no: PGI02049). The 
project is financed by the INTERREG EUROPE 
programme (European Regional Development Fund). 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

REFERENCES 
[1] EUROSTAT. Statistics explained, “Consumption of energy,” 
2017. [Online].  
Available:http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php/consumption_of_energy. [Accessed: 10-
Jan-2018]. 
[2] L. Buffet, “Europe increasingly dependent on risky oil 
imports,” Transport & Environment, 2016. [Online].  
Available:https://www.transportenvironment.org/sites/te/files
/publications/2016_07_Briefing_Europe_increasingly_depen
dent_risky_oil_FINAL_0.pdf. [Accessed: 14-Jan-2018]. 
[3] EUROSTAT. Statistics explained, “Europe 2020 indicators – 
climate change and energy,” 2017. [Online]. Available: 
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php/Europe_2020_indicators_-
_climate_change_and_energy#cite_note-1. [Accessed: 14-
Jan-2018]. 
[4] L. Raslavičius et al., “Electric vehicles challenges and 
opportunities: 
Lithuanian 
review,” 
Renewable 
and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 42. pp. 786–800, 2015. 
[5] INTERREG EUROPE Programme Regional Initiative Project 
“Electric Vehicles for City Renewable Energy Supply”. 
Project No: PGI02049 EV Energy (Duration January 2017 – 
June 
2021) 
<https://www.interregeurope.eu/evenergy/>; 
2017 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

