Grid Benefits from Energy Storage 
A Taxonomy for Smart Grid Benefits from Energy Storage 
Vivian Sultan 
California State University 
College of Business and Economics 
Los Angeles, CA 90032 
Email: vsultan3@calstatela.edu 
 
Abstract—Grid reliability is one of the greatest challenges facing 
electric utilities. We argue that energy storage will play a signif-
icant role in meeting the challenges facing electric utilities by 
improving the grid’s operating capabilities, lowering cost, en-
suring high reliability, and deferring and reducing infrastruc-
ture investments. Several studies discuss the benefits of energy 
storage. This paper offers a taxonomy for smart-grid benefits 
from energy storage based on previous literature to illustrate 
four core classes of benefits for the grid. This work provides a 
solid foundation to equip researchers with the most pertinent 
information to advance future research in this domain. 
Keywords—peak shaving; load following; intermittent 
generation; battery; power quality. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Thinking of electricity in our homes generally evokes the 
benefits it offers us. Consumers expect to have uninterrupted 
access to electricity and are consequently inconvenienced 
when provisioning is not possible. We like how inexpensive it 
is. We like that its cost is stable so we do not have to think 
about what time of day we turn on the dryer or take a shower, 
even though each of those actions may demand a hefty amount 
of energy from our power company. Finally, we really like the 
many life-simplifying gadgets it facilitates, whose numbers 
seem to increase every year: toaster ovens, hair dryers, com-
puters, mobile computing and communication devices, super-
efficient home heating systems, and zero-emission electric 
cars, to name a few. 
In contrast, few of us think much about where the energy 
comes from or how it gets to our homes. As it turns out, sup-
plying clean, high-quality, inexpensive electricity that is 
(nearly) always available to meet almost any demand is no 
mean feat. Utility companies work hard at this, and, although 
they are getting better at it, they still encounter difficulties. 
Energy storage, utility-scale batteries, can help considerably. 
Considering that energy storage is a critical component for 
the power network and considering the urgency of energy-
storage deployment, this paper addresses the research ques-
tion: “How will energy storage benefit the electric power net-
work, and what services will it offer grid operators?” The ob-
jective of this research is to develop a taxonomy for smart-
grid benefits from energy storage, to summarize the core con-
cepts, and to offer a detailed typology for energy-storage types 
and their characteristics based on the current literature. 
The remainder of this article is divided into three sections: 
Section 2 reviews the literature on utility-scale energy storage. 
Section 3 offers a taxonomy of energy-storage benefits and 
discusses those benefits in more detail. Section 4 concludes. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
We conducted a literature review regarding the smart grid 
benefits from energy storage to highlight the knowledge base 
on the topic. One way to grasp the main core of a subject is to 
look at the references cited in current articles and highlight 
papers cited repeatedly. This step was particularly helpful in 
identifying the foundational papers. A literature review is a 
particularly influential tool in the hands of researchers because 
it allows scholars to gather and recap all the information about 
research in a specific field [1]. 
A. History of Energy Storage 
Although it is not part of our collective consciousness, en-
ergy storage has been used by electric utilities for nearly their 
entire history. For example, the first major pumped hydroelec-
tric storage plant was built by Connecticut Light and Power in 
1929 [2]. The first battery-based utility-scale energy-storage 
plants were built in the 1980s, including Southern California 
Edison’s Chino Battery Energy Storage Plant offering 10 MW 
of power and 40 MWh of storage [3]. 
An August 2013 White House report, written in conjunc-
tion with the Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy Relia-
bility, detailed the vital role that energy storage would play in 
improving grid resiliency and robustness related to weather 
outages and other potential disruptions [4]. Considering that 
energy storage is a critical component to be added to the 
power network and considering the urgency of energy storage 
deployment, several research studies have discussed the types 
of energy storage and the smart grid benefits associated with 
energy-storage technologies. 
B. Types of Energy Storage 
Reference [5] offered an extensive introduction to the 
wide range of energy-storage technologies, from mechanical 
systems (flywheels, pumped hydroelectric, compressed air, 
liquid piston) to superconducting magnets and super capaci-
tors to various chemical energy-storage systems. Pumped hy-
droelectric energy storage had a significant head start on the 
field and still retains the edge in both available power (up to 
3,000 MW at a single facility) and total energy stored (24 
GWh) [6]. However, most of the new research and innovation 
is in chemical energy storage: hydrogen electrolysis, synthe-
sized methane, and such liquid and dry battery systems as lith-
ium ion, sodium sulfur, and iron chromium [5]. There is good 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-855-6
ENERGY 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

reason for this: While a pumped hydroelectric system can 
store massive amounts of power and can deliver it at high 
power levels, like any mechanical system, it suffers from a 
relatively long response time, on the order of five minutes [7]. 
While this compares well with other spinning reserves (often 
idling natural gas or diesel power plants), which can take 10 
minutes to produce their rated power [8], most battery system 
can produce their rated power in less than just a few seconds 
[9, 10]. In the remainder of this article, energy storage systems 
refers to systems with a response time of seconds or less. 
C. The Smart Grid 
Many of energy storage’s benefit stem from enabling the 
smart grid. Reference [11] offered several definitions of the 
smart grid, where smart means neat, trim, or intelligent and 
grid means a network of electrical conductors that distribute 
electricity to definite points: “An electricity network that can 
intelligently integrate the actions of all users connected to it, 
generators, consumers and those that do both, in order to effi-
ciently deliver sustainable, economic and secure electricity 
supplies” [11, p. 712]. The National Institute of Standards and 
Technology defined smart grid as “a grid system that inte-
grates many varieties of digital computing and communica-
tion technologies and services into the power system infra-
structure” [11, p. 712]. The use of distributed energy re-
sources, such as renewable technologies and storages, would 
facilitate the transition to a smart grid because it can help meet 
regular power demand [11]. 
The smart grid would help optimize energy efficiency with 
a two-way exchange of real-time electricity information be-
tween consumers and suppliers. This technology can maxim-
ize availability, efficiency, reliability, security, economic and 
environmental performance, and power distribution. Grid re-
liability is a very important point that must be studied by re-
searchers since it determines the grid’s success in providing 
the needed services to the users [11, 12]. 
III. 
BENEFITS OF ENERGY STORAGE 
Several studies discuss the benefits of energy storage. 
Based on our literature review, We have built a taxonomy for 
smart grid benefits from energy storage that offers four classes 
of benefits for the grid: enabling the smart grid, facilitating 
renewable and intermittent generation, improving transmis-
sion and distribution, and increasing grid reliability and power 
quality. The taxonomy is shown graphically in Figure 1. 
Energy storage technologies can enhance the grid’s oper-
ation and efficiency by quickly responding to changes in de-
mand through the smart grid [12]. Energy storage can be de-
fined as storage with the ability to store a definite amount of 
energy for the electric grid and to provide the stored energy 
back to the grid. These storage systems must have a known 
calendar life in years and cycle life in kWh under identified 
conditions, maintenance standards with schedules, and round-
trip efficiency. Finally, the design for these storage systems could 
be applied in one or more applications to optimize energy eco-
nomics and grid operations [12]. According to [13], battery 
storage is a promising solution to economically improve grid 
reliability through technology. Other advantages include low 
self-discharge, high efficiency, and fast response [14]. 
A. Enabling the Smart Grid 
The smart grid is an umbrella term for technologies that 
are expected to help dramatically increase local and national 
electricity grid resilience to extreme events, reliability, effi-
ciency, and quality, while reducing their environmental and 
financial costs. Energy storage can facilitate the smart grid in 
two ways, by increasing the use of renewable energy re-
sources and by allowing the grid to react more quickly to 
changes in the operating environment [12]. See Figure 2. 
B. Facilitating Renewable and Intermittent Generation 
Most consumers support moving from carbon-polluting 
energy sources (such as coal-, diesel-, and natural-gas-fired 
power plants) to carbon-neutral energy sources (such as solar 
 
Figure 1.  Taxonomy of the grid benefits of energy storage. 
 
Figure 2.  Enabling the smart grid. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-855-6
ENERGY 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

photovoltaics, wind turbines, and run-of-the-river hydro tur-
bines) because it will help reduce climate change and improve 
local air quality [15]. However, many people believe that 
these cleaner energy sources’ intermittent nature strains the 
electricity grid’s aging technologies ([16–18]. By accepting 
energy whenever it is available and providing energy when it 
is needed, energy storage breaks the necessary connection be-
tween supply and demand, greatly improving the value of re-
newable-energy resources to the grid. Properly designed en-
ergy-storage systems can help utilities meet states’ renewable 
portfolio standards and reduce their carbon footprints by rely-
ing more on carbon-neutral energy sources and less on carbon-
polluting sources. See Figure 3.  
C. Improving Transmission and Distribution 
Even the mundane field of transmission and distribution 
can be shaken up by energy storage. Long considered a fact of 
life, transmission losses and congestion can be dramatically 
improved by the microgrids and islanding enabled by energy 
storage [19]. Additionally, energy storage system distributed 
strategically around the grid would allow it to be broken into 
multiple independent grids during short outages, serving more 
customers while repairs are in progress [19]. See Figure 4. 
D. Improving Grid Reliability and Power Quality 
Grid reliability and power quality are the heart of electric 
utilities’ customer satisfaction, the most obvious aspects of the 
service provided. Reliability refers to how often the power 
goes out completely. A perfectly reliable gird, where the 
power never goes out, is a lofty goal, is never attained. In ad-
dition to staying on, high-quality power meets customers’ ex-
pectations in a range of metrics for voltage, frequency, and 
wave-form regulation. Energy storage helps increase grid re-
liability and power quality by improving load following, peak 
shaving, voltage regulation, and droop control, and by offer-
ing spinning reserve service and dynamic control of power os-
cillations [3]. See Figure 5.   
 Load following means quickly increasing or decreasing 
the output of an energy source in response to changes in de-
mand. This increase and decrease is important to the grid be-
cause it ensures that the right amount of power is available at 
all times. If too little power is available, the voltage or fre-
quency of the electricity supplied will drop. If too much power 
is available, at least one of them will increase. In either case, 
the results can be damage to sensitive electronics or loss of 
service in some areas. Most energy storage systems are easily 
ramped up and down in response to the load on the system, 
improving voltage regulation and droop control [3]. 
Peak shaving means reducing the highest demand levels at 
the powerplant. This is important because power produced by 
peaking plants, those power plants than can quickly ramp up 
to meet a quick spike in demand, is the most expensive. 
 
Figure 4.  Improving grid reliability and power quality. 
 
Figure 3.  Facilitating renewable and intermittent generation. 
 
Figure 5.  Improving transmission and distribution. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-855-6
ENERGY 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Because energy storage systems respond quickly to changes 
in demand, they provide a spinning reserve service and can 
dramatically reduce the need to use expensive peaking plants, 
a savings that utilities can pass on to their customers in the 
form of lower energy costs [3]. 
Finally, mismatches between the supply and demand of 
power can lead to oscillations in the voltage, phase angle, and 
frequency of the power. These oscillations degrade power 
quality, possibly damaging sensitive electronic equipment. If 
that equipment is in the consumer’s home or place of business, 
the consumer is inconvenienced. If that equipment is part of 
the grid infrastructure, the result can be much worse, possibly 
leading to a blackout [20]. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
This study aimed to address an important question: “How 
will energy storage benefit the electric power network and 
what services will if offer to grid operators?” To answer the 
research question, we have searched the background literature 
to develop a taxonomy for smart-grid benefits from energy 
storage. The taxonomy offered in this paper is the first to ad-
dress the research question and is intended to help researchers 
identify areas for future research endeavors. 
From this research, we conclude that all four classes of 
grid benefits are important, but they are too broad to cover in 
any depth in a single research project. Prospective authors in 
this space could examine topics such as modeling battery be-
havior, planning energy-storage backup for the smart grid, 
battery data management and pipeline to enable analytics, re-
cent advances in battery technology, the future of grid-storage 
solutions, and advanced designs to integrate energy storage 
into the electricity systems. 
The literature review and taxonomy offered in this paper 
provide a solid foundation to equip researchers with the most 
pertinent information. From this taxonomy, a research frame-
work can be developed to provide direction for future research 
in this domain. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The completion of this undertaking could not have been 
possible without the support of Editide’s editing services. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Aneke and M. Wang, “Energy storage technologies and real life 
applications–A state of the art review,” Appl. Energy, vol. 179, pp. 
350–377, 2016. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy
.2016.06.097 
[2] F. Cheng et al., “Applying battery energy storage to enhance the 
benefits of photovoltaics,” in 2012 IEEE Energytech. Piscataway, NJ: 
IEEE, pp. 1–5, May, 2012. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1109
/EnergyTech.2012.6304684 
[3] H. C. Hesse, M. Schimpe, D. Kucevic, and A. Jossen, “Lithium-ion 
battery storage for the grid—A review of stationary battery storage 
system design tailored for applications in modern power grids,” 
Energies, vol. 10, no. 12, art. 2107, 2017. Available from: https://doi
.org/10.3390/en10122107 
[4] The President’s Council of Economic Advisers, the U.S. Department 
of Energy’s Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability, and 
the White House Office of Science and Technology (August, 2013). 
Economic Benefits Of Increasing Electric Grid Resilience To Weather 
Outages. Available from http://energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2013/08/f2
/Grid%20Resiliency%20Report_FINAL.pdf [retrieved: April, 2021] 
[5] T. Hou, Y. Cui, X. Zhou, W. Zhang, and B. Ruan, “Charge-discharge 
strategy for battery energy storage to smooth power fluctuations from 
wind farms,” in 2016 China International Conference on Electricity 
Distribution. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE, pp. 1–5, August, 2016. Available 
from: https://doi.org/10.1109/CICED.2016.7576001 
[6] S. Keller, “Consumer demand for clean energy significantly 
increases,” Bloomberg Business, April 22, 2019. Available from: 
https://www.bloomberg.com/press-releases/2019-04-22/consumer-demand
-for-clean-energy-significantly-increases [retrieved: April, 2021] 
[7] European Energy Research Alliance, “Pumped hydro energy storage,” 
EERA Joint Program SP4—Mechanical Storage, Fact Sheet 1. 2016. 
Available from: https://eera-es.eu/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/EERA
_Factsheet_Pumped-Hydro-Energy-Storage.pdf [retrieved: April, 2021] 
[8] C. Campbell, “Making the case for spinning reserve on the grid.” 
Rewewable Energy World. (2011). Available from: https://www
.renewableenergyworld.com/storage/making-the-case-for-spinning
-reserve-on-the-grid [retrieved: April, 2021] 
[9] L. Song, Z. Wang, and W. Luo, “Analysis on the response time of the 
battery energy storage system.” Proceedings of the 2014 International 
Conference on Materials Science and Energy Engineering, (2015). 
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1142/9789814678971_0080 
[10] X. Fan et al., “Battery technologies for grid-level large-scale electrical 
energy storage.” Trans. Tianjin University vol. 26, pp. 92–103. (2020). 
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12209-019-00231-w 
[11] S. Lewis, “The 10 largest pumped-storage hydropower plants in the 
world,” Engineering News-Record, April 11, 2018. Available from: 
https://www.enr.com/articles/44302-the-10-largest-pumped-storage
-hydropower-plants-in-the-world [retrieved: April, 2021] 
[12] K. Moslehi and R. Kumar, “Smart grid-a reliability perspective,” in 
2010 Innovative Smart Grid Technologies. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE, pp. 
1–8, January, 2010. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1109/ISGT
.2010.5434765 
[13] Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, “History of 
hydropower,” 2016. Available from: https://www.energy.gov/eere
/water/history-hydropower [retrieved: April, 2021] 
[14] B. P. Roberts, “Deploying battery energy storage in the utility 
distribution grid,” in IEEE PES General Meeting. Piscataway, NJ: 
IEEE, pp. 1–2, July, 2010. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1109
/PES.2010.5589571 
[15] G. D. Rodriguez, “A utility perspective of the role of energy storage in 
the smart grid,” in IEEE PES General Meeting. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE, 
pp. 1–2, July, 2010. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1109/PES.2010
.5589870 
[16] N. Sharma, and S. Sankar, “Modeling and control of battery energy 
storage system for providing grid support services,” in 2018 Clemson 
University Power Systems Conference. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE, pp. 1–
5, September, 2018. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1109/PSC.2018
.8664018 
[17] G. Spanos and L. Angelis, “The impact of information security events 
to the stock market: A systematic literature review,” Comput. Secur, 
vol. 58, pp. 216–229, 2016. Available from: http://doi.org/10.1016/J
.COSE.2015.12.006 
[18] M. C. Such and C. Hill, “Battery energy storage and wind energy 
integrated into the smart grid,” in 2012 IEEE PES Innovative Smart 
Grid Technologies. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE, pp. 1–4, January, 2012. 
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1002/est2.50 
[19] M. L. Tuballa and M. L. Abundo, “A review of the development of 
Smart Grid technologies,” Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev., vol. 59, pp. 710–
725, 2016. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.01.011 
[20] K. K. Zame, C. A. Brehm, A. T. Nitica, C. L. Richard, and G. D. 
Schweitzer 
III, 
“Smart 
grid 
and 
energy 
storage: 
Policy 
recommendations,” Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev., vol. 82, pp. 1646–1654, 
2018. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.07.011 
 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-855-6
ENERGY 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

