SmartEnergyHub - A Big-Data Approach
for the Optimization of Energy-Intensive Infrastructures
Florian Maier, Andreas Wohlfrom, Falko Koetter∗, Sabrina Merkel-Malkowski† and Daniel Zech‡,
∗Fraunhofer IAO
Nobelstr. 12, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany
Email: ﬁrstname.lastname@iao.fraunhofer.de
†Seven2one Informationssysteme GmbH
Waldstr. 41-43, 76133 Karlsruhe, Germany
Email: sabrina.malkowski@seven2one.de
‡Fichtner IT Consulting AG
Sarweystr. 3, 70191 Stuttgart, Germany
Email: daniel.zech@ﬁt.ﬁchtner.de
Abstract—The Energiewende in Germany comes with growing
uncertainties due to constantly changing regulatory requirements,
volatile and less controllable generation from renewables and
rising energy costs for consumers. As a result, operators of large-
scale infrastructures, such as airports or production industries,
have to reconsider their energy supply and management. Prog-
nosis and combined optimization of multiple forms of energy
are mandatory to reduce costs and to proﬁt from monetary
incentives. For solving such an optimization problem in real-
time and subsequently controlling the energy supply and demand
respectively, information and communication technology (ICT)
is mandatory. Within the SmartEnergyHub research project an
approach is developed to identify energy optimization potentials
based on a big data approach, which uses high volumes of
sensor data. Therefore, SmartEnergyHub combines models for
energy demand prediction, as well as optimization techniques for
efﬁcient energy consumption, production and procurement to ﬁnd
optimal operating schedules. This paper describes the software
requirements that have to be met by such a system and presents
an architectural concept for its design using the Stuttgart Airport
as an example.
Keywords–energy management; big data; smart data; in-memory
database; infrastructures.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Infrastructure operators especially in Germany have to
cope with rapidly changing energy markets and regulations
as a consequence to the German Energiewende. Considerable
ﬂuctuations in electricity generated from wind and solar energy
and a related increase of energy costs through the Renewable
Energy Act levy force infrastructure operators to improve their
energy efﬁciency and reinvent their energy management [1].
The energy market is currently undergoing a rapid transfor-
mation - from a consumer driven market to a producer driven
market [2], which gives energy-intensive infrastructures the
opportunity to actively participate in the energy market and,
thus, potentially improve their economic situation.
Infrastructures such as airports, harbors, industrial or chem-
ical parks, factories and public facilities are considerable
producers and consumers of energy. They are confronted with
new technologies and requirements such as energy storages,
load proﬁle forecasting or demand side management [3]. In
addition to the stepwise implementation of these technologies
and process models, they have to ensure that their technical in-
frastructure provides safe, stable and efﬁcient energy services.
In light of these developments managers of infrastructures face
the challenge of ever-increasing energy costs, as well as the
need to utilize the advantages offered by active energy mar-
ket participation, which allows a considerable cost reduction
through ﬂexible purchasing times.
Small and medium producers and consumers of energy do
usually not have the resources and knowledge to optimize
their energy systems in an integrated approach. A survey
of the Fraunhofer Institute stated that only 31 % of small
and medium enterprises (50-249 employees) actively monitor
and manage their energy supply and demand [4]. However,
conventional energy management systems already reach their
limits with respect to the new challenges as optimization
approaches in most cases only relate to individual compo-
nents. This is why innovative approaches are needed. The
solution described in this paper aims at an intelligent and more
efﬁcient use of already available data by applying big data
technologies. The objective is to develop a scalable energy
management IT platform built on top of existing infrastructure
systems in order to optimize both internal energy ﬂows and
the energy procurement strategies. The major contributions of
the SmartEnergyHub project are the real-time integration of
sensors in a high-performance platform, that provides a holistic
optimization of the energy system, the automated computation
of schedules for energy generation and consumption units, as
well as methods for decision support which take the current
market situation into account.
The SmartEnergyHub Architecture addresses the following
challenges:
•
Analysis of big streams of data needs to be done fast
and reliably.
•
Information related to subsystems needs to be inte-
grated into larger contexts, which allows a compre-
hensive view of the system and an improvement of
the energy efﬁciency by connecting formerly unrelated
information.
•
Results of the energy management optimization in the
form of schedules help to adjust the system continu-
ally.
•
Load forecasts need to be considered to adjust the
system in advance.
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

•
In addition to a short-term optimization long-term
energy procurement strategies are taken into consider-
ation.
This work is structured as follows. Section II gives an
overview of ICT solutions, which are comparable to the
SmartEnergyHub in a way that they either deal with the
integration of large amounts of sensor data, offer the integra-
tion of forecasting models or enable optimization of energy
systems. In addition to the introduction of state-of-the-art
software platforms, several ideas, techniques and approaches in
the context of smart grid architectures are explained. Section
III addresses different requirements that are necessary for a
sensor-based and cloud-based platform. In Section IV, the
architectural concept of the SmartEnergyHub is illustrated and
core processes are described.
II.
RELATED WORK
Katiraei et al. [5] provide a framework for the control and
operation aspects of smart grids. They focus on existing smart
grids and the description of approaches for market participa-
tion. An autonomous demand side management was developed
by Mohensian-Rad et al. [6]. The model is based on a common
electricity net but does not deal with heating, cooling and
air condition. Agent prices are determined with game theory
approaches. Real-time pricing models have advantages but are
restricted to the technology (see Mohensian-Rad and Leon-
Garcia [7]). There are several mathematical models that can
be used for optimizing infrastructures and smart grids [8]–
[10]. The security and safety of data is addressed in [11]. A
communication model based on heterogenous data sources was
introduced in [12]. The design of a data driven communication
model was also discussed from a microeconomic point of
view in [13]. Other publications focus on web-based modeling
of a smart grid [14], optimal energy ﬂow management for
distributed energy hubs [15] and load ﬁle forecasting [16]–
[19]. Aman et al. discussed measures for the evaluation of the
prediction models [20]. The integration of fault detection and
diagnosis in the context of energy consumption into a compre-
hensive energy management system is described in [21]. The
analysis of the existing literature gives an overview of various
aspects of energy management, which should be considered in
the comprehensive approach in the SmartEnergyHub project.
The following sections will focus on the question how these
approaches can be reﬂected throughout the modules to build a
SmartEnergyHub.
III.
REQUIREMENTS
In the SmartEnergyHub project, new approaches for energy
optimization of large infrastructure providers are developed
and applied at the Stuttgart Airport. Stuttgart Airport handles
about 10 million passengers each year, which requires the
operation of an infrastructure comparable with a small city.
Therefore, the Stuttgart Airport takes on the role of both an
energy consumer and producer. Energy generation facilities
include a combined heat and power unit, photovoltaic plants,
as well as emergency power generators. Energy has to be
provided mainly for heating, cooling and ventilation but is
also necessary for baggage handling systems or apron light-
ing. About 10,000 sensors distributed throughout the infras-
tructure area constantly record power and gas consumption,
temperature or air quality and numerous other parameters,
which are also partially inﬂuenced by visitor behavior. As
the infrastructure and the sensor landscape is getting more
and more complex, the quantity of data is growing fast. In
addition, the frequency of the data collection is expected to
increase. Currently most of the sensors supply values every
minute or every ﬁfteen minutes. The project SEH aims to
extract necessary information about optimization potentials by
using big data processing. Beyond the use of existing sensor
data, external data sources (e.g., weather forecasts, energy
price forecasts or passenger numbers) will be connected to
a new scalable platform, which relies on a high performance
in-memory database. The SmartEnergyHub project aims at a
comprehensive approach, which takes into account all energy
facilities. The main modules of the SmartEnergyHub are:
•
Data import: The system has to support data im-
port of different sources. These include sensor data
available through the infrastructure system, weather
forecasts, as well as price forward curves.
•
Data cleansing: The system has to support the cleans-
ing of imported raw data and offer possibilities to
convert heterogeneous data to a standardized data
format. One of the major challenges will be to realize a
sufﬁcient import speed and frequency in combination
with a data cleaning process that ensures the necessary
data quality for subsequent processes. The correct
interpretation of outliers e.g., as measurement error
or as an actual critical system state, plays a key role.
•
Data storage: The system must be able to store
different data types. These include time series of
sensors, weather and price data but also master data,
calculation results and system control plans.
•
Optimization: The system must generate system con-
trol plans for the next 24-hours with regard to a
minimization of energy costs. Changes in key param-
eters should trigger a recalculation or adaption of the
control plans.
•
Market interaction: The system must create recom-
mendations for optimizing the energy procurement
process to support a procurement manager to make
efﬁcient decisions.
•
Forecasts: The system should be able to forecast
the energy consumption based on historic and current
sensor, weather data and further parameters. Those
forecasts are a necessary input for the optimization and
the market functions. Whereas the optimization has
its focus on the near future and thus needs short-term
predictions for the upcoming hours, market functions
require a long-term forecast of load curves for the next
2 to 3 years.
•
User interface: The system must support decisions,
as well as offer near-time visualization. This includes
also the approval of system control plans through
authorized users with the help of a user interface.
The system must also present energy procurement
recommendations to the user.
•
Control plans: The system has to be able to pass con-
trol plans to the infrastructure system after approval
through authorized users.
IV.
ARCHITECTURE
Based on the functional and non-functional requirements
described in the previous section, an architecture was designed.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

To ensure a sufﬁcient level of performance, the in-memory
database SAP HANA [22] was chosen as the application
backbone. Database operations needed during the generation
of optimal control plans, forecasts or energy procurement
recommendations, are encapsulated in an intermediate layer
called Model-Interface, which exposes common operations via
a generic interface supporting interchangeability of individual
modules.
A. Modular Architecture
The system has a modular design as illustrated by the
architecture diagram in Figure 1. Modules, displayed as boxes
in the ﬁgure, expose their functionality via interfaces and
communicate with other modules with the help of a message
broker. The architecture contains a data, application and a
presentation tier. General purpose functions are provided by
the module ’Basic Services and Orchestration’. The system
architecture consists of the following modules:
Figure 1. Overview of architecture and methodology (focus of this work
highlighted in grey).
•
Sensor-Imports: Sensor-data is imported through an
interface to the existing infrastructure system, which is
a building control system in the case of the Stuttgart
Airport. Imported raw data is converted into a stan-
dardized data format.
•
Non-Sensor Imports: Non-sensor data in this case is
data that is not collected by sensors within the infras-
tructure, but is offered by other providers (containing
data like weather or energy prices). This data is also
imported and then converted to the standardized data
format and stored in the database.
•
Data Integration: This module transforms imported
raw data into adjusted data using a generic time series
data model for incoming sensor data and a hierarchical
data model to store sensor master data.
•
Data Storage: This module provides functions related
to the storage and processing data within the database.
•
Internal Optimization: Based on sensor, master and
forecast data an optimal infrastructure control plan for
energy facilities is generated. Database operations are
executed with the help of the model interface, which
offers generic methods for database interactions. The
optimal infrastructure control plan is written to the
database.
•
Market Functions: Based on sensor and forecast
data this module creates action recommendations for
interaction with energy markets. Those action recom-
mendations are also written to the database. Conceived
as a decision support system for the energy manager,
this module should also allow a smooth handover of
chosen interaction strategies
•
Forecasts: Based on sensor and external forecast data,
this module generates forecasts, which can be used
by the Internal Optimization module or the Market
Functions module. Thus the forecast data is written to
the database.
•
GUI: The GUI module provides a user interface to
support especially the approval process of generated
infrastructure control plans or action recommendations
related to the energy market.
•
Actuator Interface: After a new infrastructure control
plan has been created and approved by an adminis-
trator, the control plan is passed to the infrastructure
system.
•
Basic Services and Orchestration: This module
coordinates the module communication and sequence
control.
B. Core Processes
The following core processes provide a dynamic cross-
module view of the planned system:
1) Import: The import process is responsible for loading all
relevant data into the database. This includes sensor data which
is available through the infrastructure system like sensor or
master data, as well as data from external sources. The received
data is transformed into a standardized data format and saved
into the database. After recording the data in the database,
subsequent processes can be triggered via the message broker.
2) Data Cleansing: After the recognition of new data the
data cleansing process starts and writes modiﬁed data back
to the database. Data cleansing supports for example the
interpolation of missing values.
3) Forecasts: Within the forecast process all relevant data
such as sensor, weather and energy price data is used to
generate forecasts for the expected load curve. For accessing
the input data, the model interface is used, which offers generic
methods to read and write data, but also to process data within
the database in case of time-critical operations. After a new
forecast curve was produced this data is written to the database.
4) Internal Optimization: During the internal optimization
process, an optimization algorithm is used to generate an op-
timal infrastructure control plan for energy relevant facilities.
The input for the optimization algorithm consists of sensor,
weather and energy price data, as well as calculated forecasts.
The optimization algorithm will consider both technical and
contractual constraints. For example, reaction times of tech-
nical systems, as well as legal requirements concerning clean
air policies, will be modeled. Generic methods of the model
interface can be used for both loading data from the database,
as well as for delegating calculations to the database. Upon
completion of the algorithm, the result in form of an optimal
infrastructure control plan is written to the database.
5) Market Functions: The process market functions sup-
ports the energy procurement and the interaction with energy
markets through recommendations. Sensor, energy price data
and forecasts serve as input. Based on both current and
predicted energy prices as well as the energy load curve, an
optimal procurement plan is developed.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

V.
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION
The requirements described in this paper can be met by
the presented system architecture. The system contains several
modules, which support the required functions such as im-
porting data from different sources, data cleansing, generating
optimal control plans, forecasts and procurement recommen-
dations, as well as human approval and passing control plans
to the infrastructure system. Building on top of a in-memory
database, the system supports high performance sensor data
processing. The requirements were collected in cooperation
with the Stuttgart Airport as the ﬁrst pilot user. The evaluation
of the system will start in 2016 as a pilot project and help
to verify and ensure the feasibility of the developed solution.
Through a continuous operation of the system until the end of
the project 2017 the components will gradually be improved
and extended. Further infrastructure managers and users who
will be involved in a newly founded user group, will take part
in the implementation and evaluation process as well.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
This paper describes the current state of the SmartEner-
gyHub architecture, which lays the foundation for a high-
performance smart data platform to optimize energy man-
agement in infrastructures such as airports, factories and
public facilities. Applying big data technologies to energy
management systems, SmartEnergyHub helps to make use of
all kinds of available sensor data to optimize internal and
external energy ﬂows. In addition to meter and sensor data,
external data providers are connected to the platform, which
allows to take additional information such as weather or energy
price forecasts into account. The data pool, which is enriched
in this way, enables the generation of accurate short and
long term load forecasts with regard to the overall system,
as well as for subsystems. The forecasts itself are used to
optimize the system in an integrated approach to control the
individual plants and components proactively. This also allows
to use current market opportunities such as temporary low-
price phases to reduce energy costs. The required core pro-
cesses and corresponding modules (see Figure 1) are described
in detail in this paper. In future work, the implementation
of the modules as well as the enhancement of the system
architecture is planed. One of the major challenges for the
future implementation consists in the design of forecast and
optimization algorithms for huge amounts of data so that
they can meet the real-time requirements. By involving further
infrastructure operators the transferability of the solution will
be shown.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work published in this article was funded by the
Bundesministerium f¨ur Wirtschaft und Energie (BMWi) under
the promotional reference 01MD15011C, www.smart-energy-
hub.de). The SmartEnergyHub project is a joint work of:
Fichtner IT Consulting AG, Flughafen Stuttgart GmbH, Faun-
hofer IAIS, Faunhofer IAO, in-integrierte informationssysteme
GmbH and Seven2one Informationssysteme GmbH.
REFERENCES
[1]
E. Gawel et al., “The future of the energy transition in germany,” Energy,
Sustainability and Society, vol. 4, no. 1, 2014, pp. 1–9.
[2]
German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, “An elec-
tricity market for germanys energy transition (green paper),” 2014.
[3]
Y. Simmhan et al., “Cloud-based software platform for big data analytics
in smart grids,” Computing in Science & Engineering, vol. 15, no. 4,
2013, pp. 38–47.
[4]
R. Jochem, P. Karcher, and M. Siemer, “Betriebliches Energiemanage-
ment in produzierenden Unternehmen Deutschland 2013,” Fraunhofer
IPK, Tech. Rep. 4, 2013.
[5]
F. Katiraei, R. Iravani, N. Hatziargyriou, and A. Dimeas, “Microgrids
management,” Power and Energy Magazine, IEEE, vol. 6, no. 3, 2008,
pp. 54–65.
[6]
A.-H. Mohsenian-Rad, V. W. Wong, J. Jatskevich, R. Schober, and
A. Leon-Garcia, “Autonomous demand-side management based on
game-theoretic energy consumption scheduling for the future smart
grid,” Smart Grid, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 1, no. 3, 2010, pp. 320–
331.
[7]
A.-H. Mohsenian-Rad and A. Leon-Garcia, “Optimal residential load
control with price prediction in real-time electricity pricing environ-
ments,” Smart Grid, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 1, no. 2, 2010, pp.
120–133.
[8]
M. C. Bozchalui, S. A. Hashmi, H. Hassen, C. A. Ca˜nizares, and
K. Bhattacharya, “Optimal operation of residential energy hubs in smart
grids,” Smart Grid, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 3, no. 4, 2012, pp. 1755–
1766.
[9]
A. Parisio, C. Del Vecchio, and G. Velotto, “Robust optimization of
operations in energy hub,” in Decision and Control and European
Control Conference (CDC-ECC), 2011 50th IEEE Conference on.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 4943–4948.
[10]
P. Mancarella and G. Chicco, “Real-time demand response from energy
shifting in distributed multi-generation,” Smart Grid, IEEE Transactions
on, vol. 4, no. 4, 2013, pp. 1928–1938.
[11]
S. Uludag, S. Zeadally, and M. Badra, “Techniques, taxonomy, and
challenges of privacy protection in the smart grid,” in Privacy in a
Digital, Networked World.
Springer, 2015, pp. 343–390.
[12]
S. Uludag, K.-S. Lui, W. Ren, and K. Nahrstedt, “Secure and scalable
data collection with time minimization in the smart grid,” Smart Grid,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. PP, no. 99, 2015, pp. 1–1.
[13]
M. Steurer, M. Miller, U. Fahl, and K. Hufendiek, “Enabling demand
side integration–assessment of appropriate information and communi-
cation technology infrastructures, their costs and possible impacts on
the electricity system,” E. SmartER Europe Smart Energy Research at
the crossroads of Engineering and C. Science, Eds., 2015.
[14]
A. Vaccaro, M. Popov, D. Villacci, and V. Terzija, “An integrated
framework for smart microgrids modeling, monitoring, control, com-
munication, and veriﬁcation,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 99, no. 1,
2011, pp. 119–132.
[15]
M. La Scala, A. Vaccaro, and A. Zobaa, “A goal programming
methodology for multiobjective optimization of distributed energy hubs
operation,” Applied Thermal Engineering, vol. 71, no. 2, 2014, pp. 658–
666.
[16]
N. Amjady, F. Keynia, and H. Zareipour, “Short-term load forecast of
microgrids by a new bilevel prediction strategy,” Smart Grid, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 1, no. 3, 2010, pp. 286–294.
[17]
G. Zhang, B. E. Patuwo, and M. Y. Hu, “Forecasting with artiﬁcial neu-
ral networks:: The state of the art,” International journal of forecasting,
vol. 14, no. 1, 1998, pp. 35–62.
[18]
G. P. Zhang, “Time series forecasting using a hybrid arima and neural
network model,” Neurocomputing, vol. 50, 2003, pp. 159–175.
[19]
R. Sevlian and R. Rajagopal, “Short term electricity load forecasting on
varying levels of aggregation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1404.0058, 2014.
[20]
S. Aman, Y. Simmhan, and V. K. Prasanna, “Holistic measures for
evaluating prediction models in smart grids,” Knowledge and Data
Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 27, no. 2, 2015, pp. 475–488.
[21]
L. M. Blanes, A. Costa, N. R´ehault, and M. M. Keane, “Integration
of fault detection and diagnosis with energy management standard iso
50001 and operations and maitenance of hvac systems,” Clima 2013,
2013.
[22]
SAP. Sap hana. [Online]. Available: http://hana.sap.com (04, 2016)
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

