Energy Feedback for Smart Grid Consumers: Lessons Learned from the Kukui Cup
Robert S. Brewer, Yongwen Xu, George E. Lee, Michelle Katchuck, Carleton A. Moore, Philip M. Johnson
Department of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Hawaii at Manoa
Honolulu, HI, USA
{rbrewer, yxu, gelee, katchuck, cmoore, johnson}@hawaii.edu
Abstract—To achieve the full beneﬁts of the Smart Grid,
end users must become active participants in the energy
ecosystem. This paper presents the Kukui Cup challenge, a
serious game designed around the topic of energy conservation
which incorporates a variety of energy feedback visualizations,
a multifaceted serious game with online educational activities,
and real-world activities such as workshops and excursions.
We describe our experiences in developing energy feedback
visualizations in the Kukui Cup based on in-lab evaluations
and ﬁeld studies in college residence halls. We learned that
energy feedback systems should address these factors: they
should be actionable, that domain knowledge must go hand
in hand with energy feedback systems, and that this feedback
must be “sticky” to lead to changes in behaviors and attitudes.
Keywords-Serious games; energy feedback; energy; energy
literacy; smart grid.
I. INTRODUCTION
The development of the Smart Grid and the two-way com-
munication that it provides have enabled a variety of new
customer-facing possibilities including real-time feedback
on electricity usage, real-time pricing, and demand response.
However, to make full use of this potential, end-users of the
Smart Grid will need to be engaged about their electricity
use, and become more energy literate. We believe that in
addition to a Smart Grid, we need Smart Consumers.
In this context, we have developed the Kukui Cup Chal-
lenge, a serious game [1] (a game with additional goals
beyond just entertainment) designed around the topic of
energy. The Kukui Cup includes a variety of energy feedback
visualizations [2] designed to inform and engage the players
about their energy use. The Kukui Cup also includes a
multifaceted online game with educational activities, and
real-world activities such as workshops and excursions [3].
The Kukui Cup is designed to provide players with insight
into how their behaviors affect energy consumption and pro-
duction. Such behaviors occur on a spectrum, from the short-
term, immediate impact behaviors such as turning off lights,
to the longer-term, collective impact of behaviors such as
considering the energy policies of political candidates when
deciding how to vote. Creating a challenge that helps players
understand energy from this wide scope sets the Kukui Cup
apart from other similar “energy game” initiatives. It also
impacts on our understanding of effective feedback for smart
grid customer-facing applications.
Based on our experiences designing and evaluating energy
feedback in the Kukui Cup, we have three recommen-
dations for designing energy feedback systems for smart
grid consumers: they should be actionable, that domain
knowledge must go hand in hand with feedback systems,
and that this feedback must be “sticky” to lead to changes
in behaviors and attitudes. This paper explores how we came
to these conclusions, and what evidence we have collected
that supports these conclusions.
In this paper, we ﬁrst describe the Kukui Cup system, fol-
lowed by an explanation of how energy goals and baselines
are used in the Kukui Cup. With that foundation, we discuss
our results from developing and deploying the Kukui Cup
in the ﬁeld over two years in the areas of designing energy
feedback visualizations, the importance of energy literacy
in understanding energy feedback, and our use of a serious
game to encourage users to engage with the energy feedback
information. Finally, we end with sections describing our
plans for future work and conclusions.
II. THE KUKUI CUP
College residence hall energy competitions have become
a widespread mechanism for engaging students in energy
issues, with more than 160 taking place or being planned for
the 2010–2011 academic year in North America [4]. Resi-
dence hall energy competitions are events where residence
halls or ﬂoors within a residence hall compete to see which
building will use the least energy over a period of time.
The competitions tap into both the residents’ competitive
urges, and their interest in environmental issues. However,
unlike home residents, the dormitory residents typically do
not ﬁnancially beneﬁt from any reduction in electricity use
resulting from their behavior changes, since residence hall
fees are ﬂat-rate and do not change based on energy usage.
Since they lack even a monthly bill as feedback, residents
are completely unaware of their energy usage,
Residence hall energy competition technologies range in
complexity from simple web pages with weekly electricity
data to complicated web applications [5, pp. 6–11]. An early
adopter of the residence hall energy competition, Oberlin
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Figure 1.
The Smart Grid Game widget, displaying level 2 actions.
College, developed a real-time electricity consumption feed-
back system as described by Petersen et al. [6]
To build on this area of active energy work, we decided
to target our serious game to college students living in
residence halls. The Kukui Cup extends the typical college
energy competition into a broader energy challenge where
electricity consumption feedback is only one part of a larger
game experience for players. The challenge is named after
the kukui nut (also known as candlenut), which was burned
by Native Hawaiians to provide light, making it an early
form of stored energy in Hawai‘i.
In a Kukui Cup challenge, residents are grouped into
teams based on where they live. Different ﬂoors of a building
or entire buildings can be formed into teams. The electricity
usage of teams is measured either through manual meter
readings or through automated meter data collection. In
addition to the energy competition, the Kukui Cup has a
energy literacy competition where players can earn points
by engaging in educational and social activities on the
challenge website. The point system provides a way to
motivate players to explore and use the system, as the Kukui
Cup is currently deployed as an extracurricular activity.
Much of the point competition revolves around a section
of the challenge website called the Smart Grid Game (SGG).
The Smart Grid Game consists of rows of actions arranged
into columns based on a particular topic (similar to the
popular game show “Jeopardy”), shown in Fig. 1. Clicking
on a square in the SGG shows details about the action and
explains how players can complete the action to earn points.
There are several types of actions: short YouTube videos on
energy and sustainability topics, activities like measuring the
ﬂow rate of a shower, excursions such as visiting a farm that
produces all its own electricity, and commitments such as
carpooling or not eating meat. There are also creative actions
such as writing a poem about energy or a letter to the editor
on a sustainability topic. The ﬂexibility of the SGG allows
us to provide a wide variety of interesting actions for players
to take part in.
The completion of each action (with the exception of
commitments) is veriﬁed through the challenge website
before points are awarded. For activities, players are usually
asked a randomly-selected question, and their answer is
placed in a queue for challenge administrators to review.
The administrator can approve or reject the submission, and
can provide feedback on the players’ answers. The game
also supports activities that are veriﬁed by submission of an
uploaded image such as a photo or screenshot.
A. Running a Kukui Cup
A Kukui Cup challenge consists of multiple components
working together to provide the entire game experience.
For challenges using real-time energy data, the open source
WattDepot [7] system is used to collect, store, and ana-
lyze the data. The challenge website and associated game
mechanics are provided by the open source Makahiki sys-
tem [8]. The current educational content is tailored to the
needs of college students living in residence halls in Hawai‘i,
but can be tailored to suit other audiences or goals.
B. Field Studies
In addition to in-lab evaluations and beta tests, there have
been two sets of ﬁeld studies of Kukui Cup challenges.
The ﬁrst Kukui Cup challenge took place over 3 weeks
starting in October 2011 in four residence halls for ﬁrst-
year students on the University of Hawai‘i at M¯anoa campus
containing a total of approximately 1070 residents. Pairs of
ﬂoors, referred to as lounges, were the team unit in the 2011
Kukui Cup.
The second set of challenges started in September 2012.
The University of Hawai‘i (UH) Kukui Cup is taking place
in the same four residence halls with approximately the same
number of residents, but over the entire 9 month academic
year. The ﬁrst month of the competition was an intensive
period with multiple real-world events taking place each
week, while the remaining months will be less intensive.
The goal of the much longer time frame is to discourage
short-term and unsustainable behaviors (such as forgoing all
electronic device use).
In addition to the 2012 UH Kukui Cup, Hawaii Paciﬁc
University (approximately 200 residents) and the East-West
Center (approximately 130 residents) have run their own
challenges using the Kukui Cup system with our support.
III. BASELINES AND GOALS
Goal setting has been shown to be an effective tool in
changing energy consumption behavior [9], [10] and are
a common component of energy feedback mechanisms.
Setting achievable goals is important from a game play
perspective, so goals must typically be based on previous
energy use. The most common way to generate a goal is to
calculate a baseline of energy usage based on past energy
usage, and then set the goal as some percentage reduction
from the baseline.
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Figure 2.
A bar chart visualization of energy use as compared to a goal
Two of the most common ways to calculate the electricity
baseline are to average recent prior usage (such as the
last two weeks), or to average usage from previous years.
Both of these methods are problematic because they assume
that this previous usage is representative of future usage,
even though there are many factors that can signiﬁcantly
alter electricity use over time including: occupancy, weather,
activities (e.g., studying for a big midterm exam), and
changes to the building infrastructure such as efﬁciency
upgrades. Any of these factors can lead to the baseline
being an inaccurate predictor of future usage in an energy
competition, as described by Johnson et al. [11].
Since baselines can be poor predictors of future electricity
use, comparing actual electricity use to the baseline in
order to determine how much electricity was “saved” by
an intervention is misleading and can tempt designers to
make claims about energy saved that cannot be substantiated.
However, comparison of actual electricity usage to a goal
generated from a baseline can be helpful as a game mechanic
to motivate players to conserve energy.
In the 2011 Kukui Cup, we used a baseline that was
derived from an average of the two weeks prior to the
challenge. In the 2012 Kukui Cups, we have switched
to a dynamic baseline [11] that consists of the average
electricity usage for the two previous weeks, but the baseline
is recomputed every day throughout the challenge. The
dynamic baseline means that as the challenge progresses,
the baseline will include usage during the challenge. In
essence, a goal generated from a dynamic baseline requires
a team to reduce their energy usage compared to the recent
past. Since the baseline is not a static value picked once
before the challenge, anomalous conditions during the period
before the challenge will soon be replaced with new, more
representative data.
IV. ENERGY FEEDBACK DESIGN EXPERIENCES
Feedback on electricity consumption has been used as a
means for facilitating energy conservation by researchers in
the human-computer interaction community [2] as well as in
the broader energy efﬁciency [12]–[14] and environmental
psychology [9], [10] communities. One reason for this focus
on feedback is undoubtedly the hidden nature of electricity,
so feedback provides an awareness that is otherwise unavail-
able.
One of the fundamental principles of energy feedback in
the Kukui Cup is that it be actionable. While any energy
feedback may implicitly encourage energy conservation be-
haviors simply by making energy use visible, this does not
meet our deﬁnition of actionable. A feedback display that
shows that a home has used 20 kWh so far on a particular
day leaves the viewer with natural questions: is that a lot?
what should I do if I wanted to reduce my energy use?
A. The Energy Bar Chart Visualization
An early attempt at energy feedback for the Kukui Cup
is shown in Fig. 2. This “Energy Bar Chart” shows hourly
energy use for a team participating in the Kukui Cup over
24 hours as compared to an energy goal. Note that the data
shown in this particular ﬁgure are simulated. Bars that are
entirely green show the actual energy usage for that hour and
indicate that the energy use was below the hourly goal. For
mixed red and green bars, the main green portion represents
the energy goal for that hour of the day, while the red tips
of the bars represent the actual usage in excess of the goal.
This form of energy feedback shows the variation in
energy use over the course of a day, which is an important
energy literacy concept. It also shows in what parts of the
day energy use is exceeding the goal, and by how much. By
displaying the times during the day when the hourly goals
are not being met, residents could focus on understanding
what activities are going on during those periods.
As (naive) designers, we felt that this visualization pro-
vided a great deal of useful feedback both clearly and
concisely. However, results of an in-lab evaluation were un-
equivocal: the visualization provided too much information,
the meaning of its components was not obvious, and the
“actionable” aspects were not obvious. This energy feedback
visualization was a failure, and we began a redesign to
address its deﬁciencies.
B. The Daily Energy Goal Game Feedback Visualization
To make our energy feedback easier to understand and
also more actionable, we developed the Daily Energy Goal
Game (DEGG) visualization shown in Fig. 3. The three
most prominent components of the DEGG are: the energy
consumption so far during the current day, the energy goal
so far for the current day, and a trafﬁc light that shows in the
most straightforward way whether the team is meeting their
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Figure 3.
The Daily Energy Goal Game feedback visualization
energy goal. The display updates once every 10 minutes with
new energy data.
We picked the daily time frame for the game for two
reasons. First, having a daily goal makes behavior changes
more visible and feedback more immediate than a longer
time frame such as weekly or monthly. Second, by concen-
trating on a daily goal, teams that are performing poorly
on a particular day can redouble their efforts to do better
the next day. Similarly, a team that does particularly well
for one day cannot rest on their laurels, as they must make
an effort to conserve every day. This game design reﬂects
our belief that changing energy behaviors is a marathon
and not a sprint: radical short-term changes made to win
an energy competition are unlikely to be sustainable, and
therefore are of very limited utility in achieving long-term
energy conservation.
Residential energy use varies in intensity over the course
of a day: typically low when people are sleeping and
much higher during evening hours. For the students in the
residence halls in our studies, the energy usage peak occurs
at approximately midnight, and the lowest between 8 and 9
AM, which is considerably different than an average single-
family home. There is also daily variation between days of
the week, as the activities taking place on a Monday night
are different than those on a Saturday night. To account for
the hourly and daily variation in energy use, we computed
hourly and daily baselines for energy use, and the goal value
is a percentage reduction from the baseline. The energy
consumption and goal values displayed in the DEGG are
computed over the time period from midnight to the current
time. This choice of time frame is particularly important for
the goal value, because if a daily goal value were simply
spread linearly over the course of a day, players would see
their energy use as always under the goal during low-usage
periods, and going above the goal during the high-usage
periods, possibly to a degree that makes it impossible to
meet the goal for that day.
The DEGG also links the energy conservation competition
with the point competition. When a team meets their daily
energy goal, each team member is awarded an administrator-
Figure 4.
The “How can we make our daily goal?” widget
conﬁgured number of points. This linkage provides an
additional incentive for players to pay attention to the
energy competition, because successfully reducing energy
use below the goal can signiﬁcantly increase team point
totals.
Below the trafﬁc light display of the DEGG is a list of
actions from the Smart Grid Game that players can take
to either learn more about energy, or directly help reduce
their energy use. The actions displayed depend on what
actions the player has already completed in the rest of the
system. The DEGG is highly actionable because it provides
direct links to actions that players can take to reduce their
energy usage, tailored to the opportunities available in their
residence hall.
Evaluation of the DEGG visualization during actual game
play indicates that players do not have a problem understand-
ing this visualization. The stoplight image provides a clear,
unambiguous signal, and the actual/goal numbers provide
further context. In addition, the visualization is explicitly
paired with links to descriptions of appropriate actions for
that player in the context of the game and the team’s current
energy use. Log data indicates that players do click on these
links in order to understand how to take action based on the
energy feedback. This energy feedback was a success and
is included in the current version of the Kukui Cup.
C. The “Wii Hours” Energy Feedback Visualization
In another energy feedback design effort, we created a
small widget below the DEGG titled “How can we make
our daily goal?”. This widget, shown in Fig. 4, showed how
much the player’s team energy usage was above the goal, and
provided a drop-down menu of electrical devices commonly
present in student rooms: laptops, XBox 360, Wii, etc. When
a device was selected from the menu, the system would
display the approximate number of hours of device use that
would equal the amount of team energy use over the goal
value. The time value was intended to show players how
much device use they would need to forego in order to
get back on track to their energy goal, and develop their
intuition about the relative power use of different devices
(i.e., plasma TVs use much more power than Wii game
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

consoles). Therefore, a short time value could point out an
easy way to make the goal, and a long time value would
indicate less signiﬁcant energy conservation.
However, during in-lab evaluations of the system, we
found that multiple subjects misinterpreted the time value,
thinking that high time values were bad rather than good.
Since the Wii was the device on the list with the smallest
power use (20 W) compared to an XBox 360 or Playstation
3, it led to the highest time values. Some subjects drew the
conclusion that using a Wii was worse than using an XBox
360 or Playstation 3, which was precisely the opposite goal
of this widget. One subject even took the time to use our
in-game team discussion forum to post the message “don’t
play wii” after using the widget! Because of this example,
we dubbed this confusion the “Wii problem”.
Clearly, energy feedback that can lead at least some
players to the opposite conclusion than intended is a failure.
The “Wii Hours” visualization never made it into production,
and we are still searching for a design variant that can convey
this information in an unambiguous fashion to players with
minimal energy literacy.
V. DOMAIN KNOWLEDGE AND ENERGY FEEDBACK
Energy feedback systems provide data on some aspect of
behavior with the goal of reducing negative environmental
impact [2]. However, they often assume users possess some
level of domain knowledge about the environmental topic
they hope to address. The term energy literacy has been used
to describe the understanding of energy concepts as they
relate both on the individual level and on the national/global
level.
Some examples of energy literacy are: understanding
the difference between power and energy; knowing that a
microwave uses much more power than a refrigerator, but
that the refrigerator will use much more energy over the
course of the day; and knowing how electricity is generated
in one’s community.
Unfortunately, all indications are that energy literacy
is low in the United States. DeWaters and Powers have
developed an energy literacy survey instrument for middle
and high school students. They found that the student mean
attitude scores were 73%, but that knowledge scores lagged
far behind (42% correct) [15]. Based on their ﬁndings,
they make some recommendations, such as energy curricula
be “hands on, inquiry based, experiential, engaging, and
real-world problem solving...”, and using the campus as
a “learning laboratory”. Similarly a nationwide survey of
adults on energy by Southwell et al. found that the average
respondent answered fewer than 60% of the energy knowl-
edge questions correctly [16].
One energy literacy topic that we emphasize in the Kukui
Cup is the difference between power and energy, power be-
ing the rate at which energy is being consumed or produced
(measured in watts) and energy is the quantity of work
that can be performed by a system (measured somewhat
confusingly for electricity in kilowatt-hours). In the Kukui
Cup we explain this relationship as being analogous to
speedometer and odometer in a car.
Through answers submitted to the online activities in the
Kukui Cup, we can see that many players have trouble
understanding the concepts of power, energy and their
interrelationship. Players often confuse the two concepts
and often fail to grasp the time sensitivity of power, and
thereby considering devices that consume a lot of power as
“bad” irrespective of how long they are actually used. When
the users of visualizations do not understand the concepts
that are being visualized, understanding of the visualizations
becomes much more difﬁcult. It is for this reason that
we claim that energy feedback systems should incorporate
educational components, or risk being unintelligible to users.
However, we reject the notion that power and energy,
watts and kilowatt-hours are too complicated and that users
should be provided instead with analogies to cars driven or
hamburgers eaten. These energy concepts are important for
effective customer participation in the smart grid, and should
not be reduced to analogies alone.
VI. ENERGY FEEDBACK, STICKINESS, AND SERIOUS
GAMES
A meta issue for all energy feedback systems is how
to ensure that they continue to be “sticky” for users, as a
feedback system that users do not view will be unable to
accomplish anything. There are indications that the long-
term impact of energy feedback may be diminished due to
habituation. Froehlich suggests that the average user will
spend less than one minute per day exploring their energy
consumption behaviors [17]. A study by Houde et al. of
households using Google PowerMeter found an “immediate
decrease in electricity consumption, but in the long term
these electricity savings decrease and disappear.” [18] This
ﬁnding suggests that a primary concern for any energy
feedback system is ensuring that users continue to interact
with it over the long term. Put another way, energy feedback
alone is not enough to accomplish the goal of long-range
customer engagement with their energy consumption.
One solution to the lack of stickiness of energy feedback
systems is the incorporation of game play. Serious games
like the Kukui Cup provide an alternative route to promote
both learning and engagement with energy feedback. It is
for this reason that we designed the Kukui Cup as a serious
game that incorporates electricity consumption feedback as
one aspect of the game experience, rather than an energy
feedback system that has been “gamiﬁed”.
While games are not the only way to promote long-term
engagement with energy issues, we submit that any normal
energy feedback system will quickly be abandoned by users
once the novelty wears off. There must be a continuing
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

reason for users to revisit the system that even the most
novel and interesting energy feedback systems lack.
VII. FUTURE WORK
The Kukui Cup is an ongoing project and we continue to
build upon our initial work. The ﬁrst area of future work
is the 2012 UH Kukui Cup. The 2012 UH Kukui Cup will
last nine months and should shed light on several issues.
Can we maintain player interest over longer periods despite
fewer prompts from intensive marketing and events? Can
the new player-provided educational content ﬁll the gap of
the longer challenge duration? What are the results of the
DEGG with dynamic baselines over a long time frame?
The 2012 Kukui Cups happening at Hawaii Paciﬁc Uni-
versity and the East-West Center will also offer new insights
into how challenge administrators outside our research group
design Kukui Cup challenges tailored to their organization,
and how different student populations perform.
A longer range goal is to integrate the Kukui Cup with
Hawai‘i’s smart grid efforts. The Kukui Cup is currently a
effort-intensive program, so scaling to hundreds of thousands
of players will require scaling the management of the
challenge, ﬁnding a means of funding, and a way for players
to incorporate household energy data fairly, in a completely
heterogenous environment.
One ﬁnal area of research is longitudinal studies of players
after the game is over and they have moved out of the
residence halls. We want to ﬁnd out whether the Kukui
Cup experience actually had lasting impacts on players, and
whether they were able to continue any new behaviors after
leaving the context of the residence hall.
VIII. CONCLUSION
We have described the Kukui Cup serious game, and our
results from ﬁeld trials of the system. We have discussed
some of the energy feedback visualizations we developed,
including both those that succeeded and those that failed.
Based on our experiences, we provide three areas that energy
feedback systems for the smart grid should address: they
should be actionable, they must address users lack of domain
knowledge, and they must ﬁnd ways to be sticky.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported in part by grant IIS-1017126
from the National Science Foundation; the HEI Charita-
ble Foundation; Hawaiian Electric Company; the State of
Hawaii Department of Business, Economic Development
and Tourism. We are also thankful for the support from
the following organizations at the University of Hawai‘i:
the Center for Renewable Energy and Island Sustainability,
Student Housing Services, Facilities Management, and the
Department of Information and Computer Sciences.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Zyda, “From visual simulation to virtual reality to games,”
IEEE Computer, vol. 38, no. 9, pp. 25 – 32, Sep 2005.
[2] J. Froehlich, L. Findlater, and J. Landay, “The design
of eco-feedback technology,” in Proceedings of the 28th
international conference on Human factors in computing
systems - CHI ’10.
New York, New York, USA: ACM
Press, Apr. 2010, pp. 1999–2008.
[3] R. S. Brewer, G. E. Lee, and P. M. Johnson, “The Kukui
Cup: a dorm energy competition focused on sustainable
behavior change and energy literacy,” in Proceedings of the
44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences,
January 2011, pp. 1–10.
[4] C.
Hodge,
“Dorm
energy
competitions:
Passing
fad
or
powerful
behavior
modiﬁcation
tool?”
Presen-
tation
at
the
2010
Behavior
Energy
and
Cli-
mate
Change
conference,
November
2010.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.stanford.edu/group/peec/cgi-bin/docs/
events/2010/becc/presentations/2C ChelseaHodge.pdf
[re-
trieved: January, 2013].
[5] G. E. Lee, “Makahiki: An extensible open-source platform for
creating energy competitions,” Master’s thesis, University of
Hawaii, June 2012. [Online]. Available: http://csdl.ics.hawaii.
edu/techreports/2011/11-01/11-01.pdf
[retrieved:
January,
2013].
[6] J. E. Petersen, V. Shunturov, K. Janda, G. Platt, and K. Wein-
berger, “Dormitory residents reduce electricity consumption
when exposed to real-time visual feedback and incentives,”
International Journal of Sustainability in Higher Education,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 16–33, 2007.
[7] R.
S.
Brewer
and
P.
M.
Johnson,
“WattDepot:
An
open source software ecosystem for enterprise-scale energy
data collection, storage, analysis, and visualization,” in
Proceedings of the First International Conference on Smart
Grid Communications, Gaithersburg, MD, October 2010, pp.
91–95.
[8] G. E. Lee, Y. Xu, R. S. Brewer, and P. M. Johnson,
“Makahiki:
An
open
source
game
engine
for
energy
education and conservation,” Department of Information and
Computer Sciences, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii
96822, Tech. Rep. CSDL-11-07, January 2012. [Online].
Available:
http://csdl.ics.hawaii.edu/techreports/2011/11-07/
11-07.pdf [retrieved: January, 2013].
[9] L. J. Becker, “Joint effect of feedback and goal setting on per-
formance: A ﬁeld study of residential energy conservation,”
Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 428–433,
1978.
[10] J. H. van Houwelingen and W. F. van Raaij, “The effect of
goal-setting and daily electronic feedback on in-home energy
use,” The Journal of Consumer Research, vol. 16, no. 1, pp.
98–105, June 1989.
[11] P. M. Johnson, Y. Xu, R. S. Brewer, G. E. Lee, M. Katchuck,
and C. A. Moore, “Beyond kWh: Myths and ﬁxes for energy
competition game design,” in Proceedings of Meaningful
Play 2012, October 2012, pp. 1–10.
[12] S. Darby, “The effectiveness of feedback on energy consump-
tion,” Environmental Change Institute, University of Oxford,
Tech. Rep., 2006. [Online]. Available: http://www.eci.ox.ac.
uk/research/energy/downloads/smart-metering-report.pdf [re-
trieved: January, 2013].
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

[13] A. Faruqui, S. Sergici, and A. Sharif, “The impact of
informational feedback on energy consumption–a survey of
the experimental evidence,” Energy, vol. 35, no. 4, pp.
1598–1608, 2010.
[14] B. Foster and S. Mazur-Stommen, “Results from recent
real-time feedback studies,” American Council for an Energy-
Efﬁcient Economy (ACEEE), Tech. Rep. B122, February
2012. [Online]. Available: http://aceee.org/research-report/
b122 [retrieved: January, 2013].
[15] J. E. DeWaters and S. E. Powers, “Energy literacy of
secondary students in New York State (USA): A measure
of knowledge, affect, and behavior,” Energy Policy, vol. 39,
no. 3, pp. 1699–1710, 2011.
[16] B.
G.
Southwell,
J.
J.
Murphy,
J.
E.
DeWaters,
and P. A. LeBaron, “Americans’ perceived and actual
understanding of energy,” RTI Press, Tech. Rep. RR-0018-
1208, 2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.rti.org/pubs/
rr-0018-1208-southwell.pdf [retrieved: January, 2013].
[17] J. Froehlich, “Moving beyond line graphs: The history and
future of eco-feedback design,” Presentation at the 2010
Behavior Energy and Climate Change conference, 2010. [On-
line].
Available:
http://peec.stanford.edu/docs/events/2010/
becc/presentations/3D JonFroehlich.pdf [retrieved: January,
2013].
[18] S. Houde, A. Todd, A. Sudarshan, J. A. Flora, and K. C.
Armel, “Real-time feedback and electricity consumption:
A ﬁeld experiment assessing the potential for savings and
persistence,” The Energy Journal, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 87–102,
2013.
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

