Energy Management in a Smart Grid-integrated Hydrogen-based Storage 
Electric Grid balancing when integrating large-capacity Renewable Energy sources 
 
Diego Arnone, Alessandro Rossi, Massimo Bertoncini 
Engineering I. I. S.p.A.  
Palermo and Roma, Italy 
diego.arnone@eng.it, alessandro.rossi@eng.it, 
massimo.bertoncini@eng.it 
Rosario Proietto 
Onyx Technology S.r.l. 
Roma, Italy 
proietto.rosario@gmail.com 
Diana Moneta 
Ricerca sul Sistema Energetico S.p.A. 
Milano, Italy 
diana.moneta@rse-web.it 
Giuseppe Tondi 
ENEL Distribuzione S.p.A. 
Roma, Italy 
giuseppe.tondi@enel.com 
 
Carlos García-Santiago 
Tecnalia 
Miñano, Spain 
carlosalberto.garcia@tecnalia.com
Abstract—The integration of plants for the distributed 
production of electric energy from renewable (especially solar 
and wind) sources into the electric grid has become an 
increasingly complex task over the last years because the 
amount of “green” energy nowadays injected into the grid is 
sometimes comparable to the energy supplied by traditional 
thermal plants. This introduces a strong variability, a partial 
unpredictability and a significant dependency from the 
location, three of the main features that characterize the 
energy produced by photovoltaic plants and wind turbines. 
This paper introduces a high level description of an innovative 
system that integrates high-capacity hydrogen-based storage 
into the grid with the aim of contributing to the grid balancing 
and to the improvement of the power quality. A concrete 
demonstrator is being designed and will be connected to a 
properly selected primary substation where most of the power 
lines connected to the medium voltage bus bar are active 
because they are connected to many photovoltaic plants and 
wind turbines. 
Keywords-energy 
management 
system; 
hydrogen-based 
storage; integration of renewable energy sources; grid balancing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Thanks to a growing environmental awareness as well as 
to many government directives and incentives, the 
distributed production of energy from renewable sources is 
rapidly expanding. The amount of “green” energy nowadays 
injected into the grid is in some places comparable to the 
energy supplied by traditional thermal plants. In order to 
obtain an efficient Renewable Energy Sources (RES) 
injection into the grid in terms of stability and power quality, 
both transmission and distribution grids need a certain level 
of “smartness”, because RE is characterized by non-
controllable 
variability, 
partial 
unpredictability 
and 
locational dependency [1]. So, the integration of photovoltaic 
plants and wind farms into the grid entails the need to 
provide proper solutions to a wide range of problems not 
entirely new to the network but still more critical. The huge 
amount of RE can negatively affect the efficiency of classic 
fossil fuel-based generators and reduce their lifetime because 
it forces them to operate in not optimal and continuously 
changing conditions to balance load and overall supply.  
Today, Distribution System Operators (DSOs) must 
compensate RE output fluctuation, grid faults, conventional 
generation outages, load variation with more flexibility 
consisting in conventional generation flexibility (e.g., “unit 
commitment” techniques), demand/response, energy storage 
(e.g., batteries, hydrogen production and storage, water 
pumping, etc.) and grid-friendly RE generation. In this 
context, the INGRID FP7 European co-funded project 
[2][3][4] is studying several solutions, which this work, still 
in progress, is part of. In order to balance power supply and 
demand by empowering the grid flexibility, the proposed 
solution may either shift the electricity adsorption or modify 
the energy injected into the grid. These methods must be 
applied in the context of a strict cooperation with the 
distribution system operator. Our integrated approach 
involves combining a solid-state high-density hydrogen 
storage system with advanced solutions for smart distribution 
grids, which monitor and control a large number of RES. In 
the vision of the INGRID project, when a huge amount of 
energy produced by RES injected into the distribution grid 
reaches a critical level in terms of balancing, power quality, 
grid stability and so on, this amount of green energy (or part 
of it) may be transformed and moved on a different energy 
vector, e.g., hydrogen, syngas, Full Electric Vehicle (FEV) 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

mobility, or simply injected into the grid again, by providing 
proper ancillary services. The brain of the proposed solution 
is the Energy Management System (EMS). 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: in 
Section II, an overview of the related works is provided; in 
Section III, the INGRID System is described; in Section IV, 
more details are provided about the role played by the EMS; 
in Section V, the EMS optimisation problem is modelled as 
well as the solution that is being investigated to address it; in 
Section VI, the conclusions are given. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Many research projects and initiatives are focused on 
proposing new approaches and solutions to balance energy 
supply and demand when renewable sources are integrated 
into the electric grid. Recently closed EU co-funded FP7 
projects, like SEESGEN-ICT [5], INTEGRIS [6] or 
HiPerDNO [7], aim at designing and implementing new 
solutions for EMS, in particular through communication 
networks improvements. Other research works, like the 
recently ended MIRABEL project [8], propose an approach 
on a conceptual and infrastructural level that allows energy 
distribution companies to balance the available supply of 
renewable energy sources and the current demand in an ad-
hoc fashion. Moreover, many research works concerning 
optimization strategies for EMS have been published. As 
reported in [9][10][11] the optimization strategy is based on 
a proper objective function that may be a profit function or a 
losses function. However, despite a considerable amount of 
research undertaken in ICT-based EMS, significant research 
challenges do exist in terms of improving sustainability, 
reliability and cost-efficiency of energy supply. Of course, in 
order to cope with these challenges, significant changes 
towards an ICT-empowered Smart Energy Grid are required. 
Moreover, the expected transition to Smart Grids requires 
deep technological transformations and huge financial 
investments. This involves enhancing and upgrading existing 
infrastructure, implementing new systems and improving 
integration throughout the ICT operating environment. 
In general, very partial and fragmented solutions have 
been proposed so far. A comprehensive yet fully integrated 
contextual data model is missing, as well as a suitable 
intelligence in the processing of the captured information; all 
of these aspects will be fundamental for proactively 
predicting the energy production and accordingly fine tuning 
the energy produced and transmitted into the grid.  
Current EMSs are lagging behind due to their low 
integration level among the different subsystems, like power 
grid, RE sources, storage system, etc., which prevent EMSs 
to effectively accomplish their task of mitigating the 
intermittent energy supply from RE sources through 
balancing activities offered by storage systems. 
III. 
THE INGRID SYSTEM 
The INGRID system will strictly collaborate with the 
Distribution Management System (DMS). That collaboration 
will allow either to adsorb or to inject active or reactive 
energy considering both DSO indications and results coming 
from each subsystem. 
When needed, the INGRID system may indirectly adsorb 
the electricity produced by RES based plant outside INGRID 
system by means of an electrical connection to the grid. 
Moreover it may directly adsorb/supply electricity if an 
internal RES (iRES) based plant inside INGRID system is 
taken into account. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Graphical representation of the INGRID System. 
As depicted in Figure 1, the adsorbed electricity is used 
to supply a Water Electrolyser (WE) to produce hydrogen 
which may be either stocked in an innovative solid-state 
storage system by exploiting a patented magnesium 
hydrides-based technology, or directly injected into existent 
methane pipeline (if feasible). The hydrogen, stored in high 
capacity but conventionally sized tanks, can be sold in the 
green H2 market (open loop) or can be used to supply a Fuel 
Cell (FC) that, according to the specific strategy adopted by 
the System, converts it again in electricity (closed loop). This 
electricity is either injected into the grid or used by the 
charging stations of an innovative green urban mobility 
system [12] whose management system is named Intelligent 
Dispenser (ID). Grouping all the subsystems in two main 
categories, i.e., loads or sources, the INGRID EMS, 
addressed by this paper at a very preliminary stage, is the 
ICT-based component in charge of monitoring and 
controlling the power flows from sources to loads.  
TABLE I.  
POSSIBLE ENERGY CONNECTIONS 
 
  
  
Loads 
  
  
Grid 
AUX 
ID 
H2P&D 
Sources 
Grid 
no 
yes 
Yes 
Yes 
iRES 
yes 
yes 
yes 
Yes 
FC 
yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
 
In Table 1, a schema of the possible electric connections 
inside the plant is reported, where AUXiliary equipment 
(AUX) is considered as well. 
In order to perform a real-time demand/supply balance 
according 
to 
a 
specific 
strategy 
(e.g., 
economic 
sustainability), the EMS must exchange information about 
energy requests and offers, costs and prices, constraints and 
degrees of freedom, with all the System sub-units that will be 
equipped with proper management systems. For instance, the 
Hydrogen Production and Distribution System (H2P&DS) 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

will control hydrogen production, manage its storage, accept 
purchase orders, supervise and manage the tanks delivery 
and its injection into the gas distribution network. But, it also 
will predict its own power adsorption in the future hours and 
communicate this adsorption profile to the EMS that, in its 
turn, will decide if and to what extent the required power 
adsorption profile will be followed. In general, the EMS 
receives (sends) from (to) each subsystem a load or 
generation trend intended as a graph of power vs time. The 
time (horizontal axis) is divided in different “time slots” 
where the EMS, in accordance with a certain optimisation 
strategy, defines the power level (vertical axis) of each 
subsystem, i.e., the set-point of each component, its electrical 
connections and widely the plant configuration.  
The System that is being currently designed will be 
instantiated in a concrete 39 MWh energy storage facility 
that will be deployed and will operate in Troia (Puglia 
region, Italy). As a variable passive load (0 - 1200 kW), the 
plant will be connected to a middle voltage feeder of a 
primary substation (150/20 kV/kV). As a variable generator 
(0-90 kW), the plant will be connected to a low voltage 
power line. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Exchange profile from Terna to Enel Distribuzione in Puglia 
region. 
The primary substation has been identified among the 
ones having an high value of power reverse flow, calculated 
as the number of hours in one year in which the phenomena 
occurs. The curves in the Figure 2 represent the power 
requested by the distribution network managed by Enel 
Distribuzione in the Puglia region, to the transmission and 
transport grid, managed by Terna, the unique Transport 
System Operator (TSO) in Italy. The diagram shows the 
effect of the growing distributed generation from 2010 to 
2012. The curves are lowered along years reaching a value of 
zero (in 2012, the local RES generation balanced the local 
adsorption) and even a reverse flow during the low load days 
occurred. 
IV. 
THE ROLE PLAYED BY THE EMS 
The EMS is the core of the INGRID system defining the 
energy adsorption/supply of the INGRID components. 
Energy Management Systems can be found in a number of 
different applications, since this generic denomination can be 
adopted whenever some kind of management must be 
applied to energy (e.g., mobile devices, data centres, FEVs, 
smart buildings, etc.).  
In the Smart Grid domain, the concept of EMS-Family 
has been recently proposed [13]; it includes different types of 
EMS for generation plants, for TSOs, for DSOs, for 
substations, for micro-grids and final energy consumers. All 
these systems are coordinated by a global EMS that can be 
considered as the Smart Grid brain. The system described in 
this paper is in charge of dispatching electric power flows 
among the different sub modules of the overall infrastructure 
by significantly contributing to grid balancing, while 
ensuring the economic sustainability by selling hydrogen and 
providing FEV charging services. 
The proposed  EMS will be based on the concept of a 
closed-loop feedback control process. The feedback cycle 
starts with the collection and monitoring of relevant data 
from the interested sources that reflect a fine-grained state of 
the whole system. A comprehensive contextual information 
model will fully describe the whole status of the involved 
parties, i.e., the Green Energy Storage (GES), the grid or the 
Green Urban Mobility System, as well as factors which 
affect the decisions for energy dispatching, i.e., price of both 
energy and hydrogen, historical energy demand, etc. 
Structuring and reasoning about the collected data will be 
done during the subsequent analysis phase which will 
include machine learning methods and semantic contextual 
information extraction, business intelligence and statistical 
methods, consumption forecasting and distribution rules.  
The analysis phase will originally combine and integrate 
intelligent processing technologies, e.g., basic and advanced 
statistics, data mining, complex event processing (CEP), 
predictive analytics, etc., to plan all the power flows internal 
to the plants and towards the grid as well as the hydrogen 
tanks transfers into the green hydrogen market.  
Applying CEP techniques in the domain of the Smart 
Grid will allow to detect relevant events from the distributed 
and heterogeneous data sources and to analyse their impact 
in real time. Based on the results coming from the analysis, 
the EMS will take a decision about how to reach a desirable 
state, often taking into account opposing goals, involving 
also external factors, such as local policy for a risk analysis 
about reliability of the whole energy system.  
Finally, in order to accomplish all the decision task 
balancing the energy flows, the EMS must monitor each of 
the overall system sub-modules, i.e., the WE, the Hydrogen 
Solid-state Storage (HSS), the FC, the ID and its scheduling 
system, the local RES production and related predictions as 
well as all the request coming from the DSO (e.g., through 
the DMS), the price of energy, the price of hydrogen, etc., 
The full feedback process can follow two approaches 
where, according to the requirements of reliability and/or to 
risk policies, a human intervention can be required or not, 
enabling the EMS system to follow either fully automatic or 
semi-automatic 
paradigm 
by 
requesting 
the 
human 
intervention in order to achieve the desired goal. So, human 
operators will be able to question, and possibly, to override 
the decisions. Similarly, the knowledge will be incremental, 
learning from past successful and unsuccessful decisions 
taken by the system, as well as from issued human advices. 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

V. 
THE EMS OPTIMISATION PROBLEM 
The optimisation problem is related to the maximisation 
of an objective function. In this case revenues and costs have 
to be taken into account and a profit function is considered, 
as fully described in [14], and just reported here.  
∑           (  )                         (  )        (  )  
 
   
 
      (  )          (  )     (   )   (  )           (  )     
      (  )          (  )         (  )          (  ) (       (  )      
      (  )         
   
 
 
 
      (1) 
The WE power level at a generic instant is represented by 
        where            is the part dedicated to the open 
loop.           is the energy adsorbed by the grid to supply 
the ID and is the part of the overall required energy 
(            ) sold at the price    .      represents the FC 
power dedicated to the ID, while (   )    is related to the 
ancillary services.      represents the related incentive,       
the electricity price,      the RES power.   is a conversion 
parameter from electrical energy to H2 quantity,   is the 
round-trip efficiency,    are technical weights and   
  is the 
incentive granted by the DSO for following its profiles. 
The first part of the function represents the possible 
revenues from electricity supply and hydrogen production, 
whereas the second one is related to the incurred costs. Some 
weights are used to take into account technical constrains.  
Moreover, that function has to be maximized considering 
different technical constraints as the maximum FC power, 
the advised range of the WE power level, the capability of 
the HSS system and so on. As an example, the constraint 
related to the storage capability is reported below: 
              (    )            (  )             (  )      
                     
 
 
 
      (2) 
where             and                represent the closed 
loop HSS charge state and its capability, respectively.  
Considering the complexity and nonlinear trends, three 
different algorithms are being implemented to solve the 
optimisation problem: two heuristic algorithms, Simulated 
Annealing and Tabu Search, and the nonlinear programming 
method Generalised Reduced Gradient. By means of these 
algorithms, the EMS will control a subset of the input 
variables defining an optimal plant configuration for each 
considered time slot (  ) in a wide time horizon (N*  ). 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS 
The proposed solution is a variable and controllable 
load/generator, whose cooperation with the DSO will 
support the electric grid balancing, following the adsorption 
or generation profiles sent periodically. The development of 
new incentive models to support such a flexible system, the 
management of the hydrogen production and sale and energy 
supply to electric vehicles will help to accomplish this task. 
The system potentiality in real conditions will be tested 
by a prototype connected to a feeder of a primary substation 
where a power reverse flow occurs, since the renewable 
energy produced exceeds the adsorbed one. The proposed 
solution will be as much general and versatile as possible, 
allowing the adoption of different optimization approaches.  
The results achieved by applying the proposed algorithms 
will be processed and released soon and will help to evaluate 
the economic sustainability of the proposed solution. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is part of the INGRID project, co-funded by 
the European Commission (EC) within the FP7 Framework 
Programme. Authors thank the members of the INGRID 
Consortium as well as the EC for supporting any project 
dissemination activities. This work reflects only the authors’ 
views. The Commission is not liable for any use that may be 
made of the information contained therein. 
REFERENCES 
[1] “Grid integration of large-capacity Renewable Energy sources 
and use of large-capacity Electrical Energy Storage”, White 
Paper, IEC MSB, Oct. 2012, http://www.iec.ch/ 2014.1.13 
[2] INGRID 
(High-capacity 
hydrogen-based 
green-energy 
storage solutions for grid balancing) EU FP7 project: 
http://www.ingridproject.eu/ 2014.1.13 
[3] D. Arnone et al., “An ICT-based Energy Management System 
to Integrate Renewable Energy and Storage for Grid 
Balancing”, ACM e-Energy 2013, Berkeley, USA, May 2013. 
[4] A. Rossi, D. Arnone, M. Bertoncini, and D. Moneta, “Sistema 
di gestione energetico innovativo con stoccaggio a idrogeno 
per l’integrazione di fonti rinnovabili a supporto del 
bilanciamento della rete”, AEIT 2013, Palermo, Oct. 2013. 
[5] SEESGEN-ICT (Supporting Energy Efficiency in Smart 
GENeration 
grids 
through 
ICT) 
EU 
FP7 
project: 
http://seesgen-ict.rse-web.it/ 2014.1.13 
[6] INTEGRIS 
(INTelligent 
Electrical 
Grid 
Sensor 
communications) EU FP7 project: http://fp7integris.eu/ 
2014.1.13 
[7] HiPerDNO (High Performance Computing Technologies for 
Smart Distribution Network Operation) EU FP7 project: 
http://dea.brunel.ac.uk/hiperdno/ 2013.1.13 
[8] MIRABEL (Micro-Request-Based Aggregation, Forecasting 
and Scheduling of Energy Demand, Supply and Distribution) 
EU FP7 project: http://www.miracle-project.eu/ 2014.1.13 
[9] M. Aguado et al., “Economical assessment of a wind 
hydrogen energy system using WindHyGen® software”, 
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, vol. 34, issue 7, 
Apr. 2009, pp 2845-2854. 
[10] R. Dufo-López, J. L. Bernal-Agustín, and J. Contreras, 
“Optimization of control strategies for stand-alone renewable 
energy systems with hydrogen storage”, Renewable Energy, 
vol. 32, issue 7, June 2007, pp. 1102-1126. 
[11] R. Carapellucci and L. Giordano, “Modeling and optimization 
of an energy generation island based on renewable 
technologies and hydrogen storage systems”, International 
Journal of Hydrogen Energy, vol. 37, issue 3, Feb. 2012, pp. 
2081-2093. 
[12] F. D'Errico, A. Screnci, and M. Romeo, “A Green Urban 
Mobility 
System 
Solution 
from 
the 
EU 
Ingrid 
Project”, REWAS 
2013: 
Enabling 
Materials 
Resource 
Sustainability, pp. 179-191.  
[13] H. Sun, B. Zhang, W. Wu, and Q. Guo, “Family of energy 
management system for smart grid”, ISGT Europe 2012, 3rd 
IEEE PES International Conference and Exhibition, 14-17 
Oct. 2012, pp. 1-5. 
[14] “D2.4 - EMS Requirements and Algorithms Analysis”, FP7 
INGRID Project’s report, unpublished. 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

