Simulation Tool For Energy Consumption and Production 
The development of a simulation tool for measuring the impact of a smart grid on a building 
Michael Nysteen, Henrik Mynderup, Bjarne Poulsen, Chresten Træholt 
Department of Informatics and Mathematical Modelling & Department of Electrical Engineering  
Technical University of Denmark 
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 
{s062413, s062373}@student.dtu.dk, bjp@imm.dtu.dk, ctr@elektro.dtu.dk 
 
 
Abstract—In order to promote adoption of smart grid with the 
general public it is necessary to be able to visualize the benefits 
of a smart home. Software tools that model the effects can help 
significantly with this. However, only little work has been done 
in the area of simulating and visualizing the energy 
consumption in smart homes. This paper presents a prototype 
simulation tool that allows graphical modeling of a home. 
Based on the modeled homes the user is able to simulate the 
energy consumptions and compare scenarios. The simulations 
are based on dynamic weather and energy price data as well as 
a controller unit of the user’s choice. The results of the 
simulations can be compared using a dynamic reporting 
window that allows the user to create custom charts of the 
data. The application has been designed such that it can easily 
be extended with additional controller units, price and weather 
data as well as appliances and other electrical components used 
in the modeled homes. 
Keywords-Smart grid; simulation; modeling; controller; 
smart home; software; graphical user interface; end-user 
application; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
According to a Danish workgroup [1], the government 
needs to increase the awareness of the smart grid technology 
with the consumers to smooth the transition to smart grid. 
Following the above mentioned recommendation a tool that 
helps people realizing the effects of smart grid integration in 
private homes is needed.  
The power grid today is highly affected by variations in the 
use of power during a day. The energy use during the night 
is very low, but the use of energy increases significantly 
during a couple of hours in the morning, afternoon and 
evening (called peak hours) when people come home from 
work. Today the demand in these peak hours are met by 
powering up so called peaker plants that can be started up 
rapidly when more power is required [2]. These typically 
run on oil or natural gas and are very expensive to operate. 
Furthermore, they produce a significant amount of pollution 
[3]. In some countries the consumption in the peak hours is 
reaching, or even exceeding, the full capacity of the grid and 
results in frequent power outages [4]. A way of shaving 
these peaks in consumption would be to give the consumer a 
motivation for moving her energy consumption to other 
periods of the day. Such a motivation is likely to be of 
economic character, e.g. by making energy cheaper outside 
of peak hours.  
 
In order to maximize the economic gain of dynamic 
pricing, energy should be consumed at the cheapest possible 
time. Several systems [5, 6], so called controller units, have 
been developed that control the energy consumption in the 
home by automatically increasing consumption when the 
prices are low and decreasing consumption during peak 
hours. This includes the Control4 EMS 100 controller system 
[5] and Tendril Connect [6] among others. Both of these 
systems can control any energy consumption in the home 
such as heating, lights and appliances as well as charging 
electric vehicles. 
A. Network Architecture of the Smart Grid 
The smart grid is based on a tiered architecture of a 
number of networks that connects all the parts of the smart 
grid, from power plants to the private home. The 
communication goes both ways so that each partner in the 
smart grid can communicate with each other, in theory. The 
smart grid can be divided into three main networks; Wide 
Area Network (WAN), Neighborhood Area Network (NAN) 
and Home Area Network (HAN).  
The solution described in this paper only focuses on the 
HAN, as this network is responsible for the communication 
between the appliances within the house. There are currently 
two overall approaches for constructing a Home Area 
Network without looking at which technologies to use. 
Common for both of the approaches is that a smart meter is 
connected to the HAN along with all the appliances. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. An example of a centralized HAN. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
A Decentralized HAN solution is where each appliance 
on the network will be responsible for their own 
scheduling. Each appliance is communicating with the 
smart meter directly using the chosen standard and they 
contain embedded controller software that based on the 
current power price decides how the appliance should 
act. This price is the current market price for a kWh 
which the smart meter receives from the distribution 
network. 
 
A Centralized HAN network is a network where all the 
appliances are connected to a router which may be 
connected to the Internet. The smart meter and a control 
unit are also connected to this network. In this scenario 
each of the appliances, which are connected to the 
network, only provides a software interface that can be 
used to control the appliance. This interface can then be 
accessed by the controller unit on the HAN. The 
controller unit will control the appliance based on the 
power price information that the controller unit gets 
from the smart meter. 
 
A Home Area Network in itself does not provide any 
intelligence to the home. This intelligence comes from the 
controller units connected to it (or partly by the individual 
appliances). By making the consumer aware of the dynamic 
prices she can save a significant amount of energy. A report 
from California Energy Commission [7] states that the 
average household can save 34.5% through technology used 
to inform people  of the varying prices and each units 
automatically adjusting their consumption according to the 
price. In order to maximize the benefit from this 
information, however, one needs something that can control 
energy consumption 24 hours a day. This is the so-called 
controller unit. A controller unit is placed in a centralized or 
decentralized HAN (here it is actually not a physical unit, 
but a unit distributed in all devices). The centralized 
approach can be divided into two types of controller units: 
A physical unit installed in the home that controls each unit 
based on the customer’s preferences or an external service 
communicating with the household over e.g. the Internet.  
B. State-of-the-Art Simulation  
A number of simulation tools that examine the energy 
consumption in homes have been developed. Many tools 
such as GridLab-D [8] and EnergyPlus [9] examine the 
energy consumption with focus on heat generation and 
thermal load of a building. Very few tools examine the 
home in the context of a smart grid where the price of 
energy varies throughout the day. One of the few tools that 
were found is PowerMatcher Simulation Tool [10]. It is, 
however, only intended to demonstrate the PowerMatcher 
technology which is a home controller system and the tool is 
therefore limited in features. It does e.g. not provide any 
means of modeling accurate energy consumption patterns 
based on many independent appliances, but simply allows 
the user to create a static energy demand [11].  
None of the existing simulation tools consider the effects 
of using different controller units for controlling the home’s 
energy consumption and none of them provide a modeling 
environment that allows the user to create an accurate 
representation of her home to be used in the simulations. 
This means that the existing tools cannot properly show a 
consumer how turning her home into a smart home will be 
of value to her. These points are addressed in this work. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 describes the identified requirements for the 
simulation tool and the targeted audience. Section 3 presents 
the core features of the prototype simulation tool and shows 
the Graphical User Interface (GUI). Finally, conclusion and 
future work are presented in sections 4 and 5. For an 
extensive explanation of the developed tool see the report 
that this paper is based on [12]. 
II. 
SOLUTION REQUIREMENTS 
The simulation tool that was developed in this work can 
provide reasonable simulations of how a private household 
is (financially) affected by a smart grid implementation. The 
simulation tool focuses on allowing the user to create a 
virtual household and add electrical appliances (washing 
machines, dish washers, refrigerators etc.) as well as local 
energy sources (such as wind turbines, solar cells etc.) to the 
household using a user friendly drag-and-drop approach. 
The focus of the simulations is to see how different 
scenarios affect the power bill when the energy 
consumption is controlled using various controller units.  
In order to simulate this, the application will use 
environmental variables which includes the weather 
(affecting power generated by wind turbines, solar cells etc.) 
and the prices of buying energy from external energy sources 
at any given time. Most of these variables will be importable 
from real sources or manually configurable. The application 
supports the creation of multiple home scenarios and lets the 
user compare these, giving the user the possibility of 
evaluating the value of potential appliances that might be 
added to the house in the future. The scenarios can also be 
executed without smart-scheduling, thereby allowing the 
user to compare the scenarios with and without smart-
scheduling enabled to see the effect of using controller units 
to schedule the energy consumption. 
A. Target Audience 
Three groups of people have been identified as potential 
users of the application. These groups are the consumer, 
energy advisers/salesmen and educators/educates. Each of 
these groups has been analyzed and their preferences in four 
categories have been compared: Focus, Interaction with 
Tool, Desired Output and Generic vs. Real Data. Focus 
refers to what the user wishes to achieve when using the 
application. Interaction with Application indicates what is 
most important to the user in the way she interacts with the 
application. Desired Output is the kind of output that 
supports the focus of the user in the best way.  
 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
Figure 2.      Shared interests between target audiences. 
 
Finally, Generic vs. Real Data refers to whether or not 
the user prefers realistic data about weather, energy prices, 
and more importantly manufacturer specific appliances or 
generic versions of the appliances and customizable weather 
and prices.  
The three user groups have a number of shared interests 
that they find important; Money savings, user friendliness 
and scenario comparisons. From the three main focus areas 
of the program it seems realistic to develop an application 
that can be used by all three user groups. Therefore the target 
audience is a combination of the three user groups. 
B. Electric Components in the Home 
In order to give the user the best possible results, the 
program needs to be as realistic as possible when modeling 
scenarios that they want simulated. Therefore the program 
has to contain realistic and user-customized content. 
In the program a home can consist of a lot of components 
such as lights, refrigerators, freezers, computers, TVs, 
washing machines etc. Some of the components, such as 
washing machines, can be scheduled based on dynamic 
prices while others, such as TVs, computers and lights, 
cannot. While you can still implement energy saving 
initiatives 
for 
non-schedulable 
components 
such 
as 
automatically turning off the components when you’re not 
home, the work described in this paper focuses on how 
components can be scheduled based on dynamic prices 
during a day. Therefore components will be placed in two 
groups; schedulable and non-schedulable components. 
Schedulable components will, as the name indicates, be 
scheduled by the simulation based on the dynamic prices, 
whereas the non-schedulable components will simply be run 
during a user-defined period each day regardless of the 
electricity price. 
III. 
SOLUTION PRESENTATION 
When the developed application is started the user is met 
by the main window. This window is shown in Fig. 3 and 
the four main regions of the program are marked.  
 
 
Figure 3.  The main window of the application with each of the primary 
regions marked. 
 
1. Ribbon navigation: This region provides the user with 
various options to manage the project including created 
models and simulations. 
2. Toolbox: This region contains all the elements that can 
be used when modeling a home.  
3. Canvas: The elements from the toolbox can be dragged 
onto this region to create the desired models of houses. 
4. Summary: This region provides a brief overview of the 
yearly power consumption distribution in the modeled 
homes.  
A. Input: The application provides data about power prices 
and weather to be used during the simulations. 
B. Simulation: The simulation component of the program 
simulates the consumption of the modeled homes and 
provides the results to the user. This is not shown in Fig. 
3. 
C. Reporting Window: The reporting window allows the 
user to analyze the results of the simulations provided by 
the simulation component. This can be seen in Fig. 8. 
 
The user can now start adding content to the Canvas (3) 
by dragging elements from the Toolbox (2) onto the Canvas 
or he can go through the options within the ribbon navigation 
(1). Initially the text on the Canvas informs the user that he 
can drag elements onto the canvas to start modeling. If the 
users choose to add content to the Canvas (3) the text on the 
canvas will change to inform the user of the next step, i.e. 
adding components. Once the user adds components to the 
scenario the Summary (4) will update. The summary region 
will contain a sum up of the content currently on the canvas, 
with information about their estimated yearly consumption 
and their overall part of the consumption of the house 
(Scenario).  
 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

A. Modelling - Toolbox 
In the left side of the program's main window is a 
toolbox containing all the elements that can be dragged onto 
the centered canvas. The toolbox is divided into logical 
categories where each category contains the elements 
related to it. The Cooking category could e.g. contain an 
oven and a stove as well as other cooking appliances. 
Clicking the expander arrow of a category unfolds it and 
clicking it again collapses the category.  
It is possible for the user to create new, delete or edit 
existing toolbox elements. This allows them to create 
exactly the elements that they use within their home and 
reuse them in another project. When the user wants to edit 
or delete elements they can do this from two places; from 
the modeling tab in the Ribbon and from a context menu 
that appear when right clicking on an element. Creating new 
elements can only be done from the modeling tab in the 
Ribbon. 
When choosing to delete or edit an element through the 
Ribbon the users will be prompted with a simple window 
where they can choose the element to edit or delete. When 
the user chooses to delete the element from either the 
window above or from the context menu, the element is 
deleted and will be removed from the toolbox. 
When choosing to edit an element the user is prompted 
with a new window which contains all the possible 
properties which can be edited on the selected element. 
Before saving the changes the input values are verified in 
order to ensure that they are of the correct format. It could 
be that numbers do not contain letter and so on. 
 
 
Figure 4.  The Edit Toolbox Element window that allows the user to edit 
properties of an element in the toolbox. 
 
In Fig. 4 a screenshot of the edit window can be seen, 
containing fields and values related to a Light Bulb element. 
As seen in the figure two buttons are placed in the bottom of 
the window. These buttons allow the user to cancel changes 
and close the window or save changes and close the 
window. 
The window for creating a new element is very similar 
to the edit window. The main difference is that when 
creating a new element you need to choose which type of 
element you want to create before the related fields will 
occur. When new elements are added to the toolbox it is 
automatically refreshed to include the new element. 
B. Modeling - Canvas 
The canvas is a crucial part of the modeling in the 
program. It is responsible for containing and presenting the 
result of the users modeling actions. Graphically the canvas 
is only a white background, but the elements which are 
shown on it are represented by an icon and some small 
buttons used for control and information.  
The estimated yearly consumption of the component is 
shown in the top right corner of its icon (see Fig. 5). The 
color indicates how high the consumption is; the darker red, 
the higher consumption. The component can be edited by 
right clicking it or through the controls that appear when 
hovering the mouse over it. 
      When modeling a home the components added to the 
home are connected via colored lines. The colors of these 
lines represent the category the component belongs to as 
seen in the toolbox.  
 
Figure 5.   Example of a modeled house with eight connected 
components. 
 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
 
C. Modeling - Summary 
As mentioned above a graphical summary of the 
estimated consumption of the scenarios on the canvas is 
shown in a view to the right of the canvas (see Fig. 7). The 
summary contains a section for each scenario on the canvas 
in which the consumptions of the components connected to 
the scenario is summed up and grouped by their category. 
The estimated consumptions are also displayed as a pie 
chart along with an estimated total yearly consumption for 
the scenario. The color of the categories is the same as the 
colors used by the lines connecting the components with the 
home. This makes it a lot easier for the user to identify 
which components are members of what category such that 
the reasons for a high consumption in a particular category 
can be identified quickly.  
 
 
Figure 7.    The summary displaying a breakdown of the consumption of 
a scenario. 
 
 
 
 
D. Input Data 
There are currently two types of input windows in the 
solution, one for weather data and one for power data. They 
are two very similar windows in which it is possible to 
retrieve data from a selected data provider. The window can  
be accessed through the buttons from the input tab in the 
ribbon navigation. In the top of the window is a drop down 
menu containing the providers you want to retrieve data 
from. Multiple different weather and power providers can be 
added to the application and selected here. Next to the drop 
down menu are two calendars where the user can select the 
start and end date for the period that he want to retrieve data 
for. Clicking the “Get Data” button retrieves the specified 
data and displays it in the window. In the current 
implementation no CO2 data is retrieved although it is part 
of the simulations as there are currently no accessible 
sources for this information.  
To create custom data models the user can add or edit 
values in the fields by selecting the field with the cursor and 
then typing the new value into the field. This enables the 
user to create her own examples of data for special events 
like storms or increasing oil prices and use these when 
performing simulations.  
E. Simulation 
To perform a simulation the user has to navigate to the 
Simulation tab, which can be seen above in Fig. 6. In this 
tab the user can either inspect previously performed 
simulations or perform a new simulation, as described in 
this section. Before starting a new simulation the user has to 
consider the values in the five settings controls to the left of 
the “Run Simulation”-button. 
     As seen in Fig. 6 the users starts off by choosing which 
type of controller they want to use for their scheduling. The 
application supports having multiple different controllers 
using different simulation strategies to choose from. Then 
the users need to set the time span that they want to run the 
simulation over, by setting a start and end date. Finally it is 
possible for the users to select which power and weather data 
they want to use for the simulation. Here it is possible to 
select the earlier created input models (Weather and Power), 
such that they can simulate a user created setup. To run the 
simulation the user presses the “Run Simulation”-button and 
then waits for the program to notify when the simulation is 
finished. While waiting, the user can see the progress of the 
simulation in a window that opens when the simulation 
starts. 
 
Figure 6     The simulation tab of the ribbon navigation menu. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

The simulation divides the modeled components into two 
main groups: Components which consumption can be 
automatically controlled and components which are turned 
on and off manually by users. Components that can be 
controlled will be scheduled based on the price model chosen 
for the simulation such that the total consumption of the 
component is as small as possible while still respecting 
defined rules for the component such as temperature limits 
for refrigerators or total on-time required for washing 
machines. Components that cannot be scheduled will 
consume energy based on the pattern defined by the user 
when modeling the scenario. The algorithms used for 
calculating the consumption of components are very general 
and the intention is that the prototype is extended with 
models of real components containing more specific 
calculations for the given component. The consumption of 
the components is calculated independently of each other. 
F. Reporting 
Based on every simulation performed, one or more 
reports can be made. A report consists of an overview of the 
simulation results along with a number of charts. The 
reporting window lets the user see and edit the reports of a 
simulation. The reporting window can be found either by 
clicking on the “Show Report” button when a simulation is 
finished or by choosing an older simulation in a drop down 
menu in the ribbon and clicking on the “Inspect Selected 
Simulation” button. The reporting window can be seen in 
Fig. 8.  
At the top left is a drop down menu saying “Apartment” 
in Fig. 8. This menu allows the user to choose for which 
home to show the simulation result (in this screenshot the 
name of the chosen home is “Apartment”). The chart called 
“Overview” shows the consumption pattern of each of the 
components of that home in the simulated period. 
 
 
Figure 8.    The reporting window used to analyze the results of a 
simulation. 
 
    The x-axis shows the time and the y-axis shows the 
consumption at the given time in watt-hours. To the left of 
the overview chart is a view very similar to the summary. 
This area works similarly, but instead of showing the 
estimated yearly consumption it shows the consumption in 
the simulated period for each category as well as the total 
price for the power used by each category. These values are 
from the actual simulation rather than estimations and 
should therefore be more accurate than the ones found in the 
summary in the main window. These categories are also 
shown in the specific color of the category as in the 
summary. Upon cursor hovering over each category an 
estimation of the yearly consumption, price and CO2 
emission can be seen, calculated by scaling up the simulated 
results to match a year. Therefore the longer the simulation 
period is, the more accurate these results become (see Fig. 
9).  
     Below the overview is a region called “Create a Custom 
Chart”. It provides the user with controls to create charts 
based on the simulation results. The charts can be generated 
from a wide range of parameters. The first column of 
controls allows the user to choose the start and end time of 
the data for the new chart. By default this is the first and last 
data entry of the simulation result. The second column 
allows the user to select which data series to add from the 
model. In the first drop down the user can select what 
components to include in the chart. The second drop down 
holds the properties to be displayed for the selected 
components such as price, CO2 emission, consumption or 
on-time intervals. The last drop down allows the user to add 
data series to the chart that shows the total consumption of 
the homes selected in this drop down. All three drop down 
menus allow for multiple elements to be chosen at the same 
time.  
 
 
Figure 9.  A screenshot showing the tooltip displayed when hovering the 
cursor over a category in the overview. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

     In the third column the user can choose which input data 
to display in the chart such as wind speeds, power prices etc. 
By adding these it becomes easy to see how the components 
have been scheduled compared to the fluctuating prices and 
weather. The final column specifies information about the 
chart that should hold the series specified in the other 
columns. The first drop down allows the user to add series 
to an existing chart or to choose to add them to a new chart. 
If “New Chart” is chosen (i.e. leaving the value empty) the 
user can specify a title and a chart type (line, bar, pie etc.) 
for the chart. Clicking the “Add Series” button creates the 
series and/or chart specified and adds them to the “Custom 
Charts” region.  
     Fig. 10 shows two examples of charts that have been 
created. The first one contains series showing the prices 
over time for a refrigerator and a washing machine in the 
home. The second chart shows the fluctuating power prices 
in the same period. It is important to note that all series 
(consumption, prices, wind speeds etc.) can be combined in 
the same charts. This provides a very high flexibility when 
creating charts, but also means that the y-axis of the custom 
charts is without unit as it may at the same time represent 
currency, watt-hours, m/s and more. Additionally, some 
series, such as consumption of washing machines, will show 
very large values whereas some series, such as power prices, 
will show very low values, making these series impractical 
to have in the same chart. Therefore it is advisable to 
separate them into two charts and compare these as shown 
in Fig. 10. 
     In the upper right corner of each chart are three buttons: 
Edit, save and delete. The delete button removes the chart 
from the report. The edit button opens an Edit Chart 
window (see Fig. 11) in which the user can change the name 
and type of the chart as well as remove series from the chart 
by clicking on the trash bin next to the series.  
 
 
Figure 10      A selection of the reporting window showing the 
Custom Charts section in which the charts created by the user are 
displayed. 
 
Figure 11      The view in which the user can edit an existing chart. 
 
     When a report has been created with the desired charts it 
can be saved using the save icon in the upper left corner of 
the reporting window. This allows the user to choose a name 
for the report and when it has been saved the user can toggle 
between which report to show, using the drop down menu 
just above the region with the custom charts. Since reports 
are connected to a single simulation result only reports 
connected to the same simulation result can be displayed this 
way. If reports connected to another simulation result needs 
to be displayed the reporting window must be closed and the 
desired simulation result should be found in the drop down 
menu in the ribbon using “Inspect Selected Simulation” as 
explained earlier in this section. It is, however, possible to 
have two reporting windows open at the same time showing 
different simulation results if comparison across simulations 
is required 
IV. 
CONCLUSION  
As mentioned in the beginning of the paper the Danish 
workgroup, Smart Grid Netværket, recommended that the 
knowledge of the smart grid should be increased at consumer 
level in order to increase the acceptance of the smart grid. 
The presented work contributes to reaching this goal by 
allowing consumers to model their own home and see how 
their energy consumption would change if the appliances 
were smart grid enabled and the house used fluctuating 
energy prices rather than flat rate prices.  
An analysis of the state-of-the-art simulation tools 
showed that very little work has been done in the area and 
that the existing tools are mostly non-graphical and therefore 
not very easy to use. The current work offers a low entry 
barrier for people to model their own home energy 
consumption. Additionally, previous work does not provide 
much opportunity to model specific homes and the 
incorporation of real energy and weather data is non-existent. 
Lastly the graphical analysis and comparison of different 
simulations were virtually absent in all previous work. These 
above mentioned facts provided the incentive for developing 
this simulation tool. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Additionally, a number of other areas have been 
identified in which the application may prove valuable. This 
includes salesmen that wish to illustrate the economic 
benefits of their product (see Fig. 1) and utility companies 
that wish to measure the flexibility of the homes connected 
to the grid, as identified during a meeting with a leading 
manufacturer of smart home controllers in Denmark. 
The application has multiple uses. One of them is to 
answer the question: “How will the smart grid affect my 
energy bill?”. This question can be answered by creating a 
model of the home and running a simulation using no smart 
grid enabled components and a flat rate power model and 
running a simulation using smart grid enabled components 
and fluctuating energy prices. A case study has been 
performed that models a typical four person house with 
dryer, washing machine, dishwasher, freezer, refrigerator etc. 
The case study showed that changing from flat rate to 
fluctuating energy prices the consumer can save €78. If the 
consumer also invests in smart grid enabling all the 
appliances the savings increase to €148 for the house [12]. 
This should be enough motivation for most users to 
participate in the smart grid [13]. Obtaining such a saving 
requires investments in new equipment and the price of such 
investments is difficult to estimate due to the limited range of 
products and the unsettled prices. Therefore the return of 
investment of the modeled setup is not easily predicted.  
V. 
FUTURE DEVELOPMENT 
The goal was to create an application that would be 
simple and easy to develop further. Therefore, one of the 
main focus areas of the application was extensibility and the 
application was designed with the best practice software 
principles of loose coupling. A list of the most significant 
suggested extensions is shown below. 
 
 
Integration with other simulation tools, such as GridLab-
D, to include other aspects of consumptions for e.g. 
heating of homes. 
 
Include floor plans of the modeled household to provide 
more precise heating calculations. 
 
Provide a list of components based on the simulations 
that would provide lower energy consumptions than the 
components in the home. 
 
Support dependencies between components, such that 
the scheduling between them can be synchronized when 
simulating, such as TVs and DVD players. 
 
Historic consumption data from the user could be 
integrated to provide knowledge of usage patterns and 
thereby provide even more accurate results. 
 
Web based deployment such that the application can use 
more computational power and the users can get access 
to the application through a web browser. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Klima- Energi- og Bygningsministeriet, ”Smart Grid 
Netværkets Arbejde - Sammenfatning og anbefalinger,” 2011, 
p. 12. 
[2] K. Haas, “Peaking power plants,” 2009 [cited 2012 13/2]; 
Available from: 
http://www.energyandcapital.com/articles/peaker-plants-
bridge-the-gap/991. 
[3] Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. “Peaker power 
plant fact sheet,” 2011 [cited 2012 13/2]; Available from: 
http://www.epa.state.il.us/air/fact-sheets/peaker-power-
plant.html. 
[4] K. Nozik, “Eastern power outage unfortunate but entirely 
predictable,” n.d. [cited 2012 25/8]; Available from: 
http://www.frugalmarketing.com/dtb/electricity.shtml. 
[5] Control4. “Introducing the Control4 EMS 100,” 2012 [cited 
2012 24/2]; Available from: 
http://control4.com/energy/products/. 
[6] Tendril. “Tendril Connect,” 2012 [cited 2012 24/2]; Available 
from: http://www.tendrilinc.com/platform/connect/. 
[7] California Energy Commission and Charles River Associates, 
“Statewide pricing pilot: Summer 2003 Impact Analysis,” 
Charles River Associates, 2004. 
[8] GridLAB-D. “GridLab-D simulation software,” 2011 [cited 
2012 22/2]; Available from: http://www.gridlabd.org/. 
[9] EnergyPlus, “Getting started with EnergyPlus, in basic 
concepts manual - essential information you need about 
running EnergyPlus,” US Department of Energy, 2011. 
[10] PowerMatcher Smartgrid Technology, “Basic structure and 
agent roles,” n.d.  [cited 2012 6/6]; Available from: 
http://www.powermatcher.net/get-technical/powermatcher-
technology/basic-structure-and-agent-roles/. 
[11] PowerMatcher Smartgrid Technology, “PowerMatcher 
simulation tool,” Energy Research Centre of the Netherlands, 
2012. 
[12] M. Nysteen and H. Mynderup, “A smart home simulation tool 
– the development of a simulation tool for measuring the 
impact of a smart grid on a private home,” The Technical 
University of Denmark, 2012, pp. 1-148. 
[13] Konkurrencestyrelsen, ”Konkurrencen på detailmarkedet for 
el,” 2009, pp. 9-14. 
[14] M. Nysteen and H. Mynderup, ”Program Installation,” 
https://www.dropbox.com/s/8eiuhsmyfusvuwk/Program%20In
stallation.rar  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The application’s installation files can be found at [14]. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

