Implementing Load Management in Manufacturing Companies: A Feasible 
Approach 
 
Jan Hicking, Steffen Nienke, Günther Schuh 
Institute for Industrial Management  
at RWTH Aachen University (FIR) 
Aachen, Germany 
E-mail: Jan.Hicking@fir.rwth-aachen.de 
 
Abstract—In order to introduce load management in the 
manufacturing industry, some obstacles need to be pointed out. 
This paper presents a feasible approach on how to implement 
load management measures in companies. To do so, load 
management and energy management are explained and 
distinguished in a first step. Subsequently, the implementation 
method is introduced. Therefore, by using this paper, companies 
will be enabled to use load management measure and reduce 
their energy costs significantly.  
Keywords - Load management; Energy management; Energy 
Monitoring; Manufacturing industry; Renewable energies. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In a continuously changing production environment, the 
ability to stay competitive depends for the majority of 
companies on the production price of a product [1]–[3]. The 
ability to produce a product at lower costs can lead to a 
significant 
market 
advantage. 
Therefore, 
the 
ideal 
adjustments of essential target values like occupancy, 
timelines, or process costs are crucial for a company’s 
success [2]. However, the costs for resource, energy and 
production utility raised in the last decades dramatically [4].  
In particular, the price for electrical energy in Germany has 
risen severely over recent years. This development refers to 
the increasing expansion of renewable energy [1]. Within the 
implementation of the priority access of renewable energy the 
prices for electrical energy raised [5]. This development 
refers to the fact, that the EEG-allocation (EEG: German 
Renewable Energy Sources Act, legislation to foster the use 
and invest in renewable energies) in Germany increases in the 
amount of expanding renewable energies [6]. As a result of 
the expansion of renewable energy the grid stability is 
endangered [7]. The priority access of volatile renewable 
energy leads to an unsecure supply reliability, which is one 
of the most important location factors for the German 
manufacturing industry [8].  
Raising energy prices promotes a significant competitive 
disadvantage for the manufacturing industry shown in Figure 
1 [5]. Moreover, growing scarcity of resources pushes energy 
prices [1]. Especially the scarcity of resources in the past 
increased environmental awareness in society and industry 
[2][9]. 
 
Figure 1. Development of energy prices [10] 
In order to guarantee the grid security and create a greater 
environmental compatibility, Germany published a target to 
develop the most energy efficient and environmental 
friendliest economy in the world [11]. The focus of this 
program is the expansion of renewable energy. To 
compensate the incoming side effects like increasing energy 
prices flexibility mechanisms are even more relevant. The 
management of loads in the electrical grid can be realised by 
using flexibility potentials in manufacturing industry. The 
identification of those potentials is very important. Hence the 
survey of process-specific energy data in the manufacturing 
industry is necessary to point out any potential [12]–[14]. In 
this context, information gathering can be done by continuous 
energy monitoring of manufacturing companies [2]. Many 
companies are struggling to identify which information is 
necessary for load management and how the information can 
be collected. Consequently, there is a lack of a structured 
approach on how to create the information base to archive the 
energy transparency as a first step to load management. The 
presented approach focusses on the manufacturing industry, 
as literature research confirms, that this area has the greatest 
potential for load management. However, the concept can 
easily be adopted to other application areas (e.g. Office 
buildings). 
In Section 2, this paper describes fundamentals of load 
management concepts. In Section 3 it then focusses on the 
implement of load management in the manufacturing 
industry. Considering, among other things, organisational 
requirements as well as the necessary transparency of the 
energy system, this paper develops a general approach to 
introduce load management in manufacturing companies.  
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-556-2
ENERGY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

II. 
DEFINITIONS AND FUNDAMENTALS 
Describing basic concepts and distinguishing several 
terms within the field of energy management, load 
management and energy efficiency is essential to get a 
common understanding of the presented work. In contrast to 
base loads that is covered by conventional power plants like 
lignite-fired power plants or nuclear power plants, the 
sustainable generation in renewable energy plants usually 
cannot be controlled. These circumstances lead to a 
discrepancy between feed-in time and amount of fed-in 
power of some renewable energy technologies like wind and 
solar systems [7][15][16]. To get deeper understanding of 
this, Figure 2 visualises a comparison of installed and given 
power of renewable energy technologies. The figure displays 
the discrepancy of installed and given power of renewable 
energy technologies in January, May and June. Biomass and 
hydropower are not volatile. Therefore, the loads are nearly 
constant or were reduced by demand management. The 
behaviors of Solar and Wind plants are quite different. The 
strong volatility of solar can be seen in the difference between 
January and May. Wind, on the other hand, covers 70% of 
the installed load in January, but drops the production close 
to zero in June.  
German 
electricity 
transmission 
system 
operators 
compensate the incoming volatility by using control energy. 
Within this concept manageable power plants like gas turbine 
plants or pumped-storage power plants are usually used [17]. 
The control energy concept leads to dealing with peak loads 
or loss loads properly [18]. In Summary it can be said, that 
through expanding renewable energy in the electrical grids 
the supply reliability cannot be guaranteed. Dealing with the 
volatility of renewables refers to the priority access of those 
ones legitimated by EEG-allocation. Control energy uses 
load flexibilities to secure supply reliability. This is necessary 
to ensure the critical success factor like low energy prices for 
a society with a manufacturing industry as leading edge. 
However, energy prices are rising. Therefore, load 
management is one possible opportunity to compensate 
increasing energy prices. 
 
 
Figure 2. Renewable energy volatility [19] 
A. Definition of Energy 
Energy is a fundamental factor. Several types of energy 
can be transformed into each other, but neither be created nor 
exterminated [7][14][20]. Energy is used to heat buildings or 
to warm up process fluids to a high temperature (space or 
process heat). Besides that, energy is used to drive engines 
within machines or vehicles. In this context, energy is called 
mechanical energy or electrical energy. 
B. Definition of Energy efficiency 
The term “efficiency” follows its Latin origin “efficientia” 
which means efficacy [21]. Energy efficiency is the relation 
between benefit and initial energy input [22]. Energy 
efficiency also describes an intelligent usage of the initial 
input aiming to use the available energy as efficient as 
possible [13]. Following this definition, energy efficiency is 
increased 
by 
reducing 
energy 
consumption 
while 
(simultaneously) keeping the energy benefit constant [23]. 
C. Definition of energy management 
The introduction of energy management in the 
manufacturing industry will have an impact on increasing 
sustainability, receiving environment and lowering energy 
costs [9][24]–[26]. Energy management is defined as an 
instrument of coordination aiming an ecological and 
economical 
satisfaction 
of 
energy 
requirements 
in 
companies. This goal is realized by a predictive, organised 
and systematic approach of energy production, procurement, 
storage, distribution and usage [27][28]. 
Energy management can be considered from two 
perspectives. There is a technical perspective dealing with 
energy monitoring, analysing the energy data and deriving 
plans of action to achieve defined goals. Furthermore, there 
is an organisational perspective which follows a holistic view 
of energy consumption and usage in processes, proceedings 
and procedures in the manufacturing industry [9]. To achieve 
goals, such as raising energy efficiency or reducing energy 
costs, energy management uses approaches like investing in 
new technologies, changing behaviours and identifying 
energy saving opportunities [29]. Referring to the identified 
approaches and goals of energy management, load 
management describes one aspect of energy management. 
D. Definition of load management 
First, load management must be distinguished from 
demand side management (DSM), since both terms are easily 
mixed up. Demand Side Management is a generic term for 
different approaches of systematically switching loads. It 
contains load management, energy saving approaches, fuel 
substitution 
and 
load 
optimisation 
[30]–[32]. 
Load 
management, however, describes the way to achieve the goal 
of changing the point of time and amount of load that is 
required [31]. Hence, load management describes the 
temporal relocation of energy consumption [12]. In addition 
to that definition load management is defined as switching 
loads on and off [13]. Therefore, load management focuses 
on internal processes, to reduce load peaks and thus reduce 
energy costs [33]. Examples of load management are 
described in the following chapter.  
 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-556-2
ENERGY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

E. Measures of load management 
 
 
Figure 3. Load management measures 
To avoid energy costs due to load peaks, load management 
focuses four different types of measures as shown in Figure 
3 [30]–[32][34]. In the following, the different types are 
explained. “Peak Clipping” describes the immediate handling 
of peak loads. Thereby peak loads are reduced by a specific 
amount which reduces the energy costs significantly [30]–
[32]. It is achieved by ejecting loads to prevent a significant 
peak load [35][36]. Using energy storage technologies are 
another opportunity to prevent peak loads by feeding-in 
energy at the point a peak load would occur [37]. 
“Load Shifting” also describes the immediate handling of 
peak loads. However, in this case, technologies are 
introduced to reduce peak loads. Energy storage technologies 
enable companies to temporary switch production processes. 
The change of organisational or production processes leads 
to a reduction of peak loads. Although energy is not saved, 
energy costs are significantly reduced. The energy 
consumption of several production procedures is not saved 
but switched to a point of time in there is no risk of peak load 
[30]–[32].  
“Valley Filling” describes a load management measure, 
which lifts the base load of a company to cut the average 
electricity price. This measure accompanies with a change of 
energy contract of the energy supplier. Because the total 
energy consumption is increased, the load profile is polished. 
Any energy supplier prefers a polished load profile and will 
remunerate those profiles. Another use case is a loading of 
electric cars in the night. The raised load in off-peak times 
polishes the whole load profile.  
The last measure of load management is named 
“Insourcing”. It describes the reduction of energy purchase. 
Unlike “peak clipping”, “insourcing” reduces the load profile 
holistically. There is no need for a specific peak load analysis. 
Companies reduce the energy purchase by producing a 
specific energy amount themselves. Achieving this goal, 
companies need new energy production technologies like 
cogeneration units or PV-plants in combination with an 
energy storage.  
In order to summarise and classify these findings, the 
following Figure 4 explains in several layers how terms like 
energy and load management relate.  The top layer represents 
the concept layer. As described earlier, operational energy 
management is the primary term. Energy management 
comprises 
several 
goals 
and 
measures.
 
Figure 4. Content of operational energy management 
Hereafter follows the goal layer. In this layer, all goals of 
energy management are summed up. It starts with lowering 
energy costs, raising energy efficiency, acting resource-
friendly and finishes with reducing energy consumption. 
These goals which have their origin in the operational energy 
management, can be achieved be various actions. The 
organisational layer describes two typical types how energy 
management topics can be addressed. On the one hand, 
companies can implement a holistic energy management 
system (EMS) that is standardized by a German, European or 
international institutions. On the other hand, a not 
standardized solution to achieve the formulated goals can be 
realised without using such a system. In this case, the 
organisation of the individual solution falls in the 
responsibility of the company. For an appropriate usage of an 
energy management system, the information flow must be 
organised properly. Therefore, an energy database for 
continuous memorizing energy data would be crucial. Thus, 
the measured data is always ready for a delivery on demand. 
For a company, it is important to receive data and information 
to the exact right point of time, spot and quality. Therefore, 
the introduction of an energy information system (EIS) is 
necessary. The combination of an energy management 
system, energy information system and energy database is the 
best way to deliver information and data to the type of quality 
as further up explained. The use caser layer describes 
different applications within the energy management context. 
The focus of this paper is on the field of load management, 
but it is worth mentioning, that use cases like predictive 
maintenance, quality management and energy monitoring 
can also achieve energy management goals. All aspects have 
in common that they collect data which must be memorized 
for later using.  
The last layer is the measure layer. This layer contains all 
load management approaches. In principle, all terms of the 
layer above have their own measures on the layer below. 
Hence, this figure represents one expression from a concept 
to certain measure in energy management context and load 
management application. 
Peak Clipping
Valley Filling
Load Shifting
Insourcing
Original load profile
New load profile
Load adjustment
Insourcing
Peak Clipping
Energy and load 
development
Load Shifting
Valley Filling
Predictive 
Maintenance
Energy 
monitoring
Quality 
Management
Load 
Management
…
EMS
without System
Lowering 
energy costs
Acting 
resource-friendly
Raising energy 
efficiency
Reducing energy 
consumption
Operational Energy Management
EIS
Energy data 
flow
Energy 
database
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-556-2
ENERGY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

III. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF LOAD MANAGEMENT IN THE 
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY 
Companies should be supported by the following approach 
to introduce load management. It should give answers to 
questions such as: how can load management implemented 
holistically? Where are the benefits? 
 
 
Figure 5. Load management introducing approach 
The approach in Figure 5 contains four essential steps. 
First, companies must meet the organisational requirements. 
Second, companies must fulfil the demand of information. 
Third, when the demand of information is accomplished, the 
required energy generation/consumption transparency can be 
achieved. Fourth, once all required foundations are provided 
the load management can be introduced by implementing 
load management measures. 
A. Organisational requirements 
The reduction of energy consumption is a long term 
process. Therefore, it is recommended that the introduction 
of load management must be well organised and controlled. 
The organisational requirements are basically described by 
the DIN EN ISO 50001:2011. But not all requirements to 
introduce load management are addressed in this standard. 
First, it is important that companies create an energy policy. 
A policy in this context must contain energy long-term goals. 
Furthermore, it must contain a motivation that is 
communicated within the company, because the employees 
shall live and realise those policies. The policy must be 
formulated close to reality, comprehensible and goal-
orientated. Moreover, a company must implement a process 
of documentation. Besides that, a company must develop an 
energy plan to summarise all goals, approaches and review 
processes. Within an energy plan, a company decides which 
energy data must be collected, how data can be collected, 
how does a data working process looks like and how a 
company would work with the information flows. Those 
steps are important to build a fundament for the introduction 
of load management.  
B. Demand of information 
Every measure within the context of load management 
works with real time data. Collecting those data is therefore 
a necessary requirement. To acquire the required information 
in a continuously changing environment, data must be 
collected in various dimensions of the company, e.g., 
company’s location, buildings, rooms, production processes 
and energy sources. This kind of consideration is called 
system analysis. The objective is to create a holistic flow 
sheet of all forms of energy and its use locations. Assuming 
an overall system, to achieve a holistic flow sheet, it has to be 
broken down to its source elements. 
 
Figure 6. System analysis [22] 
Figure 6 represents a typical construct of a company in the 
manufacturing industry. Dividing this construct in three types 
of system elements, it is shown that there are different 
degrees of depth. Starting with the overall system, which 
contains all given components, a company has its locations 
(T=0). The location level is the first layer. Diving in the 
subsystem, a location contains at least one building (T=1). 
The building level is the second layer. Each building contains 
at least one unit of its company for example production, 
supply, quality management or services (T=2). The unit level 
is the third layer. The deepest layer are the energy consumers 
(T=3). For example, there are machine tools, cooling energy 
generation or printers. The consumer level is the last layer. In 
order to achieve energy transparency in a company, a system 
analysis is fundamental. Close to a system analysis is the 
balancing. The goal of both concepts is to disperse the areal 
boundaries of energy consumers in a company for transparent 
visible consumer structure.  
Once all energy consumers in a company have been 
identified, the next step would be to determine where they are 
located, what form of energy they are using and when they 
are consuming how much energy. Consequently, an energy 
monitoring system must be implemented to collect the real-
time consumption data. The collected real-time data must be 
memorized in a database. But there are circumstances, for 
example financial barriers, which inhibit a company to 
implement an energy monitoring system. In this case, there 
are different options to collect data. Literature has shown that 
there are just few energy consumers in the manufacturing 
industry with high impact on peak loads. By comparing the 
main energy consumers and the main energy conserve 
potentials in the manufacturing industry, a measurement 
priority listing can be determined:  
1. 
Compressed air generation 
2. 
Energy generation for cooling purposes 
3. 
Ventilation system 
4. 
Machine tools 
5. 
Electrical system 
6. 
Pumps 
Energy transparency
Organisational Requirements 
Demand of information
Manage and document the approach
Formulate energy political goals and motivation
Energy planning
Energy balancing
System analysis
Information sources
Identify peak load influence components
Load Management
1
2
3
4
Energy 
database
Company
Units
Locations
Consumers
Buildings
Overall system
Elements
Subsystem
T=0
T=1
T=2
T=3
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-556-2
ENERGY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Influences to peak loads due to illumination or information 
and communication technologies are usually neither 
significant nor manageable. The list above shows, which 
consumers in the manufacturing industry must be prioritised 
when collecting real-time data. 
C. Energy transparency 
Collecting real-time data is a fundamental component to 
achieve energy transparency in a company. Real-time data is 
required to implement an autonomous load management in 
the future. The needed data acquisition is a separate 
challenge, which is discussed in other publications. In 
addition, the issue of IT security must be considered. The 
acquired data is now used to identify specific components of 
the maximum load peak of a company’s load profile. Figure 
7 presents an activity diagram which contains an approach to 
identify specifics peak load components. 
Deriving essential elements of the diagram, it is noted that 
load profiles of energy consumers and the main load profile 
of a company are required. Furthermore, the specific 
consumer load profiles must be inspected for load peaks to 
the point of time when the main peak load occurs. After this 
step, all specific loads are summarized and compared with the 
amount of the main peak load. If there is a difference 
(<<if(n)>>) it must be ensured, that the data set is complete 
as possible. If there is no difference (<<if(y)>>) a 
visualisation of the result should be created. The next 
question asked is whether the result is detailed enough or not. 
To answer this question, a company’s layer must be 
determined. As explained before, a company has several 
layers. Load management requires information about the 
peak load components in sufficiently detailed depth. The 
ideal case would be at plant level (T=3). Including these last 
steps, energy transparency is guaranteed. The described steps 
enable companies to get a detailed view over their energy 
consumption and which kind of consumer has the highest 
impact on the total consumption. Another advantage of 
implementing the whole energy monitoring process is that the 
result can be used to identify energy wastage. 
This procedure was validated at a company. The energy 
transparency was established and it was shown that the 
energy generation for cooling purposes had a peak load share 
of 20%. This transparency allowed counter-measures to be 
implemented.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
Load management leads to lower energy costs in 
companies working in the manufacturing industry. This paper 
described the requirements that needs to be fulfilled to 
implement a load management. With the presented approach, 
companies are enabled to collect these data and information 
in a well-structured development. Starting with fundamentals 
like formulating a company’s energy strategy and an energy 
plan. Furthermore, the company is advised to motivate their 
employees and document the whole introduction process. 
 
 
Figure 7. Identification of peak load components 
Besides that, a company must start with a system analysis 
in order to create a transparent list of all energy consumers. 
Furthermore, a company must start with measurements in an 
early stage, to collect necessary data. Energy monitoring 
system assists companies in collecting important data and 
information regarding the energy consumption of machines, 
etc. Possible circumstances force companies to reject energy 
monitoring systems. In this case, the measurement of the 
energy 
consumption 
of 
prioritised 
consumers 
is 
recommended. This paper presented relevant consumers 
which have a high impact on the main peak load in the 
manufacturing industry. Using these fundamentals and the 
memorized data and information, energy transparency can be 
achieved by analysing collected and memorized data. 
Therefore, load profiles on all layers, such as buildings, units 
or consumers must be analysed following the presented 
approach. The result of this approach is detailed knowledge 
Identify components of peak load
Load profiles
of all consumers
Load profile
data
Check specific consumer
loads at peak load
Memorize
Total
control
Guarantee
data completeness
if(n)
Develop
visualisation
if(y)
Memorize
Determine
layer
if(T<3)
Use
Pareto approach
Sum specific consumer
loads up at peak load
Memorize
Total control
Guarantee
data completeness
if(n)
Develop
visualisation
if(y)
Memorize
Record peak load
components
if(T=3)
Check
detail degree
if(y)
Sum specific consumer
loads up at peak load
Memorize
Total control
Guarantee
data completeness
if(n)
Develop
visualisation
if(y)
Memorize
Don’t use
Pareto approach
if(n)
Record peak load
components
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-556-2
ENERGY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

about every component of the main peak load. In the end, 
load management can be used to reduce energy cost in a 
company. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This article arose during the work of the authors, within the 
context of the research project FlAixEnergy (project number: 
0325819A) funded by the Federal Ministry for Economic 
Affairs and Energy in Germany. The authors want to thank all 
donors, supporter and critics. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  M. 
Schenk 
and 
M. 
Schumann, 
“Einleitung 
- 
Herausforderungen für die Produktion mit Zukunft,” in 
Produktion und Logistik mit Zukunft: Digital engineering and 
operation, M. Schenk, Ed., Berlin: Springer Vieweg, 2015, pp. 
1–48. 
[2] G. Schuh, Produktionsmanagement: Handbuch Produktion und 
Management 5, 2nd ed. Berlin: Springer Vieweg, 2014. 
[3] G. Schuh and V. Stich, Eds., Grundlagen der PPS, 4th ed. 
Berlin: Springer Vieweg, 2012. 
[4] T. Bauernhansl, Energieeffizienz in Deutschland - eine 
Metastudie: Analyse und Empfehlungen, 2014th ed. Berlin, 
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014. 
[5] J. Gochermann, Expedition Energiewende, 1st ed. Wiesbaden: 
Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, 2016. 
[6] S. Döring, Energieerzeugung nach Novellierung des EEG: 
Konsequenzen für regenerative und nicht regenerative 
Energieerzeugungsanlagen. Berlin: Springer Vieweg, 2015. 
[7] H. Niederhausen and A. Burkert, Elektrischer Strom: 
Gestehung, Übertragung, Verteilung, Speicherung und 
Nutzung elektrischer Energie im Kontext der Energiewende. 
Wiesbaden: Springer Vieweg, 2014. 
[8] BMWi - Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie, Ein 
Strommarkt für die Energiewende: Ergebnispapier des 
Bundesministeriums für Wirtschaft und Energie (Weißbuch). 
Berlin: Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie 
(BMWi), 2015. 
[9] M. Geilhausen, J. Bränzel, D. Engelmann, and O. Schulze, 
Energiemanagement: 
Für 
Fachkräfte, 
Beauftragte 
und 
Manager. Wiesbaden: Springer Vieweg, 2015. 
[10] BMWi - Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie, 
“Energiedaten: Gesamtausgabe: Stand: Januar 2016,” Jan. 
2016. 
[11] Deutsche 
Bundesregierung, 
“Energiekonzept 
für 
eine 
umweltschonende, 
zuverlässige 
und 
bezahlbare 
Energieversorung,” Berlin, Sep. 2010. 
[12] M. Roscher, C. Maasem, and R. Martynski, “Intelligentes 
Energiemanagement 
in 
der 
Produktion: 
Effiziente 
Energienutzung in der Fertigung durch Energiemonitoren und 
Lastmanagement,” UdZ - Unternehmen der Zukunft, 2014, pp. 
20–22, 2014. 
[13] H. Seidl, C. Schenuit, and M. Teichmann, “Roadmap Demand 
Side Management. Industrielles Lastmanagement für ein 
zukunftsfähiges Energiesystem: Schlussfolgerung aus dem 
Pilotprojekt DSM Bayern,” Berlin, Jun. 2016. 
[14] F. Wosnitza and H. G. Hilgers, Energieeffizienz und 
Energiemanagement: Ein Überblick heutiger Möglichkeiten 
und Notwendigkeiten. Wiesbaden: Vieweg+Teubner Verlag, 
2012. 
[15] P. Kurzweil and O. K. Dietlmeier, Elektrochemische Speicher: 
Superkondensatoren, 
Batterien, 
Elektrolyse-Wasserstoff, 
Rechtliche Grundlagen, 1st ed. Wiesbaden: Springer Vieweg, 
2015. 
[16] C. Köpp, H.-J. von Mettenheim, and M. H. Breitner, 
“Lastmanagement in Stromnetzen,” Wirtschaftsinf, vol. 55, no. 
1, pp. 39–49, 2013. 
[17] S. Lehnhoff, Dezentrales vernetztes Energiemanagement: Ein 
Ansatz auf Basis eines verteilten adaptiven Realzeit-
Multiagentensystems. Wiesbaden: Vieweg+Teubner Verlag / 
GWV Fachverlage GmbH Wiesbaden, 2010. 
[18] H. Voss, Modellierung des regionalen Erzeugungsangebots auf 
dem Elektrizitätsmarkt der Europäischen Union. Berlin: Lit, 
2012. 
[19] Fraunhofer 
ISE, 
Energy 
Charts. 
[Online] 
Available: 
https://www.energy-charts.de/contact_de.htm. Accessed on: 
Jun. 16 2016. 
[20] B. Diekmann and E. Rosenthal, Energie: Physikalische 
Grundlagen ihrer Erzeugung, Umwandlung und Nutzung, 3rd 
ed. Wiesbaden: Springer Spektrum, 2014. 
[21] J. Hesselbach, Energie- und klimaeffiziente Produktion: 
Grundlagen, Leitlinien und Praxisbeispiele, 1st ed. s.l.: 
Vieweg+Teubner (GWV), 2012. 
[22] E. Müller, J. Engelmann, T. Löffler, and J. Strauch, 
Energieeffiziente Fabriken planen und betreiben, 1st ed. 
Berlin: Springer Berlin, 2009. 
[23] W. Irrek and S. Thomas, “Definition Energieeffizienz,” 
Wuppertal, Jul. 2008. 
[24] H. Wannenwetsch, Integrierte Materialwirtschaft, Logistik und 
Beschaffung, 5th ed. Berlin: Springer Vieweg, 2014. 
[25] M. Schenk, S. Wirth, and E. Müller, Fabrikplanung und 
Fabrikbetrieb: Methoden für die wandlungsfähige, vernetzte 
und ressourceneffiziente Fabrik, 2nd ed. Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014. 
[26] S. 
Hirzel, 
“Betriebliches 
Energiemanagement 
in 
der 
industriellen Produktion,” Karlsruhe, Sep. 2011. 
[27] Energiemanagement - Begriffe, 4602-1, 2016. 
[28] J. 
Kals 
and 
K. 
Würtenberger, 
“IT-gestütztes 
Energiemanagement,” HMD, vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 73–81, 2012. 
[29] Manufacturing Execution Systems (MES) – Kennzahlen für 
Energiemanagement, 66412-4, 2015. 
[30] CRA, “Primer on Demand-Side Management: With an 
emphasis on price-responsive programs,” Oakland, USA, Feb. 
2005. 
[31] S. C. Bhattacharyya, Energy economics: Concepts, issues, 
markets and governance. London: Springer, 2011. 
[32] Arnusorn 
Saengprajak, 
“Efficiency 
of 
demand 
side 
management measures in small village electrification 
systems,” Dissertation, Universität Kassel, Kassel, 2006. 
[33] M. Kruppa, “Lastmanagement im Unternehmen: Grundlagen,” 
2015. 
[34] Z. Hu, D. Maskovitz, and J. Zhao, “Demand-Side Management 
in China's Restructured Power Industry: How Regulation and 
Policy Can Deliver Demand-Side Management Benefits to a 
Growing Economy and a Changing Power System,” 
Washington, D.C., USA, Dec. 2015. 
[35] Z. Hu, Integrated resource strategic planning and power 
demand-side management. Heidelberg, S.l.: Springer; China 
Electric Power Press, 2013. 
[36] D. Y. Goswami and F. Kreith, Energy efficiency and renewable 
energy handbook. Boca Raton: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis 
Group, 2015. 
[37] M. Kleber, “Leitfaden Lastgangmessung: für das Projekt 
Teilenergiekennwerte, gefördert durch das BMWi, erstellt 
durch das Fachgebiet Bauphysik & Technischer Ausbau 
(fbta),” Karlsruhe, 2010.
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-556-2
ENERGY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

