Exploiting Demand Response in Web-based
Energy-aware Smart Homes
Andreas Kamilaris
Department of Computer Science
Networks Research Laboratory
University of Cyprus
P.O. Box 20537, Nicosia, CY 1678, Cyprus
Email: kami@cs.ucy.ac.cy
Andreas Pitsillides
Department of Computer Science
Networks Research Laboratory
University of Cyprus
P.O. Box 20537, Nicosia, CY 1678, Cyprus
Email: andreas.pitsillides@ucy.ac.cy
Abstract—Energy conservation is a global issue with tremen-
dous environmental implications. By 2030, the global energy
demand will double. High demands and environmental concerns,
force the transformation of electricity grids into smart grids,
towards more rational utilization of energy. Residential smart
metering transforms homes into energy-aware environments,
allowing residents to make informed choices about electricity.
Web-based smart homes employ Web principles to interconnect
electrical appliances. The Web, as a highly ubiquitous platform,
can be used to connect energy-aware smart homes to the smart
grid. An important characteristic of the future grid is demand
response, deﬁned as real-time pricing, according to supply
conditions. Energy-aware smart homes can exploit this capability
to schedule electricity-related tasks for future execution. We
investigate this possibility by deploying a Web-based, energy-
aware smart home, adapted to demand response. An initial
technical study denotes the feasibility of our approach and a
small survey indicates the potential for saving energy and money.
Keywords-Smart Home; Smart Meters; Electrical Appliances;
Smart Grid; Demand Response; Web.
I. INTRODUCTION
Energy conservation is a big issue in the world with
tremendous environmental, political and social implications.
Predictions denote that by the year 2030, the global energy
demand will double, rising up the energy-related green gas
emissions by 55% [1].
This high energy demand cannot be accommodated by
current electricity grids. Most of the electricity grids around
the world have been designed many decades ago, to meet the
energy requirements of the society at that time.
Increasing demand and environmental concerns, inﬂuenced
initiatives towards more rational utilization of electrical energy.
This goal can be achieved when the electric utilities are fully
aware in real-time about the electrical consumption and the de-
mands of their customers. The grid becomes intelligent when
it manages to deliver electricity from suppliers to consumers
using two-way digital communications and a smart metering
system. This vision is believed to convert traditional electricity
grids into modern smart grids.
Smart metering of electricity does not only affect the future
development of the smart grid, but also motivates the rational
management of the electrical consumption in houses and
buildings. Buildings consume a large proportion of the total
electrical energy [2]. This fact has a signiﬁcant environmental
impact, as more than 30% of all greenhouse gas emissions can
be attributed to buildings.
Residential smart meters are devices that measure in real-
time the energy consumption of a house, or even of various
electrical devices and control their operation. These meters
have gained popularity recently. For example, it is planned
that every home in Britain will be equipped with such meters
by 2020. Equipping home area networks (HAN) with smart
meters, allows the enablement of energy-aware smart homes.
According to numerous studies such as [3], timely electrical
consumption feedback through smart metering, is believed to
reduce electrical consumption by a fraction of 5-15%.
However, further savings can be achieved, when energy-
aware smart homes get connected to the smart grid. The Web is
an appropriate platform for such a wide-scale interconnection.
In this work, we assume the existence of the smart grid and
we develop an energy-aware smart home that can exploit the
demand response functionality offered by the grid, through the
Web. In such a way, home residents can save money, while
electric utilities can save energy and be assured about the
societal acceptance of the grid and its smooth operation.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
provides background information as well as related work,
while Section III argues about the beneﬁts of using the Web
as an integration platform. Then, Section IV presents the
system’s implementation and Section V discusses the technical
feasibility of our approach. Finally, Section VI investigates
possible savings through a small case study and Section VII
concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
Our approach spans in two research domains: HAN
equipped with residential smart meters and the smart grid.
In the following subsections, we present some background
information regarding the smart grid and energy-aware home
environments, along with signiﬁcant related work in the ﬁelds.
A. Towards the Smart Grid
The smart grid is expected to provide advanced function-
alities such as high power quality, immediate failure alarms,
27
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

reliability, security and improved customer service.
An important characteristic of the smart grid is real-time
pricing, which is a smart energy pricing scheme that is set
for a speciﬁc time period on an advance basis and which
may change according to load demands or price changes in
the market. Prices paid for electricity consumed during these
periods are known to consumers a priori, letting them to vary
their energy usage in response to these prices and manage their
energy costs by shifting usage to a lower tariff period. This
mechanism is mainly known as demand response (DR).
Many experts state that Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles
(PHEV) will be the grid’s killer application. PHEV are hybrid
vehicles with rechargeable batteries that can be restored to full
charge when connected to an (external) electric power source.
For example, a study from the Paciﬁc Northwest National
Laboratory [4] states that even the existing grid in the United
States, if optimally utilized, could provide enough power for
PHEV to replace up to 73% of the nation’s cars. However,
if the charging times of PHEV are not properly managed, the
load to the grid’s distribution network will be highly increased.
The smart grid can afford this issue by means of DR. Improved
tariffs, adjusted to reﬂect the system’s congestions, would
promote proper scheduling of plug-in vehicle charging.
Pilot projects that implement the smart grid in an experi-
mental basis have appeared lately. A popular pilot project is
SmartGridCity [5], performed by Xcel Energy utility supplier
in the area of Boulder, Colorado.
Masdar City [6] will be the world’s ﬁrst zero-carbon city,
powered entirely by renewable energy sources. Pilot resi-
dences will be equipped with DR-enabled smart appliances.
By receiving signals from the grid, they will customize the
appliances’ usage to reduce energy demand on the grid.
The interconnection of smart homes and the smart grid
through the Internet, by means of Web services is proposed
in [7]. It is stated that service-oriented architectures are well
suited for the smart grid.
B. Energy-aware Smart Homes
Residential smart metering transforms home environments
into energy-aware smart spaces. There exist two broad cate-
gories for household energy monitoring and control: whole-
home and device-speciﬁc.
Whole-home approaches place one smart meter where the
home connects to the power grid. Marchiori et al. [8] use
circuit-level power measurements to separate aggregated data
into device-level estimates, with 90% accuracy. ViridiScope
[9] places inexpensive sensors near electrical appliances to
estimate their power consumption with less than 10% error.
Traditional smart meters offer a house-level granularity,
where only the whole-home energy consumption can be visu-
alized. As the technology becomes more advanced, monitoring
the energy consumption of each electrical appliance and con-
trolling its operation, becomes possible. Device-speciﬁc tech-
niques plug smart meters in individual electrical appliances.
Some device-speciﬁc smart meters offer even wireless net-
working capabilities, extending the residential smart metering
infrastructure into a robust wireless network. As an example,
Ploggs [10] incorporate wireless transceivers, based on the
IEEE802.15.4 wireless standard.
ACme [11] is a high-ﬁdelity AC metering network that
uses wireless sensors, equipped with digital energy meters
to provide accurate energy measurements of single devices.
Energie Visible [12] employs smart meters to visualize in
real-time the energy consumption of the appliances that are
connected to the meters, in a Web interface. In the Energy
Aware Smart Home [13], users can use their mobile phones
as magic lenses to view the energy consumption of their
appliances, by pointing out them with the phone’s camera.
A big challenge for energy-aware smart homes, taking into
account the existence of the smart grid, is to provide to the
home environment visibility of grid conditions and dynamic
prices, in order to take local decisions and intelligently control
the usage of household electrical appliances, to save energy
and money. Studies that speciﬁcally examine the implications
of demand response functionality of the smart grid in energy-
aware smart homes are still lacking, to our knowledge.
III. THE WEB AS AN INTEGRATION PLATFORM
We believe the Web is an appropriate platform for bridging
energy-aware smart homes and the smart grid. By means of
the Web, smart homes can be fully synchronized with the grid.
The Web is highly ubiquitous and it scales particularly well.
Almost every house has Internet connectivity today, while
technological advancements in mobile telecommunications
such as 3G and WiMAX, permit the Internet to penetrate in
the mobile world.
A. The Web and the Smart Grid
We identify many beneﬁts in using the Web as an integration
platform for the smart grid.
A cloud-based smart grid strategy constitutes a cost-efﬁcient
practice for enhancing grid’s functionality incrementally as
energy demands arise. New capabilities can be implemented in
parallel with existing operations and systems, while the impact
on ongoing operations is minimized.
Existing systems can be securely integrated with new com-
ponents and further be connected to users and customers, by
means of the Web. The Web is a scalable framework for
incorporating third-party and partner techniques.
Most importantly, utilization of the Web would promote
the Web service model, minimizing expenses for additional
infrastructure and overall implementation time. Web services
are core parts of cloud computing, providing a wealth of
proven methods for systems integration.
B. Web-based Smart Homes
Designing smart homes based on the Web principles is a
recent practice. In the Web Home application framework [14],
we reused central principles of the modern Web architecture
to integrate physical devices to the Web and build an inter-
operable smart home that supports multiple home residents
concurrently. By using the Web as application layer, ﬂexible
28
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

applications on top of heterogeneous embedded devices can be
built with a few lines of code, facilitating home automation.
Web-based smart homes build upon the notion of the Web
of Things [15], which is about employing well-accepted Web
practices to interconnect the quickly expanding ecosystem of
embedded devices, built into future household appliances.
REpresentational State Transfer (REST) [16] is proposed
for Web-based interaction with household appliances as it is a
lightweight architectural style that deﬁnes how to use HTTP
as an application protocol. REST advocates in providing Web
services modeled as resources. Resources can be manipulated
by the methods speciﬁed in the HTTP standard, under a
uniform interface. REST guarantees interoperability and a
smooth transition from the Web to home environments.
Enabling home appliances to the Web, permits the extension
of Web mashups into physical mashups [17]. Physical mashups
take advantage of real-world services offered by physical
devices and combine them using the same tools and techniques
of classic Web mashups. In this way, physical devices can be
blended with Web content and services, without much effort.
A future cloud-based smart grid strategy would allow the
seamless integration of the grid with Web-based, energy-
aware smart homes. As an example, what follows is a shell
script that implements a physical mashup, combining electrical
appliances and Web services provided by an electric utility.
We assume in this example that the utility exposes, as a
RESTful Web service, information about its real-time tariffs.
This script checks the current home tariff and starts charging
automatically a hybrid electric vehicle as soon as the tariff
falls below some deﬁned limit.
function check {
if [ $? -le LOW_TARIFF ] ; then
curl -d "State=ON"
-X PUT [HomeAddress]/PHEV/Switch/
fi
}
curl -s -X GET [UtilityAddress]/Tariff/Home/ $1
check;
Through the Web, residents can pull easily the data they
need from an open API offered by their electric utility, and use
them right away in their own applications, in any programming
language that supports HTTP.
As a more general example, a reliable Web-based weather
forecast service can be combined with smart appliances, e.g.,
to turn off the electric heating automatically, in case the
temperature is about to increase in the next few hours.
These simple examples indicate that advanced home au-
tomation, high ﬂexibility and energy conservation can be
achieved, when using the Web as a platform.
IV. DEVELOPING A WEB-BASED ENERGY-AWARE
SMART HOME
We extended our Web Home framework [14] to support
interaction with residential smart meters and consequently
with the electrical appliances of a smart home.
We utilized Plogg residential meters to create a wireless
smart metering network inside the house. We exploit the
Living Room
Kitchen
Bathroom
Bedroom
Laundry Room
Energy-aware 
Smart Home
Application
Fig. 1.
A typical energy-aware smart home.
fact that wireless sensor networks can provide a reliable and
extensible solution for real-world deployments. Each Plogg is
associated with some speciﬁc appliance, in order to monitor
its electricity footprint and control its operation.
In Figure 1, a typical deployment of Ploggs inside an
energy-aware smart home is shown. These smart meters use
their multihop communication abilities to inform the resident
about his electricity footprint. In the ﬁgure, ﬁve hops are
needed from the meter that acts as the base station, to reach
the meter which monitors and controls the television. Plogg
discovery is automatic, based on the ZigBee speciﬁcations.
We exposed the functionality of the Web Home framework
as a RESTful interface and we developed a client application
in JavaScript, using the Google Web Toolkit (GWT). The
client application offers a Web-based, interactive graphical
user interface (GUI), in order to help residents to visualize
their energy-aware home environment and fully manage their
electrical appliances through the Web.
Detailed, real-time consumption data from each electrical
appliance and the aggregation of historical data about energy
into graphs, facilitate the extraction of informed knowledge
about the home’s energy performance, encouraging the habi-
tant towards more rational usage of electricity.
In Figure 2, a typical snapshot of the client application can
be observed, where the electricity footprint of each appliance
is depicted in a pie chart. Through detailed energy monitor-
ing, electricity-wasting actions can be avoided and energy-
inefﬁcient devices can be managed better or be replaced.
Through the Web, each appliance can be individually con-
trolled. For example, the resident from his work may switch
off the television he forgot on, when he hastily left the house.
Furthermore, our application enables the resident to asso-
ciate the energy consumption of his electrical appliances with
the actual tariffs from his electric utility, translating kilowatt
hours (kWh) into money. Based on these tariffs, the electricity
cost consumed by each appliance is automatically calculated.
29
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

Fig. 2.
Detailed electrical appliances’ consumption allocation.
A. Exploiting Demand Response
As we previously noted, a signiﬁcant feature of the grid is
DR. DR would assist in offering dynamic tariffs, according
to supply conditions. Dynamic tariffs can be received in
real-time, when utilities provide Web APIs to automatically
disseminate them to the homes of the consumers. Since not
many countries provide yet such capabilities, we also let the
resident deﬁne himself the existing local tariffs.
The DR capability would allow users to cut their energy
bills by telling low priority devices to harness energy only
when it is cheapest. We included a task scheduling mechanism
adapted to DR from electric utilities, following the physical
mashup paradigm. The residents are able to program actions
to be executed automatically in low-tariff hours. A low tariff is
speciﬁed as a lower percentage from the basic tariff, which is
offered by the utility. As an example, the resident can program
the electric water heater to heat water for a shower, when the
tariff is 10% less than normally.
The resident is able to further adjust the task scheduling
procedure, according to his own preferences. He can deﬁne a
maximum amount of waiting time, in case tariff does not fall
below the speciﬁed limit in that time window. In this case,
the task can start right after. The resident can also specify
the execution of a task to be performed in morning, afternoon
or night time. Finally, he can set the duration of each task,
forcing the application to switch the corresponding electrical
appliance off, as soon as the task completes.
A DR-based task scheduler can have a psychological factor.
Energy-aware smart homes and the introduction of the smart
grid in the residents’ daily lives, can engage them in more
sustainable lifestyles and energy-efﬁcient practices [18]. The
potential for saving energy and money can cultivate informed,
actively involved and environmentally-aware consumers.
V. TECHNICAL FEASIBILITY STUDY
In this section, we examine the feasibility of our approach
from a technical perspective.
We have deployed inside an experimental smart home of
around 100 m2, a wireless network of Ploggs. The typical
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1:00
2:00
3:00
4:00
5:00
6:00
7:00
8:00
9:00 10:00 11:00 12:00 13:00 14:00 15:00 16:00 17:00 18:00 19:00 20:00 21:00 22:00 23:00 0:00
Time of Day
Total Demand (MW)
Daily Demand
Average Demand
Morning
Late Night
Afternoon
Early Night
Fig. 3.
Total electricity demand in a typical winter day.
structure of the house is shown in Figure 1. Our application
has been installed on a laptop inside the storeroom.
Since our country does not yet support the smart grid,
we simulated its operation through the Web. We developed a
Web server that simulates DR functionality for the Electricity
Authority of Cyprus (EAC) [19], which is the only utility in the
country. A RESTful Web service informs customers in real-
time about the utility’s current tariffs using RSS Web feeds.
These tariffs, although simulated, aim to reﬂect the actual
energy loads and demands in our country. Figure 3 presents
the total electricity demand in Cyprus, at a typical winter day.
We assume that the power plants of EAC are able to operate
in four different modes for generating electric power. These
modes reﬂect the average electricity demands when dividing a
winter day into morning, afternoon, early night and late night.
These four modes can be observed in the ﬁgure.
To produce real-time tariffs, correlated to electricity demand
patterns, we used the simple equation shown in (1):
Tariff = α · BasicTariff · ( InstantDemand
AverageDemand)
(1)
where α is a coefﬁcient used to weight the prices according
to differences in demands. Using this equation with α = 1,
we produce real-time tariffs that give incentives to consumers
to utilize their electrical appliances not in peak hours. These
tariffs ﬂuctuate around the (current) basic home tariff, which
is offered by EAC (20,07 cent/kWh), as shown in Figure 4.
To test the performance of our system, we considered a
typical real-life scenario. Most washing machines allow a user
to deﬁne a preferred operation mode and start the washing
in a future time. We programmed such a washing machine
through the task scheduling mechanism, to start the washing
when the tariff from the electric utility is 5% less than its
normal price. According to Figure 4, this would happen at
4:00, 7:00, 14:00 and 23:00 in a typical winter day. We also
set some parameters such as the duration of the task to be
one hour and 30 minutes and the maximum waiting time to
be eight hours. We measured the execution times of this task,
placing the washing machine and its corresponding Plogg, in
different hops from our application (base station).
30
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

15
17
19
21
23
25
1:00
2:00
3:00
4:00
5:00
6:00
7:00
8:00
9:00
10:00
11:00
12:00
13:00
14:00
15:00
16:00
17:00
18:00
19:00
20:00
21:00
22:00
23:00
0:00
Time of Day
Tariff (cents/kWh)
Dynamic Tariff
Basic Tariff
8%
8%
5%
15%
Fig. 4.
Real-time tariffs based on electricity demand.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1
2
3
4
5
Washing Machine Distance (Hops)
Time (seconds)
Plogg Switch-On Service
Plogg Switch-Off Service
Fig. 5.
Task scheduling performance.
Figure 5 illustrates the results of this experiment. In all
ﬁve multihop scenarios, we created the task at 12:00, it
started executing exactly at 14:00 and it ﬁnished execution
at 15:30. Less than two seconds are needed, from the time
the application is informed about the tariff change, until the
washing machine starts working, even in ﬁve-hop distance.
Switching off the device needs a bit longer, approximately 4-6
seconds. This difference is due to the speciﬁc operation of the
Ploggs’ ﬁrmware. Since the task scheduling mechanism will
operate for control scenarios with low workload, our results
in regard to task execution times, are considered satisfactory.
VI. POTENTIAL SAVINGS
Connecting energy-aware smart homes to the smart grid,
creates a new potential for saving energy and money. We
attempt to estimate this potential, considering that household
appliances account for 50-90% of the residential consumption.
We deﬁne home devices into three broad categories. Perma-
nent devices, which should never be turned off such as a fridge,
on-demand devices, which are utilized by home residents
spontaneously, in order to accomplish a momentary task such
as a toaster and schedulable devices, which are devices that are
supposed to accomplish some speciﬁc task but their operation
is not momentarily urgent and can be postponed for a future
time such as a dishwasher.
We are mostly interested in schedulable devices as they are
devices that can be programmed to operate during low-tariff
periods of the day. These devices can fully harness the DR
feature of the smart grid. Therefore, electric utilities can save
energy by better managing their load conditions and residents
can save money by using electricity when it is cheapest.
A. A Survey for Schedulable Devices
We performed a small-scale, telephone-based survey to
identify schedulable electrical appliances. We discussed with
twenty housewives and we posed to them the following
question: ”if your electric utility offered cheaper tariffs at
some hours of the day, which tasks, handled by your electrical
appliances would you schedule for these hours?”. We also
asked them about the duration of each task per day, translated
into operational time of the relevant appliance and also the
monthly frequency, in which they perform this task.
Their responses are listed in Table I. We used average values
for task duration and monthly frequency. These values depend
on many parameters such as weather conditions (electric water
heater), number of family members (electric iron, washing
machine), mentalities and habits of each society (electric oven,
dishwasher) etc. Surely, these values are not absolute but
just indicative, in order to facilitate our purpose of roughly
estimating possible savings through our approach.
Observing the table, we can notice that some devices can
be categorized both as schedulable and on demand (hair dryer,
electric mixer, electric oven). Eight housewives commented
that they were willing to use such devices according to low-
tariff periods, in case this would save them signiﬁcant money.
B. Calculations for Money Savings
After identifying home schedulable devices, we located
some popular products for each device type and we recorded
their energy consumption in kilowatt-hours (kWh). We com-
puted the average values to derive typical consumption ﬁgures.
For our calculations, we used the typical home tariff offered
by EAC (20,07 cent/kWh). In the last three columns of Table
I, we can view possible savings for schedulable devices, when
home tariff falls 10%, 20% or even 30%.
Devices such as the electric mixer do not contribute in
money savings and there is no need to schedule them for future
time. However, devices such as the washing machine and
the electric oven could contribute more effectively, allowing
monthly savings of more than e 1 each, when tariff falls 10%
and more than e 4, in case tariff falls 30%.
If we apply our optimized policy for all electrical appli-
ances, monthly savings can be summed around e 6 in 10%
tariff reduction and up to e 19 in case of 30% reduction. Con-
sidering the fact that the average monthly cost for electricity
in houses around Cyprus is e 175, possible saving of e 19
gives 10,85% reduction in the bill of a typical home.
A survey from Parks Associates [20] remarks that over
80% of US households would pay up to $100 for cost-saving
equipment if it chopped at least 10% off their monthly elec-
tricity bills. This survey indicates a possible acceptance of our
approach by home residents. This is only valid under certain
conditions such as effective tariff reductions by utilities.
31
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

TABLE I
A LIST OF SCHEDULABLE ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES AND POSSIBLE SAVINGS.
Device
Consumption (kWh)
Duration
Monthly Frequency
Tariff Reduction in e
10%
20%
30%
Hair Dryer
2.1 (1.5 - 2.5)
35 minutes
25
0,63
1,27
1,9
Electric Mixer
1.3 (0.8 - 1.5)
20 minutes
8
0,07
0,14
0,22
Electric Iron
2.8 (2.4 - 3.0)
2 hours
8
0,93
1,85
2,78
Electric Oven
2.7 (2.5 - 3.0)
60 minutes
26
1,45
2,91
4,36
Electric Water Heater
3.0
30 minutes
20
0,62
1,24
1,86
Dishwasher
1.5 (1.3 - 2.0)
40 minutes
22
0,46
0,91
1,37
Washing Machine
2.6 (2.0 - 3.0)
1 hour 40 minutes
16
1,44
2,87
4,31
Clothes Dryer
3.6 (3.0 - 4.3)
50 minutes
11
0,68
1,37
2,05
Total Possible Savings
6,28
12,56
18,84
Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle
3.3
8 hours
10
5,46
10,93
16,39
As we remarked before, an example killer application of the
smart grid might be PHEV. It would be essential for the healthy
operation of the grid to force residents to charge their PHEV in
low-demand periods of the day, e.g., during the night. The last
row of Table I shows possible savings when a typical PHEV
exploits real-time pricing. We assume that a typical PHEV
needs approximately eight hours of charging in 3.3 kWh and
provides driving range on batteries up to 150 miles. Therefore,
it would need charging every 3-4 days to adequately support
the needs of a family. In this case, monthly savings can be
more than e 10 when the tariff is reduced by 20%.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Demand response is a promising capability of the smart
grid. Energy-aware smart homes can exploit this functionality,
using the Web as an integration platform. This seamless
interconnection has the potential for signiﬁcant energy and
money savings, both for the electric utilities and the customers,
allowing Web-enabled smart appliances to schedule their ex-
ecution for low-demand and respectively low-tariff periods.
Few people predicted the revolutionary advancements the
Internet has brought to the world. Even fewer have predicted
that the Web would affect so many aspects of our lives.
Energy-aware smart homes and the smart grid, represent the
extension of this trend to power consumption.
In the future, we plan to perform a small-scale deployment
of our Web-based, energy-aware home infrastructure in real
houses around Cyprus. In cooperation with EAC, we will try
to simulate the DR feature of the grid in realistic conditions.
In this way, we will be able to extract more precise estimations
about energy and money savings and to assess the overall
inﬂuence of the smart grid in the society.
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Electricity Authority of
Cyprus. We would like to thank Mr Antonis Valanides, the
director of the IT Department, for his valuable advice.
REFERENCES
[1] International Energy Agency. World Energy Outlook 2007. 2007.
[2] Europa Press Release. Communication from the European Commission.
Energy Efﬁciency: Delivering the 20% target. November 2008.
[3] Sarah Darby. The effectiveness of feedback on energy consumption A
review for defra of the literature on metering, billing and direct displays.
Environmental Change Institute, University of Oxford, 2006.
[4] Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory. Mileage from megawatts, May
2011. Online at: http://www.pnl.gov/news/release.aspx?id=204.
[5] Xcel Energy.
SmartGridCity Project, May 2011.
Online at:
http://smartgridcity.xcelenergy.com/.
[6] Masdar City, May 2011. Online at: http://www.masdarcity.ae/en/.
[7] Cor Warmer, Koen Kok, Stamatis Karnouskos, Anke Weidlich, David
Nestle, Patrick Selzam, Jan Ringelstein, Aris Dimeas, and Stefan
Drenkard. Web services for integration of smart houses in the smart
grid. In Grid-Interop Conference, Denver, November 2009.
[8] Alan Marchiori and Qi Han. Using Circuit-Level Power Measurements
in Household Energy Management Systems. In First ACM Workshop
On Embedded Sensing Systems For Energy-Efﬁciency In Buildings
(BuildSys), pages 7–12, Berkeley, California.
[9] Younghun Kim, Thomas Schmid, Zainul M. Charbiwala, and Mani B.
Srivastava. ViridiScope: design and implementation of a ﬁne grained
power monitoring system for homes. In Ubicomp ’09: Proceedings of
the 11th international conference on Ubiquitous computing, pages 245–
254, New York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM.
[10] Energy Optimizers Ltd. Plogg Smart Meters, May 2011. Online at:
http://www.plogginternational.com/.
[11] Xiaofan Jiang, Stephen Dawson-Haggerty, Prabal Dutta, and David
Culler.
Design and implementation of a high-ﬁdelity AC metering
network. In Proc. of the 2009 International Conference on Information
Processing in Sensor Networks (IPSN), pages 253–264, Washington,
DC, USA, 2009.
[12] Dominique Guinard and Robert Unteregger. Energie Visible, May 2011.
Online at: http://www.webofthings.com/energievisible/.
[13] Marco Jahn, Marc Jentsch, Christian R. Prause, Ferry Pramudianto,
Amro Al-Akkad, and Rene Reiners. The Energy Aware Smart Home.
In the 5th International Conference on Future Information Technology
(FutureTech), pages 1–8, May 2010.
[14] Andreas
Kamilaris,
Vlad
Trifa,
and
Andreas
Pitsillides.
The
Smart
Home
meets
the
Web
of
Things.
International
Jour-
nal of Ad Hoc and Ubiquitous Computing (IJAHUC), Special is-
sue on The Smart Digital Home (To appear), 2011.
Online at:
http://seacorn.cs.ucy.ac.cy/papers/ﬁles/KamilarisIJAHUC10.pdf.
[15] Erik Wilde. Putting things to REST. Technical Report UCB iSchool
Report 2007-015, School of Information, UC Berkeley, 2007.
[16] Roy Thomas Fielding. Architectural Styles and the Design of Network-
based Software Architectures.
PhD thesis, University of California,
Irvine, California, 2000.
[17] Dominique Guinard and Vlad Trifa. Towards the Web of Things: Web
Mashups for Embedded Devices. In Workshop on Mashups, Enterprise
Mashups and Lightweight Composition on the Web, in Proc. of WWW
Conference, Madrid, Spain, 2009.
[18] W. Fred Van Raaij and Theo Verhallen. A behavioral model of residential
energy use. Journal of Economic Psychology, 3(1):39–63, 1983.
[19] Electricity
Authority
of
Cyprus,
May
2011.
Online
at:
http://www.eac.com.cy/.
[20] Parks
Associates.
50%
of
U.S.
households
are
interested
in
home
energy
monitoring,
May
2011.
Online
at:
http://www.parksassociates.com/blog/article/50–of-u-s–households-
are-interested-in-home-energy-monitoring-7.
32
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

