An Inclusion of Electric Grid Reliability Research Through the Enhanced Energy 
Informatics Research Framework 
Work-In-Progress Paper 
Vivian Sultan 
Center of Information Systems and 
Technology 
Claremont Graduate University 
Claremont, CA 
email: vivian.sultan@cgu.edu  
Au Vo 
Department of Information Systems 
San Francisco State University 
San Francisco, CA 
email: auvo@sfsu.edu  
Brian Hilton 
Center of Information Systems and 
Technology 
Claremont Graduate University 
Claremont, CA 
email: brian.hilton@cgu.edu 
Abstract— Energy Informatics (EI) is the area of research that 
addresses the application of technology to resolve complex 
problems within the energy domain. Goebel et al. have 
provided an EI research framework that attempts to 
encompass all aspects of EI research. Due to the rapid 
improvements in EI, there are uncharted research areas that 
were not incorporated into the framework. Specifically, we 
posit that grid reliability is an underrepresented research area 
and should be incorporated into the framework. The goal of 
this research in progress is to bring forth grid reliability 
research and present to the community as a viable, important, 
and bountiful research domain. In this work-in-progress, we 
raise the need for grid reliability research, define grid 
reliability, and provide the Enhanced EI Research Framework.  
Keywords-Energy Informatics; Grid Reliability; EI Research 
Framework. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Energy informatics (EI) research covers the use of 
information and communication technology to address 
energy challenges [1]. It is the area of research that addresses 
the application of technology to resolve complex problems in 
the energy domain. The Department of Energy’s Office of 
Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy [2] classified 
challenges within the energy domain into two types: (1) the 
Transmission System challenges and (2) the Distribution 
Systems challenges. Transmission Systems challenges 
include issues in Grid Operations and Grid Stability while 
Distribution Systems challenges refer to Power Quality and 
Protection Coordination issues.  
Goebel et al. [3] stated that energy efficiency and the 
renewable energy supply are the two principal types of 
research movements currently within the energy domain. 
Energy efficiency research involves studying individual 
incentives and behavioral dynamics to influence electricity 
consumers’ usage behavior. This first type drives the 
evolution of smart energy saving systems. The second type 
of research, renewable energy supply, seeks to resolve 
challenges that arise with the integration of renewable 
sources of energy, such as wind and solar power generation 
into the electric grid. This in turn drives the advancement of 
smart grids. 
In this work-in-progress research paper, we attempt to 
define grid reliability and present our initial findings of a 
revised EI framework. These steps are the preludes for our 
upcoming publication in regards to elucidate an understudied 
research area within the EI research area: the grid reliability 
research.  
Due to the rapidly changing nature of energy generation, 
new developments of the electric power network, the 
incorporation of distributed energy resources into the grid, 
circuits and equipment overloads, grid reliability research 
has been underwhelming. In Goebel et al. [3] EI research 
framework, grid reliability research was considered an 
inferior topic. Specifically, he considered reliability as one of 
the segments under the renewable energy supply research 
movement. However, due to the shift in challenges within 
the electric utility industry, we argue that grid reliability 
research should be classified as a separate new type of 
research. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II, 
we raise awareness of grid reliability by putting forth the 
research need. In Section III, we attempt to define grid 
reliability. In Section IV, we describe our systematic 
literature review method. In Section V, we present the results 
of the review are described, a new enhanced EI framework is 
proposed, and finally, Section VI contains the conclusions of 
the paper. 
II. 
 RESEARCH NEED  
Since EI is a relatively young field, there are scattered 
research that handle different aspects of EI, ranging from 
efficiency, storage, to societal impact of renewable energy. 
Two seminal work by Watson et al. [4] and Watson and 
Brodeau [1], and later built upon by Goebel et al [3] are the 
most early work that attempted to provide a comprehensive 
EI framework. Other related works focusing on Green 
Technology [5][6]  are included in the framework, but it 
seems like a subset of reliability has been omitted.  
The lack of grid reliability in the current research 
frameworks set forth a need analysis of grid reliability as a 
necessary topic in EI. An omission of grid reliability is not 
only detrimental to the understanding of the electric grid 
overall but also an impediment for creating a reliable and 
sustainable energy storage and consumption system. In 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

addition, the research attempts to provide additional research 
tools that are otherwise overlooked by previous framework. 
Such inclusion from the domain and the tool perspectives 
will help facilitate a more complete research agenda with 
regards to EI research.  
Due to a rise in electricity usage via new technologies, 
such as electric vehicles, circuits and equipment overloads, a 
significant 
number 
of 
publications 
from 
research 
organizations, governmental bodies, and utility companies 
have focused on understanding grid reliability, causes of 
faults, and analyses of power outages events.  The National 
Academies of Sciences [7] has recently published 
“Enhancing the Resilience of the Nation’s Electricity 
System” in response to the US Congress’s call for an 
independent assessment to “conduct a national-level 
comprehensive study on the future resilience and reliability 
of the nation’s electric power transmission and distribution 
system.” In addition, the National Academies of Sciences 
established a committee to conduct the relevant research. 
Throughout this report, the committee highlighted all 
elements of grid reliability and resilience, the risks of the 
system wide failure that will grow as the structure of the 
power industry becomes more atomized and complex, and 
laid out a wide range of actions to improve the resilience of 
the US power system. Analytics (including machine 
learning, data mining, and other artificial intelligence-based 
techniques) will play a very important role in response to the 
diagnosed attacks on the electric grid, failures, or other 
impairments due to their capability of generating real-time 
recommendations [7].  
In another exemplar research, Adderly examined 
Department of Energy’s (DOE’s) power outage data from 
2002-2013 and investigated reliability trends [8]. The 
research objective was to assess the correlation between 
utilities’ reliability and grid investment projects such as the 
deployment of smart grid assets. Using the deployment of 
smart meters as a proxy for grid investments, Adderly 
concluded that the increase of smart meters correlated 
strongly with the decrease of the frequency of outages [8]. 
The author acknowledged that due to the presence of 
confounding variables, the reduction in power outage 
couldn’t be attributed to any specific smart grid investment 
project.  
There are several studies that attempt to understand grid 
reliability. Mitnick’s report prepared for the Electric Markets 
Research Foundation is another important resource that 
explains the reasons for concerns about grid reliability [9]. 
The author suggests that the incorporation of the distributed 
energy resources into the grid should be carefully managed 
to minimize the grid reliability risk. Another relevant study 
conducted by the Lawrence Berkeley National Lab  brought 
the attention to the fact that reliability data trends might not 
improve due to the addition of smart grid technology, such as 
automated outage management systems is reporting service 
interruptions more accurately [10]. Since the study was 
based on a sample of reliability data from several utilities, 
the authors did not attempt to make claims about overall 
power reliability in the US. 
With respect to the power outage causes study domain, 
the majority of the outages in the US are the result of events 
that occur at the distribution side of the grid. Infrequent 
outages are caused by the external factors. There are three 
main causes for the electrical outages: (1) Hardware and 
technical failure, (2) environment-related, and (3) human 
errors. In hardware and technical failure, outages are 
experienced due to equipment overload, short circuits, 
brownouts, and blackouts, to name a few [11]–[13]. These 
failures are often attributed to unmet peak usages, outdated 
equipment, and malfunction of backup power systems [14]. 
Interrupted power supply is not deemed as a mere 
inconvenience any longer. As the duration and spatial extent 
of 
electricity 
system 
outage 
increase, 
costs 
and 
inconvenience grow. Critical social services, such as medical 
care, 
police 
and 
other 
emergency 
services, 
and 
communications systems are relied upon electricity to 
function at the minimum. Such failure can bring catastrophic 
outcome; lives can be lost. Grid Reliability is slated to be a 
preventative research, and the more we understand the 
causes, the ready we are to implement redundancy and 
resilience into the electric grid. 
To heed this call, we peruse the literature regarding grid 
reliability to bring forth the knowledge base of the topic. 
There are two approaches in reviewing the literature, either 
through a traditional literature review or through a systematic 
literature review [16]. A systematic literature review is a 
particularly influential tool in the hands of researchers, since 
it allows a scholar to gather and recap all the information 
about research in a specific field [15]. A systematic literature 
review has the following advantages over a traditional one. 
First, systematic literature review contains both breadth and 
focus in the search. Second, the review is rooted in empirical 
knowledge and evidence rather than preconceived notion. 
Third, a systematic literature review is replicable [16]. 
As a first systematic literature review in grid reliability 
research, this systematic literature review will focus on the 
different 
grid 
reliability 
topics 
and 
their 
specific 
characteristic. We intend to use this article to enrich the 
existing literature reviews and integrate the most recent 
articles into the body of knowledge. 
III. 
GRID RELIABILITY DEFINITION 
The grid reliability topic area aims to address challenges 
and remove barriers to integrating high penetrations of 
distributed energy generation at the transmission and 
distribution 
levels 
[2].The 
subject 
includes 
many 
unaddressed questions such as what makes the grid reliable? 
Why might reliability degrade? How do the changes in use 
of the grid that are underway impose such a risk? What can 
we do to improve the grid reliability? The DOE has recently 
released its electric grid reliability study, recommending the 
research prioritization on the development for grid resiliency, 
and reliability [17]. Additionally, in the same month, the 
DOE’s Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability 
announced an initial investment of nearly $900,000 to 
address the risk and uncertainty of power systems, enabling 
academic research in the US [18]. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

There are several definitions with respect to the reliability 
of the grid. The North American Electric Reliability Council 
defined reliability as “the degree to which the performances 
of the elements of the electric system result in power being 
delivered to consumers within accepted standards and in the 
amount desired" [19]. Osborne & Cornelia viewed reliability 
as “the ability of the power system components to deliver 
electricity to all points of consumption, in the quantity and 
with the quality demanded by the customer” [10]. Reliability 
is measured by outage indices as illustrated by the Institute 
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Standard 
1366. To facilitate a unified view of grid reliability, we 
define grid reliability as the ability of the electric grid to 
deliver electricity to customers without degradation or 
failure. The argument is that today’s power systems cannot 
accommodate 
significant 
variable 
distributed 
energy 
generation, for instance, without failure [20].  
IV. 
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW METHODOLOGY 
To facilitate an understanding of current grid reliability 
research, we conduct a systematic review under the 
framework offered by Kitchenham et al. [21]. There are three 
stages in a systematic review: the Planning Stage, the 
Conducting Stage, and the Reporting Stage.  
In the Planning Stage, we define the research questions, 
select the search strategy and parameters. In the Conducting 
Stage, we conduct the search via two prominent research 
databases: IEEE Xplore and Web of Science. We have found 
503 papers from 2015-2017. After quality assessment, we 
have perused 231 relevant papers in our systematic review. 
We compare the results with the search strategy and select 
the appropriate research to include in the in-depth analysis. 
Using this knowledge, we set out to finalize our research by 
revising the EI Framework. That is the product of the 
Reporting Stage. 
Figure 2 The Enhanced EI Research Framework 
Figure 1.  Energy Informatics Enhanced Research Framework - Enriched with Service Reliability Research  
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

V. 
A PROPOSED REVISED EI FRAMEWORK 
We restructured Goebel et al. [3] framework to include 
service reliability as a third research movement in addition to 
energy efficiency and the renewable energy supply to 
recognize this understudied research. In our proposed the 
Enhanced EI Research Framework in Figure 1, energy 
efficiency, renewable energy supply, plus service reliability 
are the three types of research movements within the energy 
domain. The first theme, Energy Efficiency, drives the 
evolution of smart energy saving systems, the second theme, 
Renewable Energy Supply, drives the advancement of smart 
grids, while the third additional theme, Service Reliability, 
drives smart grids reliability and resiliency. 
In the context of the service reliability research theme, 
we classify use cases (a collection of possible scenarios) into 
four 
fundamental 
scales: 
sub-continental, 
regional 
transmission, distribution system, and feeder scale. Sub-
continental scale can be described as a large, relatively self-
contained landmass forming a subdivision of a continent. 
Within this category, multiple grids, transmission, and 
distribution systems may exist and be interconnected. 
Regional transmission is the high-voltage transmission 
network that enables power to travel long distances from 
generating units to substations closer to local end-use 
customers where the voltage is stepped back down and sent 
into the distribution system for delivery to consumers.  
As for the third type of use cases, the electric distribution 
system moves power from the   energy system to the meters 
of electricity customers. Typically, power is delivered to 
distribution substations from two or more transmission lines, 
where it is converted to a lower voltage and sent to 
customers over distribution feeders. Although distribution 
system outages tend to be more frequent than those occurring 
on transmission facilities, the impacts of such outages are 
smaller in scale and generally easier to repair [7]. 
Considering the fourth fundamental category of uses 
cases, they fall under the feeder scale. Customers on radial 
systems are exposed to interruption when their feeder 
experiences an outage. In metropolitan areas, these feeders 
typically have switches that can be reconfigured to support 
restoration from an outage or regular maintenance. When a 
component fails in these systems, customers on unaffected 
sections of the feeder are switched manually or automatically 
to an adjacent, functioning circuit. However, this still 
exposes critical services such as hospitals or police stations 
to potential outages, so these facilities are often connected to 
a second feeder for redundancy [7]. 
We also enhanced the Researchers’ Tools/Skills category 
by adding the use of tools such as those of Geographic 
Information Systems (GIS), Design Science Research, and 
Mixed Methods research. Analytics through the use of these 
tools would set out to transform the way we think, act, and 
use energy. It can help elucidate a root cause of a problem, 
define a solution through data, and also implement the 
solution with continuous monitoring and management. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
In this research in progress, we proposed the Enhanced 
EI Research Framework to augment the original framework 
by Goebel et al. [3]. The Revised EI Framework brings forth 
two important contributions to knowledge. First, our 
systematic literature review provided a scientific approach 
and add value to the ever-expanding research in the EI 
domain. As the old saying goes, prevention is better than 
cure, we bring forth the reliability to help spark another 
stream of research focusing on power sustainability and 
reliable scaling. As renewable sources of energy start to 
become mainstream, the difficulty is to disperse, manage, 
and sustain energy storage and consumption in both local 
and global scale.  
Second, we provided tools that were not included in the 
original framework. The inclusion of GIS as a research tool 
is imperative to research that focus on location and spatial 
arrangements of power stations, energy distribution grids and 
networks, and spatial-enabled events. In addition, with 
space-time analysis, GIS could assist in understanding the 
development of power grids through time.  
Another important research tool is through the use of 
Design Science Research. Design Science Research is a type 
of Information Systems research that focuses on the science 
of the artifacts [22]–[25]. Researchers utilize two processes: 
the build and evaluation cycle of Design Science to develop 
algorithms, methods, and tools to solve real-world problems 
while relying upon research rigor [22]. Design Science 
strives when faces with new issues where technology can be 
the catalyst for change and solution for problems. 
As the world has increasingly relied on energy, grid 
reliability is both an understudied topic and an important 
one. We hope that with the introduction of the grid reliability 
research into the Enhanced EI Research Framework, we 
invite more productive research conversations about this 
topic. In addition, new tools will help research able to answer 
existing questions with renewed perspectives, furthering the 
understanding of EI.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
R. Watson and M.-C. Boudreau, Energy Informatics, 1 edition. 
Green ePress, 2011. 
[2] 
Department of Energy, “Grid Performance and Reliability,” Grid 
Performance and Reliability. [Online]. Available: 
https://energy.gov/eere/solar/grid-performance-and-reliability. 
[Accessed: 29-Mar-2018]. 
[3] 
C. Goebel et al., “Energy Informatics,” Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng., vol. 6, 
no. 1, pp. 25–31, Feb. 2014. 
[4] 
R. T. Watson, M.-C. Boudreau, and A. J. Chen, “Information 
systems and environmentally sustainable development: energy 
informatics and new directions for the IS community,” MIS Q., pp. 
23–38, 2010. 
[5] 
S. Mithas, J. Khuntia, and P. K. Roy, “Green Information 
Technology, Energy Efficiency, and Profits: Evidence from an 
Emerging Economy.,” in ICIS, 2010, p. 11. 
[6] 
V. Dao, I. Langella, and J. Carbo, “From green to sustainability: 
Information Technology and an integrated sustainability 
framework,” J. Strateg. Inf. Syst., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 63–79, 2011. 
[7] 
National Academies of Sciences, Enhancing the Resilience of the 
Nation’s Electricity System. 2017. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

[8] 
S. Adderly, “Reviewing Power Outage Trends, Electric Reliability 
Indices and Smart Grid Funding,” PhD Thesis, The University of 
Vermont and State Agricultural College, 2016. 
[9] 
S. Mitnick, “Changing Uses of The Electric Grid: Reliability 
Challenges and Concerns.” Electric Markets Research Foundation, 
2015. 
[10] 
J. Osborn and C. Kawann, “Reliability of the US electric system–
Recent trends and current issues,” EScholarship - Univ. Calif., 
2002. 
[11] 
Westar Energy, “What causes power outages – working to improve 
service reliability.” [Online]. Available: 
https://www.westarenergy.com/outage-causes. [Accessed: 29-Mar-
2018]. 
[12] 
Diesel Service and Supply, “Causes of Power Failures & Power 
Outages | Diesel Service.” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.dieselserviceandsupply.com/Causes_of_Power_Failure
s.aspx. [Accessed: 29-Mar-2018]. 
[13] 
Rocky Mountain Power, “Key Causes of Power Outages.” [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.rockymountainpower.net/ed/po/or/kcopo.html. 
[Accessed: 29-Mar-2018]. 
[14] 
K. Chayanam, “Analysis of Telecommunications Outages Due to 
Power Loss,” Ohio University, 2005. 
[15] 
G. Spanos and L. Angelis, “The Impact of Information Security 
Events to the Stock Market,” Comput Secur, vol. 58, no. C, pp. 
216–229, May 2016. 
[16] 
R. Mallett, J. Hagen-Zanker, R. Slater, and M. Duvendack, “The 
benefits and challenges of using systematic reviews in international 
development research,” J. Dev. Eff., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 445–455, 
2012. 
[17] 
T. Profeta, “The Climate Post: Grid Reliability Study Released As 
Climate Change Panel Disbands,” Huffington Post, 24-Aug-2017. . 
[18] 
R. Laezman, “Office of Energy Invests in Grid Reliability 
Research,” Office of Energy Invests in Grid Reliability Research, 
2017. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.ecmag.com/section/systems/office-energy-invests-
grid-reliability-research. [Accessed: 29-Mar-2018]. 
[19] 
E. Hirst and B. Kirby, “Bulk-power Basics: Reliability and 
Commerce,” in Consulting in Electric-Industry Restructuring, Oak 
Ridge, Tennessee, 2000. 
[20] 
Department of Energy, “Chapter 3 — Enabling Modernization of 
the Electric Power System | Department of Energy.” [Online]. 
Available: https://energy.gov/under-secretary-science-and-
energy/downloads/chapter-3-enabling-modernization-electric-
power-system. [Accessed: 29-Mar-2018]. 
[21] 
B. Kitchenham, et al., “Systematic literature reviews in software 
engineering–a systematic literature review,” Inf. Softw. Technol., 
vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 7–15, 2009. 
[22] 
A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design science in 
information systems research,” MIS Q., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 75–105, 
2004. 
[23] 
A. Hevner and S. Chatterjee, Design Research in Information 
Systems, vol. 22. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2010. 
[24] 
S. T. March and G. F. Smith, “Design and natural science research 
on information technology,” Decis. Support Syst., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 
251–266, 1995. 
[25] 
J. G. Walls, G. R. Widmeyer, and O. A. El Sawy, “Building an 
information system design theory for vigilant EIS,” Inf. Syst. Res., 
vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 36–59, 1992. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

