Integration of Wireless Sensor Networks
with Building Energy Management Systems
Nikoleta Pontikakou, Panagiotis Trakadas, Theodore
Zahariadis, Panagiotis Gkonis, Stamatis Voliotis
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technological Educational Institute of Sterea Ellada
Chalkida, Greece
e-mails:
{npontikakou|ptrakadas|zahariad|pgonis|svoliotis}@teiste.gr
Dimitrios Bargiotas
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Thessaly
Volos, Greece
e-mail: bargiotas@e-ce.uth.gr
Abstract— Reducing energy consumption within buildings has
been an active area of research. Energy usage both in
commercial and residential buildings represents a significant
portion of overall energy consumption. The viability of
Wireless
Sensor
Network
(WSN)
technologies
can
be
integrated
with
Building
Energy
Management
Systems
(BEMS) in order to reduce energy consumption within
buildings. This paper targets the description of a generic
architecture and classification of WSN-based BEMS.
Keywords - Wireless Sensor Networks; Smart buildings;
Building Energy Management Systems.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The use of electricity in commercial and residential
buildings represents a significant portion of overall energy
consumption. Effective energy conservation within buildings
will result in a significant decrease in energy demand. This
demands that customers be provided with accurate and
detailed information concerning their energy usage in real
time. Such information is a prerequisite for effective
feedback provision as well as for enabling the deployment of
remote intelligent autonomous energy control systems.
Recent advances in wireless communications, low-power
integrated
circuits,
sensor
design,
and
energy
storage
technologies have enabled the effective deployment of
Wireless Sensor networks (WSNs) in a range of real-world
application
domains
[1]-[3].
WSNs
can
be
used
by
environmental and event monitoring systems, such as
Building Energy Management Systems (BEMS). BEMS
harness WSNs to harvest detailed information concerning
energy consumption within
buildings, as well as the
prevailing context under which such consumption occurs.
BEMS are an integral part of so-called intelligent or smart
buildings. In this article, a classification of the WSNs based
BEMS for smart buildings is presented. In this context, the
rest of this article is organized as follows: An overall
presentation of WSN technology is provided in Section II,
while Section III describes BEMS and a generic BEMS
architecture is provided in Section IV. Then, in Sections V-
VII, energy monitoring, energy feedback and control systems
are presented. Finally, Section VIII list some of BEMS
challenges and Section IX states the conclusions.
II.
WSN TECHNOLOGY
A.
Characteristic Features of WSNs
A WSN can be seen as a node network that gathers in-
formation from the surrounding environment, thus enabling
interactions in predefined cases. WSNs usually include
sensor nodes, actuator nodes, gateways and clients. A large
number of sensor nodes are deployed randomly inside of or
near the monitoring area (sensor field), form networks
through self-organization. During the transmission process,
the monitored data are processed and forwarded by multiple
nodes to finally reach the gateway node. The cost of WSN
equipment has dropped dramatically and WSN applications
are gradually expanding to industrial and commercial fields.
B.
Sensor Nodes
The sensor node is one of the main parts of a WSN.
Hardware implementation of sensor nodes typically includes
four parts: the power and power management module, a
sensor, a microcontroller, and a wireless transceiver. The
power module is responsible for the provision of the
appropriate power (i.e., in terms of frequency and nominal
voltage value) for secure and reliable operation. The sensor
module
is
responsible
for
data
acquisition
from
the
surrounding environment. A sensor is in charge of collecting
and transforming the signals, such as light, vibration and
chemical signals, into electrical signals and then transferring
them to the microcontroller. The latter receives data from
the sensor and processes them according to predefined
operations. The Wireless Transceiver module transmits data
to other wireless nodes, mobile devices, or control centers.
At this point, it should be noted that all parts of a WSN node
consider the WSN node features should be of tiny size and
limited power [4].
C.
Topology
In general, a WSN consists of a number of sensor nodes
and a gateway for the connection to the Internet. The
general deployment process of a WSN can be described as
follows: first, the sensor network nodes broadcast their
status to the surroundings and receive the corresponding
status from other nodes to detect each other. Afterwards, the
sensor network nodes are organized into a connected
network, according to a predefined topology. After the
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-713-9
ENERGY 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

establishment of the network topology, optimal paths are
computed for transmitting the sensing data. The power of
sensor network nodes is usually provided by batteries, in
order to keep transmission distance of WSN nodes in a short
range. The transmission distance can be up to 800-1000
meters in the open outdoor environment under line of sight.
However, in the case of indoor environments, this distance
can
be
significantly reduced.
In
such
situations,
the
coverage of a network can be extended by the use of multi-
hop transmission mode. In these cases, the sensor network
nodes act both as transmitters and receivers. The source
node sends data to its preferred node within its range (called
parent node) based on predefined metrics. The next node,
again, forwards the data to one of its nearby nodes along the
path towards the gateway. The forwarding is repeated until
the data arrives at the gateway, the destination. All protocols
and some implementation techniques of WSNs can be
adapted to the mature architecture and technologies of
wireless and wired computer networks.
D.
Low-cost IP interconnection technology
The choice during the design of the first sensor networks
was to use private addresses to manage the sensor network
nodes. Due to its relatively short length, the address was
suitable for implementing in low-power embedded sensor
nodes. However, the management of private addresses
increased the difficulty of interaction between the sensor
network nodes and the traditional IP network nodes.
Therefore, there is a need to resolve the connectivity
problem of WSN and IP network. As it is known, IPv4
addresses have been gradually depleted, and the new IPv6
addressing scheme is suitable for a wide range of sensor
network deployment, providing each sensor node with its
unique, public IPv6 address. As a result, 6LoWPAN low-
power wireless technology based on IPv6 has emerged. The
6LoWPAN has generally implemented a simplified IPv6
protocol above the link layer of the IEEE 802.15.4 protocol
[5]. Header compression and packet fragmentation reloading
is implemented by adding an adaptation layer between the
IP layer and the link layer, which is a reliable method to
achieve protocol adaptation between the IPv6 network and
the sensor network.
III.
BUILDING ENERGY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
The advent of Building Management Systems (BMS) is
sometimes also referred to as Building Automation Systems
(BAS). Though energy control systems were becoming
progressively more sophisticated, an increased awareness of
the importance of consumption feedback to consumers as an
instrument of affecting positive behavior change was
emerging.
Initial
studies,
mainly
conducted
by
psychologists, demonstrated the potential of feedback to
reduce wasteful energy usage and save on energy cost.
Energy consumption feedback has been studied as a
mechanism
for
affecting
behavior
change
in
energy
conservation within residential buildings. In the 1990’s
thermostats,
many
with
dead
zones,
were
harnessed
extensively to control temperature within buildings; this
technology
was
subsequently
improved
by
using
Proportional-Integral-Derivative
(PID)
controllers.
The
potential of Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques was also
considered. Environmental parameters served as input in the
control
of
Heating
Ventilation
and
Air-Conditioning
(HVAC) systems. Due to the invisible nature of energy
consumption in residential and commercial buildings, a
major challenge faced by early researchers concerned the
collection of real-time and detailed information on energy
consumed by individual electrical devices within a building.
To enable energy disaggregation at the appliance level,
researchers
formulated
Nonintrusive
Load
Monitoring
(NILM)
or
Nonintrusive
Appliance
Load
Monitoring
(NIALM).
NILM
enables
per-appliance
energy
consumption by identifying changes in energy usage data, as
recorded by a meter. A new generation of BEMS emerged
with the introduction of WSN technologies [6]. Acquiring
information on energy usage at different levels, such as
appliance, building, or circuit, was made possible through
the aid of WSNs. In recent years, wireless smart meters and
smart plugs have been developed that can be installed inside
the circuit-breaker box and on outlets close to individual
appliances. Such devices integrate traditional metering
systems with communication interfaces to deliver detailed
information on resource consumption in real time, as well as
to offer additional features, such as remote actuation. Thus,
smart meters are a fundamental component of the current
generation of BEMS. Ιn addition, the concept of Internet of 
Things (IoT) integration in BMS is a challenging research
field, as it allows the interconnection of various diverse
functions in the concept of smart cities (i.e., energy demand
and consumption of various components) to be integrated in
order to maximize energy efficiency [7].
IV.
GENERIC BEMS ARCHITECTURE
A.
Key components
A generic architecture for such a BEMS is presented in
Figure 1. Conceptually, it can be considered as comprising of
three key components, namely Sensor Layer, Computation
Layer, and Application Layer.
a) Sensor Layer
Buildings, and the electrical devices and appliances with-
in them, are monitored by a sensor configuration that collects
data on energy usage and temporal contextual environmental
parameters. This information is made available to the
computation layer for further data processing and analysis.
The sensor layer is a physical-level configuration composed
of a suite of sensor nodes deployed inside a building that
periodically measure relevant
phenomena
and
forward
measurements to the computation layer for further analysis
and storage [8]. This component can be seen as comprising
three subcomponents:
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-713-9
ENERGY 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies


energy sensing: consists of a smart meter (sensor)
deployment that monitors energy usage within and
throughout a building.

environmental sensing: consists of an array of sensors
that collect information on prevailing environmental
factors, such as luminance level, temperature, relative
humidity, carbon dioxide level, and so on.

human sensing: addresses the monitoring of occupant
presence and behavior and the development of behavior
models for a given environment.
Figure 1. Architecture of BEMS.
b) Computation Layer
The function of the computation layer is to analyse all
information collected by the sensor layer using algorithmic
calculations and statistical analysis. It compromises two
components:

The computation software and

The database that records all data, including real time
and event driven, such as energy usage comparisons, and
historical calculations.
c) Application Layer
What analysis occurs, and what tools to adopt, for ex-
ample, logical reasoning, data mining, and so on, will be
driven by the needs of the application layer. This layer can
be further categorized into two application subcategories:
appliance control and the provision of user feedback across a
range
of
modalities.
Implicit
within
this
layer
is
a
management component allowing for system testing. BEMS
functionality is realized in the application layer. Two
categories of functionality may be identified:

Energy feedback systems provide building services, in
inhabitants,
and
any
other
interested
party
with
information
concerning
energy
consumption.
Such
systems can present both real-time and historical energy
usage information. Ambient displays, mobile devices, or
Web portals may be harnessed for visualisation purposes.

Energy control systems control devices and appliances
within the building in accordance with policies and
preferences defined by consumers. Preferences may be
defined using intuitive user interfaces; likewise, control
can be exercised via a range of digital displays.
Computational intelligence techniques may be harnessed
for enabling autonomous behavior.
In each of the two categories, an interface and control
component for system management activities is necessary.
B.
Cloud-enabled BEMS
Local computational capabilities may prove insufficient
to represent and manage data of BEMS using WSN. One
possible solution may involve the harnessing and integration
of cloud computing with BEMS [9]. They will initially be
realised as cloud services in the commercial context. A
service-oriented paradigm may evolve where a wide range of
services is hosted on the cloud, but consumers access them
on a subscription basis, as their needs dictate. For example,
domestic consumers may be driven by a simple need to save
money.
Figure 2. Classification of BEMS
In contrast, industrial and business users may
perceive cloud services as an appropriate solution for
legislative adherence, insurance provision, as well as
enabling contractual fulfilment. BEMS can be classified in
three
categories,
namely
monitoring,
feedback,
and
control (see Figure 2) [6].
V.
ENERGY MONITORING TOOLS AND TECHNIQUES
A.
Approaches
Traditionally, meters installed in buildings between the
baseline and the external power line fail to provide
sufficiently detailed data on energy usage, nor do they offer a
communication interface by which one could obtain such
data in real time. Research has proposed WSN-based
solutions that include energy usage monitoring using smart
meters/outlets and distributed approaches for appliance
activity monitoring. These are advanced energy monitoring
systems that measure energy consumption and provide
communication interfaces by which to transmit data in real
time. There are two major approaches being harnessed to
monitor energy usage and in the literature are referred to as
single-point monitoring and distributed monitoring:

single-point monitoring (NILM): they use a single
metering device installed at the fuse box to monitor the
entire
building
energy
usage.
To
identify
energy
consumption at the appliance level, the data is then
analyzed using estimation algorithms to identify the
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-713-9
ENERGY 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

different load usage patterns generated by various
appliances when in use.

distributed monitoring (ILM): this approach is used for
monitoring
appliance-level
energy
consumption.
It
harnesses either smart plugs/outlets or various types of
sensors for each individual appliance.
B.
Single-Point Monitoring (NILM)
A smart clip-on meter is installed at the main electrical
panel outside the building and it meters the entire building
energy usage in real time and reports this to a PC via a
gateway. This data is sometimes referred to as the aggregated
energy usage measurement of a building. The next step is to
disaggregate
appliance-specific
information
from
this
measurement. Appliance signatures are created by turning
appliances on/off during the training phase and appropriately
annotating the dataset. These signatures are then used by
machine learning algorithms to disaggregate energy data.
Appliances that have different energy usage patterns (or
signatures) are easily identifiable but those with similar
patterns are harder to distinguish. Some examples of smart
metering and WSN-based systems are the following:
a) Direct Energy Monitoring
Direct energy monitoring systems require an in-line
installation of the metering component to measure energy
usage. Most of the systems surveyed provide broadly similar
functionality, however, each of them uses varying sensor
types and is designed using different hardware/software
techniques,
such
as
circuit-panel
meter
and
energy
consumption display.
b) Indirect Energy Monitoring.
Instead of an in-line installation of a clip-on meter, this
method uses a plugin sensor to capture electrical noise
generated on power lines by the running of appliances. This
approach is used to capture appliance activity information.
Electrical Noise Sensing is an approach to identifying
appliance status is pre-sented. The system uses a single
plugin sensor to detect electrical noise on power lines created
by electrical appliances when they are switched on. Different
appliances generate different electrical noise signals. This
technique computationally expensive and also requires a
complex and time-consuming training process compared to
other NILM techniques.
C.
Distributed Monitoring (ILM)
In the case of distributed sensing, each appliance in a
monitored environment typically has one or more sensors
allocated to it. These sensors measure a range of activities
from energy usage to appliance state activity. Distributed
sensing can be considered as the most accurate approach for
appliance-level monitoring but it is very expensive. This type
of sensing consists of using either smart meters/outlets to
measure appliance level energy usage or various types of
sensors to infer appliance-specific activities [10].
a) Direct Energy Monitoring
The installation of smart metering systems usually occurs
inside the circuit breaker box and, due to safety concerns,
may
require
an
electrician
for
installation.
To
ease
installation, a range of smart outlets have been developed
and used. Smart outlets are installed between AC plugs of
appliances and the standard wall power sockets. Using a
gateway, the data is acquired by a PC and is then visualized
on a variety of media. Such systems are straightforward,
provide accurate appliance-level metering, but provide
limited functionality regarding data aggregation, analysis,
and visualization.
b) Indirect Energy Monitoring
While smart power outlets and meters are appropriate for
appliances that provide standard AC plugs, they cannot be
easily installed to operate with major energy consuming
devices, such as HVAC systems, ceiling lights, and electric
boilers because these devices are typically connected directly
to the main power line. To address such issues, various types
of sensors for indirect energy usage monitoring have been
used. Most of these techniques are used to obtain fine-
grained appliance activity information within buildings and
differ from each other on the basis of the hardware (sensor
nodes) they have adopted and software implementation. The
main approaches follow:

Electromagnetic Sensing.
It is an indirect and detailed power monitoring system in
which wireless sensors are used to report appliance state
information. The system provides detailed feedback on
appliance-level electricity consumption using a collaboration
between
sensor
nodes
placed
in
close
proximity
to
appliances and the main power meter that reports overall
electricity usage. It uses three types of sensors: magnetic,
sound, and light sensors. Magnetic sensors, placed near an
appliance or a power line, can sense magnetic field variations
when the current flows in the power line.

Environmental Sensing
It is an environmental sensing approach that harnesses
various types of sensors to infer appliance state activities
based on measured environmental parameters. A sound
sensor records the sounds produced by appliances and a light
sensor obtains information regarding light status when
switched on/off. All sensors transmit their data to a PC that
processes the data and visualizes power usage per appliance.
In order to automate the NILM training process, a temporary
deployment of wireless sensors to each appliance is done and
then appliance activity information is inferred based on the
data reported by these sensors. Systems have been developed
to reduce the energy consumption of meeting rooms by
identifying waste. Placing various types of sensors close to
appliances increases overall accuracy level but also increases
system complexity. Such approaches demand more time for
deployment while increasing installation and maintenance
cost as compared to other indirect sensing techniques [4].

Thermal Sensing
Systems
that
disaggregate
total
power
usage
into
appliance-level consumption by observing the heat patterns
generated by appliances have been developed and used. A
power meter to obtain overall energy usage and one thermal
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-713-9
ENERGY 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

camera to observe heat patterns on the appliance surface
have been also used.
D.
Monitoring Subsystem
The monitoring subsystem, is composed of a number of
electricity sensors, measuring the power consumption of
each single electrical appliance in the building. In addition to
electricity sensors, the monitoring subsystem also includes
environmental sensors for monitoring parameters, such as
temperature, light intensity, human presence, and so on. Such
information will be used by the energy manager application
to minimize energy wastes, according to energy conservation
strategies defined by the user(s). Data collected by both
electricity and environmental sensors are communicated
wirelessly to a base station located on the same floor (there is
at least one base station per floor) and, then, conveyed to a
central server. The communication between base stations and
the central server typically occurs through a wired LAN
(e.g., Ethernet) [4]. The central server has the responsibility
to collect and process data. It provides users with real-time
and/or periodic reports on energy consumption and costs.
The server also sends alert messages to notify of specific
events (e.g., a device being in active mode when it is
supposed to be in inactive mode) suggesting possible actions
to save energy.
VI.
ENERGY FEEDBACK SYSTEMS
The content of feedback given to users may contain
different reporting units, such as energy consumption and
cost, appliance-state information, or environmental impacts
(for
example,
carbon
emissions).
These
units,
when
displayed, have different impacts on motivating users to
reduce energy consumption. A classification of these
systems follows:

Energy Consumption and Cost
Usually,
feedback
systems
provide information on
energy consumptions and the cost of energy used to help
users make financial savings.

Appliance-State Information
Some
feedback
systems
provide
information
on
appliance state, whether active or otherwise. With this
information, consumers can understand where energy is
being wasted inside a building and, as a result, they can turn
appliances off if they are not needed. Systems with high
accuracy use either smart outlets or various types of wireless
sensors to obtain appliance-state information.

Environmental Impacts
One of the motivational factors of energy conservation is
to lower carbon emissions to further the goal of a greener
environment.

Feedback Disaggregation
Providing disaggregated feedback results in more energy
conservation. There are five major types of disaggregation
to help users understand their energy usage in detail: space-
specific, user-specific, appliance-specific, time-specific, and
service-specific. Space-specific disaggregation is achieved
by dividing a building into smaller areas. Division can be
based on rooms, circuit breakers, or appliance types.
Appliance-Specific disaggregated information is considered
as highly enriched feedback targeting energy estimation at
appliance level. Time-Specific Disaggregation, feedback on
different time-scales, past, present, and future is given to
help users know when and over what timescale energy was
consumed and wasted. User-Specific Disaggregation or
personalized feedback can help individuals in a building to
keep track of their own energy usage. Service-Specific
Disaggregation supports energy conservation based upon a
broader perspective through the possible reconfigurations of
services.

Feedback Presentation
The information on energy consumption should be
displayed using a medium that can capture attention, such as
digital screens, smart TVs, mobile phones, and in written
form; it should also be delivered in a way that is inter-active
using graphs, figures, and easily understandable numerical
data is preferred.

Motivational Factors
Apart from motivational factors described in the previous
sections, there are several other approaches to motivation,
such as using comparisons, goal settings, media campaigns,
and rewards has led to reduced energy usage.
VII.
ENERGY CONTROL SYSTEMS
A.
Architecture
A variety of building automation and control systems
use WSNs to conserve energy. These systems usually adopt
a three-tier architecture:

a network of sensor nodes, that report energy usage,
occupant behaviour, and environmental conditions;

a central control server; and

a set of intelligent plugs and relays that control electric
appliances within a building.
The first layer provides information to the control server.
The control server performs computation on information
received from the sensors as well as information obtained
from other sources, such as weather conditions/forecast
using the Internet. The data is then harnessed by intelligent
algorithms to control energy by switching off electric
appliances, turning off lights, reducing HVAC parameters,
and so forth. Based on the techniques and implementation
details, the energy control systems consist of three major
categories: autonomous energy control systems, manual
energy control systems, and energy forecast/modelling
systems [10].
B.
Autonomous Energy Control
Autonomous energy control systems, once configured,
can reduce energy consumption within a building by con-
trolling electrical appliances, such as HVAC and lights
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-713-9
ENERGY 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

without requiring continuous user interaction. Such systems
primarily target HVAC and lighting systems that consume a
significant portion of overall energy consumption within
commercial buildings. A combination of different sensor
nodes, such as temperature, PIR (Passive Infrared for
occupancy detection), ambient light, and sound sensors
inform the control server about the monitored environment.
The control server can then make decisions and send signals
to actuators. The overall goal is to switch off (or lower)
HVAC, lights, and other loads in the building when not
needed.
C.
Manual Energy Control
Manual
energy
control
systems
provide
user
functionalities to monitor and control electric appliances
remotely.
BEMS
provide GUIs
that
visualize
energy
consumption per appliance (mostly HVAC and lights) and
provides control options for these devices. Manual energy
control systems use smart outlets for plug-based appliances
and standard actuation devices for HVAC and ceiling-light
control.
D.
Energy Modeling Systems
The use of software tools for energy management within
buildings has become quite popular. These tools enable
users to estimate the energy consumption of buildings as
well as provide energy control features. Energy modelling
tools offer a number of functionalities regarding energy
consumption auditing, prediction, and design and evaluation
of energy control systems. Such tools are helpful in
motivating users to improve building energy consumption
by enabling them to understand the spectrum of energy
usage within buildings, especially when there are limited
resources and many technical challenges to face.
VIII.
CHALLENGES OF MANAGING BUILDING ENERGY
INFRASTRUCTURE
In building energy management, a number of challenges
can be identified:

Installing resource monitoring can prove demanding in
terms
of
the
required
technical
knowledge
and
associated deployment time, both for single-sensor and
distributed approaches.

Monitoring energy consumption demands sensing the
environment as to patterns of movement, potential
activities within, and occupancy levels.

Engineering
and
sustaining
behavior
change
is
fundamental and core to the success of building energy
management systems. User feedback is the instrument
through which behaviour change may be achieved.

Building energy management systems is extremely
heterogeneous and there is a need for the development
tools to support the rapid prototyping of standards-
compliant BEMS.
IX.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
With increasing demand and costs in energy production
and limited supply of energy resources, energy conservation
has emerged as a critical environmental issue. Much of this
attention has been directed to the use of energy in the
buildings, as energy consumption in commercial and
residential buildings, and there is a need to examine ways in
which energy consumption may be reduced.
This article presents energy monitoring, feedback, and
control strategies aimed at energy conservation within the
built environment. Also, a generic architecture for BEMS
incorporating WSNs has been given to achieve such a
solution. Finally, a classification of BEMS has also been
presented.
Future work includes the implementation of the proposed
architecture and its extended testing and comparison with
existing architectures and approaches.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Alahmad, P. Wheeler, A. Schwer, J. Eiden, and A. Brumbaugh,
“A comparative study of three feedback devices for residential real-
time energy monitoring”, IEEE Trans. On Industr. Electron., issue 59,
no. 4, 2011, pp. 2002–2013.
[2]
X. Chen, T. Wei, and S. Hu, “Uncertainty-aware household appliance
scheduling considering dynamic electricity pricing in smart home”,
IEEE Trans.on Smart Grid, issue 4, no. 2, 2013, pp. 932–941.
[3]
S. Park, H. Kim, H. Moon, J. Heo, and S. Yoon, “Concurrent
simulation platform for energy-aware smart metering systems”, IEEE
Trans. On Consumer Electron. issue 56, no. 3, 2010, pp. 1918–1926.
[4]
L-W Yeh, Y-C Wang, and Y-C Tseng, “iPower: an energy
conservation system for intelligent buildings by wireless sensor
networks”,
2009,
White
Paper,
available
at
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.470.9793&
rep=rep1&type=pdf [retrieved: March, 2019]
[5]
F. Corucci, G. Anastasi, and F. Marcelloni, “A wsn-based testbed for
energy efficiency in buildings”, Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium
on Computers and Communications, 2011 (ISCC’11), pp. 990–993.
[6]
J.-J.
Chang,
P.-C.
Hsiu,
and
K.
Tei-Wei,
“Search-oriented
deployment strategies for wireless sensor networks”, Proceedings of
the 10th IEEE International Symposium on Object and Component-
Oriented Real-Time Distributed Computing, 2007 (ISORC’07), pp.
164–171.
[7]
D. Minoli, K. Sohraby and B. Occhiogrosso, “IoT considerations,
requirements,
and
architectures
for
smart
buildings—energy
optimization and next-generation building management systems,
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 4, no. 1, 2017.
[8]
A. H. Kazmi, M. J. O’ Grady, D. T. Delaney, A. G. Ruzzelli and G.
M. P. O’ Hare, “A review of wireless-sensor-network-enabled
building energy management systems”, ACM Transactions on Sensor
Networks (TOSN), vol. 10, Issue 4, June 2014, Article No. 66
[9]
W. Kurschl and W. Beer, “Combining cloud computing and wireless
sensor networks”, Proceedings of the 11th Interna-tional Conference
on Information Integration and Web-based Applications and Services,
2009 (iiWAS’09), ACM Press, New York, pp. 512–518.
[10] A. Marchiori and Q. Han, “Distributed wireless control for building
energy management”, in Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Workshop on
Embedded Sensing Systems for Energy-Efficiency in Building, 2010
(BuildSys’10),
ACM
Press,
New
York,
pp.
37–42.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-713-9
ENERGY 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

