Non-Intrusive Load Monitoring of Single and Aggregated Proﬁles with a Hidden
Markov Model
Nad`ege Miquey
Ecole centrale de Lyon
Lyon, France
email: nadege.miquey@ecoco2.com
Etta Grover-Silva
Eco CO2
Nanterre, France
email: etta.grover-silva@ecoco2.com
Abstract—Awareness raising programs to encourage energy
efﬁcient behaviour are important in the context of the current
energy transition. Sensors and connected devices allowing for
data collection are easily available providing an opportunity
to collect electric consumption data from individual appliances.
The effective use of these data sources is necessary to optimize
an energy efﬁciency coaching program. This paper presents
a methodology for non-intrusive load monitoring analysis on
individual smart plugs to identify an unknown appliance and
disaggregated an aggregated load proﬁle, such as a power strip.
The automatic detection of a connected appliance allows for
appliance usage suggestions to be provided quickly without the
need of an end-user input. The disaggregation of an aggregated
curve such as a power strip allows for the optimization of
the number of smart plugs required to represent a signiﬁcant
proportion of the total energy use of the household. The down
sampling of high resolution data was also performed to observe
the performance of the methodology on lower resolution data.
The single appliance identiﬁcation models all had very high
accuracy (between 94 - 100 %). The disaggregation of an
aggregated proﬁle in the kitchen use case also had high accuracy
for data with a resolution of less than one minute (95 - 99 %).
The disaggregation of an aggregated proﬁle for a multi-media use
case had a lower performance when more than two appliances
were considered (55 - 85 %).
Keywords—load monitoring, machine learning, disaggregation,
energy efﬁciency.
I. INTRODUCTION
The energy transition has become an urgent topic in the
context of the accelerating climate change. This transition
implies the signiﬁcant reduction of resource usage in order
to accomplish ambitious goals set forth by world leaders
including the European Union (EU). The building sector
and more precisely the residential building sector is a large
contributor to the energy consumption of a country. In the
European Union, households represent one-fourth of its total
ﬁnal energy consumption [1]. In recent years, emissions as a
result of building energy consumption have increased reaching
an all-time high in 2018 [2].
The energy consumption of a household is dependent on
the electric appliances present and the use of these appliances
deﬁned by individual appliance usage behaviour. The second
factor can have a huge impact on the overall energy use.
Inefﬁcient use of building systems and appliances is called the
energy efﬁciency gap. This gap can represent up to 100% of
excessive energy use in comparison to the design requirements
[3]. The EU has put in place strict regulations about new
building construction to improve energy efﬁcient buildings,
however few regulations exist addressing the behavioural use
of buildings after construction.
Energy efﬁcient behaviour is highly speciﬁc to individual
households. Therefore, effective awareness raising programs
are difﬁcult to implement on a large scale without integrating
household speciﬁc analysis and advice. Several studies have
shown that appliance speciﬁc energy use combined with real-
time feedback results in the highest energy savings for multiple
awareness raising programs [4].
With recent massive deployment of smart meters in multiple
countries, individual household electric load data is more
easily accessible. Multiple awareness raising programs have
been deployed by the company Eco CO2 in the context of a
public tender in France put forth by ADEME related to a fund-
ing mechanism called Investissement d’avenir. The programs
deployed include TBH Alliance [5], Picowatty [6] and SEIZE
[7]. These programs focus on encouraging energy efﬁcient
behaviour by providing useful and user speciﬁc information
about the environment and the direct impact of their actions.
Recently, individual electric appliance load plugs have been
integrated in Eco CO2 data collection platform. These smart
plugs allow for the precise measurement of individual appli-
ance load proﬁles or of a power strip to provide appliance
speciﬁc advice to individual users. However, the cost of
individual smart plugs does not allow for the individual load
monitoring of all appliances within a household. In order to
maximize the impact of a single smart plug, Non-Intrusive
Load Monitoring (NILM) techniques [8][9] can be applied
to decompose a combined load curve of up to 6 appliances
connected to a power strip.
Multiple algorithms have been implemented in the NILM
domain for the classiﬁcation of appliance proﬁles including K-
Nearest Neighbors (KNN) [10][11], K-means [12], Decision
Tree, Random Forest, Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) [13]
and Hidden Markov Model (HMM) [14]. The selection of
the appropriate method is based on the data available for
model training, the data resolution and the computational
requirements.
In [15] individual appliance load data [16] with a one second
resolution are modeled with a Random Forest, LogitBoost,
Bagging, Decision Tree, Naive Bayes and Support Vector
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-855-6
ENERGY 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Machine algorithms. The results were compared for the classi-
ﬁcation of 33 devices. Accuracy ranged from 90-96% with the
Random Forest algorithm performing the best. However, these
algorithms were not demonstrated to be capable of analyzing
aggregated load proﬁles as well.
The KNN, K-means and Decision Tree algorithms are
well adapted for single appliance identiﬁcation. In [11] 10
second resolution data of active and reactive power is used
for the correct classiﬁcation of 8 individual appliances. One of
these algorithms, the Feed-forward Neural Network, was also
applied to aggregated curves to identify individual appliances
within an aggregated proﬁle. The aggregated model used
three appliances with a 90-98% accuracy depending on the
combined states.
A review of event based and non-event based NILM
schemes is presented in [14] where two main techniques are
discussed: HMM and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN).
The CNN and more generally Deep Neural Networks (DNN)
approach was deemed more computationally intensive for the
training period and relatively lower accuracy (below 90%) in
comparison to HMM techniques. The HMM is classiﬁed as a
non-event based NILM scheme and is preferential due to the
effective application on individual and aggregated curves, the
simplicity of the model training and the application on low
resolution data.
In [9] advantages of HMM in comparison to other NILM
techniques are described as being effective when labeled data
is available and on low frequency timeseries data. These mod-
els can also have a low computational requirement depending
on the model structure. This type of model has been proven to
be effective on the identiﬁcation of single appliances as well
as aggregated proﬁles. It has been noted that this model is
highly effective for multi-state appliances with distinct power
levels but not ideal for multi-state variable power consumption
appliances. The HMM is more effective in comparison to a
Markov Model in a disaggregation context due to the fact that
the results are not a simple sequence of states and the transition
probability. With the HMM, it is possible to study observable
power values associated with hidden states of appliances, the
probability that each hidden state is a realistic combination of
observed power states for each appliance power value state
and the transition state probability.
In this paper, a HMM methodology is implemented due to
the effectiveness of the model structure to classify proﬁles
for an individual appliance as well as an aggregated load
proﬁle. It has been proven to be effective on low resolution
data which is important for commercial application of the
model and the required data storage necessary for effective
classiﬁcation. The training period is relatively simple and
has a low computational requirement. The implementation
of this model is innovative to help in providing targeted
energy saving advice per appliance. Based on initial appliance
classiﬁcation and individual appliance consumption analysis,
awareness raising programs and impact can be more closely
studied.
The following sections will detail the simple but robust
model developed for the automatic identiﬁcation of individ-
ual appliances that is also applicable to a power strip to
identify individual appliances in an aggregated load proﬁle.
The methodology is presented in section II followed by a
realistic case study in section III. Results are discussed in IV
which includes a performance study of the developed model
on varying data resolutions.
II. METHODOLOGY
In this section, the Hidden Markov Model and pre-
processing steps of constructing the model features will be
explained. The pre-processing and feature extraction of the
timeseries data is composed of three main steps: clustering of
timeseries values, deﬁnition of buckets, feature quantiﬁcation
of buckets. These three steps allow for the effective quantiﬁca-
tion of the timeseries data to then develop individual appliance
Hidden Markov Models for individual appliance recognition.
These individual appliance models are then combined to
produce an effective state identiﬁcation model to separate
individual appliance timeseries signals out of an aggregated
timeseries signal.
A. Data pre-processing
1) Clustering on power consumption values: For each
appliance, a K-means clustering method is used to identify
groups of power consumption values and deﬁne the number of
states characteristic of each appliance. The clustering method
is applied to timeseries data for a duration of 2 to 10 days
speciﬁed in Table I for each single appliance. The duration of
training timeseries is chosen to get a representative number of
active periods for each appliance. For appliances functioning
more than 6 hours a day such as refrigerators, screen or
Internet router, 3 days allow to identify the functioning range
of values. For appliances functioning occasionally, up to 10
days of data are necessary to identify the range of values of
functioning periods.
TABLE I
K-MEANS CLUSTERING, SAMPLING RATE = 5 SECONDS
Appliance
Duration of training
Number of
type
timeseries (days)
active periods
Hot-water boiler
10
21
Refrigerator
3
94
Coffee-machine
10
29
Washing-machine
10
10
Screen
3
8
Internet router
3
NAa
Laptop charger
6
8
Television
5
12
aNot Applicable, Internet router is an always on appliance.
A silhouette score is computed to determine the ideal
number of clusters for each appliance. This method is used
as opposed to a possible K-means clustering methodology in
order to reduce computational time and prioritize simplicity
of the calculation. The average power value associated with
each cluster is also calculated.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-855-6
ENERGY 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

2) Interpolation and bucketing of aggregated proﬁle: Load
proﬁle data is assigned labels based on assigned clusters
from the K-means clustering method. This allows for the
reconstruction of the timeseries data with labeled time periods
associated with each K-means cluster. An average value is then
assigned to each cluster and used to remove all variation within
the period designated as the same cluster label. An interpola-
tion method is used to ﬁll in missing data and reconstruct
a continuous timeseries proﬁle. This new constructed load
proﬁle is then separated into buckets based on the magnitudes
evaluated in the K-means clustering method.
3) Test and training data processing: Characteristics of
the testing data set can differ from the characteristics of
the training data set. To avoid this, load proﬁles are con-
structed to obtain test load proﬁles closer to training load
proﬁles and improve models performances. To construct the
load proﬁles, buckets are created around each cluster’s value
identiﬁed on training load proﬁles. For the appliance i, with ni
clusters of mean values m1, m2, ..., mn, the created buckets
are m1 − x%, m1 + x%, m2 − x%, ..., mn + x%. Models
performances are evaluated and compared on raw test data
and on pre-processed load proﬁles.
B. Hidden Markov Model
The calculated features are then used to construct individ-
ual Hidden Markov Models for each individual appliance.
A multi-appliance model is then created by combining all
possible states of the individual appliance models.
1) Single appliance model: The ideal number of clusters
computed with the K-means clustering method is used to
set the number of hidden states for each single Hidden
Markov Model. Parameters of each single appliance HMM are
estimated with an Expectation–Maximization (EM) algorithm.
2) Multi-appliance model: Single appliance models are
then combined to obtain Hidden Markov Model for multiple
appliances. Single appliance models states are combined to
form N distinct combinations of states of the combined model.
N =
k
Y
i=0
ni
(1)
where k ∈ N∗ is the number of appliances combined in the
model, ni ∈ N∗ is the number of states of the ith appliance.
Transition matrices of single appliance models are combined
using Kronecker product deﬁned by (2):
A ⊗ B =





a1,1B
· · ·
a1,nB
a2,1B
· · ·
a2,nB
...
...
...
am,1B
· · ·
am,nB





(2)
Viterbi algorithm is used to decode sequences and determine
the most probable sequence of hidden states (which appliance
is in which states) corresponding to the observable sequence
of power consumption traces.
3) Splitting data into a training set and a test set: For
each appliance class, the load proﬁles of a speciﬁc appliance
are used to train the HMM (different refrigerators, washing-
machines etc). Feature extraction using bucketing allows to
identify speciﬁc characteristics for each appliance in the same
class (speciﬁc load proﬁle patterns, maximum power, average
power etc). Testing of the developed model is then performed
on load proﬁles that were not included in the training set.
C. Single model evaluation metrics
Single HMM are evaluated on 15 days of data using the
following metrics:
• the accuracy: the proportion of correct On and Off states
prediction
• the precision deﬁned in (3): the proportion of correct On
states prediction among all On states predicted. TP is the
number of True Positive elements, FN is the number of
False Negative elements
precision =
TP
TP + FN
(3)
• the f1-score deﬁned in (4), where precision is deﬁned in
(3) and recall deﬁned in (5)
F1 = 2 ∗ precision ∗ recall
precision + recall
(4)
recall =
TP
TP + FN
(5)
D. Combined model evaluation metrics
To evaluate performances of states prediction, two different
metrics are used. A micro-averaged accuracy score deﬁned in
(6) is computed. This score measures the fraction of correct
states prediction among all possible combination of states
of the combined model. When power consumption values
are below a certain threshold, they are bucketed to zero
consumption values. States where all appliances are Off are
thus the easiest ones to detect and these states concern a large
part of each recording. To get a more representative accuracy
score, the micro-averaged accuracyon score deﬁned in (7)
does not take into account the state where all appliances are
Off.
micro accuracy =
PN
n=0 TPn
PN
n=0 TPn + PN
n=0 FPn
(6)
∀n ∈ [0, N] such that n ̸= off state :
micro accuracyon =
PN
n=0 TPn
PN
n=0 TPn + PN
n=0 FPn
(7)
Where:
• N is the number of states deﬁned in 1.
• TPn refer to True Positive elements of states n: predicted
states are n and correspond to ground truth.
• FPn refer to False Positive element of states n: predicted
states are n whereas ground truth is not n.
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-855-6
ENERGY 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

III. CASE STUDY
The primary objective of this case study is to show the
effectiveness of the deﬁned methodology to automatically clas-
sifying individual appliances as well as combined appliances
load proﬁles. A combined appliance load proﬁle could be a
smart plug monitoring a power strip where up to six appliances
are connected. The data used for testing and validation was
collected through an internal experimental study performed
with employees of Eco CO2. The recorded power consumption
data was collected for 64 smart plugs. More than 3800 days of
data have been collected during the experimental study. The
appliances used in this case study include refrigerators, coffee-
machines, hot-water boilers, microwave-ovens, Internet router,
screens, computers, televisions, washing-machines. Two real-
istic power strip conﬁgurations have been deﬁned to simulate
a realistic application of a power strip found in a typical
residential household:
• Aggregated load proﬁle of four kitchen appliances: a hot-
water boiler, a refrigerator, a coffee-machine, a washing-
machine.
• Aggregated load proﬁle of four multimedia appliances:
a screen, an Internet router, a laptop charger and a
television.
Three models are then computed for each category: a com-
bined HMM model of two single appliance models, a com-
bined HMM model of three single appliance models and a
combined HMM model of four single appliance models.
IV. RESULTS
In this section, the results of the K-means clustering method
applied on eight single appliances will be detailed. State pre-
diction performances of the HMM deﬁned on single appliances
and aggregated proﬁles will be evaluated. The aggregated pro-
ﬁles represent two realistic conﬁgurations of possible power
strips in a kitchen or ofﬁce scenario presented in section IV.
A comparison between results on kitchen appliances and on
multimedia appliances is done based on the speciﬁcity of each
appliance type. The impact of data resolution degradation on
combined appliance HMM states predictions will be studied.
A. Model prediction of on and off states evaluation
Table II presents each cluster number and cluster centroide
for each appliance computed with a K-means method. A
majority of appliances analyzed could be coerced into a
maximum two states. The one exception is the refrigerator
category due to a high peak as a result of the electrical inertia
of the compressor, therefore creating three distinct states.
Appliances with no zero state can be interpreted as loads
that contribute to the standby consumption. Therefore, the
appliance is never completely off and consumes electricity
constantly even if the consumption is very low.
B. State prediction appliance models
1) State prediction of single appliance models: Each model
is evaluated using the evaluation metrics deﬁned in Section
II-C to determine the accuracy of state prediction. Evaluation
TABLE II
K-MEANS RESULTS, SAMPLING RATE = 1 SECONDS
Appliance
Appliance
Number of
Clusters centroids
category
type
clusters
(W)
Hot-water boiler
2
[0.3839, 2468]
Kitchen
Refrigerator
3
[0.1490, 117.7, 1269]
appliances
Coffee-machine
2
[1.417, 1576]
Washing-machine
2
[2.813, 2438]
Screen
2
[1.0, 29.06]
Multimedia
Internet router
2
[0.0, 8.122]
appliances
Laptop charger
2
[13.04, 0.015]
Television
2
[0.0, 129.4]
metrics are calculated for 15 periods of 24-hours. Each test
sample is the addition of 24-hours recordings of single appli-
ances present in the tested model.
TABLE III
SINGLE APPLIANCE HMM RESULTS ON RAW DATA FOR KITCHEN
APPLIANCES, SAMPLING RATE = 1 SECOND
Appliance
Appliance
Accuracy
Precision
f1-score
category
type
(%)
Hot-water boiler
99.9
0.82
0.90
Kitchen
Refrigerator
99.7
NAa
NAa
appliances
Coffee-machine
99.6
0.99
0.99
Washing-machine
94.3
0.75
0.84
aNot Applicable, refrigerators are three-state appliances.
Table III shows the accuracy results of states prediction for
each single appliance HMM when raw data are processed.
Low accuracy results are observed for the washing-machine
appliance due to the nature of the load proﬁle that can have
a higher variation in operational states from one appliance to
another. This implies a possible signiﬁcant difference in shape
of a training data set and the test data set of a new appliances
not seen by the model in the training set. All other appliances
had a high accuracy. The precision of the hot water boiler is
lower than the coffee machine. This could be due to a higher
variability in the usage duration, which is variable with the
amount of water being heated.
TABLE IV
SINGLE APPLIANCE HMM RESULTS ON RAW DATA FOR MULTI-MEDIA
APPLIANCES, SAMPLING RATE = 1 SECOND
Appliance
Appliance
Accuracy
Precision
f1-score
category
type
(%)
Screen
99.9
0.99
0.99
Multimedia
Internet router
100
NAa
NAa
appliances
Laptop charger
99.6
0.93
0.95
Television
99.9
0.99
0.99
aNot Applicable, Internet router is an always on appliance.
Similar high accuracy results are found for the multi-media
appliances regardless of the speciﬁcity of one appliance in
comparison to another.
Table V shows the accuracy results for all state predic-
tions and for On state predictions for each single appliance
HMM when load proﬁles are pre-processed as described in
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-855-6
ENERGY 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

TABLE V
SINGLE APPLIANCE HMM RESULTS ON PRE-PROCESSED LOAD PROFILES
FOR KITCHEN APPLIANCES, SAMPLING RATE = 1 SECOND
Appliance
Appliance
Accuracy
Precision
f1-score
category
type
(%)
Hot-water boiler
99.9
0.97
0.98
Kitchen
Refrigerator
99.9
NAa
NAa
appliances
Coffee-machine
99.2
0.72
0.72
Washing-machine
99.3
0.99
0.98
aNot Applicable, refrigerators are 3-states appliances
II-A3. Using pre-processed load proﬁles improve the results
for washing-machine models signiﬁcantly. Accuracy is also
improved in general for all appliances.
TABLE VI
SINGLE APPLIANCE HMM RESULTS ON PRE-PROCESSED LOAD PROFILES
FOR MULTI-MEDIA APPLIANCES, SAMPLING RATE = 1 SECOND
Appliance
Appliance
Accuracy
Precision
f1-score
category
type
(%)
Screens
99.9
0.99
0.99
Multimedia
Internet router
100
NAa
NAa
appliances
Laptop charger
94.2
0.99
0.91
Television
99.9
0.99
0.99
aNot Applicable, Internet router is an always on appliance.
Table VI shows the accuracy results for state predictions
for each single multimedia appliance HMM on pre-processed
load proﬁles. In comparison to the analysis done on raw data,
pre-processing actually decreased the accuracy of detection for
the laptop charger.
2) Combined appliances models:
Two, three and four
appliance models trained on single kitchen appliances are
combined. State predictions of the models are evaluated on
combined power load proﬁle of two, three and four appli-
ances respectively. Figure 1 shows states prediction of a two-
appliances HMM (hot-water boiler and refrigerator).
The accuracy of combined 2, 3 and 4 appliance models can
be seen in Figure 2.
C. Data resolution degradation
Optimizing the size of the data storage solution and the
transmission volume of data is a major issue when it comes to
the cost of implementation in a commercialized product. The
minimum resolution required while still guaranteeing a high
accuracy is tested by purposefully degrading the data resolu-
tion of each proﬁle. Power load proﬁles used for training and
for testing are re-sampled to the following data resolutions: [3
sec, 5 sec, 10 sec, 20 sec, 30 sec, 1 min, 2 min, 5 min, 10 min]
to study the impact of the down-sampling on the performances
of states prediction.
1) Combined HMM for kitchen appliances: For combined
kitchen appliance HMM, On and Off state predictions are
presented in Figure 2. Model 2 appliances includes hot water
boiler and the refrigerator, model 3 appliances is with the ad-
dition of the coffee machine and model 4 appliances includes
also the washing machine.
Figure 1.
States predictions HMM of hot-water boiler and refrigerator
combined, sampling rate = 1 second
Figure 2. On and Off state prediction accuracy results (%) versus sample rate
(Seconds) for combined kitchen appliances models.
For two HMM combined, overall state predictions and On
state predictions accuracy is above 98% for every sample
rate value bellow 1 minute. Down-sampling data decreases
signiﬁcantly on-states prediction accuracy for combined HMM
for a re-sampling rate above one minute :
• for three HMM combined, on-states prediction accuracy
decreased from 96.2% to 87.6%,
• for four HMM combined, on-states prediction accuracy
decreased from 94.3% to 89.5%.
For combined multi-media device HMM, On and Off state
predictions are presented in Figure 3. Model 2 appliances
includes the screen and Internet box, model 3 appliances is
with the addition of the television and model 4 appliances
includes also the laptop charger.
The combined model for multi-media appliances has low
accuracy when three and four appliance curves were com-
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-855-6
ENERGY 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Figure 3. On and Off state prediction accuracy results (%) versus sample rate
(Seconds) for combined multi-media device models.
bined. However, the accuracy is relatively constant across all
resolutions. This is due to the on off state characteristics of
these appliances. The Internet box and laptop charger have
a constant power value when plugged in. They also have
relatively low power values and the difference between the
load curves are very minimal. This is a limitation of this
model. The model is incapable of distinguishing and detecting
two low magnitude constant power curve signals.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper has presented a methodology for a HMM ap-
plicable to single appliance identiﬁcation and multi-appliance
load curve disaggregation. High accuracy was achieved for
all single appliance models. High accuracy was also achieved
for multi-appliance models in the kitchen use case. This is
due to the unique characteristics of each appliance considered,
creating little difﬁculty for the model to identify all individual
states of each appliance in the aggregated load proﬁle. The
combined multi-media accuracy was signiﬁcantly lower than
the kitchen appliance use case when 3 and 4 appliance
load curves were combined. This was due to the minimal
differences between individual load proﬁles. A constant power
proﬁle with low variation and low magnitude also was difﬁcult
to desegregate. These characteristics highlight the limits of
this model application. Future work could include a hybrid
method to apply the HMM only to variable appliance proﬁles.
For example, a linear aggregation model could be used on
the constant low consumption appliance proﬁle types which
could improve performance for the multi-media disaggrega-
tion. The performance of this model could also be compared to
existing python packages that have integrated disaggregation
algorithms such as the NILMTK python package [17]. The
model could be applied to open source data sets as well to
compare results with other disaggregation studies such as data
sets found in [18].
REFERENCES
[1]
Statistical ofﬁce of the european union, URL: https://ec.europa.eu/
eurostat [retrieved: February, 2021], European Commission, 2019.
[2]
Buildings sector energy-related co2 emissions in the sustainable de-
velopment scenario, URL: https://www.iea.org/data- and- statistics/
charts / buildings - sector - energy - related - co2 - emissions - in - the -
sustainable - development - scenario - 2000 - 2030 [retrieved: February,
2021], International Energy Agency, 2020.
[3]
F. Berg, A. Flyen, ˚A. L. Godbolt, and T. Brostr¨om, “User-driven
energy efﬁciency in historic buildings: A review,” Journal of Cultural
Heritage, vol. 28, pp. 188–195, 2017, ISSN: 1296-2074.
[4]
K. C. Armel, A. Gupta, G. Shrimali, and A. Albert, “Is disaggregation
the holy grail of energy efﬁciency? the case of electricity,” Energy
Policy, vol. 52, pp. 213–234, 2013.
[5]
T. Alliance, Projet tbh, French, [retrieved: February, 2021], 2015.
[Online]. Available: https://www.projet-tbh.fr/.
[6]
E. CO2, Picowatty, [retrieved: February, 2021]. [Online]. Available:
https : / / www . ecoco2 . com / plateforme - multi - services - energie -
environnement-sante/.
[7]
——, Awareness raising and accompany residential customers, small
companies and local authorities in their energy transition (seize),
[retrieved: February, 2021]. [Online]. Available: https://www.ecoco2.
com/seize-programme-pour-les-economies-denergie-des-entreprises-
en-outre-mer/.
[8]
C. Klemenjak and P. Goldsborough, “Non-intrusive load monitoring:
A review and outlook,” Oct. 2016.
[9]
A. Faustine, N. H. Mvungi, S. Kaijage, and K. Michael, “A survey
on non-intrusive load monitoring methodies and techniques for energy
disaggregation problem,” arXiv:1703.00785 [cs], Mar. 10, 2017. arXiv:
1703.00785.
[10]
J. R. Cu˜nado and N. B. Linsangan, “A supervised learning approach to
appliance classiﬁcation based on power consumption traces analysis,”
IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, vol. 517,
p. 012 011, Apr. 2019, Publisher: IOP Publishing, ISSN: 1757-899X.
[11]
O. Hamid, M. Barbarosou, P. Papageorgas, K. Prekas, and C. Salame,
“Automatic recognition of electric loads analyzing the characteristic
parameters of the consumed electric power through a non-intrusive
monitoring methodology,” Energy Procedia, International Conference
on Technologies and Materials for Renewable Energy, Environment
and Sustainability, TMREES17, 21-24 April 2017, Beirut Lebanon,
vol. 119, pp. 742–751, Jul. 1, 2017, ISSN: 1876-6102.
[12]
V. Abeykoon, N. Kankanamdurage, A. Senevirathna, P. Ranaweera,
and R. Udawapola, “Real time identiﬁcation of electrical devices
through power consumption pattern detection,” presented at the 2016
First International Conference on Micro and Nano Technologies,
Modelling and Simulation, Mar. 1, 2016.
[13]
G. W. Hart, “Nonintrusive appliance load monitoring,” Proceedings
of the IEEE, vol. 80, no. 12, pp. 1870–1891, Dec. 1992, Conference
Name: Proceedings of the IEEE, ISSN: 1558-2256.
[14]
Y. Himeur, A. Alsalemi, F. Bensaali, and A. Amira, “Robust event-
based non-intrusive appliance recognition using multi-scale wavelet
packet tree and ensemble bagging tree,” Applied Energy, vol. 267,
p. 114 877, 2020, ISSN: 0306-2619.
[15]
A. Tundis, A. Faizan, and M. M¨uhlh¨auser, “A feature-based model
for the identiﬁcation of electrical devices in smart environments,”
Sensors, vol. 19, no. 11, p. 2611, Jan. 2019, Number: 11 Publisher:
Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.
[16]
A. R. et. al., “On the accuracy of appliance identiﬁcation based on
distributed load metering data,” presented at the 2nd IFIP Conference
on Sustainable Internet and ICT for Sustainability (SustainIT), 2012.
[17]
N. B. et al., “Towards reproducible state-of-the-art energy disaggrega-
tion,” in Proceedings of the 6th ACM International Conference on
Systems for Energy-Efﬁcient Buildings, Cities, and Transportation,
ser. BuildSys ’19, New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2019, pp. 193–202, ISBN: 9781450370059.
[18]
S. Kapoor, B. Sturmberg, and M. Shaw, “A review of publicly available
energy data sets,” The Australian National University, Tech. Rep.,
2021.
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-855-6
ENERGY 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

