Smart Beijing: Correlation of Urban Electrical Energy Consumption with Urban
Environmental Sensing for Optimizing Distribution Planning
Yong Ding, Takashi Miyaki, Till Riedel, Michael Beigl
Department of Informatics, TecO
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT)
Karlsruhe, Germany
Email: {ﬁrstname.lastname}@kit.edu
Wenzhu Zhang, Lin Zhang
Department of Electronic Engineering
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
Email: {zhwz, linzhang}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract—This paper focuses on consumer-side activities
and investigates the environmental impact of the electrical
energy consumer (transportation, buildings, street lighting,
etc.), in order to improve the operational efﬁciency of the
city as a whole. To achieve the goal we propose a two-layer
approach which consists of a sensing layer and an application
layer. To begin, circumstances within the city of Beijing are
identiﬁed which have a large temporal impact on environmental
conditions. A taxi-based vehicular ad hoc network is proposed
as a low-cost and efﬁcient approach for urban sensing using
information collection methods of ”Internet of Things” to
capture various environmental parameters (air quality, noise
pollution, trafﬁc levels, water quality, etc.) in a distributed
manner in real time. Using this data and correlation analysis
techniques, global machine learning approaches will be trained
to recognize important city events and dynamics which will
affect electrical power consumption and create anomolies in
pollution levels in speciﬁc locations, such as sporting events,
rallies and fairs. This event-driven situational information
could then indicate a predictive relationship with electrical
energy consumption information, which can be exploited in
the application layer. Besides, we introduce a middleware above
the application layer to proactively plan a certain information
management system around the Common Information Model
and other information standards, in order to deal with lack
of stable integration of the standards. Utilities could then get
intelligence and values as expected from the data that will be
collected from our system.
Keywords-urban sensing; electrical energy consumption; two-
layer approach; middleware; correlation analysis.
I. INTRODUCTION
Population growth, as well as a growing middle class,
has caused an explosion in the number of vehicles on
roads, resulting in trafﬁc jams, environmental pollution and
a series of other social problems. The urban electrical energy
development has also been greatly impacted by these growth
spurts as well [4], [6]. In the 21st century, development
of low-carbon economy, construction of an ecological civ-
ilization and achievement of sustainable development are
the general consensus of scientiﬁc community. Within the
generalized Smart Grid concept, Smart City is in full swing
in the development, especially for metropolises, megacities
and cities in emerging economies. Though cities are ma-
jor consumers of energy and generators of pollution, they
can be active participants of Smart Grid and turning to
be ”prosumers” utilizing an urban environmental sensing
network, which is a remote information sensing application
in prospects of the entire city’s resources.
The Internet of Things has the potential to broaden the
Digital City concept [7] by adding more rich content, the
result of which is a new concept called a Smart City.
The Smart City concept emphasizes the inclusion of urban
information for use in intelligent control and handling. If a
Digital City is analogous to the information society which
mainly relies on personal computing, a Smart City is then a
reﬂection of a networked society which relies on pervasive
computing with intelligent devices. Authors in [9] present a
simulator based on software agents that attempts to create
the dynamic behavior of a smart city, in order to analyze and
investigate the system complexity of the future smart grid
infrastructure. Through mobile cellular networks [2], a real-
time urban monitoring system is constructed for evaluating
the urban dynamics, and the visualizations of combined
data realize several information layers on top of a map of
Rome. Within the vision of smart cities, Copenhagen uses
the Copenhagen Wheel [10] to achieve real-time environ-
mental sensing and improve the cycling experience through
the powers of crowd sourcing, Lisbon introduces a map-
based service platform [11] that allows access to real-time
information about the state of taxi transportation as well
as predictions regarding its future state based on a naive
Bayesian classiﬁer.
Although several current Smart City activities have shown
interdependencies between inter-personal interactions and
their urban environment through a mobile platform [1], [3],
such as the in daily life existing sensing infrastructure of
mobile phones, they are still not directly involving some ac-
tuation technology in terms of energy reduction or efﬁciency.
The presented work is going to investigate the impact of
end-user behavior on the entire energy consumption, and
the environmental impact of the urban energy consumer
(transportation, buildings, street lighting, etc.), through
1) Developing complex machine learning approaches for
98
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

Figure 1.
System architecture of two-layer approach with middleware to interface with CIM (Common Information Model)
distributed, city-wide situation recognition;
2) Deﬁning abstraction levels of urban situational infor-
mation;
3) Analyzing the inﬂuence of urban situational informa-
tion on energy consumption and environmental quality
levels.
Being able to recognize large-scale crowd and population
level activities will enable prediction of the immediate future
developments in energy consumption levels as well as active
locations, which could be characterized as one proactive and
interactive measure of electricity price reduction.
However, to achieve the goal of recognition of city events
and dynamics, such as sporting events, rallies and fairs that
will affect electrical power consumption and create new
issues of pollution in speciﬁc locations, a dynamical, low-
cost and energy efﬁcient sensing platform is required. A
taxi-based VANet (vehicular ad hoc network) as the main
platform for a large city-scale sensing is to be presented,
which is complemented with a PMN (Participatory Moni-
toring Network) using ﬂash disks or mobile phones for a
small-scale sensing with a ﬁner granularity. Based on this
metropolitan sensing network, an event-driven prediction
process of the immediate future developments in energy
consumption levels and highly active locations is then to
be constructed in an application layer. Furthermore, a high
level ODP (Optimizing Distribution Planning) is going to
be introduced as a middleware over the application layer,
which could give electric power industry standards such as
CIM (Common Information Model) a proper context through
an IMS (Information Management System), since today the
UML-based CIM is broadly applied for system and business
process integration by utilities worldwide (see Figure 1 right
part), and related information exchange between systems.
II. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
As described in Section I, a two-layer approach presented
in Figure 1 (left part) is employed to realize an application
framework based on the urban sensing for supporting the
optimization of the energy consumption.
• The metropolitan sensing network based mainly on
VANet consisting of city taxis, collects and processes
the urban sensing data in distributed manner. The
integration of wireless environmental sensing terminals
in city taxis realizes a unique information collection
by incorporating these vehicles in the IoT (Internet
of Things), capturing environmental and taxi-based
information in real time.
• An application layer is established on the sensing layer
as one framework, which combines the IoT technology
with Smart City requirements. This will enable intel-
ligent decision making, control and services based on
a networked solution leveraging situational recognition
technology, the IoT and distributed intelligent systems.
Through correlation analysis IV, such as a multivariate
linear regression analysis [8], [13] among the non-urban
structural factors, based on global situation recognition in
the sensing layer, immediate future energy development is
then predictable in the application layer. In electric power
transmission and distribution, the CIM that is deﬁned in
UML, provides a common language to describe exactly what
data is being exchanged among a utility’s business systems.
The major motivation for this exchange has been to support
system planning functions including transmission planning,
maintenance scheduling, and operations planning. So above
this application layer, a local model of ODP is proposed
as middleware to interface with CIM. The local ODP will
give the CIM a proper context as input through a certain
information management system, which could let the utility
99
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

adjust the activated transmission planning in real-time in
view of the predicted immediate future energy development,
in order to optimize the urban electrical energy distribution
in real-time, thereby reducing the electricity price.
III. SENSING LAYER
For the purpose of a metropolitan sensing, a model of
distributed urban sensing is proposed, in which each mobile
sensor node is responsible for the distributed processing task
with respect to the coverage zone of the neighboring nodes,
including local recognition processing. This sensing layer
enables besides the urban sensing and networking tasks, the
global situation recognition for city events as well, which
could alternatively accomplished through a social network
service like Twitter or Facebook.
The main platform of this mobile sensing network, which
has already been done, is a VANet that uses every participat-
ing taxi as a wireless node to gather and transmit data based
on IEEE802.15.4c, because 802.11p that is the standardized
MAC layer of VANet fails to provide reliable broadcast
support in a congested highway.
Some units in a city are more important for energy
consumption and must be monitored with a ﬁner granularity
than the rest of the system. Examples of these are govern-
ment buildings, tourist attractions and university campuses.
Therefore, a small-scale sensing is being developed, which
will be accomplished with a PMN using ﬂash disks or
mobile phones.
Figure 2.
Comparison of protocol stack between traditional WSN and our
metropolitan sensing network
A. Protocol Stack
This main metropolitan sensing network has a large
number of sensor nodes which work in a distributed manner,
so that the low cost design and energy efﬁciency protocols
are the main features of this network. Differing from the
conventional sensor networks whose protocol stack is com-
posed of four layers, we designed a six-layer protocol stack,
see Figure 2. The MAC and PHY layer are compliant to
IEEE 802.15.4. We replace the ROUTE layer with IP layer
which is running IPv6 protocol. Moreover, the node can be
Figure 3.
Coverage of the city by taxis; (left) the accumulated traces of
ten taxis in one day (7 am - 9 pm)
accessed via Internet directly from client computers. In order
to transport IPv6 data packets over a low-power 802.15.4
radio, an adaptive layer is added between IP and MAC layer.
B. First Dataset
Through analyzing the GPS traces of over 20,000 taxis
of Beijing, an interesting fact is revealed that quite a few
taxis could offer excellent spacial coverage of the city, at the
cost of a long round trip time, see Figure 3. For the delay-
tolerant applications, such as air quality monitoring, carbon
emission surveillance etc. using taxis as data collector and
data carrier will be a most low-cost and efﬁcient way to get
a better understanding of the dynamics of a city.
IV. APPLICATION LAYER
Situation classiﬁcation and prediction based on the urban
sensing are proposed for detecting city events and dynam-
ics, to improve prediction of temporal and spatial energy
consumption characteristics. This situational information is
event-driven, and cannot be statistical derived, as opposed
to other information sources such as weather forecasting
which currently factor into such models. In order to make
this correlation clearly, we will proceed with the following
three research topics:
• Developing machine learning approaches: for urban
pattern (situation) recognition or classiﬁcation, the
sensing data is assumed to be temporally dynamical,
so HMM (Hidden Markov Models) or other classiﬁ-
cation algorithms based on time series are going to be
considered. Due to the complexity of the city scene, we
are going to decompose the scene into many relatively
homogenous objects. The various statistical characteris-
tics of these homogenous objects in the scene are then
subjected to an object-oriented classiﬁcation, such as
traditional statistical classiﬁcation combined with fuzzy
logic classiﬁcation.
• Researching the optimal abstraction levels of situational
information [12]: 1) raw sensor data of for instance,
taxi-based sensor nodes; 2) low level contexts, such
as states of taxis, like taxi location; 3) high level
contexts, are the city activities and dynamics, such
as infrastructure changes at the edge of Inner City,
100
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

waterfront development, household services activities,
etc.
• Researching the inﬂuence of urban situational infor-
mation on energy consumption: the beneﬁts of context
(situation) prediction for enabling spatially ﬁne-grained
evaluation and control of power consumption in an
industrial application have been discussed in [5]. For
the urban scenario, we will investigate the use of a
multivariate linear regression analysis among the non-
urban structural factors that have a signiﬁcant impact on
the power demand, such as the location of the residence
relative to the city center, availability of private car in
the household, etc.
Correlation Analysis: through the data of air quality
(CO, CO2, SO2, NOx ...), location data of taxis, etc.
collected by the deployed urban sensing network, the global
situation classiﬁcation system will recognize important city
events and dynamics which are energy relevant. For instance,
during the Football World Cup, many fans will get off work
earlier in order to drive home before the game start. This
action will surely change the city’s activities and dynamics,
which leads directly to the immediate distribution change
of urban energy consumption. However, this change could
not be in view of the previous statistical consideration
of the urban energy distribution. The sudden surge of air
pollution which is transport-conditional and the trajectory
of the taxis could become the crucial situation contexts
that correlate directly with the urban energy consumption
in residential areas. Therefore, here mentioned correlation
should be actually deduced not directly from the sensed
urban data, but from some extracted situational information
of the sensed urban environment as described before.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This work began by identifying the need for energy
correlation analysis with urban environmental sensing. A
two-layer architecture was proposed that comprises a sens-
ing layer and an application layer. The already realized
metropolitan sensing network based on VANet collects and
processes the urban sensing data in a distributed manner,
which not only enhances the information processing capac-
ity, but also has the capability of network layer.
An application layer was introduced as one of the next
research steps, which enables an application framework
based on the urban sensing for support of intelligent decision
making, control and services. Through the proposed mid-
dleware ODP, utilities could get more intelligence and value
from the data that will be collected from existing USI (Urban
Sensing Infrastructure) and other ”smart grid” devices, like
AMI (Advanced Metering Infrastructure). Although the main
concepts have been presented here, a full evaluation of the
system is yet to be completed. The main aspect which is
being explored is the parameterization of the correlation
between event-based situational information and electrical
energy consumption data to introduce this as a metric for
further optimizing urban energy distribution by means of
non-statistical energy consumption prediction.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Burke, D. Estrin, M. Hansen, A. Parker, N. Ramanathan,
S. Reddy, and M. B. Srivastava. Participatory sensing. In
Proceedings of World Sensor Web Workshop, ACM SenSys,
Boulder, Colorado, October 2006.
[2] F. Calabrese, C. Ratti, M. Colonna, P. Lovisolo, and D. Parata.
Real-time urban monitoring using cell phones: a case study
in rome. In IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, volume 12, pages 141–151, 2011.
[3] A. T. Campbell, S. B. Eisenman, N. D. Lane, E. Miluzzo, and
R. A. Peterson. People-centric urban sensing. In Proceedings
of the 2nd ACM/IEEE Annual International Workshop on
Wireless Internet (WICON ’06), number 18, Boston, MA,
Aug. 2-5 2006.
[4] P. Crompton and Y. R. Wu. Energy consumption in china:
past trends and future directions. Energy Economics, 27:195–
208, 2005.
[5] Y. Ding, H. R. Schmidtke, and M. Beigl. Beyond context-
awareness: Context prediction in an industrial application.
In Proceedings of the 12th ACM international conference
adjunct papers on Ubiquitous computing (Ubicomp ’10),
pages 401–402, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 26-29
2010. ACM Press.
[6] Energy Information Administration. International energy out-
look 2010. http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/ieo/world.html, 2010.
[7] T. Ishida and K. Isbister.
Digital Cities: Technologies,
Experiences, and Future Perspectives, volume 1765, pages
1-17. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, 2000.
[8] O. Karkacier, Z. G. Goktolga, and A. Cicek. A regression
analysis of the effect of energy use in agriculture. Energy
Policy, 34(18):3796–3800, 2006.
[9] S. Karnouskos and T. N. de Holanda. Simulation of a smart
grid city with software agents. In Third UKSim European
Symposium on Computer Modeling and Simulation, EMS ’09,
pages 424–429, Washington, DC, USA, 2009.
[10] C. Outram, C. Ratti, and A. Biderman.
The copenhagen
wheel: An innovative electric bicycle system that harnesses
the power of real-time information and crowd sourcing. In
Ecologic Vehicles Renewable Energies, 2010.
[11] S. Phithakkutnukoon, M. Veloso, C. Bento, A. Biderman, and
C. Ratti. Taxi-aware map: Identifying and predicting vacant
taxis in the city. In First International Joint Conference on
Ambient Intelligence (AmI-10), pages 86–95, 2010.
[12] S. Sigg, S. Haseloff, and K. David.
A study on context
prediction and adaptivity. In Proceedings of the International
Workshop on Context Modeling and Management for Smart
Environments (CMMSE ’07), pages 717–722, 2007.
[13] F. S. Westphal and R. Lamberts. Regression analysis of elec-
tric energy consumption of commercial buildings in Brazil. In
Proceedings of Building Simulation, pages 1543–1550, 2007.
101
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

