The Future Development of Smart Grid 
The case of Morocco 
Nada Belkebir1,2, Mohammed Maaroufi 
1 Ecole Mohammadia d’Ingénieurs 
Mohammed V University 
Rabat, Morocco 
E-mail: nada.belkebir@gmail.com 
   maaroufi@emi.ac.ma  
Ahmed Khallaayoun, Rachid Lghoul 
School of Sciences and Engineering 
2 Al Akhawayn University in Ifrane  
Ifrane, Morocco 
E-mail: a.khallaayoun@aui.ma 
  r.lghoul@aui.ma
Abstract— Morocco is becoming more concerned about the 
protection of environment as it conducted different studies 
and strategies with the High Planning Commission (Haut 
Commissariat au Plan) and under the directives of top 
Moroccan 
managers whose purpose is to integrate 
sustainable energy in its economic activities. It is in this 
direction that Morocco prepared one of the largest studies 
“Prospective Maroc 2030” and in which a whole section was 
devoted to shine the light on the issues and challenges related 
to energy that the country has to face. With an expected 
growth of 5 to 6% in electricity consumption and with the 
integration of renewable energies, Smart Grid seems to be 
the natural transition to deal with the different fluctuations 
that the grid will be subjected to. This paper evaluates the 
current status of Smart Grid in Morocco in comparison with 
other developing countries.  An overview of the energy sector 
in Morocco is presented.  The regulations related to the 
power sector are also discussed.  Then challenges and 
recommendations will be discussed at the end of the paper. 
Keywords- Smart Grid; Morocco; Renewable energies; 
Energy; Electricity 
I. INTRODUCTION
As the electric grid got bigger and bigger, control and 
monitoring became imperative to ensure its management. 
The aging infrastructure and the ever increasing demand 
render the conventional grid susceptible to recurring 
failures.  With the revolution of communication systems 
and the need to make the grid smarter, the idea of the 
Smart Grid (SG) saw light to enhance the functionality of 
the electric grid.  The latter is achieved by introducing 
sensors, controls, and communication tools to enable a 
better management of energy. The electrical grid is divided 
into three major parts: generation, transmission and 
distribution. Today’s generation relies on two different 
types of resources; fossil fuels, such as coal, oil or natural 
gas and renewable energies, such as wind, solar, biomass 
or hydropower. The inclusion onto the grid of the second 
type of energies makes it more difficult to manage due to 
the inherent intermittence of those resources. As for the 
transmission part, the electric grid suffers from losses 
which if managed correctly can save a significant amount 
of energy.  As far as the distribution is concerned, 
electricity was conventionally distributed from retailers to 
customers.  Nowadays, however, a new distribution 
concept was introduced, which consists of distributed 
generation. It consists of having small production units that 
the customer can own and can locally produce the 
electricity needed.  SG aims then at assuring reliability, 
minimizing cost and managing resources [16]. 
Section II describes the features, the components and 
the challenges facing the SG. Section III presents the 
situation of SG in different countries. Section IV describes 
the current situation of the Moroccan electric grid and how 
electricy is governed. In addition, the government 
initiatives that aim at implementing the SG in Morocco 
and the challenges that the country is facing are included.  
Section V presents a comparison between Morocco and 
other countries when it come to SG. 
II. DESCRIPTION OF SMART GRID
SG is a modern electric grid characterized by the use of 
sensors, communication technology and controls with the 
goal of applying intelligence to optimize generation, 
transmission, and distribution [15].  This section presents 
the main features of a typical SG and presents its main 
components. 
A. SG Features 
One of major features that characterizes a SG is its 
ability to manage a complex network that contains central 
and distributed generation that use both, conventional and 
renewable resources. The network uses a multitude of 
telecommunication schemes where internet and electronic 
applications are used to optimize the use of energy. These 
features create a new energy value chain capable of 
mixing different technologies and in which distributed 
generation is encouraged. With the introduction of small 
and medium power farms, the introduction of technology 
enables customers to manage their energy depending on 
the local production. Energy distribution is then managed 
depending on the different regulations set by the retailers 
or the customers. With the introduction of smart meters 
each customer has the ability to get a closer look at its 
consumption and manage it depending on the dynamic 
energy pricing which can therefore reduce the peak 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

demand and flatten the demand curve [2].  The SG does 
not only manage energy at the home/building level, but it 
expends to managing whole districts by creating systems 
that combine data coming from different energy 
management systems. In other words, the aim of the SG is 
to manage the energy produced from micro-grids and the 
energy coming from macro stations in the most optimized 
manner, enabling a reduction in energy losses and 
minimization of energy cost. Mainly, the SG aims at 
reducing Green House Gases and CO2 emissions, 
providing a better transmission and a better distribution
[3].  
B. SG Components 
The SG is a set of individual technologies that cover 
the entire grid. In order to optimize the electric grid, 
different technologies continue to be deployed. The most 
important components of SG are the listed below [2]: 

Wide-area monitoring and control:  concerns the 
generation and transmission side of the grid, it 
enables 
the 
grid 
to 
mitigate 
wide-area 
disturbances, and improve transmission capacity 
and reliability. 

Information and communication technology: 
spans the whole grid and is considered the 
backbone of the system.  This technology starts 
from the generation level and goes down to the 
residential, industrial and service level. It can use 
different forms of communication networks that 
aim at providing the necessary support for data 
transmission.  The communication technology 
used enable two way communication within the 
grid.  

Renewable 
and 
distributed 
generation 
integration: renewable energies need to be 
integrated at the transmission level and at 
different scales (High, medium, and low 
voltage). With the inherent intermittence of 
renewables, 
management 
of 
the 
various 
resources becomes more challenging. The 
introduction of storage and additional spinning 
reserves may then be required to ensure grid 
stability.  

Advanced 
Metering 
Infrastructure 
(AMI): 
considered as the building blocks of the SG, 
smart meters allow customers to receive 
information about their energy consumption and 
inform them about other details, such as 
electricity prices, amount of energy consumed, 
losses and theft detection; which can help them 
better manage their electricity use and ultimately 
reduce their bills.  

Electric vehicle charging infrastructure: As the 
electric cars are introduced into the market, the 
load curve, due to the additional stress on the 
grid, might see a significant variation that might 
render the grid unstable.  The advanced metering 
infrastructure will become the mean by which 
those variations are controlled.   

Customer-side systems: it concerns all systems 
that can be used either in the industrial or 
residential sectors that allow a better energy 
management and that can help increase energy 
efficiency. 
Those 
systems 
are 
energy 
management systems, energy storage devices, 
smart appliances and distributed generation; they 
connect the customer side to all the previous 
cited technologies that make the SG. 
C. SG Communication and security 
As mentioned before, the SG needs different 
components to get the intelligence necessary to optimize 
energy consumption and reduce the customer’s bill. The 
grid is divided into two main parts. The first one concerns 
the high voltage lines that connect the power plant to the 
distribution substations.  Electricity is then transformed 
via the substation to medium voltages after which it is 
distributed to building feeders. Communication between 
the power plant and the transmission substations is 
established using high speed optical fibers. The reason 
behind this choice is the need to transfer high volume of 
SG data, with the least possible delay. The second part 
includes different networks. The first network is the 
Neighborhood Area Network (NAN) that usually manages 
energy at the neighborhood level. This latter serves 
different Building Area Networks (BANs). Each BAN 
manages energy of each separate building, which means 
that it includes a number of Home Area Networks 
(HANs). Each HAN gathers a number of home appliances 
all connected to the HAN gateway. Communication at the 
HAN is achieved using ZigBee, since it requires a low 
power compared to Wi-Fi or Bluetooth connections. As 
mentioned before, the BAN gateway monitors the energy 
consumption of different HANs. Wi-Fi can be used as a 
communication tool here, but when the BAN covers many 
households in a large area it requires the deployment of 
additional access points.  Having multiple access points in 
close proximity will interfere with other access point 
dedicated for internet usage.  An alternative can be the use 
of 
4G 
technologies, 
which 
can 
facilitate 
the 
communication between a BAN and its HANs. When it 
comes to the NAN, the connection can be done using 4G 
technologies 
as 
well. 
 
Figure 
1 
presents 
how 
communication is set between different networks 
discussed before [16]. 
It is imperative that the SG is secure and has the 
ability to prevent unwanted data exchange and malicious 
threats. For that purpose, a robust encryption mechanism 
needs to be implemented although it might cause a 
significant delay in data transmission. 
D. SG Challenges 
The most important challenge that the SG faces is to 
match supply and demand. In fact, the SG needs to adjust 
its generation depending on the data provided from the 
demand side. This latter is provided by different types of 
demand responses which require accurate forecast and 
customer participation. Privacy becomes an issue when 
customer consumption behavior is recorded; the SG needs 
to protect data coming from customers to avoid any 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

privacy issues. Another challenge of the SG is to find a 
balance between minimizing the bill for the customer vs. 
maximizing the profit for the utility. Different types of 
contracts can be set between the two in order to reach an 
equilibrium depending on each specific case. 
Figure 1.  Hierarchical communication networks in a SG model [16] 
Another 
challenge 
facing 
the 
SG 
concerns 
the 
transmission losses and the power loss due to storage. 
New algorithms need to be developed in order to optimize 
power distribution and transmission of electricity. Last but 
not least, security discussed in the previous part needs to 
be provided in order to prevent threats that might cause 
damage to the grid [16].
III. SG IN DIFFERENT COUNTRIES
After looking at the components and challenges of the 
SG, Section III will present what some countries have 
undertaken to develop a SG. 
A. SG in India 
India faces many challenges when it comes to the 
electric grid.  Even though it has a good energy mix that 
includes conventional and renewable energies, the future 
of its economy is considered as being at risk if nothing is 
done regarding the quality of its electric grid.  The total 
installed capacity of the country was 329 GW by the end 
of September 2017; 31.3% of its demand is met by 
renewable energy resources and it is expected to keep 
increasing by 2030-2040 in order to meet the demand [20].  
As of 2014, only 79% of the population had access to 
electricity 
[19]. 
Moreover, 
the 
transmission 
and 
distribution losses at the end of the same year were 
estimated to 19% [19].  Because of the aforementioned 
challenges, the Central Electric Authority created the 
“National Smart Grid Mission (NSGM)”. This new 
organization was created on March 27th, 2015 in order to 
monitor and implement new policies and programs related 
to the SG [20].  The Ministry of Power also released in 
2013 a SG roadmap for India, in which the vision and the 
targets of the country when it comes to its electric grid 
were stated. The SG vision of India is to change the Indian 
electric grid into a safe and sustainable one, in which 
electricity is assured for all [21].  In order to achieve this 
vision, many sub-goals need to be achieved: 

At the distribution level: new policies need to be 
launched in order to guarantee access to 
electricity to all households by 2017. Another 
target of the NSGM is to reduce transmission and 
distribution losses to below 15% by 2017 and 
below 10% by 2027.  After the success of the 
pilot projects of AMI in 2016, the Indian 
government is planning to develop smart meters 
with the necessary IT and communication 
infrastructure 
by 
2027. 
 
Moreover, 
the 
development of Microgrids is also one of the 
main targets of NSGM; in fact, it is expected to 
have 10,000 Microgrids in villages, industrial 
parks or commercial hubs in order to reduce the 
peak demand by 2022 [21]. 

At the transmission level: the NSGM intend to 
implement a Wide Area Monitoring Systems 
using Phasor Measurement Units for the whole 
transmission system by 2017. 50,000 Kms of 
optical fiber cables are planned to be installed in 
order to facilitate the implementation of the SG 
technologies. The Indian government plans also 
to set up a Renewable Energy Monitoring Center 
in order to ease the integration of renewables 
[21]. 
Releasing new policies and standards for all these 
initiatives is part of the SG roadmap, as they will enable an 
active involvment of customer. In fact, policies need to 
include Demand Response (DR) programs and dynamic 
pricing that can be used once the smart meters are installed 
[21].  It can be concluded that India is now aware of the 
importance of the SG for the future of its economy. The 
development of smart metering is the first step that will 
enable the country to get a better view on its energy 
consumption which will enable a better introduction of 
renewable energies to the Indian grid. 
B. SG in Turkey 
 
The electricity market of Turkey was for years 
controlled by the state, which created a high level of 
centralization [5]. By the 1980s generation, transmission 
and distribution started to be delegated to different 
companies.  Small power plants started to see the light, 
which created a more efficient environment in which 
cheap energy generation was available.  In 2004, new laws 
regarding how the privatization of the electric sector were 
published. All the transmission operations are led by the 
state control, while distribution is covered by private 
companies that are each responsible for their respective 
regions (as Turkey is divided into 21 regions) [6].  As for 
the 
distribution, 
private 
companies 
made 
some 
improvements in terms of the monitoring and control of 
electricity as they implemented the Supervisory Control 
and Data Acquisition (SCADA) software. This technology 
enables companies to get the necessary data to avoid any 
outages. Geographical Information Systems (GIS) is also 
an important tool used by the Turkish distribution 
companies as it enables locating places of high and low 
voltage consumers. Automated Meter Reading (AMR) is 
also used to collect data about the consumers’ 
consumption. All data collected by the cited technologies 
is then integrated in a system to enable better optimization 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

of electric energy in Turkey [7]. The total installed 
capacity of Turkey reached 80 GW in July 2017; 35% of 
this capacity is from renewable energy resources [22].  In 
2014, the country was still suffering from 15% of electric 
power 
transmission 
and 
distribution 
losses 
[19].  
Introducing smart metering will help reduce this 
percentage and increase energy supply efficiency; Turkey 
has dedicated $5 billion to invest in SG technologies in 
2015 [5].  On the other hand, Turkey is also concerned 
with the introduction of renewable energies, as it launched 
a strategic plan between 2015 and 2019 that aims at 
providing energy security; by increasing the percentage by 
which renewable energies contribute to the energy supply 
and by keeping investments on transmission and 
distribution components as they are the connecting bridge 
between supply and demand [22].  Support programs for 
R&D in the SG domain are also very encouraged in the 
country [5]. 
C. SG in the U. S. 
 
The total electric generation capacity of the U.S. 
reached 1,190.5 GW in 2017 with 17% of it coming from 
renewable energy resources [24].  The transmission and 
distribution losses of the U.S. was estimated to 6% in 2014  
[19].  The modernization of the U.S. electric grid started in 
the 1980s.  In 2004 the term “Smart Grid” got its first 
references by Amin and Wollenberg [7].  New policies and 
regulations that encourages the introduction of renewable 
energies and distributed generation were launched which 
led to significant investments by the American Recovery 
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 that reached $9 billion in 
2010 [8].  Progress followed throughout the years in order 
to improve the many areas of the SG. In 2014, a total of 65 
million smart meters were installed in the country; this 
number represents more than the third of electricity 
customers. The U.S. also intends to develop customer-
based technologies, such as building energy management 
systems for residential, commercial and industrial 
customers. Those systems, and with the integration of 
sensors and AMI, can provide users with a better 
management of their energy which can increase efficiency 
in different sectors [8].  The U.S. SG Initiative launched in 
2007 was a formalized way to set all the objectives the 
nation has to achieve, including the development of new 
storage and peak-shaving technologies, with a pulg-in 
hybrid electric vehicle [7].  In 2011, the annual SG 
spendings hit $5.2 billion. These investments were 
dedicated to the advanced SG projects, distribution 
automation and smart metering. It was expected that in 
2017, the total investments in SG would be about $3.3 
billion. The number may seem to decline, because less 
spending are dedicated to smart metering, but in reality it 
will gradually increase for the case of the distribution 
automation as it was $1.2 billion in 2011 and was expected 
to be $1.9 billion in 2017 [7].  Moreover, the U.S. intend to 
increase its energy mix by creating more solar, wind and 
nuclear plants, as they account for more than 10% of the 
pending plants application. As for the planned power 
plants, wind account for one third of the proposed plants 
[24]. 
D. SG in China 
 
The Chinese power grid China was considered as being 
vulnerable.  This conclusion was made after the snow 
storm of 2008 that caused a blackout in a major area of the 
country.  Moreover, the power distribution of China’s grid 
had a lack of intelligence which led to either seasonal 
shortages or surplus in different areas.  The main objective 
of China is to have a strong grid that can enable a better 
integration of renewable energies and increase energy 
efficiency in order to adapt to climate change. On the other 
hand, the country needs to attract more investors in order 
to have a better privatization of its electric industry and 
therefore have more competitiveness in the market.  
Providing  a safe power sector is ultimate if the country 
wants to have more investors [9].  For these purposes, 
China focuses on the development of its SG on high 
voltage and main network intelligence.  In other words, the 
developpement will focus on increasing the transmission 
capacity and security of energy supply [10].  The SG 
concept in China is a bit different from the one in western 
countries. As a matter of fact, China intends to invest 
largely in large power plants; and for that purpose it is 
building a strong Ultra-High-Voltage (UHV) power 
network in order to keep increasing transmission efficiency 
and reduce energy losses. It is in May 2009 that the State 
Grid Corporation of China (SGCC) shared it’s strategic 
plan to make the chinese grid  smart. Considered as one of 
the 
priorities 
of 
the 
chinese 
government, 
the 
implementation of the SG in China follows three part [27]: 

2009-2010: it is during this period that pilot 
projects were created in order to test what are the 
best options for the chinese grid and make the 
master plan for he SG 

2011-2015: called the construction period, it is 
during this period that China implemented the 
main SG technologies that can help keep up with 
the extensive growth of the energy sector of the 
country 

2016-2020: it is the final period where all the 
upgrades should be made in order to acheive a 
reliable and strong grid, in which China can 
optimize its grid at all levels 
 
With its 1,645.75 GW of total installed capacity 
recorded in 2016 [26], China considerably reduced its 
transmission and distribution losses as they reached 5.4% 
in 2014 [19].  The chinese government is also aware of the 
importance of the energy mix. In 2016, 24.8% of the total 
electricity of the country was generated from renewable 
energy resources. This percentage is expected to reach 
30% by 2020 [27].  To meet the demand, China is 
developping a smart dispatch and control technologies that 
can make energy available countrywide. The last 
characteristic of the chineese SG is that customer 
participation and demand side management are limited 
compared to west countries [11]. 
The development of the SG is specific to each country. 
As seen in this section, the development of a SG can only 
take place once the grid is robust.  Making the grid strong 
and ready to keep up with the energy growth is the first 
step towards SG; this was the case in China and India. The 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

countries can then focus on the optimization of the grid, by 
increasing its energy mix and including new IT and 
communication tools that can increase energy efficiency, 
as it is the case for the US.  For the case of Turkey, the 
country still needs to improve its electrical grid, in order to 
reduce its transmission and distribution losses. Once the 
grid is secure, more improvement can be done in terms of 
optimization of the energy consumption of the country. 
IV. SG IN MOROCCO
This section will describe the current situation of the 
Moroccan electric grid.  It will also present the government 
initiatives that aim at facing the rising demand. Challenges 
and barriers on how Morocco can set its SG will be given 
at the end. 
A. Moroccan Current Electric Grid 
Morocco is the only North African country that does 
not currently possess oil or natural gas resources.  The 
country needs to meet the rising energy demand which 
makes it dependent on foreign imports.  The later puts the 
country in a vulnerable situation when it comes to energy 
security.  In fact, the electric power consumption per capita 
went from 878 kWh in 2013 to 901 kWh in 2014 [19].  
The electric power consumption per capita in the Middle 
East and North African countries reached 2,875 kWh in 
2014, while it was 483 kWh in the Sub-Saharan and 
African countries [19].  The latter numbers show that 
Morocco is at an intermediate position compared to the 
two regions, which means that the country is making 
efforts to improve its energy sector.  The total installed 
capacity in Morocco was 8,300 MW in 2016 of which 
14% is based on renewables and 46.7% is based on coal 
[28].  In 2015, the total capacity was 8,158.5 MW with 
13.4% from renewable and 49% from coal [29].   The 
projections show that Morocco is planning to reduce its 
coal based generation while increasing natural gas and 
renewable energy generation as depicted in Figure 2 
[28][29][31].   
Figure 2.  Comparison between 2015 and 2016 in terms of installed 
capacity resources with 2020 and 2030 projections 
At the transmission level, Morocco contains 25,545 km 
of electric lines of very high and high voltage, 85,728 km 
of electric lines of medium voltage and 205,372 km of 
electric lines of low voltage [28].  The Moroccan electric 
grid is also connected to the Spanish and Algerian Electric 
grid via a 1,400 MW and 1,200 MW exchange capacity 
lines respectivly. The country is constently reinforcing its 
transmission sector  to cope with the increased demand and 
the integration of renewables into its grid.  In addition, 
Morocco is striving to becoming a hub that connects 
Europe to Africa.   
At the distribution level, Morocco adopted SCADA as 
a management tool at the regional level. This can be 
considered as a first step toward a moroccan SG  [30]. 
B. Moroccan Government Initiatives 
 
Morocco took part in major initiatives that concern the 
protection of climate and environment, namely, he took 
part in the Rio de Janeiro, Johannesburg or Kyoto 
agreements.  In 2009, the kingdom launched its national 
energy strategy, pointing out the importance of the power 
sector in the country. 
 
The Moroccan High Commission for Planning (Haut 
Commissariat au Plan) published a report “Prospective 
Maroc 2030” [1], in which specific goals on the energy 
sector were set. The most important goal is reaching a total 
electric production coming from renewable resources of 
52% by 2030 [1].  To achieve the latter, multiple projects 
started in different regions of the country, the plan is to add 
a total capacity of 6,760 MW between 2015 and 2025 
(3,120 MW of solar, 2,740 MW of wind and 900 MW of 
hydro-power). Concerning solar energy, the first part of 
NOOR project in Ouarzazate is now operational with a 
total capacity of 160 MW. Like NOOR 1, NOOR 2 and 3 
will use solar thermal technologies and will have a total 
capacity of 350 MW, while NOOR 4 will be based on 
photovoltaic technology with a total installed capacity of 
70MW. For the wind energy, 800 MW is already 
operational, 550 MW under construction, and 850 MW is 
in the planning stage. In addition, the minister of energy 
stated that an additional 1,000 MW wind power is planned 
to be installed between 2012 and 2025 [13].  It is only 
natural that new laws and regulations arise to cope with the 
energy transition that the country is undergoing.   Table 1 
details the laws and regulation realted to RE that were 
issued since 2006 [14]. 
TABLE I.    
MOROCCAN LAWS 
Law 
Name 
Issue 
Date 
Main aspects 
Law 54-
05 
February 
2006 
Allows the government and 
the 
local 
authorities 
to 
delegate the manegement of 
electricity supply services to 
private entites 
Law 13-
09 
June 2010 
This law concerned renewable 
energies. 
It 
allowed 
generation by the private 
sector in medium and high 
voltage. The generation of 
electricity needed to fulffil 
some characteristics regarding 
the capacity of the generation 
of the farm; a declaration is 
necessary if the farm capacity 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

is between 20kW and 2MW 
and an authorization is needed 
when the capacity is equal or 
higher than 2MW 
Law 47-
09 
May 2012 
Described energy efficiency 
as a fourth energy after fossil 
fuels, renewable energies and 
nuclear energy. The law also 
emphasized on the importance 
of the implementation of 
energy efficiency measures in 
all sectors 
Law 57-
09 
June 2010 
Concerned the creation of the 
Moroccan Agency for Solar 
Energy (MASEN) with the 
specific target to implement 
and reach the solar plan 
Law 16-
09 
June 2010 
Published for the creation of 
the National Agency for the 
Development of Renewable 
energies 
and 
Energy 
Efficiency (ADEREE). This 
institution was created in 
order 
to 
launch 
sectorial 
programs all over the country 
in order to seak the potential 
of each region in terms of 
renewable 
energies 
and 
energy efficiency so that new 
solar and wind projects can be 
installed in order to produce 
electricity 
Law 58-
15 
December 
2015 
Amendment and completing 
law 13-09. This latter allows 
the generation of electricity at 
the low voltage. It also 
presents the possibility of 
selling excess of electrity, but 
the producer can not sell more 
than 20% of their total annual 
generation 
 
Another Moroccan initiative is the program of rural 
electrification that started in 1996.  
Figure 3.  Evolution of the rural electrification rate [28] 
At that time, the rural electrification rate was 18% only, at 
the end of 2015 this rate atteined 99.15%, Figure 3 
presents how this rate kept increasing during these last 
years  [28].  
C. Moroccan Electricity Power Industry 
 
Before the 1990’s Morocco faced shortage in its 
electricity supply and part of the country experienced 
regular power cuts.  It was then imperative to reform the 
electricity sector in order to mitigate the shortage issue.  
Independent Power Producers (IPPs) were authorized to 
privately generate electricity which was monopolized by 
ONEE before. The reform aimed at reducing the electricity 
generation using oil and hydropower and shifting some of 
it to coal and natural gas.  The reform set by Morocco did 
not cover only generation but it was extended to 
distribution.  The privatization of the distribution sector 
helped 
establish 
and 
improve 
the 
distribution 
infrastructure.  At the transmission level, ONEE still has 
monopoly. As for generation ONEE contributed by 29.2% 
of the electricity generated in 2016, mainly from hydro, 
thermal and wind energy resources. IPPs, which are 
TAQA (also called JLEC (Jorf Lasfar Energy Company)), 
EET (Energie Electrique de Tahhadart), CED (Compagnie 
Eolienne du Détroit), TAREC (Tarfaya Energy Company) 
and MASEN contributed by a total of 56.9%. The 
remaining 14% of energy were imported from the 
interconnections between Spain and Algeria. At the 
distribution level, ONEE covers 45%, another 42% is 
covered by different public and private utilities. The 
remaining 12% are direct customers. Figure 4 details the 
situation of the Moroccan electrical industry in 2016 [28].   
Figure 4. Supply and demand of electricity in Morocco in 2016 
D. Challenges and Recommendations Toward a 
Moroccan SG 
 
The inclusion of renewable energies in the electricity 
generation in Morocco is imperative to its socio-economic 
development.  The government and the top Moroccan 
managers are publishing new regulations in order to cope 
with the energy transition that the country is undergoing. 
New projects are planned and the generation capacity will 
keep increasing to deal with the increasing demand, but 
renewable energies remain a small part of the SG. This 
latter needs a wide-area control and monitoring, 
information and communication technologies, advanced 
metering infrastructure, distributed generation, customer-
side systems and electric vehicle charging infrastructure. 
The first challenge resides at the transmission and 
distribution levels; as a matter of fact, these losses reached 
a percentage of 14.7% in 2014, therefore they definitely 
need to be reduced to secure the grid [19].  The percentage 
has been increasing since 2004 where it was as low as 5% 
[19].  In order to reduce losses, a wide area monitoring 
network needs to be established.  As far as the 
transmission infrastructure, more lines are being deployed 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

each year to accompany the demand.  At the distribution 
level, 
the 
metering 
infrastructure 
still 
relies 
on 
conventional (electro-magnetic) meters.  It is clear that an 
AMI needs to be implemented.  Given the 58-15 law, for 
instance, enabling low voltage integration of RE will 
require a metering infrastructure that will enable the 
utilities to bill the customers accordingly and to implement 
a particular pricing scheme. In addition, if Morocco 
expects to apply measures for peak shaving, it will be 
important to involve the customers which can only be 
achieved through an AMI.   Introducing energy 
management 
systems 
and 
dynamic 
pricing 
could 
significantly improve energy efficiency and maximize the 
use of locally generated RE.  The country will need to 
implement social awareness initiatives to promote the use 
of distributed generation.  The importance of SG needs to 
be promoted as well and the different demand response 
programs need to be explained to the public in order to 
show the benefits customers can benefit from after 
installing an AMI.  Security is also a challenge in 
implementing  
a SG.   The country needs to procure the 
most secure network for its customers in order for them to 
trust the utilities and share their private data.   
V. COMPARISON OF MOROCCAN SG SITUATION WITH 
OTHER COUNTRIES
 
In this section, we compare the current situation of 
Morocco to various countries using the main components 
of the SG as the metric for comparision.  The main 
components of the SG are:  
TABLE II.  SMART GRID COMPARISON TABLE 
Morocco 
India 
Turkey 
US 
China 
A 
Electric Power 
Consumption 
per Capita 
(2014) 
901.13 KWh 
per capita 
805.60 KWh 
per capita 
2,854.60 
KWh per 
capita 
12,986.74 
KWh per 
capita 
3,927.04 KWh 
per capita 
Regulations 
and  
perspectives 
National 
energy 
strategy 
(2009) 
SG roadmap 
for India 
(2013) 
Strategic plan 
2015-2019 
The US SG 
initiative 
(2007) 
Strategic 
plan for a 
robust grid
(2009) 
Total installed 
capacity 
8,300 MW 
(2016) 
329,000 MW 
(2017) 
80,000 MW 
(2016) 
1,190,500 
MW (2017) 
1,645,750 
MW (2017) 
Wide-Area 
Monitoring 
SCADA 
Phase 
Measurement 
Units 
SCADA / 
GIS 
Strong Area 
monitoring 
Development 
of SG on HV 
and smart 
dispatch and 
control 
technologies 
B 
Transmission 
losses 
14.7% 
19% 
15% 
6% 
6% 
Business 
Model of the 
electric 
industry 
56.9% of 
generation 
from IPPs 
42.1% of 
distribution 
is private 
5% of 
distribution is 
private  [32] 
65% of 
generation 
from IPPs 
All 
distribution is 
privatized  
[33] 
41% of 
generation 
from IPPs  
[34] 
Generation 
dominated by 
5 state-owned 
utilities and 
distribution by 
3 state-owned 
operators  [35] 
C 
% of energy 
from RE 
14.0% 
31.3% 
35% 
17.0% 
24.8% 
D 
Smart meter 
--- 
Development 
of smart meters 
Automated 
Metering 
Reading  
Automated 
Metering 
Infrastructure 
Smart meter 
procurements 
ongoing [35] 
E 
Electrical 
vehicle 
--- 
Shift to 
electrical 
vehicles 
expected by 
2030 [21] 
--- 
Development 
of plug-in 
hybrid 
technologies 
Target of 1 
Million 
electric cars 
by 2020 [27] 
F 
Customer-
based 
technologies 
--- 
Development 
of Demand 
Response 
programs 
--- 
Development 
of customer 
based 
technologies  
Demand Side 
Management 
programs 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

A- Wide Area Monitoring 
B- Information and Communication Technology 
C-
Renewable and Distributed Generation Integration 
D- Advanced Metering Infrastructure 
E-
Electrical Vehicle Charging Infrastructure 
F-
Customer-side Systems 
As detailed in Table 2, Morocco needs to follow the 
footsteps of other countries that are on the right track to 
deploying a SG.  It is clear from Table 2 that the US is the 
only country that is consedering all the components, China 
and India come after.  With the integration of RE into the 
energy mix in Morocco, it is only natural that the country 
will transition to a grid that is smarter and more robust.   
VI. CONCLUSION
 
SG is the future definition of electric grid around the 
world. Countries are making huge efforts in order to reach 
the necessary intelligence needed to optimize the use of its 
electricity. This paper presented the main components 
needed to acquire a robust electric grid, along with its 
challenges. Different countries around the world set short 
and long term plans that would help reach a certain 
intelligence needed for their electrical grid.  The energy 
transition that Morocco is undergoing will only help hasten 
the development of a SG.  The country is on the right track 
when it comes to passing the right laws that accompany the 
transition to a smart grid.  Morocco is facing some real 
challenges to attain a certain level of intelligence, but 
following steps of developed countries can help getting its 
SG.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 
This paper’s publication was supported by two projects. 
“Fes-Meknes Energy performance”; financed by the Region 
of Fes-Meknes and “Development of Smart Metering and an 
Energy Management System in Morocco”; financed by the 
National Center of Scientific and Technical Research 
(CNRST). The authors would like to thank both the Region 
and the Center for their help. 
REFERENCES
[1]
High Commission for Planning, "Prospective Morocco 2030: 
Morocco's Energy Outlook Issues and Challenges," High 
Commission for Planning, Rabat, 2009. 
[2]
I. E. Agency, "Technology Roadmap: Smart Grids," 
International Energy Agency, Paris, 2011. 
[3]
S. Luthra, S. Kumar, R. Kharb, M. F. Ansari, and S. L. 
Shimmi, "Adoption of smart grid technologies: An analysis of 
interactions among barriers," Elsevier, vol. 33, no. Renewable 
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, pp. 554-565, 2014. 
[4]
M. F. Nejad, A. M. Saberian, H. Hizam, M. A. M. Radzi, and 
M. Z. A. Ab Kadir, "Application of Smart Power Grid in 
Developing Countries," in IEEE 7th International Power 
Engineering 
and 
Optimization 
Conference, 
Langkawi, 
Malaysia, 2013. 
[5]
I. Colak et al., "Smart grid opportunities and applications in 
Turkey," Elsevier, vol. 33, no. Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews, pp. 344-352, 2014. 
[6]
T. Atasoy et al., "Challenges & Opportunities towards Smart 
Grid in Turkey; Distribution System Operator Perspective," in 
IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Europe (ISGT 
Europe), pp. 1-6, Istanbul, 2014. 
[7]
M. G. Simoes et al., "A Comparison of Smart Grid 
Technologies and Progresses in Europe and the U.S.," IEEE 
Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 
1154-1162,  July/August 2012. 
[8]
U. S. D. o. Energy, "2014 Smart Grid System Report: Report 
to Congress August 2014," United States Department of 
Energy, Washigton, DC, 2014. 
[9]
J. Lu, D. Xie, and Q. Ai, "Research on Smart Grid in China," 
in IEEE T&D Asia, pp. 1-4, 2009. 
[10] Z. Ming, A. Sikaer, and H. Kelei, "The Future Development 
of Smart Grid in China," in 8th International Conference of 
Intelligent Computation Technology and Automation, 2015. 
[11] Z. Ruihua, D. Yumei, and L. Yuhong, "New Challenges to 
Power System Planning and Operation of Smart Grid 
Development in China," in International Conference on 
Power System Technology, pp. 1-8, 2010. 
[12] Directorate of Observation and Programming, "Energy 
Statistics," Ministry of Energy, Mining, Water and 
Environment, Rabat, 2014. 
[13] Ministry of Energy, Mining, Water and Environment, "Mr. 
Amara: "Morocco is developing energy projects with real 
investment opportunities valued at more than $ 37 billion"," 
2015. 
[14] Ministry of Energy, Mining, Water and Environment, "Texte 
Réglementaires: Electricité et Energies Renouvelables," 
Moroccan Kingdom. 
[15] The Shift Project, "Data Portal: Browse Energy and Climate 
Data," The Shift Project, [Online]. Available: tsp-data-
portal.org. 
[16] Z. M. Fadlullah and N. Kato, Evolution of Smart Grids, New 
York: Springer International Publishing, 2015. 
[17] I. L'hadi, "Liberalization of the Moroccan Electricity Market: 
A General Equilibrium Analysis," Ifrane, 2016. 
[18] Indian Ministry of Power - Central Electricity Authority, "All 
Installed Capacity of India," 30 September 2017. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://cea.nic.in/reports/monthly/installedcapacity/2017/install
ed_capacity-09.pdf. [Retrieved April, 2018]. 
[19] World Bank Group, "The World Bank," IEA Statistics, 2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/. 
[Retrieved April, 2018]. 
[20] Ministry of Power - Central Electricity Authority, "Annual 
Report 2014-15," Government of India, New Delhi, 2015. 
[21] Ministry of Power , "Smart Grid Roadmap for India: Vision, 
Targets and Outcomes," Government of India, New Delhi, 
2013. 
[22] Republic of Turkey Ministry of Energy and Natural 
Resources, "Electricity," Ministry of Energy and Natural 
Resources, 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.enerji.gov.tr/en-US/Pages/Electricity. [Retrieved 
April, 2018]. 
[23] Republic of Turkey Ministry of Energy and Natural 
Resources, "2015-2019 Strategic Plan," Ministry of Energy 
and Natural Resources, Ankara, 2015. 
[24] P. Zummo, "America's Electricity Generation Capacity 2017 
Update," American Public Power Association, February 2017. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

[25] Z. XU, Y. Xue, and K. P. Wong, "Recent Advancements on 
Smart Grids in China," Electric Power Components and 
Systems, vol. 42, no. 3-4, pp. 251-261, 27 April 2014. 
[26] Statista Inc., "Installed capacity of electric power generation 
in China in 2016, by source (in GW)," Statista, 2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/302191/china-power-
generation-installed-capacity-by-source/. [Retrieved April, 
2018]. 
[27] " Energy Transition in the Power Sector in China: State of 
Affairs in 2016. Review on the Devlopments in 2016 and an 
Outlook. Analysis on behalf of Agora Energiewende and 
Chaine National Renewable Energy Centre," June 2017. 
[28] ONEE, "Activity Report 2016," ONEE: Electricity Branch, 
2017. 
[29] ONEE, "Activity Report 2015," ONEE: Electricity Branch, 
2016.  
[30] S. Sahbani, H. Mahmoudi, A. Hasnaoui, and M. Kchikach, 
"Development prospect of smart grid in Morocco," Procedia 
Computer Science, vol. 83, pp. 1313-1320, 2016. 
[31] Direction des Energies Renouvelables & de l’Efficacité 
Energétique, "Smart 
Grid: Un levier essentiel pour 
accompagner 
la 
montée 
en 
puissance 
des 
énergies 
renouvelables," Ministère de l’Energie, des Mines & du 
Développement Durable, Benguerir, 2017. 
[32] International Trade Administration, "2016 Top Markets 
Report Smart Grid Country Case Study: India," U.S. 
Department of Commerce, 2016. 
[33] International Trader Administration, "2016 Top Markets 
Report Smart Grid Country Case Study: Turkey," U.S. 
Department of Commerce, 2016. 
[34] EIA, "Power Plant Operations Report," EIA, 2016. 
[35] International Trade Administration, "2016 Top Markets 
Report Smart Grid Country Case Study: China," U.S. 
Department of Commerce, 2016. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

