Demand Response for Increasing Renewable Energy  
Penetration in Isolated Power Systems 
 
Michael Negnevitsky 
University of Tasmania 
Hobart, Australia 
e-mail: 
Michael.Negnevitsky@utas.edu.au 
Dusan Nikolic 
Hydro Tasmania 
Hobart, Australia 
e-mail: Dusan.Nikolic@entura.com.au 
 
Martin de Groot 
CSIRO 
Sydney, Australia 
e-mail: Martin.deGroot@csiro.au 
 
 
Abstract— Electric power industry is undergoing a profound 
change.  The change is driven by technical, economic and 
environmental factors.  The emerging challenges are 
particularly significant for distribution grids, where the level 
of automation or “smartness” is relatively low. With the push 
for energy conservation, demand response is becoming a vital 
tool under the smart grid paradigm. This paper outlines some 
experience obtained at the University of Tasmania, Hydro 
Tasmania and the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial 
Research Organisation (CSIRO), Australia in developing fast 
DR for isolated power systems.  The paper presents results of 
the implementation of DR for enabling higher wind energy 
penetration in isolated power systems.  The presented 
approach is based on the centralized control of residential and 
commercial loads with the DR execution time of 1 second.  The 
technology discussed in the paper has been implemented in the 
King Island power system in Australia. 
Keywords-smart grid; distribution system; demand response. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Electric power systems are undergoing a profound 
change. This change is driven by several factors that include 
technical, economic and environmental factors. We need to 
deal with an aging infrastructure of power systems and 
maintain the required level of grid reliability.  We need to 
integrate renewable energy sources, particularly wind and 
solar, and provide secure power supply to our customers, and 
at the same time improve operational efficiency. The 
emerging changes and challenges are particularly significant 
for distribution grids, where the level of automation or 
“smartness” is relatively low.  Manual and “blind” 
operations along with old electromechanical relays are to be 
transformed into a “smart grid”. This transformation is 
necessary to meet environmental targets, accommodate 
distributed generation, and support plug-in electric vehicles.  
In fact, these needs present the power industry with the 
biggest challenge it has ever faced.  On one hand, the 
transition to the “grid of the future” has to be evolutionary – 
we still need to supply electricity to our customers to keep 
the lights on.  On the other hand, the challenges associated 
with the smart grid are significant enough to expect 
revolutionary changes in power system design and operation. 
With the push for energy conservation, demand-side 
management and demand response are becoming vital tools 
under the broad smart grid paradigm. 
The term “demand-side management” (DSM) was first 
introduced by Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) in 
the 1980s, and since then has been widely used around the 
world.  In fact, DSM is a term that implies many activities 
such as direct load control, peak shaving, peak shifting, and 
various load management strategies.  Effective load 
management programs are often referred to as demand 
response (DR).  According to the US Federal Energy 
Regulatory Commission, DR is defined as: 
“Changes in electric usage by end-use customers from 
their normal consumption patterns in response to changes 
in the price of electricity over time, or to incentive payments 
designed to induce lower electricity use at times of high 
wholesale market prices or when system reliability is 
jeopardized.” 
Customers living in remote areas often cannot be 
supplied from conventional interconnected power systems. 
These customers are usually serviced by a local electricity 
generation and distribution system with electricity generated 
using diesel fuel. Due to remoteness and consequent high 
cost of diesel fuel supply, the cost of electric energy in 
isolated power systems is high compared to conventional 
interconnected systems. In some locations, the price exceeds 
US $1/kWh, which is an obvious incentive for introducing 
renewable energy (RE) generation. Unfortunately, RE from 
the two most abundant energy sources – wind and solar – 
incurs significant stability and reliability issues due to the 
intermittency of those sources. 
This paper outlines and builds on recent research in 
utilizing DR in power systems. It presents fast (i.e., sub-
second) DR as an enabling technology for increasing 
renewable energy penetration in isolated power systems 
(IPS). The contribution of this paper lies in presenting the 
concept of implementing fast DR in a real IPS case study, 
presenting preliminary results proving the concept of fast 
DR and outlining its potential future applications. 
The paper has the following structure. In Section II, we 
discuss potential benefits of the DR application in isolated 
power systems. In Section III, we consider DR as a virtual 
power plant, or a DR generator, for supporting higher RE 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

penetration by providing required spinning reserves.  We 
present the architecture of the DR generator, communication 
protocols and the structure of the control system.  In Section 
IV, we present a case study based on the King Island 
Renewable Energy Integration Project.  Finally, in Section 
V, we report our conclusions. 
II. 
DEMAND RESPONSE IN POWER SYSTEMS 
A. Standard approach to DR  
Recent research has shown that DR can provide benefits 
 to power systems and their customers by: 
 
Supporting frequency and/or voltage regulation [1, 2]; 
 
Reducing 
operational 
costs 
and 
emissions 
by 
increasing utilization of RE sources [3]. Note that 
reducing operating costs in turn leads to a greater 
return on investment which would incentivize 
expansion of the RE industry; 
 
Reducing operational costs and emissions caused by 
traditional generators installed to provide spinning 
reserve for RE [4]; 
 
Relieving stress from transmission and distribution 
infrastructure by coordinating loads close to RE 
sources [4]; 
 
Reducing utility operating costs through advanced 
metering infrastructure installed to enable DR [5]. 
Most of the research is focused on large systems, price-
driven signals to DR [6], day-ahead scheduling [7], or 
demand response which responds in period of 10-minutes or 
longer [8].  
In recent years, researchers have started recognizing the 
need for fast direct load control; one which does not depend 
on price responsiveness [9]. Benefits of this fast DR was 
taken further by showing that sub-second response of DR 
can support primary frequency regulation [10].  
This paper focuses on benefits of fast DR in IPS. 
B. Special case of IPS 
Most DR applications focus on large power systems, 
which have a steady and predictable load profile defined by 
morning and evening peaks. The time and size of these peak 
periods can be accurately estimated using historical load 
data and weather forecasts. In contrast, isolated power 
systems not only supply less power (MWs, rather than 
GWs) they are also geographically much smaller. Being 
smaller in capacity means that demand is less predictable. 
Being smaller in area means that supply from RE sources is 
more variable, as a larger percentage of the RE generators 
are likely to be affected by the same weather events (e.g., a 
lull in the wind or passing clouds). Due to their reduced 
demand predictability and increased variability of RE 
supply, conventional generation scheduling in isolated 
systems with RE is more challenging. From a generation 
scheduling perspective - where RE generation is usually 
treated as a load offset – the daily load curve becomes 
extremely volatile. An example of an IPS with RE load 
curve is giving in Figure 1. Notice that it does not even have 
predetermined daily peaks. 
High load variation makes scheduling of diesel 
generation more difficult and less efficient, as diesel engines 
will rarely operate at their peak efficiency, and more 
generator start-ups are required. This is where fast DR can 
help. It can smooth the variability of required diesel 
generation by quickly adjusting system load. To be able to 
do that, fast DR cannot rely on typical load patterns – it must 
be executed in real-time. If DR is to complement RE in an 
isolated system, it has to be as fast as the speed at which RE 
generators change their power output. 
 
Figure 1. Daily load diagram in an isolated power system. 
 
III. 
DEMAND RESPONSE AS A VIRTUAL POWER PLANT 
The idea of aggregating and controlling small loads to 
create a large block of variable demand has been discussed in 
the power engineering literature where it is often referred to 
as a ‘virtual power plant’ [11]. Since isolated power systems 
generally have only one power station, the idea of adding 
another (virtual) power plant to this system might be a bit 
misleading. However, isolated systems with RE might have 
several generating sources (e.g., diesel, wind, solar, etc.). 
Therefore, aggregated DR could be treated as a ‘virtual 
generator’. Although such a ‘DR Generator’ (DRG) is not 
generating real power, the power system controller perceives 
it as one due to the DRG’s ability to decrease the amount of 
energy needed from other generating sources. 
Isolated systems are usually controlled by a single 
controller. The controller is typically implemented with a 
programmable logic controller (PLC). The role of the 
controller is to schedule available generation in accordance 
with the current power system constraints, and to maintain 
system stability. In addition, the controller can be 
programmed to maximize the amount of RE generation and, 
consequently, minimize running costs. The controller 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

effectively controls the entire system by collecting data on 
the current system status and by issuing commands to 
various generation sources, as shown in Figure 2. 
When the controller has a goal to maximize the use of 
RE, it will dispatch as much renewable generation as the 
power system can handle while simultaneously maintaining 
an appropriate level of spinning reserve to ensure system 
stability. If the amount of RE drops and the system suddenly 
does not have enough spinning reserve, the controller starts 
a diesel generator. The role of the DRG is to support higher 
RE penetration by providing additional spinning reserve. If 
sufficient spinning reserve is provided by the DRG, diesel 
generator start-up is prevented. 
 
 
Figure 2. Smart Grid generator in IPS control system. 
 
A DRG consists of three main components, as shown in 
 Figure 3: 
• DRG Master controller, 
• communications network, and 
• Slave controllers. 
 
 
Figure 3. The DRG architecture. 
 
 
A. DRG Master Controller 
The master controller collects metering data (voltage, 
current, real and reactive power) from each available load 
and aggregates it into predefined virtual loads (e.g., feeders, 
geographical regions). It only aggregates the loads, which are 
currently consuming energy. 
The Master controller then communicates available DR 
capacity to the power system controller (PSC) while 
checking for DR dispatch requests from the PSC. DR 
requests identify a target virtual load and the amount of 
demand to curtail. The master controller selects the 
individual loads to curtail from the virtual load, and 
immediately sends a switch-off signal to each. It also ensures 
that customers are not greatly affected by load curtailment, 
and that all customers are treated evenly. This is achieved by 
imposing constraints on the maximum length of control for 
each individual load.  
Finally, Master controller controls only individual 
consumer loads and not entire feeders or their parts. 
B. Communications Network 
A multi-protocol bidirectional communications network 
delivers information between all elements of the DRG. 
Ethernet is used within the control system. A dedicated 
WiMAX network provides the backhaul capability. Within 
individual customer sites, a WiMAX gateway is connected 
by Ethernet to a ZigBee gateway for the final link to the load 
metering and switching devices. This communications 
configuration is configured to ensure a sub-second round trip 
for DR requests from the PSC out to the load control devices 
and back again. 
C. Slave Controllers 
Slave controllers are located in each DR capacity 
providing site. They consist of a pair of gateways to provide 
WiMAX-Ethernet-ZigBee signal translation between the 
backhaul network and the individual load control devices. 
The load control devices perform both metering and load 
switching. They provide a range of power metrics and also 
support set-points. 
A DRG providing spinning reserve must be extremely 
responsive and reliable. The master controller must be able 
to monitor and dispatch slave controllers at all times. This 
critical requirement becomes obvious in the two most 
 common scenarios: 
• If the PSC requests DR for extended periods of time, 
some slave controllers may override the dispatch as they 
exceed their maximum dispatch duration. In this 
situation, the master controller must quickly identify and 
dispatch another device (or devices) with an equivalent 
load. 
• If a slave controller or communication link is unreliable, 
the DRG may be forced to always dispatch more DR 
than requested to ensure a suitable margin of error in 
either load switching or reporting. This is not an efficient 
use of capacity and may reduce the overall effectiveness 
of the DRG. 
IV. 
CASE STUDY 
The 
fast 
DR 
technology 
discussed 
above 
was 
implemented in an IPS as part of the King Island Renewable 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Energy Integration Project [12]. King Island lies in the Bass 
Strait between Tasmania and the Australian mainland. It has 
a population of approximately 2000 people, and an economy 
based on agriculture and food processing. 
A. The King Island Power System 
Customer load on King Island ranges between 1 MW 
and 3 MW, with an average of around 1.5 MW. The King 
Island power system is shown in Figure 4. There is one 
power station on the island with four distribution feeders 
delivering electricity to customers. The power station 
houses four diesel generators with a total generation 
capacity of 5.8MW. Three fixed speed Nordex N29 (250kW 
each) wind turbines are installed on a nearby hill, together 
with two Vestas V52 turbines (850kW each) with doubly 
fed induction generators. Two 800kW diesel engines with 
flywheels are also connected to the system. In these 
generators the flywheels are separated by a clutch from a 
diesel engine and provide system with additional inertia. 
 
 
Figure 4. The simplified schematic of the King Island power system. 
Normally the spinning reserve in the King Island power 
system is provided by diesel generators. During the wind-
only operation of the system, the spinning reserve is equal 
to the dump load, as it represents the surplus of renewable 
energy in the system. If wind power suddenly drops, quick 
start-up of diesel generation is needed.  
By adding to the spinning reserve (represented by dump 
load) during the wind-only operation of the system, the 
available DR has the opportunity to delay or prevent diesel 
generation start-ups, and by doing so, increase RE 
penetration in the system. 
B. The King Island Smart Grid Project 
The ongoing King Island Smart Grid project has the goal 
of supporting higher levels of wind energy integration in the 
King Island power system by providing: 
1. Spinning reserve by implementing the DRG concept, 
and 
2. Fast fine-grained under frequency load shedding (based 
on the slave controller level). 
The master controller constantly monitors each available 
load, aggregates it and passes this information to the PLC-
based power system controller (PSC). At the same time, the 
PSC monitors the current level of power system spinning 
reserve. 
If the spinning reserve falls below a predefined 
threshold, the controller instructs the DRG to curtail some 
load and effectively raise the spinning reserve. This function 
can be observed in Figure 5, where due to a sudden drop in 
wind generation, the spinning reserve falls. The reduction in 
spinning reserve causes the power system controller to 
initiate a request for all available DR, as shown in the lower 
graph. 
The results shown in Figure 5 demonstrate that the 
implemented DRG was able to respond accurately to given 
set-points. It also shows that DR capacity can be dispatched 
reliably in 1 second. 
C. Selection of Smart Grid technology 
As presented in Section III, there are three components 
of 
the 
Smart 
Grid 
project: 
master 
controller, 
communications network and slave controllers. The King 
Island Smart Grid project is, in fact, a research and 
development project. However, all the equipment installed 
during the project duration is meant to be industrial grade 
and capable of operating in real power systems for extended 
periods of time. Having this in mind, ruggedized and proven 
equipment has been used during in the Smart Grid project: 
 
Master controller is an industrial in-rack server 
computer with operating systems for embedded 
devices. It requires very little or no maintenance. 
 
Communications network is built using widely 
available and proven telecommunications technology. 
Since the requirements of the King Island Smart Grid 
are much lower than usual operating requirements to 
communication networks, the network maintenance 
cost is also very low. To ensure the minimum response 
time, a proprietary long-polling protocol has been 
developed by CSIRO and used for communications 
between master and slave controllers. This protocol 
maintains a permanent open communication link 
between devices. There is no need for opening and 
closing the communication link, which provided an 
obvious advantage in the overall response time 
compared with industrial standards.  
 
Slave devices are modem, gateway and miniature 
circuit breaker (MCB) switch capable of at least 50,000 
operations. If any of these devices malfunctions, their 
replacement is relatively inexpensive and fast.  
An essential part of the King Island Smart Grid project 
is to provide training to local electricians in maintaining the 
system including its repair when equipment fails. The Smart 
Grid has been in operation for over a year now, with no 
serious equipment failures. The outcome of selecting widely 
available devices is a relatively low capital cost of the 
installed equipment. Selecting proven and ruggedized 
equipment resulted in very low maintenance costs. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

D. Preliminary Implementation Results 
Currently the King Island DRG has 50 sites under 
management and has been fully integrated into the power 
system. When complete, the DRG will be extended to 
include 150 households and several commercial loads. 
Prior to roll-out on King Island, the DRG was tested 
with 10,000 simulated customer loads with minimal 
performance degradation [13]. This implies that the full 
DRG will supply more than 100 kW of sub-second DR 
capacity. 
 
Figure 5. Results of the King Island DRG operation. 
The effectiveness of the King Island DRG depends 
largely on its integration with the power system controller. 
Figure 6 demonstrate how the controller requests for the 
DRG and uses it as a tool for regulating demand accurately. 
 
 
Figure 6. Operation of the King Island DRG. 
During the period of over 2 hours, the King Island power 
system was running in zero-diesel operation and the DRG 
was used under small and short dips in wind power 
generation. In this mode of operation, the power system 
controller prioritizes DRG dispatch, and thus postpones 
unnecessary start-ups of a diesel generator. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
With a strong drive for energy conservation, demand-
side management and demand response are becoming vital 
for the implementation of the smart grid concept. This paper 
outlines some experience obtained at the University of 
Tasmania, Hydro Tasmania and the Commonwealth 
Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO), 
Australia in developing fast DR for isolated power systems. 
The paper presented DR as an enabling technology for 
higher penetration of renewable energy in isolated power 
systems. These systems are often based on diesel generators. 
However, due to high costs of diesel fuel supply, the cost of 
electricity in isolated power systems is much high compared 
to conventional interconnected systems. This presents an 
incentive for introducing renewable energy generation in 
isolated power systems.  
Unfortunately, the integration of renewable generation 
presents significant stability and reliability challenges due to 
their intermittency. The solution proposed in this paper is 
based on centralized two-way communication and control of 
residential and commercial loads. DR can be dispatched and 
confirmed within 1 s. The technology has been installed and 
successfully tested in an isolated power system on King 
Island in Australia. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank power operators of the 
King Island system, Australia for sharing insights their 
extensive knowledge and experience in operating isolated 
power systems. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. A. Short, D. G. Infield, and L. L. Freris, “Stabilization of 
Grid Frequency Through Dynamic Demand Control,” IEEE 
Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1284-
1293, 2007.  
[2] T. L. Vandoorn, B. Renders, L. Degroote, B. Meersman, and 
L. Vandevelde, “Active Load Control in Islanded Microgrids 
Based on the Grid Voltage,” IEEE Transactions on Smart 
Grid, vol. 2, no.1,  pp. 139-151, 2011. 
[3] M. de Groot, J. Forbes and D. Nikolic, “Demand Response in 
Isolated Power Systems”, Australasian Universities Power 
Engineering Conference, Proc. AUPEC 2013, Hobart, 
Tasmania, Australia, 29 Sep. – 3 Oct. 2013, pp. 1-6. 
[4] D. Westermann and A. John, "Demand Matching Wind Power 
Generation With Wide-Area Measurement and Demand-Side 
Management," IEEE Transactions on Energy Conversion, vol. 
22, no. 1, pp. 145-149, 2007. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

[5] N. Rajakovic, D. Nikolic, and J. Vujasinovic, “Cost benefit 
analysis for implementation of a system for remote control 
and automatic meter reading,” Proc. PowerTech, 2009 IEEE 
Bucharest, 2009, pp. 1-6. 
[6] A. J. Conejo, J. M. Morales, and L. Baringo, "Real-Time 
Demand Response Model," IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 
vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 236-242, 2010. 
[7] A. S. Kowli and S. P. Meyn, "Supporting wind generation 
deployment with demand response," Pros. the IEEE/PES 
General Meeting, Detroit, MI, USA, 24-28 July, 2011, pp. 1-
6, IEEE Catalog Number CFP11POW-USB, ISBN 978-1-
4577-1001-8. 
[8] B. J. Kirby, "Spinning Reserve From Responsive Loads," Oak 
Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, USA, 
March 2003. 
[9] D. S. Callaway and I. A. Hiskens, "Achieving Controllability 
of Electric Loads," Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 99, pp. 184-
199, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[10] S. A. Pourmousavi and M. H. Nehrir, "Real-Time Central 
Demand Response for Primary Frequency Regulation in 
Microgrids," Smart Grid, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 3, pp. 
1988-1996, 2012. 
[11] J. Kumagai, “Virtual power plants, real power,” IEEE 
Spectrum,  vol. 49, pp. 13-14, 2012. 
[12] Hydro Tasmania. (2013). King Island Renewable Energy 
Integration Project (KIREIP). [Online]. Available from: 
www.kireip.com.au  2015.04.10 
[13] D. Nikolic, M. Negnevitsky, M. de Groot, S. Gamble, J. 
Forbes and M. Ross, “Fast Demand Response as an Enabling 
Technology for High Renewable Energy Penetration in 
Isolated Power Systems”, Pros. the IEEE/PES General 
Meeting, Washington DC, USA, 27-31 July, 2014, pp. 1-5, 
IEEE Catalog Number CFP14POW-USB, ISBN 978-1-4799-
6414-7. 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

