Transforming Utilities: Turning Data into Intelligence with Data Analytics 
 
Vanesa Čačković, Željko Popović 
Ericsson Nikola Tesla did. 
Zagreb, Croatia 
e-mail: vanesa.cackovic@ericsson.com 
e-mail: zeljko.popovic@ericsson.com 
 
 
Abstract—Data analytics is an important part in solving the 
challenges faced by transforming utilities. The introduction of 
smart meters and smart grids is leading to the convergence of 
information and communications technologies and utilities. 
Data analytics can be a powerful tool to create major 
improvements in efficiency and customer experience or it can 
even bolster service innovations. The deployment of data 
analytics is a necessary move as infrastructures, particularly 
electric grids, are expected to transform from more or less 
linear energy systems into networked, distributed systems with 
a multitude of market participants and management models in 
play. The grids simply become too complex to handle without 
large-scale data analytics. 
Keywords-data analytics; utilities transformation; smart 
metering; smart grid. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Data analytics is a broad term frequently heard in the 
utility industry together with the phrase big data. In theory, 
analytics is simple: data delivered from devices, sensors, and 
meters throughout the grid is being analyzed and used to 
create an intelligence in order to inform and improve 
operator responses to a given situation. Most of the analysts 
agree that analytics solutions and big data have gone from 
hype to work [1][2][3][9][11]. It is becoming a foundation 
for decision-making and a business priority among the 
world’s organizations. Big data is a term describing large 
amounts of data, collected from variety of sources, analyzed 
with the purpose of creating new intelligence and building 
business advantages. It brings faster results, a new depth to 
analytics and an unprecedented predictive power. Data 
analytics solutions are primarily used for three things: 
increasing customer experience, efficiency and growth. They 
are used as powerful preventive mechanism as well as 
corrective mechanism for real-time and near real-time 
control and management. A data-enhanced customer 
experience provides a deeper understanding of users and an 
increased customer experience through high performance 
services, fast feedback and customized offerings. Data-
driven efficiency means taking advantage of the information 
available within the organization, in order to work smarter 
and reduce costs. Growth, finally, is about innovations and 
new revenue streams sparked by big data [4]. 
The utilities industry is transforming. Electrical grids, 
water and gas pipes are examples of infrastructures that are 
expensive to build and maintain, and are often heavily 
regulated and considered ’natural monopolies’. Market 
conditions vary significantly between countries in terms of 
competitiveness and private/public ownership, but in general, 
the sector has particular ways of conducting business. 
Simply put, utility businesses have been built around energy 
resources and have had generation, transmission and energy 
retail flowing from the center in a one-way, linear build-up. 
Consumers have had little influence on service and pricing. 
Today, there is a new situation for utilities companies: 
market mechanisms are changing, competition is increasing 
and pricing is becoming increasingly complex. There are a 
number 
of 
factors 
that 
contribute 
to 
the 
market 
transformation and call for big data solutions. Some of the 
most important drivers include: 
1. 
Regulatory pressure: Governments are under 
pressure to improve energy efficiency, and their actions have 
consequences for energy companies. Regulations like the 
European Union’s 2012 Energy Efficiency Directive and the 
US Energy Policy Act of 2005 put pressure on energy 
companies to become more efficient and reduce their 
environmental impact. Utilities are also incentivized to 
utilize their assets in more effective ways. This is done 
through 
value-based 
assets 
management, 
including 
deployment of sensors and analysis of the financial impact of 
outages. 
2. 
Consumers become producers: The relationship 
between utility companies and consumers is becoming 
increasingly complex. The combination of decentralized 
generation and storage options with demand side flexibility 
can further enable consumers to become their own suppliers 
and managers for (a part of) their energy needs, becoming 
producers and consumers and reduce their energy bills. 
Decentralized renewable energy generation, whether used by 
consumers for their own use or supplied to the system, can 
usefully complement centralized generation sources. Where 
self-consumption exhibits a good match between production 
and load, it can help reducing grid losses and congestion, 
saving network costs in the long-term that would otherwise 
have to be paid by consumers. If consumers generate their 
own electricity from onsite renewable energy systems, they 
consume less electricity from the grid. This will affect how 
network tariffs are calculated. Network tariffs should be 
designed in a cost-reflective and fair manner while 
supporting energy efficiency and the renewable energy 
objectives and being simple and transparent for consumers 
Those dramatic changes in market mechanisms push energy 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

companies to find ways to manage distributed generation and 
net metering using the data analytics to help manage all new 
relations, power flow and business models.  
3. 
Increase in price volatility: The increase of 
intermittent energy sources like wind and solar has resulted 
in more fluctuations in energy access over time. The 
volatility is elevated further with the growing influence of 
power markets. By introducing smart meters, consumers can 
adjust their energy use in relation to the fluctuating prices. 
These fluctuations are now becoming normal; but handling 
those demands require sophisticated data analysis. 
4. 
Threats against the service delivery: Utilities are 
among the most critical infrastructures in society. Major 
incidents such as geopolitical events and natural disasters can 
cause severe damage to vital systems, in turn threatening 
markets, security, and people’s lives. We all rely on energy 
infrastructure, and the increased level of these threats calls 
for improved resilience and intelligence.  
5. 
Aging infrastructure: Around the globe, utility 
infrastructure is growing, and with aging technology comes 
increased vulnerability and a lack of interoperability with 
newer 
systems. 
Old 
infrastructure 
requires 
ongoing 
optimization to remain functional and cost effective [5]. 
Implementation of Distribution Grid Optimization 
Analytics described in this paper proposes using existing 
utility data fetched from several sources of smart metering 
network to achieve better visibility and easier monitoring of 
the end-to-end electricity network. It is important to state that 
analytics engine used here is real near time which enables 
users to act on the identified situation immediately. Another 
important aspect of this implementation is that the data 
model internally used by this analytics system is based on 
metadata which enables modelling of any kind of network 
elements, 
communicating 
over 
any 
communication 
technology in any type of network (electricity, water, gas 
networks with smart meters, routers, repeaters etc. 
communicating over power line communication, RF Mesh, 
3G or any). So, the same concept could be applied for 
different types of utility networks. 
This paper presents the typical current situation in 
European utilities regarding implementation of analytics 
methods based on industry research and commercial 
implementations experience together with possible benefits 
for implementing analytics and big data solutions.  
The paper is structured in following way: Section I gives 
an introduction to the subject, Section II describes the 
Traditional utilities approach to data, Section III explains the 
Data Analytics Potential, Section IV gives an overview of 
the Implementation Use Case, while Section V gives the 
Conclusion of the paper. 
II. 
TRADITIONAL UTILITIES APPROACH TO DATA 
 
Today utilities only make use of existing data to a limited 
extent. Decisions are based mostly on historical data from 
internal data sources and sometimes combined with external 
source, for example weather data. Usage of real time data is 
limited to pilot projects and small scale initiatives. Utilities 
often do not use all valuable data they have access to. Major 
analysts estimate that around 5% of existing data is being 
used for some specific purpose, while the rest is not 
processed at all. For example, a smart meter can be seen as a 
sensor that can help to visualize “the health” of power grid 
and communication. Only small percent of data one smart 
meter is capable of storing and sending is being fetched and 
that is primarily for billing purposes. The fact that a utility 
collects data does not necessarily means that it is making use 
of the data. Everyday operation and maintenance routines 
often mean handling of various excel files coming from 
different data sources and is not being done in real-time 
manner. Databases are also often updated by hand. 
Utilities approach can be described as “one problem/one 
system” approach which means that single problems are 
handled using single dedicated applications. Links between 
systems are loose or missing. This means that many utilities 
still lacks synchronized databases and use many redundant 
databases (data silos). However, efforts to integrate those 
separate data systems can be already seen for most of energy 
companies. 
Today’s utilities usually have some business intelligence 
tools in place and have insight into some areas of their 
operation. Those tools used by utilities are mostly standard 
reporting tools and obsolete forecasting models. 
However, utilities are aware of the changes in the energy 
landscape and available data sources. They see that 
conversion of operation and information technologies brings 
massive volume of data. Some utilities have started pilot 
projects to investigate the use cases for big data other than 
accurate billing. It is clear that utilities will have to invest in 
new technologies for data management to unlock true 
potential of new data sources. They need to re-build their 
data architecture model and redefine data use cases. 
Data management is not new for utilities. For example, 
traditional 
supervisory 
control 
and 
data 
acquisition 
(SCADA) systems [6] are in place for a while now, but the 
volume and velocity of data in smart grid is something which 
they are not prepared for. The main difficulty that they will 
have to overcome to start implementing big data 
technologies 
refers 
to 
expertise, 
infrastructure, 
and 
perception of risk (business value recognition). 
Handling a tremendous amount of data from the grid, 
smart homes, in-house data bases or social networks requires 
big data processors with enormous storage capacity and 
specialized ICT services. Most utilities do not have that. 
They also complain about the shortage of people specialized 
both in energy industry and big data. 
Business model transformation will mean step by step 
adoption of new data management technologies for more 
informed decision making. The transformation will be based 
on 3 pillars: 
• 
Emergence and adoption of new data sources 
• 
Integration of new types of data 
• 
Changes in data consumption model 
With the emergence of smart grids, utilities will start 
exploiting new data sources (grid sensors, smart meters, and 
electric vehicles) to optimize their business and provide 
better customer services. Utilities will be also forced to 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

improve customer interaction building on social media and 
various web data. 
Utilities are used to dealing with simple and structured 
data limited in volume and velocity. Collection, storage, and 
processing of M2M data from sensors and meters will pose a 
challenge for energy companies who have no in-home big 
data capabilities. However, the greatest difficulty will be to 
integrate those structured data with unstructured one which is 
totally new to utilities [1][7]. 
Business model transformation will be based on 
connecting traditional and new data sources, tapping new 
data, and integrating smart meter, smart grid, transaction, and 
geospatial data as shown on Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Data-business model transformation 
 Big data in the utilities sector will be dependent on a 
much larger number of nodes than for example in telecoms, 
demanding lots of machine power and powerful analytic 
models. Smart meters are not the only components of smart 
grids that can generate useful data for utilities companies.  
In the transformation, period utilities will not be using the 
full potential of available data. Utilities will leverage data 
potential only to some extent, mainly using just smart meter 
data on commercial scale. Starting from reporting, billing 
and settlement, they will test new technologies and use cases. 
After choosing the most successful ones, they will start 
adding new sources of data to their data management 
systems and build up their analytics capabilities. 
The development pace of data management systems will 
differ by country, energy market participants and technology. 
Utilities will start with analyzing structured data. Many 
pilot projects, especially involving smart meter data have 
already been kicked off. Utilities will lag behind with 
adoption of analytical tools for processing unstructured data. 
It seems that cost approach will be the biggest challenge 
which will have to be overcome to enable moving to a truly 
data-driven model. 
Cloud computing may be the answer for utilities 
hesitancy in deploying advanced analytics solutions. Some 
utilities have already moved part of their processes to cloud 
environment, however, a majority of those cases are non-
mission critical processes. 
III. 
DATA ANALYTICS POTENTIAL 
There is evidence that analytics is quickly becoming an 
extremely important component of many utilities’ overall 
IT/OT strategy. From predictive maintenance to customer 
engagement (CE), from energy efficiency optimization to 
grid optimization and beyond, analytics solutions are 
evolving rapidly and promise to dramatically alter the utility 
IT landscape in years to come. In a study commissioned by 
C3 Energy, the consulting group McKinsey and Company 
found that the potential annual savings per meter, through 
utility analytics solutions, could approach $300 [2]. 
By implementation purpose analytics solutions can 
roughly be divided into three categories: 
1. Distribution Grid Optimization Analytics 
2. Customer experience analytics 
3. Business Intelligence analytics 
 
1. Distribution Grid Optimization Analytics: 
Smart grid data analytics can support a myriad of use 
cases, but in order to fully maximize the benefits of smart 
grid 
deployments, 
analytics 
solutions 
that 
support 
operational improvements are necessary. Grid optimization 
analytics can leverage data from smart meters and other grid-
sensing devices, as well as through asset monitoring data, to 
optimize the operation of the transmission and distribution 
networks and asset performance [2].  
For the Distribution Grid Optimization Analytics it 
makes most sense to include the analytics solution from the 
very start, with the rollout of smart meters. If so, the 
analytics solution can be powerful tool to track the rollout 
progress. Main benefits of using analytics in parallel with the 
rollout are reducing times for detecting and fixing faults, 
decreasing number of needed field interventions, increasing 
quality of service, improving network visualization and 
decreasing the operational cost of the network in general. 
After the rollout is finished, with the analytics solution 
already in place, the same system can be used for further 
distribution grid optimizations (for example, Demand 
Response Management System (DRMS), energy data 
forecasting/load forecasting,  various visualization tools 
etc.). 
2. Customer experience analytics: 
The business-to-consumer model is being challenged by 
forms of energy production that allow private individuals to 
become energy producers. Wind farming, solar energy, the 
unloading of surplus energy from electric vehicles into the 
grid, or other forms of distributed generation (the ability for 
consumers to sell power) all complicate the transaction of 
energy and payments. This in turn demands more from 
billing and charging systems. Data analytics is necessary for 
dealing with the complex customer relationships following 
from distributed generation. It can also provide the 
foundation for new services that address new customer 
 
Customer 
databases
Asset 
specifications
Historical 
Consumption 
Data
Historical 
Price Data
Calendar, 
Data, 
Weather 
Forecassts
GIS data
Smart 
Meter and 
Smart Grid 
Data
Mobile 
Workforce 
data
Connected 
Cars
Real Time 
Price Data
Social 
Media
Real-time 
weather 
data
Traditional sources of data (historical and structured)
New sources of data (real time data, structured and unstructured, very large
in volume)
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

needs. Smart meters and smart home appliances provide new 
opportunities to invent solutions that build customer 
engagement and grow revenue. They can track consumer 
behavior on different appliances, and combine that 
information with weather data, pricing information and other 
variables to create solutions that save energy and money for 
users. Data analysis can be used to mitigate price volatility 
on the consumer level, through better management of the 
risks associated with a portfolio of commercial and physical 
assets. These types of data-driven innovations help to build 
new services, improve billing and charging algorithms and 
ultimately build engagement among customers in the long 
term. They can help to transform utility companies’ 
businesses beyond distributing and selling electricity.  
Like telecoms, the utilities industry is a sector where 
timing is vital. The intricate network of assets needs 
continuous monitoring and support, especially as many 
infrastructures are aging, and ongoing optimization becomes 
a way of prolonging their life. Data analytics solutions can 
give companies early warning services, detecting signs of 
problems that may affect customer experience in advance. 
The aim is to optimize everyday performance and prevent 
issues through effective fault management. There is also a 
customer care dimension to experience issues. Through 
analytics solutions, companies can identify the underlying 
issues that lead to customer complaints. It becomes possible 
to drill down into each customer’s usage history and find the 
root cause of issues, making it possible to explain and 
resolve bad experiences. 
 
3. Business Intelligence analytics: 
Broadly, business analytics are used to guide business 
planning and identify inefficient business processes. Within 
the utilities sector, business analytics have historically been 
used for financial and production planning applications to 
analyze historical data and provide information to business 
users around a set of predefined key performance indicators 
via 
reports, 
dashboards, 
and 
web 
portals. 
Typical 
applications include financial and compliance reporting, 
demand forecasting for energy trading, and customer 
operations. Today, armed with a multitude of new data 
generated by smart grid technology deployments, utilities are 
trying to understand the potential for business intelligence 
(BI) data analytics applications beyond those provided by 
traditional BI tools. BI analytics can leverage smart meter 
data and asset monitoring data to improve the efficiency of 
M2C operations, enhance revenue assurance, provide greater 
visibility into system performance and asset utilization, and 
enable load and generation forecasting for energy trading or 
production 
planning 
activities. 
The 
more 
advanced 
applications move from a predominantly descriptive 
approach toward more predictive analytics that will enable 
utilities to become proactive in their strategies [2]. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION USE CASE 
Implementation of analytics solution as a rollout support 
is being chosen as an example for this paper since it 
describes well the usefulness of the analytics solution for 
utility company as well as help to understand basics and the 
full potential on one analytics solution.  
A. Architecture 
Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) is defined as a 
full measurement and collection system that consist of a 
meter hardware located at the customer site; communication 
networks between the customer and a service provider such 
as an electric, gas, or water utility; and data reception and 
management systems that make the information available to 
the service provider. AMI has a variety of specific 
characteristics that present challenges to the effective 
management of its communications and head-end systems. 
The biggest challenges an AMI network faces include 
controlling and utilizing waves of meter data, building AMI 
networks to scale, and meeting important requirements 
including bandwidth, latency, throughput and reliability. 
Advanced  Metering  Infrastructure  are  systems  that 
measure, 
collect, 
and 
analyze 
energy 
usage, 
and 
communicate with metering devices such as electricity 
meters, gas meters, heat meters, and water meters, either on 
request or on a schedule. These systems include hardware, 
software, communications, consumer energy displays and 
controllers, customer associated systems, Meter Data 
Management System (MDM) and supplier business systems. 
The most common architecture used to address the 
features of smart metering systems is presented in Figure 2. 
It consists of [11]: 
• 
Smart meters (SM) 
• 
Data concentrators (DC): process data from several 
meters 
• 
Head End System (HES): central data collection 
point 
• 
Local area network (HAN, NAN): allows bi-
directional communication between the smart 
meters and a data concentrator 
• 
Wide area network (WAN): allows bi-directional 
communication between the data concentrators and 
the head end system. 
Head End
System
WAN
2G, GPRS, 3G, xDSL
HAN
HAN
HAN
NAN
Data 
concentrator
Meter
Data 
Management
System
Utility
 
Figure 2.  Typical AMI architecture 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Though the basic function of the MDMS will include 
validation and storage of smart meter data, utilities expect 
additional functionality in support of more business 
processes across their value chain. Meter Data Analytics 
(MDA) is an upcoming trend where Meter Data 
Management (MDM) vendors or ICT vendors are trying to 
expand their offerings into in order to provide utilities add-
on capabilities for data processing, analyzing, and reporting 
trends that add value rather than just uploading data. MDA 
enables utilities to avoid forecast failures rather than respond 
to them. 
B. Implementation  
Utility company described in this use case is one of the 
largest electricity distribution companies on the Baltic 
countries, owning over 640.000 metering points (residential 
and industrial), 61.000 km of power lines and 22,000 
substations. Main motivation for transformation the utility 
was the fact that all electricity meters need to be remotely 
readable by 2020 according to EU directive and aging 
equipment with high maintenance cost. The utility company 
started an eight-year long transformation project within 
which integration of new MDMS was included as well as 
rollout of smart meters and integration of Analytics platform 
with existing systems. Smart meters help modernize the 
power grid by providing the ability to remotely monitor and 
transfer energy consumption and power quality information.  
Smart metering also benefits end customers in the form 
of energy and cost savings, reduced carbon emissions, 
improved service reliability and improved customer service 
and responsiveness. To make all of these benefits a reality, 
utilities need a secure and flexible two-way communications 
infrastructure to connect and communicate with smart 
meters.  
Collection and transmission of energy consumption data 
is a continuous process that is done automatically. As the 
network grows, efficient operation of Smart meter 
communication network becomes a critical process. Ability 
to address critical issues in network and also capability to 
address problems before a failure require innovative tools to 
support communication personal in their daily work. 
Analytics platform is a solution for enabling visualization 
and context development for smart metering data to support 
power grid management [12]-[17]. 
The Analytics Platform gathers the data from various 
data sources (HES, MDMS, GIS, CIS, asset management, 
etc.) in online mode and does the modelling and processing 
of data in order to act on newly processed information. 
During the implementation over 50 candidates for analysis 
and implementation were identified (so called use cases) 
which can roughly be divided into three groups: power 
network operations, smart meter operations and fraud&loss 
related use cases.  
Examples of the use cases are: 
1. Use Case (Communication supervision):  
Loss of meter data during the collection process may 
cause issues with billing, as well as disturbances in the 
distributed energy generation. Upon a data collection failure, 
it is possible to quickly analyze possible causes by drilling 
down in the communications network, from a geographical 
network map down to an individual meter in an apartment 
house. Regardless where the information come from 
(multiple systems), it is presented in the same user interface 
which uses latest usability principles to increase user 
efficiency and effectiveness. The majority of the faults can 
be identified and solved either with remote reconfiguration 
or by deploying field personnel by issuing a work order. 
Network planning issues are found and can be corrected 
during normal operation. The method can be used to 
discover causes for income drops, users complaints, users 
churn, loss of control of distributed generation figures etc. 
There might even be regulations which put requirement on 
fault identification and fault repair which forces the utility 
company to have an efficient tool to localize and correct 
faults within a predefined period implying that every saved 
second means saved money. 
2. Use Case (Power Quality Visualization):  
Power quality determines the fitness of electric power to 
consumer devices.  Without the proper power, an electrical 
device (or load) may malfunction, fail prematurely or not 
operate at all. The complexity of the system to move electric 
energy from the point of production to point of consumption 
combined with weather variation, generation, demand and 
other factors provide many opportunities for the quality of 
supply to be compromised. Smart meters provide simple 
power quality measures. Analysis of this information can aid 
in the detection of anomalies and other emerging adverse 
conditions in the distribution network, allowing the utility to 
proactively initiate equipment maintenance, reducing the 
likelihood of an outage. Power quality monitoring helps in 
preventive system repairs/ maintenance by identifying areas 
of poor quality and subsequently acting on those, 
additionally life of assets could be extended and unplanned 
service interruptions could be avoided via predictive and pro-
active maintenance 
3. Use Case (Energy Loss Detection):  
Fraud amongst the subscribers is always a risk, including 
loss of income to unbalance in the power grid. Aggregation 
and correlation of multiple metering points (e.g. substation 
vs. aggregated feeder line consumption) makes it possible for 
the utility to understand magnitude of, and identify possible 
fraud activity. All information available from different 
sources is gathered in the same user interface to optimize the 
user experience and increase the efficiency. An alarm as well 
as a work order can be issued upon detected (suspected) 
fraud. The method can be used to reduce the loss of income 
but also prohibit unwanted unbalance in the power grid.  
4. Use Case (Outage management visualization): 
Smart meter events such as ‘last gasp’ and ‘power 
restore’ that provide meter off/on status can be used for 
improving outage management. Being real time or near real 
time events, these have an obvious advantage over outage 
information coming from customers and field staff. 
Examples of scenarios which could be visualized: 
Momentary 
outages 
and 
restoration-related 
events; 
communication and network interface issue-related events; 
Events due to planned outages, outages at the lateral, feeder 
or transformer level, customer disconnects, etc. Effective 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

events processing & analytics engine shall be used to detect 
outages at the right device level, create proactive tickets, as 
well as ‘power restore’ to identify nested outages after large-
scale outage restoration. Aim is to help make outages shorter 
and restoration more reliable. It can also reduce the customer 
complaints if information about the outage can be handled 
and in some cases distributed, even before the customers 
notices the outage. 
After integrating described solution utility doubled the 
back-office engineer efficiency, times for solving faults were 
cut by half and overall communication quality between SM 
network elements improved significantly [8].   
It has been seen that it would be beneficial to for use this 
type of Analytics platform also in other parts of utility 
organizations such as call center and general performance 
monitoring of the company [18][19]. 
As an outcome of the integrating the Analytics platform 
with existing systems and various data streams, it is possible 
to visualize the network, get communication quality, drill 
down to root cause, read configuration of devices and have 
near real time data available. The platform enables proactive 
and/or fast actions in order to secure needed network quality 
and meter data availability, supervise network rollout with 
higher quality, handling big number or smart meters and 
reduce operating costs. Analytics platform provides a way to 
collect, aggregate and analyze data in real-time, allowing 
utilities companies to prevent issues and manage the 
customer experience.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Collection and transmission of measurements and events 
from devices is a continuous process that is done 
automatically. The variety, velocity and volume of data 
gathered from and about utility networks are growing day by 
day. Such trend enables, but at the same time makes it 
difficult to process the data in order to make accurate, 
adequate and actionable decisions on managing those 
networks. 
Understanding 
the 
collected 
data 
brings 
opportunities to acquire new markets, customers and work 
with efficiency. Many organizations have a lot of data 
available, but do not have enough experts to leverage big 
data, and are not recruiting enough talent either. What is 
equally serious is that many organizations do not have good 
systems, routines and do not ascribe sufficient importance to 
data to make insights available to the whole organization. 
Data analytics makes it possible to collect real-time data 
from existing grid elements to gain better control of the 
infrastructural assets. Ongoing monitoring of resources 
improves proactive maintenance actions and operations. Data 
from smart meters and other smart assets helps us to 
understand asset usage and provides a means of asset 
lifecycle management. The ability to anticipate issues that 
could interrupt the provision of service is a value that big 
data brings to both customer experience and operations. Like 
many other aspects of running a utilities operation, fault 
management is an area that is more difficult to handle today 
without data analytics solutions. Predictive modeling of 
events that cause outages can be deployed to trigger 
automated mitigating actions. This is an effective tool to 
reduce costs and improve customer experience. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Smart metering in Europe; Tobias Ryberg, Berg Insight 
research team; www.berginsight.com, [Last access April 
2016] 
[2] Navigant research: “Smart Grid IT Systems MDMS, CIS, GIS, 
SCADA, EMS, DMS, OMS, AMS, MWMS, DRMS, 
DERMS, and Utility Data Analytics Solutions: Global Market 
Analysis and Forecasts”; published 2Q 2015 
[3] Frost&Sullivan: “Data-driven Utilities: Business Intelligence 
and Analytics to become the Top Investment Area for Energy 
Companies”, October 2013 
[4] Industry Transformation - Horizon Scan: ICT & the Future of 
Utilities; http://www.ericsson.com/news/141211-horizon-scan-
ict-and-the-future-of-utilities; [Last access April 2016] 
[5] Actionable intelligence Transforming Utilities; Ericsson; 
http://www.ericsson.com/res/docs/2015/actionable-
intelligence-transforming-utilities.pdf; 
[Last 
access 
April 
2016] 
[6] http://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/SCADA-supervisory-
control-and-data-acquisition; [Last access April 2016] 
[7] Data-driven Utilities: Business Intelligence and Analytics to 
become the Top Investment Area for Energy Companies; 
Frost&Sullivan; October 2013 
[8] http://www.ericsson.com/industry-transformation/energizing-
estonia/; [Last access April 2016] 
[9] Rob Lockhart: "Smart Grid Data Analytics: a New Approach 
for Utilities"; Gigaom Research, 2015 
[10] http://www.metering.com/smart-meter-europe-estonia-utility-
deploys-half-of-630k-target/; [Last access April 2016] 
[11] GTM Research: "The soft grid 2013-2020: Big Data & Utility 
Analytics for Smart Grid";  
[12] ”Functional reference architecture for communications in 
smart metering systems”, CEN/CLC/ETSI/TR, Tech. Rep., 
ICS 33200; 91.140.01, Ref. CEN/CLC/ETSI/TR 50572:2011 
E, December 2011. 
[13] J. Kwac, J. Flora and R. Rajagopal, "Household Energy 
Consumption Segmentation Using Hourly Data", IEEE 
Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 5, no. 1, January 2014, pp. 
420-430. 
[14] G. Chicco, "Overview and Performance Assessment of the 
Clustering Methods for Electrical Load Pattern Grouping", 
Energy, vol. 42, no. 1, June 2012, pp. 68-80.  
[15] L. Hernandez, et al. "A Survey on Electric Power Demand 
Forecasting: Future Trends in Smart Grids, Microgrids and 
Smart Buildings", IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 
vol. 16, no. 3, Third Quarter 2014, pp. 1460-1495.  
[16] I. S.Bayram, G. Michailidis, M. Devetsikiotis, and F. 
Granelli,"Electric Power Allocation in a Network of Fast 
Charging Stations", IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in 
Communications, vol. 31, no. 7, July 2013, pp. 1235-1246.  
[17] A.G. Phadke and J.S. Thorp, "Synchronized Pharos 
Measurements and Their Applications (Power Electronics and 
Power Systems)", Springer, 2008, ISBN 978-0-3877-6535-8.  
[18] Y. Zhang et al. "Wide-Area Frequency Monitoring Network 
(FNET) Architecture and Applications," IEEE Transactions on 
Smart Grid, vol. 1, no. 2, September 2010, pp. 159-167. 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

