Energy Coupling Control of Telecommunication Network and Power Grid 
Heiko Lehmann, Christoph Lange and Andreas Gladisch 
Deutsche Telekom Laboratories 
Ernst-Reuter-Platz 7 
10587 Berlin, Germany 
[H-Lehmann, Christoph.Lange, Andreas.Gladisch]@telekom.de 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we present a control architecture that 
allows to operate the energy storage facilities integrated into 
the wide area telecommunication network as mediators 
between the optimality criteria of the Smart Grid and the 
energy consumption modeling of the telecommunication 
network itself. Different control modes are discussed.  
Keywords—Green ICT, Smart Grid, energy storage facilities, 
telecommunication network 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In this paper, it will be argued that the storage facilities 
for electrical energy which have been integrated into the 
national carrier networks as a power reserve for blackouts 
with system-wide coverage may serve as a crucial link 
between the telecommunication network domain and the 
emerging Smart Power Grid (for an – albeit not rigorous – 
definition and basic discussion see [1]).  
Consider the following three-part reasoning, first seen 
from the energy domain point of view:  
• 
The success of the so-called Smart Grid will hinge 
on its capability to incorporate renewable energy 
sources on a large scale.  
• 
The renewable energy sources (mainly wind and 
solar energy) come with a high volatility – time and 
place of their availability will, as a rule, not coincide 
with the demand.  
• 
Hence, technically efficient and controllable energy 
storage topologies with a system-wide coverage 
have to be set up.  
• 
(Also, concurrent transmission network capabilities 
have to be created. For the argument of the present 
paper, this aspect shall be disregarded.) 
On 
the 
other 
hand, 
the 
national 
carrier 
telecommunication networks such as e.g. Deutsche Telekom 
(DT) in Germany are heavy consumers of electrical energy 
(German landline operation of DT alone consumes around 2 
TWh per year). As the traffic load of network services 
increases in near-exponential fashion (e.g. [2]), to curb the 
energy consumption in all layers of the ICT (information and 
communication technology) domain is a paramount task for 
the ICT industry, summed up in the term Green ICT. The 
reasoning given above is now met by the ICT domain point 
of view:  
• 
Emergency electricity provisioning has historically 
been integrated into the telecommunication network 
at each of the major technology sites (approximately 
9.000 in the case of DT) and further real estate sites.  
• 
Whereas at a share of these sites performance is 
individually measured with a high temporal 
resolution, others are provisioned according to 
suitable standard load profiles.  
• 
The actual technology is a lead-acid storage battery 
with a summed-up capacity of ca. 22 MAh. This 
value is, at closer inspection, a nonlinear function of 
the discharge current. 
• 
As per current operation, the default charge level is 
100%.  
The conclusion is fairly simply to draw: provided the 
option of remote management is given for the storage 
batteries, their charge levels can now be regarded as control 
entities with two competing control paradigms:  
A. Telecommunication Consumption Modelling 
The storage capacity is used to cap peak loads of the 
telecommunication network energy demand and shift them to 
off-peak times. As the spot market prices of electrical energy 
(day-ahead trading) are strongly correlated to the aggregate 
load profile, even minor shifts of peak loads result in 
reductions of the overall power bill. Further optimization 
dimensions are the transmission fees which are a strongly 
nonlinear function of site-specific performance values and 
controllable variations of the standard load profile. This is a 
purely Telco-internal optimization scenario. 
B. Smart Grid Stabilization Services 
Alternatively, the buffer control can be operated 
according to the necessities of the utilities: positive and 
negative control energy options could be realized, or, storage 
elements may be operated as parts of virtual power plants. 
The remuneration in this control paradigm is external and is 
derived from the economical value of the Smart Grid 
stabilization.  
 
Both paradigms may, however, be combined. With a 
common value scale (e.g. currency units), a joint cost 
function can be constructed comprising the values of Smart 
Grid stabilization services and power purchase bill 
reductions. The mathematics of complex optimization 
allows, then, to identify the optimal operation of the storage 
elements with respect to the two domains “Smart Grid” and 
“Green ICT”.  
This work reports first findings on the presented control 
mechanisms derived from research at Deutsche Telekom 
87
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

Laboratories 
and 
discusses 
the 
possible 
further 
developments.  
The paper is organized as follows: in the first section, the 
joint control architecture of the coupled domains “Smart 
Grid” and “Green ICT” is developed and discussed. In the 
second section, partial optimization scenarios for the 
operation of the energy buffers are developed and recent 
R&D work (at DT) is scanned for relevant input. A synthesis 
is subsequently developed. Finally, an outlook is given.  
II. 
JOINT CONTROL ARCHITECTURE AND CONTROL 
PARAMETERS 
In Figure 1, the layer coupling as described above is 
schematically depicted. In the topmost layer, the network 
structure of energy consumption in the telecommunication 
domain is shown. The energy buffer elements integrated in 
this network constitute the mediating middle layer, whereas 
the bottom layer represents the power grid.  
 
 
 
telecommunication
network energy
consumption
telecommunication
network energy
buffers charge
power grid performance
with renewable energy
sources
(
)
(
)
(
x )t
V
x t
P
x t
P
tel
buffer
t
tel
tel
,
,
,
(0)
∂ η
+
=
(
)t
buffer x
,
η
(
)
(
x )t
V
x t
P
x t
P
grid
buffer
t
grid
grid
,
,
, )
(
(0)
∂ η
+
=
 
Figure 1: Telecommunication and electrical power network coupled by energy buffer elements. 
 
The coupling function h is a capacity measured in Ah. Its 
first temporal derivative gives a current which describes 
charging and discharging of the buffers. Multiplied by the 
voltage a positive or negative performance is expressed 
which might be operated to modify the performance balance 
in the top and bottom layer. Several observations are due: 
• 
In the telecommunication network no energy is 
generated. Therefore, ∑t hbuffer
ttteeelll§ 0 at all times.  
• 
A cyclical recharging boundary condition is 
implemented: h(t) = h(t+T) with T = 24 h as the 
starting point.  
• 
Discharge current limitations are derived from the 
battery technology: |∑t hbuffer| § I* in order to preserve 
the nominal capacity and ensure the life expectancy 
of the battery. 
• 
Note also the basic dimensioning Ptel º 0.02 µ Pgrid. 
 
Let us now shortly discuss Figure 1. In the top layer, the 
buffered performance of the telecommunication network as 
presented to the grid is expressed as the sum of the 
unmediated consumption Ptel
(0) and the buffer performance. 
The latter is always negative as energy can – in this layer – 
only be taken out of the buffers. ∑t hbuffer
ttt ttteeelll presents thus a 
means to react to price variations as it dissolves the rigid 
coupling between consumption and grid-based provisioning. 
In the mediating middle layer, the buffer charge hbuffer = 
hbuffer tel + hbuffer grid is here modeled to consist of two parts – 
one mediating the telecommunication network consumption 
and one interacting with the grid itself. The latter describes 
the purchase of buffer energy in off-peak hours (∑thbuffer
gggrrriii d
dd   ¥ 
0) as well as technoeconomical operations typical for the 
Smart Grid. The most important of these are:  
• 
Positive control energy: Buffer energy is fed into the 
grid in order to counteract under-provisioning 
(∑thbuffer
g
ggrrriiiddd      < 0). The corresponding economics is 
usually a traded option over a specified amount of 
energy with defined performance. The use of 
distributed medium-sized buffers prevents the costly 
use of control power plants, e.g. gas turbines and is 
very efficient with respect to transport costs. 
• 
Negative control energy: Buffer capacity is offered 
to be charged with surplus energy which threatens to 
destabilize the transmission grid. The typical 
situation is a high feed of wind energy in night hours 
not met by comparable consumption. Again, options 
to charge buffers are traded as a reassurance against 
grid destabilization. As above, the system-wide 
coverage of buffers allows to act in the lower 
hierarchy layers of the grid, thus transferring – and 
effectively curbing – risks from the high-voltage grid 
to medium-and low-voltage parts.  
• 
Virtual power plants: Physically the same effect as 
the positive control energy discussed above, the 
coupling of buffer performance into a cloud of 
generation facilities constitutes a virtual power plant. 
The mode of operations, however, will be different: 
option trading with rare actual events is replaced by 
regular operation. Lifecycle considerations have, 
thus, to be taken into account. 
88
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

III. 
BUFFER OPERATION CONTROL 
In this section, first approaches to the control paradigms 
presented above are reviewed and discussed. Before 
embarking on the full systemic case, let us consider the 
decoupled regimes hbuffer
y = 0, where y = {tel, grid}, 
respectively.  
A. Telecommunication Consumption Modelling 
Following the reasoning given in the introduction, 
research activities at T-Labs, the central R&D department of 
Deutsche Telekom Group, have been set up to investigate the 
use of buffers in the pure y = tel mode discussed above. 
Starting point is an energy provisioning mode where the bulk 
of energy is secured by long-term base and peak contracts. 
This results in a rectangular function which has to be shaped 
by day-ahead trading on the stock exchange to the actual 
demand function. Only this latter part of the overall 
provisioning is subject to the buffer mediation as discussed 
in this paper since for long-term effects the buffer size is not 
sufficient.  
In a detailed analysis of historical data (consumption data 
and stock exchange prices of the years 2008 and 2009), the 
feasibility of buffer operation to model the Telco network 
consumption has been studied. Two effects have been shown 
to dominate the optimization:  
• 
Balancing group management: The stock exchange 
price curve (see Figure 2) gives clear indication at 
what times purchase should be avoided and at what 
times encouraged.  
 
hours
prices / €
 
 
Figure 2:  Exemplary stock exchange prices over a week, beginning with 
Monday. Night times, especially at the weekend lead to zero, even negative 
prices. 
 
• 
Transmission fee optimization: transmission fees are 
built on the basis of the maximal current integrated 
over any 15 minutes in the course of a year. 
Uncontrolled 
buffer 
recharging, 
e.g. 
after 
a 
maintenance operation or an actual black-out 
incidence, leads to high transmission bills. This 
effect cannot be studied in the aggregate model 
developed in the initial analytics approach since the 
consumption sites have individual characteristics and 
have to be modeled individually.  
In a first evaluation, perfect a priori knowledge about 
stock exchange prices has been assumed (given by the 
historical data). Also, operational issues of the battery 
management have been neglected (lifecycle issues, current 
limitations etc.). Then, the optimal buffer operation has been 
determined by linear optimization. The result is given in 
Figure 3 [3] .  
 
hours
energy /MW
 
Figure 3:  Modeled Telco network consumption over a typical week 
beginning with Monday: The red curve shows how the load peaks are 
capped by buffer energy. 
 
Figure 3 shows how the load peaks of the Telco network 
consumption can be capped by ∑t hbuffer
tttttteeelll: Charging at night 
and weekend times enables the aggregate buffer (note again: 
this is a model pathology) to substitute the peak loads over 
the working week.  
B. Smart Grid Stabilization Services 
In this subsection the pure y = grid mode – as introduced 
in the beginning of section III – and the related use of the 
buffers is elaborated on.  
In Smart Grid environments several types of energy have 
to be integrated and handled within an overall electricity 
grid: Besides the energy generated by conventional power 
plants like coal-burning power plants or nuclear power plants 
renewable energies have to be included. Typical renewable 
energy sources are wind, sun and tides, but also for example 
biomass. Renewable energy is highly volatile with respect to 
time t and location x of its occurrence in a power grid – and 
the amount of renewable energy generation is thus a function 
of time t and location x. Wind energy is typically generated 
in certain regions – e.g. in maritime regions by using on-
shore facilities and in off-shore wind parks, where strong 
wind activity is observed. The wind occurrence and intensity 
has a statistical nature [4] leading to a high variation in wind 
output with respect to time and locality. Solar energy is best 
generated in regions with long periods and high probability 
of sunshine. These areas may be preferably desert-like 
regions which are – in general – different from regions with 
high wind output. Tidal energy sources depend on tidal flows 
in the sea. They are expected to be better predictable with 
respect to temporal occurrence [4], but this type of energy is 
restricted to sea shores with significant tidal activity. Some 
89
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

time t
power P(t)
Pgrid (t)
Pdemand (t)
T0
T1
T2
T3
T4
(0)
time t
power P(t)
Pgrid (t)
Pdemand (t)
T0
T1
T2
T3
T4
(0)
 
congruence between the wind and tidal energy source 
locations may be argued, but also in these cases there may be 
significant discrepancies since high wind capacity is not only 
observed in maritime and off-shore regions, but also in 
central country parts [4]. Another renewable energy source is 
bioenergy for future energy supply where a major challenges 
lies in its sustainable and efficient use and generation [5]. 
The time periods of interest are expected to range from 
short times, like diurnal or weekly periodicity, up to yearly 
and seasonal variability: An example would be the more 
strong wind activity in maritime regions during autumn and 
spring compared to typical summer winds – where instead 
the solar energy generation is expected to have a peak value 
with respect to historical observations. 
The associated overall generated power Pgrid
(0) may be 
modeled as a function of time t and location x: 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
x )t
P
x t
P
x t
P
x t
P
x t
P
x t
P
,
,
,
,
,
,
tide
sun
wind
nucl
coal
(0)
grid
+
+
+
+
=
 
Since the renewable energy sources generate a highly 
volatile power, the remaining conventional power plants will 
have to be able to provide a varying electricity demand – 
depending on the wind, sun and tide activity: Considering an 
exemplary case of a power consumer with approximately 
constant power draw – like, for example, current 
telecommunication networks within certain limits are – the 
electricity demand remaining for the coal-burning and 
nuclear power plants will vary and there is a need of energy 
storage to accommodate this in an efficient way. 
Energy storage facilities are installed in electricity grids: 
As an example there are the pumped storage plants in 
mountainous regions which are able to store energy in 
mechanical form and convert them back to electricity on 
demand. However, the high volatility of renewable energy 
with respect to time and location will require, first, energy 
storage facilities which are able to handle requests in short 
times for storing and providing energy as well as, second, 
distributed storage facilities with sufficient capacity in a 
certain region to accommodate the location dependency of 
renewable energy generation. During times of generation of 
high amounts of renewable energy it will be necessary to 
store considerable amounts, but being able to deliver it 
during times of low activity of renewable energy sources. 
Central storage facilities, connected to e.g. geographical 
characteristics – like pumped storage plants are – may be not 
sufficient, since in that case possibly long distances would 
have to be bridged and the transmission loss would decrease 
the energy efficiency. Here a clear argument for de-
centralized storage facilities is observed, since transmission 
losses can be minimized by distributed storage energy 
facilities. In conclusion of this paragraph it can be stated that 
current energy storage facilities are not flexible enough to 
handle the future grid requirements and hence more suitable 
solutions are necessary allowing for a more economical grid 
operation. 
For the future it is expected that the share of renewable 
energies in the overall energy mix will increase targeting at a 
reduced greenhouse gas emission. For example in Germany 
there is the target established to have 35 % of the gross 
energy consumption generated by renewable energy sources 
by 2020 [5]. After that time, Germany targets at 50 % by 
2030, 65 % by 2040 and 80 % by 2050 of gross energy 
consumption generated from renewable energy sources [5]. 
With respect to the longer term future, like e.g. looking at 
2050 it is expected that wind energy will play a key role in 
electricity generation [5].  
Before this background it will be necessary to establish 
concepts like those elaborated on in this paper to allow for an 
efficient and reliable energy supply by future electricity 
grids. 
The 
energy 
storage 
elements 
of 
the 
telecommunications network are distributed all over the 
country and have a certain capacity – which is usually much 
lower than the grid would require to accommodate the whole 
amount of variations. However, the distributed energy 
storage facilities may help to stabilize the grid and ensure its 
economical operation in cases of small variations of the 
provided grid power with respect to the power demand. 
Figure 4: Exemplary and principle curves of the the power demand Pdemand 
(t) and of the grid-provided power Pgrid
(0)(t) over time t at a constant 
location x. 
Figure 4 shows the principal behaviour of the generated 
power Pgrid(t) by the grid and the power Pdemand (t) demanded 
by the consumers as exemplary functions of time t, i.e. for a 
certain location (x = const.). The electricity demand Pdemand 
(t) is assumed to be nearly constant over time. Two cases 
concerning the buffer usage can be distinguished: Energy 
stored in the buffers is fed into the grid in order to counteract 
under-provisioning (∑thbuffer
g
ggrrr iiiddd       < 0) or the grid produces more 
power than demanded by the consumers and this surplus 
energy amount is stored in the buffers (∑thbuffer
g
ggrrr iiiddd       > 0). In 
Figure 4 this is illustrated: There are shaded areas – between 
T0 and T1 as well as between T2 and T3 – where Pgrid(t) < 
Pdemand (t) (∑thbuffer
g
ggrrriiiddd      < 0): In this case the grid generates less 
power than demanded by the power consumer, for example 
since there is low wind energy output. Then the difference 
power Pdemand(t) – Pgrid(t) has to be provided by the energy 
storage facilities of the network, i.e. the batteries which had 
to be previously charged appropriately. During times, where 
Pgrid(t) > Pdemand (t) (∑thbuffer
gggrrriii d
dd      > 0) – i.e. between T1 and T2 
as well as between T3 and T4 – the batteries may serve as 
buffers and store the power generated, but not used by the 
90
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

power consumers at that particular time period. These 
amounts of energy than may be used at later points in time, 
when the first case applies. 
C. Synthesis 
Let us now sketch the combined control of Telco network 
energy consumption modeling and Smart Grid stabilization 
services. In the modeling language developed above in 
section II, a unifying cost function has now to be developed. 
In continuation of earlier work where the essential coupling 
mechanisms between layers have been modeled qualitatively 
[6], here, a more analytical approach is sought. To this end, 
the performance modeling of Figure 1 has to be set in 
relation to real costs.  
Consider the performance-related costs as a functional (in 
arbitrary dimensionless units) of the overall buffer charge 
hbuffer(t): 
 
[
]
( )
( )
( )t
t
t
t
C
buffer
c
2
buffer
(0)
bm
buffer
'
d
π η
η
π
η
+
=∫
. 
(1) 
 
Here, the first rhs term describes the costs of the 
balancing group management: the stock exchange price 
function pbm
(0)(t) weights the charging and discharging 
performance, respectively. As discussed above, a further 
dependence of the costs on the charge and discharge currents 
exists (transmission fees) whence a quadratic dependence on 
the currents follows.  
In the oversimplified model presented here, the positive 
control energy (see discussion above) may be regarded as 
subsumed in the balancing group management, since the 
corresponding option prices will strongly correlate with the 
stock exchange prices, so that pbm
(0)(t) may be understood as 
incorporating both.  
The negative control energy costs, however, have to be 
modeled separately. This is done in the second term in eqn. 
1: If pc is a constant option price for providing negative 
control energy, the costs are directly proportional to the 
available buffer. It has to be stressed again at this point, that 
this model is not designed for mathematical accuracy but for 
highlighting the leading effects in the presented control 
problem. The Euler equation for the optimization problem 
(1) follows immediately to  
 
( )
( )
[
]
c
(0)
bm
d 2 'buffer
d
π
π
η
t =
t
t
    
. 
 
(2) 
 
Figure 5 shows the principal effects of the optimization 
problem (2): The higher the option price pc, the more 
favourable it is to discharge the buffers since this creates 
capacity for accommodating the surplus energy (see above). 
In Figure 5, pbm
(0) has been modeled as a Gaussian centered 
at midday – in the rough modeling presented here, this 
mimics the realistic curve in Figure 2.  
Obviously, a realistic negative control energy option 
price would reflect the higher risk of network instabilities 
due to overfeeding in the night hours. Also, correlations 
between stock exchange prices pbm
(0) and the aggregate load 
profiles which will also strongly influence both control 
energy prices have been neglected here.  
 
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0 t
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
hHtL
 
Figure 5: Buffer charge h (arbitrary units) over a diurnal cycle for different 
values of negative control energy option prices (increasing values from top 
to bottom).  
 
In current R&D work at Deutsche Telekom Laboratories, 
a detailed spatio-temporally resolved model is developed in 
order to realistically gauge the effects presented here 
qualitatively.  
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK 
In conclusion of the presented joint control approach of 
Telco network consumption modeling and Smart Grid 
effects, several principal findings can be stated:  
• 
First, the gross demand and supply of electrical 
energy are coupled by prices – be that the stock 
exchange prices for day-ahead provisioning or the 
hedging prices for control energy of either sign.  
• 
Further, a system-wide buffer structure integrated 
into the Telco network may be used in two different 
modes: either to model proprietarily the Telco 
consumption characteristics by load-shifting, or, to 
mediate performance surpluses and deficits of the 
Smart Grid itself. 
• 
Thus, with integrated prices as a unifying basis, a 
cost functional can be derived for combining the 
different control requirements on the operation of the 
buffer charges integrated into the Telco network. 
With respect to the behaviour of the combined control 
strategy, interesting options open up:  
• 
There is mutual competition and enhancement of 
cost effects: Whereas negative control energy and 
balancing group management both act towards 
buffer discharge, positive control energy and Telco 
network consumption modeling compete. Here, a 
more refined model is needed to derive the optimal 
control strategy.  
• 
Current initiatives for load-adaptive mode in the 
Telco network operation (see section III B and e.g. 
[6]) will amplify the presented effects: Whereas 
today the Telco network energy consumption varies 
little over time (see Figure 4), load-adaptive mode 
will correlate it more strongly with the general 
91
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

demand curve and, thus, the price curve. The 
buffering effects are expected to increase in scale for 
such a scenario.  
• 
Furthermore, load-adaptive mode of the Telco 
network operation, turns the initially unresponsive 
Ptel
(0)(t) into a controllable entity. Thus, new options 
for stabilizing the Smart Grid arise.  
 
For a working real-time control strategy, the stochastic 
character of prices and the renewable energy grid feed has to 
be taken into account. Furthermore, the model has to be 
broken down to the individual operation of the different 
buffer elements.  
The principal argument of the presented work is that the 
energy elements integrated into the telecommunication 
carrier network may serve as a catalyst in Smart Grid 
evolution scenarios. As imperfect as sites and technology of 
today’s energy buffers may be, they provide a relevant 
starting point by their system-wide coverage.  
REFERENCES 
[1] IEEE Standard 2030 Guide for Smart Grid Interoperability of Energy 
Technology and Information Technology operation with the Electric 
Power System (EPS) and End-Use Applications and Loads, doc.: 
IEEE 802.15-09-0658-00. 
[2] Cisco Visual Networking Index: Forecast and Methodology, 2009–
2014. 
Cisco 
Systems, 
2010, 
Available: 
http://www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/
ns705/ns827/white_paper_c11-481360.pdf 
[3] Deutsche Telekom Laboratories, Internal Project Report ‚Smart Sub-
Grid, July 2010. 
[4] J. Cox, “Impact of Intermittency: How wind variablity could change 
the shape of the British and Irish electricity markets”, Pöyry Energy 
Consulting report, July 2009. 
[5] German Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology (BMWi) and  
German Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation 
and Nuclear Safety (BMU) (eds.), “Energy Concept for an 
Environmentally Sound, Reliable and Affordable Energy Supply”,  
Berlin, September 28, 2010. 
[6] C. Lange, A. Gladisch, “Energy Efficiency Limits of Load Adaptive 
Networks”, Proc. Optical Fiber Communication Conference and 
Exposition (OFC). San Diego (CA, USA), March 21–25, 2010, paper 
OWY2. 
[7] H. Lehmann, A. Gladisch and U. Bub, “Energy-Aware End-to-End 
ICT Production“, Proc. Going Green CARE INNOVATION 2010,  
Vienna, Austrian Society for Systems Engineering and Automation 
eds., November 8–11, 2010 
 
92
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

