SmallCAN - A Reliable, Low-Power and Low-Cost
Distributed Embedded System for Energy Efﬁcient
Building Automation
Harald Schrom, Tobias Michaels, Steffen Stein, Rolf Ernst
Institut f¨ur Datentechnik und Kommunikationsnetze
TU Braunschweig
Braunschweig, Germany
schrom|michaels|stein|ernst@ida.ing.tu-bs.de
Abstract—In this paper we propose a new reliable, low-
power and low-cost platform for a building automation system,
BAS, which is suitable to be used as a single platform for
all appliances of a building. Furthermore today’s platforms for
building automation do not focus on low-energy consumption
of the platform itself. The costs are also quite high and the
installation has limited ﬂexibility and needs extensive planning.
The proposed platform features low-power consumption, has a
reliable wired structure which is ﬂexible, simply structured and
can easily be extended. The low-power and low-cost approach
targets the wide spreading of smart buildings to maximize global
energy saving and to easily interface with a future smart grid.
The SmallCAN platform has shown during evaluation in our
demonstrator that it is able to fullﬁl all identiﬁed requirements
of a modern building automation system.
Index Terms—low-power; low-cost; building automation; em-
bedded systems; smart grid; platform;
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays up to 40 % of the overall european energy con-
sumption is used by buildings [1]. Since resources in general
and energy in particular are limited, different measures are
researched to lower the total energy consumption of buildings.
Today’s buildings are containing many energy consuming
appliances like air conditioning, heating, lighting, ﬁre detec-
tors, burglar alarm etc. and also energy generating appliances
start to enter the building sector for example solar panels or
small combined heat and power units. Usually every single
appliance is controlled separately. For example heatings often
use a dedicated temperature sensor measuring the outside
temperature and the temperature in the living room to control
the heating.
The logic separation of appliances does not take advantage
of a comprehensive control of all appliances regarding efﬁcient
energy usage. A trivial example would be to make the data of
burglar alarm sensors available to the heating. The heating
would then be able to check whether there are any open
windows before starting to try raising the room temperature.
One can think about many other examples how the logic
coupling of separate appliances of a building may boost the
energy efﬁciency of the particular building. Consequently it is
an obvious approach to use only one platform which controls
every appliance of the building. This single platform would be
aware of all the available data of the building and can control
the building appliances as energy efﬁcient as possible.
Furthermore a single platform will be able to easily provide
comprehensive energy usage or energy generation data in real-
time to the smart grid. A fast and broad reaction upon data
provided by the smart grid is also an advantage of a single
platform.
Another important parameter of a platform for building
automation is often overseen: the energy consumption of the
platform itself. Many of the current platforms are not energy
efﬁcient and do not scale well with respect to their own energy
comsumption. Additionally the overall cost of the available
platforms is quite high.
Therefore we propose a new platform for a building au-
tomations system which is able to control all appliances of a
building by providing a reliable communication network, has
a low power consumption and is designed of cheap standard
components.
We will begin with identifying the needed requirements of
a platform for building automation in the following section.
In section III we will compare current platforms for building
automation the identiﬁed requirements. Based on this compar-
ison and the requirements identiﬁed in section II we propose a
new platform which fulﬁls all of the mentioned requirements
in sections IV to VII. We will then describe a demonstrator
that we built to evaluate the new platform in section VIII.
After that we ﬁnish with our conclusion.
II. REQUIREMENTS
A platform for building automation which should be used
to control all appliances of a building and provide/receive data
to/from a smart grid has to fulﬁl several requirements to be
beneﬁcial for the energy efﬁciency and the general usability of
the building. Several different platforms have been developed
and/or proposed so far addressing the control of building
appliances. A comprehensive and detailed overview of current
platforms can be found in [2].
One of the main requirements of a single platform which
may be used for all possible appliances is high reliability.
13
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

This is needed to ensure a safe and secure operation over
several decades without causing dangerous conditions in case
of errors. Furthermore appliances like burglar alarm systems
or ﬁre detectors rely on a reliable communication network.
Another important requirement is a low power consumption.
The power consumption of the platform has to be as low
as possible to guarantee maximum energy savings without
spending to much energy in operating the platform itself.
Otherwise buildings equipped with a building automation
system may consume more energy in total, because operating
the system uses more energy than it saves by efﬁcient control
of the building’s appliances. This does also depend on the
size of the building and the number of installed appliances,
because a platform may scale bad with respect to power
consumption. Therefore the overall energy consumption of a
platform becomes a main factor for its success.
The overall cost of the platform, including component
and installation cost is last but not least important to make
the platform affordable for everyone to maximize the global
energy saving by installing a building automation system in
every building. Therefore a platform for building automation
is in general cost sensitive.
In the next section current platforms for building automation
will be compared against the identiﬁed requirements.
III. DIFFERENTIATION OF CURRENT BUILDING
AUTOMATION SYSTEMS
The reliability of the used communication network is the
main requirement for a platform which should be used for
all appliances of a building. Recent research has proven that
wireless systems do not fulﬁl this requirement since they tend
to be easily disturbed. Especially the often used IEEE802.15.4
Standard mainly used in wireless sensor networks for building
automations systems suffers heavily from IEEE802.11 data
communication resulting in a packet loss rate of up to 100 %,
[3], [4], [5], [6]. However, the ease of installation and the
ﬂexibility make a wireless network an interesting option for
appliances which do not require high reliability of the com-
munication network like light switches or temperature sensors.
Power-line communication is another option, if the focus
lies on ease of installation, especially for retro-ﬁtting build-
ings, but power-line communication can be interrupted by
devices without or defect noise suppression or by other devices
injecting noise into the low-voltage grid like light dimmers
or microwave ovens for example, [7], [8]. Up to 78 % packet
loss was observed in low-thoughput power-line channels under
adverse circumstances and even in optimal conﬁguration there
was still a remaining packet loss of 15 %, [9]. Therefore
power-line communication is similar to the wireless approach
with respect to reliability of the communication network.
Platforms fulﬁlling the reliability requirement by using
dedicated data-lines for a reliable communication network can
be divided in platforms, which power the nodes over bus,
also known as linkpower, and platforms where each node is
powered by a separate power supply. The power consumption,
which was identiﬁed as another important requirement, differs
Fig. 1.
SmallCAN System
between these two principles. Platforms powering each node
separately suffer from the fact that each node has to generate
its own low voltage supply including the inherent power loss
of the respective power supply. This leads to maximum power
consumption per node of 4.6 W [10].
Linkpowered platforms use one or more central power
supplies which supply all nodes. This approach leads to a
lower power consumption compared to separately powered
nodes, because the power supply standby losses only occur
once and not at every node. The operational losses can be
further reduced by the use of a highly efﬁcient and reliable
power supply. Furthermore there is an inherent need to design
energy efﬁcient nodes to be able to supply as many nodes
as possible. Typical nodes of such a platform for example are
supplied by one central 24 − 30 V power supply and consume
about 0.6 W each [11], [12].
Other existing approaches such as I2C or one-wire bus
are not designed for use in harsh building environment, not
dealing with potential differences, voltage losses on long lines,
auxiliary power for arbitrary sensors and actuators and high
efﬁcient throughput.
The different platforms also cause different installation
costs. Direct digital control-based platforms for example usu-
ally require a star topology instead of an easier to install
bus topology which raises the installation cost compared to
systems using bus topologies. Platforms allowing a completely
free topology cause the lowest installation costs, if only
dedicated wiring platforms are considered, since no detailled
planning is needed and the shortest path between two adjacent
nodes can always be taken.
In the next section we will propose and describe a new
reliable, low-power and cost-sensitive system for building
automation, called SmallCAN, since no current platform for
building automation fulﬁls all requirements satisfyingly.
IV. SMALLCAN SYSTEM OVERVIEW
We propose a system meeting the requirement for high
availability and reliability by using dedicated wiring for data
transmission together with a reliable communication protocol.
Furthermore the topology of the wired bus medium is not
restricted and completely decentralized to lower costs for
planning and installation. The low-power requirement is met
by powering all bus components with a single extra-low
voltage power supply over the bus line. This reduces the losses
which usually occur if every bus component needs to supply
14
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

itself. We also developed a sophisticated busnode layout with
respect to power consumption to be able to deal with the
restricted amount of power provided by the single power
supply. To also satisfy the cost sensitiveness we use as many
uniﬁed parts as possible in an exemplary implementation to
proof that a cheap mass production of all system components
is possible.
Thus we present a new distributed embedded system for
the control of building appliances which is able to completely
satisfy all of the identiﬁed requirements by implementing the
above named design decisions. The system which we present
in this paper is called SmallCAN, because the communication
protocol is mainly derived from the CAN speciﬁcation, [13].
Our system consists of:
• low-power bus-devices, which are build of a uniﬁed
busnode and a function-speciﬁc device adapter
• dedicated bus wiring for communication and power sup-
ply of the bus-devices
• a central power supply
• an optional gateway interfacing the SmallCAN to smart
grids or the internet for remote control
The bus-devices usually contain sensors, actuators or both
and are used to operate the building appliances forming
different applications such as room temperature or lighting
control for example. The topology of the dedicated bus wiring
connecting and supplying the bus nodes is completely free, see
ﬁg (1). Only one central power supply, backup power supply
possible, is used to power all bus-devices via the bus.
The following sections will describe in-depth the SmallCAN
system starting with the communication network.
V. COMMUNICATION
A. Physical Layer
The SmallCAN communication network uses a dedicated
star quad cable for data transmission and power supply. Two
wires are used for data transmission consisting of the data
line itself and the associated ground wire. The dataline is
driven to 23 V by the central power supply unit. 23 V is the
idle level of the dataline which also complies to the recessive
state of the bus. The busnodes are able to drive the voltage
level of the dataline low with a single transistor. The low-level
corresponds to the dominant state of the bus. With respect to
the binary-physical-allocation the high-voltage-level, recessive
state corresponds to 0 and the low-voltage-level, dominant
state corresponds to 1. The used datarate is 9.6 kbit/s. Several
measures, described in the next subssection, have been taken
to allow for an efﬁcient system operation by reducing the re-
quired telegram and data rate. The comparatively low datarate
allows for a long busline without the need of termination
resistors or restricted stub lengths, because the datarate enables
the voltage-level to settle before the next bit is transmitted.
Therefore the bus lines can be arranged in a completely free
topology. This hierarchy free topology enables adding nodes
easily to an existing system. The physical layer is designed
to operate up to 1000 nodes with an overall bus length of
1000 m.
The remaining two wires of the dedicated star quad cable
are used for the 30 V power supply of the busnodes. Due to the
low-power design of the busnodes all nodes can be powered
by the bus through a single power supply. This power supply is
a high quality mains adapter regardless of high costs, because
this is only needed once per system or segment. This central
power supply should be highly efﬁcient to ensure a low overall
system power consumption. The availability of the system can
be further improved by the optional use of a second redundant
mains adapter to prevent this central unit from being a single
point of failure. It is also possible to use battery buffering to be
protected against mains ﬂicker or temporal mains shutdown.
To maintain our target of a low-cost system, we decided
to not galvanically insulate data and power supply ground
which would otherwise lead to a higher component count and
therefore to higher cost.
B. Protocol
The implemented multi-master communication protocol
uses CSMA/CA for medium access which guarantees a very
efﬁcient use of the medium’s datarate. It uses short telegrams
with a ﬁxed length. This ﬁxed length can easily be handled in
software by the busnodes. This is needed to achieve a simple
software implementation of the protocol.
The developed protocol is in general very similar to the
widely-known CAN speciﬁcation which is used mainly in
automotive environments[14]. SmallCAN inherits most of the
properties of CAN to reach the same reliability. Therefore it
is also easily possible to port the system to using a normal
CAN-Bus, if needed.
A SmallCAN telegram consists of a unique 2 byte address
which identiﬁes the sender of the information and implies the
priority. This is followed by 2 bytes containing payload and
one CRC-byte for protection against transmission errors. The
termination is done by positive or negative acknowledgement
ﬂags respectively and an inter-frame space to separate the
telegrams. Each of the address, payload and CRC-bytes is
accompanied by separate start and stop bits to allow for
resynchronization of the receiving busnodes. These start and
stop bits are also a replacement for bitstufﬁng which is used
in CAN. Therefore frame errors can be recognized by missing
or wrong positioned start or stop bits respectively.
This telegram structure leads to a constant and short tele-
gram length of 69 bit including the minimum inter-frame
space of 11 bit. Every single data value is packed into the
payload of only one telegram leading to low latencies with
respect to measurement value or command transmission.
C. Communication Network Properties
The availability of the communication network is high due
to the use of a dedicated, wired communication medium.
The central, high reliable power supply powers all nodes via
the bus wire. An additional power supply can be installed
to compensate down times of the main power supply. These
15
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

power supplies can also be backed up by a USV to protect the
system against local mains breakdowns.
The high reliability is also based on the wired communica-
tion and the CRC protection against transmission errors. The
CRC allows the detection of corrupted data and the needed
telegram acknowledgement bits make it possible to signal data
corruption or loss by the receiving busnode, [15].
A wired communication network generally comes with
low error rates and a continuous availability thus enabling
low latencies. In combination with the CSMA/CA medium
access, timing guarantees can be calculated for all running
applications by doing a formal system analysis, [16]. Therefore
applications with mixed criticality may also run on this system.
The wired connection with integrated powering of the nodes
also enables easy maintainability because the status of every
node can be polled every time. The bus integrated power
supply has an advantage compared to battery powered or
energy harvesting devices, because it allows the use of sensors
and actuators without the restriction for extremely low-power
operation between actions. Thus high sampling rates of sensors
for example as well as safety and security related functions
which require fast condition monitoring are possible.
The robustness of the system follows from the conceptual
design being an independent system. For example there is no
personal computer needed to operate the system which would
be an unforeseeable maintenance factor.
The network performance is a result of a predictable timing
behaviour. Retransmissions in case of communication errors
are the main reason for timing problems in the system.
The low bus latency during medium access - implied by a
short data telegram length and supported by a lightweight
fast software implementation - in combination with the low
error rate on the wired medium reduces timing problems and
supports mixed criticality as described above. The data rate
of 9.6 kbit/s may seem low, but the efﬁcient protocol leads
to an effective telegram rate of up to 140 telegrams/s. In
BAS the telegram rate is more important than the sheer data
rate since the transmitted data or commands usually ﬁt into
one telegram, making the data rate a negligible parameter
compared to the telegram rate. Different measures may be
taken to further reduce the required telegram rate for the
respective applications and therefore use the available telegram
rate more efﬁciently. Common measures include: Event driven
message transmission, send-on-delta with sophisticated jitter
suppression, trafﬁc shaping and discarding outdated data prior
to transmission.
The following sections will further describe the structure of
the bus-devices regarding hard- and software.
VI. BUS-DEVICE
A. Hardware
A bus-device consists of two parts, a uniﬁed busnode and a
function-speciﬁc device adapter. The current busnode operates
with 20 V to 30 V. The average power consumption of the
bus-node itself is 0.060 W, the average power consumption
of a complete bus-device including sensors, relays or other
small actuator elements is 0.080 W. A busnode contains nearly
all of the electronic parts and the complete software for
bus communication and the device functionality. The device
adapter only implements a few components needed for the
specialised bus-device function, for example to interface a
special kind of sensor etc. The layout for a device-adapter
can be deviated from a set of templates and therefore usually
requires only small design efforts. At this stage the overall
power consumption of every bus-device has to be limited and
optimized by appropriate circuit design and power manage-
ment for the sensors and actuators. For cost and reliability
reasons the bus-devices use as few electronic components as
possible. A signiﬁcant amount of effort have been put into the
optimization of the busnode with respect to power, cost and
size. Only standard components are used which are available in
high quantities for low prizes. The central part of the busnode
is a PIC16F88-microcontroller which was chosen for its low-
power consumption and its predictable structure with respect to
timing. The only other active parts are a crystal and a voltage
regulator. The bus driver circuit consists only of a MOSFET
transistor and a resistive voltage divider.
Multiple measures have been taken to protect the nodes and
the bus in case of errors, such as over-voltage protection, short
circuit protection, and shut-off of the physical bus driver.
Primary common and cheap sensors and actuators are used
to be integrated in device adapters (e.g. relays, humidity
sensors, text displays). Sometimes it is necessary to interface
modules and third party devices even though they are more
expensive and less power efﬁcient. This is done by standard-
ized interfaces, such as RS232 or an ”0-10V” analog interface.
Devices of other domain speciﬁc bus systems are interfaced
as well to avoid the need for parallel bus cabling, especially
for new installations. The local integration of such domain
speciﬁc bus systems is done by a so called gateway device
adapter, e.g. for DALI, MBUS and MP-BUS. These gateway
device adapters are build similar to the normal bus-devices
including their low complexity and power consumption. Stand-
alone devices without dedicated bus connections have also to
be controlled by specialized device adapters, e.g. gas heaters
or electric meters. Because of the many possibilities of easy
direct interfacing on device level, it is possible to use the
presented system as a universal and holistic solution for all
appliances of a building.
B. Software
The software structure consists run time kernel, an interface
to local user functions and the user functions itself. The
OS handles the bus communication protocol and standard
functions such as I/O port operations and diagnostic functions.
The implemented OS has a small code base and is well tested.
The system also allows user functions which are in-system
programmable over the bus. These user functions can be
divided into two groups: hardware-related, hr, and non-
hardware-related, nhr, functions. The hr function is used to
control the hardware connected to the busnode or device
adapter. The nhr function can be used to implement logic
16
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

functions without being allowed to access hardware, for ex-
ample a controller coordinating the access to window blinds
and window openers. Each busnode may contain one hr and
one nhr function. The user functions are connected to the OS
by an interface which routes all calls of the OS to the user
functions.
C. Bus-Device Properties
A high availability of the hardware is reached by a robust
design and the reliability of the components itself. The number
of the used electronic parts was kept as low as possible
to reduce the probability of hardware failures. Furthermore
extra circuits to monitor power stages, etc, enable an online
surveillance of the hardware status to support fast response
times in case of severe hardware failures. Thus defective
busnodes can be easily located and exchanged fast.
The OS was kept as simple and small as possible. It was
tested under several different conditions and for a longer time
period to make sure it works reliable.
The costs of the bus-device are low because of the few
standard components and the small design effort for new
device-adapters. Especially the uniﬁed busnode uses a small
pcb which can be assembled by common SMEs.
As mentioned before the average power consumption of
only 0.080 W per bus-device is at least an order of magnitude
lower compared to the systems which are currently state of
the art and also fulﬁl the reliability requirements.
It is now possible to derive the system properties from the
detailled descriptions of the system components. This will be
done in the following section.
VII. SYSTEM PROPERTIES
By combining the described communication network with
the bus-devices and the central power supply we get a system
with the following general attributes:
• Highly available, because of the dedicated, wired com-
munication network and the high availability of the bus-
devices
• High reliability, because of the used robust protocol and
thoroughly designed bus-devices
• Low-cost, since uniﬁed bus-nodes are used with a low
component count and low part prizes
• Low-power, because of the central high efﬁcient power
supply and the careful considered part choice and layout
of the bus-devices
The robustness of the system follows from the conceptual
design of an independent system. The multi-master commu-
nication, the redundant power supply and the absence of
a central controlling unit avoids a single point of failure.
Especially there is no personal computer involved which
would be an unpredictable maintenance factor. The high signal
amplitudes were chosen to avoid problems with interferences.
All signals leaving or entering the bus-devices are protected
against damage by over-voltage etc.
Fig. 2.
Demonstrator: Future Workspace
The installation costs are split into the initial installation of
the wiring and the costs for later system extensions by adding
new bus-devices. The free topology allows the freedom to
install and expand the system at any time without any detailled
planning. Especially there is no need to route dedicated cables
between sensors and actuators, e.g. between light switches
and lights, because all nodes are wired in the same manner.
However the dedicated wiring makes retro-ﬁtting of an existing
building uncomfortable compared to systems using wireless or
power-line communication.
In summary the overall system costs are quite low compared
to the currently available systems. Furthermore the operation
costs are kept low, because of the energy efﬁcient design of
the system itself. Talking about several decades of operation
the energy consumption itself becomes one of the main factors
for the overall costs.
The busnodes offer sufﬁcient performance for intelligent
distributed controls. This enables a full exploitation of the
energy saving potential by enabling easy to conﬁgure rules
and functions as well as more complex algorithms.
The energy consumption of the overall system is the sum of
the used bus-devices, the loss on the communication lines and
the loss at the high efﬁcient main power supply. For a common
system in a family home a simple system may contain 25
bus-devices up to 250 bus-devices in total for a high-comfort
system covering all possible applicances. Inclusive all sensors
and actuators, excluding the 230 V devices like lights, motors,
etc., the simple system will need about 2.5 W. The high-
comfort system will only need about 20 W.
In the next section we describe a demonstrator which is
used to evaluate the presented system, before we conclude in
the last section.
VIII. DEMONSTRATOR
To be able to test and evaluate the above presented Small-
CAN system we decided to build a demonstrator. Therefore
we became partner of a local architectural research project in
Braunschweig called future:workspace [17].
The aim of this project is to transform a ﬂoor of a tower
building belonging to TU Braunschweig into the perfect
workspace of the future. This includes the energy efﬁcient use
17
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

Fig. 3.
Wirings looms and single wire
of several building appliances like air conditioning, heating,
lighting, etc. Therefore we installed our SmallCAN system
in one of the four ofﬁces of the future:workspace. About
100 m of bus-line and 93 busnodes were installed in total. The
installed system consists of many sensors for room and outside
temperature, temperatures inside the heating and air condition-
ing subsystems, humidity, brightness, windspeed, noiselevel,
etc and also switches and other possibilities to interact with
the system like LC-Displays for example. Furthermore several
nodes controlling actuators of the appliances were installed
like window blinds and electric window openers, lighting
control, power socket relays, waterpumps, etc.
The other three ofﬁces of the future:workspace were
equipped with a state of the art DDC system using Ethernet
for communication between the busnodes. All four ofﬁces
were conﬁgured to reach the same range of functions so that
both systems can be directly compared in a real application
environment.
Some advantages of the SmallCAN system were observed
immediately. The star-topology wiring loom of the DDC
system showed to be more complex and space-occupying com-
pared to the single bus-line of SmallCAN, see ﬁg 3. Material
usage is an important factor in terms of environment protection
and economical handling of materials. Additionally the ﬁre
load and cable conduits do affect the overall costs. Further-
more the overall power-consumption of the SmallCAN system
is only 9 W including an optional ARM-based Linux-gateway
for remote control over internet. The power consumption of
the DDC system is currently monitored. The SmallCAN shows
an average telegram rate of 8 telegrams/s in the current
conﬁguration which corresponds to an average busload of
5.7 % for a system consisting of 93 busnodes of the possible
1000 busnodes. Since the implemented control algorithms are
way above average in the demonstrator, this shows that the
choice of a low-datarate communication medium together with
an efﬁcient protocol and measures to keep the telegram rate
low is working well. Further measurements to characterize
SmallCAN like monitoring the packet loss rate and the busload
with varying control algorithms are currently conducted and
will be used to further improve the current platform or its
successor. Smart power sockets, based on the SmallCAN
platform, being able to measure and control the power usage
of 230 Volt devices will be added in future to further increase
the potential energy savings.
IX. CONCLUSION
The ﬁrst test results of the presented SmallCAN system are
promising and the system seems to fulﬁl all proposed require-
ments. It was proven that a platform for building automation
which provides all necessary functions can be built with an
exceptionally low-energy usage and without sacriﬁcing system
cost. Furthermore, due to the holistic approach to control every
building appliance with one platform, comprehensive data can
be sent and received to/from a smart grid. Future work will
contain a more detailed comparison and analysis of the energy
efﬁciency of the SmallCAN system and other BAS. Currently
a model of the timing behaviour of the uniﬁed bus-nodes
and the whole system is being build to be able to investigate
the SmallCAN system by methods of formal analysis. Also
porting the system to a more recent processor architecture is
planned.
REFERENCES
[1] DIRECTIVE 2002/91/EC, Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Commu-
nities, The European Parliament Std., 01 2003. [Online]. Available:
http://www.eebd.org/ﬁlelibrary/docs/Directive English Version.pdf
[2] W. Kastner, G. Neugschwandtner, S. Soucek, and H. Newmann, “Com-
munication systems for building automation and control,” Proceedings
of the IEEE, vol. 93, no. 6, pp. 1178 –1203, jun. 2005.
[3] A. Sikora and V. Groza, “Coexistence of ieee802.15.4 with other systems
in the 2.4 ghz-ism-band,” vol. 3, may. 2005, pp. 1786 –1791.
[4] S. Pollin, I. Tan, B. Hodge, C. Chun, and A. Bahai, “Harmful coexistence
between 802.15.4 and 802.11: A measurement-based study,” may. 2008,
pp. 1 –6.
[5] M. Petrova, L. Wu, P. Mahonen, and J. Riihijarvi, “Interference measure-
ments on performance degradation between colocated ieee 802.11g/n
and ieee 802.15.4 networks,” apr. 2007, pp. 93 –93.
[6] M.
Z.
n.
Zamalloa
and
B.
Krishnamachari,
“An
analysis
of
unreliability and asymmetry in low-power wireless links,” ACM
Trans. Sen. Netw., vol. 3, June 2007. [Online]. Available: http:
//doi.acm.org/10.1145/1240226.1240227
[7] S. Bolognani, L. Peretti, L. Sgarbossa, and M. Zigliotto, “Improvements
in power line communication reliability for electric drives by random
pwm techniques,” in IEEE Industrial Electronics, IECON 2006 - 32nd
Annual Conference on, 2006, pp. 2307 –2312.
[8] F. Canete, J. Cortes, L. Diez, and J. Entrambasaguas, “Modeling and
evaluation of the indoor power line transmission medium,” Communi-
cations Magazine, IEEE, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 41 – 47, 2003.
[9] Y.-J. Lin and H. Latchman, “On the effects of maximum transmission
unit in power line communication networks,” in Power Line Commu-
nications and Its Applications, 2007. ISPLC ’07. IEEE International
Symposium on, 2007, pp. 511 –516.
[10] Busch-Powernet EIB Jalousie-/Serienaktor 6972 AG-102, Busch-Jaeger
Elektro GmbH, 2010.
[11] HS485 D, ELV AG, 2010.
[12] Siemens, KNX bus, 2010.
[13] ISO 11898, ISO Std.
[14] CAN Speciﬁcation Version 2.0b, Robert Bosch GmbH Std.
[15] J. Wolf and R. I. Blakeney, “An exact evaluation of the probability of
undetected error for certain shortened binary crc codes,” in 21st Century
Military Communications - What’s Possible?, vol. 1, October 1988, pp.
287 – 292.
[16] R. Henia, A. Hamann, M. Jersak, R. Racu, K. Richter, and R. Ernst,
“System level performance analysis - the symta/s approach,” IEE Pro-
ceedings Computers and Digital Techniques, vol. 152(2), pp. 148–166,
2005.
[17] C. Bremer, “future:workspace - moderne arbeitswelt an der tu braun-
schweig,” xia intelligente architektur, Zeitschrift f¨ur Architektur und
Technik, vol. 60, pp. 48–51, 2007.
18
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

