 
The Implementation of the Automatic Dispatching System (ADS) to Support the 
Smart Grid Pilot Project for Distribution Grid Improvement in Sumba Island 
 
 
Abstract — In order to minimize the oil fuel consumption, 
in its power generation, PLN (Perusahaan Listrik Negara) as 
an electric state company has promoting a de-dieselization 
program which either integrated PV and existing diesel into 
Hybrid or install PV in the isolated system, to get optimum 
performance and reliability. However, the intermittent 
characteristic of PV should be considered since this would 
impact the frequency instability of the network system itself. 
To maintain the stability of the system, new system 
operations should be adopted. Thus, ADS (Automatic 
Dispatching System) is introduced to compensate the 
fluctuation sources from PV. Before ADS was implemented, 
dispatch combination between Diesel Generator (DG), and 
Photovoltaic (PV) has triggered unreliable supply since there 
is no load control center as well as the insufficient 
communication channel available.  Implementing ADS, this 
allows PLN to minimize fuel consumption, and develop the 
first operational Smart Grid system. Subsequently, ADS has 
proven capable of maintaining frequency stability in the 
system that contains intermittent power generation. Based 
on the simulation study, and actual measurement testing, it 
can maintain the stability frequency within in its normal 
range (49,5 < Hz < 50,5). 
Keywords — Automatic Dispatching System, Diesel 
Generations, Photovoltaic, Smart Grid system  
I. INTRODUCTION  
In recent years, PV based generating systems have 
been widely implemented into distribution systems due to 
environmental concerns. VRE (Variable Renewable 
Energy), such as PV and wind energy may bring additional 
reliability benefits to the system, as they can be operated 
along with the DG units, thereby minimizing customer 
interruptions, in case of system emergencies [9]. However, 
PV power output is not constant and tends to fluctuate 
depending on weather conditions. This fluctuating power 
causes frequency deviations and reduction in reliability of 
the isolated power utility or microgrid when large output 
power from several PV systems is penetrated in the utility 
[8]. On the other hand, the rising energy needs could not 
be fulfilled by the current weak grid supplied by the 
majority generation based on DG [7]. However, the 
intermittent characteristic of PV has major concern to be 
solved especially in isolated grid. Meanwhile, there are 
hundreds of units of DG that need either to get them 
hybridized with VRE or interconnect existing DG and 
VRE altogether in the system.  
To prepare for the reliable system operation in the 
mentioned program above, pilot project in Sumba Island 
can be discussed since it has VRE penetration among most 
of the diesel generation. Thus, on grid PV system is 
currently being considered as an attractive, and clean 
option for isolated grid operations. This application is a 
means to reduce diesel fuel consumption. VRE that 
integrated with DG systems are currently being considered 
as an economic, and clean option for isolated microgrids, 
to offset oil fuel consumption by shifting generation from 
existing units; However, the security and stability of the 
system are a challenge from the increasing penetration 
VRE [6]. Meanwhile, Indonesia adopted European 
countries use electric frequency 50 Hz. If this electric 
frequency in the power network is not constant, the 
electrical equipment connected to it would have potential 
to get damage. So, the frequency needs to be maintained in 
a tolerable range. To keep this frequency stable and 
constant, it needs an automatic control scheme that can 
identify changes in frequency, then mitigate those changes 
by choosing which dispatch from DG has the lowest 
economical losses, which is known as the Automatic 
Dispatching System (ADS) [10].   
The ADS was installed at the several DG units in 
eastern grid of Sumba Island since it is interconnected to 
the 1 MWp installed capacity of solar PV. Consequently, 
an isolated grid such as Sumba system has a potential risk 
of frequency instability. It is because the electricity sources 
are supplied by PV with intermittent characteristics. Under 
such conditions, implementing an efficient secondary 
controller through load frequency control (LFC) plays an 
important role in restoring power system stability [3].  
 
 
Figure 1. Sumba distribution grid and its planning expansion 
 Sumba island is in the southern part of Indonesia, 
which has population more than 250 thousand with the 
electricity demand less than 7 MW. Meanwhile, installed 
Dimas Bangun Fiddiansyah  
Digital Management Division  
PT PLN Head Office   
Jakarta, Indonesia 
email : dimas.bangun@pln.co.id 
Dr. Hanny Benchmark 
USAID SINAR  
Jakarta, Indonesia 
email : 
hanny.berchmans@tetratech.com 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

capacity of the total generation close to 16 MW, which 
majority 70 % supplied by diesel generation, and the 
others sourced from renewable energy, such as hydro, 
biomass and PV as indicated in Figure 1. 
The load profile in Sumba has typical load profile 
characteristic which has low load in the daytime and 
increasing load demand in the evening. The Majority of 
typical load on the PLN East Sumba network is of a 
residential type with the characteristics of time in Figure 2. 
The peak-load 6.8 MW, and during, the daytime load, has 
parallel operation with the maximum PV generation 
week’s cycle, which fluctuates between 3,7 MW – 4,8 
MW. 
 
Figure 2. Typical daily load profile in Sumba Island 
 
 
 
Figure 3. PV Output Power 
 
Currently, Sumba Island has two main grids, eastern and 
western grid which the majority supply based on diesel 
fuel generation. East grid has PV generation with the 
installed capacity 1 MWp, which now represent 10 % of 
the capacity. Meanwhile, most of the diesel generations 
are operating in load following mode with manual 
dispatching. In addition to diesel, the Sumba electricity 
network is supplied with a Hambapraing PV with a 
capacity of 1 MWp which the output is varies with time 
movement as shown in Figure 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 1. POWER GENERATION COMPOSITION IN SUMBA 
 
 
 
  
 
 In TABLE 1 above, it can be seen that the PLN’s DGs 
available on the isolated grid will be given the ability to 
respond to changes in load. In most cases, PLN’s DG will 
be used to provide peak loads. PLN’s generators can work 
with droop governor or with the isochronous governor. 
Thus, the isochronous governor regulates the valve/gate of 
the turbine to carry the frequency return to its nominal 
value [12]. So, the system with isochronous governor has 
the capability to restore the system frequency to 50 Hz 
after instability occurs. Then, the DG that works 
isochronous will be connected to ADS [3].  
The objective of this paper is to evaluate the system 
performance of distribution grid using ADS and its impact 
in managing power quality and maintaining the penetration 
level of PV operation.  
This paper is organized as follows, Section II presents 
ADS algorithm and control basic design of ADS which 
include simulation study of frequency path with 
combination of Droop and Isochronous governor. Section 
III describes ADS configuration that applied in the 
distribution grid. It also presents the development phase 
for smart grid and advantages using ADS in an isolated 
grid. Then, the output results of ADS installation are 
reported in Section IV, including the differences before 
and after ADS implementation based on the stability 
system performances. 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

II. 
METHOD  
  In this paper, ADS Algorithm is proposed as 
modeling to represent conceptual design of ADS used in 
the system. Hence, the model is implementing in the actual 
condition to justify whether the design is applicable and 
contribute benefit to the power quality in the system. In 
this study, ADS can be modeled by making an isochronous 
governor model that is connected to the PLN’s generator in 
the system as showed in Figure 4. Then, the dynamic 
model of the governor is simulated using a simulation tool 
[3]. 
 
Figure 4. Control Basic Architecture Design of the ADS System 
 
ADS is provided with an algorithm to turn the 
isochronous generator off and on when the load is either 
too low or too high. Hence, the generator needs to be 
switched off when the load is low because low loading will 
impact in inefficient energy conversion processes in its. 
So, the generator needs to be switched on when the load is 
getting high since the load will not get sufficient sources. 
This would lead to the collapse of the system frequency 
[3]. 
The proposed algorithm can be seen in the flow chart 
in Figure 5. Referring to table 1, the PLN has largest 
generator, DTG Cummins 1.2 MW, will be the generator 
with the most priority to continue running. Its priority to be 
switched on is ordered by the magnitude of its rating. 
Subsequently, the generator that has the lowest capacity, 
DTG Deutz BA 3 250 kW, will be the generator option 
with the most priority to be switched off. Hence, the lower 
the DG rating, the more frequently it will be either 
switched on or off. The DG with the largest installed 
capacity is prioritized to be switched off because if it is 
changed prioritized to turn it on and off, there would be a 
greater frequency swing than if the PLN DTG with the 
smallest rating is often turned on and off [3]. 
In general, ADS has automatically decided which 
generations have to be switched on, synchronized, loaded 
or stopped. Consequently, this solution can handle any 
type of power generation technology, as well as can be 
applied to any grid in any size.  Meanwhile, solar PV and 
the diesel plant are developed at Kambajawa Distribution 
Station. 
 
Figure 5. Algorithm of ADS  
 
 Current ADS reflects Multiple Generator status 
(on/off, synchronized or disconnect) and  Multiple 
generator 
dispatch. 
Hence, 
ADS 
send 
power 
instruction,  not just control signal. Thus, it reads the 
status of the grid and the generations in real-time 
instantaneously, and automatically instructs the diesel 
generations to dispatch certain actual power to stabilize 
the frequency, while at the same time, it maintain 
generations in operation within its optimal power 
settings. 
Based on the simulation carried out by [3], the use 
case of 9 unit PLN’s DG with primary controller, or 
Droop Governor, and 3 units with Isochronous 
governor is simulated to verify the output frequency 
within its in normal range (49,5 s.d 50,5 Hz). As shown 
in Figure 6 below, the simulation study indicated that 
frequency trajectory from the interconnection of Unit 
PLN’s DG with Droop Governor and Unit PLN’s DG 
with Isochronous Governor. The blue chart indicated 
Droop 5% with delay governor 20 s, while orange one 
showed Droop1,6% with delay 60 seconds. 
 
 
Figure 6. Frequency path with combination of Droop and  
Isochronous governor 
 
Using ADS is expected that the isolated grid 
frequency can be adjusted in the tolerable range, 
without the need to implement an energy storage 
system [3].      
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

III. ADS CONFIGURATION AND ITS PROPOSED DESIGN IN 
THE DISTRIBUTION GRID 
Automated dispatching control system (ADS) is a 
control system tool which has function to monitor the 
system of the load flow in power network from various 
power generation types whether conventional and variable 
renewable energy, thus it capable to enter the electricity 
and energy market, as well as to accommodate the energy 
mixed. ADS is used to manage the various power supply 
characteristics capable of meeting the fluctuation of their 
load demands. On the other hand, ADS will be the flexible 
solution as the demand response in this distribution grid. 
ADS have been widely implemented in any system 
voltage level system whether in medium voltages or high 
voltages. 
Meanwhile, 
the 
important 
role 
in 
the 
configuration of ADS, as the main direction of control 
system 
development, 
was 
the 
formation 
and 
implementation 
of 
SCADA, 
which 
collaborates 
information about the processes and centralize control. 
Thus, ADS is a type of automated process control which 
can control any type of power generation roles in the grid 
[2].  
There are several methods that can be applied to 
improve Grid quality in Sumba system : implement ADS 
over East grid gensets, interconnect both grids (east and 
west grid) through high voltages lines, implement ADS 
over west grid power generation once upgraded, and 
develop the first operational smart grid power management 
[1]. 
 
 
Figure 7. Conceptual Layout of Proposed System Components 
 
Figure 7 describes the conceptual layout of the system. 
Depending on model, grid analyzer can read the grid 
from the LV bus (option 1) or from a consumer type 
step down transformer on the main HV outcome 
(option 2). Thus, the PLC can be replaced by a full size 
computer or a laptop computer, while GSM modems or 
more complex telecoms can be implemented for 
remote management and/or integrate with an active 
solar 
SCADA. 
Meanwhile, 
there 
are 
basic 
requirements to be implemented for preliminary phase 
in smart grid, which consists of [1] : 
1. All flexible generators to be operated exclusively 
in full range load following mode, with minimum 
operation setting defined at 30% or lower and 
maximum operation setting defined at 80% 
2. All flexible generators to have ECU’s, electronic 
governors and Modbus and, optionally, TCP/IP 
protocols. Removal or redefinition of the now 
obsolete grid KPI of SFC; to be substituted by the 
actual international standard of liters per kWh 
delivered 
3. Integrate them in the ADS/AGC system for 
automatic and sequential dispatching of the 
generators according to grid load behavior. 
 
Implementation Phase for Diesel Reduction 
strategy and smart grid Introduction in Sumba Island as 
illustrated in Figure 8 was the upcoming flexibility 
solution for distribution grid improvement in Sumba 
Island since high grid losses and fuel consumption 
dominated the operational system, which disrupt the 
power quality and reliability of electricity sources to 
the customers [1].   
 
Figure 8. Pilot project outline for Diesel Reduction and PV integration 
 
The development for smart grid can be executed by 
implementing the following systematic method as 
mentioned [1] : 
1. Grid impact study, by doing the simulation study and 
modeling of the power system in existing Sumba grid 
that combined with the proposed generations, would 
be obtained the load flow analysis and the other 
electric output parameters.    
2. Sizing and design of diesel buffering engine/engines, 
would be required to estimate the appropriate diesel 
capacity that are feasible to integrate with VRE. 
Hence, diesel sizing also compulsory to determine the 
ramping rate in the system 
3. All diesel should be equipped with ECU/Modbus 
controls, and operated in stepped dispatching 
procedure 
4. Sizing Solar PV up to 60% of diesel, one way to 
implement the high level penetration by integrating 
the PV share which is higher than diesel generation. 
This can be combined by applying ADS, as the hybrid 
controller unit that has function to control the flexible 
operation mode between PV and diesel. Subsequently, 
the ADS would match the synchronization between 
generation sources and the load demand.  
5. Data acquisition units in all grid key nodes, data 
acquisition as the controlling and monitoring unit can 
be applied to assist the communication and remote 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

surveillance to ensure the smooth operation in the 
system.  
  
Consequently, there are some advantages of using 
ADS in the isolated grids. During the test, the ADS has 
capable to control the grid frequency at stable rate by 
managing the operation of Kambajawa diesel power 
plant to meet the variability of power load/demand as 
well as the variability of 1 MWp solar PV power plant 
output. Thus, PLN will continue to observe the 
situation, especially during critical hours (peak hours 
or high ramping rate hours) to ensure whether the 
controllers and the generation power system balance 
power supply and power load if a nearby 1 MWp solar 
PV power plant supplies electricity intermittently due 
to weather condition [2].  
In addition, ADS operation mode and its dispatch 
would not only guarantee the power quality and grid 
stability, but also it will support the induced load 
reduction from the Solar PV and other VRE that would 
be installed in the future. By allowing PLN to 
capitalize on the fuel usage savings and the cost spin-
down effect of the incorporation of continuously lower 
cost VRE generation, which subsequently would lower 
PLN’s operational cost as well as increase corporate 
profits. 
 
IV. OUTPUT RESULTS 
 
The main issue in the distribution grid before 
ADS installation was the difficulty to maintain 
frequency stability in East Grid when the intermittency 
condition occurred as the result of fluctuation of output 
operation from the PV due to the PV soothing and solar 
irradiance changing. 
 
 
Figure 9. Typical electricity production of the Solar PV 1 MWp in 
East Sumba during cloud events. 
 
The High Ramping Rate triggered the sudden changing 
of power frequency, which can impact the power 
quality and stability in distribution grids which is 
implied in Figure 9 where the PV output varied during 
cloud events. 
 
There are preexisting condition before ADS 
integrated in the system, such as manual dispatching 
and wider range of grid frequency operation, constant 
power spillage by overpowering the grid, high thermal 
losses, and high-power leaking to neutral, high 
instability of the grid during operation hours of PV, 
and Black out/feeder disconnection due to under 
frequency. 
 
Figure 10 The proposed of ADS configuration in distribution grid 
 
ADS system can control the complex mini grid operation 
that consist of PV and diesel generation as implied in 
Figure10, which is possible to integrate between many 
renewable energy sources with diesel generation by 
maintaining stable power quality with high efficiency and 
security level [1]. 
 
 
Figure 11. Typical electricity production as the impact of the Solar PV’s 
operation 
 
Figure 12. Typical electricity production in the system, before and after 
ADS installation 
 
Before ADS 
After ADS Implementation 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
  The graph displayed in figure 11 and 12 above 
described that ADS has primary roles to maintain the 
frequency stability in its nominal ranges by adjusting 
mechanical power in the power generations. The fig 
implied that before ADS installation, the frequency 
fluctuated above the tolerable limit. After ADS installation 
is applied, the frequency can be maintained within normal 
range (49,5<Hz<50,5). Yet, ADS utilization offers flexible 
operation since main devices can be modified as needed, 
as well as modifying its control algorithms in a good 
manner.  Subsequently, the outcome emerges after ADS 
Installation which referring to the data diagram obtained 
that frequency system fluctuation is better adjusted within 
the nominal required range compared with the previous 
condition. In this use case, ADS can support distribution 
grid improvement by maintaining the stability of frequency 
in the system.  
 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS  
 
1. The ADS implementation is possible to raise smart 
grid’s operational performance, and provide reliability 
as well as quality power to their consumers, while 
minimizing the operation cost, which can be achieved 
by embracing the ADS installation as the first step to 
improve the power quality, thus minimizing losses in 
the distribution grid.  
2. The development urgency of ADS in Sumba considers    
high generation cost, flexibility of system operation, 
and the potency of power factor correction. On other 
hand, ADS has proven capable of maintaining 
frequency stability in the system that contains 
intermittent power generation. Both the simulation, 
and actual measurement testing, it can maintain the 
stability 
frequency 
within 
normal 
range 
(49,5<Hz<50,5) 
3. ADS implementation and grid monitoring system can 
be considered as the main part in integrating variable 
renewable energy into small power network, not only 
to compensate the fluctuations characteristics of VRE, 
but also to maintain grid stability and prevent the grid 
operations 
from 
abnormalities, 
such 
as 
over 
frequency, phase imbalance and frequency hunting.    
4. The success of ADS installation, testing and operation 
boosted PLN’s understanding and confidence to 
replicate the innovation to increase VRE integration in 
the upcoming de-dieselization program. 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
 
The author would like to express the gratitude to 
the joint working team between PLN and USAID 
ICED team who have great effort to develop and 
configure ADS implementation project in Sumba 
Island. Within the period 2018-2019. Subsequently, 
the ADS project obtained full support from the US 
Government. Thus, this smart grid project would be 
typical of pilot project in the future in deploying 
sustainability of renewable energy since this project 
can be potential solution to be expanded in de-
dieselization program into more affordable electricity 
access 
as 
well 
as 
promoting 
clean 
energy 
environment.   
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] USAID - ICED II Team: 'The Summary of Grid 
Improvement in Kupang and Sumba ', May 2018, pp. 
1–21 
[2] USAID - ICED II Team: “Development of Automatic 
Dispatch Controller System and  Grid Monitoring for 
East Sumba Grid ', Sharing Presentation, May 2019, 
pp. 1–46 
[3] Bangun Primanta Holand, Haryanto Nanang “Design 
of Automatic Dispacth for Control System For 
Frequency Control of Isolated Electrical Grid” School 
of Electrical Engineering and Informatics, Institut 
Teknologi Bandung, Master Thesis, 2021 
[4] T. Reber, K. Burman and B. Hirsch, "Sustainable 
Energy for Remote Indonesian Grids: Strategies to 
Accelerate Nationwide Deployment," Department of 
Energy 
by 
the 
National 
Renewable 
Energy 
Laboratory (NREL), Denver West Parkway, CO, 
2016. 
[5] H. Kanchev, F. Colas, V. Lazarov and B. Francois, 
"Emission Reduction and Economical Optimization 
of 
an 
Urban 
Microgrid 
Operation 
Including 
Dispatched PV-Based Active Generators," IEEE 
Transactions On Sustainable Energy, vol. 5, no.4, pp. 
1397-1405, October 2014. 
[6] W. Mendieta and C. A. Canizares, "Primary 
Frequency Control inIsolated Microgrids using 
Thermostatically 
Controllable 
Loads, 
"IEEE 
Transactions On Smart Grid, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1-13, 
2020. 
[7] A. Veldhuis and A. Reinders, "Potential and Cost-
Effectiveness of OffGrid PV Systems in Indonesia," 
in 2014 IEEE 40th Photovoltaic Specialist Conference 
(PVSC), 2014 
[8] M. Datta, T. Senjyu, A. Yona, T. Funabashi and C.-
H. Kim, "A Coordinated Control Method for 
Leveling PV Output Power Fluctuations of PV–
Diesel Hybrid Systems Connected to Isolated Power 
Utility," IEEE Transactions On Energy Conversion, 
vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 153-162, March 2009 
[9] K. Zou, A. P. Agalgaonkar, K. M. Muttaqi and S. 
Perera, "An Analytical Approach for Reliability 
Evaluation," IEEE Transactions On Smart Grid, vol. 
V, no. 6, pp. 2657-2665, 2014. 
[10] Johansson, Thomas & Phatwardhan, Anand and 
Nakicenovic, "Global Energy Assessment: Toward A 
Sustainable Future, Cambridge University Press, 
2012 
[11] Bangun Primanta Holand, “Automatic Dispacth for 
Control System Design” School of Electrical 
Engineering and Informatics, Institut Teknologi 
Bandung, Poster, 2020 
[12] P. Kundur, Power System Stability and Control, 
McGraw-Hill, 1994 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

