Electric Vehicles Charging Infrastructure Integration Into The Electric Grid 
Considering The Net Benefits To Consumers 
Vivian Sultan, Hind Bitar, Ahmed Alzahrani, and Brian Hilton 
Claremont Graduate University CISAT 
Claremont, USA 
e-mail: Vivian.Sultan@cgu.edu 
 
Abstract—The Electric Vehicle (EV) market is one of the most 
rapidly changing and fastest growing high-tech sectors in the 
United States. The relatively small number of large-scale 
public vehicle-charging stations makes recharging electric 
vehicles problematic, if not impossible at times. This study 
aims at addressing “How to properly integrate EV charging 
infrastructure into the electricity system and deliver net 
benefits to the consumers?” To answer the research question, 
we have built a prototype of Geographic Decision Support 
Systems (GDSS), which is an elegant, interesting, and novel 
solution, to demonstrate how an interactive, computer-based 
system can assist in decision-making considering the net 
benefits to consumers and the potential benefits to the grid. 
The proposed solution provides evidence that GIS can play an 
integral role in the problem domain.  
Keywords-dispatchable grid resource; battery range; V2G 
technology  
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The Electric Vehicle (EV) market is one of the most 
rapidly changing and fastest growing high-tech sectors in 
the United States. According to some recent estimates from 
the United States Department of Energy’s Clean Cities 
program [1], the U.S. has approximately 482,000 EVs, 
14,000 public charging stations, and 36,000 charging 
outlets. The U.S. market currently has over 20 electric 
vehicle models from 12 manufacturers. To increase the 
adoption and use of plug-in electric vehicles, President 
Obama announced the “EV Everywhere Challenge” in 2012 
as a part of the Energy Department’s Clean Energy Grand 
Challenges. It aims “to make electric vehicles more 
affordable and convenient to own and drive than today’s 
gasoline-powered vehicles within the next 10 years.” [2]. 
Similarly, a Bloomberg New Energy Finance report [3] 
suggests that the sale of electric vehicles will hit almost 90 
times the equivalent figure for 2015 by 2040. The report 
also highlights that, by year 2022, electric vehicles will cost 
the same as their gasoline-driven equivalents, the point from 
where the sale of EVs will takeoff. California’s target is to 
have 1.5 million EVs on the road by 2025, which is more 
than 600% increase over the roughly 200,000 EVs it has 
today [4]. According to Trabish [5], EV sales have already 
outperformed infrastructure growth, which is a problem that 
is expected to increase with the skyward trend of the EV 
sales.  
The relatively small number of large-scale public 
vehicle-charging stations makes recharging electric vehicles 
problematic, if not impossible at times. Supporting 
California’s target to have 1.5 million EVs on the road by 
2025, a rapid expansion of charging infrastructure (between 
150,000 and 750,000 non-home charging stations) is needed 
[6]. Faster adoption of EVs will require flexibility in 
charging. Various analyses suggest that more charging 
stations are necessary to accommodate consumer demand 
for convenient electric vehicle recharging but the question is 
where these charging stations should be located. Decisions 
on making more charging stations are not as simple as 
simply opening more stations. The reason is that an electric 
charge depends on and impacts the overall electric grid in a 
region. Charging an electric vehicle is, in some instances, 
the equivalent of adding three houses to the grid and the 
electric grid is not ready for these stratospheric spikes in 
power demand [7]. Utilities need to keep a close eye on the 
grid constraints as they plan EV charging stations 
infrastructure in order to avoid grid reliability problems, 
power outages, and other unplanned costs that might occur 
due to peak demand influences and the grid overload. 
According to SDG&E calculations, if California’s targets by 
2025 (1.5 million EVs) are all gotten charged during peak 
times, it could add almost 10,000 MW of new peak load to 
the existing 64,000 MW load on California’s grid [6].  
An additional point is that deploying networks of EV 
charging stations can stabilize and bring benefits to the grid 
in locations where there is excess power. Looking at 
possible benefits and the new electricity grid of the future, 
EV charging can absorb mid-day solar over-generation and 
alleviate wind curtailment at night. Charging EVs when 
non-dispatchable assets like solar and wind generators are 
producing more energy than the electricity system can help 
flatten out the duck curve of demand and reduce the extent 
to which supply suddenly escalates. All of these 
characteristics reduce system costs, benefit ratepayers, and 
improve the profitability of generators [6].  
Considering the grid capacity constraints, implications of 
EV charging if it is not appropriately incorporated into the 
electricity 
system, 
and 
the 
potential 
benefits 
of 
infrastructure planning, this paper addresses the research 
question: “How to properly integrate EV charging 
infrastructure into the electricity system and deliver net 
benefits to the consumers?” Previous literature showed 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-556-2
ENERGY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

insufficient attempts by researchers to provide solutions that 
can assist in decision-making with respect to this research 
question. The existing research was developed bearing in 
mind only the net benefits to EV owners while neglecting 
the electric circuit capacity constraints and the impact of the 
EV charging infrastructure on the electric grid.  
The objective of this research is to build a Geographic 
Decision Support Systems (GDSS) prototype, which is an 
elegant, interesting, and novel solution to assist in the 
placement of electric vehicles charging stations. The goal is 
to demonstrate an interactive, computer-based system to 
assist in decision-making considering the net benefits to 
consumers and the potential benefits to the grid.  
This research paper is based on the process steps in 
Takeda, et. al.’s design cycle to create the artifact/solution 
[8]. This cycle has five main steps, which are the awareness 
of the problem, suggestion, development, evaluation, and 
conclusion. The awareness of the problem phase has been 
indicated as mentioned above in the introduction and 
problem definition section. The suggestion phase is the 
decisions that have been made to develop the prototype to 
assist in the placement of electric vehicles public charging 
stations. In Section 2, we indicated the steps taken to 
develop and create the prototype considering some factors 
that will impact decision-making; in Section 3, we analyzed 
the prototype and wrote our findings; in Section 4, we 
explained the evaluation section of the paper; in Section 5 
and 6, we highlighted the limitations, future work, and 
conclusion. 
II. 
ARTIFACT: GDSS PROTOTYPE  
This study proposes a GDSS solution to assist in the 
placement of EV public charging stations as shown in 
Figure 1. A GDSS model can aid in EV charging stations 
location choices and provide actionable information for 
utilities, state-level decision-makers, and other stakeholders 
who are concerned about the EV integration as a 
dispatchable grid resource (a resource for which its power 
output can be adjusted, turned on or off at the request of the 
power grid operators). Though a GDSS can provide a 
solution to address the placement of all types (levels) of EV 
public charging infrastructure, we chose to only focus on 
level 2 EV public charging stations as we are building the 
prototype for illustration purposes.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. GDSS Prototype For Placement Of Electric Vehicle Charging 
Stations 
The factors that we have considered and used are safety, 
number of EV in the area, exploiting excess power, grid 
capacity, convenience, and accessibility. We identified these 
factors as follows:  
1) Security: safety assessment based crime rate [9]. 
2) Number of EV in the area: total count of vehicles 
that can be plugged into an electric power source to 
charge the battery, which is the sum of battery 
electric vehicles (BEVs) and Plug-In Hybrid 
electric vehicles (PHEVs) [10]. 
3) Exploiting excess power: locations with potential 
excess solar and/or wind generation [11]).  
4) Grid capacity: Load capacity of electric circuits 
determined by the maximum load a circuit can 
handle safely without overheating. The minimum 
requirement of Load capacity is 12 kilovolts 
modern circuit ([11]; [12]). 
5) Convenience: Anything that saves or simplifies 
work, adds to one's ease or comfort, which is short 
distance and comfortable place to spend time. For 
example, destination location for work and/or 
home ([13]; [14]). 
6) Accessibility: the maximum and the minimum 
distance that EV owners are willing to walk from 
and to charging station. The maximum walk is 0.5 
mile [9]. 
A. Data Selection and Acquisition  
1) Crime Index Data: LA County Portal is the data 
source for the 2016 crime index data. The LA 
County crime index database is available at [15].  
2) Parking Lot boundaries Data: LA County GIS Data 
Portal is the data source for 2014 dataset which 
contains the boundaries of the parking lots in the 
County of LA 5000 square feet and larger for 
commercial, industrial, and government properties. 
The database is available at [16]. 
3) Southern California Edison (SCE)’s Distributed 
Energy Resources interconnection Map (DERiM) 
Capacity Analysis Data: SCE’s DERiM includes 
power electric lines and the capacity analysis in 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-556-2
ENERGY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

kilowatts by circuit line. The data is retrieved from 
DERiM web map at [17].  
4) Solar Parcel Data: LA County is the data source for 
the solar parcel data. The link to LA County solar 
parcel database is available at [18].  LA County solar 
map provides key data elements such as: total roof 
area and area suitable for solar, potential solar 
system size, solar potential annual output, and 
potential cost savings.  
B. Data Preparation Steps 
1) Data was extracted and loaded into ArcMap to show 
four map layers. The first layer showed LA county 
solar data by parcel while the other layers showed 
the crime index, SCE electric circuit capacity by 
circuit line and the targeted parking lots.  
2) The targeted parking lot types were suggested by 
researchers as shown in Table 1 to meet the 
specification of the convenience factor for level 2 
EV public charging stations. Similarly, walking 
distance from the potential targeted locations were 
set to 500 feet to meet the requirement of the 
accessibility factor.   
3) According to Sultan et al. [19], the solar rooftop’s 
potential electricity output was calculated for each 
parcel by multiplying the rooftop’s solar panel area, 
the solar panel yield, the annual average solar 
radiation on tilted panels (constant for LA county, 
equal to 2018.45), and the solar system’s 
performance ratio which is the coefficient for losses 
(used default value = 0.75). Two fields were added 
in ArcMap attribute table to perform these 
calculations. 
Considering 
the 
V2G 
technology/exploiting excess power factor, these 
calculations are required to predict areas with 
potential 
solar 
excess 
generation 
assuming 
maximum adoption of solar rooftops in LA County. 
4) Considering 
the 
Grid 
Capacity 
requirement, 
locations not meeting the 12 kilovolts minimum 
circuit capacity constraints were excluded. 
5) Using ArcMap model builder tool, a model was 
constructed to spatially join all map layers and 
provide an output map layer showing the potential 
locations for level 2 EV public charging stations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 1. LA COUNTY TARGETED PARKING LOTS 
FOR LEVEL 2 EV PUBLIC CHARGING STATIONS 
Use Description 
Count 
Athletic & Amusement Facilities 
247 
Colleges, Universities (Private) 
170 
Commercial 
4970 
Department Stores 
298 
Golf Courses 
153 
Government Parcel 
7551 
Hospitals 
460 
Hotel & Motels 
1317 
Industrial 
5698 
Institutional 
37 
Office Buildings 
7989 
Parking Lots (Commercial Use Properties) 
11598 
Parking Lots (Industrial Use Properties) 
1424 
Professional Buildings 
2895 
Recreational 
11 
Restaurants, Cocktail Lounges 
4238 
Rivers & Lakes 
6 
Schools (Private) 
1096 
Shopping Centers (Neighborhood, community) 
3110 
Shopping Centers (Regional) 
610 
Supermarkets 
566 
Theaters 
67 
 
III. 
ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS 
According to Esri [20], “the Kernel Density tool 
calculates a magnitude-per-unit area from point or polyline 
features using a kernel function to fit a smoothly tapered 
surface to each point or polyline.” In this case, Kernel 
Density Estimation (KDE) is used to estimate the probability 
density function of solar excess generation.  KDE statistics is 
given as:  
 
𝑥 =    1
𝑛
!
!
𝑘!
!
!!!
𝑥 − 𝑥! = 1
𝑛ℎ
𝑘
!
!!!
  (𝑥 − 𝑥!
ℎ
) 
 
 
Where (x1, x2… xn) is an independent and identically 
distributed sample drawn from some distribution with an 
unknown density ƒ, K (•) is the kernel (a non-negative 
function that integrates to one and has mean zero) and h > 0 
is a smoothing parameter called the bandwidth. KDE 
statistics estimates the shape of this function ƒ.  
Assuming the maximum adoption of solar rooftops in LA 
County, analysis indicates there are several dense areas 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-556-2
ENERGY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

where solar excess generation is estimated as shown in 
Figure 2. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Areas With Projected Solar Excess Generation 
 
The excess solar generation dense spots appeared, as 
shown in Figures 2 and 3, in areas such as  Lawndale, 
Hawthorne, 
Inglewood, 
Gardena, 
 Downey, 
Norwalk, 
Cerritos, and Paramount. It is important to note that the 
dense spots (red areas) imply higher statistically significant 
excess solar generation. In addition, Figure 4 shows locations 
with excess solar generation along with SCE DERiM circuits 
line and substations (blue squares).  
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Areas With Forecasted Solar Excess Generation 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Locations Along With SCE DERiM  
Circuits Line and Substations 
 
The crime Index layer was joined with the excess solar 
generation layer. Then, Select Layer By Location tool was 
used to intersect the two layers in order to show only safe zip 
codes areas with excess solar generation as shown in Figure 
5. It is important to note that crime index for less than 93 per 
zip code were not considered safe area for level 2 EV 
stations installation. Considering the electric circuit current 
hosting capacity with 12 kilovolts as minimum circuit 
capacity constraints and the potential targeted areas yielded 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-556-2
ENERGY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

from the previous steps, locations where the level 2 charging 
stations might be installed were shown as in Figure 6.   
 
Figure 5. Safe Zip Codes Targeted Areas  
With The 12 Kilovolts Minimum Circuit Capacity Constraints 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Optimal Locations For Placement 
Of Level 2 EV Public Charging Stations 
IV. 
EVALUATION 
The project team applied a qualitative interview method 
to evaluate the prototype using socio-technical technique to 
assess the following metrics: propriety and utility. The 
researchers evaluated the different values held by the 
different stakeholders by sending the following three 
interview questions via email: (1) Do you agree with the 
factors’ definitions on page 2, please explain why? (2) Do 
you see the potential solution offered by the GDSS prototype 
(shown in Figure 7)? (3) What changes would you 
recommend for improvement? In this case, both EV drivers’ 
and utility executives’ perspectives were part of the 
evaluation process to ensure that their unique stances were 
understood. 
Feedback was solicited from participants who were 
previously involved in the awareness of the problem phase 
and gathering the requirements. Two participants responded 
with positive feedback and they highlighted the potential 
offered by the proposed solution. According to Jim 
Horstman, a utility industry consultant, the artifact is useful 
and he agreed with the factors’ definitions. However, 
Horstman pointed out that there is an overlap of some factors 
such as the accessibility and convenience. In spite of the 
factors’ overlap, the actual analysis would not change. 
 
V. 
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Public charging infrastructure can thus be prioritized in 
locations with sufficient circuit capacity, potential excess 
renewable power, low crime index, convenience and 
accessibility factors of the EV drivers/owners. However, a 
limitation of the GDSS prototype proposed in this paper is 
that it offers a solution to address the placement of level 2 
stations only. Thus, a prototype to address the placement of 
level 3 stations is not offered in this case. 
Due to time and data availability constraints, the 
prototype illustrated the optimal locations for placement of 
level 2 EV public charging stations considering the 
convenience, 
accessibility, 
security, 
V2G 
technology/exploiting excess power, and grid capacity 
factors. We did not address the travel time, battery range, 
and the number of EV factors of the decision-making 
framework. 
Another limitation is in the evaluation phase. It is 
important to recognize that the time constraint imposed 
limitations on the evaluation and what these limitations are.  
The project team did not have the time to complete the 
evaluation phase and address the interviewees’ comments 
after the solution delivery. The researchers did not have an 
opportunity to perform further iterations to improve the 
prototype. The project team need to get and address the 
interviewees’ suggestions to move to the next phase of the 
research.  
The utility and novelty of the solution is important to 
emphasize as the driving factors for this project.  By 
developing a GDSS prototype for decision making that 
previously did not exist, a great amount of time is reduced 
for both the developers who are interested in finding the 
optimal locations and the utility companies who are 
interested in integrating the EV charging infrastructure into 
the electricity system in ways that deliver net benefits to 
utility customers, shareholders, vehicle owners, and society 
at large. It is important to realize that this prototype is only 
meant to serve as a good starting point for the illustration of 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-556-2
ENERGY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

how EV charging demand can be managed geographically to 
minimize potential increases to overall electric system costs 
while still meeting customers’ needs. 
In future DSR cycles, the project team will address all of 
the suggestions from interviewees after they collect the 
remaining feedback from them. The project team will 
evaluate the GDSS prototype many times through multiple 
iterations to improve its utility. The next iteration will offer a 
custom tool for developers/utilities, so that they are better 
able to evaluate the results.  The prototype will run on a 
public server to give the research participants access to the 
application.   
Moreover, the project team will add quantitative methods 
in the evaluation such as System Usability Scale (SUS) and 
cognitive walkthrough. The usability of this prototype will 
increase since both methods measure the usability of any 
application. The SUS and cognitive walkthrough will be 
administered to all research participants. In this case, the 
evaluation will involve more participants who will be given 
access to the application to ensure the validity of the 
evaluation results.    
As part of future work, multiple tools can be developed 
for the purpose of building an interactive, computer-based 
system where developers/utilities are allowed to configure 
their own criteria for decision-making. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This study aimed at addressing “How to properly 
integrate EV charging infrastructure into the electricity 
system and deliver net benefits to the consumers?” To 
answer the research question, we have built a prototype of 
Geographic Decision Support Systems (GDSS). Our 
proposal was developed bearing in mind not only the net 
benefits to EV owners but also the electric circuit capacity 
constraints and the impact of the EV charging infrastructure 
on the electric grid. 
From this research, we conclude that EV charging 
demand can be managed geographically to minimize 
potential increases to overall electric system costs while still 
meeting customers’ needs. Our solution provides evidence 
that GIS can play an integral role in the problem resolution. 
If additional funds and data are made available, a custom 
GDSS solution can be developed to allow EV charging 
developers to configure their own criteria for decision-
making. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
United States Department of Energy’s Clean Cities program (2015). 
Alternative Fuels Data Center: Electric Vehicle Charging Station 
Locations. 
[retrieved: 
October, 
2016], 
from 
http://www.afdc.energy.gov/fuels/electricity_locations.html 
[2] 
United States Department of Energy (2012). President Obama 
Launches EV-Everywhere Challenge as Part of Energy Department’s 
Clean Energy Grand Challenges. [retrieved: October, 2016], from 
http://energy.gov/articles/president-obama-launches-ev-everywhere-
challenge-part-energy- department-s-clean-energy  
[3] 
California Public Utility Commission (2015a). Distribution Resources 
Plan, from  Bloomberg New Energy Finance (2016). Electric vehicles 
to be 35% of global new car sales by 2040. [retrieved: October, 
2016], from https://about.bnef.com/press-releases/electric-vehicles-
to-be-35- of-global-new-car-sales-by-2040/  
[4] 
Chris Nelder, James Newcomb, and Garrett Fitzgerald (2016). 
Electric Vehicles as Distributed Energy Resources | Rocky Mountain 
Institute. 
[retrieved: 
October, 
2016], 
from 
http://www.rmi.org/pdf_evs_as_DERs  
[5] 
H. Trabish, (2016). If you build it, will they charge? Utilities cautious 
in plans to spur electric vehicle adoption | Utility Dive. [retrieved: 
October, 2016], from http://www.utilitydive.com/news/if-you- build-
it-will-they-charge-utilities-cautious-in-plans-to-spur-elec/423982/  
[6] 
SDG&E (2015). Electric Vehicle Grid Integration. [retrieved: 
October, 2016], from http://www.westernlampac.org/2015 Spring 
Conference/Laura 
McDonald 
EVGI 
LAMPAC 
Presentation 
042715.pdf  
[7] 
K. Bullis, (2013). Could Electric Cars Threaten the Grid? | MIT 
Technology 
Review. 
[retrieved: 
October, 
2016], 
from 
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/518066/could-electric-cars-
threaten-the-grid/  
[8] 
H. Takeda, P. Veerkamp, and H. Yoshikawa, "Modeling design 
process," AI magazine, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 37-xx, 1990. 
[9] 
J. Jin, (2016). "Installing Public Electric Vehicle Charging Stations: 
A Site Suitability Analysis in Los Angeles County, California," PhD 
dissertation, University of Southern California, 2016. 
[10] M. Momtazpour, P. Butler, M. S. Hossain, M.C. Bozchalui, N. 
Ramakrishnan, and R. Sharma, “Coordinated clustering algorithms to 
support charging infrastructure design for electric vehicles,” Proc. 
ACM SIGKDD International Workshop on Urban Computing, Aug. 
2012, pp. 126-133. 
[11] C. Nelder, J. Newcomb, and G. Fitzgerald, (2016). Electric Vehicles 
as Distributed Energy Resources | Rocky Mountain Institute. 
[retrieved: 
October, 
 
2016], 
from 
http://www.rmi.org/pdf_evs_as_DERs 
[12] J. Pyper, (2016). New Edison International CEO Pizarro Calls for 
Greater Grid Investment to Enable Change, [retrieved: October,  
2016], 
from 
https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/New-
Edison-CEO-Pizarro-Calls-for-Greater-Grid-Investment-to-Enable-
Change 
[13] R. Walton, (2016).  Location matters: Utilities focus on charger 
placement to drive electric vehicle adoption: Two EV pilot programs 
demonstrate that just building charging stations isn't enough. D Utility 
Dive. 
[retrieved: 
October, 
 
2016], 
from 
http://www.utilitydive.com/news/location-matters-utilities-focus-on-
charger-placement-to-drive-electric-ve/425276/ 
[14] B. Plumer, (2016). The rapid growth of electric cars worldwide, in 4 
charts. Vox Technology. [retrieved: October,  2016], from  
http://www.vox.com/2016/6/6/11867894/electric-cars-global-sales 
[15] Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department (2012). Crime Data. 
[retrieved: 
March, 
 
2017], 
from 
http://shq.lasdnews.net/CrimeStats/CAASS/desc.html 
[16] Los Angeles County GIS Data Portal (2014). Parking Lot Boundaries 
– Commercial, Industrial,  Government. [retrieved: March,  2017], 
from http://egis3.lacounty.gov/dataportal/tag/parking-lots/ 
[17] Southern 
California 
Edison’s 
Distributed 
Energy 
Resource 
Interconnection Map (2017). [retrieved: March,  2017], from 
https://www.arcgis.com/home/item.html?id=e62dfa24128b4329bfc8b
27c4526f6b7 
[18] LA County  Solar Map and Green Planning Tool (2015). [retrieved: 
March,  2017], from http://solarmap.lacounty.gov/ 
[19] V. Sultan and H. Bitar, “Geographic Decision Support Systems To 
Optimize The Placement Of Distributed Energy Resources.” 
International jurnal of smart grid and clean energy, pp. 201-211, 
2016. 
[20] Environmental Systems Research Institute (2014). ArcGIS Help 10.2 
- Kernel Density (Spatial   Analyst). [retrieved: Novamber, 2016], 
from http://desktop.arcgis.com/en/arcmap/10.3/tools/spatial-analyst-
toolbox/how-kernel-density-works.htm  
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-556-2
ENERGY 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

