An Islanded Community Solar Microgrid with Capability of Future Fractal Growth 
 
Mark Apperley 
Department of Software Engineering 
University of Waikato 
Hamilton, Aotearoa New Zealand 
email: mark.apperley@waikato.ac.nz 
 
 
 
Tama Toki 
Aotea Energy 
Auckland, Aotearoa New Zealand 
email: tama@aoteaenergy.com 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— A design for a non-grid-connected (islanded) smart 
community microgrid is developed and elaborated. This focuses 
on a real community, and the design is developed in such a way 
as to take into account current energy demands, and future 
expansion (given that currently there is no formal electricity 
supply to the community), but also, since the community is 
located on an island with a number of neighbouring 
communities and industries, the design is developed to enable 
future fractal growth of the micro-grid. To meet these 
requirements, the development covers needs analysis, the micro-
grid configuration, and the initial sizing of the various 
components. Configuration and sizing are then optimised for 
the initial microgrid, taking into account the particular 
community social infrastructure characteristics and dynamics. 
Keywords-community microgrid; fractal microgrid design. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This paper describes the development of a design for a 
smart electricity microgrid in Aotearoa New Zealand, for the 
community of Motairehe on Aotea/Great Barrier Island, a 
remote island approximately 100km northeast of Auckland. 
There is no reticulated power system on Aotea. The entire 
population of the island (~1000) live off-the-grid, running 
their 
own 
solar/battery 
power 
systems, 
which 
are 
supplemented by petrol or diesel powered generators, natural 
gas and wood fires, and in almost all cases, the solar/battery 
systems do not provide nearly enough of the households’ 
energy needs, so there is a heavy reliance on the fossil-fuel 
powered back-up generators. 
This absence of existing infrastructure provides an 
opportunity to improve the lives of the island’s population, 
and contribute to New Zealand’s efforts to reduce carbon 
emissions and expand clean energy use [1]. The community 
on which this design focuses contains the majority of the 
indigenous Māori population of Aotea, approximately forty 
households and 90-100 people. The initial design is for the 
central part of the community, ten households together with a 
marae, but it is intended that through a phased approach, the 
microgrid would be extended over time to include the 
remainder of the households, and then on into neighbouring 
communities. A marae is a place where traditional Māori 
ceremonies and meetings are held. It normally comprises a 
meeting space, marae ātea, a meeting house, wharenui, and a 
kitchen/dining room, wharekai. The marae can accommodate 
hui, either short, smaller meetings, or larger iwi (tribal) events 
that may run for several days, with accommodation being 
provided in the wharenui. 
To accommodate this anticipated expansion, focussing on 
the use of non-dispatchable and distributed renewable energy 
generation (solar panels), and to some extent exploiting the 
absence of any existing legacy grid, the design described is 
based on a fractal grid model [2]. Considerations in this design 
include distributing both generation and storage across the 
community, in such a way as to ensure maximum local 
consumption of locally produced energy, to enable and 
support community utilisation of all energy produced, yet to 
minimise the required inter-node transmission capacity. A 
further aspect is to ensure community engagement, and 
essentially “ownership” of the microgrid [3]. 
While there is a growing body of literature on the design 
of community microgrids e.g., [4][5][6], the work described 
here essentially begins from first principles in order (i) to 
recognise the islanded environment, (ii) to base the design 
principally on solar power and batteries, and (iii) to 
acknowledge the social context of the development. 
The paper is structured in the following way. Section II 
develops appropriate household and marae load profiles, 
necessary because there is no existing reticulated power 
system. These load profiles are then used in Section III to 
establish what would be an adequate or appropriately sized 
solar/battery configuration for a household, and for the marae. 
This configuration is then adjusted in the context of a fractal 
microgrid design in Section IV, which clearly demonstrates 
the advantages of this concept. Section V provides a 
discussion of the optimal configuration and distribution of 
resources in the microgrid. The overall design, and the current 
state of the development, is then discussed in the concluding 
Section VI. 
II. 
LOAD PROFILE ESTIMATION 
Annual load profiles were established for ten individual 
households. As there is currently no grid supply to the 
community, then these profiles were derived from real 
households with appropriate occupancy and appliance 
utilisation characteristics, located at a similar latitude on the 
New Zealand mainland. Those adopted were selected on the 
basis that the houses did not have electric hot-water systems, 
nor did they use electricity as their primary form of heating. 
These were also households comprising a range of occupant 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

numbers, both adults and children. The consumption profiles 
for these houses varied considerably, in terms of average daily 
use, hourly use over the day, and seasonal differences. The 
data used was hourly data over a whole year – 8760 data points 
for each house [7]. 
While the variation between households was retained, the 
profiles were scaled to give an average daily base load (across 
the ten houses) of 7.5 kWh. This data is summarised in 
Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF HOUSEHOLD BASE LOAD DATA 
 
A load profile for the marae was also established using 
similar techniques, based on the occupancy level. One of the 
household profiles (A4, Table 1) was used as the starting 
point, but the scaled data was doubled to represent 4 adults 
(estimated permanent marae occupancy), meaning the base 
load daily average is 19.171 kWh.  To this base profile was 
then added a randomly generated hui load. Fourteen hui were 
added over the year, with their start dates randomly generated, 
and with randomly allocated durations of 1 to 3 days. This was 
based on suggestions from the community of typical hui 
frequency and size. An estimated supplementary load profile 
was created for a hui, which included additional cooking, 
lighting, and heating during the event. This added load runs 
from 2.00pm to 2.00pm, so assumes that even a 1-day hui 
involves an overnight stay for the non-local participants. 
For the marae, the addition of these hui increases the 
annual average daily consumption to 24.275 kWh, and the 
maximum consumption in any one hour over the year from 
6.051 to 9.465 kW. 
III. 
INDIVIDUAL HOUSEHOLD DESIGN 
Based on these load profiles, and standard design 
guidelines for solar installations in New Zealand: 
• 
solar panel capacity ~ average daily load / 4 
• 
battery capacity ~ average daily base load x 3 
an initial analysis was carried out for the ten households and 
the marae. 
For this initial analysis, with each household, and the 
marae, operating as an independent unit, the standard 
configuration used was solar panels of 4 kW capacity, plus a 
battery of 22.5 kWh capacity, for each site. Annual solar data 
for Aotea was used to calculate the solar panel output for each 
hour of the year [8], and key points from this analysis of the 
non-networked configuration are shown in Table 2. 
A discretionary or divertible load was added in for this 
analysis. In reality, this might, for example, represent hot-
water heating or EV charging, electricity usage carried out 
when there is a surplus, over and above the base load. This 
discretionary load was set to a daily maximum (per 
household) of 5 kWh, and was invoked only when the battery 
was at 95% charge level or more, and there was surplus solar 
generation. This produced an overall total average 
discretionary load across the community of 30.4 kWh per day, 
and there were just 9 days in which no discretionary load was 
possible at all. 
TABLE II.  
SUMMARY OF INITIAL NON-NETWORKED SIMULATION 
 
It is interesting to note (Table 2) that under this 
autonomous mode of operation, and with this configuration, 
for four of the households there were no base load supply 
failures at all over the entire year. For the other six households, 
there were times when their systems were unable to meet the 
basic household needs, with House 10 showing the most 
extreme case of 317 hours of failed base load supply. The 
marae, because of its very high peak demands during hui, 
showed 2184 hours in which the system was unable to meet 
its demands, and with this shortfall averaged  over the whole 
year, that  amounts to nearly 9kWh per day. By contrast, all 
sites, including the marae, showed a significant number of 
hours in which there was an unused surplus of solar energy. 
Of course the failure occurrences for the individual houses 
do not all occur together, although after a day of low sunshine, 
it is more likely that such events may coincide. For all of those 
failed hours across the ten households shown in Table 2, these 
were spread across 355 hours of the year. 
To give an idea of the energy balance situation, in Figures 
1 and 2 the annual hourly balance is shown for two extreme 
houses, House 5 (zero failed hours) and House 10 (317 failed 
hours). For these energy balance plots, the consumed energy 
includes battery charging as well as the actual domestic loads, 
and the produced energy  comprises both solar generation and 
anything delivered from the batteries [9]. Perfect balance is 
shown by points on the diagonal. For House 5 (Figure 1), 
perfect balance is achieved 75% of the time. The very evident 
stack of points close to the vertical axis represent hours of 
sunlight (high generation) at times of low load, when the 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

batteries are fully charged. The other vertical cluster of points 
at a load of 2.2kW represent those daylight hours when the 
discretionary load has been activated, but there is still some 
surplus. House 10 (Figure 2) actually achieves perfect balance 
83% of the time, but of course, as can be seen from the graph, 
there are 317 hours (3.6%) when the full demand is not met. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Hourly energy balance over the full year for House 5 in the non-
networked mode. 
 
Figure 2.  Hourly energy balance over the full year for House 10 in the 
non-networked mode. 
These 
two 
houses 
represent 
the 
extremes 
of 
generation/load balance using this basic design; all of the 
others lie between these in their energy balance 
characteristics [9]. 
IV. 
FRACTAL MICROGRID DESIGN 
Clearly with demands and surpluses varying between 
households, and the occasional peak demand from the Marae 
during hui, community sharing has potential to achieve a 
greater degree of balance between generation and demand. A 
fractal microgrid design [2] as represented in Figure 3 will 
now be considered. 
In this model, any terminal node (A to F, and I in Figure 
3) can comprise any combination of load, generation, and/or 
storage. Typically, these would represent individual 
households such as those being considered here, but they 
could also represent a community solar panel array 
(generation only), a community service, such as street 
lighting or EV charging (load only), or a community battery 
(storage only). Some of the households might not include 
solar panels and/or storage. The non-terminal nodes (G, H, 
and J in Figure 3) will always present themselves as 
intelligent and active to the higher level grid they are 
connected to, and will comprise a combination of load, 
generation and storage, but from the perspective of the higher 
level grid, will appear as a single entity with these properties, 
hence the term, fractal microgrid [10]. 
 
Figure 3.  The fractal microgrid concept. 
The fractal microgrid proposed here initially comprises 
just a single level 0 grid (Figure 3) and no higher levels. The 
marae forms the level 1 node (node G in Figure 3), and the 
community households the level 0 nodes (nodes A, B, C in 
Figure 3). A more specific representation of this Motairehe 
fractal microgrid is shown in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  The proposed Motairehe fractal microgrid comprising ten 
houses and the marae. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

In this model, it can seen that each household retains local 
solar generation and battery storage, but is also connected to 
the microgrid. This means that at times of surplus, the 
household can contribute to the microgrid, potentially 
supporting neighbours, and/or the marae, and at times of 
shortfall, it may be able to draw from neighbours or the marae 
surplus. The marae similarly is connected to the microgrid, 
and retains its local solar generation and storage. Also shown 
in the marae set up is the notion of community services – in 
this case, street lighting and EV charging. Such services could 
also be simply connected to the microgrid itself (rather than 
be part of the marae node), as could, for example, additional 
community solar panels. 
Although shown here as a single community system, and 
not explicitly demonstrating a fractal structure itself, it has 
been developed in this way consistent with the fractal 
microgrid concept, in order that it could in the future be 
readily extended to: 
• 
multiple community grids within the same general 
area, each connected to the marae as the upper-level 
node; or 
• 
the marae itself could be connected to a higher level 
node, potentially bringing together more distant 
groupings. 
Possible future extensions to the microgrid of this nature 
would follow the general fractal model of Figure 3. 
The approach taken with the initial design of the microgrid 
is to consider overall the same  total solar generation and the 
same total battery storage as was used for the non-networked 
analysis of Sections II and III. At this stage, it is assumed: 
• 
All houses will have the same sized system of solar 
panels and batteries; 
• 
The marae may have a different configuration, and 
the design will attempt achieve a distribution which 
minimizes the overall energy transfer between the 
marae and the community, in either direction; 
• 
It is anticipated that the fractal microgrid should 
achieve an overall better utilisation of the generated 
electricity, reducing over the entire site both the 
wasted excess production and the failed supply. 
Initially, it is a simple matter of considering the total 
generation capacity, the total load, and the total storage, across 
the whole community and marae, and carrying out an hourly 
energy balance analysis for the whole year [9]. However, once 
that analysis has been carried out, then the distribution of 
generation and storage between the houses and the marae 
needs to be explored to minimize the overall grid flow, since 
a higher grid flow will require a more substantial cable, and/or 
imply greater transmission losses. 
The results of the initial analysis are shown in the energy 
balance plot of Figure 5. The impact of hui, which overall 
present a significant load, can be readily seen, as the hours 
which correspond to hui at the marae are highlighted in this 
plot. What is remarkable, is that by considering the total 
generation, the total load, and the total battery capacity, the 
overall number of shortfall hours over the year for the whole 
community have been reduced to 64, significantly less than 
the 2184 previously experienced by the marae, and the 355 by 
all of the houses together. In fact, only 16 of the shortfall hours 
actually coincide with hui. 
Of course, this plot (Figure 5) does represent just the base 
load; any discretionary load would need to be taken during 
those hours of surplus, above the diagonal. Referring back to 
Table 2, it can be seen that these 1870 hours of overall surplus 
are more than those experienced by some of the houses in the 
non-networked mode. The impact of the fractal network on 
discretionary load is discussed later, in relation to Figure 8. 
However, each site (both Level 0 and Level 1) would need 
“smart” control to prioritise demand in the following 
sequence: 
(i) 
Local base load; 
(ii) 
Local battery charging; 
(iii) 
Microgrid (community) needs; 
(iv) 
Household discretionary load. 
To determine (iii) and (iv) will require more sophisticated 
software at each site, and communication between sites, than 
is conventionally seen in isolated off-grid solar sites, which do 
not have to concern themselves with (iii). 
 
 
Figure 5.  The overall energy balance for the fractal microgrid model. 
It is clear from this initial analysis of the fractal 
community microgrid model, that overall a much better 
utilisation of the generated electricity has been achieved, 
reducing, across the entire site, both the excess production and 
the failed supply. This has utilised the same overall total solar 
panels, and the same overall total battery storage, as with the 
original non-networked model of Section III. These numbers 
are: 
• 
Solar panels: For the non-networked model, each 
house, and the marae, was fitted with ten 400W 
panels, giving a total of 110 x 400W. 
• 
Batteries: For the non-networked model, each site 
was provided with 22.5 kWh of battery, leading to a 
total battery capacity of 247.5 kWh. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Before proceeding to optimise the configuration by 
attempting to minimise grid flow, it is worth considering other 
aspects of this fractal microgrid model. Figure 6, for example, 
shows the daily variation in total base load for the community, 
and highlights those days which correspond to hui. While it 
can be seen that there are daily peaks corresponding to hui, 
there are also peaks which are not associated with hui. 
In Figure 7, the nine days over the year in which supply 
shortfall occurs are shown, again with correspondence to hui 
highlighted. Three of these days do coincide with hui, but 
there are three quite significant shortfall days which do not. 
Those days are in the middle of winter, and in this data set 
represent days of very low solar radiation. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Overall daily base load variation for the whole community, with 
hui days highlighted. 
 
Figure 7.  Days of overall shortfall for the community over the year, 
showing some coincidence with winter hui. 
Figure 8 shows the daily baseload surplus, which is, of 
course, highly relevant in relation to discretionary loads. 
Here, it is evident that the surplus is quite variable, and also 
that there are periods during the winter where there is no 
surplus for several days in sequence. For comparison, hui are 
also identified on this plot. For the earlier non-networked 
configuration, there were just nine days when no 
discretionary load was available; under the fractal model, 
there are 60 days. However, the average daily availability of 
discretionary power is 91 kWh; the allocated average daily 
load for the non-networked model was 30 kWh. Not 
surprisingly then, the fractal model offers this option to the 
whole community on fewer days of the year, because it is 
making more effective use of surplus generation in providing 
base load for the whole community, but in total, over the year, 
there is more than adequate discretionary capability. 
It should also be noted that many of the houses, and the 
marae, already have back-up generation resources, and are 
likely to retain those when the fractal solar microgrid comes 
into existence. While the household back-up systems are 
likely to be used only for the individual households, the marae 
back-up would potentially benefit all when needed, covering 
those days of community shortfall shown in Figure 8. 
 
Figure 8.  Daily baseload surplus for the community. 
This analysis has shown the real adbvantage of the 
community microgrid approach, in that each houshold is 
fitted with the same configuration of panels and batteries, and 
in all cases has a more stable supply of electricity. 
V. 
RESOURCE DISTRIBUTION FOR OPTIMAL MICROGRID 
OPERATION 
Now that the positive aspects of the fractal microgrid 
approach have been established, it is necessary to consider the 
optimal configuration of solar panels and batteries. As 
suggested earlier, it is assumed that all houses have the same 
configuration, and that the distinction will be between the 
houses and the marae. It is the electricity flow in the microgrid 
connection which will be the determining aspect of the 
distribution of resources. For this analysis, it is necessary to 
explore both: 
• 
the peak flow, since this will dictate the size of cable 
required, and 
• 
the average flow, since this will determine the overall 
energy losses in the cable. 
The overall resources on which the results shown in 
Section IV were established, comprise a total of: 
• 
110 x 400 W solar panels, and 
• 
247.5 kWh of battery storage. 
As an example of the nature of the energy flows between 
the marae and the houses, Figure 9 shows the hourly flow over 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

a year with 20% of the panels and 20% of the battery capacity 
held at the marae. It is evident from this graph that at different 
times, energy flow can be in either direction, and that the peak 
flows (largest is ~9.5 kW) occur to the marae, although 
overall, more energy appears to flow from the marae. Almost 
all of the flows to the marae do coincide with hui, as can be 
seen from the graph. 
In order to determine the optimum allocation of resources 
to the marae, an analysis was carried out with various 
proportions of those resources, ranging from 18% to 30%. The 
results of this analysis, shown in the parallel coordinate plot 
of Figure 10, reveal clearly that a 20% allocation produces a 
minimum of both peak grid flow, and daily average grid flow. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Hourly grid flow from the marae to the houses with 20% of 
generation and storage allocated to the marae. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Parallel coordinate plot showing the relationship between the 
proportion of the resources located at the marae and the peak and daily 
average grid flows. 
Finally, to give a better picture of these grid flows, Figure 
11 shows (for this 20% marae allocation) the distribution of 
the hourly grid flows over a year. 
It can be noted that the grid flows to the marae (negative 
in Figures 9 and 11) occur on far fewer hours than the marae 
showed a shortfall in the non-networked model (see Table 2). 
But of course, under this optimised fractal microgrid model, 
the marae does have a larger allocation of solar generation and 
batteries. It should also be noted that this analysis has 
examined the flow between the marae and the houses as a 
group (refer to Figure 3), not the flow between the houses 
themselves. These latter flows are likely to be less, and it is 
reasonable to use the marae flow as the basis for cable sizing. 
 
 
Figure 11.  Duration plot of grid flow from the marae over a year. 
This proposed configuration is elaborated in more detail in 
the following concluding section. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The analysis of the preceding sections has clearly shown 
that the suggested fractal solar microgrid model for the 
Motairehe marae and community provides a superior 
outcome to isolated individual systems, for exactly the same 
overall solar panel and battery resources. A more resilient and 
reliable electricity supply for the community ensues, with far 
fewer hours overall of electricity shortfall. 
Based on the numbers from this analysis, the suggested 
configurations are: 
Marae:  
8800 W solar panels 
 
 
49.5 kWh battery 
Houses:  
3520 W solar panels 
 
 
19.8 kWh battery 
These numbers, of course, need to be rounded up for 
sensible use of currently available technology. 
In addition to this basic technology, the  houses and the 
marae need to be connected by an appropriate cable capable 
of carrying at least the calculated 10kW load with minimal 
losses. A preliminary calculation, taking into account the 
relatively close proximity of the households and marae at 
Motairehe, suggests that the cost of the interconnecting 
microgrid cables to handle this 10kW load  could have 
provided ~15% increased solar panel capacity across the site, 
if no microgrid was included. However the advantages of the 
microgrid interconnection shown in this analysis, far 
outweigh the benefits of increased, but isolated, generation. 
Additional control logic will need to be incorporated within 
each node of the microgrid, to manage the interaction, 
particularly in relation to grid needs and offers, and local 
discretionary demands. 
It should also be re-iterated that the adoption of a fractal 
microgrid model readily enables future expansion, without 
significant reconfiguration, for example: 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

• 
Addition of further community facilities, such as 
community lighting, shared solar arrays, community 
EV charging, and community storage, on the level 0 
grid. 
• 
Addition of other close-by communities or groups of 
houses into the system, either as an extension of this 
level 0 microgrid, or as another level 0 microgrid 
(refer to Figure 3). 
• 
Expansion of the fractal structure to Level 2 or higher 
(Figure 3) potentially linking it with more distant 
communities. 
The system as described is currently under development, 
with support from the MBIE Mãori Housing Renewable 
Energy Fund [11]. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The research described in this paper has been supported in 
part by the MBIE Endeavour Programme, Public Housing and 
Urban 
Regeneration: 
Maximising 
Well-being 
(Grant 
ID:20476 UOOX2003), and also the the MBIE Strategic 
Science Investment Fund grant, Ahuora: Delivering 
sustainable 
industry 
through 
smart 
process 
heat 
decarbonisation 
(Grant 
ID: 
CONT-69342-SSIFAETP-
UOW). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Emissions reduction targets. Ministry for the Environment; 
https://environment.govt.nz/what-government-is-doing/areas-of-
work/climate-change/emissions-reduction-targets/  
Accessed 2023.02.13. 
[2] 
M. Apperley, “Modelling Fractal-Structured Smart Microgrids: 
Exploring signals and protocols”, Energy 2019 Conference 
Proceedings, IARIA, pp. 13–17. 2019. 
[3] 
A. L. Berka, J.L. MacArthur, and C. Gonelli, “Explaining inclusivity 
in energy transitions: Local and community energy in Aotearoa New 
Zealand”, Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions, 34, 
pp. 165-182, 2020. 
[4] 
L. Che, X. Zhang, M. Shahidehpour, A. Alabdulwahab, and A. 
Abusorrah, "Optimal interconnection planning of community 
microgrids with renewable energy sources." IEEE Transactions on 
Smart Grid 8, pp. 1054-1063, 2015. 
[5] 
M. A. Hossain, H. R. Pota, S. Squartini, F. Zaman, and J. M. 
Guerrero. Energy scheduling of community microgrid with battery 
cost using particle swarm optimisation. Applied Energy, 254, p. 
113723, 2019. 
[6] 
N. Tomin, V. Shakirov, A. Kozlov, D. Sidorov, V. Kurbatsky, C. 
Rehtanz, and E.E. Lora, (2022), Design and optimal energy 
management of community microgrids with flexible renewable 
energy sources, Renewable Energy, pp. 903-921, 2022. 
[7] 
M. Apperley, P. Monigatti, and J. Suppers, “Grid-Lite: A network 
integrated semi-autonomous local area electricity system”,  In 
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Green IT 
Solutions (ICGreen 2015), Milan, Italy, SciTePress,  pp. 27-33, 
2015. 
[8] 
J. Suppers and M. Apperley, “Interactive solar panel simulation tool 
- from GHI to PV output”. In C. Beckmann & T. Gross (Eds.), 
INTERACT 2015 Adjunct Proceedings: Fostering Smart Energy 
Applications Workshop, pp633–642. Bamberg, Germany: University 
of Bamberg Press. 2015. 
[9] 
M. Apperley, “Modelling energy balance and storage in the design 
of smart microgrids”, Energy 2017 Conference Proceedings, IARIA, 
Barcelona, pp. 40-45, 2017. 
[10] B. B. Mandelbrot, Fractals: form, chance, and dimension, W. H. 
Freeman:  San Francisco, CA., 1977.  
[11] Māori and Public Housing Renewable Energy Fund. 
https://www.mbie.govt.nz/building-and-energy/energy-and-natural-
resources/low-emissions-economy/energy-efficiency-in-new-
zealand/maori-and-public-housing-renewable-energy-fund/maori-
housing-renewable-energy-fund. Accessed   2023.02.13
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

