Degrees of Freedom in Information Sharing on a Greener and Smarter Grid 
Kristian Helmholt, 
Department: Business Information Services 
TNO 
Groningen, The Netherlands 
Kristian.Helmholt@tno.nl 
Gerben Broenink, 
Department: Security 
TNO 
Groningen, The Netherlands 
Gerben.Broenink@tno.nl
 
 
ABSTRACT - Providing warmth, food, housing, and other 
necessities of life require the use of energy, which causes it to 
play a pivotal role in society. Changes in the production, 
distribution and consumption of energy (carriers) impact 
everyone. Next to well known (expected) changes in the area of 
renewable energy sources, we foresee the possibility of major 
changes in the way society shares information about 
production, distribution and consumption of energy (carriers). 
This is caused by the expected societal benefits of exchanging 
more information between parties connected on the energy 
grid: more efficiency though balancing of supply and demand, 
which in turn makes energy less scarce and avoids unnecessary 
‘heat pollution’. However, the sharing of information could 
introduce imbalances in ‘societal’ power between governments, 
companies and consumers. We argue that all parties involved 
should consciously decide – on a well informed basis - on what 
information they want to share. In this paper, we provide an 
overview of the degrees of freedom in information sharing on 
the green & smart energy grid of tomorrow.  
Keywords – Smart grid; information sharing; privacy. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION: RISE OF THE ‘ENERGY INTERNET’ 
DEMANDS INFORMATION SHARING 
In the coming years, we expect a further development of 
the ‘Energy Internet’. Classic energy grids (electricity, gas, 
heat, etc.) will evolve into an even larger combined world 
wide network which will be used by millions of parties to 
exchange both energy itself as well as information about the 
production and consumption of energy carriers (oil, gas, 
electricity, etc.). The Energy Internet is the next step in 
evolution of the classic ‘Energy Grid’, which today consists 
of electricity cables, transformers, pressurizing stations, gas 
pipes, etc. and is often characterized by a unidirectional flow. 
Electricity and gas flow from central power plants and gas 
production facilities, towards companies and consumer 
houses. The rise of decentralized production of energy 
carriers – for example: solar panels, windmills, biogas 
installations, etc. – will result in a more bidirectional flow of 
energy carriers. Consumers’ houses and other decentralized 
facilities like farms will not only consume energy carriers 
but will sometimes also produce energy carriers to such an 
extent it is economically or environmentally interesting to 
transport the energy to other sites. In the Netherlands, for 
example, this is already the case in the ‘green house 
industry’. The production of heat from gas is often combined 
with the simultaneous production of electricity. ‘Surplus 
energy’ from green houses is carried – using electricity - 
across the classic energy grid by so called ‘Network 
Administrator’ companies to other parties that have a need 
for this energy.  
Next to the physical evolution, on top of the classic grid 
a new information sharing network will evolve. This 
network will be used to exchange information on many 
aspects of the (expected) production, storage, transportation 
and consumption of energy carriers (see [8], [9] and [11] for 
examples of information services and architectures). 
Another advanced example is the application of automated 
(i.e., computerized) trading agents that use real-time 
information to buy and sell energy according to a buy/sell 
strategy of their owners/parties they represent. To that, these 
agents could be equipped with the ability to switch energy 
carrier consuming equipment on or off, depending on the 
availability and price/costs of energy. Pricing strategies and 
regulations (set by governments) could influence buying and 
selling behaviour. This information exchange could take 
place on different levels: between individual houses in a 
residential area and factories, between groups of consumers 
and producers, etc. It is beyond the scope of this paper to 
describe the possible implementations of a more automated 
and dynamical market where real-time information is used 
to synchronize demand and supply. In this paper, we want to 
focus on how to categorize why, what kind of information 
and when it is exchanged. We have chosen to focus on 
exposure of behaviour and identity of parties on a Smart 
Grid. Also it is beyond scope to discuss the effects of local 
energy production and consumption on network stability. 
In Section II, an overview of the related research is given. 
After that, our contribution and methodology is presented. In 
Section IV, we present the three degrees of freedom. 
Followed by, the consequences of the possible choices. In 
the end, we will present our conclusions.  
II. 
RELATED RESEARCH 
We found abundant research related to the concept of 
using information to create a greener and/or smarter energy 
grid. Potter [4], for example, recognizes the importance of 
information on the smart grid. He claims that the variation on 
renewable energy sources will be the largest variation on the 
smart grid. As a result – as we paraphrase it - better 
procedures are needed to forecast the weather in order to 
provide a better estimation the energy production from 
renewable energy sources. Potter focuses on the accuracy of 
the information on production of energy carriers from 
141
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

renewable energy sources in order to optimize (smart) grid 
efficiency. Little attention is paid in this article to aspects of 
sharing information on energy usage between parties 
connected to the grid (e.g., factories, consumer households, 
etc.). 
  
Another example of the usage of (extra) information for a 
smart grid was found in a pilot study called – 
‘PowerMatchingCity’ [2] of the European 6th framework 
project 
INTEGRAL 
(Integrated 
ICT-platform 
based 
Distributed Control in Electricity Grids). In this pilot, the so 
called Powermatcher Smart Grid Technology [1] was used. It 
is built on a market based control concept in which each 
device attached to the grid produces bids on energy, and a 
central market where the offers and bids are matched to each 
other. Information between parties is exchanged as ‘prices’ 
and ‘bids’. Suppliers offer ‘energy’ together with prices, 
while consumers bid on those offers. Through an auctioning 
mechanism the ‘PowerMatching’ system as a whole tries to 
find a market equilibrium where net balance is optimized [3]. 
A 
conceptually 
related 
example 
is 
Intelligent 
Metering/Trading/Billing System (ITMBS) as described in 
[10] 
III. 
OUR CONTRIBUTION & METHODOLOGY 
While we found an abundant research relating to the 
topic of using the information, research on the type of 
information and reasons or objections to share information 
on energy usage seems scarce [12]. We did find several 
projects and studies which developed their own information 
sharing model and we found it hard to compare the different 
models. Such a comparison is needed when a decision has to 
be made about an information sharing model; which has 
been the case in the Netherlands for example, where amongst 
others stakeholders politicians have been discussing the 
introduction of the Smart Meter. In that discussion questions 
arose like: 
 
• 
What information should be shared? 
• 
How much detail should be provided? 
• 
Who can access the information? 
• 
What is the impact of (not) sharing all information? 
 
Our contribution is a structured model to compare 
information sharing on different (partial) Smart Grid designs 
and implementations, with a strong focus on the level of 
transparency (of behavior and identity) between parties on 
the Smart Grid. As a result, comparison should be less hard 
and more effective. This enables decision makers to come up 
with a substantiated choice more efficiently. We have named 
the proposed model ‘Degrees Of Freedom in Information 
Sharing’ (DOFIS) for Smart Grids (4SG), resulting in the 
DOFIS-4SG acronym.  
 
The basic structure of the model is a set of axes, because 
we wanted to be able to carry out a comparison, between 
Smart Grid designs, in terms of different aspects. Each axis 
is a ‘degree of freedom’ and represents an aspect of 
information sharing with respect to exposing behavior or the 
identity of the owner or ‘generator’ of the information. This 
means not all aspects of information sharing are included. 
For example aspects like the size and structure of 
information are not included, since these aspects hardly 
reveal any information about the behavior of a party on the 
energy grid at all. The aspects of information sharing we did 
include are related to revealing behavior and identity. The 
basis for the included aspects was found in literature on 
Smart Grids and we tried to distill the greatest common 
denominators and make additions where they were necessary 
in order to provide for making comparisons. The process of 
distilling common denominators and making additions was 
supported by our experience with both information 
architectures for Smart Grids on which we are currently 
working 
and 
on 
our 
experience 
with 
information 
architectures in other domains where large scale information 
sharing takes place (telecommunications, healthcare, road 
pricing). This means that we did not mathematically derive 
these aspects, but carried out a selection process based on the 
criteria 1) ‘relevant to exposing behavior and identity’ and 2) 
the axes being ‘orthogonal’. This means that the location on 
one axis cannot be derived from a combination of locations 
on the other axes. Compare this to a classic x,y,z 3D grid for 
describing the location of points in a 3D space: the z part of a 
coordinate cannot be deduced from the x and y part.   
 
The process of distillation and selection above has 
resulted in what we call a ‘space of comparison’ which 
currently has three axes. Currently, we suspect that these 
axes and their subdivisions can be used to assess and 
compare all aspects of information sharing with respect to 
exposure of behavior and identity of parties on a Smart Grid. 
Providing proof for this should included in further research. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Different levels of detail in energy consumption information 
 
Note that in this version of our model we use a simple 
view on energy systems/markets, where consumers are 
sharing information with each other, and with the producers 
of energy carriers. Business roles like retailers and 
distributors which are present in several market models are 
not mentioned explicitly. However, the sharing of 
142
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

information between business roles like retailers and 
distributors can also be positioned using the DOFIS-4G 
model. Instead of consuming energy carriers directly, they 
consume energy carriers indirectly by reselling or 
distributing it to their customers. 
 
IV. 
DEGREES OF FREEDOM  
In this section we present the axes of our DOFIS-4SG 
model. All axes together constitute the model. In the next 
Section we will use this model to identify possible shifts in 
power (by information) between parties connected to (smart) 
energy grids. 
A. Level of Detail (LoD) 
The first axis we present is about the Level of Detail 
(LoD) of information. The LoD strongly influences what 
kind of market-models and types of energy matching & 
distribution are possible. For example, when a consumer 
shares its total usage of energy once a year, the receiving 
party can use this for constructing a yearly bill. However, 
when information is shared on an hourly basis, it becomes 
possible for the receiver to bill by the hour, and thus, it 
influences the consumption of energy by financial 
incentives. We identify two different types of LoD:  
 
• 
Devices. To which extent is information shared about 
the energy usage of separate devices? For example, in 
the Netherlands in most houses only the total 
accumulated usage of electricity by all devices ‘behind’ 
the electricity meter is shared with the power supply 
company. However, information could also be shared 
on what device consume(s/d) the electricity. The energy 
supplier could use this information to understand which 
devices make up for what amount of the total power 
usage at a house.  
 
• 
Time. To which extent is information shared about the 
energy usage over time. For example, instead of sharing 
information about the electricity use of once a year, it is 
also possible to share information more or less often. 
 
In Figure 1, an overview is given of the two LoD types 
and how they congregate. Both axes represent one of the 
detail levels, and together they span a field of possible 
choices. 
 
Figure 2.  Information about the past, current and future 
B. Direction in Time (DiT) 
Next to the LoD, we consider the direction in time as 
another degree of freedom with respect to information 
sharing. There are three different points in time to share 
information: 
 
• 
Past. Information on the usage of energy that has taken 
place in the past. Two examples about energy usage 
(e.g., power consumption) in the past that are often 
shared. The used amount of energy in a certain period 
(e.g., kWh) and the consumed amount of energy on a 
certain moment (e.g., Watt). In the current situation on 
the energy grid in the Netherlands, many consumers 
share their total power consumption in the past with 
their energy supplier once a year.  
 
• 
Current. Information on the current speed at which 
energy is flowing. An example is the current power 
consumption (Watt). Note that it is theoretically 
impossible to share information about the absolute 
current use instantaneously.  
 
• 
Future. Information on the estimated usage of energy 
that will take place in the future.  
 
In Figure 2, a timeline is presented that shows the three 
points/periods in time.  
C. Recipients 
The third degree of freedom is about the amount and type 
of recipients of information on energy usage. For example, 
there is a huge difference between sending information to 
only one trusted party or to a group of parties which might 
send this information to even other parties.  
In generally, the more recipients, the more the privacy of 
the consumer is violated. However, not only the amount of 
recipients is important, the type of recipient is important to. 
For example, there is a difference between sending 
information the energy supplier, or sending information to a 
neighbor. 
V. 
CHOICES HAVE CONSEQUENCES 
Now, as we have presented a model with (three) degrees 
of freedom, we can compare market models and energy 
systems with respect to consequences. In this Section, we 
will provide the reader with several examples in different 
areas that show the consequences of making different 
choices in information sharing. In other words: a different 
position in the DOFIS-4SG set of axes means different 
consequences. For example, certain services and market 
models preclude certain levels of privacy. We have identified 
four categories of consequences and we will use those to 
present the examples in a structured way. As an illustration 
of the consequences, we introduce two possible future 
energy systems/markets in which electrical energy will be 
exchanged/sold. Both energy systems are extreme, and it is 
not likely that only one of them will be put into practice. We 
143
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

expect something in the middle. However, their location at 
opposite sides of the spectrum is useful to illustrate the 
consequences of information sharing decisions. The 
examples will show that choices (i.e., restrictions) on 
information sharing can enable or disable certain energy 
systems and markets. The two ‘opposites’ are:  
 
• 
“Massif Central”. In this scenario, governments and 
electricity supplying companies will invest their money 
in extra centralized energy production capacity. As a 
result the current energy grid will need to be scaled up, 
to be able to handle the peak loads in areas where 
electrification is increasing (in some areas of the 
Netherlands heating by gas is changing to heating by 
electricity using heat pumps). Thus, in the Massif 
Central scenario there seems to be little need for 
producers and consumers of energy carriers to share 
information. There is a relatively small need for ‘real-
time’ control/coordination systems to manage the 
transport of energy (carriers), since there is relatively 
little to coordinate due to centralized power plants. This 
requires less agreement between parties on the Energy 
Internet. Thus far less information sharing is needed. 
Within the model it can be positioned as having A) a 
low Level of Detail with respect to time and devices, B)  
little to zero need for sharing information about the 
current and future and C) very few recipients (only 
electricity supplier) needed.  
 
• 
“Distributed Load”. This scenario is the opposite of 
the ”Massif Central” scenario. Money is invested in a 
smart 
grid 
which 
will 
match 
production 
and 
consumption for efficiency and also to decrease peak 
loads on the network. Electricity from renewable 
sources (solar, wind) with a dynamical and relatively 
unpredictable behavior is allowed on a massive scale on 
the grid. To match production and consumption, there is 
functionality embedded in the Smart 
Grid 
to 
automatically switch devices like washing machines on 
and off, based on offerings of energy. As a result there 
is a greater need for producers and consumers of energy 
carriers to share information. Many different parties 
have to agree upon the amount of energy (carriers) that 
they will use at a certain time. Depending on the exact 
type of implementation, information about (household) 
appliances like washing machines might even be 
shared. Within the model this energy system/market can 
be positioned as having A) a high Level of Detail with 
respect to time and devices, B) need for sharing 
information about the current and future and C) a 
relatively larger group of recipients needed. 
 
Note that the two example energy systems/markets are very 
roughly positioned. This is due to the fact that the two 
examples are roughly described because of reasons of space. 
The main purpose of these examples is to show that the 
model allows for comparison. Also note that we have not 
described all parties involved in detail.  
 
With these two differently positioned example energy 
markets/systems in mind, we can provide the different 
categories.  
A. Consequences for production, distribution and net-
balance 
The expected energy usage and production information is 
needed by intelligent distributed control algorithms to 
increase both efficiency and net-balance (e.g., see [13]). The 
overview in Table I shows that the choices with respect to 
the type and amount of information which is shared have 
consequences for the ability to arrive at one of the two 
energy systems described above. For example, without 
sharing any information on expected consumption, it is very 
difficult to arrive at a stable balance in a heavily distributed 
load situation with a significant amount of intermittent 
(renewable) energy sources.  
TABLE I. 
SHARING OF INFORMATION IN DIFFERENT SCENARIO’S 
 
”Massif 
Central” 
“Distributed Load”  
Level of 
detail of 
consuming 
devices 
Information 
sharing is not 
necessary 
Information 
sharing 
per 
device, in order to switch 
devices on/off, in order to 
balance the grid. 
Level of 
detail in 
time 
Information 
sharing is not 
necessary 
High 
level 
of 
detail 
required, in order to switch 
devices on/off in real time. 
Direction 
in time 
Information 
sharing is not 
necessary 
Information 
about 
the 
expected future needed, in 
order to optimize decisions 
about which device should 
be switched on/off 
Recipients 
Information 
sharing is not 
necessary 
Information needs to be 
shared with several parties. 
Which ones, depends on 
where the intelligence is 
located within the Energy 
Internet. 
 
B. Consequences for financial settlement 
Financial settlement between consumers and producers 
of energy carriers requires information from a trustworthy 
source on the amount, date, time, etc. of energy (carriers) 
used, depending on the financial agreements between 
consumer and producer. For example, in the Netherlands, it 
is customary that consumers share information on their total 
energy carrier consumption (electricity and gas) each year 
with their power supplier. Since this is an accumulation – 
i.e., total kilowatt-hours of electricity and total cubic meters 
of gas – little can be deducted on the actual pattern of use of 
the consumer. Charging a customer for actual use at a daily 
144
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

or monthly basis is not possible, due to the yearly 
accumulated exchange of information. Also, billing by the 
hour is not possible. If the producer would like to offer 
‘hourly prices’, this means that there should be a log ‘per 
hour’.  
 
In one of our research projects at TNO, we are studying 
the necessity and effect of stimulating flexibility in energy 
usage by using financial incentives. For example, consumers 
could (indirectly) offer ‘flextime’ to producers. The idea here 
is that household appliances like washing machines are 
switched on if it is beneficial for the greener/smarter grid as 
a whole to do so. A consumer provides a ‘flex offer’ to the 
grid (how is beyond of the scope of this article) where it 
states that somewhere in next hours the washing machine 
should be turned on. The longer this period in time (i.e., the 
more flexibility), the higher the financial compensation the 
consumer gets, because the consumer is helping the 
greener/smarter grid to achieve its efficiency goals. This is 
only possible if the consumer is willing to share information 
with its energy supplier on when he/she expects or wants to 
use a certain amount of power. Note that it is also possible to 
share less detailed information with an energy supplier, by 
first accumulating that information in a group (e.g., a 
neighbourhood) and share the accumulated information. In 
this way, the producer has no information about the 
consumption of each separate home, but only the aggregate 
information of the entire neighbourhood. However, the 
financial compensation should probably go to this group. 
And within this group, the compensation should be divided 
again.  
 
We do not elaborate on different financial compensation 
schemes in this article, neither do we elaborate on other 
possible incentives (e.g., see [7]): our point is that in order to 
provide a possible incentive, some degree of information 
sharing is required. We provide two example goals of a 
greener/smarter grid that might be achieved by using 
financial incentives. Those two examples are given in Table 
II. Note that these are ‘imaginary’ examples. Current 
legislation determines whether this is possible in today’s 
energy market. Also note that the two example goals and 
incentives might also be used to improve network 
management (see next category of consequences), because 
their possible influence on the consumption of energy might 
result in less unwanted peaks for examples. 
TABLE II.  
C
CONSEQUENCES FOR BILLING 
Goal 
Required information level  
Decrease 
total volume 
in a year 
Relatively less detailed information is 
needed. Can be deduced from a meter 
with a ‘running total’, which is ‘read’ by 
a computer or humans once a year. No 
intermediate measurements are needed. 
Decrease 
used volume 
in a certain 
Relatively more detailed information 
might be needed. If periods are fixed (i.e., 
day and night) and energy prices remain 
period 
during a day 
the same during that period of the day for 
a year, then a meter with a ‘running total’ 
per period can be used; which are read at 
the end of each year. The more separate 
periods in a day, the more meters. If 
energy prices differ on a day to day basis, 
the meter should be read every day. If 
periods are not fixed, a meter with a 
running total per period does no longer 
suffice. Instead, the meter should be read 
at the beginning and the end of a period, 
and this information should be shared 
with the energy supplier. 
 
Note that it is not (always) necessary to send 
measurement information to the transport or energy provider 
in order to provide the consumer with a bill. When 
information for ‘pricing’ is available ‘on site’ (i.e., next to 
the measurement device) the total amount of money to be 
paid in a certain period, could be calculated on site (in a 
special intelligent device next to the meter) at the consumer 
site. This requires that information on (actual) prices for 
energy (carriers) in a certain period needs to be sent to this 
device. 
Connectivity 
with 
energy 
transporting 
and 
measurement parties are needed. Note that in order for the 
total amount of money to be trusted by all parties, there are 
demands to the device carrying out the measurement and 
pricing, since the ability to change ‘measurement data’ or 
‘pricing information’ on site within the device would enables 
the consumer to commit fraud. Vice versa, the consumer 
might not trust the provider/transporter of energy carriers if it 
cannot 
see 
measurement 
and 
pricing 
information. 
Measurement and pricing should therefore probably take 
place in a ‘sealed environment’ [6].  
C. Consequences for network-management 
Many different parties will connect to the Energy Internet 
of the future. This will be parties like: houses, factories, 
farms and hospitals. They use the energy infrastructure to 
receive energy carriers like electricity and gas. Also, in the 
future, they will send energy carriers. For example, houses 
with solar panels might produce electric power and farms 
might deliver biogas, just like green house companies with 
industrial strength Combined Heat & Power (CHP) 
equipment supply electric power. The classic asymmetry in 
power flow will disappear and more symmetry will evolve. 
Traditional models of the use of networks for energy carriers 
do no longer suffice. This impedes network management 
organizations in carrying out network capacity planning, 
maintenance, etc. In order to retain insight into the workings 
of the energy carrier transportation networks (as well as 
providing net balance, information about the (estimated) 
flow of energy carriers is needed. Currently, we suspect that 
more sharing of information between network management 
related parties on the grid is needed, but we cannot state yet 
which positions in the DOFIS-4SG preclude proper network 
management (in general) on a Smart Grid. The According to 
us, this is still a research topic. 
145
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

D. Consequences for privacy and balance of power 
Sharing information about energy (carrier) usage means 
sharing information about the behavior of (a collective of) 
machines (in houses/factories) and indirectly sharing 
information about company information (e.g., amount of 
products produced) or personal behavior. For example: a 
graph that shows the accumulated electrical power and/or 
gas consumption of a house through time – every minute - 
provides insight into activities of the residents; the presence 
of people is reflected in the usage of energy: with some basic 
knowledge of energy consumption patterns it is often 
possible to deduce the use of washing machines, televisions, 
etc. from such a graph [5]. If even more detailed information 
is shared – like a graph per household appliances– then very 
little knowledge is needed to deduce information about a 
person’s life from his energy carrier consumption. For 
example, how early does a person get out of bed, when does 
he/she go to work, how often does he/she use the washing 
machine, etc. In short: sharing of information is a potential 
violation of privacy. In Table III, we show how the degrees 
of freedom are related to privacy. 
TABLE III.  
I
IMPACT ON PRIVACY 
Degree of 
Freedom 
Impact on privacy  
More Level 
of Detail 
An increase in the breakdown of 
accumulated information into detailed 
information (e.g., at the appliance level), 
means less privacy with respect to the 
consumer of energy carriers. 
Direction in 
time  
Information about the future provides 
insight 
into 
predicted 
or 
expected 
consumption of energy carriers and 
removes the ability for consuming parties 
to keep their future energy consumption 
private. The same applies to information 
about the current and the past. There is a 
potential privacy violation.  
More 
Recipients 
An increase in the amount of recipients 
means less privacy. Note that the type of 
recipients also matters. We expect that 
most consumers will not object to their 
energy provider receiving information, 
while most consumers will object to 
sending it to their next-door neighbors. 
 
Closely related to the concept of privacy is the concept of 
the ‘balance of power by information’. In general this 
concept is about the ability to exercise (a certain amount of) 
power by the recipient of energy usage information on the 
sender. For example, if information about predicted energy 
consumption somehow becomes available to criminals, they 
could decide to ‘visit’ a certain house when predicted energy 
consumption is at a minimum, since this is an indication of 
the inhabitants of the house be absent. Also, government 
agencies could decide to use that information for tracking 
down people involved in social security fraud. The amount 
of electricity used at a location provides information on 
whether or not – or how many - people actually inhabit a 
residence. This shifts the balance of power in the direction of 
the state and away from its citizens. Another example is the 
public availability of power consumption of factories: market 
analysts could use this information for estimates on 
production numbers. A final example is where (commercial) 
parties target certain consumers for new washing machine 
offers based on their power use signature.  
In short: sharing information potentially shifts the 
balance of power by information. By sharing information 
with another party, that party is empowered in some way. 
More information could lead to more power (by information) 
and more power could mean the ability to collect even more 
information.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we have shown that the evolution of classic 
energy grids towards the future Energy Internet will have 
impact on information sharing between parties connected to 
the grids. In order to meet the growing demands for more 
sustainability (i.e., a greener grid) and more efficiency (i.e., a 
smarter grid) there is a need for change in information 
sharing. To evolve towards a greener grid, there seems to be 
a need for the increased use of decentralized intermittent 
energy sources (wind, waves, solar, etc.). This in turn seems 
to require more coordination between producing and 
consuming parties on the grid, just as is needed for a smarter 
grid. More coordination requires sharing more information, 
which in turn will have impact on privacy and balance of 
power. Also, the use of financial incentives to stimulate 
certain behavior with respect to energy carrier production 
and consumption (e.g., time and volume), will also require 
more information to be shared on the actual production and 
consumption patterns. Deciding upfront not to share this 
information because of privacy reasons means disabling 
several ways to evolve to a greener and smarter grid. This 
leads us to our final conclusion that for the evolution to a 
greener and smarter Energy Internet to take place it is 
important to put information sharing mechanisms into place, 
that stimulate sharing, provide as much privacy protection as 
possible and finally enable society to consciously decide on 
when and with whom information is shared. There should be 
a package of measures be put into place to impede an 
automatic ongoing concentration of power (by information). 
Especially because after a society has decided to share 
information at a certain Level of Detail, with a certain 
direction in time and with a certain number of recipients, we 
expect it will be difficult to turn back the clock. For example: 
government agencies that are used to having energy usage 
information at their disposal, will probably object to that 
stream of information being stopped, since this would mean 
a reduction of their abilities to carry out public tasks in the 
area of inspection and fraud detection. In other words: we 
think removing privacy is easier than reinstating it. 
 The DOFIS-4SG model we have presented enables 
policy and decision makers to compare different designs of 
energy systems and markets with respect to aspects of 
146
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

exposing behavior and identity of parties Smart Grids. The 
comparison is not only with respect to aspects like ‘level of 
detail’ itself, but also with respect to the consequences of 
sharing information. We suspect that the model can be 
refined and extended and invite other researchers to do so. 
Currently, we are carrying out research on that refinement 
and in 2011 and beyond we hope to provide our research 
results. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank our fellow researchers at TNO for providing an 
environment where the issues in this paper could be 
discussed. Their active participation in Dutch and European 
research projects on Smart Grids provided us with a way to 
test out our ideas. We also thank those researchers who took 
the effort to describe what information is exchanged between 
parties in their energy-market model. This again enabled us 
to test out our ideas with respect to current research.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
http://www.powermatcher.net/, last visit 15 march 2011. 
[2] 
http://www.powermatchingcity.nl/, last visit 15 march 2011. 
[3] 
K. Kok, Z. Derzsi, M.  Hommelberg, C. Warmer, R. Kamphuis, and 
H. Akkermans, "Agent-Based Electricity Balancing with Distributed 
Energy Resources, A Multiperspective Case Study," Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, Proceedings of the 41st 
Annual , pp. 173, 7-10 Jan. 2008 
[4] 
C.W. Potter, A. Archambault, and K. Westrick, “Building a smarter 
smart grid through better renewable energy information”, 200 
IEEEPES Power Systems Conference and Exposition, pp. 1-5, 2009 
[5] 
C. Efthymiou, and G. Kalogridis, "Smart Grid Privacy via 
Anonymization 
of 
Smart 
Metering 
Data," 
Smart 
Grid 
Communications (SmartGridComm), 2010 First IEEE International 
Conference on , pp. 238-243, 4-6 Oct. 2010 
[6] 
P. McDaniel, and S. McLaughlin, "Security and Privacy Challenges 
in the Smart Grid," Security & Privacy, IEEE , vol. 7, no..3, pp. 75-
77, May-June 2009 
[7] 
S. Caron, and G. Kesidis, "Incentive-Based Energy Consumption 
Scheduling 
Algorithms 
for 
the 
Smart 
Grid," 
Smart 
Grid 
Communications (SmartGridComm), 2010 First IEEE International 
Conference on ,pp. 391-396, 4-6 Oct. 2010 
[8] 
R.L. King, "Information services for smart grids," Power and Energy 
Society General Meeting - Conversion and Delivery of Electrical 
Energy in the 21st Century, 2008 IEEE, pp. 1-5, 20-24 July 2008 
[9] 
M. McGranaghan, D. Von Dollen, P. Myrda, and E. Gunther, "Utility 
experience with developing a smart grid roadmap," Power and Energy 
Society General Meeting - Conversion and Delivery of Electrical 
Energy in the 21st Century, 2008 IEEE , pp. 1-5, 20-24 July 2008 
[10] P. Wang, J.Y. Huang, Y. Ding, P. Loh, and L. Goel, "Demand Side 
Load Management of Smart Grids using intelligent trading/Metering/ 
Billing System," Power and Energy Society General Meeting, 2010 
IEEE , pp. 1-6, 25-29 July 2010 
[11] K. Young-Jin, M. Thottan, V. Kolesnikov, and L. Wonsuck, "A 
secure decentralized data-centric information infrastructure for smart 
grid," Communications Magazine, IEEE , vol. 48, no. 11, pp. 58-65, 
November 2010 
[12] S. Rohjans, M. Uslar, R. Bleiker, J. González, M. Specht, T. Suding, 
and T. Weidelt, "Survey of Smart Grid Standardization Studies and 
Recommendations," Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), 
2010 First IEEE International Conference on, pp. 583-588, 4-6 Oct. 
2010 
[13] R.R. Negenborn, B. De Schutter, and H. Hellendoorn, "Multi-Agent 
Model Predictive Control of Transportation Networks," Networking, 
Sensing and Control, 2006. ICNSC '06. Proceedings of the 2006 
IEEE International Conference on, pp. 296-301 
 
 
147
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

