Fit for Solar Power - Computer-Assisted Planning of Regional Power Grids 
 
Thomas Rist 
Faculty of Computer Science  
University of Applied Sciences Augsburg 
Augsburg, Germany 
e-mail: tr@rz.fh-augsburg.de 
Michael Wiest 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering 
University of Applied Sciences Augsburg 
Augsburg, Germany 
e-mail: michael.wiest@hs-augsburg.de
 
 
Abstract—Additional 
power 
feed-in 
by 
newly 
installed 
photovoltaic panels may exceed the available capacity of an 
existing power grid and can seriously harm grid stability. Grid 
operators need to consider future scenarios with an increased 
share of solar power and examine whether the capacity of an 
existing grid will suffice or whether upgrades or extensions 
need to be made. In this contribution, we present IPDS, an 
Interactive Planning tool, which assists a grid planner in 
making predictions about such future scenarios. Starting from 
a cadastral map that shows the topological structure of an 
existing power grid, the tool estimates the yet unused roof 
surfaces of buildings, which are connected to a certain grid 
circuit. In turn, this estimation can be used to estimated future 
additional power feed-in.   
Keywords- Renewable energy - energy source integration 
models, network/grid plannin, integration of solar technologies. 
I. 
 PROBLEM STATEMENT 
Due to favorable funding conditions, Germany recorded 
a rapid increase in photovoltaic (PV) solar power plants 
during the last years.  According to a monthly publication of 
the German Federal Network Agency [1], the total installed 
capacity of all funded and registered PV installations reached 
a value of 34,186 MWp in June 2013. Following forecasts of 
the German energy industry [2], this development will 
continue even in case of expected declining public funding.  
The increasing share of solar power generation 
contributes to the implementation of the politically 
encouraged energy turnaround from fossil fuels to renewable 
sources. On the other hand, this development challenges grid 
companies and stake-holders who need to decide on 
investments into a technically reliable and economically 
well-dimensioned grid infrastructure.  
The capacity of an existing power grid is limited by the 
maximum load capacity of its components (such as cables 
and transformers). As a consequence, additional feed-in by 
newly  installed PV panels may exceed available grid 
capacity and cause severe problems. In order to prepare for 
counter measures, grid operators need to consider future 
scenarios with an increased share of solar power and 
examine whether the capacity of an existing grid will still 
sufficiently meet the requirements of power quality [3], and 
if not, which components should be upgraded (e.g., larger 
cable sizing), or in which way a grid needs to be extended 
(e.g., additional lines and transformers).  
Calculations of this kind are usually performed with the 
assistance of a dedicated power system analysis software, 
such as PowerFactory [4]. Typically, such programs rely on 
schematic maps to display local wiring together with other 
grid components, such as transformers, of a concrete power 
grid. However, calculations are performed on the provided 
input data. Since the result of such capacity calculations 
impacts decision making on whether or not to invest into a 
certain grid infrastructure, it is decisive that capacity 
calculation are performed on the basis of accurate 
assumptions about possible future scenarios. Unfortunately, 
it is difficult to predict in detail where additional PV sources 
may appear in the future as the installation of new PV panels 
is to a great extend in private hands (especially in rural areas 
by the owners of houses and land). In the sequel, we describe 
a tool which assists grid operators in making accurate 
predictions. 
II. 
IPDS - AN INTERACTIVE TOOL FOR PLANNING GRID 
EXTENSIONS 
Interviews with grid operators revealed that the amount 
of not yet used roof surfaces is a good starting point for 
making assumptions where new PV panels may appear in the 
future. Therefore, a grid planner may consult two sources of 
information: i) a cadastral map that shows the boundaries 
and ownership of land parcels and buildings together with 
the topological structure of an existing power grid, and ii) an 
aerial view (e.g., a street map or an aerial image) for finding 
out where are roof surfaces which are suitable for additional 
PV panel installations. Such working practices motivate the 
development of an interactive tool -called IPDS-  that 
supports the following essential use cases: 
A. Use Case 1: Interactive examination of existing circuits 
As a basic data source we rely on cadastral maps that 
show the topological structure of an existing power grid. In 
order to gain some independence from proprietary data 
representation formats of an underlying drawing tool, or a 
certain geographic information system, we assume that such 
maps are available as ready-to-print PDF-documents. To this 
end, our IPDS tool comprises a PDF-scanner module which 
turns a static cadastral map into an interactive map view.  
More precisely, IPDS extracts from the PDF source 
document both cadastral information, such as buildings and 
streets, as well as grid components, such as power lines and 
transformers which may belong to different circuits.  
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
 
Figure 1.  An interacive cadastral map showing boundaries of land parcels and buildings, as well as the structure of an existing power grid. 
 
Figure 2. Selection of a single building (marked in black) 
 
After completion of the scan process the cadastral map 
with all grid circuits is displayed in the map-view panel of 
the IPDS tool (cf. Fig. 1). In addition, IPDS comprises an 
interactive tree-view showing a hierarchical view of all 
objects that have been extracted during the scan process. 
These are the individual power lines circuits (showed in 
different colors), and all buildings connected to those lines.  
 
There is a cross-reference between the graphically 
displayed objects in the map-view and the named objects 
entailed in the tree-view. Since in IPDS's graphical user 
interface all objects are selectable (via mouse click), the grid 
planner can easily select or deselect a certain circuit in order 
to get an overview of the grid structure to be examined. To 
handle larger maps, the map-viewer also supports zooming-
in/out as well as panning. 
 
B. Use Case 2: Estimation of PV energy gain 
Starting from the schematic representation of buildings as 
given by the cadastral map, an estimation of potential 
additional power feed-in through PV panel installations can 
be obtained by summing up the map area covered by 
buildings. However, in a power grid examination task the 
grid planner should be enabled to easily include and exclude 
buildings so that a variety of possible scenarios can be 
considered. To this end, IPDS supports a number of options 
for selecting objects (i.e., buildings and outhouses):  
 
 
Selection of all buildings which are connected to a 
certain grid circuit. This selection can be done using 
the tree-viewer. There, single circuits appear as 
colored top-level tree nodes. If selected, all sub-
ordinate nodes (i.e., buildings) are selected, too. 
 
Selection of a certain building.  In this case, the user 
simply clicks on the graphical representation of the 
building in the map view (cf. Fig. 2). 
 
Selecting a group of adjacent buildings. If interested 
in a certain neighborhood, IPDS allows the user to 
draw a rectangular frame (or likewise a closed 
polygonal line) around  objects of interest shown in 
the map-view (cf. Fig. 2). All enclosed objects are 
considered as selected in proceeding calculations. 
 
Exclusion of objects from a group. In addition, it is 
possible to exclude a certain object from a group of 
selected objects. For instance, think of a church or a 
listed heritage building which should be excluded as 
an installation of  PV panels is very unlikely. 
 
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
Figure 3. Selection of a group of buildings for estimating available 
roof surface area for additional PV panel installations. 
 PV-generated energy gain depends on a number of 
factors, including: 
 
Surface Area  (in square meters) of installed PV 
panels. 
 
EPV_Type  - the specific solar module efficiency value 
of  a certain PV panel type. This value is usually 
given in "Watt Peak" measured under standard test 
conditions (1000 W/m² global radiation, 25 °C 
module temperature, and air mass factor of 1.5). 
Sunlight conversion rates of current commercial PV 
panels typically range between 18% and 21%.  
 
EInstallation  - a factor to modify the EPV_Type  value 
based on the specific characteristics of a PV panel 
installation (i.e., latitude of location, cardinal 
direction, slope angle). In addition, an accurate value 
for solar radiation at a certain location can be 
computed by means of a solar position algorithm 
(SPA)  [ 5]. 
For the power grid planner potential maximum values are 
of highest interest. As a consequence, the maximum 
available surface area for PV panel installations becomes the 
crucial variable to be estimated.  
As soon as an object  selection has been made, IPDS 
calculates the occupied ground area Aobject 
 (label 
"Grundfläche" in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3) of all selected buildings 
and estimates a potential usage area Ausage (label 
"Nutzfläche" in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3) for additional PV 
installations. Note that already installed PV-panels are 
known as they are part of the power grid and thus have 
reference points on the cadastral map.  
We calculate Ausage as  a certain percentage of Aobject, i.e., 
the summed ground area given by the set of marked objects 
in the map-view. Assuming that in (German) rural villages 
gable roofs are dominant, and due to skylights, dormers and 
chimneys, parts of a roof area cannot be used for PV panel 
installation. Using the tool showed that a default value for  
Ausage may be chosen between 35% and 60%, which is in 
accordance with values reported in [6]. However, a grid 
planner is free to adjust this value (IPDS parameter 
"Nutzfaktor"), e.g., to account for actual roof types and 
cardinal direction of buildings. 
To obtain an estimate for power feed-in generated by PV 
panels, the estimated usage area must be multiplied by a 
factor  that accounts for the installed PV module efficiency. 
IPDS allows the grid planner to make specific adjustments of 
the above mentioned parameters EPV_Type  and EInstallation. In 
most cases, for the sake of comparability, a grid planner may 
leave default settings unchanged when exploring different 
scenarios. 
III. 
IMPROVING IPDS 
The current version of IPDS supports grid planners who 
examine grids in order to identify necessary grid extensions 
which are needed for an additional feed-in from anticipated 
future PV sources. The tool is actually used in a project 
supported by a regional power company in southern 
Germany that also maintains power grids of a number of 
rural villages.  
However, feed-back from grid planners who worked with 
IPDS suggests several improvements and extensions to be 
made, some of which are briefly discussed in the sequel.  
A. Support for data exchange between IPDS and power 
system analysis software 
An obvious inconvenience in the current grid planning 
workflow is the fact that a grid planner needs to work with 
two software systems, a  power system analysis tool on the 
one hand, and IPDS on the other hand. While IPDS can be 
used to estimate the potential future feed-in through 
additional PV panels for an existing grid circuit, a power 
system analysis tool is  needed to calculate the impact of the 
additional feed-in on the existing grid circuit.  
Vice versa, if changes to the grid structure are made in 
the power system analysis tool, one would need to 
incorporate these changes into the grid representation used 
by IPDS. While technically less challenging, the issue of 
data exchange between IPDS and commercial power system 
analysis tools can only be solved in cooperation with the 
developers of such tools. 
B. Improving estimates for PV-usable roof area by means 
of an aerial image 
As elaborated in Section 2, IPDS performs a rough 
estimate of available roof surface area for additional 
installations of PV panels.  The roof surface area is estimated 
on the basis of the ground area covered by buildings as 
indicated in a cadastral map.  
Thanks to available map services on the Internet, such as 
the Google Maps API [7], it is possible to use an aerial 
image of a region as background in the IPDS map-view 
panel and superimpose a cadastral map together with a 
topological power grid visualization. For the purpose of 
demonstration, we added a Google Maps import function to 
IPDS that allows to import a map section.  
By means of a slider, the transparency value of the 
satellite image can be continuously adjusted between  100% 
transparency, i.e., only the cadastral map is visible  (left-
hand frame of Fig. 4), and 0%, which displays the 
background map fully saturated.  As shown by the right-hand 
frame of Fig. 4, a value of 20% renders the background map 
partly visible so that roof shapes are well recognizable.  
Such an overlay provides a grid planner with additional 
information about the actual roof shapes, and thus allows 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
Figure 5. Automated detection of gable roofs by means of Sobel discrete 
differentiation operators for edge detection. After edge detection, roof 
princes stand out clearly in the image.  
 
    
 
Figure 4. An interactive cadastral map with power lines (left) can be overlaid on a satellite image (retrieved via the Google Maps API).  
her/him to set the parameter "Nutzfaktor" (cf. Use Case 2)  
more accurately. 
C. Improving estimates for PV-usable roof area by means 
of image analysis techniques 
In case of an aerial image is available, one can even go a 
step further and try to deploy image analysis techniques for 
an automated classification of roof shapes. To this end, we 
experimented with some simple edge detection filters, such 
as a Sobel discrete differentiation operator. Fig. 5 shows an 
aerial view of two gable roofs. After edge detection, roof 
princes appear as edges that run parallel to a pair of edges 
which belong to a roof's side boundaries. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this contribution, we have presented IPDS, an 
interactive tool that assists a power grid planner in making 
accurate assumptions about potential additions of PV panel 
installations to an existing grid. In its current version, the 
tool supports several core functions, foremost the estimation 
of roof surface area of buildings, which are connected to a 
certain grid circuit and thus are candidates for additional PV 
panel installations.  
While the tool is currently used and evaluated in the 
context of rural grid planning tasks, we also sketched some 
ideas for extension, such as the deployment of image 
analysis techniques for automated roof shape recognition. 
A more accurate estimate of PV-usable roof area 
constitutes an upper bound for potential additional PV 
capacity. However, other factors, such as PV panel costs, 
public funding conditions, and community-specific building 
regulations are further parameters to be considered, too.    
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
IPDS is has been developed in the context of the BMBF-
funded German-New Zealand research collaboration IT4SE, 
grant number 01DR12041. Further information on IT4SE 
can be found under  www.it4se.net  
The development of IPDS has been motivated by 
scenarios as examined in the research project "Network 
Planning under Uncertainty", which is conducted by the 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering at the Univ. of Applied 
Sciences Augsburg in cooperation with the Technical 
University of  Braunschweig. 
The presented screenshots have been taken from an IPDS 
prototype, which was implemented by computer science 
students during the summer semester 2013. We would like to 
thank the group members for their dedication and 
perseverance. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Bundesneztagentur (German Federal Network Agency). 
[Online]. Available from:   www.bundesnetzagentur.de  
2014.02.14.    
[2] M. Reichmuth, “Die EEG-Mittelfristprognose bis 2016".  
Energiewirtschaft-Recht-Technik 
und 
Umwelt, 
Section: 
Energiewirtschaftliche Tagesfragen. [Online]. Available from:   
www.et-energie-online.de/Zukunftsfragen/  2014.02.14.    
[3] VDE Association for Electrical, Electronic & Information 
Technologies, "VDE application rule: VDE-AR-N 4105". 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
www.vde.com/de/fnn/ 
arbeitsgebiete/seiten/n4105.aspx  2014.02.14. 
[4] PowerFactory is a product by DIgSILENT GmbH. 
[5] I. Reda, A. Andreas, A. Solar Position Algorithm for Solar 
Radiation Applications. NREL Report No. TP-560-34302, 
2003, revised version published January 2008. [Online]. 
Available from:   www.nrel.gov/midc/spa/  2014.02.14.    
[6] G. Kerber "Aufnahmefähigkeit von Niederspannungsverteil-
netzen für die Einspeisung aus Photovoltaikkleinanlagen" 
PhD Dissertation, Technical University Munich, 2011. 
[7] Google Developers, "Google Maps API". [Online]. Available 
from:   https://developers.google.com/maps  2014.02.14. 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

