Investigation of Technical Potentials for Load Shifting and Their Suitability 
to Compensate Forecast Errors of Wind Parks 
 
Liana Maria Jacob, Sebastian Reinöhl, Wolfgang Schufft 
Dept. of Power Systems and High-Voltage Engineering,  
Chemnitz University of Technology 
Chemnitz, Germany 
e-mail: liana-maria.jacob@etit.tu-chemnitz.de 
e-mail: sebastian.reinoehl@s2009.tu-chemnitz.de 
e-mail: wolfgang.schufft@etit.tu-chemnitz.de 
 
 
 
Abstract—Fundamental changes in the availability profile of 
electric power are expected due to the predominant feed-in 
share of renewable energy sources. In order to balance the 
differences between the regional generation and consumption, 
caused by forecast errors, the expansion of the power grid is 
currently being accelerated. However, a rational and resource-
saving alternative constitutes the participation of consumers, 
which are capable of shifting load, in a Demand Side 
Management (DSM) concept. In the present work, the 
suitability of deploying existing consumers for compensating 
wind forecast errors in a German federal state is investigated. 
For the investigation, a survey regarding the structure and 
proportion of existing consumers in the domestic, industrial 
and 
service 
sector 
was 
conducted. 
Furthermore, 
the 
identification and quantification of their potentials of load 
shifting took center stage. A confrontation of expected positive, 
as well as negative forecast errors and technical potential of 
existing loads indicate that there is a high probability of 
successful elimination of unbalances, if a collaboration between 
wind parks and regional consumers was accounted.  
 
Keywords- Demand Side Management; forecast error; load 
shifting; wind parks. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Future energy systems are prone to pass through a 
massive changeover from fossil to renewable energy 
generation as the German government decided to be one of 
the leading countries on the way to a more sustainable 
environment. However, renewable energy generation is 
often subject to uncertainties due to positive and negative 
forecast errors, consequently leading to high, dynamically- 
shaped availability profiles of the generated electric power.  
Since generation and consumption in the electric power 
system has to be kept in balance, a resource-saving manner 
of providing the required balancing power is indispensable. 
Facing these uncertainties implies assuring that online 
power plants dispose of sufficient generation capacity, 
resulting in a permanent underutilization rate of power 
plants. By including load shifting consumers in a Demand 
Side Management (DSM) concept, the operating reserve of 
the power plants could be minimized or even replaced, 
increasing their utilization rate and their efficiency. 
Up to now, several scientists researched this field. Main 
contributions were related to the benefits and challenges of 
DSM [1] and to the quantification of load shifting potential 
of different consumers [2][3]. Technical, as well as 
economic aspects with respect to developing a DSM 
concept were analyzed [2]-[5]. In [1], Strbac points out, the 
process of engaging consumers in a DSM concept was 
especially favorable and advantageous for grids with a great 
share of intermittent generation sources. Nevertheless, the 
slow development processes were a consequence of the lack 
of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) 
infrastructure, as well as the lack of understanding of the 
benefits of load shifting solutions.  
A vast quantification of available load shifting solutions 
was presented by Klobasa in [2][3]. Klobasas publications, 
as well as the electric grid related report [4] refer to 
Germany, including the domestic, industrial and service 
sector. Further work related to the load shifting in industrial 
sectors was published by Ashok et al. [6] and Paulus et al. 
[7]. The impact of DSM on the domestic sector was 
investigated by Gottwalt et al. [8] and Schlomann et al. [9].  
In addition to the publications mentioned above, this 
paper aims not only to present and quantify the load shifting 
potential of the three sectors but also to confront them to 
common forecast errors in the wind power generation. Load 
shifting potential, as well as the wind power generation data 
series correspond to the same German federal state, 
presenting an individual connection between the confronted 
values of load shifting potentials and expectable forecast 
errors. More specific information about typical density 
functions of occurring forecast errors are presented in [10]. 
In [10], the author gave an overview of the magnitude of 
forecast errors to be expected in different regions.  
Following this objective, the paper is structured as 
follows: In Section II, the potentials of load shifting are 
presented and discussed. Hereby, a differentiation between 
the domestic, industrial, as well as service sector was made. 
Section II is followed by the evaluation of expected forecast 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

errors corresponding to the investigated federal state. 
Subsequently, results were discussed in Sections IV and V 
and afterwards, main conclusions were drawn. 
II. 
EVALUATION OF TECHNICAL POTENTIAL FOR LOAD 
SHIFTING 
In order to accomplish the objective of this work, it was 
first necessary to identify the main consumers of the federal 
state that have the potential of short term load shifting and 
then to quantify them in terms of electric power. For this 
purpose, a survey was conducted implying the industrial 
commerce chamber, the federal state statistical office, as 
well as relevant industrial companies in the region. These 
delivered important information with regard to the technical 
potential of load shifting in the region including parameters, 
such as the annual energy consumption of different loads of 
the domestic, industrial and service sectors in the federal 
state. Specific market saturation rates, as well as average 
electric power of appliances corresponding to the domestic 
sector were made available. The appliance with the highest 
market saturation rate among households (hh) of the 
investigated federal state is the refrigerator, with 99.8 %, 
followed by the washing machine, with 96.65 %. 
In case of industrial consumers, which are able to 
provide load shifting potential by interrupting their 
production, such as the steel industry, the annual production 
plays a major role in determining the load shifting 
potentials. In case of food industry, where load shifting can 
be made available by cooling houses and refrigeration 
compressors, the technical potential of load shifting is 
available at each time of day. Constraints are mostly given 
by the admissible duration of the load shifting process. 
Aiming to make a distinction between air conditioning and 
ventilation in different branches of the industry and the 
cooling houses, a category named cross-section technology 
has been added to the calculation. This category includes the 
ventilation and air conditioning of production and 
manufacturing halls, as well as machines.  
With regard to the service sector, the individual 
character was given by the average annual consumption as 
well as in most of the cases information about the surface 
area and the working schedules of consumers. By knowing 
the surface area of supermarkets, discounters or even office 
buildings, the demand of air conditioning, ventilation of 
rooms and cooling or freezing of food products can be 
approximated. Furthermore, water heating processes are 
also to be taken into account. The technical potentials of the 
service sector are tightly connected to the weather 
conditions. For this work, consumption values, which 
correspond to the summer months and are therefore less 
significant for a DSM concept were considered. If winter 
months are assumed, the technical potential of air 
conditioning in the service sector will increase.   
After acquiring these information, the power to be made 
available for load shifting was quantified by using the 
methodology and Load Management Factors (LMF) 
thoroughly presented in [2] and [4]. Hereby, the results 
listed in the tables I to III with respect to the domestic, 
industrial and service sector, respectively, were obtained. 
Table I shows the technical potentials of one single 
household. These amount to 146 MW if a population of 
2 million households was considered. Summing up the load 
shifting potential of the three sectors, a value of 533.3 MW 
was obtained. As shown in Table I, as well as in the 
publications [2]-[4][8] a considerable load shifting potential 
of the domestic sector could be provided by appliances with 
great market saturation, such as the refrigerator, or the 
washing machine. According to [8] the load of refrigerators 
can only be postponed for 30 minutes. A short duration of 
the load shifting process reduces considerably the available 
shifting power that might be used in a DSM concept. 
Appliances, such as the washing machine or the dishwasher 
are connected to possible comfort limitations of the 
inhabitants. Therefore, the utilization of the whole 
calculated technical potential seems to be rather unlikely. 
A survey among the industrial consumers showed that 
the only industrial process to be possibly used in a DSM 
concept can be found in the steel production. Any other 
industrial branch would require an absolute changeover with 
respect to their processes in order to be eligible for a DSM 
concept. Nevertheless, the activation of the technical load 
shifting potential of the steel industry is tightly connected to 
the melting process and is therefore limited. 
 
TABLE I. LOAD SHIFTING POTENTIALS - DOMESTIC SECTOR 
Application 
Energy 
Consumption 
Market 
Saturation 
Shifting 
Power 
Washing machine 
150 kWh/a 
96.65 % 
23 W/ hh 
Dryer 
280 kWh/a 
23.8 % 
11 W/ hh 
Dishwasher 
215 kWh/a 
61.2 % 
19 W/ hh 
Refrigerator 
200 kWh/a 
99.8 % 
29 W/ hh 
Freezer 
280 kWh/a 
45.1 % 
17 W/ hh 
 
TABLE II. LOAD SHIFTING POTENTIALS - INDUSTRIAL SECTOR 
Application 
Energy 
Consumption 
LMF 
Shifting 
Power 
Steel industry 
1100 GWh/a 
50 % 
135 MW 
Food industry 
155 GWh/a 
50 % 
17.7 MW 
Cross-section 
technology 
519 GWh/a 
11 % 
16.6 MW 
 
TABLE III. LOAD SHIFTING POTENTIALS - SERVICE SECTOR 
Application 
Energy 
Consumption 
LMF 
Shifting 
Power 
Cooling Processes 
128 GWh/a 
63 % 
169 MW 
Ventilation 
365 GWh/a 
50 % 
20 MW 
Heating 
238 GWh/a 
25 % 
7 MW 
Air Conditioning 
259 GWh/a 
75 % 
22 MW 
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

According to [2] an activation is only 40 times a year 
possible. A reduction of the consumption can be delayed for 
four hours. Cooling houses permit the load shifting up to a 
duration 
of 
two 
hours. 
In 
addition, 
cross-section 
technologies, such as cooling processes, ventilation or 
heating processes in the industrial sector might be available 
for participation in a DSM concept on daily basis with a 
maximum duration of two hours. The conducted survey 
confirmed that in the service sector only cross-section 
technologies can support shifting loads. A considerable 
amount can be provided by the consumption of cooling 
systems in supermarkets or discounters. The share of 
ventilation and air conditioning to the total technical 
potential is almost insignificant during the summer months. 
III. 
EVALUATION OF EXPECTED FORECAST ERROR 
The data series corresponding to the wind power 
generation was provided by a regional grid operator. These 
contain 15-minutes values describing the actual generation 
and the forecasted values during a year. Calculated forecast 
errors PFE were defined as difference between the forecast 
generation PF and the actual generation PA: 

PFPA = PFE,

with PFE < 0 describing an underestimation and PFE > 0 
representing an overestimation of wind generation. 
An evaluation of the given data series showed, the 
positive forecast error totaled up to 109 GWh/ a, while the 
negative forecast errors equaled -127 GWh/ a. The maximal 
values of the positive and negative forecasted errors were 
210.58 MW and -239.66 MW, respectively, while the 
reference installed power of the wind turbines amounted to 
1112 MW. Nevertheless, a positive median forecast error of 
16.3 MW is to be assumed in case of overestimation. The 
median underestimation forecast error lied at -21.2 MW.  
In order to get a better overview of the type and magnitude 
of forecast errors in the evaluated wind data series, the error 
magnitudes were analyzed by means of the frequency of 
their occurrence in the data series. The obtained histogram 
showed in Figure 1, indicates that great values of 
underestimation errors are more frequent than great values 
of overestimation errors. On the other hand, the majority of 
the forecast errors, which are positive, lie within a band of 
2 MW to 6 MW. Forecast errors due to overestimation 
greater than 65 MW proved to be rather unusual.  
For a better understanding of the character of forecast errors 
with respect to the magnitudes of the actual feed-in wind 
power, these were divided into three groups. Each of the 
three groups consist of 2928 elements and represent values 
of low, medium or high feed-in power. In accordance with 
the evaluated data series the low feed-in values range from 
1.2 MW to 73.49 MW. The high feed-in power values lie 
within a band of 196.5 MW to 840 MW. 
-200
-100
0
100
200
0
100
200
300
400
Magnitude of the forecast error [MW]
frequency of occurance
 
Figure 1.  Relative Frequency of Forecast Errors over a year. 
The tendency of overestimation or underestimation 
depending on the magnitude of the feed-in values was 
following analyzed by means of the distribution function for 
each of the three groups, as it can be seen in Figure 2. The 
average values corresponding to the three density functions 
differ from zero, meaning that there are certain tendencies 
of the three groups for overestimation or underestimation. In 
the area of the high feed-in power values, 196.5 MW to 
840 MW, the average value of the forecast error, equal to     
-17.29 MW, is negative, thus preponderantly describing 
underestimation errors. In contrast to the high feed-in group, 
the density functions of the other two groups are defined by 
positive average values. The average value of the normal 
distribution of the group represented by middle feed-in 
power values between 73.5 MW and 196.49 MW is equal to 
2.89 MW, meaning that most of the forecast errors were 
positive. 
Still, 
the 
number 
of 
overestimation 
and 
underestimation errors are almost equal for this power 
interval. The forecast errors of low feed-in power show a 
clear tendency to overestimation. Further information 
related to the forecast errors of the three groups, can be 
obtained by calculating their absolute median values. The 
median absolute values of the forecast errors that 
correspond to the three groups of high, medium and low 
feed-in power are 32.6 MW, 19.5 MW and 10.3 MW, 
respectively. 
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
forecast error [MW]
relative frequency [%]
 
 
High feed-in
Medium feed-in
Low feed-in
 
Figure 2.  Normal distribution of Forecast Errors over a year of different 
feed-in levels. 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

The calculated median values support the proposition that 
the absolute magnitude of forecast error arises with 
increasing magnitudes of the actual feed-in power. 
Furthermore, the investigated data series showed that 
forecast errors are likely to occur in the afternoon and in the 
late evening hours, as calculated forecast errors correspond 
to the day-ahead forecast method. By making use of another 
forecast method, lower values regarding the forecast error 
could be achieved. 
IV. 
CONNECTION BETWEEN TECHNICAL POTENTIAL OF 
LOAD SHIFTING AND FORECAST ERRORS 
The 
connection 
between 
overestimation 
and 
underestimation and the required countermeasures are 
described by the diagram in Figure 3. A positive forecast 
error resulting from overestimation would therefore be 
followed by a demand of positive balancing power. Positive 
balancing power can be provided by consumers that are able 
to postpone their regular consumption cycles or reduce 
these. This type of procedure can lead to an additional 
consumption at a later point of time, since most of the 
consumption cycles still has to be executed. Still, a short 
term error compensation can be achieved, if positive 
forecast error are balanced out by deploying the right 
amount of 
positive balancing power. In case of 
underestimation, negative balancing power is required. 
Appliances that have not been yet in operation are 
collectively switched on with the purpose of collecting the 
superfluous power available. The load that has been 
procured earlier may result in a reduced load profile at a 
later point in time. By matching the appropriate amount of 
negative balancing power to the occurring negative forecast 
error, a short term compensation of negative forecast error 
will result. In this way, a short term compensation of 
forecast errors and therefore an improvement of the electric 
grid by balancing supply and demand will be reached. 
underestimation
overestimation
negative forecast error
positive forecast error
error compensation
error compensation
negative balancing
power
positive balancing
power
load increasal
load reduction
 
Figure 3.  Connection between the type of forecast error and suitable 
countermeasures. 
V. 
INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS 
In accordance to the objective of this work, a 
confrontation between the technical potential and the 
expectable forecast error in wind power generation 
corresponding to the federal state is indispensable. 
Evaluating the results on regional base aims to provide an 
additional share of plausibility and applicability. The 
assumption that an ample participation of regional 
consumers to a DSM concept is able to face forecast errors 
could be consolidated, if it was shown that technical 
potential for shifting loads exceeds the expectable forecast 
error in most of the cases. This assumption has also been 
considered in the work of Stötzer et al. [11]. In this work, the 
authors analyzed the load shifting potential in Germany and 
predicted the future development of the German energy 
system. 
Developing a DSM concept requires in the first step the 
identification and quantification of regional technical 
potential. For this purpose, consumers have to be divided 
into two categories, providers of positive or negative 
balancing power. According to the regional industrial 
processes, an utilization of the load shifting operation is 
permitted only 40 days a year and is straightly oriented to 
steel production. For a time interval up to 4 hours, 135 MW 
can be made available as positive balancing power in case 
of overestimation. The participation of industrial consumers 
to compensate for positive wind forecast errors is therefore 
only possible to a limited extent, although to be encouraged. 
Cooling houses as part of the food industry could be 
engaged in a DSM concept based on direct or indirect 
control. Cooling processes of industrial sector can be 
activated on daily basis. 
All technical potentials that are related to cross-section 
technologies, such as cooling processes, ventilation or air 
conditioning can be made available every day of a year at 
least once a day for a time interval up to two hours. These 
can be aggregated and then utilized in order to provide 
positive, as well as negative balancing power, offering a 
secure source of technical potential for load shifting. As 
already stated in the work of Stötzer et al. [11], these are 
associated to a very low limitation of comfort for each 
consumer in different sectors due to their inherent storage 
function.  
Technical potential of the domestic sector resulting from 
appliances, such as washing machines or dishwashers are 
mostly available during the day. Additionally, they imply 
the active participation of the inhabitants to the DSM 
concept. Given the high market saturation of this appliances, 
it might be realistic that part of the available households 
engage in a DSM concept. Every source of load shifting 
potential, which can be made available on daily basis, is to 
be approximated by taking into consideration standardized 
load profiles of the consumers mentioned in the tables 1 to 
3. The reference load profiles describing appliances of 
domestic sector were developed by Stadler [12]. Other load 
profiles can be found in [4]. Results representing the profile 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

of the total amount of available shifting load are shown in 
Figure 4. It has to be mentioned that the presented values 
represent the maximum available amount of load shifting 
potentials. These are only once available during a day. If 
potentials have already been called up, these will no longer 
be available for a certain period of time and are to be 
subtracted from the given maximum amount. By comparing 
the values related to the maximum expected positive or 
negative 
forecast 
error, 
210 MW 
and 
- 239 MW, 
respectively, and the maximum amount of load shifting 
power that could be provided by regional consumers, it can 
be easily recognized that the technical available load 
shifting potential can compensate expected errors in most of 
the cases. The maximum negative forecast error, with an 
expected magnitude equal to - 239 MW exceed the technical 
potential available during the night. However, forecast 
errors of similar magnitudes are rather unusual and are 
mostly to be attributed to very particular events, such as 
accidents or storms that put entire wind parks out of service.  
Furthermore, forecast errors due to overestimation lie in 
over 90 % of the cases within a band of 0 and 25 MW. Over 
85 % of the underestimation errors do not exceed 25 MW. 
Taking into consideration the presented profile in Figure 4, 
a forecast error of this extent could be easily compensated 
by making use of regional load shifting potentials. Even if 
forecast errors up to 25 MW occurred simultaneously or 
repeatedly, there would be a reasonable chance that the 
required share of load shifting potential was available. Due 
to the fact that great forecast errors are more likely to occur 
during the late evening hours, the chance to compensate 
them by means of load shifting, increases. 
hour of day [h]
Power [MW]
 
 
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Washing machine
Dryer
Dishwasher
Cooling systems - domestic sector
Cooling processes - industrial sector
Ventilation - industrial sector
Air conditioning - service sector
Cooling processes - service sector
Ventilation - service sector
 
Figure 4.  Profile of Available Load Shifting Power  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Based on a survey, an investigation of the technical 
potential of a German federal state was performed. The 
results are in accordance with already published results 
regarding Germany. These showed that every sector can be 
part of a DSM concept and contribute to it. A total technical 
potential equal to 533.3 MW was calculated. This technical 
potential could be activated only once during a day, 
assuming that all participants are able to shift load. During 
the night, over 200 MW technical potential for load shifting 
can be made available.  
Most reasonable participants to a DSM concept turned 
out to be the cross-section technologies in the service and 
industrial sector, as these can be activated at least once a 
day. A further option is represented by appliances of the 
food industry and the food retail like cooling houses or 
supermarkets with high surface areas. These have a high 
power consumption and a forecast error could be 
compensated by including only a small number of 
participants. Technical potential for load shifting connected 
to industrial production processes is only represented by the 
steel industry. To a limited extent, a load reduction can be 
achieved. However, there is a huge need of modernization in 
this sector so that processes can be deployed for this 
purpose. 
The domestic sector also shows a high technical 
potential for load shifting. A direct load control could be 
applied to cooling systems. Still, it has to be highlighted that 
the duration of this process shouldn't exceed one hour. 
Further appliances in the domestic sector to contribute to a 
DSM concept are washing machines or dishwashers, which 
might be connected to comfort limitations of the inhabitants. 
It also has to be mentioned that including diverse appliances 
related to the domestic sector in a DSM concept is 
associated to an elaborate control concept and vast 
communication network.  
A reduction of the ICT infrastructure development and 
though a relief of the transition to a smart grid can be 
achieved, if every wind park had a few regional partners, 
which are willing to deploy their technical potential of load 
shifting, if required by the wind park or grid operators. 
Nevertheless, deploying available technical potential in 
order to compensate forecast errors is only possible if all 
involved participants are likely to profit from it. The 
economic benefits of their participation should definitely 
exceed the resulting effort or the comfort limitations. 
Future research should consider the effects of other 
forecast methods on the resulting forecast error magnitudes 
in more detail. In addition, the development of an algorithm 
that identifies and quantifies load shifting potential, as well 
as the magnitude of the forecast error to be expected in a 
given electric grid is desirable in order to prove that there is 
a high probability of successful elimination of unbalances in 
diverse grids. 
 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

REFERENCES 
[1] G. Strbac, “Demand side management - Benefits and 
challenges,” Energy Policy, vol. 36, pp. 4419–4426, 
December 2008, doi: 10.1016/j.enpol.2008.09.030.  
[2] M. Klobasa, Dynamic simulation of a load management and 
integration of wind energy into a national electricity grid with 
regard to control cost aspects. (in german) Doctoral Thesis, 
Zürich, 2007. Available from:   
http://publica.fraunhofer.de/dokumente/N-68615.html, 
retrieved: 03.2018. 
[3] M. Klobasa, “Analysis of demand response and wind 
integration in Germany's electricity market,” IET Renewable 
Power Generation, vol. 4, pp. 55–63, January 2010, doi: 
10.1049/iet-rpg.2008.0086.  
[4] S. Kohler, A. Agricola, and  H. Seidl: Integration of 
renewable energies into the German electricity supply in the 
period 2015-2020 with outlook 2025 (in german). Berlin, 
2010. Available from: 
https://www.dena.de/fileadmin/user_upload/Download/Doku
mente/Studien___Umfragen/Endbericht_dena-
Netzstudie_II.PDF, retrieved: 03.2018. 
[5] E. Birrer, D. Bolliger, R. Kyburz, A. Klapproth, and S. 
Summermatter, “Load Shift Potential Analysis Using Various 
Demand Response Tariff Models on Swiss Service Sector 
Buildings,” Presented at the 8th international conference on 
energy efficiency in domestic appliances and lighting—
EEDAL’15, Lucerne.  
[6] S. Ashok and R. Banerjee, “Load-management applications 
for the industrial sector,” Applied Energy, vol. 66, pp. 105–
111, June 2000, doi: 10.1016/S0306-2619(99)00125-7. 
[7] M. Paulus and F. Borggrefe, “The potential of demand-side 
management in energy-intensive industries for electricity 
markets in Germany,” Applied Energy, vol. 88, pp. 432–441, 
February 2011, doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2010.03.017. 
[8] S. Gottwalt, W. Ketter, C. Block, J. Collins, and C. 
Weinhardt, “Demand side management-A simulation of 
household behavior under variable prices,” Energy Policy, 
vol. 
39, 
pp. 
8163–8174, 
December 
2011, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.enpol.2011.10.016. 
[9] B. Schlomann et al., Energy consumption of the trading, 
commercial and service sectors in Germany from 2007 to 
2010 (in german). Available from:  
http://docplayer.org/2918561-Energieverbrauch-des-sektors-
gewerbe-handel-dienstleistungen-ghd-in-deutschland-fuer-
die-jahre-2007-bis-2010.html, retrieved: 03.2018. 
[10] B.-M. Hodge et. al., “Wind Power Forecasting Error 
Distributions: An International Comparison,” Tech. Rep., 
2012. 
[11] M. Stötzer, I. Hauer, M. Richter, and Z.-A. Styczynski, “The 
potential of demand-side management in energy-intensive 
industries for electricity markets in Germany,” Applied 
Energy, 
vol. 
146, 
pp. 
344–352, 
May 
2015, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.02.015. 
[12] I. Stadler, Demand Response – Non-electric storage systems 
for electricity supply systems with a high share of renewable 
energies (in german). Doctoral Thesis , Berlin, 2005. 
 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

