Ensuring Secure Communication in Critical Infrastructures 
Steffen Fries and Rainer Falk 
Corporate Technology 
Siemens AG 
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: {steffen.fries|rainer.falk}@siemens.com  
 
 
Abstract—Critical infrastructures as backbone of the society 
and economy are increasingly the target of cyber attacks. 
These infrastructures have been isolated in the past, but are 
connected more and more also with external systems to allow 
for new and combined services. This immediately requires the 
protection of the communication connections to external sites. 
Legislation and operation have taken this into account and 
provide 
the 
necessary 
framework 
for 
posing 
specific 
communication security requirements. From the technical side, 
different security counter measures exist to cope with the given 
requirements, but it has to be ensured that these technical 
means are not only provided, but in fact applied in operation. 
This paper describes a new approach to ensure that during the 
setup of a secure communication connection the appropriate 
security is effectively negotiated with respect to permissible 
cipher suites for authentication, message integrity, and 
confidentiality. The application within a Smart Grid is used as 
example application domain.   
Keywords–security; critical infrastructure; smart energy 
grid; industrial automation; Internet of Things; secure 
communication; security policy; security protocol; Transport 
Layer Security 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Critical Infrastructures (CI) and especially cyber security 
in critical infrastructures has gained more momentum over 
the last years. The term “critical infrastructure” in the context 
of this paper is used to describe technical installations, which 
are essential for the functioning of the society and economy 
of a country, but also globally. Typical critical infrastructures 
in this context are the smart energy grid (including central or 
distributed 
energy 
generation, 
transmission, 
and 
distribution), water supply, healthcare, transportation, 
telecommunication services, just to state a few. The 
increased threat level becomes visible, e.g., through reported 
attacks on critical infrastructure, but also through legislation, 
which meanwhile explicitly requires the protection of critical 
infrastructures and reporting about serious attacks.  
 Information Technology (IT) security in the past was 
addressed mostly in common enterprise IT environments, but 
there is a clear trend to provide more connectivity to 
operational sites, which are quite often part of the critical 
infrastructure. Examples for operational sites are industrial 
automation 
or 
energy 
automation. 
This 
increased 
connectivity leads to a tighter integration of IT and 
Operational Technology (OT). IT security in this context 
evolves to cyber security to underline the mutual relation 
between the security and physical effects.  
This paper focuses on the smart energy grid as example 
for critical infrastructures. The smart energy grid consists of 
several interworking parts depending on communication in a 
secure and reliable way. These parts are given through the 
classical power system elements like a centralized power 
generation, power transmission (typically high voltage and 
wide area connections), power distribution (low and medium 
voltage) and the consumer at the end of the supply chain. In 
the last years, the usage of renewable energy, e.g., through 
solar cells or wind power, became increasingly important to 
generate environmentally sustainable energy and thus to 
reduce greenhouse gases leading to global warming. 
Utilizing renewable energy in the power grid can be 
achieved in basically two ways: replacing classical power 
plants with renewable power plants likewise connected to the 
transmission grid. Alternatively, Decentralized Energy 
Resources (DER) are connected to the distribution network. 
In both cases, the energy generation through a grid of 
renewables needs to be monitored and controlled to a similar 
level as in today’s centralized energy generation by power 
plants, while utilizing widely distributed communication 
networks. DER may also be aggregated virtually on a higher 
level to build a virtual power plant (VPP). A VPP may be 
viewed from the outside in a similar way as a common 
power plant with respect to energy generation. But due to its 
decentralized nature, the demands on communication 
necessary to control the VPP are much more challenging.  
The target architecture for this paper is depicted on 
abstract level in Figure 1 below. It investigates into cyber 
security requirements from different sources providing 
specifics for secure communication and utilized technical 
security measures. Specifically, it proposes technical means 
to ensure the desired strength of security (given through a 
security policy) for the communication in the operation 
environment. The remainder of the paper is structured as 
follows. Section 2 investigates in cyber security requirements 
given through regulation, standards and guidelines. Section 3 
investigates into Transport Layer Security (TLS) [1] as one 
common security protocol utilized power systems. Section 4 
concentrates on the assurance that this security protocol is 
used with settings according to a given security policy. The 
technical proposal to achieve compliance to a given security 
policy for the communication between different entities of 
critical infrastructures is the main contribution of this paper. 
Note that this concept has not been implemented, yet. The 
conclusion discusses applicability to further security 
protocols and the necessity for an evaluation to determine the 
impact of the proposed solution to the overall system. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
Figure 1. Overview Smart Energy Grid as Example for Critical Infrastructures  
II. 
SMART ENERGY GRID SECURITY REQUIREMENTS 
As stated in the introduction, the operational environment 
of critical infrastructures, in this paper on the example of the 
smart energy grid, differs from office environments or 
telecommunication environments in significant aspects. This 
leads to a different focus of general security requirements, 
like shown in the following Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Comparison CI and Office environment 
These general security requirements are addressed in 
regulation, standards, guidelines and further customer 
specific or operator requirements. Figure 3 depicts example 
sources for such security requirements. 
 
Figure 3. Sources for Security Requirements  
As this paper focuses on communication security, the 
following subsections investigate into specific secure 
communication 
requirements 
in 
example 
requirement 
documents of different sources. 
A. Regulative requirements 
The regulative environments taken here as example focus 
on the operation of CI: 
 The North American Electric Reliability Council 
(NERC) has established the Critical Infrastructure 
Protection (CIP) Cyber Security Standards CIP–002 
through CIP–011 [2], which are designed as foundation 
of sound security practices across bulk power systems. 
They provide a consistent framework for security control 
perimeters and access management with incident 
reporting and recovery for critical cyber assets and cover 
functional, as well as non-functional requirements. 
NERC-CIP version 3 is formally controlled and enforced 
in the U.S. and in Canada. The first version originated in 
2006 and has been continuously enhanced.   
 
Figure 4. NERC-CIP Security Requirements 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 A further example can be given by the legislation in 
Germany. Here, the IT security law has been finalized in 
2015 requiring appropriate protection and monitoring, as 
well as reporting about security breaches for the operator 
of CI [3]. A specific regulation is the German Energy 
Act [4], which regulates in §21 the application of smart 
meters 
in 
facilities 
depending 
on 
the 
energy 
consumption/generation rate. The German “Bundesamt 
für Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik” (BSI) 
provides the technical guideline TR 03109 [5] to fulfill 
the requirements from the Energy Act and explicitly, 
how to ensure secure communication utilizing TLS to 
protect the communication. 
 In France, the “Agence nationale de la sécurité des 
systèmes d'information” (ANSSI) regulates cyber 
security. Specifically, for secure communication there 
exists a guideline for the selection of TLS mechanisms 
providing appropriate protection [6]. 
The common approach of these regulations is, that they 
cover organizational requirements, process requirements 
and also technical requirements. The examples show that the 
security of communication is a clear part of the 
requirements. 
B. Standards 
Besides legislation, there exists a variety of standards, 
formulating security requirements or provide specific 
solutions to secure communication in an interoperable way. 
The following bullet list builds on the standards stated in 
Figure 3. 
 IEC 62443, especially IEC 62443-3-3 [7] 
IEC 62443 is a security requirements framework defined 
in the IEC (International Electrotechnical Commission) 
Council) and can be applied to different automation 
domains, 
including 
energy 
automation, 
process 
automation, building automation, and others. As shown 
in Figure 5 the different parts are grouped into four 
clusters covering  
– 
common deﬁnitions, and metrics 
– 
requirements on setup of a security organization 
(ISMS related), and solution supplier and service 
provider processes 
– 
technical requirements and methodology on a 
secure system at system-wide level and  
– 
requirements to the secure development lifecycle 
of system components, and security requirements 
to such components at a technical level  
According to the methodology described in IEC 62443-
3-2, a complex automation system is structured into 
zones that are connected by and communicate through 
so-called “conduits” that map for example to the logical 
network protocol communication between two zones. 
Moreover, this document defines Security Levels (SL) 
that correlate with the strength of a potential adversary. 
To reach a dedicated SL, dedicated requirements have 
to be met.  
 
Figure 5. IEC 62443 Overview 
Several requirements formulated in IEC 62443-3-3 [7] 
directly target communication security like: 
– 
Requirement 3.3.1 Communication integrity: “The 
control system shall provide the capability to 
protect the integrity of transmitted information”. 
– 
Requirement 4.4.1 Communication confidentiality: 
“The control system shall provide the capability to 
protect the confidentiality of information at rest 
and remote access sessions traversing an untrusted 
network.”  
These requirements are used her as an example that IEC 
62443 requires the support of certain functionality. 
These requirements are linked to different security levels 
and thus have to be seen in the overall system context.  
 IEC 62351, especially IEC 62351-3 [8] 
IEC 62351, which is also defined in the IEC, targets 
security mechanisms applicable to the power systems 
domain. The standard is split into different parts 
addressing specific security topics, as shown in Figure 6.  
 
Figure 6. IEC 62351 Overview [8] 
Specifically, IEC 62351-3 targets to secure TCP based 
communication by profiling the use of TLS and is 
referenced from other IEC 62351 parts. Profiling of TLS 
relates to narrowing available options in TLS like the 
requirement to utilize mutual authentication reducing the 
number of allowed algorithms or the disallowance of 
utilizing certain cipher suites, not providing sufficient 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

protection. Moreover, this part also provides guidelines 
for utilizing options, which depend on the embedding 
environment. An example is the relation of using session 
renegotiation and session resumption in conjunction 
with the update interval of the certificate revocation 
information. 
C. Guidelines 
Besides regulations and standards, there also exist 
guidelines on how to address secure communication in 
specific application environments.  
 The 
“Bundesverband 
für 
Energie- 
und 
Wasserwirtschaft” (BDEW) introduced a white paper 
defining basic security measures and requirements for 
IT-based control, automation and telecommunication 
systems for energy and water systems, taking into 
account general technical and operational conditions 
[10]. It can be seen as a further national approach 
targeting similar goals as NERC-CIP, but at a less 
detailed level. The white paper addresses requirements 
for vendors and manufacturers of power system 
management systems by directly relating to ISO 27000. 
Section 
2.3 
of 
this 
white 
paper 
focuses 
on 
communication and formulates specific requirements for 
integrity and confidentiality of connections.   
 NISTIR 7628 [11] originates from the Smart Grid 
Interoperability Panel (Cyber Security WG) of the 
National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST). 
It targets the development of a comprehensive set of 
cyber security requirements. The document consists of 
three 
subdocuments 
targeting 
strategy, 
security 
architecture, and requirements, and supportive analyses 
and references. It specifically formulates requirements 
for smart grid information system and communication 
protection. 
III. 
TLS TO SECURE TCP COMMUNICATION 
As shown in the previous section, there are numerous 
examples of requirements to secure communication, which 
leads to the necessity to be able to verify that the appropriate 
communication security is applied in fact in operational use. 
This section investigates into technical means to ensure 
secure communication by taking TLS as example, as it is 
used widely also in power automation systems (see IEC 
62351 in section II.B) , to protect the communication.  
TLS in its current version 1.2 defines protection means for 
TCP-based communication and is defined in Internet 
standard RFC 5246 [1]. Note, that the standard has a long 
history and is constantly being evolved to cope with new 
advances in cryptography and communication security. It 
supports a variety of authentication options for the 
communicating peers and allows the negotiation of the 
protection of the preceding communication in terms of 
integrity and confidentiality and also key management 
related options like key updates, etc. The combination of 
cryptographic algorithms for authentication, integrity, and 
confidentiality protection is called cipher suite. TLS is build 
upon several sub protocols that encapsulate the protocol 
operation in the different phases as shown in Figure 7.  
 
 
Figure 7. TLS Protocol Structure  
For the discussion in this paper the most interesting phase 
is the TLS handshake, as it is performed in clear and allows 
the monitoring of the negotiated security options for the 
following communication session. Figure 8 shows the 
message exchange during the handshake. 
 
Figure 8. TLS Handshake for TLS Session Setup 
Especially, the first phase of the handshake is in focus 
here, as it conveys the information for the cipher suite 
negotiation and the authentication of the communicating 
peers. In the ClientHello message, the client passes a list of 
cipher suites to the server containing the combinations of 
cryptographic algorithms supported in order of the client's   
preference. The server will then select a cipher suite and 
respond with a ServerHello message if a matching proposal 
was found. If no matching proposal was found, the server 
will issue a failure alert. Assumed that the server will 
authenticate towards the client, it will send its certificate as 
part other response. This allows the client to identify the 
server, validate the server certificate, as well as to utilize the 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

server 
certificate 
during 
the 
further 
session 
key 
establishment. If the server additionally requires a client 
authentication as part of the TLS handshake, it will send a 
CertificateRequest message. 
The second phase of the handshake targets the client 
identification 
(if 
requested) 
and 
the 
session 
key 
establishment and the authentication of both sides. The 
Finished message from the server to the client concludes the 
handshake and is the first message encrypted using the 
negotiated session key. It also contains a hash over the 
previously exchanged handshake messages to have a delayed 
verification of the integrity of the performed handshake.  
Based on the provided TLS overview the handshake phase 
can be used to monitor the establishment of a secure 
communication, which can be audited by an independent 
component. This can be used additionally to the server 
security policy configuration to ensure that the negotiated 
security settings for a communication channel provide a 
strength required by the security policy. The independent 
audit option will reveal failures in the configuration of the 
client or server side or both.  
IV. 
ENSURING SECURE COMMUNICATION 
As depicted in the previous section by taking TLS as 
example, it is possible to monitor the security negotiation of 
secure communication protocols in a passive way, without 
interfering with the protocol. To utilize this property, an 
additional component – a crypto option filter – in a network 
is defined. This crypto filter may be realized as separate 
component or may be part of an already existing component 
handling the data exchange, e.g., a switch.  
 
Figure 9. Substation to Control Center Communication 
Figure 9 shows the underlying use case targeting the 
communication between a substation and a control center 
connected over a public network using a dedicated protocol 
(here: IEC 60870-5-104) for telecontrol, which is secured by 
TLS. Both sides are required to authenticate within TLS on 
the base of X.509 certificates and to provide support for one 
of the following cipher suites: 
 TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA 
 TLS_DH_ DSS_WITH_AES_128_SHA  
 TLS_DH_DSS_WITH_AES_256_SHA  
 TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_ AES_128_SHA 
The following cipher suites are explicitly forbidden, as 
they do not provide confidentiality of the data exchange or 
not even integrity protection (first bullet) 
 TLS_RSA_WITH_NULL_NULL 
 TLS_RSA_WITH_NULL_SHA256 
 TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_NULL_SHA 
This data is typically contained in a policy configuration 
data base together with connection specific information to 
identify the associated security policy.  
In the following, two approaches for the realization of a 
crypto option filter from a network design perspective are 
described. This also comprises a functionality to utilize the 
information for ensuring a match to a given security policy, 
which may then lead to the interruption of communication 
establishment, if the security policy is not met.  
Figure 10 shows a variant, in which the crypto option filter 
is placed directly into the communication path. This 
realization may be based on existing network components in 
the communication path.  The data analysis component 
monitors the connection establishment and the TLS 
handshake without interrupting the communication channel 
establishment. The handshake messages ClientHello and 
ServerHello carry the specific information about the cipher 
suite negotiation, which is monitored and compared with the 
data from security policy database. Additionally the 
exchange of the server and client side certificate is 
monitored. As an additional service, the crypto filter may 
validate the exchanged certificates to ensure that they are not 
outdated or revoked. Depending on the match of the security 
negotiation parameter with the security policy, the 
communication establishment may be terminated through the 
policy enforcement component.  
Network Component
Common 
Tasks 
(Routing 
Tables, etc.)
Data
Policy 
Enformcement 
Error
Data 
Analysis
Policy 
Database
Configuration
Data
 
Figure 10. In-path Crypto Option Filter 
In contrast to the in-path crypto option filter, Figure 11 
shows an off-path filter. The general evaluation is similar to 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

the in-path filter, with the exception of the data access. As 
the filter is not directly placed in the communication path, a 
probe on the network duplicates the traffic and forwards it to 
the off-path crypto option filter. This probe may be a 
separate component or a monitoring port on the existing 
infrastructure component as shown in Figure 11. If it is a 
separate component, the probe may already preprocess the 
handshake and extract the information, which can then be 
provided to the crypto option filter. If the functionality is 
included in an existing infrastructure component, the 
complete TLS handshake may be forwarded to the crypto 
option filter for inspection. Alternatively, the policy 
enforcement component may integrate the traffic duplication.  
Network Component
Common 
Tasks 
(Routing 
Tables, etc.)
Data
Policy 
Enformcement 
Error
Data 
Analysis
Policy 
Database
Configuration
Data
 
Figure 11. Off-path Crypto Option Filter 
The off-path variant has the clear advantage that the policy 
checking component can be centralized, independent from 
the actual communication path to be checked. 
Note that the description for the crypto option filter 
focused on the TLS 1.2 version as discussed in Section III. 
But TLS will be evolved and TLS 1.3 is currently under 
development. This version will result in simplifications of 
the meanwhile complex handshake and will reduce the 
available options and also shorten the handshake phase to 
three messages. Most importantly, TLS 1.3 will utilize the 
established key already in the handshake phase to protect 
messages. The monitoring approach described in the 
following is still applicable, as the message parts containing 
the monitoring target are still in clear. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK 
This 
paper 
described 
a 
solution 
to 
ensure 
that 
communication between different components of a system is 
in fact protected according to a dedicated security strength as 
defined by a given security policy. It ensures that the 
required level of security is indeed utilized during operation. 
As shown, requirements for secure communication exist 
through different guidelines, standards, and also legislation. 
The proposed solution was shown in the context of 
substation to control center communication, to ensure mutual 
authentication and an appropriate protection of the 
communicated information. As the smart energy grid does 
increasingly integrate DER systems, the chance of 
communicating privacy related data increases. And so do the 
requirements for protected communication.  
The example shown related to the protocol TLS, which is 
used 
in 
power 
system 
automation 
to 
secure 
the 
communication. Also other protocols like IPSec or openVPN 
exist, which are used to provide a secure tunnel for 
exchanging information. Here, the initial handshake during 
the connection establishment can be monitored in a similar 
way as shown for TLS. 
Moreover, as the proposed crypto filter verifies the 
establishment of secure communication channels according 
to a given security policy, it can also be used to offload 
further validation tasks from the communication peers, like 
the validation of the peer certificates utilized during 
connection establishment.  
As stated in the beginning, this paper describes the 
concept 
for 
ensuring 
the 
establishment 
of 
secure 
communication channels. The consequent next step is the 
integration of the proposed approach in a prototype, to 
validate the effectiveness.  
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, “The Transport Layer Security 
(TLS) Protocol Version 1.2”, RFC 5246, Aug. 2008, 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5246 [retrieved: Jan. 2016]. 
[2] NERC-CIP, North American Electric Reliability Corporation, 
“CIP Critical Infrastructure Protection Standards”, Version 5,  
http://www.nerc.com/pa/Stand/Pages/CIPStandards.aspx, 
[retrieved: Jan.2016] 
[3] German 
IT 
Security 
Law, 
July 
2015, 
http://www.bgbl.de/xaver/bgbl/start.xav?startbk=Bundesanzei
ger_BGBl&jumpTo=bgbl115s1324.pdf  (German) [retrieved: 
Jan. 2016] 
[4] German Energy Act, EnWG, July 2012, http://www.gesetze-
im-internet.de/bundesrecht/enwg_2005/gesamt.pdf (German) 
[retrieved: Jan. 2016] 
[5] Technical Guideline TR 03109, Technische Vorgaben für 
intelligente 
Messsysteme, 
2015, 
https://www.bsi.bund.de/DE/Publikationen/TechnischeRichtli
nien/tr03109/index_htm.html  (German) [retrieved: Jan 2016] 
[6] ANSSI Technical Note, Recommandations de sécurité 
concernant l’analyse des flux HTTPS, October 2015, 
http://www.ssi.gouv.fr/uploads/IMG/pdf/NP_TLS_NoteTech.
pdf (French) [retrieved: Jan. 2016] 
[7] IEC62443-3-3:2013, “Industrial communication networks – 
Network and system security – Part 3-3: System security 
requirements and security levels”, Edition 1.0, August 2013. 
[8] IEC 62351-x Power systems management and associated 
information exchange – Data and communication security, 
http://www.iec.ch/smartgrid/standards/ [retrieved: Jan. 2016]. 
[9] ISO 27000 Series  
[10] Bundesverband 
der 
Energie- 
und 
Wasserwirtschaft, 
Datensicherheit, BDEW "Whitepaper Requirements for 
Secure Control and Telecommunication Systems," Version 
1.1, 
03/2015., 
http://ldew.de/bdew.nsf/id/52929DBC7CEEED1EC125766C0
00588AD/$file/Whitepaper_Secure_Systems_Vedis_1.0final.
pdf  [retrieved: Jan 2016] 
[11] NIST IR 7628 Guidelines for Smart Grid Cybersecurity: Vol. 
1 - Smart Grid Cybersecurity Strategy, Architecture, and 
High-Level Requirements, Vol. 2 - Privacy and the Smart 
Grid, Vol. 3 - Supportive Analyses and References, NISTIR 
7628 
Rev. 
1, 
(Volumes 
1-3), 
http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2014/NIST.IR.7628r1.pdf 
[retrieved: Jan 2016] 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

