Ener-SCAPE: A Novel Persuasive Game to Improve the Energy Consumption 
Awareness 
 
Diego Arnone, Alessandro Rossi, Enrico Melodia 
Research and Development Laboratory 
Engineering I.I. S.p.A. 
Palermo, Italy 
email: diego.arnone@eng.it, alessandro.rossi@eng.it, 
enricogabriele.melodia@eng.it 
Marzia Mammina 
DemetriX S.r.l. 
Palermo, Italy 
email: marzia.mammina@demetrix.it 
Sandra Elizabeth Jenkins 
Engineering Systems Division, Technology and Policy Program ‘14 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology  
Cambridge, MA, USA 
e-mail: sandjenkins@gmail.com  
 
 
Abstract— Ener-SCAPE is an educational game, relying on a 
novel software framework, whose main aim is trying to 
improve the awareness of the energy consumption of its users, 
at home where they live, as well as in the office where they 
usually work. Players participate by trying to exit from their 
home or office, by improving some predefined energy 
efficiency indexes which show the environmental performances 
of the place. The software application uses a common escape 
room game framework, tailoring the  game archetype to focus 
on 
energy 
efficiency 
and 
consumption 
awareness. 
Furthermore, Ener-SCAPE implements a novel feedback 
mechanism based on real energy consumption that induces 
consumers to apply what they have learned from the virtual 
reality of the game into their daily real lives. 
Keywords-energy-awareness; serious game; educational 
game; escape game; virtual currency; energy consumption; 
energy efficiency; social network interaction. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
World energy consumption is steadily increasing, 
despite mitigation efforts, particularly in the countries that 
are having a great economic growth. This is a global issue 
for the environmental protection as well as an economic and 
political issue for countries dependent on foreign energy 
supplies. 
In order to address increasing consumption, many 
solutions are being proposed and implemented: incentives 
for renewable energy sources, new technologies for highly 
efficient buildings, new technologies for more efficient 
appliances, more sustainable transportation, etc. However, 
the aggregate energy consumption behaviour of the general 
population is responsible for a significant percentage of the 
overall energy consumption worldwide. For this reason, the 
energy policy adopted by many countries is focused on 
Energy Consumption Awareness (ECA). The main factors 
that may influence energy consumption behaviours of 
citizens are environmental education, real time control of 
energy consumption, involvement of young people and 
greater energy consumption awareness. Thus, ECA policies 
can be strategic for the reduction of energy consumption. 
With the growing number of products and devices in 
homes and offices, learning and keeping up to date with 
energy efficiency measures can be difficult. However, as 
more devices are able to communicate with each other, 
consumers are going to increasingly look for more 
innovative and accessible ways to manage and learn about 
energy efficiency. It is essential that all citizens are "energy 
aware", because improving energy efficiency does not mean 
that people should give up activities to save energy. Rather, 
new technologies and more effective behaviour will actually 
allow citizens to do more, improving their living conditions 
without compromising their standard of living. Furthermore, 
while the improvement of energy efficiency means lower 
costs and greater sustainability, it is also a great opportunity 
to stimulate economic growth. 
This work aims at following and going beyond the series 
of current initiatives. Through a novel application, our goal 
is to improve the energy consumption awareness of people 
both at home and in the office by employing three features: 
(i) a well-known and successful game model, (ii) a real-time 
intuitive feedback on consumption and (iii) a strict 
collaboration with other players/consumers. 
In Section II, the state of the art of serious and pervasive 
games is briefly reported. In Section III, the Ener-SCAPE 
applications are fully described. In Section IV, the 
conclusions are given.  
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
In the last few years several institutions, including the 
European Union (EU), have become increasingly committed 
to promoting a higher awareness of energy consumption. 
With this aim, the EU has launched several initiatives and 
published several documents, especially directed at children 
and young adults. In addition, information campaigns for 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

greater awareness in energy consumption, not only directly 
related to public institutions, have spread. Nevertheless, 
these are actions that will produce long-term results; 
particularly, those focused on children which can get 
significant results across generations [1]. 
In order to obtain immediate results, feedback on 
consumption is frequently adopted to improve the energy 
awareness. Research projects, like BeAware [2], or 
commercial products, like Energy Orb [3], aim at motivating 
users to be more responsible in their use of electric 
appliances by showing real-time energy consumption 
feedback through an intuitive user interface. Recent studies 
demonstrate that this kind of feedback alone is enough to 
reduce the consumption by 23% to 27% [4]. Moreover, 
persuasive technologies have proven useful in modifying 
behaviours related to energy usage. A relatively unexplored 
potential way to drive awareness is through the development 
of the so called “serious games”, i.e., interactive virtual 
simulations whose fundamental purpose is the development 
of the user's abilities and skills in a simulated environment, 
so they can be then applied in the real world. Ecoville [5] is a 
web-browser simulation game that develops a city and its 
population, handling the energy balance, CO2 emissions, 
garbage disposal, etc. EnerCities [6] takes this concept 
further, based on the Theory of Planned Behaviour [7], 
where players have to balance three variables: population, 
planet, profit. Power Agent [8] and Power Explorer [9] are 
two “pervasive games” that put family members in 
competition to reduce domestic consumption, as measured 
by sensors, and points out the difference between players’ 
and non-players’ behaviours utilizing an avatar to help 
convey best practices in energy efficiency. 
Even though there have been relatively good results, 
serious games still remain a “niche” field. The main limits to 
their popularity are their target audience (scholars and 
families, often very different from the average users and 
surely far from the player community), the perception that 
educational games are boring, and the lack of entertainment 
and achievement typical in traditional games. One of the 
most downloaded mobile games, Angry Birds [10], is a very 
simple physics based game. As many other F2P (“free-to-
play”) games, it is an example of the translation of  various 
objectives (commercial, in this case) into gaming ones 
(credits, in-app purchases). F2P games strength lies in their 
simplicity, intuitive interfaces, and their repay value. 
Moreover, applications like Farmville [11], a farming 
simulation social network game, demonstrate that people like 
cooperative games in large online communities, consisting of  
traditional gamers and non-gamers alike.  
Ener-SCAPE is meant to exploit the strengths of serious 
games, while overcoming their weaknesses, by posing them 
in a new light to make them  more entertaining and, thus, 
more likely to be successful.  
III. 
ENER-SCAPE 
Ener-SCAPE is a persuasive game aiming at improving 
the awareness of energy consumers both in their homes and 
in buildings where they usually work. Players are tasked 
with escaping from their apartment or office by solving rebus 
puzzles, through the use of specific information and the 
implementation of strategies. Improving energy consumption 
behaviour in the game helps the player to earn virtual 
currency redeemable for an easy escape. By simulating real 
situations, the information and sensations experienced 
remain strongly impressed, and, thus, allow the player to 
sharpen perception, attention and memory by promoting 
behavioural changes through “learning by doing”. 
Two versions of the game Ener-SCAPE are being 
developed: one related to a home environment and the other 
to a building/office environment.  
Both versions include and integrate three different 
applications: a dashboard for monitoring real consumption, 
which shows performance indicators and hints to improve 
performance, an escape game (Point & Click), and a tool for 
integration with social networks (Facebook/Twitter) to allow 
collaboration between players/consumers. The innovative 
aspect of the proposed approach consists of a simple but 
effective mechanism to integrate the three applications with 
the aim of converting existing successful models to an 
“edutainment” (education and entertainment) function.  
The cornerstone of the Ener-SCAPE game, as previously 
introduced, is essentially to escape from a house (or a 
building in the second version of the game) as in any escape-
game. Escaping can only be achieved after the resolution of a 
sequence of rebus puzzles (find items, combine them, use 
them, look for clues, piece together clues, gather 
information, find combinations, compose puzzle, solve 
riddles, etc.). The main feature of the game lies in the themes 
of each action: eco-sustainability, savings, efficiency, and 
energy-awareness. The most innovative aspect of the 
proposed application is the feedback from the real world. 
The game is integrated with a very simple and intuitive 
interface (monitoring dashboard), which processes the data 
collected through a sensing infrastructure and allows the 
consumers to see their real energy performance. The 
application allows the users to compare their current energy 
consumption with the historical average values.  
While playing, users acquire information (gained from 
the game or the social networks where they get useful tips 
for solving puzzles) which can also be used in the real world. 
The ultimate aim of the game is impacting the consumers' 
behaviour in their real life. The monitoring dashboard 
provides a means to measure performance improvement, 
which is then translated into virtual currency which can be 
spent in the game to ease an escape. In order to facilitate the 
solution of a rebus puzzle, the users utilize the virtual 
currency that they can obtain from both their real 
performance improvements, and their social network 
interactions. The user can cooperate with other consumers in 
specific social network groups : each consumer builds his or 
her own reputation by cooperating with the community in 
solving the escape room rebuses as well as in achieving 
better energy performance in the real world. Reputation is 
also translated into virtual currency. 
In this way users at home will strive to improve their 
behaviour by trying to reach the optimal values of real 
performance indexes. Therefore, as can easily be seen from 
Figure 1, Ener-SCAPE implements a beneficial cycle that 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

allows the consumer to learn about how to efficiently use 
energy simply playing the game [12]. At home, the user can 
save or waste energy. Then, the dashboard graphically 
represents the real performances coming from a sensing 
infrastructure installed in the home. The transition from the 
physical world to the virtual one corresponds to the 
translation of the real results into virtual currency that affects 
the consumer’s ability to solve the rebuses in the virtual 
escape room. Finally, the beneficial cycle results in 
simulated solutions, information the user collects, applied 
hints, cooperation with other players, monitoring virtual 
performance, and sharing ideas inside a community. In this 
way, players may become consumers with increased energy 
consumption awareness that can help them to detect 
inefficiencies and improve their energy behaviour.   
 
Figure 1. Ener-SCAPE approach to energy consumption awareness (home 
environment). 
The game environment has been designed to be as 
physically attractive as possible, through a good quality 
architectural rendering.  
Finally, the application was designed to be used from 
both Personal Computers (PC) and mobile devices, such as 
smartphones and tablets, in order to meet the requirements of 
accessibility and to avoid limiting the game to a single kind 
of device. 
Figure 2 shows a mock-up of the game in the tablet 
version in the home environment. On the right, there is a 
basket where discovered items are collected; at the bottom, 
there are some widgets where players can view their virtual 
and real performances, as well as their scores and hints. 
Figure 3 shows a mock-up of the dashboard in the tablet 
version in the home environment. The monitoring interface 
includes diagrams which give the users a representation of 
their consumption and performance. In particular, through 
these diagrams, they can check their current consumption 
and the ideal average consumption for similar classes of 
consumers. Improvements in energy performance are 
translated into money (virtual currency) that can be spent in 
order to virtually buy needed items in the game. 
 
 
Figure 2. Mock-up of the game (tablet version) in the home environment. 
 
 
Figure 3. Mock-up of the dashboard (tablet version) in the home 
environment. 
 
Figure 4. Energy consumption diagrams (smartphone version). 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

The access to energy consumption and performance 
values is enabled in multiple ways: by selecting household 
appliances in the star structure that represents the set of 
monitored devices (see Figure 3), or by selecting a 
consumption category (e.g., heating, lighting, appliances, 
sockets etc.). The user may also access focused hints and 
check any possible abnormalities in their consumption 
caused by inefficiencies.  
As already mentioned, users can also compare their 
current consumption with their historical consumption, as 
showed in Figure 4 which depicts the dashboard for 
smartphones. 
 
 
Figure 5. Mock-up of the game (PC version) in the office environment. 
 
Figure 6. Ener-SCAPE approach to energy consumption awareness 
(building environment). 
The game version for an office environment (see Figure 5 
for a mock-up of the PC version) has only one significant 
difference from the one for the home environment: it is an 
escape game played in teams. The basic idea of the game is 
identical to the previous one, but with additional 
consideration of other actors besides the user/player: the 
energy 
manager 
(responsible 
for 
the 
coordination, 
management and efficient use of energy resources in the 
building/field) and other users/players, who, being in the 
same environment, are energy consumers as well. In this 
case, a mechanism for collaboration among users belonging 
to the same team and competition with other groups/teams of 
users is implemented. Members of the same team can 
exchange tips, information, and objects in the virtual world 
where they move and every player can constantly see not 
only the results of his/her team but also the results of other 
teams. In order to improve the energy performance the 
building(s), the energy manager will oversee the progress of 
the game by having the opportunity to suggest changes in 
behaviour, 
precautions, 
or 
to 
impose 
guidelines. 
Furthermore, as with the home environment case, the user 
may take advantage of social networks as an important 
resource to acquire information and to earn virtual currency.  
The beneficial cycle previously described for the office 
environment is represented in Figure 6. 
 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTATION PLAN 
Ener-SCAPE 
is 
under 
development 
and 
no 
experimentation phase has been started yet. Nevertheless a 
plan to validate the proposed approach has been defined. 
Since the application integrates components already known 
to users neither acceptance problems nor transients for the 
achievement of a steady operation are expected. 
Some metrics have been identified to evaluate the results 
and have been divided into quantitative metrics and 
qualitative metrics. 
Quantitative metrics measure the effects of greater 
energy awareness. No preliminary consumption baseline is 
provided for the evaluation of the performance: users are 
clustered on the basis of a set of parameters (age, job, 
education, skills etc.) they provide during a preliminary 
registration phase and their performance, both in a home and 
in a building/campus environment, are evaluated on a well-
defined set of time slots (hour, day, week, month, etc.) and 
compared to their own past average values or to the values of 
users belonging to the same cluster (e.g. the best user, the 
average one or the worst one). It is assumed that in order to 
have a greater persistence of the results it is needed to 
acquire and assimilate slowly a massive amount of 
information that will have significant impact on the lifestyle 
of the consumer, rather than only on the performance 
recorded during the experimental period. The impact of 
Ener-SCAPE is expected to increase slowly with time, so 
that the comparison to the average performance, in the first 
part of the use of the application, can be considered as the 
comparison to the baseline. 
Qualitative metrics are subdivided into indirect metrics, 
aimed at assessing the user perception of the Ener-SCAPE 
application, and direct metrics, aimed at evaluating the 
effectiveness of Ener-SCAPE by evaluating the sensitivity 
acquired by the user in the field of eco-sustainability. In both 
cases, we intend to proceed by administering questionnaires 
to users. The feedback will allow to activate an iterative 
process in defining new requirements for the final prototype 
of Ener-SCAPE. The involvement of users will allow 
reaching a better understanding of their needs for the 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

achievement of the aims of the application that will allow the 
creation of a usable product appropriate to the context of use. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This work has proposed a persuasive and universal 
application to improving energy consumption awareness by 
designing and developing an energy-aware application based 
on an escape room game. The application will prove how the 
adoption of a well-known game model, as well as its 
integration with real-time consumption feedback and social 
collaboration, 
can 
significantly 
improve 
the 
energy 
consumption awareness both at home and in office 
environments. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is part of “ENERGETIC – Tecnologie per 
l’Energia e l’Efficienza Energetica” project, co-funded by 
MIUR (Italian Ministry for Education, University and 
Research) by means of the national Program PON R&C 
2007-2013, project, PON02_00_355_3391233C. 
REFERENCES 
[1] EUROPEAN COUNCIL - 25/26 MARCH 2010 - Europe 
2020: a New European Strategy for Jobs and Growth. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://register.consilium.europa.eu/pdf/en/10/st00/st00007.en1
0.pdf [retrieved: March, 2015]. 
[2] BeAware, 
"Home 
page," 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.energyawareness.eu/beaware/ [retrieved: March, 
2015]. 
[3] Ambient Devices, "Energy Orb," [Online]. Available: 
http://www.ambientdevices.com [retrieved: March, 2015]. 
[4] The Brattle Group, "BGE Smart Energy Pricing Pilot," 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.brattle.com/_documents/uploadlibrary/upload768.
pdf  [retrieved: March, 2015]. 
[5] Ecoville, [Online]. Available: http://www.ecovillelejeu.com  
[retrieved: March, 2015]. 
[6] EnerCities, 
"Home 
page," 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.enercities.eu [retrieved: March, 2015]. 
[7] I. Ajzen, "The theory of planned behavior," in Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, vol. 50, iss. 2. pp. 
179–211, October 1991, doi: 10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020. 
[8] A. Gustafsson, M. Bång, and C. Katzeff, “Evaluation of a 
Pervasive Game for Domestic Energy Engagement Among 
Teenagers,” in Computers in Entertainment (CIE), vol. 7, iss. 
4, art. 54, December 2009, doi: 10.1145/1658866.1658873. 
[9] A. Gustafsson, M. Bång, and M. Svahn, “Power Explorer – a 
casual game style for encouraging long term behavior change 
among teenagers,” in International Conference on Advances 
in Computer Enterntainment Technology, pp. 182-189, 
October 2009, doi: 10.1145/1690388.1690419. 
[10] “Angry 
Birds,” 
Rovio, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.angrybirds.com [retrieved: March, 2015]. 
[11] “FarmVille,” 
Zynga, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://it-
it.facebook.com/FarmVille [retrieved: March, 2015]. 
[12] EscaperRoom24, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.escapegames24.com/ [retrieved: March, 2015]. 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

