 
Smart Meters Security Assessment in the Brazilian Scenario 
Rafael Cividanes, Nelson Uto, Bruno Botelho,    
Sergio Ribeiro, Christiane Cuculo 
Information Security Management 
CPqD Foundation 
Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil 
{rafaelsc, uto, bpereira, sribeiro, ccuculo}@cpqd.com.br 
Danilo Suiama, Heron Fontana 
Management of Metering, Losses and Technology 
ELEKTRO 
Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil 
{danilo.suiama, heron.fontana}@elektro.com.br
 
 
Abstract – Smart meters play an important role in smart grid 
architectures and technologies. Preliminary research has 
already indicated vulnerabilities as well as attacks likely to 
happen on the new meters. The Brazilian scenario combines 
two main perspectives: one is the growing rate of fraud in the 
electric energy measurement and the other is a resolution that 
establishes the replacement of all electromechanical meters 
with the new smart meters. This paper presents a threat 
modeling in smart meters and some possible attacks related to 
the mentioned scenario. It also discusses the ongoing Brazilian 
R&D project that focuses on security assessment of these new 
devices and the creation of a laboratory for smart meter 
vulnerability research and pentest execution.       
Keywords-smart 
meter 
cyber-security; 
vulnerabilities; 
attacks; security laboratory for smart meter pentest  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Smart Grid technology brings several benefits to the 
utilities, the customer and the environment, such as: 
increased resilience after service disruption, flexible 
distribution, energy efficiency (less waste), enhanced usage 
monitoring, variable pricing structure, reliability and 
operational efficiencies, renewable sources of energy, etc. 
However, these benefits come together with some security 
concerns, including many types of vulnerabilities related to 
each asset, system or communication channel in the Smart 
Grid architecture. In fact, each Smart Grid component can be 
the target of an attack: communications, meters, transmission 
substations, distribution substations, and corporate network. 
Each element should have integrity mechanisms working 
properly [1]. The Smart Grid security issue is being analyzed 
and some publications have been issued [2] [3].  
The implementation of Smart Grids in Brazil has an 
important goal: the reduction of non-technical losses. In the 
current scenario, the energy theft in Brazil represents a loss 
of US$ 1.4 billion, not including taxes. For example, the city 
of Rio de Janeiro has about 20% of energy loss. The new 
electronic meters will help detect and reduce this huge loss. 
However, if not properly designed and tested, the use of 
these new meters may have a huge impact on the entire 
Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI).  
Almost all residential and business customers (low 
voltage) in Brazil are using electromechanical energy meters 
and the fraud techniques related to these current meters are 
well known and even obsolete. Violations are restricted to 
physical attacks. On the other hand, the new electronic smart 
meters open the door for vulnerabilities to be exploited.  
Firmware analysis, data extraction, access to cryptographic 
keys, bus sniffing, denial of service, etc., are examples of 
actions that could be performed to compromise a smart meter 
device. In this case, not only physical but also logical attacks 
are feasible.  
In 
August 
2012, 
ANEEL 
(Brazilian 
Electricity 
Regulatory Agency) approved a resolution which states that 
energy distributors will have to install electronic meters for 
all consumers who choose to be billed in differentiated 
tariffs. It is the first step by the Brazilian Government to 
replace the 67 million electromechanical meters by January 
2014. This is a unique moment in the history of the Brazilian 
energy sector when all meters will be replaced. However, the 
choice of smart meters with security weaknesses or severe 
vulnerabilities may cause serious damage to Brazilian 
economy.  
It is in this context that the research and development 
Project entitled Security Assessment for Smart Meters was 
designed. The objective is to investigate different brands and 
types of smart meters available in the market, then run tests 
on them for checking security requirements, assess potential 
impacts, and finally build the Smart Meter Cyber Security 
Laboratory specialized in security evaluation of smart 
meters. The results will help the entire energy sector in 
Brazil and the development of additional security regulations 
and standards to be included to metrologically relevant 
requirements currently in use by Inmetro (Brazilian agency 
responsible for running tests on the meters). 
The remaining part of this paper is structured as follows: 
Section II describes a threat modeling applied to smart meter 
devices, presenting what could be done if these assets were 
designed without considering a security baseline. Section III 
presents some possible attacks, how they are executed and 
the concepts related to the existing vulnerabilities. Section 
IV presents a synthesis of the Brazilian project, addressing 
the objectives, methodology of work, mechanisms of 
security tests and the establishment of a Laboratory. Finally, 
the conclusions are exposed in Section V.   
II. 
THREAT ASSESSMENT IN SMART METERS 
In the field of Smart Grid security, one of the most 
important components are the smart meter devices. They are 
the front door of several types of attacks on security. Besides 
being the common hub in the Smart Grid architecture, they 
are in the wild (outside the physical boundaries of the utility 
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
company's property), which increases the probability of 
vulnerability exploitation. The physical access to these 
devices, which can be easily obtained by consumers and 
adversaries, facilitates the execution of an attack. In order to 
study and understand the smart meters' characteristics and 
mechanisms of protection (if any), any individual can, for 
example, buy a device on eBay.  
Smart meter devices are made of electronic components 
and encompass different types of technologies, protocols, 
and embedded systems. The risks related to these new 
devices come from the fact that they are, almost never, built 
with security requirements in mind. In this way, it is 
expected that they would fail if exposed to unexpected 
situations, creating opportunities for security violations. 
Thus, to mitigate these risks, it is essential to determine the 
attacker's perspective, 
which 
generally 
includes 
the 
opportunity for financial gain, the opportunity for mischief, 
and the opportunity for chaos [4]. These perspectives can 
result in different kinds of threats, depending on each 
country's scenario. 
In the Brazilian scenario, it is possible to identify four 
main threats: (1) energy usage frauds; (2) user privacy 
violation; (3) propagation of malicious code to others meters 
through the AMI; and (4) malicious interruption of electricity 
supply. Each threat outlined above can result from different 
security vulnerabilities being exploited, culminating in 
success of the attack. However, in all the cases, the threats 
exist 
because 
of 
the 
smart 
meters' 
technological 
characteristics, i.e., the existence of a firmware (maybe the 
most common target of the attacks), the physical interfaces 
that provide access to the device (serial, parallel, and 
infrared/optical ports), the electronic components that store 
data (EEPROM, Flash, RAM), the buses that pass data 
between components (parallel and serial buses), the wireless 
communication protocols, and the two way communication. 
In the case of the first threat, the energy usage fraud, 
besides 
the 
existence 
of 
many 
frauds 
related 
to 
electromechanical meters currently in use in Brazil, there are 
also record of frauds related to others new electronic devices, 
for instance pay TV [5]. From this context, it is possible to 
infer that the new smart meter devices to be used in Brazil 
will further increase the current level of fraud. Hacker 
attacks against the new meters are likely to occur. This kind 
of threat also includes attacks executed only for fun, to show 
how easy it is to change the energy consumption data in the 
meters. 
User privacy violation, the second threat, is another 
important issue when analyzing smart meters security [6]. 
The metering data may reveal some customer behaviors, 
determining when they are at home, at work, or traveling. 
When at home, even specific activities may be deduced. It 
was recently approved in Brazil a law addressing Internet 
Privacy and it is also being studied the Privacy issue in the 
Smart Grid environment as a part of another R&D project, 
funded by ANEEL. Thus, the metering data stored in these 
smart meters are also the target of attacks, being necessary, 
therefore, to fully test the encryption mechanism used to 
protect them. 
Considered perhaps the most dangerous threat, the 
propagation of malware over the AMI, could cause 
irreparable loss to the entire energy sector. In this case, an 
analogy can be made with the spread of a computer virus 
over the Internet. The recent outbreak of Stuxnet worm is a 
real example in the nuclear facilities [7]. Indeed, the 
overarching goal of an attacker is to try to identify 
vulnerabilities that allow expanding the control of a single 
device to other devices with limited or no physical access. 
The aggravating factor related to the Brazilian context is that, 
in a short period of time, all old meters will be replaced, 
increasing the risk of adopting vulnerable smart meters if the 
process occurs without care.  
At last, but not least, the existence in the smart meters of 
a functionality for remotely interrupting the energy supply 
can be maliciously used as part of a physical attack. Consider 
for instance that a thief wants to invade a store, protected by 
an alarm system connected to an uninterruptible power 
supply. In order to commit the robbery, the burglar could 
simply cause a power cut and wait until the batteries get 
drained and the protection system is disabled. A worst 
scenario to be considered consists of simultaneously and 
persistently replicating the aforementioned attack to every 
single building of a city or a major area, which would 
quickly lead to total chaos.  
Although some research activities are being conducted, 
there are still several threats related to vulnerability 
exploitation in smart meters. This section addressed the four 
main threat cases in the Brazilian scenario. Various types of 
possible attacks can result in the materialization of these 
threats. For this reason it will be necessary to map and study 
them, so that tests can be performed on these devices just as 
they are tested in the metrological aspects (already 
performed in Brazil). The following section discusses some 
possible attacks against smart meters, related to this R&D 
project. 
III. 
POSSIBLE ATTACKS 
Before presenting the possible attacks against smart 
meters, it is important to understand their architecture and 
main components as illustrated in Figure 1. Generally, there 
are two processors: one for calculating, with the aid of the 
current and voltage sensors, the energy consumption, which 
is showed on the LCD, and the other for processing and 
transmitting the collected data, besides implementing 
additional functionalities such as access control and 
firmware management, for example. The smart meter 
firmware and configuration parameters are stored in the 
EEPROM and/or flash memory modules and can be 
remotely updated if necessary. Several modules are 
responsible by providing the communication layer, using 
technologies such as PLC, GSM/GPRS, ZigBee, and WiFi. 
Examples of buses used to interconnect these components 
include SPI, I2C, and SMbus. Maintenance can occur using 
the aforementioned network protocols or through an optical 
port compliant with the ANSI C12.18 specification.  
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
Metrology
Processor
Application
Processor
GSM/GPRS
Module
ZigBee
Module
WiFi
Module
RAM
Optical
Port
EEPROM/
Flash Memory
LCD
Voltage
Sensor
Current
Sensor
PLC
Modem
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
1
3
 
 
Microprocessor
RF Module
Non-Volatile Memory
Volatile Memory
Optical Port
Analog Sensor
PLC Modem
LCD Segment
1. I²C/SPI/Serial
2. Analog Signal
3. Radio Frequency  
 
Figure 1. Smart Meter Anatomy 
 
Recently, discussion has been growing about security 
attacks on smart meters. As a matter of fact, some research 
was done focusing on the “smart meter pentest” subject. The 
initial stage of this present R&D work covered the research 
of known attacks that are related directly to the mapped 
threats in the Brazilian scenario. Four works are 
distinguished: in [8], some general weaknesses are listed, 
including some hacking methods used on the devices; in [9], 
some interesting attacks against smart meters are explained; 
in [10], a methodology of attack on AMI is addressed; and in 
[11], a pentest model for smart grid is proposed with focus 
on smart meters. 
Attacks on smart meters generally start by the physical 
interaction with the device usually performed through an 
optical port.  In general, the first obstacle in accessing the 
meter is to bypass the authentication mechanism. However, 
some meters still do not have password or use the default 
manufacturer password. When using robust passwords, two 
possible attacks are the attempt to extract data from hardware 
components and the use of brute-force methods. The first 
one depends on the comprehension of the smart meter 
anatomy, as shown in Figure 1. 
When accessing the device, after the successful 
authentication, smart meters can be connected to laptops 
through optical probes. This method is generally used by the 
company’s field technicians who perform maintenance and 
conduct configuration changes in meters’ setup. Attackers 
can use the same method to start their attacks. A slight 
change in the meters’ setup data is considered an attack, as 
this can increase or decrease the energy consumption data. 
Furthermore, these changes may allow non-authorized 
communication with other meters, aggregators or non-AMI 
networks. 
Another type of attack includes tampering hardware 
components in order to damage the device. Some smart 
meters contain tamper-protection mechanisms, although this 
type of control may fail after massive exploration. This kind 
of approach is initiated by gathering the available 
documentation such as components datasheets, operation 
guides and schematic diagrams. After the initial evaluation, 
the next important stage is to identify the weaknesses in the 
electronic 
components, 
for 
instance, 
the 
traffic 
of 
confidential data (e.g.: passwords or encryption keys) that 
runs between the components in a non-secure way. In this 
case, logical analyzers and oscilloscopes are used to help 
establish the type of traffic and evaluate the reading 
possibility. Another more advanced attack technique, related 
to this issue, is the use of hardware reverse-engineering 
techniques that makes possible the introduction of tampered 
components into smart meters. This type of attack is 
classified as hardware hacking.  
Another category of attack is the attempt to access the 
data stored in the meter's components such as RAM, Flash 
memory and EEPROM chips. For the EEPROM, access is 
performed while the device is deactivated using the 
following tools: total phase beagle sniffer, bus pirate, syringe 
probes and JTAG programmers. Based on the dumped data, 
search for relevant information is performed focusing mainly 
on the following: (1) encryption keys and (2) firmware.  
Other executable codes, configuration data and files, in 
addition to the meter’s authentication passwords or IDs, if 
obtained, can be useful to the attacker to run other attacks. 
The attempt to find encryption keys can be performed 
through a simple search for basic strings (obvious keys) and 
entropy analysis techniques. The access to the smart meter’s 
cryptographic keys can result, for instance, in the 
impersonation of the victim’s smart meter, by the attacker, 
within the Neighborhood Area Network (NAN). Another 
aspect is the access to other meters that share the same 
symmetric key that the one which has been discovered. In 
any case, the impact can be enormous. 
Software design flaws are the most common source of 
security weaknesses. Memory corruption vulnerabilities like 
stack overflows, heap overflows, format string, use-after-
free, and off-by-one overwrite, can be exploited aiming 
information disclosure and arbitrary code execution. Code 
injection vulnerabilities like SQL and XML injection can 
allow improper access to user private information, device 
and network configuration parameters, enterprise private 
data, etc. 
Attackers usually target firmware image recovery, as 
from their perspective it may drive many other attacks, like 
those related to software flaws. When obtaining the firmware 
source code, search for vulnerabilities can be performed 
through static analysis.  When this is not possible, the 
alternative is to perform reverse-engineer of the firmware 
binary. This technique can be used to identify hard-coded 
strings like encryption keys and device passwords. 
Furthermore, firmware reverse engineering can be used with 
fuzzing tests [12] to identify software implementation flaws 
as well. The impact of attacks that explore firmware flaws 
goes from denial of service to total device compromise. It is 
important to emphasize that the binary code analysis, if 
demanded, is time-intensive and requires professionals with 
highly specialized skills.   
Another attacking approach addressing the firmware 
consists of replacing it by a malicious version, using the 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
remote update functionality present in most smart meters. 
Vulnerabilities in the way they verify the authenticity of the 
code to be installed could be used by such an attack. In the 
worst case, one can consider devices that do not authenticate 
the new firmware at all. A much more advanced possibility, 
however, involves breaking the code authentication 
mechanism employed by the meter. A real example of the 
latter, in the context of operating systems, is the technique 
used by the flame malware [13] to camouflage as a valid 
Windows software update. In this case, it was necessary to 
improve Stevens’s cryptanalytic attack against the MD5 hash 
function [14], in order to make the attack possible.    
IV. 
R&D BRAZILIAN PROJECT: METERS SECURITY 
This Brazilian R&D project is a 24-month program that 
includes the following phases: Phase (1) the state-of-the-art 
analysis of smart meters security: includes the research 
process on the already identified main vulnerabilities, attacks 
related to device intrusions both on the software and the 
hardware; Phase (2) elaboration of a methodology able to 
evaluate meter security and to build the Smart Meter Cyber 
Security Laboratory: covers the development of a 
methodology for testing, which will be used in the 
replication of future smart meter evaluations, and also 
includes the deployment of two laboratories, one for 
vulnerability research and discovery, located at CPqD, and 
another twin laboratory for running security tests, located at 
Elektro; Phase (3) execution of the hardware and software 
security tests in smart meters: considered the core of this 
project, addresses the smart meter pentests, the prospecting 
of new attack methods and the specification of minimum 
requirements for security taking into consideration the 
Brazilian scenario; and Phase (4) transfer of knowledge: 
deals with the transfer of knowledge to Elektro's team and 
the presentation of final results to the R&D committee and to 
the regulatory agency.  
After the first phase of this work, it was prepared a 
survey addressing the main vulnerabilities and most relevant 
attacks on smart meter devices that were discussed during 
the latest security conferences worldwide. Considering the 
threats in the Brazilian scenario, it was possible to 
preliminarily ratify the elevated risk facing the replacement 
of all meters in Brazil. Considering the meters strength, in 
terms of security, which changes depending on the device, 
one can conclude that their conception is not based on 
requirements regarding information security.  
Some laboratories in Brazil are already accredited by 
Inmetro to perform tests on meters. However, the 
information security tests are in initial stage in the country. 
The Smart Meter Cyber Security Laboratory will be the first 
of its kind in Brazil and will focus mainly on security tests. 
This laboratory can be used as the basis for the deployment 
of other similar laboratories elsewhere. Based on the results 
obtained from this R&D project, a set of minimum 
requirements for software integrity and security will be 
proposed, in addition to the procedures to check the 
compliance with these requirements. In the future, these 
items could be incorporated to the current Inmetro 
requirements. Currently, the project is in the phase of 
structuring the laboratories, acquiring equipment and testing 
tools. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
By the beginning of 2014, power supply companies in 
Brazil will have to be ready to replace all their current 
meters. Considering the preliminary analysis, based on 
scientific papers and presentations that took place during the 
main security conferences, the replacement of meters may 
cause irreparable damage to the Brazilian energy sector. For 
this reason, research and development investments in the 
evaluation of software security for smart meters is crucial, 
mainly in the current Brazilian scenario. The results of this 
program will help the entire energy sector in Brazil through 
the creation of the first laboratory in the country, 
concentrating on information security tests including the 
specification of all features, tools and procedures to check 
the smart meter robustness for security baseline.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research project has been carried out in partnership 
between CPqD Foundation (independent institution focused 
R&D and innovation) and Elektro (the eighth largest power 
supply organization in Brazil) and relies on R&D financial 
resources provided and managed by ANEEL.  
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Fries, "Securing the Smart Grid", The First International 
Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT 
Energy-aware Technologies - ENERGY 2011, Keynote 
Speaker, Presentation, May 2011. 
[2] Technical briefing: “Attacking the Smart Grid,” Insights on 
governance, risk, and compliance - Ernst & Young, December 
2011.  
[3] H. Khurana, "Smart-Grid Security Issues", Security & 
Privacy, IEEE, Volume: 8 , Issue: 1, pp. 81-85, February 
2010. 
[4] W. Sikora, M. Carpenter, and J. Wright, "Smart Grid and 
AMI Security Concerns", InGuardians & Industrial Defender, 
Presentation, July 2009. 
[5] Art Presse, Pirataria em TV por assinatura chega a 11,44 
milhões de lares na América Latina, October 2012. 
[6] B. Murrill, E. Liu, and R. Thompson II, "Smart Meter Data: 
Privacy and Cybersecurity", Congressional Research Service, 
February 2012. 
[7] N. Falliere, L. Murchu, and E. Chien, "W32.Stuxnet Dossier", 
Symantec Security Response, Version 1.4, February 2011. 
[8] M. 
Davis 
(IOActive), 
"SmartGrid 
Device 
Security: 
Adventures in a new medium", Black Hat USA, July 2009. 
[9] D. Weber (InGuardians), "Looking into the eye of the meter", 
DEFCON 2012, July 2012. 
[10] InGuardians, Inc., "Advanced Metering Infrastructure Attack 
Methodology", March 2011. 
[11] J. Searle (UtiliSec), "Dissecting Smart Meters", Black Hat 
Europe 2012, March 2012. 
[12] American National Standard Protocol Specification for ANSI 
Type 2 Optical Port, ANSI C12.18-1996, April 1996. 
[13] sKyWIper Analysis Team, “sKyWIper (a.k.a. Flame a.k.a. 
Flamer): A complex malware for targeted attacks”, May 2012. 
[14] M. Stevens, A. Sotirov, J. Appelbaum, A. Lenstra, D. Molnar, 
D. A. Osvik, and B. de Weger, “Short Chosen-Prefix 
Collisions for MD5 and the Creation of a Rogue CA 
Certificate”, in CRYPTO 2009, Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, vol. 5677, pp. 55-69, August 2009. 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

