Load and Demand Side Flexibility Forecasting
Rocio Alvarez Merce
Ecole Polytechnique
Palaiseau Cedex, France
Email: rocio.alvarez-merce@ecoco2.com
Etta Grover-Silva
Eco CO2
Nanterre, France
Email: etta.grover-silva@ecoco2.com
Johanna Le Conte
Eco CO2
Nanterre, France
Email: johanna.leconte@ecoco2.com
Abstract—Recent developments in energy metering technologies
have allowed electric load data to be more easily accessible.
Services that use this data to inform customers can raise
awareness about electricity consumption and provide sugges-
tions to encourage energy efﬁcient behavior. Quantifying the
ﬂexibility of the demand combined with accurate predictions
of the total electric load allow information services to provide
suggestions to end-users on how to reduce electric consumption
that are appliance and time speciﬁc. With the arrival of new
electric generation technologies, such as photovoltaic or wind
energy, demand side ﬂexibility will play an important role in
the optimization of the future electric system. The accurate
prediction of demand ﬂexibility at a building level, therefore
can contribute to the optimization of load scheduling. This
study presents an effective multi-step technique to forecast the
average hourly demand ﬂexibility for a household, using neural
networks, unsupervised clustering techniques and an optimization
algorithm, combined with statistical studies. The model is mainly
based on the historical electric use of a building and does not
require signiﬁcant computational capacity, thus making it widely
applicable and informative for residential customers, helping
them improve their behavior to be more energy efﬁcient in the
future.
Keywords–non-intrusive load monitoring; demand ﬂexibility;
long short-term memory; recurrent neural network.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Worldwide, the energy sector is increasing the penetration
of decentralized renewable power generation systems and
therefore, reducing more traditional centralized fossil fuel
generation. This transition presents several challenges, such
as moving from a more stable and controllable power gener-
ation to a more volatile and less predictable one. Mitigating
this volatility and simultaneously decreasing the number of
conventional power generators makes it harder to balance out
supply and demand in order to ensure a stable and reliable
grid. In addition, emissions from buildings have risen in the
last few years, reaching an all-time high in 2018 [1], making
this transition even more challenging. In particular, households
in the European Union (EU) represented one-fourth of its total
ﬁnal energy consumption [2]. This results from several factors,
including extreme weather conditions that increase energy
demand for heating and cooling and inefﬁcient behavioral
habits that result in high energy use which is unnecessary for
the comfort of building inhabitants.
Accordingly, demand side management is important to
reduce overall emissions of buildings while guaranteeing end-
user comfort. Accurate forecasts of individual building electric
loads are crucial to effectively inform end-users about their
energy consumption habits. The willingness of end-users to
change their energy use habits can therefore provide demand
ﬂexibility. Accurate predictions of the energy demand and
demand ﬂexibility at a building level can help encourage
energy efﬁcient behavior, stabilize the electricity grid and
reduce the electricity bill, while accelerating the sustainable
energy transition.
Recent developments in technology have allowed energy
consumption data to be more easily accessible. Several studies
show that real-time feedback about appliance speciﬁc enery
use in energy efﬁciency awareness programs results in the
highest energy savings [3]. In this regard, an awareness raising
project has been put in place by the company Eco CO2 in the
context of a public tender in France put forth by ADEME
related to a funding mechanism called Investissement d‘avenir
[4]. This awareness raising service called Tableu de Bord de
l’Habitat (TBH) Alliance aims to test different interfaces with
varying information about the electric load of each user to
encourage energy efﬁcient behaviour. A digital tablet and a
website is available for users to observe their electric load data,
load proﬁle analysis metrics and suggestions to reduce their
consumption. In this context, quantifying demand ﬂexibility
combined with accurate predictions of the total electric load
can lead to services that provide action plans to reduce energy
consumption that are appliance and time speciﬁc.
Models used in building energy analysis can be grouped
into two categories: the top-down approach, and the bottom-
up approach [5]. Top-down approaches do not consider the
occupant behavior inside, and very little information is needed
about the building, they rely mostly on historical consumption
data. Bottom-up techniques take into consideration the physical
characteristics of a building and occupant behavior resulting
in more detailed models. The bottom up approaches require
a signiﬁcant amount of detailed input information about each
building and often require complex models that require a high
computational time. Therefore, a pure bottom-up approach is
not feasible for the assessment of a large group of end-users
where detailed information is not available.
Many different top-down methods have been developed for
load forecasting, such as curve ﬁtting using numerical methods
or machine learning algorithms [6]–[9]. Load forecasting is
a complex multi-step time series regression problem. Some
forecasting techniques, such as curve ﬁtting using numerical
methods, do not provide accurate results as they often fail
to track seasonality and trends accurately. Machine learning
algorithms, such as neural networks are more effective at
integrating seasonal trends. In particular, they can be applied
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-788-7
ENERGY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

to energy consumption data to forecast electric load proﬁles. In
spite of new developments in literature and applied modeling,
this remains to be a difﬁcult problem [6].
Traditional machine learning algorithms are often inef-
fective at predicting sequential data, where each data point
represents an observation at a certain point in time. The
algorithm assumes that the data is non-sequential, and that each
data point is independent of the others. As a result, the inputs
are analyzed independently, without the intrinsic temporal
dependencies. Consequently, some models are successful at
predicting a single value, but they fail to attain multi-step
forecasting. A beneﬁt of neural network models over many
other machine learning techniques is that they are able to
compute multi-step predictions. This is useful in time series
forecasting as the forecasts are multiple future time steps. In
the ﬁeld of building energy consumption forecasting methods,
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANN) are the most commonly
used models for making load and energy use predictions [7].
ANN modeling techniques have been used to estimate energy
consumption in multiple studies [6], [8], [10], [11] using
Convolutional, Nonlinear Autoregressive and Feed Forward
Neural Networks.
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) has been proven to be
a powerful tool for modeling sequential data as a regression
time-series problem. The RNN is able to remember the anal-
ysis that was done up to a given point by maintaining a
state, considering past observations. The state can be thought
of as the memory of the RNN, which captures information
about whats been previously calculated and is integrated into
each step in the training process. This allows RNNs to pro-
cess information sequentially and exhibit temporal behavior
for a time sequence while retaining information from the
past. Nonetheless, there are a few challenges in the effective
implementation of this algorithm. Recurrent networks are
computationally intensive since they keep track of past states.
Some other common issues that may appear during the training
phase are the vanishing or exploding gradient. As a result, the
simple Vanilla RNN is not useful for long sequences of data.
To solve these problems, a speciﬁc type of RNN that maintains
a strong gradient over many time steps is used, thus being able
to efﬁciently work with long sequences: the Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) model.
Once accurate predictions of the load proﬁle are acquired,
it is necessary to then assess the ﬂexibility of this future
load. Several strategies to quantify the demand response of
the residential sector to optimize electricity consumption are
present in literature. Furthermore, the individual ﬂexibility of
different smart appliances has been quantiﬁed. Sancho Tomas
et al. [12] applied a time-inhomogeneous Markov process to
model energy variations over time for different appliances.
Laicane et al. [13] investigated the potential for demand side
management to reduce peak load. Load shifting algorithms
were developed by Dlamini and Cromieres [14] to achieve sig-
niﬁcant household load reduction. DHulst et al. [15] presented
a demand response ﬂexibility analysis based on measurements
from appliances within a large-scale implementation of smart
grid technologies in a distribution grids project. These studies
allow for the quantiﬁcation of the ﬂexibility of individual
appliances.
In this paper, a LSTM model is used to predict the load
proﬁle of individual households. This predicted load proﬁle
is then decomposed into speciﬁc load categories using a
combination of both top-down and bottom-up non-intrusive
analysis. The prediction of appliance speciﬁc load proﬁles
then allows for the forecast of total demand response potential
of a household and the associated ﬂexibility. Firstly, limited
information about households is gathered through a question-
naire about the building energy systems and operational set
points. Then, an effective supervised learning algorithm is used
to forecast the energy consumption of the households, using
historical load proﬁle data. Thirdly, in a top-down approach,
a decomposition algorithm is used to partition the predicted
load proﬁle into two main categories: active (manual control of
appliances by inhabitants) and inactive (appliances that cycle
automatically and are not controlled directly by inhabitants)
loads. These categories are then further separated by applying
statistical studies of typical appliance uses to provide an
estimate of the expected energy use per device [16]. Finally,
an optimization algorithm is used to reconstruct a load forecast
and the average ﬂexibility of the demand is determined for each
hour of the day. This multi-step hybrid approach is applied to
a case study of three residential clients and the results are
presented. The following sections of this paper are composed
of Section II describing the methodology of the algorithm
including Section II-A detailing the forecasting algorithm,
Section II-B describing the estimation of the load ﬂexibility
and Section II-C presenting details on the evaluation of the
load predictions. It is followed by Section III, which describes
the case study where results are presented in Section IV and
ﬁnal conclusion in Section V.
II.
METHODOLOGY
The electric load data used for this study was collected
through the services offered by the company Eco CO2. Using
a LSTM model, total load proﬁles were forecasted for each
household. These forecasted load proﬁles are then analyzed
with a non-intrusive load decomposition technique. Addition-
ally, an optimization algorithm is used to reconstruct the
hourly load proﬁle for each appliance type. Finally, the hourly
ﬂexibility potential for each household is determined.
A. Forecasting
For the load forecasting, an LSTM model was used. The
RNN has two hidden layers: a 200-neuron LSTM layer, and a
100-neuron dense layer, implemented in python with the Ten-
sorFlow and Keras sequential model packages. To determine
the best choice of hyperparameters for the model, a sensitivity
test was performed on multiple hyperparameters of the LSTM
algorithm. Different architectures of LSTM networks were
compared, each one with different hyperparameters, reaching
an optimal compromise between forecasting accuracy and
low computational time. The number of time steps used as
input was ninput = 24 prior observations, and both the
input and output layers have the same number of time steps
(ninput = noutput).
The network was trained on 43 weeks of historical data in
each run. This 43 week period was choosen based on the max-
imum historical data available for all users. This was repeated
four times in order to obtain 1 full month of load predictions
for each user. The default number of epochs and batch size
for all analysis was nepochs = 400 and nbatch = N/25,
respectively, being N the total number of training samples.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-788-7
ENERGY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Finally, the rectiﬁer (ReLU) was chosen as the activation
function, and ADAM (Adaptive Moment Estimation [17]) as
the optimizer.
B. Energy Flexibility
To determine the ﬂexibility potential of a 24-hours period
for a household, a two-step approach was applied to the load
forecasts. The load category partitioning algorithm published
in [3] is applied to forecasted proﬁles obtained from the
LSTM model to classify the total weekly energy use into eight
categories listed in Table I. Active load periods are classiﬁed
as the time intervals with a relatively high value and high
variance.
TABLE I. HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS
Active load categories
Inactive load categories
Cooking
Domestic Hot Water (DHW)
Lighting
Refrigeration
Multimedia active
Multimedia standby
Washing
Continuous Mandatory Ventilation (CMV)
The load categories classiﬁed as inactive were assumed
to be a constant percentage of the inactive load proﬁle for
the whole week period. The load categories classiﬁed as
active required an optimization algorithm to assign the active
consumption to different time periods of the active load
proﬁle. Therefore, identifying the expected times of use of
each category. This was achieved by minimizing the objective
function:
min
T
X
t
Xact,t ∗ pact − bact,t
(1)
where Xact,t is the unknown binary variable matrix where
each column corresponds to a speciﬁc active load category time
series, bact,t is a column vector with the forecasted total energy
use of each category for the week, and pactis a column vector
with the average hourly power values for each category. These
last values were collected from statistical household energy
consumption studies [18]–[21]. In addition, four constraints
were deﬁned, one per each active load category:
T
X
t
jt ≤ jtot
(2)
where jt is the value of the active category j corresponding
to timestep t and jtot is the weekly energy use obtained in the
previous step, corresponding to the same category j of the
active consumption.
With this two-step approach, hourly load proﬁles were
obtained for each consumption category. The average hourly
ﬂexibility potential was then determined. Flexibility depends
on both the total load value and the end use device or category.
For categories labeled as inactive, reducing consumption en-
tails changing the temperature set-point for different inactive
appliances or reducing the consumption of phantom loads.
Literature studies show that Domestic Hot Water (DHW)
demand response potential can be reduced 3% by decreasing
the set-point by 3◦C, while refrigeration can attain a 40%
reduction by increasing its set-point by 3◦C [15]. Standby or
phantom loads from the multimedia category have shown a
17% ﬂexibility potential if devices are unplugged when not
in use [22]. For categories labeled as active, demand side
ﬂexibility correlates more with postponing the cycle of active
appliances: 1 washing event over 3 can be shifted in order to
increase ﬂexibility potential [15].
C. Forcasting evaluation
Different criteria can be used to evaluate the performance
of the regression forecasting model. Commonly used metrics
are the coefﬁcient of determination (R-squared, R2), the Root
Mean Square Error (RMSE), and the Mean Absolute Error
(MAE). These error measures are deﬁned in (3), (4) and (5),
respectively.
R2 =
PN
i=0(yi − ˆyi)2
PN
i=0(yi − ¯yi)2
(3)
RMSE =
sPN
i=0(yi − ˆyi)2
N
(4)
MAE = 1
N
N
X
i=0
|yi − ˆyi|
(5)
where yi denotes the observed values from the test set, ˆyi
the predicted values, and ¯y the mean of the observed data as
deﬁned in (6).
¯y = 1
N
N
X
i=0
yi
(6)
The RMSE is the most used evaluation metric for regres-
sion models. On the other hand, averaging values makes MAE
more robust to outliers while the RMSE gives a relatively high
weight to large errors. For the coefﬁcient of determination,
high values are preferable. However, even a model with low
R2 can be accurate if the RMSE is low [23].
III.
CASE STUDY
The data used for this study was collected through the
services offered by the company Eco CO2. Load data from
3 French households was collected through sensors that are
capable of reading and transmitting the total electric load data
for each household. Additionally, limited information about
the households was gathered through a questionnaire. The
characteristics of the case study households is summarized in
Table II.
TABLE II. HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS
Household 1
Household 2
Household 3
Surface (m2)
100
110
160
Heating type
Natural gas
Natural gas
Natural gas
DHW
electric
electric
electric
CMV
yes
no
yes
Cooking
electric
electric
electric
Refrigeration
2
3
3 + freezer
Washing
3
3
3
Multimedia
6
6
7
Annual consumption (kWh)
5786
10193
4172
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-788-7
ENERGY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Household 1 shows an annual electric consumption of 5786
kWh. Household 3 presents the lowest measured value, roughly
exceeding 4000 kWh, whereas household 2 uses more than
10000 kWh per year. The maximum consumption attained for
one-hour period ranges between 4 kWh to almost 7 kWh, for
users 2 and 3, respectively.
All households present gas heating, electric cooking de-
vices and roughly the same number of washing and multimedia
appliances. Regarding the refrigeration category, household 1
presents the lowest number of appliances (two). Both house-
holds 2 and 3 have three refrigeration devices, taking into
consideration that, for the latter, one of these appliances is
a freezer. User 3 is the only one without electric DHW and
user 2 does not have a Continuous Mandatory Ventilation
(CMV) system. For this reason, these end-use appliances will
not be considered for these users during the decomposition
algorithm. In addition, the studied households present different
surface dimensions. This variation is taken into account in
the optimization model when applying normalized values of
statistical household energy consumption studies. For example,
the lightning category is highly dependent on the area of the
household.
IV.
RESULTS
The LSTM model used to forecast electricity consumption
was efﬁcient after ﬁnding the optimal hyper-parameters. Error
measure results are shown in Table III.
TABLE III. PERFORMANCE OF FORECASTING MODEL
Household ID
R2
RMSE
MAE
1
0.692
0.432
0.334
2
0.625
0.464
0.402
3
0.496
0.157
0.125
R-squared values were calculated for the monthly time
series forecasts for each user. The calculated values ranged
from 0.496 to 0.692, showing a good ﬁt to the test values. The
calculated RMSE and MAE showed low values for all cases.
Household 3 showed smaller results not because of under
ﬁtting issues, but because its average electricity consumption
was lower than the other two cases, hence leading to smaller
forecasted values and metric results.
The optimization algorithm was then applied to determine
the partitioned consumption forecast as shown in Figure 1.
Active and inactive loads are highlighted in shades of gray.
An example day for each user is presented in Figure 1 with
the associated partitioned load curve for the different categories
presented in Table I.
Of the three users analyzed, household 3 did not have
electric domestic hot water and household 2 did not have a
CMV. Accordingly, during the decomposition algorithm, these
end use appliances were not considered for these users. The
variability of the total consumption may change according
to each user and their energy behavior. However, an overall
decrease of global consumption occurs for all studied cases
during nighttime hours, around 12am, or between 1am and
3am.
Overall, most of the consumption corresponds to the in-
active category, reaching 60% and up to 78% of the total
consumption. This is mainly caused by the use of DHW,
Figure 1. Example electric load forecasts partitioned into appliance
categories for a 24-hour period for household 1 (top), household 2 (middle)
and household 3 (bottom). Inactive load categories are shown at the bottom
of each graph, while active loads are shown at the top of the stacked bars
one of the highest consumption appliances, followed by the
refrigeration category. As could be expected, inactive load
consumption stays almost constant for all forecasted periods,
while active consumption changes depending on user behavior.
The consumption of the active part is dominated by
the multimedia and lighting categories, showing consumption
peaks several times a day. The washing and cooking categories
are only active approximately once every 24 hours. For all
end-users, active periods corresponding to multimedia and
lightning categories usually occur during the same intervals.
These intervals are often between 4am and 6am, or during the
afternoon between 1pm and 19pm. With respect to the cooking
and washing categories, they occur more often between 10am
and 1pm or between 8pm to 10pm.
It is important to notice when these forecasted active and
peak inactive periods occur during the day, considering that
these could be the possible periods where demand response
programs could be more efﬁciently deployed.
The ﬁnal average forecasted ﬂexibility potential for each
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-788-7
ENERGY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

household is shown in Figure 2. These results are based on
the possible consumption savings obtained from the different
guidelines mentioned in Section II-B: for inactive loads, re-
ducing consumption entails diminishing the consumption of
phantom loads or changing the temperature set point; for active
loads, demand side ﬂexibility correlates more with postponing
the cycle of active appliances.
Figure 2. Average demand ﬂexibility values for the three households for a
24-hour period
Average ﬂexibility potential is dependent on the household
characteristics, time of day and inhabitant behavior. For all
cases, the smallest values for a 24-hour period are found
around midnight, between 11pm and 1am, or during the early
morning, between 3am and 4am.
Household 1 shows the lowest ﬂexibility values, mostly
between 0 and 0.08 kW. This is explained by the characteristics
of the household, such as having the lowest number of refrig-
eration appliances (see Table II) and refrigeration consumption
values of all study cases. The adjustment of refrigeration
temperature set points results in the largest ﬂexibility in the
inactive category, thus not allowing for signiﬁcant load ﬂex-
ibility in this particular case. Moreover, ﬂexibility associated
with changing domestic hot water temperature set points result
in only 3% savings. Therefore, for this household, where 70%
of the inactive load corresponds to the use of DHW, this results
in overall lower ﬂexibility potential.
On the contrary, household 3 presents the highest ﬂexibility
values, around 0.08 kW for every hour. This household has the
lowest total electricity consumption of all three and does not
have electric DHW, usually responsible of a large percentage
of the inactive loads. Additionally, more than 50% of his
inactive consumption corresponds to the refrigeration category,
resulting in a possible 40% inactive load ﬂexibility.
Finally, household 2 shows the greatest variability in the
ﬂexibility potential values since it is the household with the
highest total consumption. Besides, during all the studied
period, the percentage of the active load is higher and more
variable, providing a higher active load ﬂexibility but a lower
inactive load ﬂexibility.
V.
CONCLUSION
This paper has presented an effective multi-step tech-
nique to forecast the average hourly demand ﬂexibility of a
household. This model is widely applicable, does not require
high computational capacity, and is also compatible with the
type and resolution of data available through the massive
deployment of smart meters. This solution allows for end-
users to learn about their energy use and receive behavior
adjustment suggestions for future possible use to encourage
energy efﬁcient behavior in advance.
The average demand ﬂexibility values vary between
0.015kW and 0.08kW for each hour depending on the house-
hold characteristics, time of day and user behavior. For all
cases, the smallest values for a 24-hour period are found
around midnight, between 11pm and 1am, or during the early
morning, between 3am and 4 am, where it has been noted that
the load is relatively low.
The largest ﬂexibility comes from the inactive part of
the consumption: changes of temperature set points and un-
plugging unused multimedia devices causing phantom loads
that increase total consumption. Particularly, the adjustment of
refrigeration set points results in the largest ﬂexibility values
in the inactive category, while DHW usage leads to smallest
values: domestic hot water appliances are often responsible
of a large percentage of the inactive consumption but its
temperature set point change results in only 3% savings. Active
consumption appliances contribute to smaller ﬂexibility values
since it concerns end-user active behavior, rescheduling activ-
ities, postponing appliances or actively changing consumption
habits.
Overall, the individual demand ﬂexibility of each user is
limited, between 15W and 80W every hour, but the aggregate
demand ﬂexibility is interesting to exploit in a massive de-
ployment program. With the arrival of new electric generation
technologies, such as photovoltaic or wind energy, demand
side ﬂexibility will play an important role in the optimization
of the future electric system.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Buildings sector CO2 emissions in the sustainable development sce-
nario,” International Energy Agency, 2019, URL: https://www.iea.org/
[accessed: 2019-10-02].
[2]
“Statistical ofﬁce of the european union,” European Commission, 2019,
URL: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat [accessed: 2019-10-02].
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-788-7
ENERGY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

[3]
K. C. Armel, A. Gupta, G. Shrimali, and A. Albert, “Is disaggregation
the holy grail of energy efﬁciency? the case of electricity,” Energy
Policy, vol. 52, 2013, pp. 213–234.
[4]
T. Alliance. Projet tbh. [Online]. Available: https://www.projet-tbh.fr/
(2015)
[5]
L. G. Swan and V. I. Ugursal, “Modeling of end-use energy con-
sumption in the residential sector: A review of modeling techniques,”
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 13, no. 8, 2009, pp.
1819–1835.
[6]
K. Amarasinghe, D. L. Marino, and M. Manic, “Deep neural networks
for energy load forecasting,” in 2017 IEEE 26th International Sympo-
sium on Industrial Electronics (ISIE), June 2017, pp. 1483–1488.
[7]
S. Seyedzadeh, F. P. Rahimian, I. Glesk, and M. Roper, “Machine learn-
ing for estimation of building energy consumption and performance: a
review,” Springer International Publishing, 2018.
[8]
F. S. et al., “Predictive models for building’s energy consumption: An
artiﬁcial neural network (ann) approach,” in 2015 XVIII AISEM Annual
Conference, Feb 2015, pp. 1–4.
[9]
P. A. Gonzlez and J. M. Zamarreo, “Prediction of hourly energy
consumption in buildings based on a feedback artiﬁcial neural network,”
Energy and Buildings, vol. 37, no. 6, 2005, pp. 595–601.
[10]
R. Platon, V. R. Dehkordi, and J. Martel, “Hourly prediction of a
building’s electricity consumption using case-based reasoning, artiﬁ-
cial neural networks and principal component analysis,” Energy and
Buildings, vol. 92, 2015, pp. 10–18.
[11]
J. Yuan, C. Farnham, C. Azuma, and K. Emura, “Predictive artiﬁcial
neural network models to forecast the seasonal hourly electricity
consumption for a university campus,” Sustainable Cities and Society,
vol. 42, 2018, pp. 82–92.
[12]
A. S. Toms, M. Sumner, S. Lamparter, and D. Robinson, “On the energy
demands of small appliances in homes,” Energy Procedia, vol. 78, 2015,
pp. 3384–3390, 6th International Building Physics Conference, IBPC
2015.
[13]
I. Laicane, D. Blumberga, A. Blumberga, and M. Rosa, “Reducing
household electricity consumption through demand side management:
The role of home appliance scheduling and peak load reduction,”
Energy Procedia, vol. 72, 2015, pp. 222–229, international Scientiﬁc
Conference Environmental and Climate Technologies, CONECT 2014.
[14]
N. G. Dlamini and F. Cromieres, “Implementing peak load reduction
algorithms for household electrical appliances,” Energy Policy, vol. 44,
2012, pp. 280–290.
[15]
R. Dhulst, W. Labeeuw, B. Beusen, S. Claessens, G. Deconinck, and
K. Vanthournout, “Demand response ﬂexibility and ﬂexibility potential
of residential smart appliances: Experiences from large pilot test in
belgium,” Applied Energy, vol. 155, 2015, pp. 79–90.
[16]
E. Grover-Silva, E. Magliaro, and J. L. Conte, “Electric load proﬁle
non-intrusive analysis to guide energy efﬁcient behavior for residential
clients,” no. 163.
Bucharest, Romania: 2019 IEEE PES Innovative
Smart Grid Technologies Europe, Oct. 2019, pp. 1–5.
[17]
D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.”
ICLR 2015: International Conference on Learning Representations, jan
2017.
[18]
Enertech, “Lighting appliance mesurement compaigne for 100 house-
holds in france (campagne de mesures de l’eclairage dans 100 logements
en france),” Electricite de France et Agence de l’Environnement et de
la Maitrise de l’Energie, Tech. Rep., 2004.
[19]
T. Kreitz, “Refrigeration, washing machines and ac appliance mesure-
ment compaigne (campagne de mesures des appareils de production de
froid, des appareils de lavage et de la climatisation),” ADEME, Tech.
Rep., 2016.
[20]
Enertech, “Load mesurements for residential multi-media appliances
and information technology devices (mesure de la consommation des
usages domestiques de laudiovisuel et de linformatique),” ADEME,
Tech. Rep., Jul 2008.
[21]
O. Sidler, “Knowledge and management of electrical appliances for the
residential sector (connaissance et maitrise des usages speciﬁques de
l’electricite dans le secteur residentiel),” Enertech, Tech. Rep., 2009.
[22]
R. Y. et al., “Quantifying ﬂexibility of commercial and residential loads
for demand response using setpoint changes,” Applied Energy, vol. 177,
2016, pp. 149–164.
[23]
D. Alexander, A. Tropsha, and D. A. Winkler, “Beware of R2 : Simple,
unambiguous assessment of the prediction accuracy of QSAR and
QSPR models,” Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, vol. 55,
2015, pp. 1316–1322.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-788-7
ENERGY 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

