Reducing Power Consumption Using the Border Gateway Protocol
Shankar Raman∗, Balaji Venkat‡ and Gaurav Raina‡
India-UK Advanced Technology Centre of Excellence in Next Generation Networks
∗Department of Computer Science and Engineering, ‡ Department of Electrical Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600 036, India
Email: mjsraman@cse.iitm.ac.in, balajivenkat@tenet.res.in, gaurav@ee.iitm.ac.in
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a framework to reduce
the aggregate power consumption of the Internet using a
collaborative approach between Autonomous Systems (AS). We
identify the low-power paths between the AS and then use
Trafﬁc Engineering techniques to route packets along the paths.
Such low-power paths can be identiﬁed by using the available
power-to-bandwidth (PWR) ratio as an additional constraint in
the Constrained Shortest Path First algorithm. For re-routing
the data trafﬁc through these low-power paths, the inter-AS
Trafﬁc Engineered Label Switched Path that spans multiple AS
can be used. Extensions to the Border Gateway Protocol can
be used to disseminate the PWR ratio metric among the AS
thereby creating a collaborative approach to reduce the power
consumption. Since calculating the low-power paths can be
computationally intensive, a graph-labelling heuristic is also
proposed. This heuristic reduces the computational complexity
but may provide a sub-optimal low-power path. The feasibility
of our approaches is illustrated by applying our algorithm to a
subset of the Internet. The techniques proposed in this paper
for the inter-AS power reduction require minimal modiﬁcations
to the existing features of the Internet.
Keywords-Border Gateway Protocol; Autonomous systems;
Trafﬁc engineering.
I. INTRODUCTION
Estimates of power consumption for the Internet predict a
300% increase, as access speeds move from 10 Mbps to 100
Mbps [2]. Various approaches have been proposed to reduce
the power consumption of the Internet such as designing
low-power routers and switches, and optimizing the network
topology using trafﬁc engineering approaches [3].
Low-power router and switch design aim at reducing the
power consumed by hardware components such as trans-
mission link, lookup tables and memory. In [7], it is shown
that the link power consumption can vary by 20 Watts be-
tween idle and trafﬁc scenarios. Hence, the authors suggest
having more line cards and fully utilize them. Operating at
full throughput will lead to less power per bit. Therefore,
larger packet lengths will consume lower power. The two
important components that have received attention for high
power consumption are static and dynamic RAM-based
buffers (SRAM, DRAM) and Ternary Content Addressable
Memories (TCAM). A 40 Gb/s line card would require more
than 300 SRAM chips and consume 2.5 kW [1]. Some
variants of TCAMs have been proposed for high speed lines
with reduced power consumption [10]. But these schemes
cannot scale forever.
At the Internet level, creating a topology that allows route
adaptation, capacity scaling and power-aware service rate
tuning, will reduce power consumption. In [9], a subset
of IP router interfaces are put to sleep, using an Energy
Aware Routing (EAR) after calculating shortest path trees
of the network from each router. Such a technique is useful
in setting up paths within an Autonomous System (AS).
In [5], the authors provide a way to introduce hardware
standby primitives and apply trafﬁc engineering methods to
coordinate and reduce power consumption under given net-
work operational constraints. Power savings while switching
from 1 Gbps to 100 Mbps is approximately 4 W and from
100 Mbps to 10 Mbps around 0.1 W. Hence, instead of
operating at 1 Gbps the link speed could be reduced to a
lower bandwidth under certain conditions for reduced power
consumption. A detailed review on energy efﬁciency of the
Internet is given in [6].
Multilayer trafﬁc engineering based methods make use of
parameters such as resource usage, bandwidth, throughput
and Quality of Service (QoS) measures, for power reduc-
tion. In [13], an approach for reducing intra-AS power
consumption for optical networks using Djikstra’s shortest
path algorithm is proposed. The input assumes the existence
of a network topology for constructing an auxiliary graph.
This topology is easy to obtain for intra-AS scenario. Trafﬁc
is then re-routed through the low-power optimized links.
We propose a collaborative approach that uses inter-AS
power reduction. Multi-Protocol Label Switching (MPLS)
label switched paths that traverse multiple AS carry trafﬁc
from a head-end to a tail-end. AS use the Border Gateway
Protocol (BGP) for exchanging routing and topology related
information. One of the attributes of BGP namely, AS-
PATH-INFO is used to derive the topology of the Inter-
net at the AS level. The Constrained Shortest Path First
algorithm (CSPF) uses the AS level topology with available
power-to-bandwidth (PWR) ratio as a constraint, to deter-
mine the low-power path from the head-end to the tail-end.
The PWR ratio can be exchanged among the collaborating
AS using BGP. Explicit routing can be achieved between the
head and tail-ends through the low-power paths connecting
the AS using inter-AS Trafﬁc Engineered Label Switched
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Path (TE-LSP) that span multiple AS. Since calculation
of such low-power paths can be computationally intensive
certain heuristics may be needed to reduce the computation
time. A graph-labelling heuristic is proposed to reduce the
computation time, which may lead to sub-optimal low-power
paths. We illustrate our approaches by applying it to a subset
of the Internet topology.
The uniqueness of our approach is that it can be used
for inter-AS power reduction and requires cooperative effort
from Internet Service Providers (ISP). Further, we use BGP
the existing protocol in the Internet not only for detecting
the topology but also to exchange power information and
then construct low-power path.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section
II, we discuss in detail the pre-requisites for the algorithm.
Section III introduces the proposed technique for calculating
the low-power path. We also show that by using a graph-
labelling technique, we can reduce the computational com-
plexity of the low-power path algorithm, but may obtain a
sub-optimal low-power path. In Section IV, we discuss the
implementation issues. We present our conclusion and future
work in Section V.
II. PRE-REQUISITES FOR THE PROPOSED METHOD
In this section, we discuss the pre-requisites for the
implementation of the proposed scheme.
A. Constructing network topology using BGP strands
The inter-AS topology can be modelled as a directed
graph G = (V, E, f) where the vertices (V) are mapped
to AS and the edges (E) map the link that connect the
neighbouring AS. The direction (f) on the edge, represents
the data ﬂow from the head-end to the tail-end AS. To
obtain the inter-AS topology, the approach proposed in [12]
is used. In this approach, it is shown that a sub-graph of
the Internet topology, can be obtained by collecting several
preﬁx updates in BGP. This is illustrated in Figure 1 which
shows the different graph strands of an AS recorded from the
BGP packets. Each vertex in this graph is assigned a weight
according to the available power-to-bandwidth (PWR) ratio
of the AS, as seen by an Autonomous System Border
Router (ASBR) that acts as an entry point. Figure 2 shows
the merged strands forming the topology sub-graph where
the weight of the vertices are mapped to the ingress edges. A
reference AS level topology derived from 100 strands of AS-
PATH-INFO received by an AS in the Internet is presented
in Figure 3. For a detailed discussion on completeness of
Internet topology information using BGP refer to [8], [11].
Any other algorithm that gives a complete AS topology
could also be used.
B. PWR ratio calculation
In the topology sub-graph, each AS shares its PWR ratio.
To calculate this ratio we need the available power and
maximum bandwidth with an ASBR.
A
B
D
D
G
H
G
E
X
C
B
H
X
B
E
X
0.2
0.05
0.1
0.1
0.03
0.2
0.03
0.5
0.1
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.05
0.5
0.5
0.5
Figure 1.
Strands obtained from BGP updates, vertices A,B,C,D and G
are the head-end AS; D,H and X are the tail-end AS. The vertex weights
represent the PWR ratio of an AS, and the link direction shows the next
AS hop.
B
A
D
G
H
C
E
X
0.05
0.1
0.03
0.2
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
Figure 2.
Strands combined to get the Internet topology. The PWR ratio
is mapped to the ingress link of the ASBR.
The entry point to the AS is through ASBRs that advertise
the preﬁxes reachable through the AS. Hence, the numerator
of the PWR ratio is calculated for the AS at each ingress
ASBR. We obtain the summation of power consumed at the
major Provider (P) and Provider Edge (PE) routers within
an AS. These can be obtained by using any of the intra-
AS power calculation techniques. The average available
power is obtained by subtracting the consumed power from
the maximum power rating, summing the values for all
the routers and then dividing the result by the number of
routers. Other alternatives include using a weighted average
depending on the category of the router advertising the
consumed power, or to take the average or sum of the
maximum power rating of all the routers within an AS.
The average available power is divided by the maximum
bandwidth available at each of the ASBR’s egress link.
This step is necessary as the requested bandwidth for any
path from the head-end to the tail-end using the ASBR is
limited by the bandwidth available in the ASBR’s egress
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Figure 3.
Internet topology graph derived from 100 strands of AS-PATH-INFO attribute by an AS through an ASBR. The top-most node (myas) represents
the head-end and the bottom-most node (8043) represents the tail-end AS.
links. Simple Network Management Protocol can be used to
extract this power information [4].
The highest available bandwidth amongst the egress links
of the ASBR is used as the denominator in the PWR
ratio computation. This PWR ratio must be computed and
disbursed much ahead of time before the inter-AS TE-LSP
explicit path is computed using the CSPF algorithm. The
correctness of this ratio is of importance to compute the
inter-AS TE-LSP route through the low-power AS. If the
entry point to the AS is through a different ASBR then the
PWR ratio assigned to the ingress link of the ASBR might
vary. Hence, it is possible that an head-end AS might see
different PWR ratios for an intermediate AS.
As an illustration, consider an AS X which is one of the
AS in the vicinity of another AS Y . Let this ASBR of X
have 3 egress links denoted as E(1), E(2) and E(3), and
2 ingress links labelled I(1) and I(2). We now calculate
the PWR ratio for I(1) and I(2). Assume that the routers
in X have average available power of 200 kW/hour. From
Figure 4 we can calculate the PWR ratio for I(1) and I(2) as
200 kW/(60 ∗60 ∗1.5 Gb) = 3.7037∗10−8. We could scale
this to 0.37037. This ratio is a mapping function deﬁned for
each of the ingress link of the ASBR of an AS. Note the
absence of ingress link for the head-end AS.
The PWR ratio can then be advertised to the other
neighbouring AS through the control plane using BGP
extensions. BGP ensures that the information is percolated
to other AS. On receipt of this PWR ratios by the AS at the
far-end of the Internet, the overall AS level topology can
be constructed. Note that view of the Internet is available
with each of the routers without using any other complex
discovery mechanism. Some sample link weights shown in
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

ASBR
E(1)
E(2)
E(3)
I(1)
I(2)
1Gb
1Gb
1.5Gb
200kW/(60 * 60 * 1.5Gb)
Figure 4.
Calculation of PWR ratio by an ASBR of an AS. The I’s
are ingress links and E’s are egress links. 200 kW/hour is the average
available power in the AS. 1.5 Gb is the maximum available ASBR egress
link bandwidth.
B
A
D
G
H
C
E
X
0.05
0.1
0.03
0.2
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
Figure 5.
Dotted lines represent low-power path but has a longer number
of hops than the shortest path.
Figure 2 are obtained by using such a mapping function on
the ingress links.
C. Explicit routing using TE-LSPs
The head and tail-ends may reside in different AS and the
path could span multiple intervening AS. To generate this
path we can use Trafﬁc Engineered Label Switched Paths
(TE-LSPs). TE-LSPs can inﬂuence the exact path (at the
AS level) for the trafﬁc and this path can be realized by
providing a set of low-power consuming AS to a protocol
like Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP). RSVP-TE then
creates TE-LSPs or tunnels, using its label assigning proce-
dure. The routers use these low-power paths created by the
explicit routing method rather than using the conventional
shortest path algorithm. This inﬂuences the exclusion of a
number of high power AS on the path from the head-end
to the tail-end AS. For example, the dotted line in Figure 5
represents the explicit route that is chosen by making use
of such TE-LSPs from head-end AS “A” to the tail-end AS
“X”. Note that if the metric used is the number of hops,
then the route chosen could be different.
III. LOW-POWER PATHS
In this section, we present the low-power path calculation
algorithm. The algorithm consists of two sub-algorithms: the
ﬁrst algorithm is executed by all the ASBRs in the network
and the other by all the Path Computation Elements (PCEs)
in their respective AS. PCEs have been proposed by the
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) for path computa-
tion activities. We can use the existing PCE architecture for
our algorithm. The algorithms for the ASBRs and PCEs are
given as Algorithm 1, 2 and 3.
Algorithm 1 ASBR low-power path algorithm
Require: Weighted Topology Graph T=(AS, E, f)
1: Begin
2: if ROUTER == ASBR then
3:
/* As part of IGP-TE */
4:
Trigger exchange of available bandwidth on band-
width change, to the AS internal neighbours;
5:
BEGIN PARALLEL PROCESS 1
6:
while PWR ratio changes do
7:
Assign the PWR ratio to the Ingress links;
8:
Exchange the PWR ratio with its external neigh-
bours;
9:
Exchange the PWR ratio with AS’s (internal) AS-
BRs;
10:
end while
11:
END PARALLEL PROCESS 1
12:
BEGIN PARALLEL PROCESS 2
13:
while RSVP packets arrive do
14:
Send and Receive TE-LSP reservations in the ex-
plicit path;
15:
Update routing table with labels for TE-LSP;
16:
end while
17:
END PARALLEL PROCESS 2
18: end if
19: End
A. Illustration
We illustrate the technique with a simple example. Con-
sider the AS level topology sub-graph shown in Figure 5
constructed using the strands shown in Figure 1. The PWR
ratio calculated at an ASBR is assigned to the ingress link.
AS “H” has two edges coming into it: one from “B” and
the other from “G”. Note that the power metrics for the two
strands are different. “G” to “H” is lower than that of “B”
to “H”. This means that the lower power metric into “H” is
better if the path from “G” to “H” is chosen rather than “B”
to “H”. The dotted lines in Figure 5 represent low-power
path.
To construct a path with “A” as the head-end and “X”
as the tail-end in the AS level topology the paths “A”,
“B”, “H”, “X” and “A”, “B”, “E”, “X” have the same
number of hops. However by using CSPF with the PWR
ratio as the constraint, the path “A”, “B”, “D”, “G”, “H”,
“X” is power efﬁcient. The routing choice will depend on
the reservation of the bandwidth on this path. If available
bandwidth exists to setup a TE-LSP, then the explicit path
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Algorithm 2 PCE low-power path algorithm
Require: Weighted Topology Graph T=(AS, E, f)
Require: Source and Destination for inter-AS TE LSP with
sufﬁcient bandwidth
1: Begin
2: if ROUTER == PCE then
3:
Calculate the shortest paths from the head-end to the
tail-end using CSPF with PWR ratio as the metric;
4:
if no path available then
5:
Signal error;
6:
end if
7:
if path exists then
8:
Send explicit path to head-end to construct path;
9:
end if
10:
Continue passively listening to BGP updates to update
T=(AS, E, f);
11: end if
12: End
“A”, “B”, “D”, “G”, “H”, “X” is chosen. The Resource
Reservation Protocol (RSVP) adheres to its usual operation
and tries to setup a path. If bandwidth is not available in the
low-power path thus calculated, then we may fall back to
other shortest paths, provided there is available bandwidth.
The low-power path algorithm given as Algorithm 2 is
executed by the PCE. Algorithm 1 prepares the topology
and feeds it as input to the PCE as a weighted topology
graph.
Using the CSPF algorithm to calculate the route from
source to destination could be time consuming for large
networks. But the topology is dynamically updated and
hence the computation of the shortest path can be triggered
based on need. We now give a heuristic method based on
graph-labelling that reduces the computation time but could
trade-off the low-power path.
B. Equivalence class with total ordering
The heuristic is based on avoiding high PWR ratios
by partitioning the weighted links into equivalence classes
based on a range of PWR values. For each partition a
label is applied such that each link in the partition has the
same label. A total ordering relationship is then deﬁned
on the equivalence class. The heuristic starts including
partitions with minimum label value iteratively until we get a
connected component, which includes the head-end and tail-
end AS. We apply the CSPF algorithm with the weights as
label values on this sub-graph to obtain the low-power path.
The modiﬁed algorithm which uses this scheme is given as
Algorithm 3. It should be noted that this algorithm could
provide sub-optimal power paths as the intermediate steps
carry incomplete Internet topology information.
Algorithm 3 PCE low-power path algorithm with graph
labelling
Require: Weighted Topology Graph T=(AS, E, f)
Require: Source and Destination for inter-AS TE LSP with
sufﬁcient bandwidth
1: Begin
2: if ROUTER == PCE then
3:
Group the links into “N” partitions with a label for
each partition depending on the PWR ratio
4:
Sort the labels in ascending order.
5:
repeat
6:
Include the links that have the least label value;
7:
Remove the partition with this label;
8:
until there is a path from the head-end to tail-end AS
9:
Calculate the low-power path using labels from the
head-end to the tail-end using CSPF ;
10:
if no path available then
11:
Signal error;
12:
end if
13:
if path exists then
14:
Send explicit path to head-end to construct path;
15:
end if
16:
Continue passively listening to BGP updates to update
T=(AS, E);
17: end if
18: End
C. Illustration of graph labelling
We brieﬂy illustrate the graph-labelling algorithm in Fig-
ure 6. In this ﬁgure, the links are categorized into three
partitions based on the PWR ratio. PWR ratio less than 0.1
are labelled as “G”, between 0.1 to 0.3 are labelled as “Y”
and the rest “R”. The total ordering is deﬁned as “G” <
“Y” < “R”, where the “G” links have low PWR ratios than
the “Y” links. The path could be established through the AS
that has “G” as the ingress link; the path being 1245, 1339,
34234, 23411 and 16578.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION NOTES AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we present some notes on feasibility of
implementation of our scheme in a live network.
First, the requested bandwidth should be available on the
low-power path, but the CSPF algorithm is run with multiple
constraints, one of which is the bandwidth requirement
for the ﬂows to be transported through the TE-LSP. The
PWR ratio can then be applied to the available paths thus
computing the low-power paths. Second, as we are using
trafﬁc engineering with link state routing protocols, there
is a reliable ﬂooding process that gets triggered when
updates about the change in characteristic arise. We propose
addition of some attributes with no change to the protocol
implementation. There may be a time lag when the far ends
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

1245
1377
2485
5677
3426
6785
1006
11228
4563
7786
1339
34234
23411
1485
8298
15467
9732
16578
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
Y
Y
Y
Y
G
G
R
Y
R
Y
R
R
R
Figure 6. Application of the graph-labelling heuristic. We consider 3 labels
“G” < “Y” < “R”. Using algorithm 3 the “G” path from the head-end 1245
to the tail-end AS 16578 is chosen in the ﬁrst iteration.
of the Internet receive the attribute and the time it originated.
This however cannot be avoided as with other attributes and
metrics.
In MPLS-TE, when the TE metrics are modiﬁed, there
is a reliable ﬂooding process within an Interior Gateway
Protocol (IGP). Such triggered updates apply to the PWR
ratio as well. The proposed PWR ratio is advertised to
the neighbouring AS and the information percolated to all
the AS, in a AS-PATH-POWER-METRIC attribute. This
attribute can be implemented as shown in Figure 7. The
frequency of the updates for this attribute should be ﬁxed to
avoid network ﬂooding.
The AS-PATH-POWER-METRIC for each ASBR is cal-
culated, and advertised as the PWR ratio for the AS. This
AS-PATH-POWER-METRIC is ﬁlled into an appropriate
transitive non-discretionary attribute and inserted into a
unique vector for a set of preﬁxes advertised from the AS.
Such advertised preﬁxes may have originated from the AS
or be the transit preﬁxes. The ﬁlled vector is sent to the
ASBR of the neighbouring AS, and later propagated to all
the ASBRs. If the elements denoting AS in a vector of AS-
PATH-INFO is not the same as the ones that need to be
advertised in a AS-PATH-POWER-METRIC, then a suitable
subset of AS-PATH-POWER-METRIC is to be identiﬁed
and sent in the BGP updates. A vector of size 1 also can be
32 Bit AS Number
PWR Ratio for the AS
Advertising ASBR’s IP router ID
64 bit sequence number for  restarts, aging
and comparison of current PWR ratio
32 bits
Five 32-bit
words
Figure 7.
Proposed PDU format with a new attribute for AS-PATH-
POWER-METRIC.
A
B
D
A
C
E
D
D
X
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.02
0.2
0.2
Figure 8. Example of strands where more than one PWR ratio is advertised
by “D”.
A
B
D
X
C
E
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.02
0.2
Figure 9.
Low-power path derived using the algorithm that uses low value
ingress link but through the same AS.
employed if the AS in question is the only one for which
PWR ratio has changed in the originating AS.
The power consumed by each router may ﬂuctuate over
short time intervals. In order to dampen these ﬂuctuations,
which can cause unnecessary updates, power can be mea-
sured when falling within intervals of suitable size (say a
range of values). This is as opposed to measuring power
as a discrete quantity. This method of power measurement
reduces the frequency of triggered updates from the routers
due to power change.
Multiple ASBRs advertising differing PWR ratio can lead
to AS that have low PWR ratio through an ingress link and
not through other. Consider the case of multiple ASBRs that
belong to the same AS, advertising differing PWR ratios.
This could lead to power values that belong to different
classes with intervening classes in between. These advertised
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

PWR ratios could lead to one ASBR being preferred over
the other thus taking a different path from head-end to tail-
end. This also entails that there may be multiple paths to the
AS through these different ASBRs. As an example, consider
Figure 8 which shows a set of strands that derive a topology
as in Figure 9. Here, “D” is reachable via two paths but the
PWR ratios differ. This illustrates the case where the better
metric wins out. The average power consumed would not
have an effect but the bandwidth available on these ASBR
egress links would deﬁnitely inﬂuence the path.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have proposed a scheme for reducing
the power consumption of the Internet using collaborative
effort between AS. The topology of the Internet is depicted
as a graph using the strands obtained from the AS-PATH
attribute of the BGP updates. CSPF algorithm is run on
this topology by using the PWR ratio as a constraint.
The PWR ratio is advertised through the ingress links of
the ASBRs associated with AS using BGP updates. The
CSPF algorithm determines the low-power consuming path
between AS and routes data packets from head-end to tail-
end. Explicit routing is handled through the use of TE-LSPs.
Since using CSPF can be time consuming a heuristic algo-
rithm to derive the low-power paths using graph-labelling
is proposed. Our work complements the current schemes
for reducing power consumption within a router such as
switching off or bringing to power-idle-state certain select
components within the forwarding and lookup mechanisms.
The scheme proposed in this paper assumes that the PWR
ratio information is reliable. It is possible that ISPs could
fake the PWR ratio information. However, ISPs usually have
service level agreements (SLAs) for carrying trafﬁc. One
method is to link up each ISP with a power application
level gateway to ensure that proper ratios are advertised. This
could be mandated at least amongst the cooperating ISPs.
Further the proposed algorithms might lead to increased
latency as the number of hops increase, which could be
critical for time sensitive applications. Since the PWR ratio
could vary dynamically with trafﬁc, the impact of trafﬁc on
the algorithm would also be of interest. Our future work will
quantify and analyse these issues.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Shankar Raman would like to acknowledge the support by
BT Public Limited (UK) under the BT IITM PhD Fellowship
award. Balaji Venkat and Gaurav Raina would like to
acknowledge the UK EPSRC Digital Economy Programme
and the Government of India Department of Science and
Technology (DST) for funding given to the IU-ATC.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Appenzeller, “Sizing router buffers”, Doctoral Thesis,
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University,
2005.
[2] J. Baliga, K. Hinton and R. S. Tucker, “Energy consumption
of the Internet”, Proc. of joint International Conference on
Optical Internet, June 2007, pp. 1–3, doi: 10.1109/COINA-
COFT.2007.4519173.
[3] A.
Bianzino,
C.
Chaudet,
D.
Rossi
and
J.
Rougier,
“A survey of green networking research”, IEEE Com-
munications and Surveys Tutorials, preprint, pp. 1–18,
doi: 10.1109/SURV.2011.113010.00106.
[4] F. Blanquicet and K. Christensen, “Managing energy use
in a network with a new SNMP power state MIB”, IEEE
Conference on Local Computer Networks, October 2008,
pp. 509–511, doi: 10.1109/LCN.2008.4664214.
[5] R.
Bolla,
R.
Bruschi,
A.
Cianfrani
and
M.
Listani,
“Enabling
backbone
networks
to
sleep”,
IEEE
Net-
work,
vol.
25,
no.
2,
March/April
2011,
pp.
26–31,
doi: 10.1109/MNET.2011.5730525.
[6] R. Bolla, R. Bruschi, F. Davoli and F. Cucchietti, “En-
ergy efﬁciency in the future Internet: A survey of exist-
ing approaches and trends in energy-aware ﬁxed network
infrastructures”, IEEE Communications Surveys and Tuto-
rials, vol. 13, no. 2, second quarter 2011, pp. 223–244,
doi: 10.1109/SURV.2011.071410.00073.
[7] J. Chabarek, J. Sommers, P. Bardford, C. Estan, D. Tsiang
and S. Wright, “Power awareness in network design and
routing”, Proceedings of the IEEE INFOCOM 2008, April
2008, pp. 457–465, doi: 10.1109/INFOCOM.2008.93.
[8] H. Chang, R. Govindan, S. Jamin, S. J. Shenker and W. Will-
inger, “Towards capturing representative AS-level Internet
topologies”, Computer Networks, vol. 44, April 2004, pp.
737–755, doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2003.03.001.
[9] A. Cianfrani, V. Eramo, M. Listanti and M. Polverini, “An
OSPF enhancement for energy saving in IP networks”, Com-
puter Communications Workshops, INFOCOM 2011, April
2011, pp. 325–330, doi: 10.1109/INFCOMW.2011.5928832.
[10] W.
Lu
and
S.
Sahni,
“Low-power
TCAMs
for
very
large forwarding tables”, IEEE/ACM Transactions on Com-
puter Networks, June 2010, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 948–959,
doi: 10.1109/TNET.2009.2034143.
[11] R.
Oliveira,
D.
Pei,
W.
Willinger,
B.
Zhang
and
L. Zhang, “The (in)completeness of the observed Inter-
net AS-level structure”, IEEE/ACM transactions on Net-
works,
vol.
18,
no.
1,
February
2010,
pp.
109-122,
doi: 10.1109/TNET.2009.2020798.
[12] B. Venkat et.al, “Constructing disjoint and partially disjoint
InterAS TE-LSPs”, USPTO Patent 7751318, Cisco Systems,
2010.
[13] M. Xia, M. Tornatore, Y. Zhang, P. Chowdhury, C. Martel
and B. Mukherjee, “Greening the optical backbone network:
A trafﬁc engineering approach”, IEEE ICC Proceedings, May
2010, pp. 1–5, doi: 10.1109/ICC.2010.5502228.
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

