Electric Substation Emergency Disaster Response Planning Through the Use of 
Geographic Information Systems
Vivian Sultan 
Center of Information Systems and 
Technology 
Claremont Graduate University 
Claremont, CA 
email: vivian.sultan@cgu.edu  
Au Vo 
Department of Information Systems 
San Francisco State University 
San Francisco, CA 
email: auvo@sfsu.edu  
Brian Hilton 
Center of Information Systems and 
Technology 
Claremont Graduate University 
Claremont, CA 
email: brian.hilton@cgu.edu 
Abstract— There are many reasons behind power failure that 
we are facing today. When examining some of these reasons, 
the research team found that an electric substation failure 
could cause massive power outages. In this research-in-
progress paper, we investigate the important relationship 
between electric substations and the important infrastructure 
they support. Specifically, we try to answer the research 
question: “Which important facilities would be affected by the 
power outage from an electric substation level?” To answer the 
question, we build a proof of concept Decision Support Tool 
using Geographic Information Systems to inform emergency 
responders which important facilities need to be attend to first. 
We select nursing homes and emergency facilities in Southern 
California, USA as the facilities of interest for the proof of 
concept. 
Keywords- Emergency Disaster Response; GIS; Power 
outage. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Electrical power, within a short time, has become a 
necessity of modern life. Our work, healthcare, leisure, 
economy, and livelihood depend on the constant supply of 
electrical power. Even a temporary power outage can lead to 
relative chaos, financial setbacks, and possible loss of life. 
Our cities dangle on electricity and without the constant 
supply from the power grid, pandemonium would break 
loose. Power outages can be especially tragic when it comes 
to life-support systems in places like hospitals and nursing 
homes or systems in synchronization facilities such as 
airports, train stations, and traffic control. Though our lives 
are interwoven with electricity, outages happen more often 
that we perceive. An estimated economic cost of power 
interruptions to U.S. electricity consumers is $79 billion 
annually in damages and lost economic activity in a 2006 
report [1]. A preliminary update of the report put the 
number approximately at $110 billions in 2014 [2].  
As a result, power failure should be treated with the 
urgency it deserves. In general, there are three causes of 
power outages: (1) technical failure in the hardware 
components, (2) environmental-related issues, such as 
winds, tornadoes, animals, and (3) human-induced errors, 
e.g., acts of terrorism. The devastating effects of power 
outage have prompted county-level, state-level, and federal-
level investigations [3]–[6]. While maintaining the overall 
grid reliability is an important issue and being pursued by 
other researchers, this article investigates a specific issue in 
power outage, especially in the sudden outage at the 
substation level. 
Power failure at the distributing site such as at a 
substation is an event that could cause massive power 
outage. For instance, a 2017 power outage in San Francisco 
shut down power to businesses, an important rail station, a 
federal court, and 90,000 inhabitants [7].  The electrical 
substation is the part of a power system in which the voltage 
is transformed from high to low or low to high for 
transmission, distribution, transformation and switching [8]. 
Substations are normally owned and operated by an 
electrical utility and are generally unattended, relying on 
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) for 
remote supervision and control. Power transformers, circuit 
breakers, bus bars, insulators, lighting arrestors are the main 
components of an electrical substation [8]. Any mechanical 
failure of these components could lead to a power outage. 
 In this research-in-progress paper, we investigate the 
important relationship between electric substations and the 
crucial infrastructure they support. Specifically, we try to 
answer this research question: “Which important facilities 
would be affected by the power outage from an electric 
substation level?” To answer the question, we built a proof 
of concept Decision Support Tool using Geographic 
Information Systems (GIS) to inform emergency responders 
which facilities need to be attend to first. We select nursing 
homes and emergency facilities in Southern California, 
USA as the facilities of interest for the proof of concept.  
In Section II, we examine utilities emergency response 
planning and GIS applications in various sectors to establish 
GIS as an appropriate solution in the research endeavor. In 
Section III, we detail steps in which we design a GIS model 
design to build the proof of concept and present it. In 
Section IV, we discuss our findings. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

II.
BACKGROUND LITERATURE REVIEW 
In this section, we discuss about the need for a GIS 
application in dealing with the emergency response planning 
in the electric utility domain. First, we describe the current 
emergency response planning landscape in the domain, then 
we briefly introduce GIS and demonstrate the utility of GIS 
in different sectors. With the proven usefulness in planning 
and responding to disasters, the electric utility domain could 
also be benefited from the GIS technology. 
A. Electric Utilities Emergency Response Planning 
Electricity is a crucial product many of us take for 
granted. We scarcely think about it, unless we don’t have it. 
Because electricity plays such an important role in our lives, 
we rely on electric companies to provide a reliable supply of 
on-demand 
power. 
Companies 
constantly 
plan 
for 
emergency situations that could impact their ability to 
generate or deliver power. Overall, the industry has a strong 
track record of maintaining high levels of reliability [9]. 
No matter how well the industry is prepared, incidents of 
power outage still happen. As a result, every electric 
company has a contingency plan for dealing with power 
outages. In this plan, there is a detailed instruction for 
restoring electricity. Typically, one of the first steps a 
company takes – to respond to significant outages – is to 
identify where the impacted areas are and who are in 
danger. Restoration then proceeds based on established 
priorities. If business operations or households are 
disrupted, customers expect to know how long they will be 
impacted. Then, estimated restoration time will be 
established, monitored, adjusted, and communicated to 
impacted customers. Regulators and local government 
officials will also be notified regarding the outage and the 
impact. All in all, electric utilities strive to meet customer 
needs through effective risk assessment, mitigation, 
preparedness, response and communications. 
Despite the fact that the electric utilities are doing their 
parts in restoring service, communities also partake in the 
emergency response to ensure safety for the community 
members. However, the practice of emergency response 
planning varies considerably among communities. In some, 
the planning process is quite formal: there is a specific 
assignment of responsibility to an office having an 
identifiable budget. In other, it is informal: responsibility is 
poorly defined and a limited budget is dispersed among 
many agencies [10]. Therefore, there is a need to understand 
the impact of power outage in the community and which 
important facilities are immediate affected, especially in the 
communities where informal emergency response is the 
norm. With a more holistic view of an emergency event and 
its related geographical areas, facilities, and population, 
emergency responders can act more effectively.  
B. Geographic Information Systems 
The Environmental Systems Research Institute defines 
GIS as a class of tools for seizing, storing, analyzing, and 
demonstrating data in relation to its position on the Earth’s 
surface [11]. Analysts utilize GIS to view different objects’ 
locations and study their relationships. Satellite as well as 
tabular data can be entered into GIS for a single map 
display. GIS applications include recognizing site locations, 
mapping topographies and also developing analytical 
models to forecast events [11]. 
The utility companies have started to employ GIS but 
primarily as a display tool and not so much as an analytical 
tool [12]. There are several applications that exist 
demonstrating the usefulness of GIS, especially in 
California: Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Solar 
Photovoltaic and Renewable Auction Mechanism Program 
Map, Southern California Edison’s Distributed Energy 
Resource Interconnection Map, and San Diego Gas & 
Electric’s Interconnection Information Map [13]. With the 
advent of spatial analysis and the importance of geographic 
nature of emergency response, GIS has started to gain more 
popularity, thanks to the utility of the tools in solving 
pressing problems in this field. 
C. GIS Applications In Various Sectors 
GIS assists with public works departments’ budgets and 
maintenance work prioritization [14]. Michael Isun, an 
engineer technician for Public Works Road Operations 
Division, stated that “We use GIS throughout our entire 
operation, from data collection and asset management to 
maintaining our predictive models and developing our 
annual budgets” [14].  
In addition to the application of GIS in public works, it 
has been employed as a forecasting tool to stop and control 
the spread of infections and diseases in public health. Idowu 
et al. [15] discussed an instance where GIS was employed to 
predict the malaria epidemic hot-spots in Nigeria. In this 
scenario, GIS succeeded to stop the malaria epidemic in a 
country where malaria incidents were excessive with 8-
12.5% mortality rate [15]. 
 Considering GIS success in solving significant 
problems for public work and public health, we chose GIS 
to create our Decision Support proof of concept. Not only 
can GIS be used as a display tool, but it also can be used in 
analytics and modeling. The proof of concept in Section III 
will highlight how GIS could aid emergency responders in a 
case of substation power failure.  
III.
PROOF OF CONCEPT DESIGN
In this section, we delineate our steps in collecting data 
and designing a prototype for the GIS application. First, we 
describe the data that we used and how we got them. 
Second, we state the software that we utilized to create the 
proof of concept. Lastly, we display the design steps we 
took to create the prototype. 
A. Data Collection  
For the design of the proof of concept, we limit our data 
collection to the spatial extent of an area that encompasses 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

five cities reside in the San Gabriel Valley area of Los 
Angeles County, Southern California: Claremont, La Verne, 
Glendora, San Dimas, and Pomona. We obtain the nursing 
home data from the Homeland Infrastructure Foundation. 
There are three types of nursing homes: continued care, 
retirement community, and assisted living. Given our spatial 
extent, we chose to include all three types. In addition, we 
extracted the Urgent Care Facilities from the same dataset. 
We excluded hospitals in our dataset, only focusing on 
medical clinics. In addition, we relied upon the US Census 
Tract Parcel data to provide us with the commercial and 
residential areas of the spatial extend. While there is an 
interest 
of 
expanding 
study 
into 
the 
residential 
demographics, it is outside the scope of our study.  
For the substation data, we utilized the Southern 
California Edison (SCE)’s Distributed Energy Resources 
interconnection Map (DERiM) Capacity Analysis Data. 
Since Southern California is serviced by one public 
company, SCE, this map is adequate to understand the 
overall electricity makeup of the region. The SCE’s DERiM 
includes a majority of the electricity components: power 
electric lines, the capacity analysis in kilowatts by circuit 
line, and the substation locations. The data was utilized to 
situate and develop an area that is proximal with electric 
power distribution centers and substations to measure which 
specific areas would be affected by a potential power outage 
or 
outage 
caused 
by 
a 
natural 
disaster.
B. Design Software 
The project utilized ArcGIS mapping platform for 
windows desktop. ArcGIS is used for creating and using 
maps, compiling and editing geographic data, analyzing 
mapped information, sharing and discovering geographic 
information using maps and geographic information in a 
range of applications, and managing geographic information 
in a database. We used the ArcGIS 10.3 developed by 
Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI) for 
designing the proof of concept. 
C. Design Steps 
First, we create a map with the spatial extent that 
encompasses five cities reside in the San Gabriel Valley 
area of Los Angeles County, Southern California. We then 
locate all nursing homes, urgent care facilities, power 
substations, and power lines in the vicinity, the perform 
spatial joins to create linkages between them. We then 
proceeded to color-coding to separate each power 
substations and its connected facilities. Figure 1 is the final 
result. 
IV.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this research, we build a proof of concept to create 
linkages between power stations, power lines, nursing 
homes, and urgent care facilities.  The outputs of this study 
show each substation and its connected lines with nursing 
homes and urgent care facilities through different color-
coding. This could become a tool in which inter-city 
governments can use to coordinate to response in an 
Figure 1. Design Model Output 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

emergency to power failure at the substation level. In other 
words, the prototype provides locations of important 
facilities that are affected by the power outage. The 
coordination effort could be diverted to assist the most 
pressing facilities, as demonstrated by the use of nursing 
homes and urgent cares in the prototype. 
In future iterations of the prototype, we envision a full-
scale emergency response platform for different types of 
critical facilities targeting the most vulnerable populations, 
such as children hospitals and hospice. The platform can 
also assist different non-critical facilities but important, e.g., 
schools, 
administrative 
governmental 
buildings, 
and 
churches. In addition, this emergency response could 
provide utility companies with the understanding in regards 
to prioritization of a power backup based on the specific 
needs of each community. 
REFERENCES
[1] 
K. H. LaCommare and J. H. Eto, “Cost of Power 
Interruptions to Electricity Consumers in the United States,” 
Energy Int. J., 2006, 1845-1855. 
[2] 
J. Eto, “The National Cost of Power Interruptions to 
Electricity Consumers - An Early Peek at LBNL’s 2016 
Updated Estimate,” in IEE PES, Boston, MA, 2016. 
[3] 
J. 
M. 
Lee 
Morgan, 
“Blackout 
sparks 
multiple 
investigations,” 
sandiegouniontribune.com, 
Sep-2011. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.sandiegouniontribune.com/news/watchdog/sdut
-power-surges-back-on-2011sep09-story.html. 
[Accessed: 
26-Mar-2018]. 
[4] 
Governor Cuomo Press Office, “Governor Cuomo, 
Displeased with Length of Power Outage, Directs 
Investigation into Rochester Gas & Electric’s Preparation 
For and Response to Windstorm,” Governor Andrew M. 
Cuomo, 
11-Mar-2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/governor-cuomo-
displeased-length-power-outage-directs-investigation-
rochester-gas-electrics. [Accessed: 26-Mar-2018]. 
[5] 
A. Morris, “Senator Ricardo Lara Calls for Independent 
Investigation of Long Beach Power Outages,” Long Beach 
Post, 25-Jul-2015. 
[6] 
Y. Steinbuch, “FBI joins probe into power outage at Atlanta 
airport,” New York Post, 19-Dec-2017. 
[7] 
N. Chandler, “Substation Failure Causes Massive Power 
Outage in San Francisco,” Transmission & Distribution 
World, 
26-Apr-2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.tdworld.com/substations/substation-failure-
causes-massive-power-outage-san-francisco. [Accessed: 26-
Mar-2018]. 
[8] 
US Department of Agriculture, “Design Guide for Rural 
Substations.” United Stated Department of Agriculture, Jun-
2001. 
[9] 
National Academies of Sciences, Enhancing the Resilience 
of the Nation’s Electricity System. 2017. 
[10] 
US Department of Homeland Security, “National Response 
Framework.” US Department of Homeland Security, May-
2013. 
[11] 
ESRI, “Lesson 1: Why GIS?,” in Understanding GIS--The 
Arc/Info method, 6th ed., Redlands, CA: Environmental 
Systems Research Institute, 1992. 
[12] 
V. Sultan, “Exploring geographic information systems to 
mitigate 
America’s 
electric 
grid 
traffic 
congestion 
problem,” in Computational and Business Intelligence 
(ISCBI), 2016 4th International Symposium on, 2016, pp. 
74–79. 
[13] 
California Public Utilities Commission, “Distribution 
Resources Plan (R.14-08-013),” Distribution Resources 
Plan, 
Jul-2015. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.cpuc.ca.gov/General.aspx?id=5071. [Accessed: 
26-Mar-2018]. 
[14] 
D. Totman, “Model predictions: GIS helps public works 
manage assets,” American City and County, 17-Apr-2013. 
[Online]. Available: http://americancityandcounty.com/gis-
amp-gps/model-predictions-gis-helps-public-works-
manage-assets. [Accessed: 26-Mar-2018]. 
[15] 
A. P. Idowu, N. Okoronkwo, and R. E. Adagunodo, “Spatial 
predictive model for malaria in Nigeria,” J. Health Inform. 
Dev. Ctries., vol. 3, no. 2, 2009, 30-36. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

