Potential Impacts of 9-150 kHz Harmonic Emissions on Smart Grid 
Communications in the United States 
 
Maria Arechavaleta, S. Mark Halpin, Adam Birchfield, Wendy Pittman, W. Eric Griffin, Michael Mitchell 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Auburn University, AL USA 
e-mails: mza0036@auburn.edu, halpism@auburn.edu, abb0017@auburn.edu,  
wcp0002@auburn.edu, weg0003@auburn.edu, mdm0018@auburn.edu  
 
 
Abstract— A key enabling component of the Smart Grid is 
communications.  Of particular interest is power line 
communications between distributed smart meters and some 
central relay point.  In the very vast majority of cases, smart 
meters will be located in the low voltage environment and 
therefore must be designed to operate properly in the presence 
of disturbance levels bounded by established compatibility 
levels. Numerous smart meter products are designed to 
communicate in the 2-150 kHz frequency band range.  
Communication failures, thought to be due to higher-
frequency harmonics, have been reported in the literature and 
demonstrated in tests conducted in Europe.  All of this 
information is being considered by the International 
Electrotechnical Commission Technical Committee 77, Sub-
Committee 77A, Working Group 8, which is presently tasked 
with developing compatibility levels for disturbances in this 
band. However, only limited (if any) work has been done in 
North America.  It is unknown if compatibility levels developed 
based on the European low-voltage environment are applicable 
in North America where the environment is much different in 
several key aspects.  Emission evaluation results from product 
testing in the 120 V three-wire low-voltage environment 
commonly found in North America are presented in this paper.  
Results of initial tests conducted to evaluate 9-150 kHz 
disturbance propagation through North American low-voltage 
systems are also presented. 
 
Keywords-smart grid, power line communication, high-
frequency harmonics, electromagnetic compatibility. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Smart meters are typically connected directly at the low-
voltage (LV) point of service for an end user.  These meters 
make the traditional direct measurements of voltages and 
currents and compute power and energy consumption for 
billing purposes.  Of course, smart meters are also capable 
of providing many other characterizations of the quantities 
measured such as harmonic content and voltage excursions.  
All of these evaluations/calculations are done locally at the 
meter point.  When these meters and their enhanced 
capabilities are integrated into a coordinated communication 
and control system, the smart grid is born.  Without data 
sharing and communications, there would be no smart grid. 
Smart meter communication approaches can be broadly 
divided 
into 
two 
categories: 
wired 
and 
wireless.  
Recognition and tolerance of the background environment 
and disturbances for wireless systems are covered by 
numerous 
applicable 
standards 
for 
wireless 
communications.  Similar standards for wired systems exist 
for higher frequencies (generally above 150 kHz) and lower 
frequencies (generally below 2 or 3 kHz), but no consensus 
presently exists over the range 2-150 kHz [1].  This 
frequency range includes the bands used by most smart 
meter manufacturers for communications via the power line 
(PLC).  Lacking existing compatibility levels and limits in 
the 9-150 kHz range has resulted in smart meter 
development without regard to standardized background 
emission levels and problems are beginning to appear [2].  
Other problems in addition to PLC failures have also been 
attributed to harmonics in this range [3]-[5].  All industry 
stakeholders recognize the need for rapid standardization 
and numerous activities are underway across Europe.  
Concerns related to PLC systems are most often the main 
focus [2][6-8]. 
Working 
Group 
(WG) 
8 
of 
the 
International 
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) Technical Committee 
(TC) 77, Sub-Committee (SC) 77A is specifically charged 
with reviewing and evaluating the results of these ongoing 
activities and developing consensus compatibility levels in 
the 2-150 kHz frequency range [9].  This task is complicated 
by the fact that numerous end-use products produce 
emissions in this frequency range, usually due to the 
common use of various high switching frequency power 
converter designs required to meet energy efficiency 
requirements [6][10].  These high-frequency emissions are 
produced by end-use equipment categories ranging from 
entertainment (e.g., televisions and displays) to lighting 
(compact fluorescent and LED ballasts and controls).  Other 
sources of high-frequency emissions include voltage-source 
inverters used in motor drives and a number of alternative 
energy (e.g., photovoltaic system) interfaces with the public 
network.  All of these emissions combine in the LV network 
serving the end-user facility and the cumulative disturbance 
levels could reach values such that interference with smart 
meter communications occurs.  Alternatively, these high-
frequency emissions could essentially circulate between 
local-area direct-connected devices, resulting in very little 
impact on the supply system [11]-[13]. 
To date, all testing, research, and evaluation of high-
frequency harmonic product emissions has been focused on 
products used in European LV networks [11][14].  While 
these networks are certainly important, smart meter 
manufacturers stand to benefit from a truly international 
specification that can be used on a global scale.  To 
accomplish this, information on products used in North 
American LV networks is required.  The testing and 
measurement approach used in this work to help provide 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

information on North American LV networks is described in 
Section II.  Emission testing results for some 120 V 
products in common use in North America are presented in 
this paper in Section III.  Also in Section III, results of tests 
to assess high-frequency disturbance propagation in 120 V, 
three-wire LV systems are presented so that postulates can 
be developed regarding how multiple disturbance-producing 
(in the 9-150 kHz range) products might summate at the 
point of service where the smart meter is located. 
II. 
TEST AND MEASUREMENT APPROACH  
All measurements were carried out on 120 V equipment 
and systems using a 100 MHz Tektronix digitizing 
oscilloscope with built-in signal processing functions 
including Fourier analysis.  Spectral analysis was also 
conducted off-line using digitized data transferred from the 
oscilloscope to a local computer.  The tests were carried out 
using a 120 V supply taken directly from the local public 
network.  Equipment was connected to the 120 V public 
supply source using a standard three-wire cable (#12 AWG 
solid copper “romex” cable commonly used in North 
America) rated for continuous operation at 120 V, 15 A.  
Measurements are taken at two locations:  (1) the supply 
terminals, M1, and (2) the load equipment connection point, 
M2.  Voltage signals were the only quantities that were 
measured; current emissions were not considered in this 
work.  The setup is shown in Figure 1 and mimics a 
standard 120V service to end-use equipment.  Note that the 
required filters, described later in this paper, are connected 
at the terminals of measurement points M1 and M2 prior to 
the connection of the measurement equipment. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Test and Measurement Setup 
 
As required by electrical codes in the United States, the 
public supply point is grounded at the point of service only.  
The equipment under test (EUT) is grounded by connection 
back to the single ground point at the service; this ground 
conductor is specifically required to be isolated from the 
normal current-carrying conductors.  Because smart meters 
will communicate using the power conductors and not the 
ground, the emission levels produced at the EUT terminals 
and the supply voltage terminals are measured between the 
two power conductors rather than from either conductor to 
the ground. 
Measurements are made at the points M1 and M2 as 
shown in Figure 1.  The measured emission levels at M2 
with and without the EUT in operation can be used to 
evaluate the emissions due solely to the operation of the 
EUT.  The measured levels at M1 with and without the EUT 
in operation can be used to evaluate the propagation of 
emissions from the EUT to the supply point.  Of course this 
propagation is a direct function of the frequency response of 
the power cable and the impedance of the supply system 
along with any other connected equipment [11]-[13].  While 
theoretical models can be developed for simple cases, this 
task can be become difficult and inaccurate for realistically 
complex systems and is best assessed via direct 
measurement of input and output characteristics (e.g., at M2 
and M1). 
Typical disturbance levels in the range 9-150 kHz are on 
the order of a few millivolts (mV) and are commonly 
expressed in the units “decibel-microvolt” (dBV) where 20 
dBV= 10*1 V=10 V, 40 dBV=100*1 V=100 V, etc.  
Expressed in this common dBV unit, typical disturbance 
levels in the frequency range of interest will be around 80-
100 dBV (10-100 mV).  Of course, these disturbance 
levels will only be encountered at the specific frequencies at 
which they are produced; much lower levels, typically 40-60 
dBV, will be present over the majority of the frequency 
range of interest.  In order to resolve these small spectral 
components with sufficient accuracy using a typical 
oscilloscope/spectrum analyzer, it is necessary to remove 
the power frequency component from the measured signal 
before it is processed by the spectrum analyzer.  This 
removal process requires an analog filter of band-stop or 
high-pass design to eliminate the power frequency signal or 
pass without attenuation the higher frequencies of interest, 
respectively. 
A high-pass design was chosen for the measurements 
reported in this work and a custom design was conceived 
and implemented to avoid any over-dependence on 
commercial products.  In addition, it is difficult to select any 
particular 
commercially-available 
product 
based 
on 
accuracy, performance, or other criteria because no 
standardized interface coupling exists [14].  The analog 
filter design is shown schematically in Figure 2.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Filter Design and Parameters 
 
Because the filter is a custom design, it is necessary to 
validate the expected high-pass frequency characteristics 
and verify that the power frequency component, in this case 
at 60 Hz, will be sufficiently attenuated.  The frequency 
response characteristic of the filter is shown in Figure 3.  
 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
Figure 3.  Simulated Frequency Response of Custom Filter 
 
It is clear from Figure 3 that the filter delivers a significant 
attenuation at the power frequency and corresponding low-
frequency harmonics whereas the response is essentially flat 
with minimal attenuation in the frequency range of interest 
(9-150  kHz).  
 
III. 
MEASUREMENT RESULTS 
Measurements were conducted at M1 and M2 in Figure 1 
using the high-pass filter of Figure 2, the digitizing 
oscilloscope, and off-line computer-based (Matlab) spectral 
analysis.  All measurements were taken in a university 
office/laboratory environment.  Measurements were initially 
performed at M1 with no EUT operating in order to establish 
a baseline condition.  To recognize and evaluate expected 
variations in background disturbance levels over time, the 
baseline evaluations were conducted over a 72 hr period 
including a normal workday, multiple nighttime periods, an 
end-of-week day, and a holiday.  These results are shown in 
Figure 4 averaged over a period defined by a particular date 
and hour-of-day range as shown in the figure.  It is clear 
from Figure 4 that the variations in background disturbance 
levels are not overly significant. It is equally clear that there 
are significant background disturbances in the frequency 
range 60-70 kHz. 
The background disturbance levels in Figure 4 can be 
used during the emission assessment of various operating 
EUTs.  These longer-time background levels are also useful 
for evaluating potential measurement errors; erroneous 
measurements would likely deviate significantly from the 
established background levels.  It is important to note that 
the particular background levels shown are relevant only to 
the particular measurement sets of this paper and should not 
be directly transferred or assumed applicable to another 
location or time period. An example of this time dependence 
can be seen in some of the measurement results that follow 
where “before” and “after” measurements are shown. 
 
 
Figure 4.  72 hr Background Disturbance Levels 
 
Two major categories of consumer products were tested 
in this work:  lighting and televisions (displays).  
Measurements were taken on both ends of the supply cable 
impedance (approximately 30.5m long power cable as 
previously described) with and without the EUT in 
operation.  For the cases with the EUT disconnected, 
measurements were made both before and after the EUT 
connection and operation so that the reference levels 
immediately before and after each test could be known and, 
for validation purposes, compared to the longer-time results 
of Figure 4 as appropriate. 
The results of two compact fluorescent lamp (CFL) tests 
are shown in Figure 5 (a) and (b).  These results clearly 
show that one of the CFLs produces a noticeable emission 
around 120 kHz whereas the other tested lamp provides an 
attenuating affect around 80 kHz at the EUT terminals but 
not at the supply terminals.  From these two tested lamps, it 
does not appear reasonable to make generalizations. 
 
 
(a) 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
(b) 
Figure 5.  Emissions from Compact Fluorescent Lamps 
 
The results of four LED lamp tests are shown in Figure 6 
(a)-(d).  These results show higher emissions around 50 kHz 
(a), the effects of an increasing change in background 
disturbancess (b), a general change with some increases and 
some decreases (c), and the effects of a decreasing change in 
background disturbances (d).  For all the tested LED lamps, 
there does not appear to be a significant impact on 
disturbance levels relative to the background levels at either 
the source or load terminals.   
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
(d)  
Figure 6.  Results of LED Lamp Tests 
 
 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

(a) 
 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
 
(d) 
Figure 7.  Results of Television/Monitor Tests 
 
The results of four television/display tests are shown in 
Figure 7 (a)-(d).  Tests (b) and (d) show some amplification 
and attenuation effects of the power cable, particularly 
around 110-120 kHz (b) and 120-130 kHz (d).  The other 
two tests do not appear to have any single dominant features 
but it is clear that the disturbance levels change with and 
without the EUT in operation in all cases. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Emission testing of 120 V consumer products that are in 
common use in the United States has shown that typical 
products do in fact present the potential to appreciably 
change the high-frequency harmonic disturbance levels in 
locations in close (electrical) proximity to the equipment 
under test.  However, the measurement results reported in 
this paper are clearly different from one piece of (similar) 
equipment to the next and no obvious generalizations can be 
made.  Furthermore, connecting a public-supply source to 
the tested equipment using standard power cable conductors 
has shown that the power cabling can have amplifying or 
attenuating effects depending on the specific situation. 
All of the tests conducted as a part of this work support 
the general conclusion that typical consumer equipment can 
be expected to increase the disturbance level by 5-10 dBV 
(more in some cases) over relatively narrow ranges of the 
general band of interest 9-150 kHz.  Combined with the 
long-duration evaluation of the background disturbance 
levels present in the public supply source, these increases 
can help to establish a realistic compatibility level for 
harmonics in the 9-150 kHz band.  Given these levels, smart 
meter manufacturers can offer improved communications 
hardware that can more effectively communicate using 
public power system conductors as the channel. 
 
 
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

REFERENCES 
[1]  R. Burkart and J.W. Kolar, “Overview and Comparison of 
Grid Harmonics and Conducted EMI Standards for LV 
Converters Connected to the MV Distribution Grid,” 
Proceedings of the 1st Power Electronics South America 
Conference and Exhibition, September 2012. 
[2] P. Pakonen, S. Vehmasvaara, M. Pikkarainen, B.A. Siddiqui, 
and P. Verho, "Experiences on Narrowband Powerline 
Communication of Automated Meter Reading Systems in 
Finland," Proceedings of the Electric Power Quality and 
Supply Reliability Conference (PQ), June 2012, pp. 1-6. 
[3]  M. Pikkarainen, S. Vehmasvaara, B.A. Siddiqui, P. Pakonen, 
and P. Verho, "Interference of touch dimmer lamps due to 
PLC and other high frequency signals," Electric Power 
Quality and Supply Reliability Conference (PQ), June 2012, 
pp. 1-6. 
[4] G.A. Franklin, "A Practical Guide to Harmonic Frequency 
Interference Affecting High-Voltage Power-Line Carrier 
Coupling Systems," IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, 
pp. 630-641, April 2009. 
[5] B. Gustavsen, "Study of Transformer Resonant Overvoltages 
Caused 
by 
Cable-Transformer 
High-Frequency 
Interaction," IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, April pp. 
770-779, 2010. 
[6] S.M. Bashi, “Effects of High Power Electronics Converters 
on PLC Signals,” Journal of Applied Sciences, pp. 1888-
1891, January 2006. 
[7] S. K. Ronnberg, M.H.J. Bollen, and M. Wahlberg, 
“Interaction 
Between 
Narrowband 
Power-Line 
Communication 
and 
End-User 
Equipment,” 
IEEE 
Transactions on Power Delivery, pp. 2034-2039, August 
2011. 
[8] E. de Jaeger, H. Renner, and K. Stockman, “Special Report-
Session 
2: 
Power 
Quality 
and 
Electromagnetic 
Compatibility,” 22nd International Conference on Electricity 
Distribution (CIRED), June 2013. 
[9] D. 
Heirman, 
“EMC 
Standards 
Activity,” 
IEEE 
Electromagnetic Compatibility Magazine, January 2014, pp. 
94-96. 
[10] J. Luszcz, “High Frequency Harmonics Emission of Modern 
Power Electronic AC-DC Converters,” 8th International 
Conference on Compatibility and Power Electronics, June 
2013, pp. 269-274. 
[11] E.O.A Larsson, C.M. Lundmark, and M.H.J. Bollen, 
“Distortion of Fluorescent Lamps in the Frequency Range 2-
150 kHz,” 7th International Conference on Harmonics and the 
Quality of Power, September 2006. 
[12] S. Ronnberg, M. Wahlberg, M. Bollen, A. Larsson, and M. 
Lundmark, “Measurements of Interaction Between Equipment 
in the Frequency Range 9 to 95 kHz,” 20th International 
Conference on Electricity Distribution (CIRED), June 2009. 
[13] D. Frey, J.L. Schanen, S. Quintana, M. Bollen, and C. 
Conrath, “Study of High Frequency Harmonics Propagation 
in Industrial Networks,” 2012 International Symposium on 
Electromagnetic Compatibility, September 2012, pp. 1-5. 
[14] M. Coenen and A. van Roermund, “Conducted Mains Test 
Method in the 2-150 kHz Band,” 2014 International 
Symposium on Electromagnetic Compatibility,” September 
2014, pp. 601-604. 
 
 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-406-0
ENERGY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

