Concerning the Sustainability of Smart Grids  
A critical analysis of the sustainability of current Smart Grid models and on indicators of Smart Grid 
sustainability assessment 
Antonio Caló, Jean-Nicolas Louis, Eva Pongrácz 
NorTech Oulu, Thule Institute 
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland 
e-mail: antonio.calo@oulu.fi 
 
 
Abstract — There is currently no generally accepted definition 
of Smart Grids, especially on what is expected to make them 
smart and how. On the other hand, the general assumption 
about Smart Grids implies the development of power networks 
toward more efficient, greener and sustainable systems. In this 
article, we present the intrinsic limitations of this view, 
showing how any aim for a future sustainable energy system 
will require analyses considering the multidimensional 
structure of the problem, including the integrated dynamics of 
different energy sources and carriers. The aim of this paper is 
to present the case for the development and conceptualization 
of a smarter and more comprehensive system known as Smart 
Energy Networks. We also put forward a set of indicators that 
we believe could aid in assessing the sustainability of smart 
grids and follow progress toward the development of a more 
sustainable energy regime. 
Keywords - Smart Energy Networks; Smart Grids; Sustainable 
Development; Sustainability Assessment; Energy Services. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
There is currently no accepted definition of Smart Grids 
(SGs). An argument can be made that, in many respects, this 
also reflects a lack of generally accepted understanding of 
what SGs should be, do or achieve. Any discussion on SGs, 
though, includes two commonly accepted premises: they 
represent the (on going) evolution of the power network and 
their development is driven by our – ever more pressing – 
needs for a more efficient, environmentally performing and 
sustainable energy system.  
In recent years, the quest for energy efficiency and 
environmental performance has led to extending the 
boundaries of SGs and a broader concept of energy network 
has emerged [1],[2]. The expression Smart Energy Network 
(SEN) indicates a concept intended to go beyond the SG 
idea, where multiple energy carrier and their synergies can 
be considered. SENs are therefore defined by broader 
boundaries and they can be expected to provide a better 
systemic tool for the development of a more sustainable 
energy regime. 
At the same time, analyses concerning the sustainability 
of SEN focus primarily on the environmental performance, 
and even more limited to center on the reduction of 
greenhouse 
gases 
(GHGs) 
emissions. 
The 
general 
expectation of lower GHG emissions is based on an 
increased use of Renewable Energy Sources (RES) and 
improved efficiency through owing to, and supported by, the 
technological development of the last few decades especially 
in the fields of Information and Communication Technology 
(ICT). On the other hand, to the best of our knowledge, no 
in-depth consideration concerning the overall system 
performance of SEN has been introduced or discussed, 
leading to, in our opinion, a number of significant 
misapprehensions concerning the expected results in terms of 
sustainability. 
In this paper, we intend to address these issues, 
presenting how the concept of SG alone is intrinsically 
insufficient and a broader concept, such as the SEN is 
required to properly address the sustainability of the energy 
system. Furthermore, we intend to discuss the idea of 
sustainability within the framework of SGs and SENs. Far 
beyond the mere notion of environmental performance, the 
concept of sustainability in itself is a subject of intense 
research work; in this paper we intend to provide the readers 
with a set of elements to be considered in the quest for a 
more sustainable (and smarter) energy regime. 
This manuscript, beside the introduction, develops on 3 
sections. Section II introduces the concept of sustainability 
applied to the generally understood development of SGs, 
underlying, from different point of view, the limiting factors 
the concept of SG carries along in comparison with the more 
comprehensive concept of SENs.  In Section III we introduce 
the paradigm shift required to overcome the presented 
limitations, suggesting what we believe to be the two key 
factors: addressing the multilayered and multidimensional 
character of sustainable energy system, and overcoming of 
the 
intrinsically 
limited 
nature 
of 
a 
quantitative 
understanding of the energy system. In Section IV we 
present a summary of our critical analysis of the generally 
accepted sustainable development of smart grids and our 
final conclusions. 
II. 
ADDRESSING SUSTAINABILITY 
Addressing the concept of sustainability, in our work we 
refer to the widely accepted definition of a process that “… 
meets the needs of the present without compromising the 
ability of future generations to meet their needs” [3]. 
Although often associated with environmental performance, 
and consequent separated references to economic or 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

technological challenges and social acceptance/involvement, 
the concept of sustainability is based on what is referred to as 
the triple bottom line (TBL) (Figure 1). The TBL view 
indicates that companies ought to manage also their social 
and environmental capital in as much as they would manage 
their economic bottom line.  
In this section, we discuss the currently generally 
accepted view of SG development from each of the 
mentioned sustainability dimensions. 
A. The Environmental Case 
The advantages and expectations concerning the 
environmental performance of SGs can, in most cases, be 
summarized in terms of significant reduction in GHG 
emissions through a wider use of RESs and improvements in 
terms of energy efficiency. We believe that, placed in these 
terms, both the goal and the means represent indeed 
fundamentally important factors for the development of a 
better energy regime, and yet they are an incomplete answer 
to the quest for a sustainable energy regime. 
The reduction of GHGs is essential for combating global 
warming. On the other hand, it should be kept in mind that it 
is not the only element of concern in terms of environmental 
performance. Factors such as the competing uses of 
resources such as biomass and water, direct and indirect 
land-use impacts usually falls outside the spectrum of 
elements describable by using exclusively GHGs reduction 
based criteria. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. The three pillars of sustainability [4]. 
 
Concerning the means through which we try to achieve 
our goals, it should be evident that the use of an increasing 
share of RES does not automatically imply an improved 
system performance toward sustainability. When it comes to 
evaluating the environmental performance on the use of 
RES, a good starting point is the fundamental limiting factors 
usually introduced in distinguishing renewable and non-
renewable energy sources. Non-renewable energy sources 
are limited by the available stock: the progressive exhaustion 
of the stocks define the energy source availability usually in 
terms of financial viability and profitability. Renewable 
energy sources are defined by the flow: our limitations in 
tipping in these sources come, consequently, to be described 
in terms of limited capacity in “catching” these flows. If, in 
some cases, limitations are physical or technological, a 
limitation often overseen is defined by the limited resources 
we have at our disposal to bring to bear the means for 
“catching” the energy flow in the first place. Issues related to 
energy efficiency fall also under these limitations. In 
addition, the production and deployment of smart 
technologies massively rely on ICTs using a number of 
materials whose availability is given for granted. Scarcity of 
key component materials is a potential barrier to both large-
scale deployment and reductions in technology cost. This is 
because many SG technologies (ICT and renewable energy) 
resort to critical metals. A raw material is labeled ‘critical’ 
when the risks of supply shortage and their impacts on the 
economy are higher compared with most of the other raw 
materials [5]. Critical materials important for low carbon 
energy 
generation 
and 
electronics 
share 
the 
same 
insufficiencies in their life cycles; low recycling rates and a 
high degree of dissipative losses, with a major share of the 
material being lost into other material flows [6]. Due to the 
rapid growth of SG technologies, end-of-life (EOL) 
management will become increasingly important. The role of 
recycling is negligible at the moment, but shall play an 
important role when recent and future installations will reach 
their EOL.  
An important conclusion concerning the analysis of 
environmental implications for the development of a 
sustainable energy regime is that, also in the case of RES, we 
need to deal with stock limited resources. Since the 
development of a SG based system is expected to rely on 
these technologies, it is important to take these elements into 
considerations. 
B. The Economic Case 
In this paper we do not intend to produce an in depth 
discussion 
concerning 
the 
economy 
and 
economic 
mechanisms behind the development and deployment of 
SGs. It is, on the other hand, our intention to present few key 
points that we believe are generally missing and which are 
essential for sustainability. 
Concerning the economic aspects of sustainability, this 
element is often understood in terms of financial 
profitability. Although an essential aspect of any system 
development, financial considerations should not entirely 
replace the economic ones (economic being here understood 
as the science that study the production, distribution and 
consumption of goods and services). Already the concept of 
sustainable use of non-renewable resources comes with some 
important economic consequences (e.g., access and use rate 
of mined resources) and, as mentioned in the previous 
section, it represents the determining factor for stock defined 
resources. On the other hand, even accepting the intrinsic 
limitations of a predominantly finance based approach to the 
problem, major concerns regarding possible contradictions in 
the development of a sustainable energy system arise. 
Simply put, the key issue resides in the maintenance of the 
core business model: as long as the customers pay for energy 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

units (kilowatt-hours), the more are the kilowatt-hours sold, 
the better are the revenues supporting the growing energy 
business. The argument then can be made that there is little 
actual incentive to systematically reduce consumption or, in 
contradiction with a popular and generally supported 
understanding, energy efficiency does not – cannot – 
automatically translate in cheaper bills for the end-users at 
the end of the value chain. 
C. The Social Case 
The social dimension of SG development is often related, 
on one hand, with user response and interaction with a 
smarter power network, and, on the other hand, with 
concerns related to privacy and security with respect to a 
technology potentially very intrusive. We can argue that this 
is also a valid, important, and yet incomplete assessment of 
the social dimension related to SGs. A large use of RESs 
implies the distributed deployment of power generating 
units, access to resources often not necessarily accepted by 
the involved parties. Furthermore, privacy and security 
issues are often addressed with “end-of-pipe” solutions such 
as data protection, encryption, etc., while the efficient and 
effective system operation often relies on virtually 
unrestricted possibilities of access and control. A number of 
solutions concerning these issues have been presented, and 
they generally rely on the concentrated accumulation of data. 
Setting 
aside, 
for 
a 
moment, 
pure 
technological 
considerations and focusing on more technical aspects of this 
approach, a question should be asked on the direction we 
pursue for the design of the SGs system.  The new system 
will be born from the synergic integration of the energy and 
the ICT networks, relying on, and supported by, an ever 
more decentralized power production and communication. 
Under the new paradigm, it should be questioned if 
physically decentralized power production system still 
relying on a centralized data management system can be still 
technically referred to as Smart Grid. 
D. Sustainability Indicators 
It is expected that long-term profitability of energy 
provision should go hand-in-hand with social justice and 
protecting the environment [7]. Indicators are needed to 
assess the environmental, economic and social sustainability 
of smart grids, to monitor trends in conditions over time, or 
to provide an early warning signal of change. It is widely 
recognized that some socio-economic indicators are related 
to environmental indicators (e.g., resource conservation) and 
that public acceptance depends on environmental impacts 
[8]. This manuscript recommends using a set of indicators 
under four categories, based on Dale et al. [9] and Global 
Reporting Initiative [7] to assess the sustainability of smart 
grids: 
 
- 
Energy security and profitability 
o 
Security of supply 
o 
Net present value (NPV) 
o 
Energy price volatility 
o 
Trade volume 
 
- 
Social acceptability 
o 
Energy quality 
o 
Data privacy and security  
o 
Transparency and compliance  
o 
Public opinion, stakeholder participation 
- 
Social well-being 
o 
Employment 
o 
Impact on customer well-being 
o 
Access to energy 
o 
Diverse services 
- 
Resource conservation  
o 
Depletion of non-renewable resources 
o 
Energy return on investment (EROI) 
o 
Land-use changes  
o 
(CO2) emissions 
 
This selection of indicators of SG sustainability is based on 
the availability of information about socioeconomic 
conditions for each category, on other efforts to identify sets 
of indicators, and on established criteria for selecting 
indicators. This set of 16 indicators is not as detailed or 
comprehensive as other approaches but, we argue, that it is 
more practical to apply. The indicators were selected based 
on being practical, unambiguous, resistant to bias, sensitive 
to changes, related to those changes, predictive, estimable 
with known variability, and sufficient when considered 
collectively [9]. 
III. 
PARADIGM SHIFT 
The expression “paradigm shift”, a ubiquitous phrase 
often used to describe the radical changes SGs are expected 
to bring about on century old power system, finds its origins 
in the book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions by 
Thomas S. Kuhn [10]. In his book, Kuhn, a historian and 
philosopher of science, argued that science does not 
progress linearly but though a series of anomalies that 
challenge the existing theories and, after some time, 
generate a revolutionary change in thoughts, a paradigm 
shift. An often cited example of this process is the 
Copernican revolution vs. the Ptolemy’s view of the 
universe. The comparison between the Copernican and the 
SG revolutions is perhaps useful to underline the deep and 
radical system level re-thinking of the energy system 
required for a sustainability assessment. It is indeed the case 
that innovative solutions might appear more like an addition 
of system appendices, the equivalent of epicycles and 
deferents in the Ptolemaic system, rather than a radical, 
concept level, change of perspective.  
Essentially, there are two key factors that need to be 
addressed: the intrinsic limitations of addressing the power 
system 
alone 
and 
the 
fundamentally 
quantitative 
understanding of the energy system. 
A. A more comprehensive approach 
As mentioned earlier, the expression Smart Energy 
Network refers to an information-based distributed system 
including a multilayered and multidimensional interaction 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

of different energy carriers and vectors. The synergies 
among different forms of energy (end their network flows) 
allow for a more comprehensive theoretical framework upon 
which we could base our analyses. 
A sustainability analysis focusing exclusively on SGs 
does not allow a proper and complete assessment of the 
entire energy system value chain. In particular, essential 
aspects of the energy production are amiss, as they do not 
directly contribute to the power system. Consequently, a 
conditio sine qua non is the consideration of a larger, more 
comprehensive system that would include the synergic flow 
of resources and energy. At the same time, broadening the 
system boundaries generally reduces the risk of externalities 
introduced in the previous section and calls for a general re-
evaluation of system sustainability in the face of the new 
paradigm. 
 
 
Figure 2. Indicative representation of the different elements required for an effective and  
comprehensive energy service to play a role in a smart grid based energy system. 
 
 
 
B. Energy Services 
In order to sustain a radical transformation of the future 
energy network, it is required for an important share of the 
future energy business to move from the production and 
commercialization 
of 
energy 
to 
the 
offering 
of 
comprehensive energy services (Figure 2). Customers’ 
services would include, among others, monitored grid 
access, real-time information on costs and consumption, 
possibility to customize the service’s profile and the 
possibility to sell small-scale renewable energy production in 
an open, transparent and easily accessible manner. These 
services rely primarily, but not exclusively, on efficient and 
effective data sharing and information extraction processes 
used by different operators to maintain a real-time overview 
of the network and feed back necessary, and valuable, 
information to end-users (e.g., energy consumption and price 
forecast). The other element energy services are to rely on is 
customized “on the field” technical assistance. This can 
potentially support the development of a more sustainable 
energy regime on two fronts. On one hand, end-users’ living 
environments are expected to develop and grow in efficiency 
and complexity, requiring a number of dedicated and 
customized technical solutions and support services often 
currently not available on the market. This would potentially 
support the development of the system sustainability, 
especially for what concern the social dimension we 
described in section 2C. On the other hand, these services 
can support the development of an energy quality based 
systems rather than a material production ones. The key idea 
is to prevent moving the focus of the sustainability problem 
from the production of energy to the production of the 
materials required to produce energy, therefore avoiding the 
shortcomings we discussed in section 2B. 
It is, notwithstanding, important for the new energy 
system to remove the commercialization of energy on a 
quantitative base as the primary economic driver. Based on 
our previous consideration, we can claim that any scenario 
built outside this premise is destined to present inevitable 
limitations, and any claim of sustainability can be put 
forward only by limiting the analyses to some specific 
element of the energy system (i.e., Smart Grids). 
Consequently any consideration of (un-)sustainability 
becomes, de facto, an externality.    
Energy services are currently not widely available, or 
shared among a limited number of market players in a non-
user-friendly way. Furthermore, each element of the network 
needs monitoring and assistance, they need to be combined 
at the local level and they need to be properly included in the 
common grids where their activity can be properly 
monitored in order to maintain the efficiency and the 
stability of the common networks. All these elements, even 
if, in most of the cases, are technically available, are not 
provided in a coordinated and viable fashion to the end-
users. Other elements, especially for what concern the 
inclusion of the models considered in this work in the 
common grids, are currently not available. Apart from a 
number of administrative and political aspects, there are a 
number of technical obstacles that need to be overcome.  
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we presented a critical analysis of the 
sustainability of smart grid development. We pointed out 
that, in terms of assessing the sustainability of smart grids, 
attention is often limited to environmental considerations 
only (such as CO2 emissions and the share of renewables), 
often ignoring entirely the economic and social dimensions 
of sustainability. More specifically, we showed that the 
concept of sustainability, in its sometimes underestimated 
complexity, comes, for what concern the future development 
of SGs, with two key elements of consideration: the first one 
is that the concept of SG is, in itself intrinsically inadequate 
for a proper sustainability evaluation as it represent a far too 
limited portion and, therefore, an incomplete representation 
of the energy system. The second point is that the economic 
driver of the future energy regime will have to oversee a 
transition from an energy based system to an energy service 
based system. Finally, we foresee that the social well-being 
impact of smart grids will be a key characteristic in European 
smart grid development efforts, with social acceptability 
providing a “make or break” feature, especially in terms of 
stakeholder participation, transparency and compliance. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
A. Caló and E. Pongrácz thank the funding provided for 
the SMARCTIC project by the Finnish Funding Agency for 
Technology and Innovation (Tekes). J.-N. Louis thanks the 
funding of the Thule Institute Research Programme. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. S. Chai, “Simulation of congeneration within the concept 
of smart energy networks”, M.A.SC. thesis, University of 
Waterloo, Mechanical Engineering, 2012. 
[2] D. S. Chai, J. Z. Wen and J. Nathwani, “Simulation of 
congeneration within the concept of smart energy networks”, 
Energy. Convers. Manage., vol. 75, 2013, pp. 453–465. 
[3] World Commission on Environment and development, 
“Report of the World Commission on Environment and 
Development: Our Common Future”, United Nations, 1987. 
[4] W. M. Adams, The Future of Sustainability: Re-thinking 
Environment and Development in the Twenty-first Century, 
Report of the IUCN Renowned Thinkers Meeting, University 
of 
Cambridge, 
2006. 
URL: 
http://cmsdata.iucn.org/ 
downloads/iucn_future_of_sustanability.pdf. 
[5] European Commission, DG Enterprise and Industry, “Critical 
raw materials for the EU: Report of the Ad-hoc Working 
Group on defining critical raw materials”,  study of the 
European Commission, Enterprise and Industry’s study, 2013. 
[6] T. Zimmermann and S. Gößling-Reisemann, “Critical 
materials and dissipative losses: A screening study”, Science 
Total Environ., 461–462, 2013, pp. 774–780. 
[7] Global Reporting Initiative G4, “Sustainability reporting 
guidelines”, 
2013. 
https://www.globalreporting.org/ 
resourcelibrary/GRIG4-Part1-Reporting-Principles-and-
Standard-Disclosures.pdf. 
[8] S. L. Collins et al. An integrated conceptual framework for 
long-term social–ecological research, Front. Ecol. Environ., 9 
(2011), pp. 351–357:  
[9] V. H. Dale et al. Ecological Indicators 26 (2013) 87–102,  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2012.10.014. 
[10] T. S. Kuhn, ”The structure of Scientific Revolutions”, 
University of Chicago press, 1962. 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

