Integrated Renewable Energy Infrastructure - Challenges And Opportunities  
 
Dr Mirek Piechowski 
Group Leader – Meinhardt Building Science Group 
Meinhardt Australia Pty Ltd 
Melbourne, Australia 
E-mail: mirek.piechowski@meinhardtgroup.com 
Executive Director – Centre for GeoExchange and 
Renewable Energy Infrastructure (CGREI) 
centre.grei@gmail.com 
Anila Weerakkody 
Environmental Engineer 
Meinhardt Australia Pty Ltd 
Melbourne, Australia 
E-mail: anila.weerakkody@meinhardtgroup.com
 
 
Abstract—Traditional approach to the sustainable built 
environment focuses on the passive design and energy efficient 
heating and cooling technologies. Most of the green building 
rating systems reward buildings with integrated renewable 
energy power generation, such as building integrated 
photovoltaic (BIPV) or wind power.  Experience indicates that 
while such initiatives can be justified by achieving the desired 
rating outcome or a demonstration of the owner’s commitment 
to sustainability, rarely they can be justified from the 
commercial point of view.  In many cases such initiatives begin 
to be seen as a cynical attempt at scoring points rather than 
demonstrating efficient design or environmental sustainability.  
While renewable energy generation is undoubtedly the right 
way for the future, the commercially viable strategies for 
integrating them with the built environment receive much less 
attention.  It seems that the renewable energy sector and the 
built environment sector have not yet developed a framework 
for the integration of the two, both on the technical, 
commercial and legal levels.  Smart grids can provide partial 
solution to such integration.  The proposed renewable energy 
infrastructure consists of the distributed sources of renewable, 
or low emissions, power generation and also include thermal 
storage component designed to offset adverse effect of thermal, 
and electrical, demand fluctuations of buildings due to ambient 
temperature variations.  The paper provides examples of 
integration of GeoExchange infrastructure with different 
sources of distributed, renewable energy generation. The paper 
also discusses some of the key commercial and technical 
challenges related to the integrated renewable energy 
infrastructure.  The paper discusses some of the opportunities 
and challenges of integrated approach to the development of 
precinct scale sustainable built environment and its supporting 
renewable energy infrastructure.  It also proposes a two-tier 
sustainability rating system which aims to encourage 
integration of renewable energy resources with urban design.   
Keywords- Reknewable energy; district energy; sustainable 
precincts; green building;rating schemes. 
I. 
PROGRESS ON CLIMATE CHANGE POLICY TO DATE  IN 
AUSTRALIA AND THE ROLE OF THE BUILDING SECTOR  
 
Renewed awareness on climate change driven by 
global protocols and climate change summits are driving 
governments to set standards for environmental governance. 
The Australian federal government has currently committed 
to a 25% reduction in Green House Gas (GHG) emissions 
from 2000 levels by 2020 [1]. In order to deliver these 
targets the government has proposed options for the 
implementation of a carbon price in Australia and renewable 
energy targets where the federal government aims to deliver 
20 per cent of Australia’s electricity supply from renewable 
sources by 2020 [1].  
 
As energy use by buildings (residential and 
commercial) accounts for approximately 20 per cent of 
Australia's greenhouse gas emissions [2], the introduction of 
stricter energy efficiency standards mandated through the 
Building Code of Australia (BCA) 2010, proposed new 
mandatory disclosure provisions and fiscal incentives such as 
the Green Building Fund and Renewable Energy Bonus 
Scheme aim to reduce GHG emissions from the building 
sector. 
 
Furthermore, 
sustainability 
agendas 
and 
environmental stewardship is now embedded in many 
corporate policies, which then influence decisions to 
incorporate sustainability principles into new development 
and buildings.  
 
Using building environmental assessment methods 
such as Green Star, BCA (Building Code of Australia) 
FirstRate, NABERS (National Australian Built Environment 
Rating System) and LEED (Leadership in Energy and 
Environmental Design) provides third-party verification that 
a building was designed and built using strategies aimed at 
improving performance across environmental metrics: water 
efficiency, CO2 emissions reduction, improved indoor 
environmental quality and materials stewardship. In this 
context there is an opportunity for environmental rating 
systems to encourage and promote renewable energy and 
other sustainability infrastructure as an integral part of the 
sustainable built environment.   
 
The aim of this paper is to discuss and develop the 
idea of district level sustainability infrastructure as a driver 
for full integration of renewable energy resources with urban 
design.  In creating a discourse around this concept the paper 
is structured as follows: Section 2 argues that large scale 
sustainable infrastructure such as renewable energy, co/tri-
generation and recycled water should be provided at a 
district network level such that individual buildings can tap 
into these resources rather than the building itself having to 
provide these costly and complex systems and services to 
meet its sustainability objectives or green building rating 
52
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

system criteria.  This is illustrated by examining the 
provision of GeoExchange Infrastructure (GXI) as a means 
of precinct, or subdivision, scale integration of renewable 
energy storage, generation and distribution with the built 
environment.  Section 3 presents the case study of 
vicurban@officer to illustrate the financial viability of 
coupling district level sustainable infrastructure with 
individual high performance passive building design. Section 
4 discusses the potential for resource sharing between 
buildings connected to a district infrastructure network. 
Section 5 presents an argument for a two tired green building 
rating system; where the buildings passive design elements 
are assessed separately to its large scale active sustainable 
systems such as renewable energy and recycled water which, 
have a strong correlation to the urban infrastructure.  Finally 
Section 6 examines the role of the local government in 
driving these sustainable district level infrastructure 
networks.   
 
II. 
RETHINKING OWNERSHIP AND  PROVISION OF 
SUSTAINABLE AND REKNEWABLE BUIDING SYSTEMS AND 
SERVICES   
 
The 
stakeholders 
involved 
in 
the 
design, 
construction, operation and use of sustainable buildings are 
the building developer and operators, owners and occupants, 
local councils, planning and regulatory agencies, the local 
community and the commonwealth government. All these 
stakeholders interact with the building on different levels. 
Starting at the level of commonwealth government, the 
sustainable features of the building and its reduction in 
resource use contribute to the overarching commonwealth 
resource minimisation targets and environmental objectives. 
To the local government or planning and regulatory body, 
the building represents progress made in the community in 
recognising and promoting environmentally sustainable 
design as the resource use within that community is reduced.  
At the level of local government the availability of 
sustainable 
infrastructure 
and 
the 
level 
of 
urban 
environmental governance within the local community both 
complement and drive the sustainable aspects of the 
building. For the developer/operator the sustainability of the 
building presents a marketing opportunity; to raise the 
developer's community profile, showcase the developments 
sustainability credentials and increase return on investment. 
However the implementation of individual building scale 
sustainable services which, is required for higher levels of 
"environmental performance" such as renewable energy 
systems, co-gen, tri-gen, and grey/blackwater treatment 
systems often involve a high cost premium. This can 
sometimes be a deterrent in the desire to pursue sustainable 
design especially adopting voluntary green building rating 
scheme 
assessment. 
 
For 
the 
owner/occupiers 
the 
sustainability of the building represents potential operational 
energy savings and an improved indoor environmental 
quality. It may also be a means to promote their corporate 
ethos 
and 
environmental 
policies. 
However 
the 
owner/developer must also pay for the higher cost associated 
with the large scale sustainable building services and 
systems. These usually include recycled water, renewable 
energy and sustainable transport and are typically delivered 
at the site level and have a strong correlation to the local 
urban context, community and landscape.  Opportunity exists 
for the provision of this infrastructure at the local 
government/precinct/district level by supplying reticulated, 
recycled water, district energy systems and the provision of 
sustainable transport options, routes and links.  A building 
when placed in a certain location and community will play a 
role 
within 
that 
community's 
socio-economic 
and 
environmental context. The idea of sustainable development 
should extend beyond the realm of individual buildings.  
Building based sustainable services should be incorporated 
into the wider urban infrastructure network, involve other 
parties such as the community, adjacent buildings and 
councils which, are all stakeholders in their immediate built 
environment.  The building should be seen as part of an 
integrated precinct or neighborhood resource and energy 
system.  This concept is illustrated in Figure 1.   
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Buildings with individual sustainable and reknewable sevices 
(top) and buildngs integrated with district based sustainable infrastructure 
(bottom) 
53
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

A. GeoExchage infrastructure (GXI)   
 
Examples of sustainable district infrastructure 
systems which, feed into individual buildings and 
developments within a neighborhood or precinct include 
geoexchange systems.  GXI is an example of a renewable 
energy storage system utilising large thermal capacity and 
inertia of the ground.  Due to its large thermal capacity and 
inertia the ground temperature at a certain depth is almost 
constant throughout the year. Similarly thermal storage 
effects can be achieved with bodies of water, lakes, 
groundwater aquifers and ponds.  GXI can provide both heat 
sink and source at the same time, particularly in temperate 
climates.  A heating system combined with GXI will source 
up to 75% of heating energy from solar energy accumulated 
in the ground.  GXI networks can also be integrated with, 
and supplemented by waste-to-energy plants, wood biomass, 
combined heat and power (co/tri-generation) systems and 
solar thermal systems. Waste heat generated from building 
services and equipment, especially in neighborhoods which, 
have an industrial component can be fed into and distributed 
through a GXI network.  In summer where there is a need for 
cooling, this waste heat can be directed to an absorption 
chiller which uses low temperature heat to generate 
chilled/cold water. The GXI network aims to provide a more 
or less constant water temperature which, can be used for 
heating or cooling in heat pump systems.  Similarly, 
renewable energy infrastructure such as extents of thermal 
solar 
collector 
panels 
established 
at 
district 
and 
neighborhood level can feed into the individual buildings 
that comprise of the energy precinct.  Solar thermal systems 
can also be integrated into GXI to provide solar cooling 
through absorption chillers, etc.  The building is no longer a 
stand-alone element in the built environment but an entity 
integrated 
with 
its 
landscape 
and 
neighborhood 
infrastructure.  Figure 2 and Figure 3 illustrate an example of 
an integrated GXI system.   
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Example of geoexchange system for space conditioning and 
domestic hot water 
 
Figure 3.  Example of geoexchange system integrated with co-gen 
 
GXI lends itself to be a perfect coplement to the 
smart grid infrastructure.  While smart grid is focusing on IT 
and active supply and demand management, GXI provides 
natural thermal energy storage component.  Coupling the 
electricity demand for comfort heating and cooling with 
natural thermal storage, independent of ambient temperature 
variations provides a means of demand management.  Lower 
and flatter demand characteristic is an inherent feature of 
GXI, as compared with the traditional air source air 
conditioning systems.   
III. 
CASE STUDY IN SUSTAINABLE INTERATED DISTRICT 
INFRASTRUCTURE-VICURBAN@OFFICER 
 
VicUrban@Officer is one of 16 projects selected 
worldwide by the Clinton Climate Initiative (CCI).  It is a 
32ha mixed-use site built around the Officer Train station, 
south-east of Melbourne, Australia.  Figure 4 below shows a 
masterplan of the entire development.  Stage 1 of the 
development is the precinct discussed in this case study. It is 
a mixed used precinct consisting of residential, commercial, 
retail and community buildings.  It is anticipated that the 
residential gross floor area (GFA) will be in the order of 
130,000m2, retail up to 40,000m2 and commercial 
approximately 50,000m2.  Alternative and renewable energy 
solutions are being considered for the precinct as part of an 
integrated district based energy strategy.  GXI is one the 
alternatives being considered.   
 
Figure 5 shows an energy and cost performance 
comparison between using conventional air source heat 
pumps for heating and cooling for the residential component 
of stage 1 and a water source heat pumps coupled to a GXI 
network.  The analysis was done based on a minimum code 
compliant dwelling (BCA First Rate (FR) 6 Star) as a base 
line and then compared against better performing design 
(FR8 and better than 50% FR6 and FR8).  Figure 5 
illustrates the cost saving produced when a dwelling is 
designed to better than code compliant standards and 
coupled to GXI system.  It also highlights the impact of 
54
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

building passive design on the estimated size of GXI.  It 
clearly demonstrates how best practice passive design, such 
as glazing, insulation, shading, building form and 
orientation impact on the viability of GXI.   
 
 
 
Figure 4.  vicurban@officer MASTERPLAN 
 
 
Figure 5.  vicurban@officer sample calcualtiopns for Geoexchange at 
Officer   
IV. 
INFRASTRUCTURE CONTEXT FOR SUSTAINABLE 
BUILDINGS-OPPORTUNITY FOR RESOURCE SHARING 
THROUGH SUSTAINABLE DISTRICT LEVEL INFRASTRUCTURE 
NETWORKS   
 
The rating systems as well as local and regional 
regulation do not address resource sharing in building design 
and operation. In instances where commercial buildings are 
located adjacent to each other it is possible to share 
resources; especially renewable resources.  For example; if a 
building harvests rainwater, generates waste heat or produces 
solar hot water that far exceeds its own demand, there is no 
concession or credit driven by regulation or the green 
building rating system, which, promotes the supply and 
distribution of this excess to nearby and adjacent buildings 
that may not have the production capabilities or systems.  
This will reduce the overall municipal potable water and 
electricity demand. Although such schemes may be eligible 
for innovation points under Green Star and LEED; subject to 
the judgment of assessors, they need stronger policy driven 
support mechanisms to be adopted by developers.  
Developers should be encouraged to contribute to 
infrastructure schemes that extend beyond the buildings site 
boundaries 
and 
incorporate 
nearby 
buildings 
and 
communities.  In order to make these schemes viable and 
cost affective to the developer, cost of additional reticulation 
and connection infrastructure would need to be supported by 
concessions and mutually beneficial commercial funding 
models.   
V. 
THE DICHOTOMY OF THE GREEN BUILDING RATING 
SYSTEM 
 
There exists a dichotomy in green building design, 
construction and operation where different building design 
and operational elements are delineated at building level and 
site level.  Therefore, in order to encourage and promote 
renewable energy and other sustainability infrastructure as an 
integral part of the sustainable built environment and 
sustainable building construction and operation we propose a 
two-tier green building rating system.  The building level 
sustainability features such as the fabric, shading, massing 
and services are assessed separately to the larger site level 
features such as renewable energy, recycled water, 
sustainable transport and local ecology.   
 
The objectives of the fist tier should be the 
assessment of the building level sustainable features based 
on matrices such as water use reduction, energy consumption 
minimisation, thermal comfort and the provision of a healthy 
indoor environment. The objectives of the second tier assess 
the interaction and integration of the site level sustainable 
infrastructure with the building function and operation. This 
would refer to the availability of district energy, renewable 
energy options and recycled water supply and reticulation etc 
which, the building could tap into, as well as the availability 
of sustainable transport routes and how the building caters 
for the use of these facilities through allocation of bike 
55
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

storage, etc.  The objectives of the second tier assessment is 
to build social awareness of community infrastructure and its 
role in achieving sustainable community outcomes, increase 
equity in sustainable infrastructure and encourage economic 
activity through access to this infrastructure.  The provision 
of building level sustainability features is the responsibility 
of the developer/owner whereas the provision of the site 
level sustainable infrastructure should also involve the local 
planning authority and local government agencies as they are 
all stakeholders in the buildings use and operation.  The site 
level sustainability features should be assessed in relation to 
the 
availability 
and 
provision 
of 
such 
sustainable 
infrastructure within the surrounding landscape and local 
community.   
 
  In green building design it is important to look 
beyond the building supplying the entire infrastructure 
required for it to operate sustainably but examine a 
sustainable building within a community which provides 
sustainable infrastructure such as a recycled water network, 
district heating etc.  To achieve this, provision of district 
level sustainable infrastructure must be mandated by strong 
environmental commitments from governments and be 
supported by the local government policy and planning 
processors.  A two-tiered system provides for better social 
inclusion and equity as sustainable infrastructure is made 
available and accessible to all.  A two tiered system also 
makes green building construction and operation more 
feasible as the large-scale sustainable infrastructure is 
provided at the community level and the cost shared by all 
stakeholders and not merely the developer/owner.   
VI. 
THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT STAKEHOLDERS IN 
DRIVING SUSTAINABLE INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
Planning authorities must integrate sustainable 
infrastructure with their urban renewal and redevelopment 
plans.  Zoning laws and requirements should encourage 
symbiotic or related developments and industries to be sited 
in the same areas with an intention for resource sharing and 
building resource networks.  In this way, through careful 
land-use planning and the design of individual buildings and 
developments the sharing of utilities and resources can be 
facilitated.  Strategies to develop sustainable infrastructure 
could include support for distributed generation, waste heat 
utilisation, financial incentives to locate developments near 
energy and waste heat sources, establishment of district 
heating zones, establishment of wastewater reuse zones, 
local level investment in GXI, wind and solar technologies 
and financial and technical assistance for building level 
alternative technologies.  Consequently the availability of the 
types of sustainable infrastructure will mean it will be easier 
for the buildings to meet their green building rating system 
objectives.  Availability of this sustainable infrastructure will 
also shape building design and the systems installed.   
 
 Local authorities have a key role to play in the 
provision of sustainable infrastructure. They are also at the 
level of government that has direct interaction and access to 
the community and are responsible for educating local 
communities and disseminating knowledge on sustainability, 
they are also in charge of current supply and maintenance of 
infrastructure.  Local authorities are also aware of local 
issues and the infrastructure and sustainability needs 
particular to a community.  Local issues on sustainability 
may vary from wider overarching commonwealth policies on 
sustainability.  Different environmental segment may have 
regional and local priorities.  Therefore local government is 
well placed to drive sustainable infrastructure and the 
subsequently encourage and facilitate green building 
development and adoption of green building rating tools.  
However, local government needs the support of overarching 
commonwealth and state legislature which will set a 
blueprint for sustainable development.   
 
While the technological aspect of GXI and 
integrated infrastructure is reasonably well understood, its 
commercial and legal framework is much less understood.  
Before GXI, and similar concepts, become the reality some 
pressing questions in relation to the ownership, revenue 
generation and allocation among potentially diverse 
stakeholders have to be addressed.  GXI technology provides 
solution to some key challenges facing energy generation 
and distribution at the precinct level, such as reduction of 
maximum demand and energy use, reduction of volatility of 
demand and integration of renewable energy resources. 
However, prospective GXI operators will have to develop 
commercial models which redistribute costs and benefits in 
an equitable manner among its key stakeholders.   
VII. CONCLUSION  
 
Often green building design and adoption of green 
building rating systems is seen as having an increased cost 
component over conventional design which can be a 
deterrent for builders and developers to pursue these options.   
The increased costs usually arise from installation of larger 
scale sustainable building systems and services such as 
grey/blackwater 
treatment 
systems, 
sewer 
mining, 
cogeneration, tri-generation and renewable energy systems.  
If this type of infrastructure could be provided at a 
community and local level it would free up capital for other 
less costly elements of the sustainable building design such 
as through building form, orientation, passive ventilation 
strategy, daylight strategy, exposed mass, shading devices, 
high performance glazing and insulation.   
 
There needs to be planning and policy instruments 
that implement sustainable infrastructure at regional, local 
and community neighborhoods such that buildings can be 
slotted into this context of sustainable infrastructure.  The 
building therefore only needs to be designed with the focus 
on the environmental performance of its façade, fabric and 
equipment in mind, the larger scale sustainable infrastructure 
such as wastewater treatment, renewable energy generation 
is provided at the local level.  In the long run this will enable 
building design with better environmental performance since 
56
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

the burden of high cost infrastructure has been removed 
freeing up capital for lower cost passive and active solutions.   
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Australian Government Department of Climate Change and Energy 
Efficicency  
         http://www.climatechange.gov.au/en/government/reduce.aspx
 
Accessed 17/02/2011 
[2] 
Australian Government Department of Climate Change and Energy 
Efficicency 
http://www.climatechange.gov.au/what-you-need-to-
know/buildings.aspx, Accessed 17/02/2011 
[3] 
F. Butera, “Towards the Rekenewable Built Environment-Urban 
Energy Transition,” Edited by Peter Droege, from fossil fuels to 
reknewable power. University of Newcastle, NSW, Australia; World 
Council for Renewable EnergyChapter 14, pp. 329–364, March 2008.  
[4] 
S. Lehmann, Sustainability on the urban scale; green Urabism-New 
models for urban growth and neighbourhoods, Edited by Peter 
Droege, University of Newcastle, NSW, Australia; World Council for 
Renewable Energy Chapter 18, pp. 409–430, March 2008. 
[5] 
S Sayce, L Ellison and P Parnell. Understanding investment drivers 
forUK sustainable property. Building Research & Information (2007) 
35(6), pp 629–643 
[6] 
I.G. Theaker and R. J. Cole, The role of local governments in 
fostering ‘green’ buildings:a case study, Building Research & 
Information (2001) 29(5), pp 394–408 
[7] 
I. C. Mell, Can green infrastructure promote urban sustainability, 
Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers,Engineering 
Sustainability 162, March 2009 Issue ES1,pp 23–34 
[8] 
V. Novotny., J. Ahern,.and P.Brown., Planning and Design For 
Sustainable And Resilient Cities: Theories, Strategies, And Best 
Practices For Green Infrastructure, Water Centric Sustainable 
Communities; Planning, Retrofitting and building the next urban 
Environment.2010 John Wiley and Sons inc. pp 135-176 
[9] 
J Engel-Yan, C. Kennedy, S. Saiz, and K Pressnail, Toward 
sustainable neighbourhoods: the need to consider infrastructure 
interactions. Can. J. Civ. Eng. 32: pp 45–57 (2005) 
 
 
 
57
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

