Decision Support Independence in a Smart Grid  
 
Kendall E. Nygard, Steve Bou Ghosn, Md. Minhaz 
Chowdhury, Ryan McCulloch, Davin Loegering, Anand 
Pandey, Md. M. Khan 
Department of Computer Science 
North Dakota State University 
Fargo, ND, USA 
{Kendall.Nygard, Steve.Boughosn, Md.Chowdhury, 
Ryan.Mcculloch, Davin.Loegering, Anand.Pandey, 
Mahbuburrahman.Khan}@ndsu.edu 
 
Prakash Ranganathan 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
University of North Dakota 
Grand Forks, ND 
prakashranganathan@mail.und.nodak.edu
 
Abstract—We describe a novel framework for designing and 
implementing agent based simulations of the smart electrical 
grid. The framework is based on two primary concepts. First, the 
eletrical grid system is separated into semi-autonomous 
microgrids, each with their own set of hierarchically organized 
agents. Second, models for automating decision-making in the 
grid during crisis situations are independently supported. 
Advantages of this framework are scalablity, modularity, 
coordinated local and global decision making, and the ability to 
easily implement and test a large variety of decision models. We 
believe that simulators based on this kind of framework will be 
valuable for evaluating the effectiveness and reliability of 
alternative methodologies for configuring automated self-healing 
in the grid with little human intervetion. The primary 
achievement of work is the software design for directly 
supporting decision model independence.  
Keywords-Multi-agent 
Multi-agent 
System; 
SmartGrid; 
Distributed Computing; Intelligent Systems; Self-healing. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A primary objective of smart grid software architectures is 
to provide intelligence and communications technology to 
support powerful and efficient automation. A power system is 
exposed to faults created by natural calamity, terrorism and 
equipment or operator failures. Once a fault occurs in a power 
system, it is necessary to quickly isolate the malfunctioning 
components from the rest of the network to minimize outages. 
A power failure can range in magnitude and impact from a 
relatively modest curtailment to a catastrophic regional 
blackout. Because most power failures cannot be prevented 
[6], it is desirable for the Smart Grid to have self-healing 
capabilities that respond appropriately to disruptions when 
they occur, restore the power system to a healthy state, 
minimize consumer outages, and involve little or no manual 
intervention. 
Due to the large scale and complexity of the Smart Grid, 
anticipating all possible scenarios that lead to performance 
lapses is difficult [7]. There is a high degree of uncertainty in 
accurately estimating the impact of disruptions on the 
reliability, availability and efficiency of the power delivery 
system. These uncertainties result in hesitation on the part of 
decision makers in committing to smart systems for grid 
management. We report here on research that is focused on the 
use of simulation models to promote trust in Smart Grid 
solutions in safe and cost effective ways. 
Recently developed Smart Grid simulators and analysis 
tools include GridLAB-D and the Graphical Contingency 
Analysis (GCA). Both are projects developed at the U.S. 
Department of Energy's (DOE) Pacific Northwest National 
Laboratory (PNNL). GridLAB-D is a sophisticated simulator 
that provides detailed information of the power grid’s state, 
including power flow, end-use loads, and market functions and 
interactions. The GCA is a visual analytic software tool that 
aids power grid operators in making complex decisions. By 
using human friendly visualizations and classifications of 
critical areas and by allowing the operators to simulate 
possible actions and their consequences, the tool helps human 
operators to analyze large amounts of data and make decisions 
in a reasonable amount of time. Due to the large amounts of 
data representing the grid status at any given time, even when 
aided by simulation and analysis tools, there are still 
limitations on how quickly human operators can make 
efficient decisions in near real time. 
Because of the limitations of human operators in 
comparison with automated control, there is considerable 
research being done on how to fully automate control of the 
electrical grid by using software agents. A software agent is an 
encapsulated software system situated in an environment 
where it can conduct flexible and autonomous actions to meet 
its design objectives [2]. A Multi Agent System (MAS) is 
composed of multiple interacting intelligent agents that can 
sense, act, communicate and collaborate with each other. In 
our previous work [1], we presented guidelines for an agent-
oriented smart grid simulation design. The agents in our MAS 
exhibit autonomy or partial autonomy, are decentralized, and 
have local views and knowledge. This design is related to 
other agent-based simulators that have been developed 
[4][5][16][17].  
A fully automated grid relying on a multi-agent system will 
also presents some challenges and disadvantages along with its 
many advantages however. For example, developing agents 
able to function on par with human experts for the various 
scenarios that can happen in the smart grid, this will require a 
significant amount of research and experimentation. Relying 
on autonomous agents will also introduce a number of security 
issues. An agent could be hacked and controlled by an attacker 
who could manipulate the decisions and communications of 
the agent to perform malicious behavior. The trustworthiness 
of any particular agent or even the system as a whole could be 
called into question because of both the security risks and the 
general difficulty in replicating human expertise. Much must 
be done in order to overcome these inherent disadvantages of 
autonomous agent based systems. 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Supporting 
knowledge 
bases 
and 
decision-making 
capabilities within individual agents is a key challenge in 
Smart Grid designs. In order to successfully evaluate 
intelligent systems that allow agents to employ appropriate 
decision models for self-healing scenarios that can occur in the 
Smart Grid, intensive testing should be done using simulators. 
We are carrying out extensive experimentation with our own 
simulator based on the discussed framework. The following 
types 
of 
questions 
are 
being 
answered 
through 
experimentation within the simulator.  
 
What decision model is most appropriate for handling 
self-healing in a particular situation in the smart grid?  
 
What decision model can guarantee that reliability and 
efficiency is maximized for a given power system?  
 
How can decisions be made quickly enough to avoid 
potential cascading failures, yet be deliberate enough to 
maintain high efficiency in the overall system?  
Unfortunately, previous smart grid simulators, despite 
their valuable contributions, do not provide suitable simulation 
frameworks for answering these kinds of questions. 
In this work, we present a simulator design aimed at 
directly supporting the research and experimentation required 
for full automation of distributed decision making in the grid. 
Our design assumes that the Smart Grid is naturally 
modularized into microgrids. A microgrid is a regional 
grouping of electrical generation, storage and consumption 
units that can be isolated from the centralized grid. microgrids 
typically have some ability to function autonomously if 
necessary. The new framework is fundamentally based on 
Distributed Control and Decision Model Independence. This 
paper is divided as follows: Section II discusses the previous 
research works in more details. Section III discusses the 
Distributed Control aspects of the simulation framework, 
including its advantages challenges. Section IV discusses 
Decision Model Independence. In section V we present our 
conclusions and describe future work. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
There have been several attempts to create simulation 
systems for a smart grid using multi agent systems. In one of 
the earliest works [3], the authors created an accurate hardware 
simulation of a simple microgrid using MATLAB and 
Simulink to model the functionality of low level electrical 
circuits. Their agent implementation was very simple, with 
voltage monitoring to activate a circuit breaker and secure 
critical loads, with no complex decision making. Their focus 
was on showing that a microgrid can be managed as part of the 
global grid and is still able to work autonomously in an 
islanded mode. Their simulation of agent interaction and 
collaboration was not thoroughly tested, evaluated or 
analyzed. Their contribution was valuable in showing that the 
smart grid could be modularized into smaller independent 
units with their own agents and that those modules could work 
autonomously and as part of the whole. 
In [10], a centralized multi-agent framework for power 
system restoration was designed. In [11] and [12], 
improvements were done to the framework while still 
maintaining a centralized design. Multi-Agent systems that 
utilize centralized control are typically not able to respond 
quickly enough to perform global decisions and actions in near 
real time. Thus, such systems fall short of being able to 
address critical situations like a cascading failure that could 
have catastrophic consequences if not dealt with promptly. In 
[13] and [14], new multi-agent frameworks for the power grid 
based on decentralized multi-agent systems are presented. The 
frameworks presented in [13] and [14] are decentralized multi-
agent systems, but have the disadvantage of only allowing 
nodes to communicate with their neighbors. When nodes only 
acquire information from their neighbors, it greatly limits the 
quality of the decisions that the nodes can make, due to 
insufficient data. In [15], a hybrid multi agent framework that 
combined centralized and decentralized architectures was 
proposed. All of these approaches are topology dependent, 
with the exception of [14] and [15], which used a topology 
independent framework. By allowing the framework to work 
irrespective of the physical structure of the grid, a high level of 
flexibility and scalability can be obtained. Other agent-
oriented Smart Grid designs are described in [4] and [5]. 
In [8] and [1], we describe our MAS simulator, including 
innovations in supporting power grid topology, dynamic agent 
generation, and scalability. The simulator is based on a 
topology independent framework that places the physical 
aspects of the power grid and the actual agents in separate 
independent layers.  
A major goal of our simulator is to support the appropriate 
decision models for the various self-healing scenarios that can 
occur. This addresses the previously unmet need to allow 
researchers to easily configure the type of decision model used 
by the agents, to compare how agents perform in the same case 
scenario when using different reasoning processes. More 
importantly, we also address the need for researchers to 
develop their own models and easily integrate them in the 
simulator for testing. 
The framework we present in this research work addresses 
many of the shortcomings of traditional centralized and 
decentralized schemes by utilizing a hierarchical distributed 
control scheme. It also supports direct comparisons among 
different decisions models, by implementing them in a 
separate independent layer from the agents. We see 
considerable potential for the simulator to help in the building 
of smarter electrical grid architecture.  
III. 
DISTRIBUTED CONTROL 
To address the large size and complexity of the smart grid, 
we break the problems that were handled by a centralized 
controller into smaller problems handled by multiple 
distributed controllers. It is critical to utilize a granularity that 
allows the units to work independently and autonomously as 
well as to integrate and coordinate with each other in order to 
guarantee that the system works efficiently as a whole. 
Our design is inspired by the concept of an Intelligent 
Autonomous Distributed Power System (IDAPS) that was 
proposed by the Advanced Research Institute of Virginia 
Tech. [9]. An IDAPS is essentially a microgrid that contains 
sufficient intelligence and resources to be fully autonomous, 
yet function within the global grid. We specifically design 
microgrids so that they are capable of disconnecting 
themselves from the rest of the grid under certain situations 
and work autonomously in islanded mode [3].The intelligence 
in the microgrid handled by the multi-agent system associated 
with the microgrid and its quality depends directly on the 
multi-agent design employed. 
A. Multi-Agent Design 
In our design, we establish hierarchical relationships 
among the agents, where the agents on higher levels supervise 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

those in the levels below. With this arrangement, an agent can 
either be entirely autonomous (acts on its own) or semi-
autonomous (works under direction from a supervisor) [18]. In 
our framework, we implement a three level hierarchical 
system of agents, in which the agents in the second level are 
supervised by the agents in the first level and agents in the 
third level are supervised by those in the second. In general, 
this means that the agents in the first level exhibit full 
autonomy in that they act of their own accord without direct 
instruction, while the agents on the second and third layer act 
semi-autonomously in that they receive instructions form their 
supervisory agents. 
In our modeling of autonomous micro-grids, we use a three 
layered design, the two upper layers of which consist of the 
two hierarchical agent levels as described above. The bottom 
layer is a simple hardware simulation called the physical layer. 
The purpose of this bottom layer is to mimic the behavior of 
the electrical components themselves. This layer simulates 
devices such as relays, transformers, capacitors, power lines, 
consumers and generators that run on their own, with no 
intervention or added intelligence. This separation between the 
intelligent agent layers and the physical simulation allows 
researchers to run two basic scenarios in the simulator, one, at 
the base hardware level without autonomous actions like the 
grid would normally operate, and another, using intelligent 
autonomous agent support. 
The top layer, called the management layer, hosts the 
management agents that make the high level decisions. These 
agents are continuously sending data that represents the status 
of the microgrid at a given point in time. A management agent 
organizes, analyzes, and parameterizes models with the data, 
in order to detect situations in the grid that require healing. If 
such a situation is detected, it creates a strategy to handle the 
disruption and heal the system. This strategy is expressed as a 
set of different roles to be performed by the middle layer 
agents, known as corrective behaviors. The management agent 
is the main decision maker in our simulation framework, but 
the agents in the middle layer do have a certain amount of 
autonomy in how they carry out the high level decisions 
generated by the management agent. 
We refer to agents in the middle layer as distributed energy 
resource (DER) agents, user agents, device agents, and control 
agents. These agents collaborate with each other as well as 
report to and follow the instructions of the management 
agents. We describe each in turn. 
1) User agents: act on behalf of consumers to ensure that 
businesses, 
organizations, 
homes, 
or 
other 
electricity 
consumers have the power they need. 
2) DER agents: act on behalf of the DERs within the 
microgrid. DERs are generation sources that are independent 
from the main power distribution circuit. These generators are 
typically small companies or special consumers that also 
participate in the power market, such as a wind power unit or 
geothermal generator. DER agents act on behalf of their 
generators by engaging in power supply negotiations with 
users. 
3) Device Agents: act on behalf of the individual electrical 
grid components (such as switches and transformers). The 
device agent reports the device’s sensor and meter readings to 
the control agents. It also has the ability to perform actions 
such as using a relay to reroute power, or closing a circuit 
breaker. 
4) Control agents: are in charge of monitoring a section 
of the grid by collecting data from all of the agents in that area. 
These agents carry out data fusion and are sent on to the 
management agent as the representation of the current status of 
the system. 
In order for the agents in the middle layer to communicate 
with simulated physical components in the first layer, it is 
fundamental 
to 
have 
middleware 
to 
facilitate 
the 
communication. This is achieved by encapsulating the bottom 
layer within an environment agent. An environment agent 
contains all information about the grid topology and all device 
status information at any given time. Middle layer agents can 
query the environment agents to gain information about the 
physical grid. They also communicate with the environment 
agent when they seek to alter the behavior of the physical grid. 
This simulates, at an abstract level, how the agents can be 
integrated with smart meters and other sensors in a real grid. 
 
 
Figure 1 shows a graphic representation of the communication 
flow between the layers, illustrating the kinds of intelligence 
that is integrated into each layer. High level decisions are 
carried out by a management agent, and the physical 
components with no intelligence reside at the bottom. The 
middle layer agents have limited intelligence. 
IV. 
THE PRIMARY ADVANTAGES OF THIS FRAMEWORK 
USING DISTRIBUTED CONTROL ARE MODULARITY, 
SCALABILITY AND EFFECTIVE LOCAL AND GLOBAL 
DECISION MAKING 
A. Modularity 
The complexity of large systems such as the smart grid can 
be managed with a divide and conquer approach. As much as 
possible, each autonomous unit is responsible for managing 
and solving local problems that pertain to the unit itself. When 
a critical situation occurs in the unit it is simple to isolate that 
unit from the global grid to prevent the crisis from propagating 
to other sections of the grid, which happens easily for 
cascading failures. Modularity also allows the different agents 
within the microgrid to tune themselves and adapt to use the 
decision models and strategies that optimize resource usage 
and maximize efficiency for that particular microgrid, with its 
own topology, organization and operation.  
Management 
Agent 
Control 
Agent 
DER 
Agent 
User 
Agent 
Device 
Agent 
Environment 
Agent 
Management 
Layer 
Middle 
Layer 
Physical 
Layer 
Figure 2. Graphical representation of communication 
between layers 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

B. Scalability 
Separation into well-defined independent autonomous 
units simplifies the process of testing at the unit level. 
Integration testing, referring to testing how the modules 
coordinate and integrate together, is also facilitated. The 
design supports the scalability of the system, because every 
microgrid enjoys autonomy in that all the subordinate agents 
in the microgrid report to their management agents and 
communication 
is 
done 
exclusively 
between 
elected 
management agents in each microgrid. This means that if we 
verify that a number of units work properly when tested 
independently and also work properly together when tested 
through integration testing, that is good evidence that adding 
more units would also scale well.  The main purpose of our 
design is to allow for easy scaling of the system. With our 
approach we can create a larger macrogrid by connecting 
several microgrids together. It is convenient for a user to 
create a simulation of a large grid by developing several 
different microgrids in the simulator, followed by connecting 
them together.  
Once a user has generated several microgrids and 
established connections between them, the simulator should 
give him/her some flexibility on how to run those microgrids. 
Many microgrids could be set to run on the same computer or 
one microgrid per computer. Therefore, the only limits to the 
scalability of the system are the resources available to the user. 
The simulator itself shouldn’t have specific limits, since 
different instances of it can be run to support each microgrid, 
and the microgrids if connected can communicate and interact 
with each other. 
C. Local and Global Decision Making  
In designing a distributed control system, it is often very 
difficult to coordinate effective local and global decision 
making. For example, in distributed systems, if agents are only 
able to communicate with neighboring agents, there is a severe 
restriction on the quality and quantity of the data that can be 
collected. For local decisions this restriction of data is 
acceptable for the decisions that are correspondingly limited in 
scope, but for global decisions this data restriction can easily 
result in ineffective and potentially harmful decisions. 
However, centralizing decision making and forcing the nodes 
to report to and be controlled by a single entity is also 
problematic due to excessive communication requirements. 
Our design combines the two extreme approaches by allowing 
local microgrid-based decisions to be handled locally, while 
still supporting certain global interactions.  
Separating the extremely large and complex electrical grid 
system into small independent microgrids facilitates effective 
local decision making. These decisions are handled by the 
management agents contained in every microgrid. These 
agents constantly receive data reflecting the status of the local 
microgrid in near real time, and therefore are enabled to make 
decisions that optimize the local performance of the microgrid. 
However, there are circumstances under which it is desirable 
for microgrids to adjust their level of autonomy. This tuning of 
autonomy levels depends greatly on the specific decision 
model in effect in the management agents. We describe this in 
more detail in the next section.  
 
 
In the electrical grid, it is highly desirable to distribute 
decision-making.  Our design allows each microgrid to 
essentially act as a single node in the larger grid. For example, 
If an individual microgrid requires electrical power from 
outside, it can communicate and negotiate with its connected 
neighbors establish a contract for that power. Under outage 
conditions, a microgrid node can island itself from its 
neighbors to avoid propagation of the disruption. Islanding to 
avoid cascading failures is described in [19]. A key advantage 
of a Smart Grid is the ability to access an open market for 
power with speed and agility [20]. This means that a microgrid 
node that requires additional power can access the power 
market, select its preferred provider based on attributes such as 
price or location, and then negotiate an automated contract 
with the provider in near real time. This ability can make 
significant advances in removing inefficiencies that are 
pervasive in the standard grid. 
V. 
DECISION MODEL INDEPENDENCE 
We envision that the true promise of the Smart Grid lies in the 
development of multiple types of decision models that carry 
out their calculations automatically and trigger actions that are 
appropriate to the situation with little or no human 
intervention. The following types of decisions are candidates 
for automation: 
 
Power rerouting. When devices or power lines fail, 
models that are equipped with details of the network 
topology and distribution costs and parameters can be 
charged with rerouting power along alternative 
pathways. The decisions must avoid exceeding the 
capacities of the available lines and devices, honor 
reliability requirements, and head off possibilities for 
cascading failures. 
 
Resource allocation. When it is critical to rapidly 
access new or reserve power supply sources, the 
decisions must consider many available combinations 
and prioritize them in terms of their advantages and 
disadvantages. Cost, transmission distance and routing 
options, risks and reliability, and contract terms are all 
factors that must be included in parameterizing these 
models. 
 
Dynamic pricing. When it is advantageous to shift 
power sources or limit power consumption at 
prescribed times to achieve cost savings, dynamic 
pricing models can negotiate and establish new power 
supply schedules at reduced cost. 
An important new innovation of our simulation framework 
is that of supporting the decision models independently within 
the design. By placing the decision model agents on an 
independent layer, the monitoring and action-oriented agents 
can carry out their functions with no encumbrance from 
extensive special interactions and communications. This is 
Figure 3. Local and Global Control Interactions  
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

accomplished 
through 
middleware 
that 
adheres 
to 
communication standards between the decision support agents 
and the others.  
A. Decision Process 
The management agents play a central role in the decision-
making process. Management agents receive extensive near-
real time data that characterizes the state of the system. The 
management agents are equipped with meta-level reasoning 
capabilities that determine if the current state of the grid is 
acceptable or in need of healing. In the latter case, it generates 
a strategy that is evaluated by calling upon decision model 
agents that carry out and return results aimed at corrective 
actions. 
Multiple decision models have been designed and 
prototyped and are at some stage of maturity. These include 
the following:  
 
Integer linear programming. These models are capable 
of identifying optimal rerouting options and resource 
allocations. They are designed for decomposition so 
that local management agents can invoke only the 
portions of the global model that pertains to their 
microgrid. 
 
Fuzzy logic. These models are based on fuzzy set 
membership functions that capture degrees of fit with 
key resource allocation parameters, such as cost, 
distance, risk and reliability. The fuzzy sets drive a 
rule-based expert system that produces the suggested 
allocations. Although heuristic in nature, this type of 
decision model can function very quickly and easily in 
near-real time decision making. 
 
Bayesian Belief Networks. These models are based on 
probabilities associated with system states. These 
models are capable of polling the grid for additional 
information that forms the basis for producing posterior 
probabilities with enhanced accuracy. 
 
Market-driven pricing models. These models work 
within a maket economy in which energy resources are 
traded. This type of model includes dynamic pricing 
based on smart building and smart meter infrastructure, 
and provides an area of great promise in improving 
grid performance and efficiency. 
In general, state variable data is made available via 
middleware in an Application Programming Interface (API). A 
key advantage of this approach is that researchers are free to 
readily test the models above as well as any other developed 
decision model. The model builder must convert data from the 
API to match the data types of the decision model. This 
method is analogous to the presentation layer in the OSI 
networking model. 
 
After a decision model is invoked, it has defined a set of 
actions and corrective behaviors that can ultimately be carried 
out middle layer agents. 
B. Adjustable Agent Autonomy 
In some cases it is desirable for certain agents to be only 
semi-autonomous in that they make decisions only in a context 
controlled by a management agent.  For example, a semi-
autonomous 
user 
agent 
may 
have 
preferences 
and 
configurations that can be compromised by a decision model 
for the betterment of the microgrid. Fully autonomous agents 
must adhere to their settings regardless of decision model 
recommendations. . Semi-autonomous agents have a “wait” 
state in which they take actions to deal with a problem only 
upon a directive from a management agent. 
Management agents can strategically choose to elevate the 
autonomy level of a semi-autonomous agent, based on the 
current decision model and system state. For example, a 
component of a management agent strategy to heal the system 
could be to promote some semi-autonomous agents to fully 
autonomous status either temporarily or permanently. The 
inherent flexibility of adjustable autonomy is a powerful 
capability that allows an agent-oriented system to respond to 
events that cannot be foreseen. It is critical that an agent-based 
system for a large complex system such as the Smart Grid 
support only agents with a high level of trust, to alleviate 
suspicions expressed by people that agent decisions could go 
awry. Adjustable, situated autonomy increases the level of 
trust. Thus, we believe that adjustable autonomy is an 
important element of decision making in the Smart Grid.  
The key advantage of Decision Model Independence is 
the ease in experimenting with and evaluating alternative 
decision models. Any single scenario can be evaluated with 
multiple models for side-by-side comparisons.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Distributed multi-agent control accomplishes modularity, 
scalability, and a balance between locally and globally 
effective decisions. We have discussed the advantages of an 
agent-based framework as a methodology for fully automating 
the electrical grid. By supporting decision models separate 
from the monitoring and action agents, alternative models can 
be easily evaluated. Adjustable and situated agent autonomy 
adds further depth and power to the design.  
VII. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Boughosn, S., P. Ranganathan, S. Salem, J. Tang, D. Loegering, 
and K. Nygard, Agent-Oriented Designs for a Self Healing 
Smart Grid, First IEEE International Conference on Smart Grid 
Communications, pp. 461-466, 2010.  
[2] Jennings, N. and Wooldridge, M., Agent-Oriented Software 
Engineering, Artificial Intelligence, vol. 117, pp. 277-296, 2000. 
[3] Pipattanasomporn, M. H.. Feroze, and S. Rahman, Multi-Agent 
Systems 
in 
a 
Distributed 
Smart 
Grid: 
Design 
and 
Implementation, 
IEEE 
Power 
Systems 
Conference 
and 
Exposition (PSCE’09), pp. 1-8, 2009. 
[4] Noorian, S. , H. Hosseini, and M. Ulieru, “An Autonomous 
Agent-based Framework for Self-Healing Power Grid,” IEEE 
Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, pp. 1983-1988, 
2009. 
[5] Karnouskos, S. and T. Nass de Holanda, Simulation of a Smart 
Grid City with Software Agents, Third European Symposium on 
Computer Modeling and Simualtion, pp. 424-429, 2009. 
[6] Solanki, J., S. Khushalani, and N. N. Schulz, “A Multi-agent 
Solution 
to 
Distribution 
Systems 
Restoration,” 
IEEE 
Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1026–1034, 
2007. 
Figure 4. Decision Model Design & Decision Process in our Framework 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

[7] Lemmon, M., G. Venkataramanan, G., and P. Chapman, Using 
Microgrids as a Path towards Smart Grids. Position Paper, ICEE 
Workshop, 2009. 
[8] Nygard, K., S. Bou Ghosn, D. Loegering, M. Chowdhury, M. 
Khan, R. McCulloch, A. Pandey, and P. Rangnathan, 
Implementing a Flexible Simulation of a Self-Healing Smart 
Grid, International Conference on Modeling, Simulation and 
Visualization Methods, pp. 106-111, 2011. 
[9] Rahman, S. M., Pipattanasomporn, and Y. Teklu, Intelligent 
DistributedAutonomous Power Systems (IDAPS), IEEE PES 
Annual General Meeting, Tampa, Florida, pp. 1-8, 2007. 
[10] Nagata, T. and H. Sasaki, “A Multi-agent Approach to Power 
System Restoration,” IEEE Trans. on Power Systems, vol. 17, 
pp. 457–462, 2002. 
[11] Nagata, T., H. Fujita, and H. Sasaki, “Decentralized approach to 
normal operations for power system network”, Proc. 13th 
International Conf. on Intelligent Systems Application on Power 
Systems, Cambridge, pp. 407–412, 2005. 
[12] Momoh, J. and O. Diouf, “Optimal Reconfiguration of the Navy 
Ship Power System Using Agents,” Proc. IEEE PES 
Transmission and Distribution Conf. and Exhibition, Dresden, 
pp. 562–567, 2006,. 
[13] Nordman, M. and M. Lehtonen, “Distributed Agent-based State 
Estimation for Electrical Distribution Networks,” IEEE Trans. 
on Power Systems, vol. 20, pp. 52–658, 2005. 
[14] Solanki, J., S. Khushalani, and N. Schulz, “A multi-agent 
solution to distribution systems restoration,” IEEE Trans. on 
Power Systems, vol. 22, pp. 1026–1034, 2007. 
[15]  Sutanto, D, Y. Ye, and M. Zhang, “Design of an Intelligent 
Self-Healing 
Smart 
Grid 
using 
a 
Hybrid 
Multi-Agent 
Framework”, Journal of Electronic Science and Technology, vol. 
9, pp. 17-22, March 2011. 
[16] Hossack, J., S. Mcanhur, J. Mcdonald, J. Stokoe, and T. 
Cumming, A Multi-agent Approach to Power System 
Disturbance Diagnosis, In Proc. International Conference on 
Power System Management and Control,, Vol. 488, pp. 317-322, 
2002. 
[17] McArthur, S., E. Davidson, J. Hossack, and R. McDonald, 
Automating Power System Fault Diagnosis through Multi-agent 
System Technology,  Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences, pp. 947-954, 2004. 
[18] Camponogara, E. and S.N. Talukdar, Agent Cooperation: 
Distributed Control Applications, International Conference on 
Intelligent System Application to Power Systems, pp. 1-6, April 
1999. 
[19] Pahwa, S., A. Hodges, C. Scoglio, and S.Wood, Topological 
Analysis of the Power Grid and Mitigation Strategies Against 
Cascading Failures, IEEE International Systems Conference, 
2010. 
[20] Ketter, W., J. Collins, J., and C. Block, “Smart Grid Economics: 
Policy Guidance Through Competitive Simulation," ERIM 
Reprot Series, 2010. 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

