Spatial Analysis to Identify the Need for Additional EV Charging 
Vivian Sultan, Benjamin Pezzillo, Roxana Cuevas, Solange Ruiz, Jinhua Tang, Amanda Acosta 
College of Business and Economics 
California State University 
Los Angeles, USA 
email: vsultan3@calstatela.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Los 
Angeles 
County’s 
electric-vehicle 
(EV) 
charging-station infrastructure is growing rapidly due to 
increased environmental awareness. Implementing city-wide 
infrastructure is costly, and funding is limited. Spatial analysis 
can offer useful insights by visualizing existing EV charging-
station infrastructure along with several other factors to 
determine where and how many EV charging stations are 
needed. Uneven EV charging-station availability complicates 
consumers’ decisions to switch to driving EV. This analysis 
examines the uneven distribution of EV charging stations, the 
demand for more charging stations, and the EV-to-charger 
ratio to fill in the spatial discrepancies with charging stations 
in Los Angeles County. 
Keywords—Electric vehicles; charging stations; Spatial 
analysis; environmental awareness. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
For most EV drivers, switching to driving EVs has not 
been simple. However, the difficulties drivers face are not 
uniform, primarily due to affluence, population, and unequally 
distributed charging stations throughout Los Angeles County. 
To help spread EV driving, our analysis report suggests 
distributing more charging stations, preferably quick and 
vehicle-brand-neutral charging stations, in areas with spatial 
disparities, particularly in lower-income communities and 
areas where EV ownership is high in comparison to EV-
charging-station availability. This would help smooth the 
transition for new EV drivers and reduce range anxiety. The 
same goal should also be applied to other communities. This is 
an important study because Los Angeles is among the top 
cities in California making the switch to EVs. 
California has rapidly increased the number of zero-
emission vehicles in the state, 1,300% in six years and from 
25,000 in 2012 to more than 350,000 today. California 
continues to lead this trend as it has the highest EV 
penetration in the country, 40% of all EVs in the United 
States. To promote EV use and combat the lack of EV 
charger availability, California enacted Executive Order B-
48-18. The order calls for “all State entities [to] work with 
the private sector and all appropriate levels of government to 
put at least 5 million zero-emission vehicles on California 
roads by 2030” and “all appropriate levels of government to 
spur the construction and installation of 200 hydrogen 
fueling stations and 250,000 zero-emission vehicle chargers, 
including 10,000 direct current fast chargers, by 2025” [1]. 
The Biden-⁠Harris Electric Vehicle Charging Action Plan 
was created to push American leadership on using such clean 
cars as EVs. President Biden set an EV market share goal of 
50% in the United States by 2030 and further explained the 
issue with the current EV charging network of over 100,000 
public chargers as they operate “with different plug types, 
payment options, data availability, and hardware hookups.” 
The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law “includes $5 billion in 
formula funding for states with a goal to build a national 
charging 
network” 
and 
“provides 
$2.5 
billion 
for 
communities and corridors through a competitive grant 
program that will support innovative approaches and ensure 
that charger deployment meets Administration priorities such 
as supporting rural charging, improving local air quality and 
increasing 
EV 
charging 
access 
in 
disadvantaged 
communities.” Moving forward, using the EV Charging 
Action Plan will establish a more uniform approach to EV 
charger accessibility while providing greater convenience for 
customers and offering increased confidence for the industry, 
which should promote the use of EVs in return [2]. 
In Los Angeles, the EV-to-charger ratio is currently 5.6. 
By 2030, this ratio is expected to grow to 37.4 as the EV 
industry is projected to grow immensely. Under the Biden 
administrations Plan for EV Infrastructure, the ratio goal is 
18.7. Our research provides a means to reach this goal. 
The paper is structured as follows. Section II reviews the 
literature on this topic. Section III presents the problem. 
Section IV presents the data. Section V presents the system 
used and the methodology. Section VI discusses the results 
and Section VII discusses the project’s limitations. Section 
VIII concludes. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
One factor we analyzed is charger locations in lower 
income communities. Identifying and prioritizing EV 
planning and extending the economic and environmental 
benefits to those who need them most is vital, with the focus 
on places with lower incomes and high environmental 
pollutants. Bui et al. [3] presents a figure showing the west 
side of Los Angeles with more cumulative EV registrations 
than the northeast and south. After adding our EV-ownership 
data, the gaps clearly represented EV ownership disparities. 
Peer-to-Peer Car Charging (P2C2) offers a scalable method 
for charging EVs that reduces the requirement for complex 
charging infrastructure. The idea is to work with a cloud-
based control system to coordinate EVs so that they can 
share chargers while enroute. This would reduce the barriers 
and limitations consumers face in transitioning to EVs 
without having more local EV charging stations [4]. 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

In contrast, our proposal is to carefully place more fast-
charging stations. We start by outlining the three tiers of 
equipment used to recharge battery EVs. To help in the 
deployment of the variety of vehicles being offered, all three 
levels of charging infrastructure, from basic, low-cost Level 
1 to DC fast chargers, should be built. “DC fast chargers will 
be important to drivers who need to quickly recharge their 
depleted batteries. Using fast chargers, most vehicles will 
recharge up to 80 percent of capacity in a ½ hour or less” [5]. 
This will help reduce range anxiety. A study in Ireland 
conducted a sensitivity analysis and discovered that the 
overall EV cost is highly sensitive to the daily availability of 
EV charging and the number of charging stations [6]. As an 
alternative to using big data, [7] used a forecasting model to 
calculate the demand for charging electric vehicles. The 
report used a decision tree for classification, a relational 
analysis to find influential elements, and cluster analysis to 
categorize traffic patterns [7]. This proposal would enable 
system engineers to foresee the need for EV charging based 
on historical traffic and weather data. Abo-Khalil et al. [8] 
evaluated the impact of random factors connected to 
vehicles’ prior driving distances and the time at which they 
connected to the electrical grid to adjust the capacity of 
charging stations. Another issue is that neighborhoods in 
different counties of California with a large Black or 
Hispanic populations have less access to public EV chargers. 
The results from [8] show that the distance off the highway 
or freeway is negatively correlated with charging-station 
density. Los Angeles County was not included in Chih-Wei 
and Fingerman’s analysis [9]. In Orange County, [10] 
created a machine-learning framework to investigate spatial 
discrepancies in EV-charging-station deployments using a 
predictive methodology. “The first was to pinpoint the 
crucial socioeconomic variables, and the second was to use 
these elements plus ground truth information from current 
charging station placements to estimate future EV charging 
station density using machine learning techniques at various 
spatial scales and compare their predictive performance to 
determine the best spatial resolution.” Optimally sited 
charging stations are required for long-distance demand in 
heavily traveled areas like Los Angeles and New York. He et 
al. [11] analyzed long-distance travel data using spatial 
analysis and an algorithm demonstrating that a 100-mile 
range is required to prevent problems. Our study will 
determine the quantity and placement of fast charging 
stations for various scenarios, better planning, and more 
environmentally friendly transportation. 
In the past, analyses have assessed the economic benefits 
of newly built public charging stations. These analyses have 
considered charging revenues and costs, land-rental costs, and 
investment costs. Charging revenues and costs are calculated 
based on electricity price, the cost of the selected electric 
vehicle supply equipment, and charging demand covered by 
the public charging station [12]. A common question in these 
studies is how much charging infrastructure is needed in each 
area and where charging infrastructure should be built. These 
question is crucial because these decisions are associated with 
large investments and have a long-term influence on adapting 
electric mobility [13]. We set out to answer them in our 
research. Careful studies have also been undertaken to 
identify the communities that EV charging 
station 
implementation 
tends 
to 
overlook. 
However, 
the 
measurement of “underserved” communities shifts according 
to the type of research and, therefore, could have many 
definitions. Zhou et al. [14], for example, looked at 
communities that experience high transportation energy costs, 
and high exposure to pollutants, which lead to public health 
issues and limited access to clean and reliable transportation. 
These factors were used to categorize underserved 
community needs. One point is certain: Lower-income EV 
drivers are more likely to rely on public charging [15], in 
large part because private EV charging stations are limited to 
homeowners. However, it is critical to implement a steady 
plan for EV infrastructure that not only supports current EV 
owners’ needs, but is able to accommodate future EV owners. 
EV ownership requires access to both public- and home-
charging infrastructure so that they can feel confident in 
transitioning to EV ownership without fear that their driving 
behavior will be curtailed due to refueling limitations [16]. 
As society moves towards using EVs, suppliers must 
work to meet consumer needs and demands. To sustain EV 
commuting, a well-running and coordinated electric-charger 
infrastructure must meet the charging demand. Aside from 
an influx of EV owners, we should also expect more EV 
owners to use public charging stations because charging a 
single EV can increase household electricity consumption by 
50% [7]. As public-charger demand grows, these stations 
will become essential and must have availability to build 
consumer confidence in their greater adoption [17]. An 
additional 10–20% EV market penetration would increase 
the daily peak electricity demand by 17.9–35.8% [18]. Such 
high electricity peaks may cause outages and other issues. 
High EV penetration and the resulting losses in the network 
would consequently impose more complexity on the solution 
of the EV-charger application problem [19]. To solve these 
issues, calculated maps are needed indicating the optimal 
city areas where charging stations could be placed according 
to specific scoring levels (which, of course, depend on the 
weighting factors). Space limitations and the maximum 
acceptable distance from the electricity network must also be 
considered before choosing new EV charger locations [20]. 
Zhou et al. [6] investigated the relationships between 
income and affluence levels and the tendency to acquire an 
EV in Ireland and examined the private EV-household-
charger population’s characteristics using a regression model 
and spatial analysis. The Ireland study used information on 
EV household chargers rather than EV ownership due to data 
limitations. “The results indicate that 1) urban areas are more 
likely to see higher concentrations of EV ownership, 2) an 
income and equity gap exists …. This finding is very 
important because it suggests that lower-income categories 
may have a financial barrier to shifting to EVs” [21]. 
It is very common to use ArcGIS tools to identify 
suitable locations to install EV charging stations. For 
example, [22] suggested installing DC fast-charging stations 
at public libraries and parks within 0.5 miles of major 
freeways based on the GIS data [23], and Chen suggested 
setting EV charging stations close to McDonald’s and 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Starbucks using geospatial datasets [24]. While the 
development of EV charging stations is in progress, several 
studies have noted that the accessibility of charging stations 
is one of the barriers to the adoption of EVs, especially for 
people with low incomes and those who live in multifamily 
housing [25]. The distribution of EV charging stations was 
uneven [26]. In some cities, the location of EV charging 
stations was not determined by population density, but by 
people’s income [27], and it has caused the issue of 
inequitable access to EV charging stations. When the 
government is involved in developing EV charging stations, 
it becomes essential to “distribute the benefits of facilities to 
all stakeholders” [28]. 
Our underlying theory is that EV charging stations are 
unevenly distributed throughout the city of Los Angeles. It is 
commonly seen throughout past research that affluent areas 
tend to be better equipped with EV infrastructure. Although 
previous analysis assessed EV-charging-station placement, 
we took a distinct approach because our research analyzes 
several factors, including current EV stations, area median 
income, EVs per Zip Code, and population. Previous 
research only analyzes one or two of these factors. We 
decided to combine these factors in addition to calculating a 
current need based on the EV-to-charger ratio, allowing us a 
better understanding of where and how many EV chargers 
need to be placed moving forward. 
Our fundamental approach is to analyze the correlation 
between EV-charger distribution, area income, and EV 
ownership in each area. This will help determine where and 
how many EV charging stations are needed to meet the 
current administration’s goal. 
III. 
PROBLEM DEFINITION 
California has the most EVs in the country, 40% of all 
EVs in the United States. The problem is our current EV 
infrastructure is unevenly distributed and will fail to meet the 
needs and demands of future EV drivers. Since the recent 
legislature, [1] and [2] have been enacted, we expect an 
influx of EV drivers, and therefore, more EV chargers must 
be readily available to meet the public’s demand. 
Currently, Los Angeles County still has areas with minimal 
to no EV-charging availability, although the area has EV 
owners. To promote EV use and combat limited EV-charger 
availability, we must determine what areas need EV chargers 
based on income, population, and demand. The goal is to 
identify areas where the population owns EVs and has 
insufficient or no EV chargers. With our analysis, we set out to 
learn how many and where additional EV charging stations are 
needed based on the ratio of EV ownership to EV charging 
station. We investigate how and if EV charger placement is 
disproportionately affected by income, population, or current 
EV ownership. Finally, we calculate an EV-to-charger ratio for 
each Los Angeles Zip Code to identify specific needs, aiming 
for a goal of 18.7 EVs per charging station. 
IV. 
DATA SELECTION AND ACQUISITION 
For our analysis, we used data from the National 
Renewable Energy Laboratory’s developer network to 
identify alternative fuel stations in the city of Los Angeles. 
We also used data from the California Department of Motor 
Vehicles that identifies vehicle ownership by Zip Code and 
fuel type [29]. Two datasets: City Boundaries and Zip Codes, 
came from Los Angeles GeoHub [30] [31]. Lastly, we used 
area median-income shapefile data from Los Angeles Mayor 
Eric Garcetti’s GeoHub site and total estimates from the Los 
Angeles Almanac. 
Alternative fuel-station data, vehicle ownership data, and 
Los Angeles Almanac data were downloaded as csv files. 
City Boundaries and Zip Codes were imported to ArcGIS as 
shapefiles. A shapefile was initially used for area median 
income. A second source of median-income data was located 
and manually converted to a csv file. 
To begin our analysis, we had to solve problems with our 
data sets. First, our vehicle-ownership file did not contain 
unique identifiers, so we added these manually before 
importing the data into ArcGIS. Second, the same data set 
only contained a Zip Code as a location identifier rather than 
latitude and longitude; therefore, to map the vehicle 
ownership detail within each Zip Code on the map, we ran 
the ArcGIS geocode function to assign coordinates to each 
Zip Code. In order to perform our OLS analysis, we needed a 
summary of EV data, a summary of EV-charger data, and 
area median-income data in one file. Since our initial area 
median-income data was only a shapefile, we located another 
source of detailed income data by Zip Code and manually 
created a csv table containing all three elements. 
V. 
SYSTEM AND METHODOLOGY 
We chose ArcGIS Pro, version 3.0, to perform our 
analysis because it provides intuitive tools that would aid in 
visualizing and manipulating our data to reveal patterns or 
correlations with EV-charger placement and other factors. 
To evaluate the current distribution of EV charging 
stations in Los Angeles County, we created a map with three 
layers: EV charging stations, city boundaries, and Zip Codes. 
Density analysis shows the concentration or clustering of 
points or lines on a map. To get a whole picture of the 
distribution of EV charging stations in Los Angeles County, 
we used Kernel Density. This tool “calculates a magnitude-
per-unit area from point or polyline features using a kernel 
function to fit a smoothly tapered surface to each point or 
polyline” [23]. We performed kernel density analysis on the 
data of EV charging stations in Los Angeles County and 
evaluated how these charging stations were distributed in the 
whole county area. 
In addition to kernel density analysis, mean center, 
median center, and directional distribution (standard 
deviational ellipse) are common useful spatial statistics 
methods to measure geographic distributions. “Standard 
deviational ellipse has long served as a versatile GIS tool for 
delineating the geographic distribution of concerned 
features” [32]. Kemtec and Knez used standard deviational 
ellipse with other spatial statistics tools, such as mean and 
median center, to evaluate the location of EV charging 
stations in Slovenia [26]. We used mean center to identify 
the geographic center of EV charging stations in Los 
Angeles County. Median center helped us locate “the point 
that minimizes Euclidean distance” to all EV charging 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

stations in Los Angeles County [33]. Directional distribution 
(standard deviational ellipse) helped us find the central 
tendency, dispersion, and directional trends of EV charging 
stations in Los Angeles County. 
Summarize Within, a statistics tool in ArcGIS, very 
effectively allows users to “overlay a polygon layer with 
another layer to summarize [and] calculate attribute field 
statistics about the features within the polygons” [23]. We 
used this tool to investigate the locations of EV charging 
stations in each city and each area by Zip Code. For insight 
into the number of EV charging stations in each city, we set 
the city boundaries as Input Polygons and set EV charging 
stations as Input Summary Features, and then calculated the  
total EV charging stations in each city. Similarly, we 
calculated the total EV charging stations in each area based 
on Zip Codes. 
We then calculated EV-to-charger ratios within each Zip 
Code using Summarize Within within Zip Code boundary 
polygons. We partially joined the summarized tables 
containing the EV-ownership detail and EV-charger detail 
and added a field that divided the sum of EV ownership by 
the sum of EV charging stations. For the purpose of 
identifying critical null values in Zip Codes where EV 
ownership is high and there are no EV charging stations, we 
manually assigned a −1 value to distinguish these areas in 
our visualization. We added another field to calculate the 
number of EV stations needed to bring the currently 
calculated ratio up or down to 18.7. With this newly created 
table, we performed a Hot Spot analysis to identify 
concentrations of high and low EV charger placement. 
Additionally, we used Optimized Outlier Analysis to identify 
areas of high and low EV charger placement, as well as to 
identify areas of high and low EV charger concentration. 
Finally, we created a manual table containing summarized 
data per Zip Code for EV ownership, EV-charger placement, 
and area median income. With this, we use OLS to find 
correlations between EV-charger placement and area median 
income or EV ownership. 
VI. 
RESULTS/DISCUSSION 
Figure 1 presents a map of Los Angeles County that 
displays EV charging stations and population density. The 
map was created to show disparities between areas with high 
and low population access to EV chargers. 
Figure 2 presents a close-up group showing high-
population to high-EV-charger density in Los Angeles 
County based on Figure 1. Areas with “high population 
density” are areas with a population of 22,000 or more and 
are shown as orange to yellow shades on the map. 
Figure 3 is a close-up group that displays low-population 
to low-EV-charger density in Los Angeles County based on 
Figure 1. Areas with “low population density” are areas with 
a population of 22,000 or less and are shown as purple to 
black shades on the map. 
These two figures show disparities between areas with 
high population access to EV chargers and low population 
access to EV chargers. The average distance from EV 
charger to EV charger in an area with high population 
density is 0.341 miles. The same average distance in areas 
with low population density is 0.913 miles. This shows an 
accessibility disparity, proving that areas with higher 
populations have more access to EV chargers. This is an 
issue because high population density does not necessarily 
point to EV-charger use. 
 
 
 
The kernel density of EV charging stations in Los 
Angeles County (Figure 4) shows the highest densities of EV 
charging stations are in Downtown Los Angeles; others are 
in Pasadena, Hollywood, Beverly Hills, Santa Monica, Los 
Angeles International Airport, and Long Beach. The western 
regions of Los Angeles County have more charging stations 
than the eastern regions. 
Figure 5 shows that the mean and median centers of EV 
charging stations are located near Downtown Los Angeles, 
 
Figure 1. Los Angeles County EV-to-charger ratios and populations. 
 
Figure 2. High-population to high-EV-charger density in Los Angeles. 
 
Figure 3. Low-population to low-EV-charger density in Los Angeles. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

and the standard deviational ellipse shows the first standard 
deviation area: Around 68% of EV charging stations are in 
this ellipse. 
 
 
As the distribution of EV charging stations in each city 
shows (Figure 6), most EV charging stations are in the city 
of Los Angeles, the red area. The bar chart (Figure 7) shows 
a total of 3,028 chargers there, which accounts for 34% of 
the county’s total EV charging stations. 
The distribution of EV charging stations in the area by 
Zip Code (Figure 8) shows how they are located in each Zip 
Code. The area in red (light yellow) indicates more (fewer) 
charging stations. Table I lists the top 10 areas by the number 
of charging stations, and it clearly shows that most of these 
areas are from the top four cities in which most EV charging 
stations are located, Los Angeles, Santa Monica, Long 
Beach, and Pasadena. 
 
 
TABLE I. TOP 10 ZIP CODE AREAS BY THE NUMBER OF EV CHARGERS 
 
Zip Code 
City 
Number of EV 
Charging Stations 
1 
90012 
Los Angeles 
351 
2 
90045 
Los Angeles 
200 
3 
90802 
Long Beach 
193 
4 
90404 
Santa Monica 
191 
5 
91355 
Santa Clarita 
185 
6 
90028 
Los Angeles 
175 
7 
90007 
Los Angeles 
162 
8 
90401 
Santa Monica 
143 
9 
90245 
El Segundo 
143 
10 
91125 
Pasadena 
139 
 
Our analysis found an uneven distribution of EV 
charging stations in Los Angeles County. Most charging 
stations are located in the western region of the county, 
concentrated in Downtown Los Angeles. This finding 
 
Figure 4. Kernel density of EV charging stations in Los Angeles County. 
 
Figure 5. Mean center, median center, and directional distribution of EV 
charging stations in Los Angeles County. 
 
Figure 6. Distribution of EV charging stations in each city. 
 
Figure 7. Top 10 cities by the number of total EV charging stations. 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

suggests that the accessibility of EV charging stations varies 
by area. People living around Downtown Los Angeles have 
more convenient access to charging stations. 
 
OLS of the manually created table contains the sum of 
EV charging stations as a dependent variable and the sum of 
EV ownership and area median income as explanatory 
variables. Results R2 multiple of 8% explained no correlation 
among these variables in Los Angeles County (Figure 9). 
To complete the following analysis, we calculated the 
EV-to-charger ratio by dividing the sum of EV ownership 
within each Zip Code by the sum of EV charging stations to 
determine a ratio within each Zip Code (Table II). By doing 
so, we will identify specific Zip Codes where the ratio is 
null, indicating EVs but no charging stations, or Zip Codes 
where the EV-to-charger ratio is high and in need of 
additional stations to bring the ratio down to the current 
administrations’ goal of 18.7. 
TABLE II. SAMPLE DATA OF LOS ANGELES COUNTY EV OWNERSHIP TO 
EV CHARGING STATION RATIO CALCULATIONS 
Zip 
Code 
Sum of Electric 
Vehicles 
Sum of EV 
charging stations 
EV to charging 
station Ratio 
90059 
36 
5 
7.2 
91301 
180 
5 
36.0 
91775 
335 
0 
−1* 
91801 
345 
9 
38.3 
90007 
68 
65 
1.0 
*Indicates placeholder number not actual calculation 
A hot/cold spot analysis of EV charger locations that 
only includes areas where the ratio is greater than 18.7 as 
proposed by the current administration (Figure 10) shows a 
higher concentration of EV chargers in northwest Zip Codes 
from Los Angeles city center and low concentrations in Zip 
Code South East of the Los Angeles city center. 
 
 
An optimized-outlier analysis of EV charger locations 
that only includes areas where the EV-to-charger ratio is 
greater than 18.7 as proposed by the current presidential 
administration (Figure 11) highlights areas of urgent need for 
EV charging stations in light blue and red. Light blue 
highlights output features with clusters of low sums of EV 
chargers, and red highlights output features with high 
outliers within a cluster of low sums of EV-charger values. 
A visualization of the EV-to-charger ratio in all areas 
broken out by Zip Code (Figure 12) indicates that the 
majority of Los Angeles Zip Codes falls significantly far 
above the proposed ratio of 18.7. This means there are more 
than 18.7 EVs per charger in these Zip Code, which could 
lead to availability issues. 
Upon identifying areas in need of more EV chargers, we 
identified how many EV charges are needed within each Zip 
Code in areas where the EV-to-charger ratio is greater than 
18.7 (Figure 13). 
 Figure 14 presents an identified area in need of more EV 
chargers to display the specific locations of existing EV 
chargers. Our calculation shows that these sample areas in 
 
Figure 8. Distribution of EV Charging Stations in the Area by Zip Code. 
 
Figure 9. OLS analysis of Los Angeles EV charging station placement 
using AMI and vehicle ownership as explanatory variables. 
 
Figure 10. Hot/cold spot analysis of EV chargers within areas of Los 
Angeles with calculated EV-to-charger ratio greater than 18.7. 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Los Angeles require between 19 to 24 new EV chargers to 
bring the current EV-to-charger ratio down to 18.7 and 
ensure availability. 
 
 
 
 
VII. PROJECT LIMITATIONS 
With access to more detailed spatial data, our analysis 
could be more in depth. For example, access to privately 
owned EV charger providers, such as Tesla, EVgo, and 
ChargePoint, would allow us to analyze their trend, peak 
time, charge frequency, and public reviews to correlate 
public preferences and determine the need for higher quality 
and more reliable charger placements. Using a dataset within 
ArcGIS pro that does not contain latitude and longitude 
limits the analysis. Since vehicle ownership data is personal 
and private, our dataset was limited to quantities per Zip 
Code and therefore the rest of our analysis was modeled 
around Zip Code analysis. Exact location data would have 
provided exact walking distances and charger accessibility. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
Our analysis was able to determine by visual observation 
that areas in Los Angeles with high populations tend to have 
more EV chargers. Kernel-density, spatial, hot-spot, and 
outlier analysis confirmed that the distribution of EV 
chargers in Los Angeles County is uneven: Areas north and 
west of Los Angeles city center have higher concentrations 
of EV chargers, while areas east and south of the city center 
have significantly lower concentrations. Most EV chargers 
are located in the city of Los Angeles, especially in 
Downtown Los Angeles. Such an uneven distribution of EV 
chargers would cause inequitable access issues for people 
living and working in other areas. 
Upon categorizing each Zip Code by EV-to-charger ratio, 
we specifically identified areas where additional EV chargers 
are needed and, more importantly, determined how many EV 
chargers would be required within each Zip Code. For Los 
Angeles to become fully electric by 2035, investment in EV 
infrastructure will require the implementation of many new 
EV chargers to support current and future EV drivers. 
Ensuring that the EV-to-charger ratio is lowered and remains 
low will ensure that drivers are able to access EV chargers 
when they need them. 
 
Figure 11. Optimized outlier analysis of EV chargers in areas of Los 
Angeles with calculated EV-to-charger ratios greater than 18.7. 
 
Figure 12. Los Angeles County EV-to-charger ratio all areas. 
 
Figure 13. Quantity of new EV charging stations needed within areas of 
calculated ratio greater than 18.7 in Los Angeles County. 
 
Figure 14. Sample area in Los Angeles County with identified quantity of 
new EV charging stations needed to meet goal ratio of 18.7. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Some possible extensions of this work are modeling EV 
penetration in different population areas and examining the 
distribution of vehicle-brand-neutral charging stations. Also, 
studies could examine the effects of encouraging low-income 
drivers to use EVs: Upfront costs for the drivers, the ecological 
impact of recycling batteries and mining the resources to 
make more batteries. Finally, more private data should be 
available at all granularities to improve on studies like this. 
REFERENCES 
[1] State of California. Governor Brown takes action to increase 
zero-emission vehicles, fund New Climate Investments. 
Governor Edmund G Brown Jr. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.ca.gov/archive/gov39/2018/01/26/governor-brown 
-takes-action-to-increase-zero-emission-vehicles-fund-new 
-climate-investments/index.html 
[2] The White House. Fact sheet: The Biden–Harris electric 
vehicle charging action plan. [Online]. Available from: https 
://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases 
/2021/12/13/fact-sheet-the-biden-harris-electric-vehicle 
-charging-action-plan/ 
[3] A. Bui, P. Slowik, and N. Lutsey. Los Angeles electric vehicle 
charging infrastructure needs and implications for zero-emission 
area planning. [Online]. Available from: https://theicct.org 
/publication/los-angeles-electric-vehicle-charging-infrastructure 
-needs-and-implications-for-zero-emission-area-planning/ 
[4] P. Chakraborty et al., “Addressing the range anxiety of battery 
electric vehicles with charging en route,” Sci. Rep., vol. 12, 
no. 1, pp. 1–15, 2022. 
[5] D. Mayfield. Siting electric vehicle charging stations. Ed. 
Carlotta Collette. Sustainable Transportation Strategies. 
[Online]. Available from: https://vacleancities.org/wp-content 
/uploads/Siting-EV-Charging-Stations-FINAL-12.pdf 
[6] G. Zhou, Z. Zhu, and S. Luo, “Location optimization of 
electric vehicle charging stations: Based on cost model and 
genetic algorithm,” Energy, vol. 247, art. 123437, 2022. 
[7] M. B. Arias and S. Bae, “Electric vehicle charging demand 
forecasting model based on big data technologies,” Appl. 
Energy, vol. 183, pp. 327–339, 2016. 
[8] A. G. Abo-Khalil et al., “Electric vehicle impact on energy 
industry, policy, technical barriers, and power systems,” Int. J. 
Thermofluids, vol. 13, art. 100134, 2022. 
[9] H. Chih-Wei and K. Fingerman, “Public electric vehicle charger 
access disparities across race and income,” Transp. Policy, vol. 
100, pp. 59–67, 2021, doi:10.1016/j.tranpol.2020.10.003 
[10] A. Roy and M. Law, “Examining spatial disparities in electric 
vehicle charging station placements using machine learning,” 
Sustain. Cities Soc., vol. 83, art. 103978, 2022. 
[11] Y. He, K. M. Kockelman, and K. A. Perrine, “Optimal 
locations of US fast charging stations for long-distance trip 
completion by battery electric vehicles,” J. Clean. Prod., vol. 
214, pp. 452–461, 2019. 
[12] H. Lin, et al., “Optimal planning of intra-city public charging 
stations,” Energy, vol. 238, art. 121948, 2022. 
[13] M. Gellrich, A. Block, and N. Leikert-Böhm, “Spatial and 
temporal patterns of electric vehicle charging station 
utilization: A nationwide case study of Switzerland,” ERIS, 
vol. 2, no. 2, art. 021003, 2022. doi:10.1088/2634-4505/ac6a09 
[14] Y. Zhou, D. Gohlke, M. Sansone, J. Kuiper, and M. P. Smith. 
Using mapping tools to prioritize electric vehicle charger 
benefits to underserved communities. No. ANL/ESD-22/10. 
Argonne National Lab. Argonne, IL (United States). 
[15] M. Nazari-Heris, A. Loni, S. Asadi, and B. Mohammadi-
Ivatloo, “Toward social equity access and mobile charging 
stations for electric vehicles: A case study in Los Angeles,” 
Appl. Energy, vol. 311, art. 118704, 2022. 
[16] S. LaMonaca and L. Ryan, “The state of play in electric 
vehicle charging services—A review of infrastructure 
provision, players, and policies,” Renewable Sustainable 
Energy Rev., vol. 154, art. 111733, 2022. 
[17] F. Avalos Jr, “An evaluation of electric vehicle charging 
stations with respect to functional consumer demand,” 
Doctoral dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles. 
[18] M. A. Quddus, O. Shahvari, M. Marufuzzaman, and S. D. 
Eksioglu, “Designing a reliable electric vehicle charging 
station expansion under uncertainty,” Int. J. Prod. Econ., vol. 
236, art. 108132, 2021. doi:10.1016/j.ijpe.2021.108132 
[19] H. Simorgh, H. Doagou‐Mojarrad, H. Razmi, and G. B. 
Gharehpetian, “Cost‐based optimal siting and sizing of 
electric vehicle charging stations considering demand 
response programmes,” IET Gener. Transm. Distrib., vol. 12, 
no. 8, pp. 1712–1720, 2018. 
[20] D. Gkatzoflias et al., Optimal allocation of electric vehicle charging 
infrastructure in cities and regions. The new technical research 
report of the Joint Research Centre of the European Commission, 
the European Commission’s in-house science service. 2016. 
[21] B. Caulfield, D. Furszyfer, A. Stefaniec, and A. Foley, 
“Measuring the equity impacts of government subsidies for 
electric vehicles,” Energy, vol. 248, art. 123588, 2022. 
[22] J. S. Jin, “Installing public electric vehicle charging stations: 
A site suitability analysis in Los Angeles County, California,” 
Doctoral dissertation, University of Southern California. 
[23] ArcMap. An overview of the Density toolset. [Online]. Available 
from: https://desktop.arcgis.com/en/arcmap/latest/tools/spatial 
-analyst-toolbox/an-overview-of-the-density-tools.htm 
[24] J. Y. L. Chen, “California public electric vehicle charging 
stations’ accessibility to amenities: A GIS network analysis 
approach.” Master's Projects and Capstones. [Online]. 
Available from: https://repository.usfca.edu/capstone/565 
[25] S. Hardman, K. Fleming, E. Khare, and M. M. Ramadan, “A 
perspective on equity in the transition to electric vehicles,” MIT Sci. 
Pol. Rev., vol. 2, pp. 46–54, 2021. doi:10.1088/2634-4505/ac6a09 
[26] M. Kmetec and M. Knez, “Electric vehicle charging stations 
coverage: A study of Slovenia,” Tehnički Vjesnik, vol. 29, no. 
1, pp. 285–292, 2022. 
[27] H. A. Khan, S. Price, C. Avraam, and Y. Dvorkin, “Inequitable 
access to EV charging infrastructure,” Electricity Journal, vol. 
35, no. 3, art. 107096, 2022. doi:10.1016/j.tej.2022.107096 
[28] B. D. Chung, S. Park, and C. Kwon, “Equitable distribution of 
re-charging stations for electric vehicles,” Socio-Econ. Plan. 
Sci., vol. 63, pp. 1–11, 2018, doi:10.1016/j.seps.2017.06.002 
[29] State of California. Vehicle fuel type count by ZIP code 
1/1/2021. [Online]. Available from: https://data.ca.gov/dataset 
/vehicle-fuel-type-count-by-zip-code/resource/888bbb6c-09b4 
-469c-82e6-1b2a47439736 
[30] Los Angeles GeoHub. City boundaries. City of Los Angeles 
Hub. [Online]. Available from: https://geohub.lacity.org 
/datasets/lacounty::city-boundaries-3/explore?location=33 
.886095%2C-118.390855%2C8.28 
[31] Los Angeles GeoHub. ZIP codes (La County). [Online]. 
Available from: https://geohub.lacity.org/datasets/lahub::zip 
-codes-la-county/explore?location=33.795647%2C-118 
.302795%2C9.00 
[32] B. Wang, W. Shi, and Z. Miao, “Confidence analysis of 
standard deviational ellipse and its extension into higher 
dimensional Euclidean space,” PloS One, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 
e0118537–e0118537, 2015. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0118537 
[33] Los Angeles GeoHub. Median income and AMI (census 
tract). [Online]. Available from: https://geohub.lacity.org 
/datasets/lacounty::median-income-and-ami-census-tract 
/explore?location=33.769264%2C-118.302668%2C9.00 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

