Photovoltaic Generation Forecasting – A Case Study
Sinan Wannous, Isabel Praça, Rui Andrade, and Sergio Ramos 
Research Group on Intelligent Engineering and Computing for Advanced Innovation and Development (GECAD) 
School of Engineering, Polytechnic of Porto (ISEP/IPP) 
Porto, Portugal 
e-mail: {sinai, icp, faa, scr}@isep.ipp.pt 
 
 
Abstract— The increasing demand for renewable energy 
sources has empowered their integration into existing power 
networks. This initiated an interest in investigating the 
capabilities of these clean sources and how can then be 
efficiently utilized to support the balance of energy markets. In 
this regard, forecasting energy generation has become an 
essential research problem to improve the reliability of energy 
systems. It is of key importance to meet the energy demand, as 
well as to bridge the gap between energy consumption and 
production in energy markets. In this research, we present a 
case study to investigate the performance of ensemble learning 
models for forecasting the energy generation of photovoltaic 
(PV) modules. For this purpose, we utilize a dynamic energy 
forecasting tool to perform various experiments with different 
combinations of input data fields. Primarily, the performance 
of 3 ensemble learning models (Adaboost, Random Forest, and 
Gradient Boosting Regressor) has been investigated and then 
compared to the predictions of two previously undertaken 
neural network-based methods. The results indicated higher 
accuracy 
of 
the 
ensemble 
approaches 
in 
almost 
all 
experiments. Which was also better than the accuracy of the 
neural networks-based methods.   
Keywords-Energy Prediction; Energy Forecasting Tools; 
Prediction Models; Machine Learning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The rapid shift from traditional fossil fuel-based energy 
towards renewable energy sources is one of the core 
strategies in developing sustainable future energy systems 
[1]. As a constant source of energy, sunlight is used to meet 
the ever-increasing energy needs, and solar energy becomes 
a suitable substitute for fossil fuels [2]. The forecasting of 
wind and solar energy is getting much attention over the last 
two decades. Primarily, due to the increasing amount of 
energy generated from these renewable sources. That said, 
special emphasis is given to predicting wind and solar energy 
records because of their variability and limited predictability, 
as well as instantaneous response to weather phenomena [3].   
On the other hand, the prediction of solar power using 
photovoltaics is crucial to mitigate the random fluctuations in 
the incoming values. Many approaches have been utilized to 
predict the generated energy from Photovoltaic Panels (PV). 
Most of them make use of traditional statistical methods and 
Machine Learning (ML) approaches. Furthermore, historical 
data sets used to make predictions usually combine a variety 
of weather characteristics, cloud motion tracking, solar 
radiation, and many others. Nevertheless, time-horizon and 
climate have the most noticeable impact on the performance 
of solar energy forecasting [4]. 
In this article, we contribute to the current efforts by 
assessing the performance of 3 ensemble learning methods in 
predicting energy generation from PV panels. We also 
compare the results to the output of two other Artificial 
Neural Networks (ANN) and Deep Neural Networks (DNN) 
based models. The goal of this case study is to explore better 
forecasting 
circumstances 
by 
manipulating 
various 
prediction models and different input fields. The rest of this 
research is organized as follows. Section II summarizes a 
state of the art of currently used models to forecast solar 
energy production. Section III describes the conducted case 
study, including the used energy forecasting tool, data sets, 
and methods. In this section, we also present, discuss, and 
compare the results. Finally, Section IV highlights the 
conclusion and future perspectives of this research. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Energy forecasting is crucial in energy markets, it 
basically aims to build accurate forecasting models to inspect 
future generation/consumption scenarios. Forecasting of 
energy production has been widely covered in the literature 
to balance the supply and demand in energy systems. 
Attempts from workers in various fields have been made to 
obtain as accurate prediction models as possible. The 
accuracy of the forecasting models has significantly 
increased in the last decade. Various methods have been 
utilized to undergo short-term prediction experiments for 
energy generation obtained from photovoltaic panels. 
Namely, statistical methods and machine learning based 
methods. 
A state-of-the-art of the accuracy of solar energy 
forecasting is conducted by Blaga, R., et al. [4]. The 
compared forecasting models cover various classes: 
persistence, classical statistics, machine learning, cloud-
motion tracking, numerical weather prediction, and hybrid 
models. As a result, machine learning and hybrid models 
have the best performance for intra-hour predictions in all 
climates. However, according to Tato, J.H. and Brito, M.C. 
[5], using meteorological and historical data is not enough to 
produce accurate solar energy forecasts. Instead, the authors 
integrate a Smart Persistence prediction algorithm with 
Random Forests to analyze the data of six solar PV modules. 
The results showed a great improvement in the accuracy of 
short-term forecasts. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-967-6
ENERGY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Furthermore, due to the dependency of PV panels on 
solar radiation, Global Horizontal Solar Irradiance (GHI) has 
a strong influence on PV production. An ANN based model 
was proposed to predict the next-day produced power from 
PV panels [6]. The model makes use of real-time solar 
irradiance to provide a set of decision rules for a proper 
prediction system. The research shows that machine learning 
algorithms hold some promise in this regard. Another 
research based on a non-linear autoregressive neural network 
was presented in [7]. It aims at forecasting global horizontal 
solar irradiance as input to a photovoltaic simulator 
presented in another study [8]. This system estimates the 
energy generation profiles of PV systems in real-sky 
conditions. The goal of this process is to predict energy 
production in short-term time periods. In a similar manner, 
authors of Cannizzaro, D., et al. [9] present a methodology to 
forecast GHI from the next 15 min and up to the next 24 
hours. The proposed approach implements ML techniques 
including 
Variational 
Mode 
Decomposition 
(VMD), 
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), Random Forest 
(RF), and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM). 
On the other hand, authors of Gellert, A., et al. [10] 
propose a technique to predict the electricity production and 
consumption in a household with photovoltaics and storage 
systems. They analyze statistical models based on previous 
values aiming at increasing the self-consumption and 
reducing the dependency on the power grid. However, the 
study 
lacks 
considering 
environmental-specific 
input 
parameters, such as weather characteristics and contextual 
details. In a later study [11], the authors evaluate two 
statistical prediction methods: ARIMA and TBATS, and 
compare them to other models: Markov model, Multi-Layer 
Perceptron (MLP), Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), Bayesian 
Regression Structural Time Series (BRSTS), and LSTM. The 
evaluation results showed a better mean absolute error for 
TBATS over what was obtained by the other models. 
Deep learning methods have been also approached to 
tackle energy forecasting in solar systems. Three deep 
learning-based forecasting models were introduced for the 
continuous prediction of energy generated by concentrated 
solar power plants in Spain [12]. The proposed models are  
Naïve cloud-cover, ANN, and LSTM based approaches. The 
authors used as inputs the irradiance values and weather 
conditions forecasts. Another deep learning approach 
established on LSTM was introduced in [13]. It aimed at 
forecasting one hour-ahead energy production from a solar-
PV plant. In this study, two other data-driven methods were 
also applied, and the results revealed that the LSTM model 
gave the best results. 
Moreover, a method for detailed PV energy yield 
forecasting is presented in [14]. This study utilizes a local 
sky-imager and neural networks for horizons up to 15 min. 
The proposed approach eliminates the usual models, from 
irradiation forecast to energy yield estimation, and reduces 
the propagated errors. Another approach was presented to 
predict local PV power output based on short-term solar 
forecasting using ground-based cameras [15]. The research 
also analyzes the benefits of the forecasts to the power 
system. Furthermore, daily energy production forecasting 
methods for photovoltaic solar panels were presented using 
mathematical methods and fuzzy logic models [16]. The 
studies showed that the best model is a two-input Takagi-
Sugeno system with nonlinear membership functions. In 
their study, authors also present a prototype software 
implementing the best-performing models. 
Our approach brings novelty in many aspects: first, 
instead of considering radiation values and cloud tracking, 
we employ historical weather information, time contextual 
fields, and previous energy values as input to train our ML 
models. In addition, to obtain the most accurate results, we 
focus our efforts on conducting various experiments 
considering different combinations of the available input 
fields. Finally, we successfully utilize the tuned model to 
predict the energy production for a whole week instead of a 
couple of upcoming hours. 
III. 
CASE STUDY 
A. Overview 
The aim of this case study is to investigate the 
performance of three ensemble learning methods in 
forecasting energy generation. In this context, we use a 
dynamic forecasting tool to perform and compare various 
experiments in different conditions. We also use a historical 
data set that combines the instant generation of 3 PV panels. 
Primarily, results of the considered models are presented, 
discussed, and then compared to previously undertaken 
predictions using two neural network-based models. The 
forecasting of PV generation data will be used and integrated 
by an Energy Resource Management System (ERMS), in a 
collective residential building, to support the management of 
all building resources aiming to minimize the electricity 
consumption costs. 
B. Energy Forecasting Tool 
In this case study, we used a dynamic energy forecasting 
tool that was developed by the GECAD research group [17]. 
The tool is a web-based application that extends a set of 
machine learning models to provide dynamic energy 
forecasting services. It provides interactive user interfaces to 
predict energy generation/consumption, build forecasting 
models, compare predictions, and fine-tune prediction 
models. The used tool utilizes five supervised machine 
learning estimators which include: Adaboost.R2 (Ada.) [18], 
Random Forest Regressor (RF) [19], Gradient Boosting 
Regressor (GBR) [20], Support Vector Regression (SVR) 
[21], and Linear Regression (LR) [22]. Furthermore, the tool 
maintains two common validation mechanisms: Train Test 
Split and Cross-validation. Services provided by this tool 
cover a set of training, predicting, and tuning features with 
various input and output capabilities. In Figure 1, we show a 
sample of the tool’s training interface, in which the user 
controls the configurations of 3 prediction models. This tool 
has been used previously in conjunction with other aspects 
that might benefit from the energy forecasting services. 
Mainly, in building trust models for Local Energy Markets 
[23] [24]. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-967-6
ENERGY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
 
 
Figure 1. Energy Forecasting Tool: An example of the model training interface, it shows 3 models with their default parameters. 
C. Data Sets 
The historical data used in this case study combines the 
energy generation of three different photovoltaic solar 
modules installed and operated in Porto. The PV generation 
system under analysis is installed on the roof of a residential 
building consisting of 15 apartments of different typologies. 
There are 28 PV panels installed, each with a power of 400 
Wp, for a total installed capacity of 11.2 kW. This total PV 
power is distributed into three sets of producers, each with a 
3.68 kW installed PV power [25]. The data set represents the 
generated energy values in kW for each solar panel as well 
as the total generated values. It was internally collected and 
registered in a timestamp interval of 15 min and covers the 
whole year of 2019. 
Furthermore, to enrich the input data fields, we managed 
to retrieve detailed weather values of the exact location 
where the panels are installed. For this sake, we used a 
global weather API provided by World Weather Online [26]. 
Collected weather values include but are not limited to 
temperature, wind speed, direction, precipitation, humidity, 
visibility, pressure, cloud cover, etc. 
For the sake of transparently comparing the output 
predictions, the data set also includes forecasting results of 
two other prediction models. ANN and DNN were 
previously trained and used to forecast energy generation for 
the first week of September of the same year (2019) [27]. In 
this study, four forecasting performance metrics (Mean 
Absolute Error, Symmetric Mean Absolute Percentage Error, 
Weighted Absolute Percentage Error, and Normalized Root 
Mean Square Error) were used to evaluate the accuracy of 
both forecasting algorithms. The obtained forecasting results 
showed that both techniques had similar prediction behavior, 
however, and based on the obtained forecasting evaluation 
errors, the ANN presented a slightly better prediction 
performance in comparison with DNN. 
D. Methods 
We utilized the energy forecasting tool to perform 
multiple experiments. Primarily, we made use of 3 main 
services: a) model training with default parameters, to train 
models using a historical data set and generate downloadable 
trained models, b) bulk prediction, to use trained models to 
predict multiple future records, and c) model tuning, to find 
the best parameters for each model considering specific input 
data fields. Moreover, as per a case study undertaken using 
the same tool [17], ensemble learning methods had proven 
the most accurate results in energy forecasting in similar 
conditions. Consequently, we used the three ensemble 
learning methods: Ada., RF, and GBR. To validate trained 
models, we preferred to opt for the cross-validation 
mechanism over the train test split. Although this validation 
method is more expensive in terms of computational cost, it 
brings better and more reliable accuracy values. 
As input, the tool accepts three categories of data fields: 
contextual 
fields, 
weather 
attributes, 
and 
preceding 
consumption/generation values. In this case study, we 
consider all available contextual fields, weather fields that 
might affect the solar reflection on panels and, thus, affect 
the generated energy, and up to 10 previous generation 
values (see Table I). 
TABLE I. INPUT DATA FIELDS CONSIDERED IN THE CASE STUDY 
Input Categories 
Input Fields 
Contextual values Minute (min), Hour (h), Day of the week (dw), Day of 
the month (dm), Month (m), Year (y). 
Weather attributes Temperature (temp), Wind speed (ws), Cloud cover 
(cc), Visibility (vis), Precipitation (p). 
Previous values 
Up to 10 previous generations, where (vt-1) refers to the 
1st previously generated value, (vt-2) refers to the 2nd 
previously generated value, and (vt-n) refers to the nth 
previously generated value. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-967-6
ENERGY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

For this case study, we used the tool to perform 14 
training experiments for each model (Ada., RF, and GBR). 
Each experiment examines a different combination of input 
fields (see Table II). To obtain the most reliable results, we 
developed our case study as the following: first, we trained 
the three models using only contextual fields (Exp1). Then, 
we combined both contextual and weather fields to check the 
expected influence of weather conditions (Exp2). After that, 
to adjust the best number of previous values to be 
incorporated, we combined contextual fields with 1, 2, 3, and 
up to 10 previous values (Exp3-12). Afterward, we combined 
the contextual fields, weather data, and the best number of 
previous values for each model (Exp13). Finally, we used the 
tuning module to fine-tune the resulted models and perform 
the final experiment (Exp14). 
That said, for each experiment, we trained the three 
ensemble models using the total generated energy records, 
from January until August 2019. Then, we validated the 
trained models using the cross-validation technique and 
registered the averaged prediction accuracy for each 
model/experiment. Finally, to compare results with the 
previously conducted ANN and DNN methods, we used the 
bulk prediction service to predict energy generation during 
the 1st week of September of the same year. Nevertheless, 
although all models can be generalized to cover multiple 
years energy records, we had to consider 8 months to 
compare results with ANN and DNN predictions. 
TABLE II. TRAINING EXPERIMENTS, INCLUDING INPUT DATA FIELDS FOR 
EACH ONE 
Exp. Input Fields 
Exp1 
Contextual (min, h, dw, dm, m, y) 
Exp2 
Contextual (min, h, dw, dm, m, y), Weather (temp, ws, cc, vis, p) 
Exp3 
Contextual (min, h, dw, dm, m, y), Previous Values (vt-1) 
Exp4 
Contextual (min, h, dw, dm, m, y), Previous Values (vt-1, vt-2) 
Exp5 
Contextual (min, h, dw, dm, m, y), Previous Values (vt-1, vt-2, vt-3) 
Exp6 
Contextual (min, h, dw, dm, m, y), Previous Values (vt-1, vt-2, vt-3, 
vt-4) 
Exp7 
Contextual (min, h, dw, dm, m, y), Previous Values (vt-1, vt-2, vt-3, 
vt-4, vt-5) 
Exp8 
Contextual (min, h, dw, dm, m, y), Previous Values (vt-1, vt-2, vt-3, 
vt-4, vt-5, vt-6) 
Exp9 
Contextual (min, h, dw, dm, m, y), Previous Values (vt-1, vt-2, vt-3, 
vt-4, vt-5, vt-6, vt-7) 
Exp10 Contextual (min, h, dw, dm, m, y), Previous Values (vt-1, vt-2, vt-3, 
vt-4, vt-5, vt-6, vt-7, vt-8) 
Exp11 Contextual (min, h, dw, dm, m, y), Previous Values (vt-1, vt-2, vt-3, 
vt-4, vt-5, vt-6, vt-7, vt-8, vt-9) 
Exp12 Contextual (min, h, dw, dm, m, y), Previous Values (vt-1, vt-2, vt-3, 
vt-4, vt-5, vt-6, vt-7, vt-8, vt-9, vt-10) 
Exp13 Contextual (min, h, dw, dm, m, y), Weather (temp, ws, cc, vis, p), 
Previous Values (Best of Exp3-12 for each model)  
Exp14 Same as Exp13 
 
 
E. Results and Discussion 
In Table III, we summarize the prediction accuracy R2 (1) 
achieved by each model in all performed experiments. 
 
TABLE III. PREDICTION ACCURACY FOR EACH MODEL IN ALL EXPERIMENTS 
Exp Description 
Ada. R2 FR R2 
GBR R2 
Exp1 Only contextual fields 
93.6 % 
95.2 % 
83.7 % 
Exp2 Contextual + Weather 
94.5 % 
95.8 % 
86.5 % 
Exp3 Contextual + 1 previous value 
95.9 % 
96 % 
96.2 % 
Exp4 Contextual + 2 previous values 
96 % 
96.1 % 
96.3 % 
Exp5 Contextual + 3 previous values 
96 % 
96.2 % 
96.3 % 
Exp6 Contextual + 4 previous values 
96 % 
96.3 % 
96.4 % 
Exp7 Contextual + 5 previous values 
96.1 % 
96.3 % 
96.3 % 
Exp8 Contextual + 6 previous values 
96.1 % 
96.3 % 
96.3 % 
Exp9 Contextual + 7 previous values 
96.1 % 
96.3 % 
96.3 % 
Exp10 Contextual + 8 previous values 
96.2 % 
96.3 % 
96.3 % 
Exp11 Contextual + 9 previous values 
96.1 % 
96.3 % 
96.3 % 
Exp12 Contextual + 10 previous values 
96.2 % 
96.3 % 
96.3 % 
Exp13 Contextual + Best previous values* 
+ Weather 
96.2 % 
96.3 % 
96.4 % 
Exp14 Exp13 TUNED 
96.3 % 
96.4 % 
96.4 % 
* For Ada.: 8 (or 10) previous values, For RF: 4 (or 5-10) previous values, For GBR: 4 
previous values 
Looking into the detailed results, all models could obtain 
high accuracy in almost all experiments. This might be 
explained in terms of the consistent generation of the 
considered solar panels. Even when using only contextual 
fields (Exp1), we get high accuracy with a minimum of 
83.7% for the GBR model. Such results clearly indicate the 
significant influence of contextual fields on energy 
predictions. Furthermore, we also notice the enhancement 
that weather fields achieved when combined with contextual 
data (Exp2). Nevertheless, as weather conditions highly 
affect energy generation using solar panels, we still expect 
greater impacts of weather fields in different circumstances. 
For example, with a lower base contextual accuracy when 
dealing with less or inconsistent generation values. 
On the other hand, the results also show an increasing 
accuracy upon considering preceding values (Exp3-12), 
especially in the very early stage when we started to combine 
the latest generation values (Exp3-6). These experiments also 
indicate that the more previous values to consider do not 
necessarily mean higher prediction accuracy. As we can 
notice a phase of fluctuation for each model after reaching a 
specific number of previous values. Nevertheless, with a 15-
min interval data log, 10 previous values cover 2:30 hours. 
Consequently, we also expect a downgrade in prediction 
accuracies when combining a longer prior period which 
might involve much divergence in the actual generated 
energy. Finally, as expected, combining all input fields 
(Exp13) as well as utilizing tuned models (Exp14) were 
eventually able to bring the best accurate results. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-967-6
ENERGY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
Figure 2. Actual generation and predictions for the 1st week of September, 2019. 
Regarding the forecasting models, we could notice, in 
general, not much difference in the performance of the 
three considered models. However, we could see 
relatively better results of Adaboost and Random Forest 
in the first two experiments (Exp1,2). While the 
performance of all models turned too close during the 
later observations. 
F. Comparison 
As mentioned earlier, to better assess our prediction 
models, we used the three models resulting from Exp14 to 
predict the energy generation values during the first week 
of September 2019. We also compared the results with 
previously undertaken predictions for the same period 
using ANN and DNN [27]. All predictions were conducted 
in a time interval of 15 min. Figure 2 shows the prediction 
results and the actual generation during the first week of 
September for all considered models. Furthermore, Table 
IV presents the accuracy (R2 score) for the predicted 
generation values during the considered period. 
TABLE IV. PREDICTION ACCURACY FOR EACH MODEL FOR THE 1ST WEEK 
OF SEPTEMBER. 2019 
Prediction 
Model 
Artificial 
Neural 
Networks 
Deep 
Neural 
Networks 
Adaboost Random 
Forest 
Gradient 
Boosting 
Regressor 
R2 Score 
97.9 % 
96.1 % 
99.6 % 
99.7 % 
99.7 
 
It is clearly noticeable that the predictions of the three 
ensemble learning methods are almost identical to the 
actual generation along the whole observed period. This is 
reasonable in terms of the higher accuracy of the trained 
models obtained during the case study. Likewise, we can 
observe some deviation in the predictions of the other two 
ANN and DNN models from the actual generation, 
especially during the day hours when there is actual energy 
generation. We could also notice that, although ANN and 
DNN predictions were consistently low in comparison to 
the actual generation, they could relatively reflect the 
overall trend of the generated values.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
This research is a contribution to the efforts to obtain 
accurate energy forecasting from photovoltaic panels. In 
this regard, we conducted a case study to predict the 
energy production from 3 PV modules installed and 
running in Porto. The used dataset combines historical 
records of weather data, time-contextual fields, and 
previous generation values. We used a dynamic 
forecasting tool to undergo various prediction experiments 
using 3 ensemble learning models (Adaboost, Random 
Forest, and Gradient Boosting Regressor). Obtained results 
are then compared with the results of two ANN and DNN 
based models. The results indicate relatively high accuracy 
of the ensemble approaches in almost all experiments. 
Which was also much better than the accuracy of the 
previously conducted neural networks-based methods. 
This case study shows interesting new results. 
However, obtaining high accuracy in forecasting energy 
generation in specific conditions doesn’t eliminate the 
investigation process. Each forecasting problem has its 
own circumstances that are not necessarily the same in 
another environment. Upcoming challenges in the 
production of renewable energy always require better 
forecasting models. Future work might imply performing 
further experiments at multiple scales, utilizing a wider 
range of combinations between input fields, as well as 
investigating the effects of solar radiation when combined 
with other fields already considered in this research. The 
ultimate goal for such experiments would be to obtain as 
accurate results as possible within specific prediction 
conditions. 
 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-967-6
ENERGY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has received funding from FEDER Funds 
through COMPETE program and from National Funds 
through FCT under the project SPET–PTDC/EEI-
EEE/029165/2017. This work has also received funding 
from 
projects 
BENEFICE 
Project 
- 
PTDC/EEI-
EEE/29070/2017, 
UIDB/00760/2020, 
and 
UIDP/00760/2020. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. J. Chapman, B. C. McLellan, and T. Tezuka, 
“Prioritizing mitigation efforts considering co-benefits, 
equity and energy justice: Fossil fuel to renewable energy 
transition pathways,” Appl. Energy, vol. 219, pp. 187–198, 
2018. 
[2] 
A. Qazi et al., “Towards sustainable energy: a systematic 
review of renewable energy sources, technologies, and 
public opinions,” IEEE access, vol. 7, pp. 63837–63851, 
2019. 
[3] 
C. Sweeney, R. J. Bessa, J. Browell, and P. Pinson, “The 
future of forecasting for renewable energy,” Wiley 
Interdiscip. Rev. Energy Environ., vol. 9, no. 2, p. e365, 
2020. 
[4] 
R. Blaga et al., “A current perspective on the accuracy of 
incoming solar energy forecasting,” Prog. energy 
Combust. Sci., vol. 70, pp. 119–144, 2019. 
[5] 
J. Huertas Tato and M. Centeno Brito, “Using smart 
persistence and random forests to predict photovoltaic 
energy production,” Energies, vol. 12, no. 1, p. 100, 2019. 
[6] 
M. H. Alomari, J. Adeeb, and O. Younis, “Solar 
photovoltaic power forecasting in jordan using artificial 
neural networks,” Int. J. Electr. Comput. Eng., vol. 8, no. 
1, p. 497, 2018. 
[7] 
A. Aliberti et al., “Forecasting Short-term Solar Radiation 
for 
Photovoltaic 
Energy 
Predictions.,” 
in 
SMARTGREENS, 2018, pp. 44–53. 
[8] 
L. Bottaccioli, E. Patti, E. Macii, and A. Acquaviva, “GIS-
based software infrastructure to model PV generation in 
fine-grained spatio-temporal domain,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 
12, no. 3, pp. 2832–2841, 2017. 
[9] 
D. Cannizzaro et al., “Solar radiation forecasting based on 
convolutional neural network and ensemble learning,” 
Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 181, p. 115167, 2021. 
[10] A. Gellert, A. Florea, U. Fiore, F. Palmieri, and P. Zanetti, 
“A study on forecasting electricity production and 
consumption in smart cities and factories,” Int. J. Inf. 
Manage., vol. 49, pp. 546–556, 2019. 
[11] A. Gellert, U. Fiore, A. Florea, R. Chis, and F. Palmieri, 
“Forecasting Electricity Consumption and Production in 
Smart Homes through Statistical Methods,” Sustain. Cities 
Soc., vol. 76, p. 103426, 2022. 
[12] J. Segarra-Tamarit, E. Pérez, E. Moya, P. Ayuso, and H. 
Beltran, “Deep learning-based forecasting of aggregated 
CSP production,” Math. Comput. Simul., vol. 184, pp. 
306–318, 2021. 
[13] A. Ozbek, A. Yildirim, and M. Bilgili, “Deep learning 
approach for one-hour ahead forecasting of energy 
production in a solar-PV plant,” Energy Sources, Part A 
Recover. Util. Environ. Eff., pp. 1–16, 2021. 
[14] D. Anagnostos et al., “A method for detailed, short-term 
energy yield forecasting of photovoltaic installations,” 
Renew. Energy, vol. 130, pp. 122–129, 2019. 
[15] A. Jakoplić, D. Franković, V. Kirinčić, and T. Plavšić, 
“Benefits of short-term photovoltaic power production 
forecasting to the power system,” Optim. Eng., vol. 22, no. 
1, pp. 9–27, 2021. 
[16] G. Dec, G. Drałus, D. Mazur, and B. Kwiatkowski, 
“Forecasting Models of Daily Energy Generation by PV 
Panels Using Fuzzy Logic,” Energies, vol. 14, no. 6, p. 
1676, 2021. 
[17] S. Wannous, I. Praça, and R. Andrade, “Intelligence as a 
Service: A Tool for Energy Forecasting and Security 
Awareness,” in Practical Applications of Agents and 
Multi-Agent Systems, 2021, pp. 176–186. 
[18] H. Drucker, “Improving regressors using boosting 
techniques,” in ICML, 1997, vol. 97, pp. 107–115. 
[19] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, no. 
1, pp. 5–32, 2001. 
[20] J. H. Friedman, “Greedy function approximation: a 
gradient boosting machine,” Ann. Stat., pp. 1189–1232, 
2001. 
[21] C.-C. Chang and C.-J. Lin, “LIBSVM: a library for 
support vector machines,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. 
Technol., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1–27, 2011. 
[22] G. D. Hutcheson, “Ordinary least-squares regression,” L. 
Moutinho GD Hutcheson, SAGE Dict. Quant. Manag. 
Res., pp. 224–228, 2011. 
[23] R. Andrade, I. Praça, S. Wannous, and S. Ramos, “The 
Impact of Attacks in LEM and Prevention Measures Based 
on Forecasting and Trust Models,” Processes, vol. 9, no. 
2, p. 314, 2021. 
[24] R. Andrade, S. Wannous, T. Pinto, and I. Praça, 
“Extending a Trust model for Energy Trading with Cyber-
Attack Detection,” Electronics, vol. 10, no. 16, p. 1975, 
2021. 
[25] Z. Foroozandeh, S. Ramos, J. Soares, Z. Vale, and M. 
Dias, “Single contract power optimization: A novel 
business model for smart buildings using intelligent 
energy management,” Int. J. Electr. Power \& Energy 
Syst., vol. 135, p. 107534, 2022. 
[26] “World Weather Online.” 
https://www.worldweatheronline.com/ [retrieved: March, 
2022]. 
[27] I. Tavares et al., “Comparison of PV Power Generation 
Forecasting in a Residential Building using ANN and 
DNN.” CPES 2022, 11th Symposium on Control of Power 
and Energy Systems, June 21-23, 2022, in press. 
  
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-967-6
ENERGY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

