Smart Grid Architectures and the Multi-Agent
System Paradigm
Cagri Yilmaz, Sahin Albayrak, and Marco L¨utzenberger
DAI-Labor
Technische Universit¨at Berlin
Berlin, Germany
{cagri.yilmaz|sahin.albayrak|marco.luetzenberger}@dai-labor.de
Abstract—Currently, coal-, gas-, oil and nuclear power plants are
used to meet the ever increasing energy demand. Nevertheless,
due to an increasing environmental awareness and entailing
regulations, energy prices rise considerably. As for today, many
companies try to facilitate the production and utilization of much
cheaper energy from renewable energy sources, such as wind and
solar energy. However, due to constructional deﬁciencies, today
grid infrastructures support only a small amount of renewable
energy sources. To counter this problem, sophisticated control
applications were designed, deciding on when and where to
procure energy and safeguarding the stability of the entire grid
architecture. Over the last years we have developed many smart
grid applications and—due to the distributed nature of the
problem solving task—we always applied multi-agent technology
for this purpose. Java Intelligent Agent Component (JIAC),
version ﬁve, innately provides many features indispensably re-
quired for smart grid applications. In this paper, we present our
experiences in successfully using JIAC framework for the smart
grid applications.
Keywords–Power Network;Smart Grid;Distributed Power Gener-
ation; Electric Vehicles;Critical Infrastructures Protection;Demand
and Response;Evolution Strategy; Multi-agent Systems;JIAC Agent
Framework
I.
INTRODUCTION
The world’s energy demand increases continuously as the
use of electronic devices grows. Increasing energy demand is
accompanied by an ever increasing environmental awareness.
25.9% of total carbon emission is due to the consumption of
high carbon fuels in current power industries [1]. In addition,
today grid infrastructure is not able to cope with the increasing
energy requirement. Aged components of current electric grid
and out-dated technologies cause signiﬁcantly inefﬁcient and
unstable electric systems. Beyond that, developing technology
in last decades will change the methods and technics of
generation and delivery of electricity. Integration of Informa-
tion Communication Technologies (ICT) systems with grid
infrastructure allows sophisticated control over generation,
transportation, storage and consumption of electricity power.
In current grid infrastructure, local distributed generators are
accommodated on the electric grid in a ﬁt-and-forget man-
ner. Centralized electricity generation also creates an unre-
liable power load distribution system. Frequently, occurring
blockages and outages inhibits sustainable power ﬂow to the
consumers.
Innovative techniques in smart grid will sustain utilization
of electricity more securely and efﬁciently. Flexible and re-
organisable virtual power plants ensure better management of
power ﬂow in case of any failures in electric grid. Assistance
systems are developed in order to aid operators to handle with
the problems. Managing charging and discharging processes
of electrical vehicles (EVs) will be another signiﬁcant issue.
Uncontrolled charging proﬁles of EVs will increase the peak
demands. Load management systems are developed to shift the
EV demand to the other non-peak periods. Another concept,
demand and response mechanism, makes the customers get
involved into the power management. Considerable amount of
savings can be achieved with demand management. Further,
the demand and response concept allows customers to deliver
surplus electricity to the power grid. In addition to that,
policies for the reduction of CO2 emission also become vital
issues for future electric grid. According to the International
Energy Agency (IEA) estimates, introduction of smart grid
technologies will provide 0.9 to 2.2 gigatonnes reduction
in CO2 emissions by 2050 [1]. Over the last years, we
have developed many smart grid applications and, due to
the distributed nature of problems that were solved by with
these applications, we always used multi-agent technology for
this purpose. Nevertheless, agent-technology is still a domain
which is mainly conﬁned to the realm of research [2]. However,
it is our experience that agent-technology should be seriously
considered by industrial players. In order to substantiate this
thesis, we present selected projects, in which we used agent
technology, namely the JIAC agent framework [3]. It is our
experience that most problems in smart grid architectures come
from the distributed nature of the smart grid. The multi-agent
system approach is a mature and efﬁcient mechanism to master
these problems.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows:
Current architecture of the electric grid and related challenges
are described in section II. It is our purpose to emphasise the
distributed nature of many grid related problems. In Section III,
we outline smart grid architectures and potential extensions.
In Section IV, we present selected applications that tackle
smart grid related problems by using multi-agent technology.
In Section V, we wrap up with a conclusion.
II.
ELECTRIC GRID
An electric grid is an interconnected grid networks com-
posed of several hardware and software components to dis-
tribute electricity from generation utilities to the end-users.
Power delivery and communication infrastructures are two
main layers of the electric grid.
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

A. Current Grid Architecture and Challenges
Maintaining continuous stability in the electric grid is a
great challenge since most of the consumed electricity is
provided from centralized power plants. Supervisory Control
and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems are used for data
transmission among electronic devices of the current electric
grid. SCADA allows a utility’s operators to monitor and
control the conditions of the grid equipment and network pro-
cesses. Computers at the control centre and Remote Terminal
Units (RTU) in the ﬁeld measure the data sets from hundreds to
tens of thousands of data points [4]. Control model is based on
slow automatic control by the control centre in order to balance
load and generation. Synchronous Phasor Measurement Units
(PMU) gathers data several times in each power cycle to get
detailed picture of the grid dynamics for systems planning,
control and post-incident analysis. Special Protection Schemes
(SPS), which is also called as Remedial Action Schemes
(RAS) have been developed to meet some of the wide-area
control needs. An SPS involves instituting hardwired, point-
to-point communication among substations [5]. In current
infrastructure, these data can not be reasoned beyond the
substations. Customers demand are not involved into the load
management strategies. The present load management system
is mostly oriented to the electricity generation of the traditional
power plants. This grid structure has a limited ability to cope
with fast cascading phenomena such as blockages and outages.
III.
INNOVATIVE SMART GRID CONCEPTS
Traditional electric grid has been evolving into the smart
grid composed of spatially complex, intelligent and au-
tonomous power and telecommunication networks. Renew-
ables energy sources, plug-in electric vehicles and distributed
battery systems will increase the reliability and stability of
the electric grid. Intelligent power management system should
be designed to manage the power load among various decen-
tralized energy sources and consumers. In this sense, better
understanding of the innovative concepts is vital to analyse
and control new power system.
A. Electric Vehicles
Electric vehicles are regarded as dispatchable energy stor-
age units. They become an integrated part of the power net-
work with the well-known applications which are Vehicle-To-
Grid (V2G) and Grid-To-Vehicle (G2V) technologies [6]. Co-
operation of electric vehicles with renewable energy sources
make the power network more secure and reliable. Required
data regarding power quality and availability of Distributed En-
ergy Resources (DERs) and EVs are aggregated and processed
by responsible control units. There are several approaches to
model charging and discharging processes of electric vehicles.
The study [7] describes a decentralized online EV charging
scheduling scheme as a cyber-physical system. In another
approach [8], a strategy to coordinate the charging of plug-
in EVs is prepared by using the non-cooperative games. In
[9], a Threshold Admission with Greedy Scheduling (TAGS)
algorithm is presented as a model of harging problem with
admission control and charging capacities. This approach
includes a reserve dispatch algorithm for compensating the
intermittency of renewables. Integration of electric vehicles
into power grid will also increase the peak demand. To
decrease the demand in peak times, the load shifting methods
are applied to the charging processes of electric vehicles.
B. Renewable Energy Sources
New smart grid concepts increase the efﬁciency of renew-
ables, some of which are wind turbines, solar Photo-Voltaics
(PVs) and biofuel cells. In Germany, renewable energy sources
are expected to supply minimum 33% of the primary energy
consumption by 2020 [10]. Centralized traditional power plants
meet the power demand at the expense of high operation costs
whereas renewable energy sources operate relatively at lower
costs. Several studies are conducted to increase the efﬁciency
of the grid operations of renewables. Different algorithms to
predict the daily distribution of solar irradiation and hourly
distribution of wind speed are compared in [11]. Performances
of algorithms are compared and ranked to select the best
suitable algorithm for renewable power management. Power
shifting on demand side relying on generation of renewables
provides high economic beneﬁts for end-users. In addition to
the cost beneﬁts, renewable energy sources cut down high
carbon emission, causing greenhouse effect.
C. Virtual Power Plants
Virtual Power Plant (VPP) refers to a diverse pool of
wholesale renewable energy sources, electric vehicles and en-
ergy storage systems in supply side. According to the ﬂexible
power plant concept, numerous small-scale DER meet the
power demands with sustainable power loads. VPPs are so
modular that sources can be swapped in or out depending on
the demands. The results of the study
[12] shows that load
reduction obtained with control schedules minimize the trans-
mission congestion in the grid. In other words, ﬂexibility of the
VPP decreases the transmission congestion in distribution grid.
In another study [13], an optimization algorithm is developed
to manage a VPP composed of a large number of customers
with thermostatically controlled appliances.
D. Micro Grids
In micro grids, distributed generation and storage units are
tied together to the common feeder and this feeder is linked
to the single point of common coupling, providing connection
to the larger grid [14]. Micro grid concepts bring solutions to
the several problems of the current electric grid. In case of
any outages and blockages in utility grid, micro grids island
from the utility grid and continue to serve for the power needs.
In the event of any incidents, control system kills or activates
the power stream according to the priority level of end users.
Prioritized customers such as hospitals or telecommunication
companies are fed with sustainable power load during the
electricity interruption. Self-healing of micro grids increases
considerably the reliability of the power grid. The control
schemes required for operation of micro grid in grid-connected
and islanded modes are studied in [15]. In micro grids,
advanced power electronic systems control the operations and
services among DER and surrounding Alternating Current
(AC) electric system. The power electronic technology enables
the micro grid operators to access smart meters and other
intelligent ﬁeld devices so that ancillary services are delivered
to the electricity consumers. In this context, micro grids are
regarded as autonomous sub-grids, providing its own power
demands and related supportive services.
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

E. Demand Response Management
Customers request power load with scheduling the opera-
tions of household appliances. Home energy management sys-
tem enables end-users to participate in planning and scheduling
the power management. Smart appliances are the integral
components of the smart grid infrastructure. These intelligent
household appliances are connected to the grid via smart
meters which are electronically controlled interface devices.
Smart meters have capability to receive and respond to the
command signals coming from management systems of micro
grids and utility grids. In doing so, demand side systems sched-
ule the energy consumption of the electronic devices based the
market prices and power capacity levels of supplies. Demand
response mechanism encourages the energy consumers to shift
the operations of the smart appliances from on-peak hours
to off-peak hours. In [16], a heuristic is developed, allowing
electricity demands to be shifted according to the dynamic
energy market conditions.
F. Flexible Manufacturing System
Increasing energy costs and political policies on envi-
ronmental precautions inﬂuence the methods of developing
production plans. Achieving production targets and energy
savings are two determinants for optimization of production
plans. Several energy efﬁciency approaches are applied for
the different manufacturing scenarios. In [17], the production
plan achieving targets with minimum energy consumptions is
chosen among alternative production plans. Process scheduling
software determines the time slots, on which manufacturing
processes use up the cheapest energy. While creating produc-
tion plan, the scheduling software considers the physical con-
straints and interdependencies of the manufacturing processes.
In advance of the implementation, the conﬁguration of selected
production plan can also be modiﬁed by the human operators.
Overall, smart grid encourages the procurement of cheaper and
less energy in the manufacturing industry.
G. Grid Management Model for JIAC Agent Implementations
New technologies arising in smart grid are integrated to
the existing grid with innovative physical and cyber compo-
nents [18]. Electric grid equipped with smart devices commu-
nicating with the control center enables efﬁcient remote grid
controlling and monitoring.
Smart metering system collects the energy data from
smart meters and measured data are concentrated by smart
grid data concentrators. Those collected data are uniﬁed by
the central system called Meter Data Management (MDM)
system. Some of end users in the grid are industrial com-
panies, which plan manufacturing processes, or homeowners,
who control their electricity consumption with use of home
energy assistant systems. Data sets uniﬁed in central sys-
tem are processed by the corresponding subsystems aiming
at providing services for particular end users. Grid service
providers in the proposed model are Residential Demand
Management (RDM), Self- healing and Outage Management
(SOM), Flexible Manufacturing Management (FMM), Electric
Vehicle Charging/Discharging Management (EV - CDM) 1.
The smart autonomous grid entities are represented as JIAC
agents and these agents are scattered over the telecommunica-
tion network such as Local Area Network (LAN) and General
Figure 1.
Structure of Grid Management Model
Packet Radio Service (GPRS). Figure 1 shows the coordination
of the smart meters and the smart grid data concentrators via
Power Line Communications (PLC). JIAC agents, deployed
on grid control devices, grid concentrators, and software com-
ponents exchange JIAC messages by complex interaction pro-
tocols. Proposed grid management models include the control
schemes and algorithms which are incorporated with intelligent
agents. We will present smart grid applications based on JIAC
agent framework in the next section.
IV.
JIAC AGENTS IN SMART GRID APPLICATIONS
In the previous section, we outlined challenges and possible
(novel) areas of application that evolve from an ever increasing
development of smart grid architectures. Over the last years,
we developed several applications that fall under the umbrella
of the one or the other category of evolving business concepts
that we have outlined above.
It is our experience, that the multi-agent paradigm works
very well for the smart grid domain, simply because of the
distributed nature of most smart-grid-related problems. In
this section, we present selected applications in more detail
and respectively reference the categories (from the previous
section), that our applications belong to. All applications that
we present here are based on the JIAC agent framework
[3]. JIAC agent framework is integrated with service-oriented
paradigm. The framework provides the agent-platform, com-
prising agent nodes, physically distributed and it enables run-
time environments for JIAC agents. JIAC agent multi-system
can be deﬁned by one or more spring conﬁguration ﬁles. Run-
time environment can be monitored and controlled by Java
Management Extension Standard (JMX).
Our decision to use JIAC was based on a couple of factors.
First, as most project were developed in an academic context,
we required a free software framework. Furthermore, most
applications were supposed to be executed in real life applica-
tions, thus, reliability and a comprehensive set of development
tools and debugging capability was required as well. JIAC
provides most of these features and had already been used
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

in series of industrial applications [3]. For these reasons, we
decided to use JIAC for our applications.
We proceed by presenting selected smart grid applications
in more detail. In doing so, we respectively emphasize the
distributed nature of the problem(s) that we tackled. The fol-
lowing presentations as well as additional project descriptions
can be found in L¨utzenberger et al [19].
A. ILIas
The Intelligente L¨osungen zum Schutz vor Kaskadenef-
fekten in voneinander abh¨angigen kritischen Infrastrukturen
(ILIas) project [20] is based on the assumption that modern in-
frastructures are interdependent. Consider power- and telecom-
munications grids as examples for interdependent infrastruc-
tures. This interdependency may cause cascading effects in all
involved infrastructures, whenever failures occur. ILIas aims to
research and create intelligent and scalable management sys-
tems that provide prediction and reaction to cascading failure
effects, so that actions to stabilize the managed infrastructure
can be taken. Figure 2 presents the general architecture of the
ILIas framework.
Figure 2.
Overview over the ILIas Framework
An example for this is the reaction to power outages
and the consequent failure of telecommunication networks in
the affected areas. In ILIas, we developed an agent-based
decentralized smart grid management system, which observes
and controls the grid. Grid behaviour is predicted by means
of simulation. Power and telecommunication networks are
simulated by the agent-based simulation framework, Network
Security Simulator, (NeSSi2) [21].
NeSSi2 is developed upon the JIAC framework, resulting in
a distributed and easy-to-extend architecture. Detection algo-
rithm plugins, trafﬁc analysis, and automated attack generation
are some of the capabilities, allowing for security research
and evaluation purposes. We distinguish between an ofﬂine
simulation, in which pre-deﬁned scenarios are simulated, and
an online simulation, in which the current grid state is used as
a starting point for the calculation of predictions. The smart
grid management is agent-based, such that JIAC agents in a
Peer-to-Peer (P2P) network take over management duties for
one smart grid entity. The distributed assembly allows our
management system to work through partial or total power
outages and to deal with sub-networks, which are either con-
nected or independent from each other (islanded). We allowed
our management agents to communicate with both physical as
well as simulated smart grid entities. This design eases the
testing—even the testing of large scale systems. Furthermore,
we put particular emphasis on support for human operators.
Figure 3.
Smart grid live monitoring in ILIas (image detail)
Visualization is provided by our monitoring application
(Figure 3), which shows the smart grid topology, live sen-
sor data, the results of a situation analysis and action rec-
ommendations. The monitoring application can be used by
human operators in order to check the current grid state and
acknowledge or deny the recommended actions. Both, situation
analysis and action recommendations are provided by the JIAC
rule engine. Intelligent solutions developed in ILIas project
provide electricity and telecommunication services to general
public.
B. Gesteuertes Laden V2.0
The goal of Gesteuertes Laden V2.0 [22] was to use electric
vehicles as mobile and distributed energy storages in order to
increase the utilization of wind energy and to balance energy
grids. The focus of our application was on the driver, such
that mobility was ensured at all times. In order to account for
this, we developed an application, which optimizes charging-
and feeding processes of electric vehicles with respect to the
driver’s daily schedule. The application was implemented as a
live system including real vehicles and charging stations.
The application [23] was designed as a distributed mobility
and energy management system, in which relevant stakeholders
(e.g., the driver, the vehicle manufacturer, the energy provider,
the charging station, and the grid operator) were represented
by JIAC Agents. The JIAC agents, distributed over the Ge-
steuertes Laden V2.0 architecture is shown in ﬁgure 4.
Figure 4.
Architecture of Gesteuertes Laden V2.0
The system produces day schedules for the drivers. These
schedules include journeys as well as charging- and feeding
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

events [24]. In order to calculate these schedules, stakeholder-
speciﬁc preferences and constraints had to be considered.
Examples for such properties are: the driver’s appointments,
wind forecast, characteristics and current state of the electric
vehicles, characteristics and availability of charging stations,
and power grid constraints. In total, the system comprises
twelve JIAC agents. These agents were permanently running
on a back-end server and on the hardware of participating
vehicles. In addition, more than 100 services were executed
simultaneously, providing different functionality, from simple
information services to complex planning algorithms. Beyond
that, users and vehicles were represented by JIAC agents,
which were deployed on the back-end server, taking the main
responsibility for developing user- and vehicle schedules.
The data exchange between the electric vehicles and back-
end agents was safeguarded by failover mechanisms in order
to guarantee a reconnection after network-failures. Charging-
and feeding events are triggered by the electric vehicle agents,
which interact with the charging stations via power line
communication. We also integrated external services, such as
wind forecasts into our system. For this purpose, we used
the Web Service Gateway, which is also provided by JIAC.
An My Structured Query Language (MySQL) database was
included as well. This connection was done with a generic
database agent. We put particular emphasis on allowing users
to participate in the scenario, thus, a smartphone application
was developed. In order to connect this interface to the agent
system, the Human Agent Interface, a JIAC component, was
used. Finally, a monitoring component was installed to observe
all agents and to notify developers in case services are down.
The system was evaluated within a three-week ﬁeld test
[25]. To summarize, Gesteuertes Laden V2.0 brings in new
approaches for integration of V2G to maximize the use of
renewable energy for power grid stabilizaton.
C. The EnEffCo Project
In the Energy Efﬁciency Controlling (EnEffCo) project,
we developed an optimization software [17, also [26]] that
optimises production processes of the automotive industry in
terms of energy costs. Optimization schema for production
processes is illustrated in ﬁgure 5. The application uses the
fact that (at least in Germany), industrial players are able to
buy energy by means of short-term strategies at the day-ahead
energy market. The prices at the day-ahead market are highly
dynamic, thus, it is possible to minimize energy costs by shift-
ing energy-consuming sub-processes to time slots with less
expensive prices. Since contemporary production processes
are highly complex and comprise many co-depending sub-
processes, shifting parts of the overall process is not trivial.
We implemented our solution based on Evolution Strategy
to produce reliable optimization results quickly. Entities were
designed as JIAC agents, such that a server agent receives
information about the production process in form of a bipar-
tite graph. The graph contains architectural information, e.g.,
the sequential arrangement of all production steps, involved
machinery and storages, but also meta information, such as
the duration and the energy consumption of production steps.
In addition, the server agent receives a production target, a
timeframe and information on the energy price development.
Based on this data, the initial production plan is generated
(Figure 5). This initial plan is mutated, such that sub-processes
are randomly shifted. Each server agent produces a deﬁned
number of mutations. Quality assessment is done by means of
ﬁtness function, which selects the most effective production
plans. These plans are used as input for the next stage of
evolution, where the production plans are mutated again. The
process terminates whenever the quality of the best mutations
remains steady across several generations.
Figure 5.
Energy Efﬁciency Controlling in the Automotive Industry
In addition to the server agent, we developed an optimiza-
tion client (also a JIAC agent), which broadcasts an optimiza-
tion problem by means of a custom protocol. Available server
agents either accept and initiate the optimisation process or
refuse as a result to different reasons. Results are sent back to
the client, who compares available results and selects the best.
The best production schedule is presented to the operator, who
is able to conﬁgure his production line accordingly.
JIAC facilitated the development in two aspects. First, JIAC
allows for the execution of several optimization agents in
parallel. This capability can be used to counter the problem of
stochastic optimisation algorithms to get stuck in local optima.
It is our experience, that the simultaneous execution with
different initial populations and random mutations increases
the chance to overcome local maxima signiﬁcantly. In doing
so, the application’s execution speed remains equal while the
quality of the optimisation increases. The reason for this is
that JIAC agents are truly multithreaded, capable of running on
different Central Processing Units (CPUs). The second reason
for the appliance of JIAC is the reliable communication of
the agent framework. It is possible to distribute agents among
different hosts and thus to increase the overall performance
of the optimization software. As an example, complex op-
timisation scenarios can be supported by additional servers.
These servers can be removed when this additional calculation
performance is not required any more. The reason for this
ﬂexibility is the loose coupling between JIAC agents, which
simpliﬁes this process greatly and also supports maintenance
issues. Erroneous or obsolete server agents can be replaced
individually, without shutting down the entire application. To
sum up, outcomes,which are gained from temporal shifting of
energy demand support the manufacturing companies in the
automative industry in terms of reducing energy consumption.
V.
CONCLUSION
Smart grid architectures involve many autonomous systems
with partial knowledge that have to communicate and cooper-
ate in order to solve problems that each one of them for itself is
not able to solve. It is difﬁcult to provide a generic perspective
on smart grid architectures, but in most applications that
we developed, we designed energy consuming- and energy
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

producing entities as agents. These agents represent relevant
stakeholders that are capable to make decisions. We design
these agents to pursue their goal to allocate required, or to
dispose produced energy, respectively. To achieve this goal,
agents communicate, cooperate, or negotiate and determine
their actions themselves. Especially, in ILIas and Gesteuertes
Laden 2.0, we had to account for aspects of data security.
Furthermore, if one develops solutions for smart grid architec-
tures, one has to deal with real distribution. As an example,
consider the Gesteuertes Laden project, in which decision
making software was deployed on electric vehicles, charging
stations and backend servers. The main advantage to use
agent technology for the implementation of these systems is
the development support. Agent-oriented approaches for smart
grid problems are modelled and implemented in described
projects.
REFERENCES
[1]
E. Meer, “Smart grid estimated to reduce co2 emission by up
to 2.2 gigatonnes by 2050.” [retrieved: 01, 2014]. Available from:
http://www.prweb.com/releases/2012/11/prweb10169445.html, 2013.
[2]
B. Hirsch, T. Balke, and M. L¨utzenberger, “Assessing agent applications
— r&D vs. R&d,” in Multiagent Systems and Applications — Volume
1:Practice and Experience, ser. Intelligent Systems Reference Library,
M. Ganzha and L. C. Jain, Eds.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2013,
vol. 45, pp. 1–20.
[3]
M. L¨utzenberger, et al., “JIAC V — a MAS framework for industrial ap-
plications (extended abstract),” in Proceedings of the 12th International
Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, Sait Paul,
Minnesota, USA, M. G. T. Ito, C. Jonker and O. Shehory, Eds., May.
2013, pp. 1189–1190.
[4]
K. Barnes, B. Johnson, and R. Nickelson, “Review of Supervisory
Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) Systems,” Idaho National
Engineering and Environmental Laboratory, Idaho, Internal Technical
Report, January. 2004.
[5]
C. H. Hauser, D. E. Bakken, and A. Bose, “A failure to communicate:
next generation communication requirements, technologies, and archi-
tecture for the electric power grid,” Power and Energy Magazine, IE,
vol. 3, no. 2, March. 2005, pp. 47–55.
[6]
T. Yiyun, L. Can, C. Lin, and L. Lin, “Research on vehicle-to-
grid technology,” in International Conference on Computer Distributed
Control and Intelligent Environmental Monitoring, February. 2011, pp.
1013–1016.
[7]
R. Jin, B. Wang, P. Zhang, and P. B. Luh, “Decentralized online charging
scheduling for large populations of electric vehicles: a cyber-physical
system approach,” in International Journal of Parallel, Emergent and
Distributed Systems, January. 2012, pp. 1–17.
[8]
Z. Ma, D. S. Callaway, and I. A. Hiskens, “Decentralized charging
control of large populations of plug-in electric vehicles,” IEEE Trans.
Control Syst. Technol., vol. 21, no. 1, January. 2013.
[9]
S. Chen, Y. Ji, and L. Tong, “Deadline scheduling for large scale
charging of electric vehicles with renewable energy,” in IEEE 7th Sensor
Array and Multi-channel Signal Processing Workshop, June. 2012, pp.
13–16.
[10]
J. Burgermesiter, “Germany: The world‘s ﬁrst major renewable
energy
economy.”
[retrieved:
01,
2014].
Available
from:
http://www.renewableenergyworld.com/rea/news/
article/2009/04/
germany-the-worlds-
ﬁrst-major-renewable-energy-economy,
pp.
67–78, June. 2009.
[11]
G. M. Shaﬁullah, M. T. Amanullah, D. Jarvis, M. S. Ali, and P. Wolfs,
“Potential challenges: Integrating renewable energy with the smart
grid,” in 20th Australasian Universities Power Engineering Conference
(AUPEC), 5-8 December. 2010, pp. 1–6.
[12]
M. Wooldridge, “Intelligent agents: The key concepts,” in Multi-Agent
Systems and Applications II, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
H. K. V. Ma˘r´ık, O. ˘St˘ep´ankov´a and M. Luck, Eds.
Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2002, vol. 2322, pp. 3–43.
[13]
N. Ruiz, I. Cobelo, and J. Oyarzabal, “A direct load control model for
virtual power plant management,” IEEE Transaction on Power Systems,
vol. 24, no. 2, March. 2009, pp. 959–966.
[14]
P. Asmus, “Microgrids, virtual power plants and our distributed energy
future,” The Electricity Journal, vol. 22, no. 3, April. 2010, pp. 72–82.
[15]
A. Moallem, A. Bakhshai, and P. Jain, “Local smart micro grids,” in
2011 IEEE 33rd International Telecommunications Energy Conference
(INTELEC), October. 2011, pp. 1–8.
[16]
M. Deindl, C. Block, R. Vahidov, and D. Neumann, “Load shifting
agents for automated demand side management in micro energy grids,”
in SASO ’08. Second IEEE International Conference on Self-Adaptive
and Self-Organizing Systems, October. 2008, pp. 487–488.
[17]
T. K¨uster, M. L¨utzenberger, and D. Freund, “Distributed optimization of
energy costs in manufacturing using multi-agent system technology,” in
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Smart Grids, Green
Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies, St. Maarten, St.
Maarten, P. Lorenz and K. Nygard, Eds.
IARIA, March. 2012, pp.
53–59.
[18]
A. St. Leger, J. John, and D. Frederick, “Smart grid modeling approach
for wide area control applications,” in IEEE Power and Energy Society
General Meeting, San Diego, CA.
IARIA, 22-26 July. 2012, pp. 1–5.
[19]
M. L¨utzenberger, et al., “A multi-agent approach to professional
software engineering,” in Engineering Multi-Agent Systems — First
International Workshop, EMAS 2013, St. Paul, MN, USA, May 6–
7, 2013, Revised Selected Papers, ser. Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, M. Cossentino, A. E. F. Seghrouchni, and M. Winikoff,
Eds., vol. 8245.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 158–177.
[20]
T. Konnerth, et al., “Integration of simulations and MAS for smart
grid management systems,” in Proceedings of the 3rd International
Workshop on Agent Technologies for Energy Systems(ATES), Valencia,
Spain, 2012.
[21]
D. Grunewald, et al., “Agent-based network security simulation (demon-
stration),” in Proceedings of the 10th International Joint Conference on
Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, L. S. K. Tumer, P. Yolum
and P. Stone, Eds., May. 2011, pp. 1325–1326.
[22]
Vattenfall, BMW, TU Berlin, TU Chemnitz, and TU Ilmenau, “In-
creasing the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the applications wind-to-
vehicle (W2V) and vehicle-to-grid (V2G) including charging infras-
tructure (Managed Charging V2.0),” Technische Universit¨atsbibliothek
Hannover (TIB), 2011.
[23]
J. Keiser, M. L¨utzenberger, and N. Masuch, “Agents cut emissions -
on how a multi-agent system contributes to a more sustainable energy
consumption,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 10, no. 0, August. 2012,
pp. 866–873.
[24]
N. Masuch, J. Keiser, M. L¨utzenberger, and S. Albayrak, “Wind
Power-Aware Vehicle-to-Grid algorithms for sustainable EV energy
management systems,” in 2012 IEEE International Electric Vehicle
Conference (2012 IEVC), Greenville, South Carolina, USA, Mar. 2012.
[25]
M. L¨utzenberger, J. Keiser, N. Masuch, and S. Albayrak, “Agent
based assistance for electric vehicle- an evaluation,” in International
Conference on Active Media Technology, Macau, e. a. R. Huang, Ed.,
vol. 7669. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, December. 2012, pp. 145–154.
[26]
T. K¨uster, M. L¨utzenberger, and D. Freund, “An evolutionary optimiza-
tion for electric price responsive manufacturing,” in Proceedings of the
9th Industrial Simulation Conference, Venice, Italy, S. Balsamo and
A. Marin, Eds., Eurosis.
EUROSIS-ITI, June. 2011, pp. 97–104.
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

