Degrees of Freedom in Sharing Control of Smart Grid Connected Devices  
A framework for comparison of cross-organizational control sharing mechanisms for balancing  
supply & demand 
 
Kristian Helmholt, 
Department: Business Information Services 
TNO 
Groningen, The Netherlands 
Kristian.Helmholt@tno.nl 
Gerben Broenink,  
Department: Information Security  
TNO 
Groningen, The Netherlands 
Gerben.Broenink@tno.nl
 
 
Abstract—Electricity networks require  a balance between 
supply & demand of power in order to maintain stability and 
to provide a good power quality. The growth of renewable 
energy sources makes obtaining balance more difficult, 
because of their intermittent power profiles. Financial 
incentives for producing ‘green electricity’ locally also increase 
complexity due to the larger geographical distribution of 
electricity generation. Not surprisingly, more sophisticated 
(distributed) control mechanisms for balance in (smart) 
electricity grids are being proposed. Some of these proposals 
attempt to solve the problem of balance by managing demand, 
and thus introduce the concept of sharing control of devices 
connected to the grid. However, sharing control could 
introduce imbalances in ‘societal’ power between governments, 
companies and consumers. We propose that all parties 
involved should consciously decide on what amount of control 
they want to share. We provide a framework for comparison of 
control sharing mechanisms.  
Keywords-Smart grid; control sharing; privacy. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION: WHERE DOES IT SAY SHARING IN 
‘GRID CONTROL’? 
The concept of ‘control of an electricity grid’ can have 
different meanings. In this paper, we mean control with 
respect to obtaining balance between supply and demand of 
power in electricity grids. In an electricity grid, it is 
quintessential that the total consumption of power is 
continuously equal to the total production of power. If this is 
not the case, the quality of the provided power will degrade. 
In classic grids (as opposed to future ‘smart’ grids), control 
mechanisms are already put into place in order to deal with 
the variation in demand by power consumers. When 
consumers demand more power from the grid, power 
producing parties connected to the grid have to provide more 
power as a whole (group). In the future, more will be 
demanded from control mechanisms [11]. They have to be 
able to deal with the increase of more distributed and 
renewable power sources with variable output (wind, solar, 
wave, etc.).A solar cell or wind turbine cannot be powered 
down without wasting valuable energy. Also, wind turbines 
can not be immediately shut down by turning them away 
from the wind. Another problem is the fact that the power 
flow is changing from one way to two way. In the classic 
grid, there are a few ‘centralized’ large power plants and 
many distributed users. In future grids, there might be many 
distributed small power plants: home-owners with a wind 
mill, solar panels, geothermal installations, etc. that have a 
surplus in electricity production. This does not only reduce 
the accuracy of prediction the production of power – since it 
is now closely related to the weather–, but also the accuracy 
of the prediction of power transported across the grid, since 
locally generated electricity is consumed ‘first’ before more 
power is demanded from the grid. Another reason why more 
intelligence in the energy grid is needed, is that the rise of 
the usage of Plug-in (Hybrid) Electrical Vehicles (P(H)EV) 
seems to become a real challenge [12]. It is not unlikely that 
PHEVs will be plugged into the grid at almost the same time 
(when people come home from work). This will create a 
huge demand for power in a relatively short time, possibly 
resulting in a grid overload. The grid was not dimensioned 
with all this in mind. With the current grid it seems likely 
new control mechanisms have to be put in place.   
Currently, ‘Demand Response’ (DR) of devices 
connected to the grid is being used in several research 
projects as a new means of control [13]. Depending on the 
amount of power that is consumed by devices, it can make 
sense to switch devices on and off in order to attain balance 
in the grid. Since DR almost always requires somebody or 
something else than the owner of the device to 
(automatically) switch on or switch off the device, device 
owners are no longer fully in control. For example, when DR 
is applied at charging PHEVs, the charging process may 
have to wait for a signal ‘from the electricity network’ that 
tells the car to start charging.  
As a society, we should decide how much we want others 
to be in control of the grid-connected devices we own. For 
example, do we want to control our own devices in our own 
home, as we do now, or do we want having our devices 
controlled by some ‘entity’ in the electricity grid in order to 
have balance in the electricity grid? To make this decision 
we need a framework for comparison, which we provide in 
the remaining sections of this paper.  
In the next section, related research on this topic will be 
given. We will see that much research is done, however 
almost no research is done in comparing different solutions 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

with each other. After that, our problem description is given, 
followed by our contribution and methodology.  Section V 
describes our framework, which can be used to compare 
different demand response mechanisms. After that, the 
consequences of choices in the framework are explained in 
Section VI. As an example of the application of our 
framework to a real situation, Section VII compares two real 
systems with each other, and mentions their differences. In 
Section VIII we will draw our conclusions, and finally, in 
Section IX, the future work will be described. 
II. 
RELATED RESEARCH 
 
The main goal of our research was to be able to compare 
control mechanisms for the management of supply & 
demand in smart grids. The comparison should be useful for 
different stakeholders in society. We want them to be able to 
decide on the application of these control mechanisms, based 
on the consequences for their societal position. We did not 
find research (yet) on that specific subject.  
 
With respect to recent research on control mechanisms 
themselves we did find different approaches. First of all 
there is research with a focus on the control of the grid 
itself. In their description of a High Assurance Smart Grid 
(HASG) model Overman & Sackman put emphasis on the 
issue of admission control [1]. They describe a Smart Grid 
with ‘a control system architecture characterized by a 
distributed architecture that is designed to mitigate against 
widespread failures when control system components 
themselves are compromised’. More on this can be found a 
later paper from Overman et al., where  ‘a Three-Part Model 
for Smart Grid Control Systems’ is described [3]. They note 
that while “energy flow is now more interconnected and less 
hierarchical, the energy control system architecture is still 
largely hierarchical.”. Furthermore, they elaborate on a 
distributed control signaling architecture “such that some 
level of device collaboration can be done even when there 
are losses of control capability from the still dominant 
hierarchical control system architecture. This is a key 
feature required for a self-healing grid.”. We suspect that 
this will be an important aspect of future intelligent 
networks: distributed control, where no single entity has 
total control over the entire network. Not only because of 
the ability to deal with attacks on the network (which is an 
important aspect in the ‘three-part model’), but also because 
of the fact that one or a few central entities cannot handle all 
the dynamics of supply & demand with energy sources with 
an intermittent profile.  
 
Another example of what we think is innovative thinking 
in control of energy grids themselves, is described by 
Belkacemi et al. [6]. They use the concept of the Human 
Immune System (HIS) in order to “perform self-healing and 
control of the grid by automatic fault location and isolation, 
reconfiguration and restoration.” They see the HIS as a 
Multi-Agent System (MAS), which consists of many 
different agents that carry out separate tasks with a certain 
level of autonomy, in order to achieve a goal at a higher 
level. There is no single control entity which is directly 
carrying out all control tasks, but control tasks are distributed 
across nodes. In this paper, however, we want to focus on 
sharing control between stakeholders.  Grid stability and 
optimization is largely within the realm of a network 
operator. We also want to be able to take into account parties 
that the grid for ‘energy logistics’ and which (may) have to 
share control. There is also research carried out in this area. 
For example, an architecture for distributed control of power 
consuming and producing devices which are attached to the 
grid, is described by Tariq et al. [4].  They state that “the 
advent of renewable generation technologies has resulted in 
increased complexity, requiring more powerful EMS 
applications. Regulatory changes in market structures 
frequently require modifications to these applications”. 
EMS meaning ‘Energy Management Systems’. Next to 
stating this requirement, they “describe the elements 
required for implementation of a “Prosumer” based 
distributed control architecture for smart grid”.  In their 
description the authors describe four layers of control, that 
have no knowledge about the workings of the other layers 
and which only interact on the basis of interfaces between 
the layers: 
 
• 
Device Layer, concerned with the physical connectivity 
of electric components.   
• 
Local Control Layer, concerned with the control 
mechanisms of the devices. Examples named are the 
LTC control of a transformer and the battery charger of 
an electric vehicle. 
• 
System Control Layer. According to the authors 
Energy Management Systems (EMS) and Distribution 
Management Systems (DMS) applications are examples 
of systems control layer for Independent System 
Operator (ISO) and electric utilities. Also the authors 
see ‘corresponding’ system control layers at the level of 
microgrids, buildings, homes, etc.  
• 
Market Layer. Decision control processes at the level 
of available resources, where economic objectives are 
taken into account. This layer generates control actions 
for the system control layer or price signal for the 
external world, based on information from the system 
control layer, where market strategies are taken into 
account.   
 
We state that the concept of ‘layering’ allows for a 
necessary separation of concerns, which enables us to deal 
with the complexity of future smart grids. Another model for 
control with separation of concerns is described by 
Molderink et al. [7]. They present a “three-step control 
methodology….focused on domestic energy streams”. They 
refer to an important issue of sharing control from domestic 
environments: 
the 
comfort 
of 
residents. 
Different 
stakeholders in a smart grid have different goals and/or 
desires. While network operators might target at system 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

stability, domestic users may ‘just’ want to have their 
devices consume energy in order to provide comfort. At the 
same time a government might want to target at reducing 
CO2 emissions by increasing energy (use) efficiency. This 
requires a combination of local and (more) global 
optimization. In their paper the authors provide three steps: 
local prediction, global planning and local scheduling. 
Together, these steps form one iteration. In this way, the 
authors think it is possible to combine different goals at 
different levels of control.  
 
From a quantitative point of view one might state that 
controlling devices in a domestic environment will not be a 
real issue for the future since what amount of power can 
actually be shifted in time in homes? While this is an issue of 
debate (it also depends on the amount of electrification of 
heating and cooling equipment in homes), there is one 
development which certainly cannot be marginalized [10]. 
This is described by Erol-Kantarci et al. They state that the 
charging load of Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEV) 
can cause several problems if left unmanaged. To that, they 
discuss an admission control system [8]. If everybody with a 
PHEV plugs in their PHEV after work, the grid has to 
transport a lot of power at the same time. Current grids have 
not been designed with this in mind.  A (probably costly) 
solution would be increasing the capacity of the grid, another 
solution is to carry out some kind of ‘congestion 
management’ where PHEVs are charged ‘on-a-turn-basis’. 
This means sharing control, since the person wanting the 
PHEV getting charged is probably not the only one deciding 
on the time of charging if a congestion management 
mechanism is put into place. More on the important role of 
PHEVs or ‘gridable vehicles’ can be found in a paper from 
Venayagamoorthy, who talks about the complexity of Cyber-
Physical Energy System (CPES) [5]. He does not only see 
‘gridable’ vehicles as a consumer of power, but also as a 
possible producer. This adds an extra dimension of control to 
gridable vehicles, since this means two-way flow of power, 
making the control problem more complex. 
III. 
PROBLEM DESCRIPTION 
As stated at the beginning of Section II the main goal of 
our research was to be able to compare (distributed) control 
mechanisms for supply & demand management, based on 
consequences for ‘societal’ power. Our problem then became 
answering the question ‘what is an efficient and useful 
means of comparison – to be used by different stakeholders - 
with respect to sharing control of devices connected to the 
grid, when focusing on consequences for societal power?’  
Answering this question required a structured overview 
of what we call the ‘solution space’: what kind of variations 
in Demand Response Management can be distinguished with 
respect to consequences for sharing control of devices 
connected to the grid and thus for societal power. To that we 
needed a overview of what the consequences would actually 
be when choosing for a specific model of sharing control.  
IV. 
OUR CONTRIBUTION & METHODOLOGY 
At TNO we are involved at different research projects, 
ranging from technical pilots, simulation studies economic 
evaluation of multi-stakeholder analysis, legislative view. 
We carry out this research on behalf of different customers. 
What we describe in this paper is derived from the 
experience we have had in these projects. The demonstration 
case “PowerMatcher” is a technology which we use in 
several other projects. 
Our contribution in this paper is a framework for 
comparison, which contains a structured overview of the 
degrees of freedom for sharing control of devices connected 
to the grid. Also it contains a list of consequences caused by 
choices made with respect a certain degree of freedom. We 
arrived at this model by analyzing different (partial) Smart 
Grid designs from the viewpoint of sharing control, while 
focusing on consequences of design decisions. This resulted 
in the framework title ‘Degrees Of Freedom In Sharing 
Control’ (DOFISC) for Smart Grids (4SG). This approach 
resembles the approach we took in defining the DOFIS-4SG 
model, which was focused on ‘information sharing’ [1]. 
Like the DOFIS-4SG, the basic structure of the model is 
a set of axes. Each axis is a ‘degree of freedom’ and 
represents an aspect controlling a device or a group of 
devices of another owner. This means not all aspects of smart 
grid control are included. When control is within one domain 
of one owner (e.g. network operator), there is very little 
sharing going on, so these aspects are not taking into 
account. The aspects of sharing control we did include are 
related to differences in owner or user of a device connected 
to the grid. Just as with the DOFIS-4SG model, the basis for 
the included aspects was found in literature on Smart Grids 
and our experience with control architectures in other 
domains (i.e. telecommunications). We distilled the greatest 
common denominators and make additions where they were 
necessary in order to provide for making comparisons. And, 
once again, just as with DOFIS-4SG, this meant that we did 
not mathematically derive these aspects, but carried out a 
selection process based on the criteria 1) ‘relevant to control 
devices attached to the grid’ and 2) the axes being 
‘orthogonal’. For more information on the concept of 
orthogonal axis see [1]. We arrived at a list of possible 
consequences in a similar fashion. Currently, we suspect that 
the axes, their subdivisions and the list of consequences can 
be used to assess and compare aspects sharing control of 
devices connected to the grid.  Providing proof for this 
should be included in further research, just as it was the case 
with DOFIS-4SG, which is being evaluated at the moment.  
V. 
FRAMEWORK DESCRIPTION 
In this section, we present our framework, which can be 
used to classify and compare demand response management 
systems in smart grids. Our framework consists of 3 axes 
which are orthogonal to each other. An design choice on one 
axis does not influence an design choice on another axis. 
Before presenting the axes, we want to make a distinction  
with respect to different types of control of a device. We  
base this distinction on the three ‘modes of control’ of 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

devices by Overman et al. [3]. With respect to devices 
attached (i.e. not in) to the grid we see three types of control: 
  
1. manual control, A light that is switched on or off by 
home owners operating a switch. Another example is a 
electricity generator running on diesel. This type of 
control is difficult to share between parties which are 
not located at the location of the device.  
2. automatic control, A light that is switched on by 
movement (e.g. infra-red sensor). Another example are 
solar panels that produce electricity once the sun is 
shining. This type of control is difficult to share 
between the owner of and others, because the control 
depending on the solar intensity.  
3. remote control. A washing machine that is switched on 
by a control device outside the washing machine.  This 
type of control can be shared, especially because of the 
fact that it is ‘remote’.  
 
 Our focus in the framework is on remote control, which 
can be carried out from any location. Also, we understand 
sharing control to be the sharing of control between different 
persons and/or organizations. A network operator that uses 
distributed control mechanisms using multi-agent systems 
for ‘network stability’ does not automatically ‘share’ control 
with consumers. Only when the network operator has some 
(indirect) influence with respect to the control of power 
consuming devices, we consider this to be sharing control.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The three degrees of freedom 
A. 
Predictive window 
The predictive window is a time horizon of a controlling 
party. A controlling party has to make decisions and 
communicate them with others parties involved. It matters 
how far in advance the controlling party has to make its 
decisions. Some supply & demand designs prescribe a 
predictive window of 15 minutes, while others might have 
predictive windows of a day or even more. 
 
An important question with respect to the predictive window 
is how far in advance does the controlling entity need to 
plan? For example, in Figure 2, if the controlling entity has a 
predictive window of 1 hour, it does not know that turning 
the washing machine on in 15 minutes, will cause a heavy 
load in 2 hours, when the electric car starts loading. 
However, if a controlling entity has a predictive window of 
three hours, it can foresee that starting the washing machine 
in 15 minutes, will cause a heavy load in 2 hours. And 
therefore, the controlling entity could make another decision.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Distance in time 
 
B. 
Level of indirection 
The level of indirection determines the amount of 
freedom in control left after a control decision has been made 
by a controlling party. An extreme example is ‘direct  and 
total control’, where the controlling party directly controls a 
device connected to grid.  
There is a fundamental difference between direct control 
and indirect control. In case of direct control, the user is 
subjected to the control of the controlling party, and in case 
of indirect control, the controlling party gives directions with 
respect to power consumption. This can be in terms of 
constraints, within which is some freedom left to the 
consuming party to control devices connected to grid. Also a 
set point can be given as a direction, where the consuming 
party has to consume the specified amount of power. The 
controlling party does not specify which devices have to be 
switched on or off. An example of direct control is: a 
washing machine (2000 Watt) is turned on at 16:00, and the 
electric car (3000 Watt) will be loaded at 18:00. While an 
indirect example could be: the user will not be able to 
consume more than 3500 Watts. In both ways, the peak load 
is avoided, however in the indirect version, the user can 
chose to the order of the washing machine and the electric 
car.  While in the direct version, the consumer has no choice. 
In any design of a smart grid, a decision has to be made 
about which stakeholders is in charge of making which 
(in)direct control decisions. Note that different stakeholders 
can provide different constraints to each other. For example, 
a supplier of power can set a maximum for the amount of 
power and a network operator can set a maximum for the 
amount of power which can be transported. In Figure 3, this 
concept is shown graphically. Three examples of possible 
solutions are shown: 
 
• 
Red line: a supplier provides no constraints. The 
network operator is giving only high level 
constraints. And the direct control is given at 
device level. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

• 
Blue line: a supplier is providing no constraints, 
the network operator is providing some 
constraints, the home environment provides 
more restrictive constraints, and finally, the 
direct control decisions are made at device level. 
• 
Black line: the supplier is providing some 
constraints, and the network operator takes 
direct control decisions.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Level of indirection 
C. 
Level of participation in control decisions 
The level of participation is an important part of the control 
space. In different smart grid architectures, there are different 
levels of participation of owners of devices connected to the 
grid in control decisions. It is theoretically possible that the 
owner has no say in the control decision at all. For example, 
in the current energy network, in the Netherlands, no one is 
allowed to consume a peak load of more then 16 amps on 
one group of devices (each house can have several groups of 
devices). This control decision is based on the infrastructure 
(the infrastructure supports no more than 16 amps), and a 
consumer has no say in this decision (unless he is willing to 
pay for a special connection to the energy network). Another 
extreme is a smart grid, in which all consumers publish there 
preferences, and a distributed algorithm makes a control 
decision, satisfying as much as possible participants.  
 
Figure 4.  Level of participation 
 
Note that a high level of participation differs from a high 
level of indirection. The level of indirection is about the 
decision itself (it is a property of the decision) While the 
level of participation is about the process of decision making.  
In Figure 4, a graphical overview of the possible degrees 
of participation is provided. One extreme is no influence 
from owners/users of devices connected to grid, and the 
other extreme is almost no influence from another 
controlling party with whom control could be shared.  
 
D. 
Applying the framework 
To apply the framework, an inventory of all control 
decisions - made in a particular smart grid design - has to be 
made. Important for this phase is to recognize that there can 
be many different kind of decisions with respect to the 
control of power in one and the same design, so the 
framework may have to be applied many times in order to 
compare different designs. For example, one can imagine a 
design where parties make (indirect) control decisions: a 
power supplier who makes a control decision about the 
minimal load which is to be delivered, a network operator 
who makes control decisions about the maximal load, and a 
consumer who makes the direct decision to turn on device 
like a washing machine. In this case, at least three types of 
control decisions are made here.  
 
 
To make things worse, a smart grid can have different 
ways to treat different devices. For example, to load an 
electric vehicle demand response management can be used, 
while for switching a lamp on and off, no demand response 
management is used. As a result, the framework may need to 
be applied multiple times to one architecture.  
 
VI. 
CHOICES HAVE CONSEQUENCES 
Choosing a position on the axis in the framework has 
consequences. In this section, we discuss consequences that 
relate to societal aspects of Smart Grids. We do not claim 
that this list is exhaustive. 
A. 
Consequences for balance of societal power 
The choices, which are made on one of the axes of our 
framework, have consequences. One of those consequences 
is the impact on the balance of what we call ‘societal’ power. 
With that we mean the power to determine the behaviour of 
other people and/or organizations. In the current energy grid, 
that kind of power is distributed. Each consumer has the 
right to turn his own devices on and of, and the energy 
suppliers take care of the energy balance on the net. Demand 
response management will affect this balance. As soon as 
control of the end used devices is shared with the network 
operators, the network operates will have more societal 
power in the energy grid, and the end user will have less. We 
do not put any direct qualification to a shift in the balance of 
societal power. We do want to state that a distributed balance 
of societal power is a natural barrier to misuse of power. In 
Table I, an overview is made of the impact the three axes of 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

the frame work have on the balance of control. In this Table, 
it is shown how changing  the position on one of the axes 
will have consequences. 
TABLE I.  
CONSEQUENCES FOR THE BALANCE OF SOCIETAL POWER 
Degree of freedom 
Impact on balance of control 
Predictive window 
The size of the predictive window has a 
small impact on the balance of control. It 
determines how long in advance the 
controlling party has to make its decisions. 
Level of indirection 
The level of indirection has more impact on 
the balance of power. The more energy 
consuming and producing devices are 
directly controlled by one party, the more 
direct control this party has on the entire 
smart grid, and thus the people connected to 
it.  
Level of participation 
With a low level of participation, the 
controlling party has a high level of control, 
while a high level of participation will 
result in a lower level of control. 
B. 
Consequences for network stability and  
optimization 
In general increasing the degrees of freedom may seem to 
result in less network stability, or at least more difficulty in 
obtaining it. When more demands and wishes have to be 
taken into account, more sophisticated decisions have to be 
made. Whether or not this will be the case depends on the 
interaction of the actual control mechanism and the power 
consuming and producing behaviour of the different 
stakeholders. In this paper, we cannot provide the reader 
with a general ‘rule-of-thumb’ in this area. We can state that 
if network operators have no control at all and energy 
suppliers and consumers do share control with respect to 
balance in supply & demand, a situation could occur where 
there is balance in supply & demand from an energy point of 
view, but which cannot be implemented physically, due to 
network constraints. Also, by sharing control with a network 
operator, it could carry out more network usage optimisation 
and thus minimize the transmission costs. In any case, a 
decision on whether or not to share control with a network 
operator influences the possible usage of Demand Response 
to optimize network usage.  
TABLE II.  
CONSEQUENCES FOR THE NETWORK STABILITY AND 
OPTIMIZATION 
Degree of freedom 
Impact on stability and optimization. 
Predictive window 
In a larger predictive window there are 
more possibilities for an optimization 
algorithm to find a optimal solution. For 
example, with a distance in time of 1 hour, 
it will not be possible to find a solution 
which involves a decision about another 
devices which has to be turned on in 3 
hours. So, depending on the used algorithm 
for control, a large predictive window could 
result in a more stable and more optimized 
network. 
Level of indirection 
The impact of the level of indirection on the 
grid depends highly on the optimization and 
Degree of freedom 
Impact on stability and optimization. 
stabilization algorithms which are used. 
Some algorithms need a higher level of 
direction for a more stable and optimal 
network.  
Level of participation 
The higher the level op participation, the 
less 
influence 
of 
the 
optimization 
algorithms is used. Therefore, a higher level 
of participation will probably result in a less 
optimized and less stable network. 
 
C. 
Consequences for privacy 
The privacy discussion often focuses on the information 
which is gathered about the people. However, not only the 
information which is gathered about them influences the 
privacy. Also the amount of self-control influences privacy. 
In an extreme example: when all electricity is cut off after 
22:00, most people will be forced to go to bed early. As a 
result, people have less control about their own live, and are 
forced to apply to the rules given by the smart grid. The 
different axes in the framework have different impacts on 
privacy. In Table III those impacts are explained. 
TABLE III.  
CONSEQUENCES FOR PRIVACY 
Degree of freedom 
Impact on privacy 
Predictive window 
A large predictive window forces a 
consumer to make decisions about his 
energy consumption early. For example, 
when the decision to use no energy after 
22:00 is made at 18:00, a consumer cannot 
change his mind at 21:00. 
Level of indirection 
The higher the level of indirection, the more 
choice the consumer has, so the lower the 
impact on privacy. For example, when the 
only control is that the consumer may not 
consume more than 3000 Watts, the 
consumer can decide for himself how he 
uses the 3000 Watts. However, when the 
grid decides that the consumer cannot watch 
TV, because he will be using the washing 
machine, there will be a huge impact on 
privacy. 
Level of participation 
When the control decisions are made by an 
external party, the owner of the device 
connected to the gird loses a lot of privacy. 
However, 
when 
the 
consumer 
is 
participating in the control decisions, the 
impact on privacy will be lower. The more 
participation there is in the decision making 
process, the more privacy with respect to 
self-control is left for the consumer. 
D. 
Consequences for green ‘intermittent’ energy 
Last but not least, we come to the consequences of 
sharing control for a driver behind ‘smart grids’: creating 
space for the integration of energy from renewable sources 
with an intermittent profile and limited prediction (wind, 
solar, etc.). When there is no sharing of control in the 
balance of supply & demand, attaining balance must be 
achieved by creating and or introducing other suppliers (e.g. 
more gas turbine based electricity plants) that can 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

compensate for the variation on the ‘intermittent’ renewable 
supply side.  Demand Response management (i.e. sharing 
control) reduces the need for extra flexible suppliers.  
TABLE IV.  
CONSEQUENCES FOR ‘GREEN’ ENERGY 
Degree of freedom 
Impact on ‘green’ energy 
Predictive window 
A larger predictive window is difficult to 
obtain for power sources like wind and 
solar power plants.  
Level of indirection 
More or less indirection with respect to 
demand response management does not 
directly impact ‘green energy’. However, 
when consumers are allowed to tell which 
energy resources have to be used (‘green 
power’), direct control over the feeding of 
power to the grid does impact the use of 
green energy. 
Level of participation 
Sharing control for supply & demand 
management can be used to stimulate 
energy usage when renewable sources are 
‘at peak level’. However, a higher level of 
participation (be it consumers or produces) 
does not directly impact ‘green energy’. 
 
VII. FRAMEWORK APPLICATION 
As a demonstration of how one could apply this 
framework, we now apply it in comparing the classical grid 
and a possible future smart grid with respect to sharing 
control of balancing supply & demand. For this grid of 
tomorrow we use the ‘PowerMatcher’ distributed control 
mechanism [9]. In a Powermatcher world there are so called 
consumer and producer nodes. They are represented by a 
'software agents’. The agents exchange ‘bids’ on electricity. 
They express to what degree an agent is willing to pay 
(consumer) or receive (producer) for which amount of 
electricity. This is done through a mechanism based on 
micro-economic markets in which bids are aggregated and 
the market clearing price is determined as the equilibrium 
where supply meets demand. The ‘market clearing price’ is 
returned as a response to a bid. Agents then have to follow 
the allocated energy profile. Note that in the classical grid (in 
the Netherlands) a kind of auctioneering mechanism also 
takes place (e.g. the APX) at the level of Program 
Responsible parties (the electricity providers and network 
operators) The huge difference of the PowerMatcher lies 
within the fact that in a ‘PowerMatcher world’ devices 
attached to the grid partake into the bidding through their 
agents. We can now compare these two situations using the 
framework and focus on the consequences. 
 
Predictive window. In the classical grid, consumers of 
power do not tell producers of their need for energy directly.. 
Only very large consumers have specific contracts with 
energy suppliers and network operators. For the mass of 
domestic and SME users statistics are used, where previous 
behavior is used to determine future behavior. In a 
PowerMatcher grid consumers do communicate their energy 
need – be it indirectly – by bidding prices for amounts of 
energy. The distance in time are market rounds. The distance 
in time is related to the time it takes for a market round to 
complete and if it is allowed to bid for market rounds in the 
future. 
 
Level of indirection. In the classical grid, the consumer 
has a certain level of indirect control of balancing supply & 
demand. The entire group of consumers of controls the entire 
group of producers by demanding energy through the grid, 
which the producers have to supply, as long as the 
consumers pay. Since the price of energy for consumers 
hardly varies (in time), the amount of control of balancing 
supply & demand the producer has is very little. In a 
‘PowerMatcher world’ there is more direct control from the 
producers: by demanding a higher price in the next market 
round, they can ‘push’ the agents of consuming devices into 
not consuming power. Or by lowering the price, they can 
‘push’ agents towards consuming, depending on the actual 
need for energy of course.  
 
Level of participation.  In the classical grid there is little 
participation in control with respect to balancing supply & 
demand by both consumers and producers.  The group of 
producers responds to a total predicted demand arriving at 
centralized markets (national, international). The group of 
consumers responds to prices on the market by energy 
providers. In a ‘PowerMatcher world’ the level of 
participation is increased significantly. Each consuming 
device influences the market (indirectly) by bidding and each 
producer influences the market by demanding a certain price 
for their electricity production. However, the amount of 
participation in a ‘PowerMatcher world’ is closely linked 
with the type of mechanism is used by the specific price 
determining agents used for determining the ‘market clearing 
price’. For example, when real money is used in an 
auctioneering type of mechanism, the consumer willing to 
spend the highest amount of money available has more 
influence than parties who have less to spend. Also, 
producers demanding the least amount of money for their 
electricity will probably have more influence.  
VIII. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we presented a framework for comparing 
(distributed) control mechanisms for balance of supply & 
demand, along three axes. The framework is focused on 
sharing control of ‘end-user devices’ in a smart grid. We 
saw that changes – along these axes - in the design of a 
control architecture for a smart will have consequences. We 
discussed these consequences with respect to issues of 
network stability, balance of ‘societal’ power, privacy and 
green energy. These issues are intertwined. For example, in 
an architecture, with a low level of indirection where energy 
suppliers can directly influence the usage of energy at 
consumers, a possibly unwanted consequence is the impact 
on privacy with respect to self-control. Increasing the level 
of indirection by having the energy suppliers influence the 
total amount of power instead of devices, the impact on 
privacy is less, but due to the shared influence of both the 
supplier and the consumer, there is more impact on network 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

stability and optimization. Due to the possible large impact 
of design choices, we also argue that these design decisions 
should not be taken lightly.  Future work 
Although we already use the framework for comparison 
of control mechanisms for the management of balance of 
supply & demand in smart grids, we do think there is room 
for improvement. As the reader might have noticed the 
framework is not as fine-grained as it might need to be in 
order to make efficient and useful comparisons. Future work 
will have to determine if this is the case. To that, we want to 
integrate framework on ‘sharing control’ with our earlier 
framework on ‘sharing information’. We will be doing so in  
‘Reference Model for Supply & Demand Management on 
Smart Grids’ (working title), which TNO is currently 
working on.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the European research project 
‘Web2Energy’ in the FP7 call: “ENERGY.2009.7.3.5. Novel 
ICT solutions for smart electricity distribution networks for 
their funding to this research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Broenink, and K. Helmholt, “Degrees of Freedom in 
Information Sharing on a Greener and Smarter Grid” Smart 
Grids, 
Green 
Communications 
and 
IT 
Energy-aware 
Technologies (ENERGY), 2011 The First International 
Conference on , pp. 141-147,  22 May 2011 
[2] T.M. Overman, and R.W. Sackman, "High Assurance Smart 
Grid: 
Smart 
Grid 
Control 
Systems 
Communications 
Architecture", 
Smart 
Grid 
Communications 
(SmartGridComm), 2010 First IEEE International Conference 
on, pp.19-24, 4-6 Oct. 2010  
[3] T.M. Overman, R.W. Sackman, T.L. Davis and B.S. Cohen, 
"High-Assurance Smart Grid: A Three-Part Model for Smart 
Grid Control Systems," Proceedings of the IEEE , vol.99, 
no.6, pp.1046-1062, June 2011 
[4] M.U. Tariq, S. Grijalva and M. Wolf, "Towards a Distributed, 
Service-Oriented Control Infrastructure for Smart Grid," 
Cyber-Physical 
Systems 
(ICCPS), 
2011 
IEEE/ACM 
International Conference on, pp.35-44, 12-14 April 2011 
[5] Venayagamoorthy and Ganesh Kumar, "Innovative smart grid 
control technologies", Power and Energy Society General 
Meeting, 2011 IEEE, pp.1-5, 24-29 July 2011, 
[6] R. Belkacemi, A. Feliachi, M.A. Choudhry and J.E. 
Saymansky, "Multi-Agent systems hardware development 
and deployment for smart grid control applications," Power 
and Energy Society General Meeting, 2011 IEEE, pp.1-8, 24-
29 July 2011 
[7] A. Molderink, V. Bakker, M.G.C. Bosman, J.L. Hurink and 
G.J.M. Smit, "Management and Control of Domestic Smart 
Grid Technology," Smart Grid, IEEE Transactions on , vol.1, 
no.2, pp.109-119, Sept. 2010 
[8] M. Erol-Kantarci, J.H. Sarker and H.T. Mouftah, "Analysis of 
Plug-in Hybrid Electrical Vehicle admission control in the 
smart grid," Computer Aided Modeling and Design of 
Communication Links and Networks (CAMAD), 2011 IEEE 
16th International Workshop on, pp.56-60, 10-11 June 2011 
[9] M.P.F. Hommelberg, C.J. Warmer, I.G. Kamphuis, J.K. Kok 
and G.J. Schaeffer, "Distributed Control Concepts using 
Multi-Agent technology and Automatic Markets: An 
indispensable feature of smart power grids," Power 
Engineering Society General Meeting, 2007. IEEE, pp.1-7, 
24-28 June 2007 
[10] D.J.C. MacKay, “Sustainable Energy – without the hot air.” 
UIT Cambridge, 2008. ISBN 978-0-9544529-3-3. 
[11] G. Strbac, A. Shakoor, M. Black, D. Pudjianto and T. Bopp,  
”Impact of wind generation on the operation and development 
of the UK electricity systems”, Electric Power Systems 
Research, vol. 77, issue 9, July 2007 pp. 1214-1227 
[12] C. Framer, P. Hines, J. Dowds and S. Blumsack, “Modeling 
the impact of increasing PHEV loads on the distribution 
infrastruction” System Sciences (HICSS), 43rd Hawaii 
International conference on, 2010, pp 1-10 
[13] M.H. Albadi and E.F. El-Saadany, “Demand Response in 
Electricity Markets: An Overview”, Power Engineering 
Society General Meeting, 2007, Tampa, FL, pp 1-7. 
 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-189-2
ENERGY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

