Energy Planning Support with Geomapping Tool and Energy Demand Estimation: 
The Energis Platform 
 
Gema Hernández Moral, Víctor Iván Serna, Giulia Massa and César Valmaseda 
Energy Department 
Fundación CARTIF 
Boecillo, Valladolid, Spain 
Email - gemher@cartif.es, vicser@cartif.es, giumas@cartif.es, cesval@cartif.es 
 
 
Abstract—Energy 
directives 
aim 
at 
decreasing 
energy 
consumption and assuring a low carbon environment, in line 
with 
climate 
change 
mitigation 
strategies. 
Their 
implementation gives rise to the need of energy plans to 
improve actual energy tendencies. However, making informed 
decisions in energy planning is not always immediate, nor it is 
based on contrasted criteria, since normally the current 
conditions are unknown. There is a lack of tools that can aid 
planners in this decision-making process by showing the 
energy status of a determined area. In order to provide an 
adequate diagnosis and propose energy actions to cope with 
those needs, the baseline conditions should be based on 
validated calculation methodologies that make use of accurate 
and reliable data and are displayed in an easy and 
understandable manner. To deal with these problems, the 
ENERGIS platform is proposed where the energy demand of 
the residential sector is estimated with validated Energy 
Performance Certificate (EPC) software tool in Spain making 
use of public available data of buildings from official sources. 
The results are then reflected on a map, making use of geo-
visualisation capabilities, which sets the basis for informed 
energy planning. 
Keywords- Energy planning; demand estimation; Energy 
Performance Certificates (EPCs); maps; geo-visualisation; 
Geographic Information System (GIS). 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION: ENERGY PLANNING 
CONTEXT IN EUROPE AND PLATFORM NEED 
Growing CO2 emissions have increased the concerns 
with respect to Climate Change, which has been especially 
acknowledged by the United Nations with the signature of 
the Paris agreement [1]. In this ambitious, universal 
agreement some guidelines and objectives were set to 
provide a way forward to fight against climate change and to 
stop the current temperature rise below 2 degrees. 
The main source of these emissions is the deployment of 
fossil fuels for heating and cooling purposes, which in the 
end can be translated to the energy consumption produced by 
this type of fuels. In Europe, one of the main sectors 
contributing to the increase of CO2 emissions is the built 
environment, and in particular the residential sector 
accounting for 25,4% of the share according to Eurostat 
figures. 
These facts describe a reality where it is necessary to act 
upon, to implement regulations that enable to control the 
energy consumption and thus be able to secure a low carbon 
environment, which in the end will contribute to the fight 
against climate change. 
Reacting upon this necessity, the European Commission 
has proposed a package of Energy Directives [2], which aims 
for three main goals: putting energy efficiency first, 
achieving global leadership in renewable energies and 
providing a fair deal for consumers. It includes as well eight 
different legislative proposals that tackle, among other 
Energy Efficiency, Energy Performance in Buildings, 
Renewable Energy and Governance. 
These directives set certain objectives to Member States 
and should be transposed by each nation in order to comply 
with them by establishing plans and strategies. Depending on 
the administrative structure existing in each country, the 
plans can either be established at national level, or some high 
level guidelines at national level can be set and then specific 
objectives or actions at regional level implemented. After 
each Member State has carried out his strategies, the results 
should be reported at European level. 
These steps in energy policy implementation require the 
establishment of mechanisms to be able to propose adequate 
strategies according to the current energy status of the 
residential sector in each country at regional and national 
level. It is paramount to base the energy actions on a precise 
diagnostic of the situation to avoid off-target actions that 
result in a non-compliance of the objectives set and an 
inadequate allocation of resources. 
However, when a national or a regional authority intends 
to perform any kind of energy planning there is a lack of 
information and tools related to energy that aid in the 
diagnosis of the current situation at a global level (district, 
city or regional level), which in the end hinders the 
possibility to propose any contrasted energy action plan. 
Nevertheless, there are many elements that are not fully 
exploited and that can be deployed in this field. Firstly, there 
is public information regarding the built environment and 
climatic conditions, such as the cadastre or climate data from 
weather stations. Secondly, from the need imposed at 
European 
level 
to 
submit EPCs, 
several 
validated 
methodologies or tools have emerged at national level in 
order to obtain Energy Labels and basic energy information. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Thirdly, the existing Geographic Information Systems (GIS) 
can provide the spatial component, which is intrinsic to any 
kind of planning that involves considering cities, regions or 
nations. 
Based on these existing elements and combining their 
potential, the ENERGIS platform offers support in the 
energy planning process by enabling the visualization 
through GIS of the energy demand of the residential sector, 
which 
has 
been 
calculated 
deploying 
validated 
methodologies (Energy Performance Certificate tools in 
Spain) using public information. This platform will set the 
basis to have an adequate view of the current status and be 
able to make informed decisions. 
In Section II a review of similar approaches to ENERGIS 
has been performed. Then, in Section III, the approach 
followed in the project is presented. The specific modules 
integrating the platform are described in Sections IV, V and 
VI. Finally, some conclusions are extracted in Section VII. 
II. 
SOME APPROACHES IN THE ENERGY 
PLANNING FIELD 
The need to represent the energy current status has been 
explored in some studies in this field and they should be 
highlighted since some of the main elements introduced in 
the ENERGIS platform are addressed, even though lacking 
some of the features of the latter. These major differences 
will be explained in Section II-B. 
A. Examples of energy mapping tools 
The 
following 
represent 
examples 
that 
integrate 
simplified estimations to obtain energy indicators and are 
combined with GIS, which enables an immediate 
visualization, as it will be observed in the examples. 
 
1) Estimated total annual building energy consumption 
at the Block and Lot level for NYC 
Developed by the Sustainable Engineering Lab, this 
project aims at analysing the dynamics of final energy 
consumption in the city of New York [7]. To this aim, the 
final heating, cooling, DHW and electricity energy 
consumption in the built environment is estimated. The 
results are then displayed following a colour code through a 
web map, providing two levels of aggregation: at block and 
at lot level. The information is complemented with a pop-up 
that appears when clicking on a block or lot. 
The calculation methodology deployed was based on data 
at district level on the energy use, natural gas, diesel and 
vapour consumption of 2009 and it was combined with 
information coming from MapPLUTO, a geographical 
database of the Urban Planning Department in NYC. The 
estimation was based on the functions contained in the 
buildings (residential 1-4 people, residential multi-family, 
educational, health, storage, offices, commercial), making 
some special considerations regarding the location of the 
building. It is also based on the hypothesis that all ground 
floors have a commercial use and the upper floors are 
dedicated either to offices or residential use. 
With respect to visualization, it was developed with 
Mapbox tool, where with a colour code the different energy 
intensities are represented. However, this map only covers 
the city of New York, where the calculations have been 
estimated, without offering the capability to replicate this 
methodology in other cities. 
2) Energie label atlas 
The objective of the Energie Label Atlas is to represent 
the estimated Energy Labels of buildings in Holland [9]. 
This project was carried out with the aim of covering almost 
all residential buildings in the country and of offering 
citizens the possibility to obtain an accurate EPC of their 
dwelling. This would require performing additional 
calculations over the estimated value proposed in the map, 
but at a lower cost than usual. 
The origins of this project are to be found in the ‘Block by 
Block – Brooklyn’s Past and Present’ project that showed 
this area in New York with a colour code representing the 
age of the building. This idea was replicated in the 
Netherlands within the project Smart CitySDK, where all 
the buildings in the Netherlands are assigned a colour 
according to their age [8]. Building upon it, the Energie 
Label Atlas emerged, assigning to each building or dwelling 
an estimated Energy Label. 
To make these estimations reference buildings were 
calculated and a label was assigned to each of them. That 
implied the study of a number of building typologies that 
was representative enough of the residential sector in the 
Netherlands. Afterwards, all of the reference buildings were 
simulated, assigned to their corresponding typologies and 
mapped. In addition, the real Energy Labels coming from 
real EPCs were also mapped and the comparison among 
both results enabled. This results in some cases in high 
discrepancies between both results. 
The visualization capabilities are similar to those of the 
NYC case (Section II-A-1); however, the whole country was 
covered providing the estimated results at block level, 
regardless of the visualization scale. The information is also 
complemented by a widget, which serves to detail 
information at dwelling level, if real EPC information is 
available. 
B. Main differences with the ENERGIS tool 
The projects described above represent interesting 
approaches to the energy planning problem, by providing 
basic information on the energy status of a city (in the case 
of NYC) or of a country (in the case of the Netherlands). 
However, it is worth highlighting the main differences to the 
ENERGIS platform. 
The calculation methodology is considered highly 
relevant in order to provide accurate results. Therefore, 
instead of deploying estimated approaches in order to 
calculate consumption (as in the NYC case) the ENERGIS 
project is constrained to the estimation of the energy 
demand. This is due to the fact that there is no source of 
public information that can provide data on the energy 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

systems, rendering it inaccurate to assume the existence of a 
determined energy system. The approach used in NYC to 
calculate consumption, that is, assigning an energy system 
according to the typology of the building would be highly 
beneficial if applied within ENERGIS and would improve 
the quality of the platform. However, since there is no 
available database where these systems are described in 
Spain, no reliability can be assumed from this process. 
Moreover, the calculation is focused on the automation of 
validated tools to generate EPCs in Spain. This fact ensures 
a determined level of precision to the results obtained, 
opposed to the abovementioned approaches. With respect to 
the scale considered, aggregation possibilities are granted as 
in the case of the NYC map, but the unit of measure used to 
estimate the demand is the block, as in both showcased 
projects. Nevertheless, the scope to which the ENERGIS 
platform can be applied is the same as in the Netherlands 
case: at country level, since the main source of data is the 
Spanish Cadastre which covers the whole country [10]. 
C. The approach followed in the ENERGIS project – Main 
objectives 
As it has been observed, the ENERGIS key objectives 
can be summarized in three main points: (1) exploiting the 
potential of available public data sources, (2) automatizing a 
process 
of 
demand 
estimation 
based 
on 
validated 
methodologies, thus granting trust and precision and (3) 
exploiting visualization capabilities making use of GIS in the 
web. 
In order to fulfil these objectives, the ENERGIS platform 
is divided into three main modules: 
- 
Module 1: Information processing and treatment: 
which will be in charge of collecting the required 
information and processing it for its later use by 
Module 2. 
- 
Module 2: Estimation of the energy demand: based on 
Energy Performance Certificates tools in Spain, this 
module will be in charge of automatizing the 
calculations and providing the results of the energy 
demand of the buildings at block level. 
- 
Module 3: Geo-referencing and visualization: the 
results obtained by Module 2 are then displayed in a 
web map, following a colour code that corresponds to 
the Energy Label scale and providing different data to 
be shown and a range of filtering capabilities. 
III. 
MODULE 1: INFORMATION PROCESSING AND 
TREATMENT 
In order to design and develop this module, two main 
processes were carried out: identifying the main data 
sources to fulfil the needs of the second module (estimation 
of the energy demand) and the methods to process and 
transform the data. 
A. Identification of main sources of data 
Public data sources were examined in order to determine 
the most valuable among them according to the identified 
needs of Module 2. Information regarding the building is 
required (geometrical aspects, orientation, neighbouring 
blocks, thermal properties of the elements it is composed of 
and identification data) as well as climate data according to 
its location. 
For this purpose the Spanish Cadastre was analysed. It 
contains relevant data on buildings which is accessible for 
download through standardized mechanisms, following 
directives on spatial data, as it is the INSPIRE Directive. 
From this data source, relevant information on geometrical 
aspects, orientation, identification data and neighbouring 
blocks can be derived. 
To cope with the climate requirements, the National 
Code for Building Construction in Spain was queried, since 
it establishes reference climate data according to the 
province or town (static). 
For the building thermal properties assignation the 
National Building Code was also consulted. Based on 
several studies a Catalogue of building elements and 
materials has been generated. Based on it the different EPC 
tools are able to assign thermal property values to walls 
(external and internal), roofs, floors, windows, etc. The 
ENERGIS project based different building characteristics on 
the values used in the EPC tools, where according to the 
type of element, the year of construction and the climatic 
zone, some thermal characteristics and other parameter were 
assigned. 
B. Processing of data 
The processing of the data was needed mainly to derive 
geometrical characteristics of the data contained in the 
cadastre. For instance, the calculation of the number of 
pillars to calculate thermal bridges and estimate the number 
of windows; shadow calculation based on neighbouring 
building blocks, to determine the orientation of a wall or if it 
is interior or exterior, etc. 
All of these calculations were performed by deploying 
two scripts developed by VOXEL3D, one devoted to the 
extraction and pre-processing of raw data coming from the 
cadastre and the other devoted to the detection of 
neighbouring buildings and generation of shadow patterns 
that will be assigned to each individual wall and opening. 
As a result of the processing of this data a JSON file is 
generated containing all the required categories of 
information, which is then sent to Module 2 to estimate the 
energy demand. 
IV. 
MODULE 2: ESTIMATION OF THE ENERGY 
DEMAND 
The second module can be considered the core of the 
platform. If inadequate calculation methodologies are 
deployed, then the complete platform loses veracity and thus 
cannot be deployed with the expected results. For 
visualization purposes, it should also be able to perform 
quick estimations. Therefore, the steps followed in the 
design and development of this module were: the definition 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

of the requirements, definition of the module, its 
development and its validation. 
A. Status of EPC tools in Spain 
Having an understanding of the validated calculation 
methodologies deployed in Spain is paramount prior to the 
selection of one of them. Therefore, the first step was to 
perform an analysis of the tools used at national level. 
Based on the requirements imposed by the Energy 
Performance of Buildings Directive (EPBD, 2010/31/EU) 
[3], Member States of the EU are required to make 
mandatory the submission of EPCs for every dwelling, 
building block, or commercial premise to be leased or sold, 
as well as for every new construction and public buildings. 
In order to assure coherence among the results obtained 
in each Member State a methodological framework is 
described in the annex of the aforementioned Directive, 
which does not exactly set the formulas to be deployed, but 
instead presents the type of calculations to perform or which 
aspects to consider (for instance, thermal bridges). 
Afterwards, each Member State has the obligation to 
transpose this framework in their country and develop either 
a concrete methodology or develop specific tools to serve 
this purpose. In the case of Spain four validated tools were 
developed and made available to the public free of charge: 
Herramienta Unificada Líder-Calener (HULC), CE3, 
CE3X and CERMA. The main differences among them are 
the following: 
- 
HULC: tool developed based on public initiative, it 
presents the general energy certification method for 
buildings in the design phase, built buildings and 
existing ones (single family houses, building blocks, 
individual dwellings in a block and tertiary buildings). 
Through a relatively complex graphical user interface, 
the data insertion through this platform requires 
modelling in 3D and inserting precise data of the 
components integrating an element in the building (for 
instance the layers in a wall). The order followed when 
inserting the data should not be modified and the 
evaluation of different energy conservation measures 
proposed as an improvement to the baseline scenario 
cannot be evaluated. 
- 
CE3: tool developed based on public initiative, 
presents a simplified 
method for the energy 
certification for existing buildings (single family 
houses, building blocks, individual dwellings in a 
block and tertiary buildings). The insertion of data at 
different levels of detail is allowed and if some data is 
unknown a library of reference data is provided. In 
addition, 
it 
automatically 
offers 
three 
energy 
conservation measures as a suggestion for its 
improvement. 
- 
CE3X: similarly to CE3, this tool was developed 
based on public initiative, presents a simplified method 
for the energy certification for existing buildings 
(single family houses, building blocks, individual 
dwellings in a block and tertiary buildings). Through 
user-friendly graphical user interfaces the insertion of 
different levels of detail is allowed and also the 
evaluation of energy conservation measures. It offers 
interoperability capabilities with more advanced 
programs and the possibility to export an XML file 
with the results of the calculations. 
- 
CERMA: the only recognized tool developed based on 
private initiative, which offers a simplified energy 
certification method for building blocks. It allows 
certifying single family houses, building blocks or 
individual dwellings in a block, for existing and new 
buildings. 
The 
evaluation 
of 
different 
energy 
conservation measures is allowed. Data requirements 
of this tool are high in comparison to the rest. 
B. Definition of requirements 
Based on the objectives defined for the platform, the 
requirements of the estimation of the demand module were 
quite 
straightforward: 
the 
tool 
should 
enable 
the 
introduction of an adequate amount of data that can be fed 
by the public data sources identified. 
For this aim the study of the tools was performed, 
choosing in the end CE3X because of being the reference in 
terms of data model at national level (the data model 
proposed at national level to represent information related to 
EPCs follows the same structure as the output of CE3X). 
Moreover, it is easy to use and has data requirements that 
can be easily covered with information coming from public 
sources. Additionally, the accuracy behind the results 
provided in the calculations of the tools was also tested, 
which is explained in the validations named “prior to the 
selection of the EPC calculation tool” shown in Section E-1. 
C. Definition and design of the module 
The definition of the module was performed following 
the next steps: 
- 
Identification of the data required to perform 
simplified calculations: based on the analysis 
performed on the data required by the estimation tool 
and the available data in public data sources, as well as 
the performance validations carried out, the exact 
datasets required were identified. Among these, data 
from the cadastre, three climatic zones maps and data 
on building elements contained in a catalogue were 
identified (walls, roofs, windows, floors, internal 
walls, thermal bridges, etc.).The data introduced into 
the platform is considered to be slowly evolving or 
almost static. For instance, in the case of the climate 
data, reference data is assumed at this stage of the 
project. Given a determined location, and the zone 
where it is located, certain climatic characteristics are 
deployed, which are tabulated according to the 
Building Code in Spain. Other data deployed in the 
platform, such as the geometrical data, is considered to 
be invariable; however, the datasets contained in the 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

platform should be updated regularly according to the 
updates followed in the main source of data deployed: 
the Spanish Cadastre (approximately six months). 
- 
Simplified approaches for geometric definition of 
data: from the data coming from the cadastre some 
could be directly applicable, while other geometric 
characteristics had to be estimated, since they were not 
directly available in the cadastre. For instance, the 
information on openings, thermal bridges or the 
shadow calculation. 
- 
Establishing a workflow diagram: once the method 
to process the data had been established, a workflow 
depicting the functioning of the module was devised. 
In it the normal input data process and certification 
steps of the tool were taken into account. 
D. Development 
The development of the module was divided into two sub-
modules. The first one is in charge of extracting the 
information contained in the JSON file coming from module 
1 and generating one file per building block compliant with 
CE3X (.cex). Afterwards, the second sub-module will 
gather all of the compliant files and will automatize the 
CE3X process by introducing the information contained in 
the 
files 
and 
generating 
the 
Energy 
Performance 
Certificates. As a result, an XML is derived per building 
block where the heating, cooling and global demands are 
contained. 
E. Validation of the module 
Several types of validations have been performed during 
the design, development and validation process of the 
ENERGIS platform. Firstly, the appropriate EPC tool to use 
as a basis for the calculation module was chosen according 
to their data insertion processes, the capabilities they offer, 
and the accuracy obtained. Secondly, once the tool had been 
selected,  hypothesis and simplifications with respect to 
geometry issues such as thermal bridges, windows, etc. have 
been tested. These hypotheses were based on a set of tests 
performed on a model by model comparison, where the 
objective was to test how much do the definition of thermal 
bridges, windows and other elements of the envelope affect 
the results. Finally, once the platform had been developed, 
the final results obtained with it when automatically 
retrieving the data from the public data sources, processing 
it and automatizing the process were analysed. 
1) Prior to the selection of the EPC calculation tool 
The objective of these validations was to test the 
functioning of the different tools and the results obtained 
among each other. From this analysis the main output was 
that even though the process followed in the data insertion 
process and the tools were different, the results were similar 
among each other. This allowed selecting the tool based on 
other type of criteria than only on accuracy aspects. The 
outcome of this process was the selection of CE3X as the 
main calculation tool to be deployed, as previously justified. 
2) Testing the capabilities and how the program works 
After having selected the calculation tool and having 
analyzed both the data required and the available data in 
public data sources it became apparent that some of the 
geometric data was not directly available in public data 
sources. Therefore, an estimation to calculate openings, 
thermal bridges and shadows was required. 
To test if these hypotheses were reasonable in terms of 
precision deviation (i.e. their Energy Label did not vary) 
from a real Energy Performance Certificate, real cases were 
tested. These real cases were selected buildings in 
Valladolid (Spain), of which detailed data to perform energy 
simulations, was available. The EPC of real buildings was 
calculated based on information coming from detailed CAD 
plans, as if they had been performed by a certifier. The 
numbers of elements, their surfaces, as well as the final EPC 
results were contrasted and the result was satisfactory in 
terms of accuracy. As a consequence, and without delving 
into the hypotheses were calibrated and developed into the 
platform. 
3) Testing the results obtained 
Finally, once the hypothesis had been validated from an 
accuracy point of view, it was necessary to test that the 
process designed was responding as expected. To this end, 
the real calculations previously performed were compared to 
the results that would have been obtained manually by 
performing the geometric estimations proposed and also 
with the results obtained from Module 1. Several issues 
were detected during the process and errors were solved in a 
wide range of cases were different typologies of buildings 
and configurations were considered. 
V. 
MODULE 3: GEO-REFERENCING AND 
VISUALISATION 
The last module is devoted to the geo-referencing and 
visualization of data, which is highly relevant since it is the 
point where the information is communicated to the planner. 
A web-based platform has been developed taking into 
account the following aspects: the data to be stored and 
shown, how to store these data and the GIS web viewer.  
A. Visualization data 
The information that has to be shown in the visualizer and 
stored in the database is: 
- 
Information of the buildings from the cadastre 
without processing: year of construction, address, 
use of the building, location, etc. 
- 
Geometrical information of the building post-
processed 
from 
the 
original 
geographical 
information: surface of the building, information 
about the façades and other elements, etc. 
- 
Energy demand information calculated in the 
module 2: cooling, heating and global demand. 
In order to be able to represent the data in a map using a 
GIS system it was necessary to populate a geodatabase 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

which stores the aforementioned data with their location 
information. 
B. ENERGIS web mapping platform 
The ENERGIS web mapping platform is a map service 
platform that offers the geospatial information stored in the 
geodatabase by a set advanced tools for the access and 
management of this information, which is supported by 
vector cartography of the zones of interest or by orto-
photographs 
coming 
from 
the 
Plan 
National 
de 
Ortofotografía Aérea (PNOA). 
The backbone of the geographical web viewer is its 
functioning as an API that allows for flexibility, and 
easiness in the integration. This API allows consuming 
directly vector layers with energy information of urban 
settings. The capabilities offered can be summarized in the 
following: precise visualization tools at different scales; 
intelligent real-time filtering tools of the visualized contents, 
interactive querying the contents relative to each element of 
the map, showing different type of data, visualization with 
different base maps: PNOA, Open Street Maps, Mapzen or 
Stamen; and integration of other data of interest, such as the 
cadastre information or other post-processed information. 
 
Figure 1.  GIS web-viewer example 
The values displayed through the viewer are represented 
through a colour code that corresponds to the EPC scale. 
This enables a quick understanding of the status of a city, 
identifying which areas are most in need of retrofitting. An 
example of the viewer can be seen in Figure 1. In it, some of 
the capabilities listed above can be observed. 
As it can be seen, complementary information of each 
building can be displayed on the screen, such as: cadastre 
reference, year of construction, global energy demand, 
cooling demand and heating demand. In addition to this, 
more in depth information related to each building is 
available for download by the user. In it, data on the 
envelope used for its calculations, as well as additional 
identification data, thermal data and shadow information. 
Additionally, it should be mentioned that depending on the 
scale there are aggregation mechanisms where values of 
energy demand at region, district or at group of buildings’ 
level can be displayed. 
VI. 
LESSONS LEARNED 
The development of an energy platform to support energy 
planning has offered a number of lessons learned, which 
have arisen from trying to implement the objective of 
working with public data as a basis for energy planning 
based on existing validated energy tools. 
The first difficulty encountered was related to the lack of 
relevant geometric that has an impact on the energy 
results in public databases. Estimations on the dimensions 
of openings, lengths of thermal bridges, etc. had to be 
applied according to the types of buildings so as to consider 
these aspects in the energy simulations. 
Also the work with building typologies was necessary 
in order to apply thermal characteristics to the building 
elements considered. This assignation was based on the 
climatic zone where the building is located as well as its 
year of construction. 
Moreover, 
even 
when 
these 
assumptions 
were 
implemented in the platform, issues arose with respect to the 
geometric definition of the buildings encountered in the 
Spanish Cadastre, where not all the information was 
homogeneously defined. 
With 
respect 
to 
the 
calculation 
methodologies 
implemented, several stumbling blocks were encountered. 
Firstly, the analysis of the Energy Performance Certificate 
tools showed great differences among each other, mainly in 
the input data process. Once CE3X was chosen, the file 
formats used in this tool presented a complex structure, 
which was difficult to work with since the elements (walls, 
openings, or other type of data) reflected in the files were 
not easily identifiable. 
Furthermore, working with the tool when considering a 
restricted area (limited 
number of buildings) 
was 
manageable, but when applying the approach at a bigger 
scale (for instance, citywide), problems emerged at all 
steps of the process: public sources did not allow querying 
such amount of data at the same time and the simulation 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

time increased drastically, sometimes leading to the 
interruption of the process. 
Thus, in addition of the validation of the results 
mentioned before, a closer look to the improvement of the 
working process was necessary. 
However, regardless of the difficulties described above, 
having analysed citywide data, it was shown that this 
platform can have a high potential in the support of energy 
planning activities within local authorities. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The ENERGIS platform combines existing public data, 
validated calculated methodologies and GIS capabilities to 
offer a complete and powerful product to support energy 
planning. 
The process to define, design and develop the platform 
has followed several stages, which involved the analysis of 
data coming from public sources, working with EPC tools, 
the validation of results at all stages and working with GIS 
in order to explore its full potential. Difficulties in this 
process involved mainly the work with public sources of 
data, in particular the Spanish Cadastre. The main problem 
was the lack of a standardised approach in the definition of 
geometric data. This fact would be solved with an adequate 
implementation of the INSPIRE Directive, which would 
guarantee homogeneous information of the buildings. 
The platform provides users energy planning capabilities 
which will aid in the decision-making process when 
generating energy plans, by providing with maps showing 
the energy demand of cities and urban settings. It will 
reduce uncertainties and provide a knowledge base upon 
which to ground decisions. 
Future work related with this platform includes: (1) 
enhancing the displayed data (providing consumption 
estimation), (2) performing calculations at dwelling level, or 
(3) offering new functionalities, such as capacity to 
introduce improvement measures. 
All in all, by supporting energy planning, the adequate 
allocation of resources will be fostered to comply with 
energy directives’ objectives and thus, energy retrofitting 
interventions will be boosted. As a consequence, the energy 
consumption of buildings will be reduced, resulting in lower 
emission rates, which will finally contribute in the fight 
against climate change, advocated by the United Nations 
with the signature of the Paris agreement. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This platform was developed in the framework of the 
collaborative project ‘ENERGIS’ in a consortium formed by 
Fundación CARTIF, VOXEL 3D and SYLTEC and 
cofounded by the Agencia de Innovación, Financiación e 
Internacionalización Empresarial and FEDER funds. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Paris 
agreement 
(2015) 
(COP 
21): 
http://unfccc.int/paris_agreement/items/9485.php 
[retrieved: 
April, 2018] 
[2] Communication COM/2016/0860 final. “Communication 
from the Commission to the European Parliament, the 
Council, the European Economic and Social Committee, the 
Committee of the Regions and the European Investment –
Bank. Clean Energy for all Europeans”. Brussels, 30.11.2016: 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52016DC0860 
[retrieved: 
April, 2018] 
[3] Directive 2010/31/EU (2010). European Parliament and the 
Council of 19 May 2010 “On the Energy Performance of 
Buildings”: 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/ALL/?uri=celex:32010L0031 [retrieved: April, 
2018] 
[4] INSPIRE Knowledge Base: Infrastructure for spatial 
information in Europe: https://inspire.ec.europa.eu/ [retrieved: 
April, 2018] 
[5] INSPIRE Roadmap: https://inspire.ec.europa.eu/road-map-
graphic/32443 [retrieved: April 2018] 
[6] New 
York 
City 
Map 
– 
City-Wide 
GIS.: 
http://maps.nyc.gov/doitt/nycitymap/ [retrieved: April 2018] 
[7] Estimated Total Annual Building Energy Consumption at the 
Block 
and 
Lot 
Level 
for 
NYC: 
http://qsel.columbia.edu/nycenergy/ [retrieved: April, 2018] 
[8] All 
buildings 
in 
the 
Netherlands: 
http://code.waag.org/buildings/#52.3884,4.9438,11 [retrieved: 
April, 2018] 
[9] Energie 
Label 
Atlas 
(Netherlands): 
http://energielabelatlas.nl/# [retrieved: April, 2018] 
[10] Spanish 
Cadastre 
Official 
Website 
: 
https://www.sedecatastro.gob.es/ [retrieved: April, 2018] 
[11] B. Howard, L. Parshall, J. Thompson, S. Hammer, J. 
Dickinson, V. Modi. “Spatial distribution of urban building 
energy consumption by end use”. ELSEVIER Energy and 
Buildings 45. (2012) pp. 141- 151. 
[12] M. Kavgic; A. Mavrogianni, D. Mumovic, A. Summerfield, 
Z. Stevanovic, M. Djurovic-Petrovic. “A review of bottom-up 
building stock models for energy consumption in the 
residential sector”. ELSEVIER. Building and Environment 45 
(2010) pp 1683 – 1697. 
[13] I. Miranda Pereira, E. Sad de Assis. “Urban energy 
consumption mapping for energy management”. ELSEVIER 
Energy Policy 59. (2013) pp. 257- 269. 
[14] R. Nouvel, M. Zirak, H. Dastageeri, V. Coors, U. Eicker. 
“Urban energy analysis based on 3d city model for national 
scale applications”. IBPSA BAUSIM 2014 - Fifth German-
Austrian IBPSA Conference RWTH Aachen University. 2014 
[15] Spanish 
Cadastre 
Official 
Website. 
https://www.sedecatastro.gob.es/. [retrieved: April 2018] 
[16] Spanish National Building Code (Código Tenico de la 
Edificación). Documento Básico HE: Ahorro de la Energía 
(Document 
on 
Energy 
Savings) 
: 
https://www.codigotecnico.org/images/stories/pdf/ahorroEner
gia/DBHE.pdf [retrieved: April 2018] 
[17] Energy Perfomance Labelling Technical Basis Manual of 
existing buildings CE3X. (Manual de Fundamentos Técnicos 
de calificación energética de edificios existentes CE3X), 
IDAE, 
2012. 
http://www.minetad.gob.es/energia/desarrollo/EficienciaEner
getica/CertificacionEnergetica/DocumentosReconocidos/Doc
uments/Manual_fundamentos_tecnicos_CE3X_05.pdf 
[retrieved: April 2018] 
[18] E. Olivero, E. Onillon, P. Beguery, R. Brunet, S. Marat, M. 
Azar. “On key parameters influencing building energy 
performance”. Proceedings of BS2015: 14th Conference of 
International Building Performance Simulation Association, 
Hyderabad, India, Dec 7-9., 2015 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

