Performance Analysis of Single and Multi-step
Short-term Load Forecasts Using Multi-layer
Perceptron
Athanasios Ioannis Arvanitidis
Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Texas at San Antonio
San Antonio, USA
athanasios.arvanitidis@my.utsa.edu
Dimitrios Kontogiannis
Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Thessaly
Volos, Greece
dimkonto@uth.gr
Georgios Vontzos
Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Thessaly
Volos, Greece
gvontzos@uth.gr
Vasileios Laitsos
Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Thessaly
Volos, Greece
vlaitsos@uth.gr
Dimitrios Bargiotas
Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Thessaly
Volos, Greece
bargiotas@uth.gr
Miltiadis Alamaniotis
Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Texas at San Antonio
San Antonio, USA
miltos.alamaniotis@utsa.edu
Abstract—Load forecasting is one of the most critical factors
in modern power systems since it is the cornerstone for effi-
cient monitoring, resource management and decision making.
Therefore, there is an accrescent need for accurate and fast
electrical load predictions. Many scientific approaches have been
carried out in the field of load forecasting. In particular, the field
of Machine Learning has attracted great research interest, due
to the ability to adapt to time-series through forecasting tasks
on multiple prediction horizons, a research area that presents
challenges to several traditional methods. For this purpose,
this research offers a thorough comparative study of several
structural morphologies of Multi-Layer Perceptrons, in order
to investigate electrical load forecasting accuracy for one, twelve
and twenty-four time-steps ahead. Based on data from the Greek
Power System for the years 2017 to 2019, the three proposed
neural networks’ structural morphologies are assessed in terms
of precision through the Mean Absolute Error, Mean Squared
Error, and Mean Absolute Percent Error of the predicted
outcomes.
Index Terms—multi-layer perceptron, univariate prediction,
multivariate prediction, short-term load forecasting
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays accurate load forecasting is crucial for power
companies in order to sufficiently and reliably generate, trans-
mit and distribute electric power. Non accurate load prediction
could lead to limited facilities capacity, power supply shortage
or even power interruption, and causes annoyance to stake-
holders and consumers. Additionally, an accurate forecasting
of electrical load supports proper infrastructures’ maintenance
and reduction of power companies’ operational costs [1].
Load forecasting is commonly categorized as very short-term
(VSLTF), short-term (SLTF), mid-term (MLTF) and long-term
(LTLF) forecasting [2]. In this work, STLF is used to predict
future demand.
In terms of electrical load forecasting several methodologies
have been introduced and can be divided into two main
categories the traditional and the modern methods. In tra-
ditional techniques, statistical methods are mainly utilized.
These include models like Autoregression (AR), Moving
Average (MA), Autoregressive Moving Average (ARMA),
Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA), ARMA
and ARIMA with exogenous inputs (ARMAX and ARIMAX
respectively), Grey (GM) and Exponential Smoothing (ES) [3],
[4].
On the other hand, modern load forecasting methods are
considered machine learning, artificial intelligence-based and
hybrid technics. Machine learning approaches include Support
Vector Machine (SVM) models, which seems to be used
extensively in forecasting issues. Additionally Artificial Neural
Network (ANN) algorithms are very popular in recent years in
time series prediction. The commonly used ANN algorithms
for electrical load forecasting are Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNN), such as Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM), Convo-
lutional Neural Networks (CNN) and Feed-Forward Neural
Networks, like Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) [5], [6].
Several recent studies propose the use of MLP models
in future electrical demand prediction [7]. Although MLPs
are the simplest type of ANN, they are used to complex
non-linear problems. They not only perform well with large
number of input data but also provide fast predictions after
training [8], such as Kontogiannis et al. were observed at
experiments with residential real world data compared with
LSTM and CNN models [9]. Arvanitidis et al. used MLP
models to propose novel train data pre-processing strategies
[10] and clustering techniques [11] for SLTF. Furthermore,
MLP architecture is extended to conduct a day-ahead elec-
tricity price forecasting [12]. MLP is impactful in short term
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

forecasting tasks involving not only load related time series but
also wind power forecasting. In [13], the Simulated Annealing
optimization algorithm is used to specify the hyperparameters
of the under investigation regressor models. The MLP model
seems to predict wind power accurately compared to the other
forecasting methods examined.
Electric load forecasting is a vital step in the planning of
the power system industry. It is crucial to the management
of the power system and the scheduling of electricity in
order to ensure the system’s cost-effective and uninterrupted
performance. As a result, it offers multiple significant benefits
for controlling generating capacity, scheduling, management,
peak reduction, market assessment, and demand response. As
a result, forecasting on diverse time horizons has shown to be
incredibly effective in meeting the various criteria of their ap-
plication. The literature provides a plethora of publications that
investigate the subject of load forecasting in various prediction
horizons, but without indicating which is the optimum and
most efficient. Hence, the extensive comparison of univariate
and multivariate short-term load forecasting methods is the
novelty of this work. In this paper, three different optimized
structural morphologies of MLPs are applied to anticipate
load values for one, twelve, and twenty-four hours ahead,
respectively. In order to determine which of the suggested
morphologies of the neural networks delivers more accuracy,
the results are compared based on the various prediction
metrics.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II analyzes the
necessary actions related to the preprocessing of the data
used for forecasting, while Section III analyzes the forecasting
model. Section IV describes the hyperparameters’ optimisation
algorithm, proposes three different MLP prediction models and
presents the simulation results of short-term load forecasting,
while Section V concludes the results of the paper.
II. DATASET OVERVIEW
The datasets utilized in this research project for the per-
formance evaluation of the multilayer perceptron structure on
total electricity load predictions for the Greek power system
consist of hourly measurements of total load in MW, tempera-
ture in °C and relative humidity expressed as a percentage. The
samples in this dataset cover a three year time period spanning
from 2017-01-01 to 2019-12-31. The samples of total load
were made publicly available by the transparency platform
Entso-E [14] and the environmental variables of temperature
and relative humidity were accessed through the MERRA-2
research and analysis platform [15].
Since this project considers the short-term forecasting tasks
of 1, 12 and 24 hour-ahead total load prediction, the features
utilized in this analysis include the temporal variables for the
hour and day of the week encoded in the value intervals 0-23
and 1-7 respectively, the temperature and humidity variables
for the target time interval and the historical load features
corresponding to the same time intervals for the previous 7
days. The resulting datasets did not have any missing values
and the values were scaled through min-max normalization
[16]. The dataset was split into a training set containing 80%
of samples and a test set containing 20% of samples based
on common practices with regards to the splitting ratio [17].
Figure 1 presents the target variable of load.
Fig. 1. Graphical representation of the dataset load values.
III. MULTI-LAYER PERCEPTRON
The MLP is a neural network structure that belongs to the
class of feed forward artificial neural network architectures
as it expresses a fully connected acyclic computation graph
that focuses on the task of function approximation in order
to derive a model that efficiently predicts the target variables
given the input features x through the target function that
describes the relationship between the inputs and the output,
defined as f. This neural network consists of neurons that
perform the computations following the perceptron supervised
learning algorithm [18]. These neurons are organized in layers
that express different roles in the computation path. The input
layer receives the features from the initial input dataset, the
hidden layers express the transition from the input to the output
through a series of computations involving the adjustment
of a weight matrix W that quantifies the importance of the
input features towards the prediction of the target output and
a bias vector b that is used to offset the computed results of
the neurons. The output of each hidden layer is determined
based on activation functions that evaluate the importance of
computations and select the data that will proceed deeper in the
network. The output layer derives the estimated values from
the output of the last hidden layer. Consequently, the estimated
values f(x) derived from a multi-layer perceptron with one
hidden layer could be expressed by formula (1) denoting the
subsequent adjustments to weight matrix W 1 and bias vector
b1 for the transition from the input to the first hidden layer
through the activation function as well as the application of the
activation function and the adjustments to the weight matrix
W 2 and bias vector b2 for the transition from the hidden layer
to the output layer.
f(x) = G(b2 + W 2(s(b1 + W 1x)))
(1)
Since this study examines univariate and multivariate load
forecasting tasks, it is worth noting that the MLP is modified
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

accordingly in order to derive the appropriate estimated values.
Therefore, the number of neurons in the output layer needs to
match the number of predicted output variables, corresponding
to the target time series. The neural networks with a single
output neuron are known as univariate MLPs and are used for
hourly load forecasting, while the MLPs with several neurons
in the output layer are known as multivariate and are employed
in day ahead load prediction, as Figure 2 depicts. The MLP
structure is typically trained through back propagation with
gradient descent. Impactful structural parameters that could
affect the training process and the performance of the model
include the number of neurons at each layer, the number of
hidden layers and the number of training epochs. Additionally,
learning parameters, such as learning rate, the types of acti-
vation functions and the optimizer could be equally important
to the generalization capabilities of the model [19].
Fig. 2. Structural difference between univariate and multiariate MLPs.
IV. EVALUATION METRICS
In this section, the metrics used for the performance evalu-
ation of the single and multi-step forecasting models are out-
lined in order to further explain their role in our experiments.
Firstly, Mean Absolute Error (MAE) is utilized as a simple and
interpretable metric in order to naturally describe the average
error of the MLP. Secondly, Mean Squared Error (MSE) is
included in the examination of model performance since it is
a scale dependent error metric that considers the direction of
the predicted values. Lastly, Mean Absolute Percentage Error
(MAPE) was utilized in order to denote the generalized relative
error of the models. Given the forecasted data points yi and
the actual values xi in a set of n observations, MAE, MSE
and MAPE are given by (2), (3) and (4) respectively [20].
MAE =
Pn
i=1 |yi − xi|
n
(2)
MSE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(yi − xi)2
(3)
MAPE = 100
n
n
X
i=1
|yi − xi
xi
|
(4)
V. RESULTS
This study investigates the implications of MLPs’ univariate
and multivariate prediction procedures on the precision of
short-term load forecasting. Also, the variations in the exe-
cution time of a brute force optimization algorithm, which
is employed for the optimal hyperparameter selection on
the various morphologies of the proposed MLPs, are thor-
oughly addressed. The suggested MLPs were developed using
Python’s scikit-learn framework [21], while the computer
system utilized has an Intel Core i7-4510U CPU running at
2.00 GHz and 8 GB of installed memory.
Initially, the suggested brute force optimization approach
is used to determine the ideal values for two major neural
network hyperparameters: the number of neurons in the hid-
den layer and the number of epochs throughout the training
process. For the sake of simplicity, each suggested MLP
comprises of a hidden layer, as it is adequate for the load fore-
casting issue. Most neural networks used for load forecasting
include only one hidden layer in order to reduce computational
complexity while yet providing fast online results.
In this paper, we examine the structural morphology of
three neural networks in order to estimate hourly load values
for one hour, twelve hours, and twenty-four hours ahead,
respectively. Thus, in pursuance of a direct comparison on
the hyperparameter selection, we suggest that the number of
neurons in the hidden layer is determined as a function of
the number of neurons in the input layer for each possible
structural morphology. In each case examined, the minimum
acceptable number of hidden neurons is half of the number
of neurons in the input layer, while the maximum number of
hidden neurons can reach up to three times the number of input
neurons. The ideal number of epochs, on the other hand, is
derived by sequential scanning within the closed interval [200,
2000], where 200 is the least permitted limit of iterations and
2000 is the maximum limit of epochs.
In the following subsections, the calculation of the hyper-
parameters of the three different proposed MLPs, as well as
the execution time of the brute force optimization approach
for each case and their performance evaluation, in terms
of accuracy, for short-term load forecasting are thoroughly
examined.
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

A. One hour ahead load forecasting - Univariate Neural
Network
The case of a univariate MLP, i.e., a neural network with
a single neuron in the output layer, is first investigated.
This network generates the hourly value of the load for the
following hour. The input data to this MLP, which consists of
11 neurons in the input layer, is as follows:
• A label for the time for which the forecast is being
performed, represented as an integer within [0, 23].
• An integer that belongs to the range [1, 7], serving as
a label to identify the day being predicted. Sunday is
represented by the value 1, Monday by the value 2, etc.
• The hourly temperature value for the precise time of day
for which the prediction is conducted.
• The hourly humidity estimation for that particular hour
of day in which the prediction is made.
• Seven hourly load values for the period from the current
time up to one week in beforehand of the prediction.
B. Twelve hours ahead load forecasting - Multivariate Neural
Network
The case of an MLP used for 12 hours ahead load forecast-
ing is then considered, i.e. a neural network with 12 neurons
in the output layer. In this scenario, the number of neurons
in the input layer is 109 and results from the following input
data:
• An integer within the range [1, 7], serving as a label to
identify the day being predicted. Sunday is represented
by the value 1, Monday by the value 2, etc.
• A vector consisting of 12-hourly temperature values for
specific hours of the day for which the prediction is con-
ducted. A day is divided into two instances in the dataset.
Thus, the first vector of the day concerns the hours from
midnight to 11 am and contains the corresponding hourly
temperature data.
• A vector consisted of 12-hourly humidity estimations,
similar to the case of temperature, for that particular hour
of day in which the prediction is made.
• A vector of 84-hourly load values concerning the period
from the current time up to one week in beforehand of
the prediction, respectively.
C. Twenty-four hours ahead load forecasting - Multivariate
Neural Network
The last case study focuses at a multivariate MLP that is
used to estimate day-ahead load and has 24 neurons in the
output layer, one for each hour of the day. Similar to the other
examples, the number of input data determines the quantity of
neurons in the input layer. Thus, in this case, the 217 input
neurons result from the following data:
• An integer in the range [1, 7], acting, as in the earlier
cases, as a label to designate the day being forecast.
• A vector consisting of 24-hourly temperature values for
the day of which the prediction is conducted.
• A vector consisted of 24-hourly humidity values for the
day of which the prediction is conducted.
• A vector of 168-hourly load values concerning the period
from the current time up to one week in beforehand of
the prediction, respectively.
The boundaries of the hyperparameters for each MLP uti-
lized in each case study are reported in Table I. The results
of the optimization process used to identify the ideal hyper-
parameters for the MLPs of each case study are summarized
in Table II. Subsequently, the optimized neural networks are
used for load prediction and their results are compared, in
terms of accuracy, in order to decide whether the univariate or
the multivariate structural morphology responds better to the
STLF issue. Furthermore, Table III compiles the findings of
the MAE, MSE, and MAPE metrics yielded from each case
study. Lastly, Figure 3 and Figure 4 graphically represent the
STLF outcomes for each prediction method considered.
TABLE I
RESULTS OF THE OPTIMIZATION APPROACH FOR EACH CASE STUDY.
Boundaries
Step
MLP
Neurons
Iterations
Neurons
Iterations
1h Ahead
[6, 33]
[200, 2000]
6
10
12h Ahead
[55, 327]
[200, 2000]
55
10
24h Ahead
[109, 651]
[200, 2000]
109
10
TABLE II
RESULTS OF THE OPTIMIZATION APPROACH FOR EACH CASE STUDY.
MLP
Neurons
Iterations
Time (H:MM:SS)
1h Ahead
33
2000
2:20:11
12h Ahead
275
1800
0:56:59
24h Ahead
436
1800
1:19:43
TABLE III
ACCURACY METRICS DERIVED FROM EACH MLP FOR STLF.
MLP
MAE
MSE
MAPE (%)
1h Ahead
182.076
67603.22
2.774
12h Ahead
162.845
54383.46
2.435
24h Ahead
187.315
66564.93
2.742
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a detailed comparative analysis was conducted
with the purpose of providing accurate load forecasting results
for the Greek Power System for the period 2017-2019. The
implementation of three different structural morphologies of
MLP models were developed and assessed.
Based on the results, it is concluded that load forecasting
with the implementation of MLPs plays a critical role in the
safety, stability, and sustainability of modern energy systems.
More specifically, it is observed that for all three cases, the
results are quite satisfactory. The error values for the one
hour ahead, and twenty four hours ahead forecast are very
similar in terms of error metrics. The twelve hour ahead
model exhibited improved performance compared to the other
forecasting horizons. This might be because the number of
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Fig. 3. Graphical comparison of the load prediction results of each considered
method for a whole day in August.
Fig. 4. Graphical comparison of the load forecasting results of each consid-
ered method, for a week in September.
input layer neurons, and hence the quantity of data utilized as
input data, more closely approximates the case study under
discussion. Given the data quality and data seasonality of
the dataset, all models yielded relatively low error metrics.
This observation proves the correct use of the algorithm in a
time-series with multiple seasonalities, like the one studied.
Since, the most accurate forecast was found for the case of
twelve hours ahead, the ability of the algorithm to adapt to
multi-step ahead forecasting is highlighted. Finally, it is worth
noting that these models could assist the uninterrupted and
reliable operation of Smart Grids using real-time data, where
day ahead load forecasting delivers significant value.
In future work, this model could be evaluated on more
complex load forecasting issues and compared with other
deep learning models, used as benchmarks. Also, the proposed
techniques could be applied to Demand Side Management
and Demand Response programs [22], which have developed
rapidly in recent years due to the global increase of energy
consumption.
REFERENCES
[1] E. A. Feinberg and D. Genethliou, “Load forecasting,” in Applied
mathematics for restructured electric power systems.
Springer, 2005,
pp. 269–285.
[2] A. A. Mamun, M. Sohel, N. Mohammad, M. S. Haque Sunny, D. R.
Dipta, and E. Hossain, “A comprehensive review of the load forecasting
techniques using single and hybrid predictive models,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 134 911–134 939, 2020.
[3] M. A. Hammad, B. Jereb, B. Rosi, and D. Dragan, “Methods and models
for electric load forecasting: a comprehensive review,” Logistics, Supply
Chain, Sustainability and Global Challenges, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 51–76,
2020.
[4] T. Hong and S. Fan, “Probabilistic electric load forecasting: A tutorial
review,” International Journal of Forecasting, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 914–
938, 2016.
[5] I. K. Nti, M. Teimeh, O. Nyarko-Boateng, and A. F. Adekoya, “Electric-
ity load forecasting: A systematic review,” Journal of Electrical Systems
and Information Technology, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–19, 2020.
[6] A. Rom´an-Portabales, M. L´opez-Nores, and J. J. Pazos-Arias, “Sys-
tematic review of electricity demand forecast using ann-based machine
learning algorithms,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 13, p. 4544, 2021.
[7] A. Gasparin, S. Lukovic, and C. Alippi, “Deep learning for time series
forecasting: The electric load case,” CAAI Transactions on Intelligence
Technology, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–25, 2022.
[8] “Deep
Learning
Tutorial
for
Beginners:
Neural
Network
Basics.” [Online]. Available: https://www.guru99.com/deep-learning-
tutorial.html#5
[9] D. Kontogiannis, D. Bargiotas, and A. Daskalopulu, “Minutely active
power forecasting models using neural networks,” Sustainability, vol. 12,
no. 8, p. 3177, 2020.
[10] A. I. Arvanitidis, D. Bargiotas, A. Daskalopulu, V. M. Laitsos, and L. H.
Tsoukalas, “Enhanced short-term load forecasting using artificial neural
networks,” Energies, vol. 14, no. 22, p. 7788, 2021.
[11] A. I. Arvanitidis, D. Bargiotas, A. Daskalopulu, D. Kontogiannis, I. P.
Panapakidis, and L. H. Tsoukalas, “Clustering informed mlp models for
fast and accurate short-term load forecasting,” Energies, vol. 15, no. 4,
p. 1295, 2022.
[12] D. Kontogiannis, D. Bargiotas, A. Daskalopulu, A. I. Arvanitidis, and
L. H. Tsoukalas, “Error compensation enhanced day-ahead electricity
price forecasting,” Energies, vol. 15, no. 4, p. 1466, 2022.
[13] A. I. Arvanitidis, D. Kontogiannis, G. Vontzos, V. Laitsos, and D. Bar-
giotas, “Stochastic heuristic optimization of machine learning estimators
for short-term wind power forecasting,” in 2022 57th International
Universities Power Engineering Conference (UPEC).
IEEE, 2022, pp.
1–6.
[14] “Central collection and publication of electricity generation, transporta-
tion and consumption data and information for the pan-european
market.”
[Online].
Available:
https://transparency.entsoe.eu/load-
domain/r2/totalLoadR2/show?name=
[15] “Merra-2.”
[Online].
Available:
https://gmao.gsfc.nasa.gov/reanalysis/MERRA-2/
[16] S. K. Patro and K. K. sahu, “Normalization: A preprocessing stage,”
IARJSET, p. 20–22, 2015.
[17] “Split
training
and
testing
data
sets
in
python,”
Oct
2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.askpython.com/python/examples/split-
data-training-and-testing-set
[18] “Dive into deep learning.” [Online]. Available: http://d2l.ai/chapter
multilayerperceptrons/mlp.html
[19] [Online].
Available:
https://towardsdatascience.com/what-are-
hyperparameters-and-how-to-tune-the-hyperparameters-in-a-deep-
neural-network-d0604917584a
[20] “Error metrics: How to evaluate your forecasting models,” May 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://www.jedox.com/en/blog/error-metrics-how-
to-evaluate-forecasts/
[21] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion,
O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Van-
derplas, D. Passos, A. and Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,” Journal of
Machine Learning Research, vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
[22] V. M. Laitsos, D. Bargiotas, A. Daskalopulu, A. I. Arvanitidis, and
L. H. Tsoukalas, “An incentive-based implementation of demand side
management in power systems,” Energies, vol. 14, no. 23, p. 7994, 2021.
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-054-4
ENERGY 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

