Opportunities and Challenges of DSM
in Smart Grid Environment
Maria das Neves Queiroz de Macedo, Joaquim Jorge Martins Galo,  Luiz Alberto Luz Almeida, Antonio Cezar
Castro Lima
Department of industrial engineering postgraduate
Federal University of Bahia
Salvador, Brazil
mnevesmacedo@gmail.com, joaquimgalo2@gmail.com, lalberto@ufba.br, acdcl@ufba.br
Abstract—The demand side management (DSM) is a set of
techniques and policies that can help to provide greater
efficiency in the planning and operation of the electrical
network. The problem is that the full deployment of the DSM
for the totality of consumers requires data availability of the
loading curve and also requires devices that can operate in
real-time in the system of each consumer, individually.  In
Brazil, the current power grid does not have these features.
This article introduces the basic features of Brazil's electrical
sector, covering the issues associated with the challenges of
deployment of DSM in current scenario and discusses their
deployment in Smart Grid environment, showing how new
technologies can help to facilitate the implementation of DSM
in Brazil's electrical network.
Keywords -DSM; Smart Grid; electrical network.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The increasing complexity of electrical systems from
new markets is a worldwide phenomenon and is resulting
from the significant growth of the electric network, which
has changed the number of consumer units and also the use
of renewable energy sources that can supplement the energy
supply avoiding problems of energy shortages [1].
This fact implies the increase of initiatives and actions
that contribute to the search for greater efficiency in energy
management, involving a greater control in delivering
quality, cost reduction and attention to environmental issues
[2].
The idea is not only to increase the supply of energy, but
also to control the shape of consumption through the use of
energy management techniques by the demand side. In
addition to conservation policies, the fight against waste
involves the use of devices and more modern and efficient
technologies [3].
The demand side management (DSM) is a set of
techniques and policies that act to equalize the levels of
demand of energy consumption throughout the day. The
DSM allows the control of the consumer loads in order to
operate the system more efficiently.
The DSM can be defined as a program or activities
organized by the concessionaire that will affect the amount
of time and energy used by consumer to postpone
investment in new electrical installations [3].
The major challenge in the implementation of the
program of DSM is the quest for knowledge of the daily
behavior of the loads of the electrical system, which
normally 
is 
not 
available 
on 
systems 
based 
on
electromechanical meters.
In this scenario, the emergence of new technologies like
the Smart Grid creates an environment that introduces a
convergence between the infrastructure of generation,
transmission, distribution, energy, information technology
and digital communications infrastructure that enables the
exchange of information and control actions among the
various segments of the power grid.
This paper discusses issues associated to the DSM before
and after deployment of the Smart Grid in Brazil and how
new technologies can contribute with new applications for
the management of the electrical sector. Section 2 of the
article presents the basic characteristics of the electrical
system 
and the 
challenges of implementing DSM
programmes in Brazil in the current scenario. Section 3
discusses the implementation of DSM programmes in Smart
Grid environment including opportunities and challenges and
Section 4 presents the concluding remarks and future
prospects.
II.
BRAZIL'S ELECTRICAL SYSTEM AND THE
DEPLOYMENT OF DSM
The installed capacity of electric power generation
plants of Brazil reached 117,135 MW in 2011, according to
Agency National Electric Energy(ANEEL) [4]. Table 1
indicates that the weight of the residential customer is quite
significant, about 36%, commercial 24%, industrial 23%
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

and  pubic power 12%, included the public lighting [1] for a
total of more than 68 million consumers. The residential
sector is what contributes the most to the tip of the electric
system.
TABLE I.
ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BRAZIL IN APRIL 2011
Consumer
class
Electrical Energy
consumption
(MWh)
Number of consumer
units
Residential
9.276.139
58.220.152
Industrial
6.446.334
557.120
Trade Services
6.054.848
4.949.915
Rural
1.387.517
3.963.534
Public
authorities and
other
3.179.562
673.546
Total
26.344.400
68.364.267
Source ANEEL.
Currently, in Brazil's electricity sector, the generation
and transmission systems of energy companies already have
systems of automation, supervision and control that use
digital technology to monitor processes in virtually all major
centres. These systems offer several features such as
supervision, remote control and remote measurement
through the SCADA (System of control and data
acquisition) implemented in the Centres of Operation and
indicate the operating conditions of all system automated  in
real time.
In the case of Distribution System in Brazil (voltage less
than 34.5 kV) the reality is very different. Due to its
complexity and a high number of consumers, about 68
million according to Table 1, the automation deployment of
these systems is only at the beginning and its operation is
still performed conventionally. Power measurements for
billing are made manually in about 95% of consumer units,
from the electromechanical meter reading, which makes for
a poor monitoring of the workloads.
To deploy a DSM program efficiently, it is necessary to
perform the following steps [5]:

the study of this market present and growth prospects in
the short and long term;

study of various forms of energy supply, with the costs
involved;

study of characteristics of system loads;

definition and implementation of an appropriate
modeling system loads in the study;

consumer 
awareness 
and 
encouraging 
their
participation;

analysis of the overall costs involved and of the
evolution of the program,.
The most commonly used DSM techniques are shown in
Figure 1.
Figure 1.
Techniques  DSM
A.
Peak Clipping
Peak Clipping is a program of load cutting, demand
reduction in time for a heavy load. Cutting or reducing the
duration of the peak can be reached by direct load control, by
shutdown of consumer equipment or by distributed
generation.
B.
Filling the valleys
It is a program which encourages the off peak
consumption. It builds non-peak consumption periods which
is particularly desirable as the cost of production is lower,
which causes a decrease in the average price and improves
the efficiency of the system. Incentives in several ways.
such as discount into account should stimulate special
consumers to change their habits.
C.
Conservation strategic
It is a program for seasonal energy consumption
reduction mainly through efficient consumption and
combating 
energy 
waste. 
This 
program 
is 
quite
comprehensive and includes incentives for technological
change.
D.
Load building
It is a program to control the seasonal energy
consumption increase in building. The dealership employs
intelligent systems, processes, more efficient equipment and
more competitive energy sources to achieve energetic
efficiency.
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

E.
load shifting
It is a program, with the workload transfer period of
greatest consumption (peak period to period of lower
consumption), move tip out loads, without changing the
total consumption. This is also possible with distributed
generation.
F.
flexible modeling
It is a set of actions and integrated planning between the
concessionary and the consumer, subject to the needs of the
moment. It is a partnership in order to model consumer
loads, without affecting the actual conditions of security,
limiting the power and energy that the individual consumer
can use at certain times, through the installation of load
limiting devices.
The implementation of these techniques requires a daily
monitoring of load type of consumer units so that the most
appropriate technique can be chosen for each case.
The collection of consumer load curve is the first step in
the load characterization study. The reliability of the data
obtained is a key point, because this will be the entire basis
of the studies for the implementation of policies required to
achieve efficiency in energy management [5].
Obtaining of data of daily load curve all consumers of an
electric system, without the aid of new technologies is
technically impossible or nearly impossible, because the
conventional energy meters do not registers these daily
curves for each consumer and in this case the curve is
typically made from sampling of a small portion of the
population and are later using statistical tools to characterize
the entire population [6].
In Brazil, the data collection is made through a
campaign of measures held every 4 years (or in special
campaign), that consists in the installation of demand meters
which will record the consumption and the time during a
given period of a small sample of the population. This
method is used to calculate tariffs.
This sample is chosen randomly and normally should
represent the profile of a population that will be analyzed the
variables of interest.
The biggest problem in this case is the inaccuracy and
lack of representativeness caused by the production of daily
load curve of a small portion of the population, every 4
years.  Since there is a high probability that the consumption
profile change significantly during this period and may not
serve as a exact model for the choice of appropriate policies
for each type of consumer, once hardly this process reflects
the dynamics of consumer habits. In addition, some policies
of DSM as the direct load control presents the difficulty of
implementation in conventional systems [8].
For these reasons, in Brazil, the implementation of DSM
policies has been carried out in isolated cases with few
projects pilots deployed and which are still in operation.
III.
DSM AND SMART GRID
The Smart Grid is based on the integrated use of
information technology, automation, telecommunications
and electric network control, that involves smart meters,
sensors and digital network management devices, bi-
directional, allowing deployment of control strategies and
optimization of electric network with real-time data
processing [7].
This convergence of technologies provides real-time
data volumes with high reliability, enables the power grid to
be controlled with more autonomy to the consumer units
and enables energy management to be implemented on a
decentralised basis, requiring the development of new
methods of control, automation, and optimization of the
operation of the electric system.
Figure 2 shows a basic scheme of Smart Grid that
involves all sectors of the system: generation, transmission,
distribution and consumers with or without generation.
The Smart Grid environment introduces features that allow
[8,9]:

The integration of a variety of energy sources of
various dimensions and technology, allowing any
consumer to produce energy and store or sell the
surplus;

Consumer empowerment from the more decentralised
energy management and demand management by
remote actuation in consumer devices, registration of
consumer behaviour in the processes of planning and
operation of the network;
Figure 2.
Basic scheme Smart Grid

Monitoring and reduction of technical and commercial
losses of the electric power sector;
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies


Trend of sustainability: reduce the environmental
impact of electricity-producing system, since it can
diversify sources, reducing losses and using sources of
low environmental impact;

The integration of a variety of energy sources of
various dimensions and technology, allowing any
consumer to produce energy and store or sell the
surplus;

Monitoring and reduction of technical and commercial
losses of the electric power sector;

Trend of sustainability: reduce the environmental
impact of electricity-producing system, since it can
diversify sources, reducing losses and using sources of
low environmental impact;

Differentiated tariff and dynamics tariff ;

Power quality monitoring: from data and indicators in
real time;

Creation of a database of load curves: record of
consumer units in real time and off line to be used
subsequently in energy management programs;

Self-healing: ability to automatically detect, analyze,
respond and restore network failures;

Make and take advantage of competitive energy
markets, favoring the retail market and distributed
generation or microgeneration.
The implementation of a program of DSM in a system
with a large number of consumer units, as in the case of
Brazil, requires high reliability and ability to collect and
process data from the network. In addition to devices,
computational tools  can contribute to deciding which policy
is best suited for each consumer profile
The success of the management program is directly
associated with the monitoring of loads 24 hour per day, so
if you get the behavior of each type of load, observing the
days not typical for each load and from this monitoring to
provide precise actions for each case.
Despite the Smart Grid is a global trend, the deployment
process is normally done slowly and in well defined stages,
because it involves many challenges, such as [10]:

Hardware’s standardizing, software and protocol
communication of the devices;

High investment for replacement of conventional
devices by microprocessor and change data capture
infrastructure in each unit of the electric network;

Study for regulation and tariff policy that may result
from the new system;

The large volume of data to be processed and its
security against attacks

Choice of functionalities of network devices namely,
may enable the remote load or promote cut access to the
Web via the mains, or measure the energy per unit
equipment.
Brazil has set goals for Smart Grid deployment that
requires high investments until 2020. Several proposals are
already beginning to be discussed by ANEEL, energy
companies and industry sectors and research centers.
The first Smart Grid project of largest-scale in Brazil is
called Inovcity and is being deployed in the city of
Aparecida and it consists in the installation of 15300
electronic meters in the city, that will transmit in real time
all information of each consumer. The new equipment will
eliminate the traditional manual reading  made on each unit
and will avoid measurement errors. Another benefit is to
reduce fraud and improve the quality of energy delivered to
consumers.
A basic scheme of a system with these characteristics
must submit at least three levels of network with two-way
communication, as is represented in Figure 3.
Figure 3.
Control system scheme
Level 1 is the level of consumer units (in case of large
consumers or special) or set of consumer units connected by
hubs. This network is formed by smart meters, with fixed
address on the network, where should be installed the tools
that enable each unit to apply all of the management
features, like sending real-time data, measures, indicators,
system information, load curve, tariff schedule price,
consumption, etc.
Level 2 is the concentration of a group of consumer
units in a particular region. The information for a full region
is centered at this stage with the possibility of use of the
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

system control tools and access to region information in real
time, in addition to data storage for later study.
Level 3 is the network that concentrates and totals
information of the system as a whole and carries out
communication and information exchange with the SCADA
systems 
of 
transmission 
and 
Generation 
of 
the
concessionaire.
It is important to note that this architecture, from smart
devices have the ability to provide energy management bi-
directionally, because currently many consumer units can
also store energy or have alternative energy sources that will
meet the utility's system at certain times. This can be quite
handy, since it can supply the electrical system in times of
need or in a contingency, with reliability and security.
Another important factor is the management policy of
differentiated tariffs.. The effect of differentiated tariff is of
great impact [11]. It is already used in large industrial
consumers and it allows a better distribution of load
throughout the day. This also is only possible with the
installation of smart meters.
In this scenario, it becomes evident the need to have
systems with the features of the Smart Grid, able to process
a large volume of data in real time and choose the best
configuration of the network, as well as to indicate the
electrical system trends for the short, medium or long term
using tools like the demand projection."
In Brazil, the issues associated with efficient power
management and deployment of DSM are widely discussed,
but still there are many challenges such as lack of adequate
infrastructure and investment to the power sector to
modernize.
IV.
CONCLUSION
The concept of energy management has been expanded
in recent years because of the new demands of the global
market, which is alert to indicators of quality, efficiency and
sustainability of the electric system.
The challenge is to devise economically viable technical
alternatives capable of optimising energy consumption and
enable the postponement of investments in the expansion of
the energy supply.
Smart Grid is a world trend that presents exactly these
features and functionality, as does the electrical system
work as a large interconnected system, where there is strong
interaction 
between 
company 
and 
consumers, 
bi-
directionally which enables energy management with the
effective participation of consumers.
As described in this article, in the case of Brazil, a long
way should be done and there are many issues and technical
and economic obstacles to be overcome, although part of the
electrical system (high and voltage mean) presents
considerable advances in the automation of its processes.
It is important to note that in this initial stage of change
of the electric sector there is the emergence of a new
environment full of opportunities in developing applications
for the Smart Grid, from new algorithms and artificial
intelligence techniques for decision support.
REFERENCES
[1]
F. Saffre and R. Gedge, “Demand-side management for the
Smart Grid,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Network Oper. Manage. Symp.
Workshops (NOMS Wksps), Apr. 2010, pp. 300–303.
[2]
M. Zhou, Y. Gao, and G. Li, “Study on improvement of
available transfer capability by demand side management,” in
Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Electric Utility Deregulation and Restructuring
and Power Technologies, DRPT’08, 2008, pp. 545–550.
[3]
A. Mohsenian-Rad, V. Wong, J. Jatskevich, R. Schober, and
A. LeonGarcia, “Autonomous demand-side management based on
game-theoretic energy consumption scheduling for the future
Smart Grid,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 320–331,
Dec. 2010.
[4]
Balance report National Energy, 2011, Ministry of Mines and
Energy – MME , www.aneel.gov.br, November, 2012.
[5]
C. W. Gellings and J. H. Chamberling, “Demand-Side
Management: Concepts and Methods”. Lilburn, GA: Fairmont
Press, 1987.
[6]
P. Palensky and D. Dietrich, “Demand Side Management:
Demand Response, Intelligent Energy Systems, and Smart Loads”,
IEEE Trans. On Industrial Informatics, Vol. 7, No. 3, Aug. 2011,
pp. 381-388.
[7]
M. Amin and B. F. Wollenberg, “Toward a Smart Grid:
Power delivery for the 21st century,” IEEE Power Energy Mag.,
vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 34–41, 2005.
[8]
G. T. Heydt, “The Next Generation of Power Distribution
Systems”, IEEE Transactions On Smart Grid, Vol. 1, No. 3,
December 2010, pp. 225-235.
[9]
J. Vasquez, J. Guerrero, J. Miret, M. Castilla, and L. de
Vicuñanda, “Hierarchical control of intelligent microgrids,” IEEE
Ind. Electron. Mag., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 23–29, Dec. 2010.
[10] E. Koch, P. Palensky, M. A. Piette, S. Kiliccote, and G.
Ghatikar, “Architecture for supporting the automation of demand
response,” presented at the 1st IEEE Ind. Electron. Soc. Industry
Forum, Santa Clara, CA, 2008. pp. 177-183.
[11] R. Podmore and M. R. Robinson, “The Role of Simulators for
Smart Grid Development”, IEEE Transactions On Smart Grid,
Vol. 1, No. 2, September 2010, pp. 205-212.
[12] G.T. Heidt et al., "Professional Resources to Implement the
Smart Grid," Proceedings of the 2009 North American Power
Symposium (NAPS), Starkville, Mississippi, USA, October 4-6,
2009, pp. 123-129.
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

