Real-Time Scheduling for Peak Load Reduction in a Large Set of HVAC Loads
Marco L. Della Vedova and Tullio Facchinetti
Dpt. of Industrial and Information Engineering
University of Pavia, Italy
E-mail: marco.dellavedova@unipv.it, tullio.facchinetti@unipv.it
Abstract—This paper presents a technique to predictably coor-
dinate the activation of Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning
systems (HVACs) in order to limit the overall peak load of power
consumption (peak shaving). The proposed solution represents a
viable approach to the Demand-Side Management in the context
of a smart grid for this type of loads. The coordination method
performs a load shifting based on the discipline of real-time
scheduling traditionally studied in the ﬁeld of computing systems.
With this approach, individual constraints on the temperature
associated with the activation of each HVAC can be satisﬁed.
The main advantage of the proposed technique is its low
computational complexity, which allows to manage large sets of
loads. A speciﬁc approach is proposed and evaluated to deal with
large sets of loads by properly partitioning the load set into sub-
sets (scheduling groups) that are scheduled independently from
each other. Simulation results based on realistic parameters show
that the peak load can be reduced by 35% in normal working
conditions, and up to 60% with respect to worst case situations,
without affecting the comfort achieved by each HVAC.
Keywords- Real-time systems; Power system control; Scheduling;
Demand-Side Management; Load shifting.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Demand-Side Management (DSM) is one of the key
features enabled by the implementation of a smart power grid.
The DSM is commonly implemented to improve energy sys-
tem performance and reliability by limiting the peak load [1].
This paper proposes a technique to achieve predictable
Demand-Side Management actions targeted to the reduction
of the peak load of power consumption in a smart energy
environment. Our approach is based on load shifting to avoid
unnecessary simultaneous activations of a set of HVACs
to reduce the peak load that is caused by the absence of
coordination. A typical goal of a HVAC system is to keep
the room temperature within the desired range. Therefore,
heating or cooling is provided depending on the actual room
temperature, which is affected by the temperature of the
external environment. For a given external temperature the
activation pattern of a HVAC can be suitably approximated
by a periodic activity [2].
The modeling and control approach is derived from the
domain of Real-Time scheduling studied in computing sys-
tems [3]. The timing behavior of load activations is modeled
using parameters traditionally adopted by real-time processing
systems, such as periods and activation times. The distinguish-
ing features of our approach are: i) to provide guarantees in
worst case conditions; ii) to achieve the user constraints on
the temperature controlled by each HVAC; iii) to address the
scalability issue in order to deal with large sets of loads.
This paper addresses the load management in worst case
conditions. While it can be pessimistic in the average scenario,
0
1
0
5
0
5
0
5
10
15
20
0
5
25
Fig. 1.
Example of schedule of several HVACs. The time-scale is enlarged
from t = 20 to t = 25 to better depict the system evolution. In the top chart
shows the evolutions of temperatures normalized in their working ranges. The
second and third top charts show the consumed power by two independently
scheduled groups of HVACs. Active loads are indicated by their color. The
bottom chart shows the overall power demand.
it allows a predictable load balancing to limit the impact of
low-probability (but still possible) conditions which are behind
potentially catastrophic consequences such as power disruption
due to overloads [4]. The performance of real-time scheduling
applied to electric loads in average conditions is studied in [5],
where real-time load scheduling was compared with the case
of absence of load control.
The control action is based on the speciﬁcation of the
requirements that need to be enforced on the temperature,
i.e., the desired working range for each HVAC. The control
policy will meet such requirements, while limiting the peak
load. To model and meet the requirements on the desired
working conditions, an approach based on the existing real-
time scheduling theory has been used, namely Real-Time
Physical Systems (RTPS) [6]. RTPSs are a special case of
switching hybrid system where the switching signal corre-
sponds to a real-time schedule. A physical variable (the con-
trolled temperature, in our case) changes its value according
to the activation the HVAC, and such activations are driven
by a real-time scheduler. In practice, the dynamics of the
physical process changes when its state is switched due to
scheduling decisions. Moreover, the activity of a load may be
interrupted and resumed later to account for higher priority
loads. The priority of a load is automatically determined by
the scheduling algorithm on the basis of the timing constraints.
The focus of the proposed approach is on the scalability to
large systems. For this purpose, the discussed method has low
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

computational complexity, making it applicable to large sets of
loads. The idea is to organize the loads into distinct groups that
are scheduled independently from each others. This commonly
adopted approach is known in the ﬁeld multiprocessor real-
time computing systems as partitioned scheduling. Despite it
may produce a sub-optimal solution, the partitioned scheduling
reduces the complexity to a linear or polynomial problem, and
it allows the use of simpler scheduling algorithms having a
number of known useful properties.
Fig. 1 shows an example of system behavior where different
on/off HVACs are partitioned into two independent groups and
scheduled to limit the overall peak load. The ﬁgure also shows
the behavior of the temperature associated with each load,
which depends on the activation state of the load.
The reminder of the paper is organized as follow. In
Section II is presented a brief analysis of the state of the art in
DSM literature. Section III describes the system model in both
dynamics and timing terms. Section IV states the properties of
the system and shows how is possible to get adequate timing
parameters for the switching signal. Section V tackles the
problem of the large set of loads: a partitioning method is
proposed to achieve both good results in peak load reduction
and small complexity in algorithms that allows the method
to scale well with the number of loads. Section VI quantiﬁes
the performances of the proposed approach with simulated
examples. Final remarks are in Section VII.
II. RELATED WORKS
The literature on power systems addressing DSM ap-
proaches is wide. A recent overview and categorization of
DSM approaches is available in [1]. Some works focuses on
the modeling aspects, without proposing a control method
based on those models [7]. Optimization methods are often
leveraged to minimize the peak load. However, the adopted
solutions are based on off-line algorithms that can not cope
with the dynamic and heterogeneous nature of large sys-
tems [8], [9]. Approaches based on artiﬁcial intelligence are
also available, such as [10], where fuzzy logic is used to
control a set of thermal loads. However, the properties of these
methods (and predictability in particular) are not formally
proved. In [11] the authors present a priority-based approach to
the load management. It clearly shows different types of loads
and their working constraints. The weak point of the approach
is the manual assignment of priorities. Our approach, instead,
while being inherently based on the assignment of priorities,
provides an automatic assignment of priorities on the basis of
timing parameters. In fact, the scheduler dynamically activates
the load having the highest priority. This is a distinguishing
feature of real-time scheduling methods.
RTPSs have been ﬁrstly presented in [6], dealing with
afﬁne dynamic systems. In [6] a partitioning-based method to
manage large load sets is mentioned as a possibility and not
explicitly integrated in the model. Before the formalization of
RTPSs, the use of real-time scheduling for the management of
electric loads was proposed in [12] and [13]. In [12] the focus
is on the optimal partitioning of loads to manage large sets
of loads. However, no physical variables are associated with
the loads. In [13] such association is addressed, but the issue
of large systems is not considered. Moreover, in [13] state
variables are characterized by integrator dynamics, while afﬁne
dynamics are considered in this paper. The application of real-
time techniques to the load scheduling is investigated in [14]
considering constraints on state variable variations and model-
ing errors. Errors are characterized by a statistical distribution,
and they are compensated using a feedback technique based on
the measurement of the state variable value in correspondence
to request times.
III. SYSTEM MODEL
This section describes the system model, including the
adopted model for HVACs and its modeling terms of real-time
parameters.
A. Physical system
The power system considered in this paper is modeled as
a set of n electric on/off HVACs. HVACs are independent
from each others. A simple but accurate model for a HVAC
system is proposed in [9], and it is recalled in the following.
The adopted model describes a ﬁrst order dynamic system,
which has been proven to capture the behavior of HVAC loads
accurately.
dX(t)
dt
= Xo(t) − X(t) − Xgs(t)
τ
(1)
In (1), X(t) is the internal air temperature of the room,
Xo(t) is the outside air temperature, Xg is the temperature
gain of the air-conditioner, τ is the actual time constant of the
room expressed in minutes, and s(t) : R → B is the current
state of activation of the load: s(t) = 0 if the load is not
active at time t and s(t) = 1 otherwise. The above model
characterizes the behavior of a single HVAC. The controller
must guarantee that the inside room temperature lays within
a comfort range:
X(t) ∈

Xmin, Xmax
,
∀t
(2)
In [15] this type of loads is called controllable load,
since it can be shed to achieve the peak load reduction.
Preferably, in this speciﬁc case a feedback control scheme
should be integrated to regulate the temperature upon external
temperature variations. A suitable method for this control is
proposed in [16].
B. Real-time modeling of the switching signal
Load activations are driven by a switching signal. Such a
signal is generated by a centralized controller, called sched-
uler. Considering the entire system, the schedule is deﬁned as
the function s : R+ → Bn = [s1 . . . sn]. The distinguishing
point of the proposed approach is that the switching signal
is generated by a real-time scheduling algorithm, such as the
Earliest Deadline First algorithm (EDF) [3].
The total power demand in any given time instant t is
the sum of the power consumed by all active loads at time
t. On the other hand, the scheduling action performed by
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

the scheduler produces the effect to reduce the unnecessary
simultaneous activations of loads. As a result, the scheduling
action is able to limit the peak load by avoiding unnecessary
simultaneous activations.
Considering the above observations, the modeling and con-
trol problem translates to the assignment of proper values to
timing parameters and constraints associated with the HVACs.
For this purpose, a set of real-time parameters are associated
to each HVAC. The adopted model derives from the periodic
task model studied in real-time computing systems [17]. The
generic i-th load is associated with the tuple λi .= (Ti, Ci, Pi),
where:
• Ti ∈ R+: it is the minimum time interval between two
consecutive request times, or period; a request time ri,k
is deﬁned as the k-th request for activating the load; it
holds ri,k+1 − ri,k = Ti, k ∈ N;
• Ci ∈ R+ : Ci ≤ Ti represents the required duration of
the load activation time within each period Ti;
• Pi ∈ R+ is the nominal power of the i-th load.
Real-time parameters are used by the scheduling algorithm to
generate the switching signal, i.e., the schedule. The values of
timing parameters will be bounded to enable the schedulability
analysis in the worst case. For this purpose, the following
deﬁnition is introduced:
Deﬁnition 1 (Valid schedule). A schedule s is said to be valid
if it assigns to each load an amount of activity time equal to
Ci within each time interval [ri,k, ri,k+1]. Formally, it holds:
∀i, ∀k
ˆ ri,k+1
ri,k
si(t) dt = Ci
(3)
Note that the deﬁnition of valid schedule is slightly different
from the one applicable to traditional real-time systems. In
particular, in traditional real-time systems a less-then-equal re-
lation is allowed, since Ci refers to the Worst-Case Execution
Time (WCET). The WCET is the longest possible execution
time of a real-time computing task. The WCET is used to
perform the schedulability analysis in the worst case, while
during the system behavior the actual duration of a task can be
less than WCET. An equality is instead formulated in (3). This
is required to achieve the requirements on the state variable
variation.
To derive the results in following sections, two common
ﬁgures used in real-time systems are introduced: the load uti-
lization Ui .= Ci/Ti and the total utilization U tot .= Pn
i=1 Ui.
While Ui ≤ 1 is the fraction of time in which the i-th load
is active, U tot represents the total fraction of activity time of
the whole load set. The total utilization U tot is particularly
useful. In fact, it is used to perform a test (the so-called
schedulability test) to determine whether a given scheduling
algorithm can successfully schedule the load set [3]. Under
proper assumptions, a scheduling algorithm A is able to
schedule a load set if U tot ≤ U lub(A), where U lub(A) is
the least upper bound on the total utilization that guarantees
the schedulability when using the A scheduling algorithm.
C. The feasibility problem
As from previous deﬁnitions, the considered system model
is composed by a dynamic system, the desired working range,
the real-time parameters and a scheduling algorithm. While the
dynamic system and the working range are related with the
underlying physical process, i.e., the controlled HVAC, real-
time parameters and the scheduling algorithm can be selected
by the system designer. The selection should be made in
order to obtain a feasible RTPS, according with the following
deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 2 (Feasibility). Given the timing parameters de-
scribing the load set, a RTPS is said to be feasible if and only
if user requirements are satisﬁed by every valid schedule.
Equation (3) characterizes a class of switching signals
within the set of all possible scheduling patterns. The RTPS
feasibility problem concerns the identiﬁcation of the class
of valid switching signals such that the requirements on the
controlled temperature are guaranteed. This problem translates
to the identiﬁcation of suitable values for Ci and Ti to drive
the evolution of physical variables in compliance with user
requirements.
The analysis is based on the observation that the scheduler
generates a valid switching signal among all the possible valid
signals. Therefore, the analysis is performed considering the
worst case signal, i.e., the signal that brings to the worst
possible situation in terms of user requirements violation. This
allows to assess the behavior of all other “less critical” valid
switching signals.
D. Peak load minimization
The application of RTPSs proposed in this paper is to limit
the peak load of power demanded from a set of HVACs,
while meeting requirements on the controlled temperature. The
activity of an HVAC is controlled by the scheduler, which
generates the schedule si for the i-th load. The i-th HVAC
consumes either an amount of electric power Pi ∈ R+ when
active, no power otherwise. Hence, the power consumption
over time can be modeled with the function p : R+ → R+
deﬁned in (4).
pi(t) = Pisi(t)
(4)
Transient phases between active and inactive states are not
considered in this paper.
The overall instantaneous electric power absorbed at time t
is the sum of the power consumed by all the HVACs, as stated
in (5).
w(t) =
n
X
i=1
pi(t).
(5)
The peak load is the maximum value taken by w(t) during
the considered timespan.
The peak load minimization can be optimally achieved by
a RTPS scheduler when a uni-processor scheduling algorithm,
such as EDF, is able to schedule the load set. In this case, the
algorithm achieves that only one load is active at any given
time, and the peak load is equal to the nominal power of the
most power-consuming load. The schedulability test can be
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

used to determine whether there exists a feasible schedule,
provided that user requirements are also met.
On the other hand, if simultaneous activations can not be
avoided, i.e. when a uni-processor scheduling algorithm is not
able to schedule the load set, then the minimization of the peak
load becomes more complex. In this case, a RTPS scheduler
generates a schedule that approximates the optimal solution.
Therefore, the RTPS method represents an efﬁcient heuristic
to this problem. In fact, a scheduling algorithm as EDF has
complexity O(n log n) required to sort a queue upon a load
activation request.
IV. FROM PHYSICAL TO TIMING PARAMETERS
In [6] it is shown by a worst-case analysis how to derive
the required timing parameters, namely the period T and the
utilization U, from a ﬁrst order model of a load like the one
expressed by (1)-(2). The external temperature is represented
by a constant function Xo(t) = Xo. Basically, there exists a
set of pair (U, T ) for which the temperature is always kept
within the comfort range for any possible activation pattern
generated by the real-time scheduler using a given value for
the (U, T ) parameters. In particular, it is shown that U must
be chosen within the range

U min, U max
, where:
U min = max

0, Xg + Xmin − Xo
Xg

U max = min
Xg + Xmax − Xo
Xg
, 1

(6)
It is easy to show that a valid choice is U = Umin+Umax
2
.
Once the utilization U has be determined, the period T must
be chosen such that both inequalities (7) hold. Following this
procedure, it is possible to assign timing parameters to the
electric load such that the temperature is always kept within
the comfort range. In (7), U = 1 − U.
Xo − Xmin > 2XoeUT/τ − Xge2UT/τ + XgeT (1+U)/τ
1 − eT/τ
Xg − Xo + Xmax > 2XoeUT/τ − Xge2UT/τ + XgeT (2−U)/τ
1 − eT/τ
(7)
The set of possible solutions for both (6) and (7) determines
the region Ω of pairs in the U − T space, called feasibility
region. An example of feasibility region is depicted in Fig. 2.
As it will be clearer from Section V, the choice of a low
value for U helps to obtain a lower peak load. However,
lower U brings to lower T , thus generating a higher switching
frequency. This is often not tolerable in practical applications
such as processes driven by electric motors. Therefore, the
selection of U represents a trade-off between peak load and
system lifetime.
V. LOAD PARTITIONING
This paper proposes the use of classic real-time scheduling
algorithms to manage the set of electric loads, such as Rate
Monotonic (RM) or Earliest Deadline First (EDF) [17]. The
scheduling algorithm requires the speciﬁcation of Ti and Ci
for every load λi to build a schedule. Well known real-time
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
 
 
U
T
Ω
U min
U max
Fig. 2.
Example of feasibility region in the U − T space. By scheduling a
load with timing parameters in the feasibility region, the achievement of user
requirements is guaranteed (see Deﬁnition 2).
scheduling algorithms such as RM and EDF can generate a
schedule where only one single load is active at any given
time. However, this is possible only when the total utilization
U tot is less or equal of an upper bound U lub(A) whose
value depends on the considered algorithm A. For example,
U lub(EDF) = 1. Therefore, when U tot ≤ 1, preemptive
EDF can build a schedule S without activating more than
one load at any given time. As a consequence, the peak load
P ∗ = maxi Pi is minimized.
On the other hand, if U tot > U lub then the simultaneous
activation of two or more loads can not be avoided, leading to
a possibly larger peak power consumption P > P ∗. The pro-
posed solution is to partition the whole load set into m disjoint
sets Λj, j = 1, . . . , m, called scheduling groups. Scheduling
groups are determined such that their total utilization, deﬁned
as
UΛj =
X
λi∈Λj
Ui,
(8)
is smaller than or equal to U lub(A). This property enables an
uni-processor scheduling algorithm A to ﬁnd a valid schedule
independently for each scheduling group.
Since there is no relationship between the schedule gen-
erated within any pair of scheduling group, the maximum
overall peak load will happen when the loads with the highest
power are simultaneously activated in every scheduling group.
Therefore, an upper bound P ub on the peak load can be found
considering the simultaneous activation within every group of
the load with the highest power Pi, i.e.:
P ub =
X
Λj
max
λi∈Λj Pi.
(9)
A. Level packing
The problem of partitioning the set of loads can be for-
malized as a level packing problem [18]. Level packing is a
special case of the generic two-dimensional packing problem.
In level packing, one or more strips are ﬁlled to accommodate
a set of rectangles such that the total height is minimized. The
peculiarity of level packing is that rectangles are partitioned in
horizontal strips or levels. The complexity of the level packing
problem is NP-hard; in fact, it can be easily reduced to a
classical one-dimensional packing problem having NP-hard
complexity. Approximation methods have been proposed to
face the complexity issue [19]. The approximation methods
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

U
1
2
4
5
3
P
group
group
5
4
3
2
1
U lub
P ub
Λ1
Λ2
Fig. 3.
Example of level packing using the FFDH algorithm. Five items
are ﬁrstly ordered by non-increasing height and then packed into two levels.
Note that item 3 generates a new level Λ2 since it does not ﬁt at the right of
item 2 within level Λ1. The load utilizations of the 5 loads are respectively
(0.28, 0.26, 0.49, 0.22, 0.30). Their consumed power are (5, 4, 3, 2, 1). The
schedule generated by this system is depicted in Fig. 1.
are built by ordering the rectangles by non-increasing heights.
Rectangles are grouped to ﬁll the strips using different strate-
gies. In each level, items are packed from left to right by
non-increasing height, similarly to the arrangement of books
within a bookshelf (see Fig. 3). The First-Fit Decreasing
Height scheme (FFDH) is conceived such that it inserts the
next item X (in non-increasing height ordering) on the ﬁrst
level where X ﬁts. If no level can accommodate X, a new level
is created. After the packing action, the height of a level is
equal to the height of the leftmost item. The interesting aspect
of FFDH is that the time complexity is O(n log n). Moreover,
its approximation ratio has been formally derived. In particular,
it holds FFDH(I) ≤ (17/10)·OPT(I)+ 1, where I is a set of
items to be packed, FFDH(I) is the height obtained by FFDH,
and OPT(I) is the height produced by the optimal algorithm.
The asymptotic bound of 1.7 is proved to be tight.
B. Application to the scheduling problem
The application of the level packing to the scheduling
of electric loads requires the proper modeling of the loads.
Therefore, each load λi is represented as a rectangle having
height equal to the power consumption Pi and width equal
to its utilization Ui, being Ui ≤ 1. The packing happens in a
two-dimensional space where the utilization appears on the x
axis, while the consumed power is on the y axis. The width
of the packing space corresponds to the least upper bound on
the utilization of the considered scheduling algorithm (e.g.,
U lub = 1 for EDF). The goal to limit the total height of
packed rectangles clearly corresponds to the goal of limiting
the peak load of power consumption of the whole power
system. On the other hand, ﬁtting the items on the x axis
in each level corresponds to group a set of loads whose total
utilization is less than or equal to U lub, thus composing a set of
loads that is successfully schedulable by the considered real-
time scheduling algorithm. Once all loads have been grouped
into scheduling groups using the level packing, each group
of loads is scheduled independently from other groups. The
schedulability is guaranteed since the utilization UΛj of the
0
0.5
1
0
5
10
15
20
U
number of loads
0
20
40
60
0
5
10
15
20
T [min]
0
10
20
30
0
5
10
15
20
C [min]
Fig. 4.
Distribution of timing parameters values obtained from physical
parameters in the 100-loads Monte Carlo simulation.
group Λj is less than or equal to the upper bound U lub that
achieves the schedulability of the load set. Fig. 1 shows an
example of schedule of loads whose relevant parameters are
listed in Fig. 3. The grouping of loads is as in Fig. 3.
The proposed technique recalls the Rate Monotonic First-Fit
Decreasing Utilization (RM-FFDU) partitioning scheme for
scheduling ﬁxed priority real-time tasks on a multi-processor
system [20], where bin-packing techniques are used to allo-
cate tasks to processors. However, [20] does not address the
optimization of the total power consumption. Moreover, the
key distinction is that in this paper the ordering is made with
respect to the value of load’s consumed power, and utilization
is not considered for this purpose.
VI. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
This section assesses the performance of the proposed ap-
proach by means of simulation and using realistic parameters.
Similarly to [9], from the viewpoint of generating different
realistic operating scenarios, Monte Carlo simulations are
applied in this paper. By assuming uncertainties on differ-
ent variables (τ, X, Xo, Xg) that closely resemble real-life
operating conditions, Monte Carlo simulations are performed
through repeated sampling of uncertain variables.
Each simulation run has been initialized with pre-speciﬁed
stochastic parameters, chosen with the following method:
number of air conditioner – 100; internal temperature distri-
bution – Normal distribution with mean 72 F and standard de-
viation 12 F, i.e. X(0) ∈ N(74, 12) [F]; air-conditioner model
parameters – τ ∈ N(64, 5) [min], Xg ∈ N(30, 10) [F]; outside
air temperature – uniform distribution between 75 F and 90 F
Xo ∈ [75, 90] [F]; desired temperature range – Xmin = 70 [F],
Xmax = 76 [F]. In terms of power request, 5 air-conditioner
sizes are considered – P ∈ {1.2, 2.5, 3.0, 4.5, 6.0} [kW].
Given the load set, the timing parameters (U, T, C) are
calculated for each load as illustrated in previous sections of
this paper. In particular, it is set U = Umax+Umin
2
. Then, T is
set as the maximum value within the set of feasible values
(Deﬁnition 2). Fig. 4 shows the resulting histograms of timing
parameters. Utilizations range from 0, i.e. always off, to 1, i.e.
always on. Periods are in the range [10, 60] minutes.
In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed ap-
proach, the RTPS control method is compared with the tra-
ditional hysteresis control. In the hysteresis-control approach,
each air-conditioner is turned on when the room inside air
temperature reaches the upper thermostat set-point Xmax and
turned off whenever this temperature falls below the lower
thermostat set-point Xmin.
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
number of loads
peak load [kW]
 
 
hysteresis bound
hysteresis recorded
FFDH−RTPS bound
FFDH−RTPS recorded
optimal RTPS bound
Fig. 5.
Comparison between hysteresis- and RTPS-control methods. The
RTPS-controlled actual behavior, during the simulation of 120 hours, reduces
the peak load of the 35% in respect of hysteresis control in regular working
conditions. The improvement on the theoretical bound associated with worst
case working conditions is around 60%.
Fig. 5 shows the peak load as a function of the total number
of loads in the system under different control strategies. With
the hysteresis-based control, the worst case bound is equal
to the sum of all loads power, while in the RTPS-controlled
system the theoretical bound is obtained by summing the
power consumed by the most power-consuming loads in
each scheduling group generated by the packing algorithm.
It is worth to note that, while the theoretical bound for the
hysteresis-controlled method may represent a very unlikely
worst-case condition, it is still a possible situation, whose
likelihood increases with the system lifetime. For both control
methods, the ﬁgure also shows the actual peak load recorded
by simulating the system behavior over a 120 hours (5 days)
time span. The actual (recorded) peak load generated by the
RTPS-based control is able to reduce the peak load in average
by 35% with respect to the actual (recorded) peak load in
absence of coordination, which represents a normal working
condition. On the other hand, the peak load is reduced by up
to 60% with respect to the worst possible case (theoretical
bound) of the hysteresis-controlled case. Finally, it is worth
to note that the recorded peak load of the RTPS-controlled
system is very close to its theoretical bound This means that
the worst situation in the partitioned scheme (i.e., when the
most power-consuming loads in every scheduling group are
simultaneously activated) do happen almost always.
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper presented an approach to coordinate the acti-
vation of a large sets of HVACs in a Demand-Side Manage-
ment scenario. The proposed method is based on scheduling
techniques adapted from the domain of real-time scheduling.
The combination of a level packing strategy and uni-processor
scheduling algorithms allows to meet both timing and physical
constraints. Simulation results based on realistic parameters
prove a relevant improvement of peak load reduction.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Palensky and D. Dietrich, “Demand side management: Demand re-
sponse, intelligent energy systems, and smart loads,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Informatics, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 381–388, aug. 2011.
[2] G. Koutitas and L. Tassiulas, “A delay based optimization scheme
for peak load reduction in the smart grid,” in Proceedings of the 3rd
International Conference on Future Energy Systems: Where Energy,
Computing and Communication Meet.
ACM, 2012, p. 7.
[3] G. Buttazzo, Hard real-time computing systems: predictable scheduling
algorithms and applications, ser. Real-Time Systems Series.
Springer,
2005.
[4] D. Novosel, M. M. Begovic, and V. Madani, “Shedding light on
blackouts,” Power and Energy Magazine, IEEE, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 32
– 43, jan-feb 2004.
[5] M. L. Della Vedova, E. Di Palma, and T. Facchinetti, “Electric loads
as real-time tasks: an application of real-time physical systems,” in
7th International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing
Conference (IWCMC), July 2011, pp. 1117–1123.
[6] M. Della Vedova, M. Ruggeri, and T. Facchinetti, “On real-time physical
systems,” in Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Real-
Time and Network Systems (RTNS), November 2010, pp. 41–49.
[7] A. Molina-Garcia, M. Kessler, J. Fuentes, and E. Gomez-Lazaro,
“Probabilistic characterization of thermostatically controlled loads to
model the impact of demand response programs,” Power Systems, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 241–251, Feb. 2011.
[8] T.-F. Lee, M.-Y. Cho, Y.-C. Hsiao, P.-J. Chao, and F.-M. Fang, “Opti-
mization and implementation of a load control scheduler using relaxed
dynamic programming for large air conditioner loads,” Power Systems,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 691 –702, may 2008.
[9] B. Ramanathan and V. Vittal, “A framework for evaluation of advanced
direct load control with minimum disruption,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Systems, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 1681–1688, November 2008.
[10] C.-M. Chu, T.-L. Jong, and Y.-W. Huang, “A direct load control of
air-conditioning loads with thermal comfort control,” in IEEE Power
Engineering Society General Meeting, June 2005, pp. 664–669 Vol. 1.
[11] M. Pipattanasomporn, M. Kuzlu, and S. Rahman, “An algorithm for
intelligent home energy management and demand response analysis,”
Smart Grid, IEEE Transactions on, vol. PP, no. 99, p. 1, 2012.
[12] T. Facchinetti, E. Bini, and M. Bertogna, “Reducing the peak power
through real-time scheduling techniques in cyber-physical energy sys-
tems,” in Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Energy
Aware Design and Analysis of Cyber Physical Systems (WEA-CPS),
April 2010, pp. 18–25.
[13] T. Facchinetti and M. L. Della Vedova, “Real-time modeling and
control of a cyber-physical energy system,” in Proceedings of the First
International Workshop on Energy Aware Design and Analysis of Cyber
Physical Systems (WEA-CPS), April 2010, pp. 10–17.
[14] ——, “Real-time modeling for direct load control in cyber-physical
power systems,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, special
issue on Information Technology in Automation, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 689–
698, November 2011.
[15] S. Shao, M. Pipattanasomporn, and S. Rahman, “Development of
physical-based demand response-enabled
residential load models,”
Power Systems, IEEE Transactions on, vol. PP, no. 99, p. 1, 2012.
[16] M. L. Della Vedova and T. Facchinetti, “Feedback scheduling of real-
time physical systems with integrator dynamics,” in Proceedings of 17th
IEEE International Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory
Automation (ETFA), September 2012.
[17] C. L. Liu and J. W. Layland, “Scheduling algorithms for multiprogram-
ming in a hard real-time environment,” Journal of the Association for
Computing Machinery, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 46–61, January 1973.
[18] A. Lodi, S. Martello, and D. Vigo, “Models and bounds for two-
dimensional level packing problems,” Journal of Combinatorial Opti-
mization, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 363–379, 2004.
[19] A. Lodi, S. Martello, and M. Monaci, “Two-dimensional packing
problems: A survey,” European Journal of Operational Research, vol.
141, no. 2, pp. 241 – 252, 2002.
[20] Y. Oh and S. Son, “Allocating ﬁxed-priority periodic tasks on multipro-
cessor systems,” Real-Time Systems, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 207–239, 1995.
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

