GIS Deep Learning For Power Assets’ Detection and Identification 
Vivian Sultan 
California State University 
Los Angeles, CA USA 
email: vsultan3@calstatela.edu 
 Jose Ramirez 
California State University 
Los Angeles, CA USA 
email: jramire3@calstatela.edu 
Jordan Peabody 
California State University 
Los Angeles, CA USA 
email: jpeabod@calstatela.edu 
Madison Bautista 
California State University 
Los Angeles, CA USA 
email: mbauti33@calstatela.edu 
Abstract—In this study, ArcGIS Pro 2.8 identified power poles 
and towers from Light Detection And Ranging (LiDAR) point-
cloud data. In previous research, machine learning has 
identified objects from such data. We sought to demonstrate a 
deep-learning model developed by the Environmental Systems 
Research Institute and a group based in Australia and whether 
deep learning is a viable solution for identifying power assets 
in three California areas. The deep-learning model was 
deployed in ArcGIS Pro using the Classify Point Cloud Using 
Trained Model geoprocessing tool. The model successfully 
identified some power poles in both rural and urban areas. A 
better training dataset might improve on this limited success, 
suggesting that deep learning can successfully classify point 
clouds. Those interested in using LiDAR point clouds with 
deep learning to classify power poles and towers should 
produce training data using accurately labeled data that 
accurately represents the objects of interest to ensure optimal 
results with a new model. 
Keywords—LiDAR; deep learning; point cloud; ArcGIS Pro; 
point classification. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Light Detection And Ranging (LiDAR), a type of 
remote-sensing technology, uses pulsed lasers to measure 
variable distances, heights, or depths of objects and areas. 
LiDAR devices are generally mounted on Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicles (UAV). These UAVs are remotely operated to scan 
areas of interest. At a minimum, this process requires a two-
person team to remotely operate the UAV and verify the data 
is correct [1]. This data can be input to software that can read 
the point-cloud data for further processing. UAVs and 
LiDAR data provide several benefits over sending people to 
physically inspect all assets of interest. For instance, a UAV 
can easily scan large areas without regard to the type of 
terrain (steep slopes, dense forests, etc.). Several studies have 
examined extracting objects from point-cloud data. 
Based on the current and future potential of LiDAR data 
in assessing and managing forest structures, remote sensing 
and classification can identify specific trees in a cluster and 
more closely identify the species [2]. The article is relevant 
to our research question of whether LiDAR can be used to 
identify power poles and structures, which may be imbedded 
in forests or other rural areas. 
3D LiDAR imaging could be used in conjunction with a 
Recurring Neural Networks (RNN) to identify different 
objects. With the progression of scanners, 3D LiDAR images 
provide enhanced measurement data [3]. The point spacing 
between objects could be leveraged to create a model to 
recognize objects [3]. The RNN model showed promise, and 
warrants further research, as does pursuing better 3D data. 
Using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), Maggiori 
et al. [4] created an end-to-end satellite-imagery classification 
framework, noting its ability to classify satellite images, 
identify objects, and produce quality images. Untrained 
models performed less well. From an existing model, they 
constructed a manually classified dataset with significant 
improvements. They propose a two-step approach with a 
small manually classified training dataset to classify a larger 
unclassified set. 
Kudinov [5] used the Point Convolution Neural Network 
(PointCNN) framework to automatically identify power lines 
and poles. The group used artificial intelligence for the labor-
intensive task of manually labeling the point cloud. Their 
study area was a city in Australia, and their dataset contained 
540 million points. They trained their PointCNN model 
using four classes: other, wires, stray wires, and utility poles. 
Studying the You Only Look Once (YOLO) deep-
learning algorithm, Fan et al. [6] detect objects in point-
cloud datasets for self-driving vehicles, which need real-time 
information to avoid collisions. Consequently, the researchers 
propose a computationally efficient algorithm, LS-R-
YOLOv4, using color images and point-cloud data to 
precisely segment and detect objects. Borcs et al. [7] 
proposed a pipeline to quickly classify point clouds. One 
component of this pipeline is a CNN trained to classify 
objects. 
LiDAR data can be used to accurately pinpoint large 
areas’ micromorphology [8]. Comparing a Digital Elevation 
Model (DEM) generated from LiDAR data to the surveyed 
plots, Brubaker et al. [8] learned that their research was 
accurate to within 0.3–0.4 m of the actual survey, a single 
point in the point cloud. With their data, they generated the 
surface constraint of the surveyed area faster and from a 
greater distance compared to a traditional survey. The DEM 
is important as it allows LiDAR data to be accurately 
separated from ground, water, or any surface constraints 
based on elevation. 
Azevedo et al. [9] showcased UAVs to replace 
helicopters. UAVs with LiDAR would help companies 
maintain their equipment more efficiently with a team of a 
few people for data vetting and to control the UAV. LiDAR 
data can be converted to point-cloud data and fed through an 
algorithm to help identify and sort items in the LiDAR data. 
They argue that, while the algorithm they used failed to 
correctly identify possible points, those points were 
classified as unidentified due to the difficulty of 
differentiating vegetation and other objects. They conclude 
that a more powerful algorithm may correctly identify points 
of interest and that Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) would 
process faster. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-967-6
ENERGY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

The CNN algorithm was able to transform, organize, and 
label data [10]. With orthophotos and LiDAR data, Nahhas 
et al. [10] created a digital surface model, DEM, shapes, and 
input other data through the model to detect buildings. From 
their findings and experiments, the CNN and machine-
learning model accurately classified background and 
buildings and drew the geometry and shapes of the building 
from the LiDAR and orthophotos. They were able to 
transform low-level detail into highly detailed, classified 
features. 
Section II describes the materials and methods used in 
the study. Section III presents the results and discusses the 
findings. Section IV concludes. 
II.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
In this section, we define the problem, outline the data 
selection and acquisition, and lay out the methodology. 
A. Problem Definition 
Utility companies must carefully manage their assets 
against various hazards, visually inspect their assets 
regularly. Generally, these assets require many hours to 
manage and are not easily accessible due to their remoteness. 
Dispatching teams of people to assess the status of power 
equipment is expensive and time consuming. LiDAR data 
serves as a cost-efficient alternative for surveying large areas 
of land and generating real-time images of objects. 
The point-cloud data generated by scans can be analyzed 
to identify assets needing maintenance. Additionally, utility 
companies can lower labor and transportation costs as there 
is no need to send maintenance crews into the field. 
The cost of LiDAR depends on the type of equipment 
and the range and scope of work [11]. LiDAR drones can 
potentially be cost effective for difficult-to-reach forested 
areas, rural towns, or high-elevation areas. LiDAR can also 
be used in high-density areas such as urban or suburban areas 
[12]. The high upfront cost leaves just maintenance of the 
equipment, future upgrades, and pilot licensing as needed 
[13]. These costs can be calculated in advance, while the 
ongoing costs of dispatching workers depends on the scope 
of work and may not be easily estimated [14]. In many cases, 
contractors may be required in difficult-to-reach areas and 
may not have the quality control utility companies need. 
While manually assessing and inspecting equipment is 
beneficial as the information about them can be updated in 
real time, high-scale LiDAR data must be processed and 
analyzed to ensure error-free data [9][10]. 
LiDAR technology provides several benefits when 
surveying objects. Therefore, this study sought to answer the 
following question. Can utilities use LiDAR point-cloud data 
to accurately define asset locations (poles and towers)? 
The literature suggests deep learning can be used to 
classify objects of interest. This study deployed a deep-
learning model to classify points of interest (utility poles). In 
addition, we gauged the effectiveness of other ArcGIS Pro 
classification tools at classifying poles and towers. This 
study may be of interest to utility companies and individuals 
interested in using LiDAR to manage assets. 
B. Data Selection and Acquisition 
Using publicly available point-cloud data from the 
United States Geological Survey website, we explored 
datasets from June 19, 2018, for parts of Santa Cruz, West 
Hollywood, and North Long Beach (>30 million points and 
1.5 GB each) to study a PointCNN deep-learning model’s 
ability to correctly classify power poles. The deep-learning 
model employed came from ArcGIS Online. 
The following steps describe the point-cloud download 
process. (1) Navigate to the national US Geological Survey 
map [15]. (2) Select “Show where Lidar is available” and 
“Show AOI [Area Of Interest] Results” in the left pane. The 
latter may only show after an area of interest is defined. (3) 
Select the area of interest by Ctrl-clicking and dragging. (4) 
A results pane will appear on the right. Click “Lidar within 
AOI” for the download files. Note that all steps are for 
Windows users. Mac steps are similar. 
C. Methodology 
This research explored ArcGIS geoprocessing tools, 
including a deep-learning model and additional tools. We 
classify the tools into three categories: (a) data conversion, 
(b) deep learning, and (c) .LAS conversion and discuss 
deploying a deep-learning model to classify point-cloud data. 
1. Data Conversion and Projection 
The data files come from USGS in the .LAZ format. To 
use these files in ArcGIS Pro, they must be decompressed. 
The first step is to convert them to .LAS using the open-
source laszip.exe executed at the command prompt: (1) 
Download the conversion tool [16]. Place the downloaded 
file in a folder with the .LAZ files. (2) Bring up the 
Command Prompt (Windows), allowing file access as 
necessary. (3) Type cd /d. (4) Copy the location of the .LAZ 
files from the file manager, paste it on the command line, 
and press Enter. (5) Copy the command laszip.exe *.laz to 
the command prompt and press Enter. (Note: pressing Enter 
will start the tool converting the .LAZ files to .LAS files. 
The tool must be located in the same folder as the .LAZ files, 
otherwise it will not find them.) The converted files will 
appear in the folder with the .LAZ files. 
ArcGIS Pro requires a .LAS dataset to manipulate the 
point-cloud data. In addition, the deep-learning model’s 
documentation requires the point cloud’s x, y, and z
coordinates be in metric. The USGS .LAS datasets, by 
default, are in imperial units. ArcGIS’s “Create LAS 
Dataset” can perform this conversion: (1) Navigate to the 
Geoprocessing Tools pane in ArcGIS Pro and find “Create 
LAS Dataset.” Click on the folder icon under Input Files and 
locate the .LAS files decompressed earlier. Under “Create 
PRJ For LAS Files,” select “All LAS Files.” (2) Click on the 
globe icon under Coordinate System. (3) A separate window 
will open for setting coordinate systems. Click on Current 
XY and find NAD 1983 NSRS2007 California (Teale) 
Albers (Meters) or whatever is appropriate for your dataset. 
It is found by expanding Projected Coordinate System – 
State Systems. (4) Click Current Z and navigate to “NAD 
1983 (NSRS2007)” found by expanding Vertical Coordinate 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-967-6
ENERGY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

System – Ellipsoidal-based – North America. Once the X, Y
and Z coordinates are correctly specified, click OK. 
2. Deep-Learning Tools 
Our main approach involved using a publicly available 
PointCNN deep-learning model to automatically classify 
power poles and towers. Due to resource and time 
constraints, this study instantiated an existing trained model 
to determine whether deep learning is an effective solution 
for extracting the desired objects from point-cloud data. 
ArcGIS Pro provides three tools to classify data, train a 
model, and use a model: Prepare Point Cloud Training Data, 
Train Point Cloud Classification Model, and Classify Point 
Cloud Using Trained Model 
This project employed the Classify Point Cloud Using 
Trained Model (CPCWTM) geoprocessing tool to run the 
trained model on the .LAS datasets. To run deep-learning 
models in ArcGIS, one must install the Deep Learning 
Framework for ArcGIS Pro 2.8. (1) Download and install 
required framework to run deep-learning models on ArcGIS 
[17]. At that link, click Deep Learning Libraries Installer for 
ArcGIS Pro 2.8 in the Download section. Unzip and run the 
executable. (2) Download the deep-learning model to 
classify power lines [18]. The tool is also on ArcGIS online 
through the ArcGIS Catalog Pane. You will need to store the 
deep-learning model in your project folder. (3) Open the 
CPCWTM geoprocessing tool. Enter your .LAS dataset 
under Target Point Cloud. Under Input Model Definition, 
locate the downloaded deep-learning model from the folder 
icon. Under Existing Class Code Heading, select Edit 
Selected Points. Under Existing Class Codes, select “1” to 
run the model on unclassified points. With all parameters 
entered, click Run. The required time to complete depends 
upon the size of the dataset and the computer’s resources. 
The model may take several hours to classify the point-cloud 
data. (4) Filter the layer to display only power poles: Select 
the .LAS dataset map layer in the Contents plane. On the 
Appearance tab of the ribbon click “LAS Data Points.” Turn 
off all but classification code 15—transmission tower—by 
unchecking the other checkboxes. 
3. .LAS Classification Tools 
We also evaluated whether ArcGIS’s .LAS classification 
tools in Geoprocessing Tools support classifying power 
poles and towers: “Classify LAS Ground,” “Classify LAS 
Building,” “Classify LAS by Height,” “Classify LAS 
Noise,” and “Change LAS Classification Codes.” 
The point-cloud data was classified using the above tools 
prior to running the model without improvement. In addition, 
the “Classify LAS by Height” tool helped determine if poles 
could be classified by their height. The tool proved 
ineffective at classifying poles as it only considers the height 
of the point not its other attributes or its relation to 
neighboring points. 
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION OF FINDINGS
In this section, we present the results and discuss the 
findings. 
A. Results 
The CPCWTM geoprocessing tool used with the 
PointCNN deep-learning model successfully classified point-
cloud data points as power poles and towers. The model was 
able to identify power poles and towers in the Santa Cruz 
Mountains, West Hollywood, and Long Beach (Figures 1–3). 
While the tools achieved the objective of identifying 
power poles and towers, they could have performed better. 
They performed better in urban areas than in rural areas, but 
it had difficulty finding most of the power poles and towers 
within the datasets examined. In the Santa Cruz dataset, only 
seven power poles were identified. In the North Long Beach 
dataset, several poles were identified but not in their entirety, 
and some poles were not classified at all. The West 
Hollywood dataset gave similar results. Further, the deep-
learning model did not identify any power poles or towers in 
the densely forested parts of the Santa Cruz Mountains. 
Figure 1. Scotts Valley, CA (Santa Cruz County). 
Figure 2. North Long Beach, CA. 
Figure 3. West Hollywood, CA. 
The remote-sensing classification tools did not increase 
model performance compared to unclassified data. The 
model failed to identify many power poles and towers. 
B. Discussion of Findings 
Our project produced several findings. Troubleshooting 
the .LAZ–LAS file conversion led us to discover a third-
party tool for converting .LAZ files, discussed in an earlier 
section. Using the tool on the command prompt, our group 
converted multiple files at one time for greater efficiency. 
The deep-learning model required the dataset’s projected 
coordinate system in the metric system. We used the 
“Classify LAS Dataset” geoprocessing tool to change the 
coordinate system. Some group members experienced issues 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-967-6
ENERGY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

with plotting the data. More than once, the point cloud was 
plotted in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean. Each time this 
issue surfaced, team members repeated the first steps of the 
workflow. Importing newly converted data solved the 
problem each time, and the data was plotted correctly. 
Running the CPCWTM geoprocessing tool resulted in 
key findings on converting data from imperial to metric 
measures. Finding a method to convert both the XY 
coordinates and the Z coordinates took a combined 20 hours. 
ArcGIS contains many coordinate systems with limited 
explanations of each system. 
Using the PointCNN trained deep-learning model led us 
to several key findings. When running the model more than 
once, we found that ArcGIS occasionally did not always 
accept the parameters we entered. In one case, ArcGIS 
would not recognize where the downloaded tool was kept. 
Closing the project and creating a new one fixed the issue. 
Another issue we faced was the inability to run the deep-
learning model. Although the correct path to the deep-
learning model was input from both the local file directory 
and ArcGIS Online, the CPCWTM tool could not find it. 
After several hours of troubleshooting, the issue was 
resolved by reinstalling ArcGIS pro on all desktop profiles. 
The different members’ varying computer hardware and 
processing capabilities was challenging. Recommended 
hardware for using ArcGIS Pro is a four-core central 
processing unit, with two cores at a minimum and 10 cores 
optimally. Devices with lower specifications had some 
issues, such as freezing and becoming unresponsive. The 
datasets in the research ranged from 1.5 to 3.2 gigabytes, and 
the group noticed that ArcGIS Pro to function with fewer 
issues with less data processed. Additionally, some 
troubleshooting was required for some users to get the 
machine-learning model to function. For example, ArcGIS 
Pro must be installed for all users or there will be an issue 
with permissions. 
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
Utilities must manage assets for reliable service and to 
protect property and life. Asset inspections are expensive, 
labor intensive, and difficult in hard-to-reach locations. 
LiDAR can efficiently scan areas and generate point-cloud 
data that can be efficiently and cost-effectively processed 
and classified to visualize objects of interest and identify 
physical changes with such software as ArcGIS Pro. 
Small teams can quickly scan large areas and analyze the 
data to determine which assets need attention, focusing 
efforts on assets needing maintenance. This study validates 
deep-learning methods to classify power poles and towers 
from a LiDAR point cloud. 
Due to time constraints and lack of training data, we 
opted for a model trained with other data. Though the study’s 
results are suboptimal, they do show deep learning is viable. 
According 
to 
the 
Environmental 
Systems 
Research 
Institute’s deep-learning documentation, a model developed 
with other data may underperform because the project data 
differs from the data used to train the model [19]. 
ArcGIS Pro comes equipped with tools to interactively 
classify points. These tools can be used to label points of 
interest in the training and validation data that accurately 
represent the project data. These steps should produce a 
model that can automatically classify other point clouds [20]. 
REFERENCES
[1]
National Ocean Service, “What is LiDAR,” US Department of Commerce. 
[Online]. Available from: https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/lidar.html 
[2]
M. Van Leeuwen and M. Nieuwenhuis, “Retrieval of forest structural 
parameters using LiDAR remote sensing.” Eur J For Res, vol. 129, 
pp. 749–770, 2010. [Online]. Available from: https://link.springer
.com/article/10.1007/s10342-010-0381-4. 
[3]
D. V. Prokhorov, “Object recognition in 3D LiDAR data with recurrent 
neural network,” IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, vol. 2009, pp. 9–15, 2009. 
[4]
E. Maggiori, Y. Tarabaka, G. Charpiat, and P. Alliez, “Convolutional 
neural networks for large-scale remote-sensing image classification,” 
IEEE Xplore. [Online]. Available from: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org
/document/7592858 
[5]
D. Kudinov, “PointCNN: Replacing 50,000 man hours with AI,” 
Medium. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://medium.com/geoai
/pointcnn-replacing-50-000-man-hours-with-ai-d7397c1e7ffe 
[6]
Y.-C. Fan, C. M. Yelamandala, T.-W. Chen, and C.-J. Huang, “Real-
time object detection for LiDAR based on LS-R-YOLOv4 neural 
network,” J Sensor, vol. 2021, Article 5576262, 2021. [Online]. 
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/5576262). 
[7]
A. Borcs, N. Balazs, and C. Benedek, “Instant object detection in 
LiDAR point clouds. Digital Object Identifier System,” [Online]. 
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1109/LGRS.2017.2674799 
[8]
K. M. Brubaker, W. L. Myers, P. J. Drohan, D. A. Miller, and E. W. 
Boyer, “The use of LiDAR terrain data in characterizing surface 
roughness and microtopography,” Appl Environ Soil Sci, vol. 2013, 
Article 891534, 2013. [Online]. Available from: https://doi.org/10
.1155/2013/891534. 
[9]
F. Azevedo et al., “LiDAR-based real-time detection and modeling of 
power lines for unmanned aerial vehicles,” MDPI. [Online]. Available 
from: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/19/8/1812/htm 
[10] F. H. Nahhas, H. Z. M. Shafri, M. I. Sameen, B. Pradhan, and S. 
Mansor, “Deep learning approach for building detection using 
LiDAR–orthophoto fusion,” J Sensors, vol. 2018, Article 7212307, 
2018. [Online]. Available from: https://www.hindawi.com/journals/js
/2018/7212307. 
[11] J. Antunes, “Should you choose LiDAR or photogrammetry for aerial 
drone surveys?” Commercial UAV News. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.commercialuavnews.com/construction/choose-lidar
-photogrammetry-aerial-drone-surveys 
[12] K. K. Singh, G. Chen, J. B. McCarter, and R. K. Meentemeyer, 
“Effects of LiDAR point density and landscape context on estimates 
of urban forest biomass,” ISPRS J Photogramm Remote Sens, vol. 
101, pp. 310–322, 2015. [Online]. Available from: https://doi.org/10
.1016/j.isprsjprs.2014.12.021. 
[13] C. Van Tassel, “The true cost—Implementing LiDAR into your 
business,” LiDAR News. [Online]. Available from: https://lidarnews
.com/articles/the-true-cost-implementing-lidar-into-your-business 
[14] T. E. Glavinich and A. L. Chichester, “Pricing service work for profit,” 
Electrical Contractor Magazine. [Online]. Available from: https://www
.ecmag.com/section/your-business/pricing-service-work-profit 
[15] US Geological Survey, “3DEP LidarExplorer,” [Online]. Available 
from: https://prd-tnm.s3.amazonaws.com/LidarExplorer/index.html 
[16] Rapidlasso, “LAStools: Award winning software for rapid LiDAR 
processing,” [Online]. Available from: http://lastools.org/download/laszip.exe 
[17] GitHub, “Deep learning libraries installers for ArcGIS,” [Online]. 
Available from: https://github.com/Esri/deep-learning-frameworks/blob
/master/README.md?rmedium=links_esri_com_b_d&rsource=https
%3A%2F%2Flinks.esri.com%2Fdeep-learning-framework-install 
[18] Environmental Systems Research Institute, “Deep learning model to 
classify point clouds into distribution wires, poles, or background,” 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-967-6
ENERGY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

[Online]. Available from: https://www.arcgis.com/home/item.html?id
=6ce6dae2d62c4037afc3a3abd19afb11 
[19] Environmental Systems Research Institute, “Classify a point cloud 
with deep learning,” [Online]. Available from: https://pro.arcgis.com
/en/pro-app/latest/help/data/las-dataset/classify-a-point-clould-with
-deep-learning.htm. 
[20] Environmental Systems Research Institute, “Introduction to deep 
learning and point clouds,” [Online]. Available from: https://pro
.arcgis.com/en/pro-app/latest/help/data/las-dataset/introduction-to
-deep-learning-and-point-clouds.htm 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-967-6
ENERGY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

