Synchronization Issues for Smart Grids
Peter M. Corcoran, Fellow IEEE, 
College of Engineering & Informatics, 
National University of Ireland Galway 
Galway, Ireland 
e-mail: peter.corcoran@nuigalway.ie    
 
 
 
Hugh Melvin, 
College of Engineering & Informatics, 
National University of Ireland Galway 
Galway, Ireland 
e-mail: hugh.melvin@nuigalway.ie 
Abstract—The loss of time synchronization across a Smart 
Grid due to local A/D and D/A conversion processes between 
the digital domain and the analogue control domain is 
considered. It is shown that a local calibration can be 
implemented to enable a determination of clock skew in 
individual analog sub-systems. Given this information two 
correction strategies are explained, one based entirely on 
network-side modification of the control signal data stream. A 
second approach is based on modification of the control signal 
on individual client sub-systems allows use of a multi-cast 
control 
signal 
and 
facilitates 
both 
local 
and 
global 
synchronization of the control signals.  
Keywords- smart grid; synchronization; analog control; clock 
skew, standards IEEE 1588, IEC 61850 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Smart Grid is the integration of communications 
networks with the power grid in order to create an electricity 
communications superhighway extending from generation 
nodes right through transmission and distribution into end 
user premises. Such a Smart Grid has two distinct features; 
firstly it allows flexible and real-time decision making based 
on real-time pricing; furthermore, it is capable of 
monitoring its own health at all times, alerting operators 
immediately when problems arise and automatically taking 
corrective actions that enable the grid to fail gracefully and 
prevent a local failure from cascading out of control. 
One can think of Smart Grid as a system of systems, each 
with its own architecture [1]. Some of the key infrastructure 
requirements are reliable distribution of information and 
time synchronization among network elements in order to 
correlate different network events. Time management and 
clock synchronization requirement in Smart Grid varies 
from system to system. 
PSRC (Power System Relaying Committee) [2] working 
group H7 is defining IEEE1588 standard profile for power 
system applications to be called IEEE C37.238 [4]. The 
purpose of that standard is to facilitate adoption of 
IEEE1588-2008 for power system applications requiring 
high precision time synchronization. The profile specifies a 
well-defined subset of IEEE1588-2008 mechanisms and 
settings aimed at enabling device interoperability, robust 
response to network failures, and deterministic control of 
delivered time quality. 
This set of PTPv2 parameters and options allows 
IEEE1588-2008 based time synchronization to be used in 
mission 
critical 
power 
system 
protection, 
control, 
automation and data communication applications. 
The world of precise synchronization is standardized by 
the IEEE 1588 document [3] also known as the Precision 
Time Protocol (PTP) facilitates both time and timing 
synchronization. In recent years, it has become highly 
relevant to network providers who are migrating from 
circuit switched SDH/SONET networks to IP Based Next 
Generation Networks. Such providers need a replacement 
mechanism to transfer timing (and also time) within their 
networks Many application domains such as industrial 
automation, 
measuring, 
telecommunication, 
substation 
automation or audio/video transmission require a precise 
synchronization across their equipments to ensure a correct 
and safe execution. The main IEEE 1588 standard defines 
the basic rules and protocol elements to achieve precise 
synchronization, while profiles refine the main standard by 
adapting it to a specific application domain. Three profiles 
are currently under definition. The first one is the power 
systems profile driven by the IEEE Power Systems Relaying 
Committee (PSRC), the second one is the audio/video 
bridging of IEEE 802.1, while a third one addresses the 
telecom applications. 
Another important standard is IEC 61850. This has been 
substantially developed for substations but is seen as a key 
standard for all field equipment operating under both real-
time and non-real time applications. The use of IEC 61850 
for wide-area communication is already discussed in IEC 
61850-90-1 (Draft technical report) in the context of 
communication between substations.  
Much of this work relies on the use of Network Time 
Protocol 
(NTP) 
to 
provide 
the 
underlying 
time 
synchronization for real-time systems [5]. Now NTP 
provides a well tested method to enable reasonably accurate 
time 
synchronization 
across 
TCP/IP 
networking 
infrastructure. It can be further refined using hardware 
extensions and taking advantage of the ubiquitous GPS 1pps 
signal to refine local time synchronization to the 
microsecond level.  
However, returning to our earlier comment that the Smart 
Grid is a “system of systems” we can see that the above 
standards take a uniquely “digital” view of the Smart Grid, 
108
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

conveniently ignoring that the underlying electricity which 
is carried by the grid is actually an “analog system” and 
must ultimately be monitored and controlled in the analog 
domain. Once we realize that Smart Grid relies on imposing 
a digital management, monitoring and control layer onto the 
underlying analog grid it becomes clear that we need to 
extend our considerations on synchronization beyond the 
digital domain. 
In this paper we will outline some other fields where we 
have 
studied 
time 
synchronization, 
outlining 
the 
fundamental problem of moving from digital to analog 
signals and how the D/A process can introduce its own 
synchronization issues. 
II. 
THE ANALOG SYNCHRONIZATION PROBLEM 
NTP based techniques use a range of mechanisms to 
cleverly keep two networked digital systems in close time 
synchronization. However, if we step back a little from this, 
we realize that each local system has its own local clock and 
in a sense these digital techniques are simply providing us 
with a measurement of the clock skew between these two 
systems. The underlying problem, however, is that each 
networked system must in turn take input from a further 
series of analog monitoring sub-systems and/or drive a 
further series of analog control sub-systems as part of its 
role in monitoring/controlling the local power grid.  
 
Fig 1: Architecture of IEC 61850 Substation Automation System 
with Station Bus and Process Bus [8] 
Typically each of these individual sub-systems will have 
its own local clock hardware. Granted that it may take a 
signal from master clock derived from the original 
networked control system but while such master clock 
signals can provide microsecond levels of accuracy, 
peripheral clocks can be subject to buffering delays and 
jitter. More significantly, intelligent electronic devices 
(IEDs) within the substation infrastructure may connect to 
peripheral controllers or monitoring units over a local 
control bus such as CAN or SPI [9]. Such secondary control 
networks do not support 1588 synchronization and may use 
asynchronous or semi-synchronous timing mechanisms.  
In addition the 1588 standard only considers the 
synchronization of digital clocks, yet many embedded 
systems will have separate clocking subsystems for their 
analog circuitry. In particular the D/A functionality of many 
embedded sub-systems may rely on individual timing 
circuits or crystals. In Fig 1(a) we show a typical IEC 
61850 architecture from ref [8]. 
In summary, the underlying problem is that even when 
there is precise synchronization of the top-level monitoring 
or control signals carried by the Smart Grid local timing 
offsets or accumulated delays may still exist due to 
mismatch between the analog and digital sub-systems in 
local monitoring or control nodes. 
III. 
ANALOG SYNCHRONIZATION IN AN AUDIO SYSTEM 
The analog synchronization problem can be best 
understood 
by 
considering 
a 
simplified 
substation 
architecture. In Fig 2(a) we illustrate a legacy Electric 
Substation architecture. Real-time digital control data is 
streamed over a network connection from a control center 
and this data is written into a memory buffer by the main 
substation controller. It will then be processed and used to 
manage/control local substation processes. Similarly local 
status monitoring is performed and relayed back to the 
substation controller. Note that in this configuration both 
monitoring and control processes are directly wired to the 
main substation controller and thus synchronization of the 
monitoring and control data is trivial at the substation level. 
Synchronization between local substations and the main 
electric grid control center can be easily achieved using IEC 
61850/IEEE 1588 compatible network protocols.  
 
 
Fig 2(a): Legacy Electric Substation Architecture. 
 
 
Fig 2(b): Next generation Electric Substation Architecture. 
 
109
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

By contrast Fig 2(b) illustrates a next generation 
distributed substation architecture where two intelligent 
electronic devices (IED) are networked to the main 
substation controller. Now the embedded subsystems of 
such networked IEDs can be tightly synchronized using 
purely software techniques [3]. However the analogue 
control and monitoring subsystems of such client devices 
can introduces unspecified temporal drift.  In normal 
operation, output analogue data is produced at a fixed rate, 
which is typically dependant on an internal (local) clock 
signal. As this signal is derived from some form of 
electronic oscillator it is subject to variations due to both 
manufacturing and environmental factors. Thus it is unlikely 
that two analogue subsystems can be exactly matched. 
Some local synchronization could be achieved using a local 
master clock for analogue subsystems but there are inherent 
difficulties in synchronizing between local, hard-wired 
environments. 
To place this in context, even if the two networked IEDs 
illustrated in Fig 2(b) were resynchronized at the start of 
every control cycle – say every 3 minutes – a drift of 0.01% 
or 1 in 10,000 between two control channels will produce an 
inter-channel delay of 18mS which is more than sufficient 
to produce a significant phase difference and induce 
unwanted sub-harmonics onto the powerline.    
IV.  CLOCK SKEW IN ANALOG SUBSYSTEMS 
A. Client-Side Callibration 
Now it is well known that the local clock skew of the 
control and monitoring subsystems on each networked 
client IED can be accurately determined [6], [7].  
In the field of digital multimedia it is known to 
determine a local clock skew rate and modify the received 
multimedia stream in a manner, which does not affect the 
quality of the rendered analog signal [7]. For a practical 
embodiment the client device or sub-system must be able to:  
(i) perform real-time interrupt-driven analysis of its output 
signal in order to measure real-time clock skew; 
(ii) at the same time it must decode the digital control 
signal and may also need to de-interleave the 
received control stream; and finally,  
(iii) in order to increase, or decrease the size of a received 
audio data packet to compensate for the determined 
clock skew the client device should perform an 
analysis of each received audio packet to determine 
where, and how, to insert (or remove) audio samples.  
All of these methods must be further implemented in real-
time placing a high computational load on the client device 
typically requiring a powerful, high-end processing unit 
with significant power requirements. Furthermore, in a 
complex system architecture such as Smart-Grid there 
should be a uniform approach to such client-side 
recalibration of digital signals.  
Also worth noting is that problems will occur in higher-
level control algorithms if some sub-systems are accurately 
calibrated and others are not. Thus, even if local calibration 
were adopted as a solution, it would still be necessary to 
inform the external Smart-Grid of the local calibration 
status.  
B. Network-Side Callibration  
The alternative approach is to pass the calibration 
problem back to a server, or a network-side service. This 
approach is actually quite sensible in the context of Smart-
Grid applications as it simplifies the requirements at the 
client-side (i.e. at the local substation level) and enables a 
uniform services model to be developed at the network 
level.    
In such implementations the local client should initially 
register with the network service, providing technical details 
of the various analogue sub-systems integrated into the local 
grid infrastructure. Then from time-to-time the network 
service would send out calibration requests to these 
subsystems during slack periods. Each client device can 
perform a local clock skew measurement. Typically a 
control sequence would be provided which should be 
implemented by the local analogue sub-systems, which 
returns time-stamped messages at the start and after the 
completion of each digital control sequence. It is thus 
possible to determine the likely time deviations of 
individual systems from their ideal. Or in cases involving a 
sensing sub-system a fixed length dataset is recorded and 
returned to the central service with start and end-timestamps 
derived from a local time-synchronized clock.  
The recording and statistical analysis of these data can 
be better performed and managed by a centralized network 
service. Further, it is more practical for network-level 
control algorithms to access such centralized data. It also 
offers a method of monitoring and determining local sub-
systems that may require maintenance or replacement. If 
data is recorded over a period of time then degradation in 
performance or sub-systems accuracy will be easy to track.  
These data are analysed as part of the network service 
and are statistically analysed to determine a long term clock 
skew rate which will be applied to each individual 
monitoring or controlling client sub-system. Also, these 
clock skew measurements should typically be initiated from 
the network-side and, typically, a more intensive calibration 
regime would be applied when a device is initially 
connected to the Smart Grid until a reliable clock skew rate 
is determined for it. Certain methods and techniques 
employed by NTP may be advantageously adapted for this 
purpose.  
110
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

IV. 
CORRECTION STRATEGIES 
Now that we have developed a strategy for determining 
the clock skew of individual analog monitoring or control 
subsystems we can consider a number of correctional 
approaches. As per our earlier discussion it makes sense to 
implement most of the corrections on the network-side 
rather than on the local system. This makes sense because 
correction of multiple local clock skews will be most 
important where Smart Grid algorithms are implemented 
across a section of the power grid, spanning multiple local 
substations. Similarly it is when local data is gathered to a 
central location that the correction of individual clock skews 
are most important so that individual monitoring data sets 
can be compared across a common timebase.  
Because of the real-time nature of most Smart-Grid 
control applications it is important that correction strategies 
for measured signals and for applied digital control signals 
are simplified where possible. Thus in this preliminary 
consideration we will only look at correction strategies 
where individual bits of data can be dropped without 
significantly affecting the measured or applied signals.  
A. A First Approach: Stripping of Signal Data 
When the server is requested to initiate multiple new 
control signals spread across multiple control sub-systems it 
will need to prepare the data for digital streaming. The raw 
digital control data can typically be pre-encoded, or 
optionally passed through a codec which may be 
implemented as a hardware subsystem. The encoded signal 
data is next packetized and this process may also 
incorporate an interleaving step wherein the data from a 
single control sequence is spread over multiple data packets. 
This minimizes the effects of packet loss on the signal at the 
client. The precise implementation of each of these steps of 
encoding, packetization and interleaving will depend on the 
format of the digital data stream. Data formats may be 
optimized to facilitate packet de-interleaving, stream re-
assembly and stream decoding.   
 
Fig 4: Examples of Redundant Signal Samples (RSS).  
In our approach an additional step is now added to this 
chain of server-side processes. By employing the 
predetermined clock skew rates for each networked client 
device. This step performs additional stream processing to 
adjust the signal data for each individual client subsystem. 
The precise form of stream processing is, to some extent, 
dependent on the underlying control signal format. However 
we can identify two generalized techniques, which cover 
most applications where frequency spectrum characteristics 
must be preserved:  
(i) an appropriate number of redundant signal samples 
are either removed or added to each analog channel; 
alternatively, as shown in figure 4; 
(ii) where the underlying digital format requires close 
phase synchronization in addition to overall time 
synchronization, then redundant analog samples which 
should be added to (or removed from) the signal data are 
marked separately from the signal data and are conveyed 
to individual client sub-systems by means of a parallel 
data channel, or in the form of a packet header  
 
Fig 5: Server-Side Stripping of Media Stream  
Hereafter we refer to method (i) as “stripping” and 
method (ii) as “marking”. Now the preferred method of 
stream processing in a simple embodiment of the present 
invention is method (i) as it allows all of the stream 
processing to be achieved on the server side and, in turn, 
does not require any client side modifications. This 
embodiment is illustrated in Fig 5. 
For clarity the steps of encoding, packetization and 
interleaving are omitted. Thus, according to method (i) an 
signal data block is analyzed by a redundant signal sample 
analyzer which determines, based on the clock skew of the 
receiving subsystem, how many, redundant analog samples 
need to be removed to achieve clock skew compensation for 
the receiving subsystem. This process generates a stripped 
analog data block that may be optionally encoded prior to 
being packetized and broadcast over the network. As the 
111
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

required clock skew compensation has been entirely 
performed on the server no modifications are required on 
the client devices.  
B. A Second Approach: Marking of Signal Data 
However there are potential disadvantages to this method, 
particularly where an algorithm needs to be applied across 
multiple local sub-systems. For example, the present 
implementation can be simply extended to multiple sub-
stations each with more than one local analogue control (or 
monitoring) sub-system, as illustrated in Fig 7. Thus 
multiple control sub-systems located in different sub-
stations can simultaneously apply the same synchronized 
control algorithm data, each control group being locally 
synchronized within the sub-station environment, and 
globally synchronized with multiple sub-stations at diverse 
geographic locations. Each local control group obtains the 
signal data from the same multi-cast control data stream so 
that network bandwidth requirements are optimized. 
Evidently the “stripping” method of signal synchronization 
will not be suitable for such more widely-deployed control 
algorithms. 
Thus method (ii), although being more complex to 
implement 
and 
requiring 
a 
combined 
client-server 
processing can have advantages over method (i). This 
marking method is illustrated in Fig 6. The server must 
obtain clock skew rates for each networked analog sub-
system and provide a “marked” list of redundant analog 
samples customized for each in the main control data. 
Typically there will be overlap between these “marked” lists 
and this data may be optionally organized in a set of 
difference tables to reduce network bandwidth requirements. 
 
Fig 6: Server-Side marking combined with Client-Side Stripping of 
the Control Signal Stream  
The operation of this embodiment is illustrated for a 
single client in Fig 6. A control signal data block is 
analyzed as before by a redundant signal sample analyzer 
which determines, based on the clock skew of the receiving 
device which, and how many, redundant signal samples 
need to be removed from the digital signal block, for each 
receiving client sub-system, in order to achieve clock skew 
compensation for the receiving sub-system. In this 
embodiment these samples cannot be simply stripped from 
the signal stream as each client device will have a unique 
clock skew and require a different set of samples to be 
stripped. Accordingly the stripping operation must be 
performed separately on each client and the required 
“marking” data for each client is recorded within an RSS 
Header or otherwise communicated to the clients. The 
original audio data block remains in an unaltered form. This 
signal data is next packetized into a multicast stream which 
can be received by a plurality of networked client sub-
systems.    
When a signal data block (or payload) is received at the 
client the relevant list of “marked” audio samples is 
extracted or reconstructed, as appropriate, from the RSS 
Header by an RSS stripper, which may be implemented in 
either hardware or software or some combination thereof. 
The RSS stripper then determines from said list if audio 
samples should be inserted or removed at the “marked” 
locations. According to our preferred embodiment samples 
are either removed or simply duplicated, as appropriate. 
This has the advantage that only the location of a redundant 
audio sample needs to be recorded in the RSS header. The 
resulting stripped data block is next passed to the standard 
device driver for the analog subsystem and written over the 
data bus into the analogue output of the control subsystem. 
In this case the stripping operation occurs on the client, 
rather than on the server.   
 
Fig 7: Enterprise systems view of Smart-Grid 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
We have outlined some issues in achieving accurately 
synchronized real-time control over the Smart-Grid. These 
are caused by differences in the behaviors of local D/A and 
A/D monitoring and control sub-systems.  
112
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

Given the availability of calibration data we then 
examined two different approaches to modifying algorithm 
control sequences. The first is implemented entirely on the 
network-side and requires no modification to local 
subsystems. Our second approach relies on some client-side 
intelligence where individual analog subsystems can 
identify corrections to their data stream and modify a multi-
cast control sequence accordingly. This approach has to 
benefit of allowing local corrections within a substation 
environment and a more global synchronization correction 
across multiple substations. 
Compensation techniques can be applied at the local 
substation level, but we have noted that these are best 
developed and driven from a network control center, rather 
than 
being 
implemented 
within 
the 
local 
system 
components. It was also observed that centralized gathering 
and management of calibration data would enable long-term 
monitoring of Smart-Grid systems and provide indications 
of a need to service or replace components. The importance 
of this approach can be understood by considering the 
Enterprise level view of the smart-grid infrastructure shown 
in Fig 7 above. While it would be possible to manage all 
timing aspects of the control cycle locally, our argument is 
that a  local controller can only be aware of local issues. 
Some straightforward logic quickly makes it apparent why it 
may be sensible to have a higher-level management of these 
subtle local timing aberrations.  
Consider a particular IED that is standard equipment 
across a power grid. Each device will behave slightly 
differently and while it could be compensated for at the 
local substation level it is not possible to consider the 
possible side effects of several dozen or even hundreds of 
these IEDs at a grid level, unless their control and 
calibration patterns are managed centrally. However this 
remains a topic for future investigation and further 
discussion.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I would like to acknowledge the contribution of Alex 
Cucos in assisting with the prototyping and technical 
evaluation of certain elements of the research work 
presented in this paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Don Von Dollen, Report to NIST on the Smart Grid Interoperability 
Standards Roadmap, June 2009 
[2] 
www.pes-psrc.org 
[3] 
Standard 
IEEE 
1588, 
"Standard 
for 
a 
Precision 
Clock 
Synchronization Protocol for Networked Measurement and Control 
Systems", 2008. 
[4] 
IEEE PSRC, IEEE 1588 Profile for Power system Application (work 
in progress) 
[5] 
www.ntp.org 
[6] 
H. Melvin and P. Corcoran, "Playback synchronization techniques for 
networked home appliances," in Proc. of IEEE International 
Conference on Consumer Electronics, pp. 1-2, 2007. 
[7] 
A. Cucos and P.M. Corcoran, ”Synchronizing multi-channel speakers 
over a network, United States Patent 7,805,210. 
[8] 
J. McGhee and Maciej Goraj, Smart High Voltage Substation based 
on IEC 61850 Process Bus and IEEE 1588 Time Synchronization. 
[9] 
M. Roman-Barri, I. Cairo-Molins, A. Sumper, & A. Sudria-Andreu, , 
"Experience on the implementation of a microgrid project in 
Barcelona," Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference Europe 
(ISGT Europe), 2010  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
113
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

