 
 
An Overview of Smart Grids in Brazil 
Opportunities, Needs and Pilot Initiatives 
Cesare Quinteiro Pica, Daniella Vieira, Gabriel Dettogni 
Reference Centers of Innovative Technologies – CERTI 
Florianopolis-SC, Brazil 
e-mail: cqp@certi.org.br, dpv@certi.org.br, gdt@certi.org.br 
 
  
 
 
Abstract—With the Smart Grid boom, vendors and investors 
are already looking for the opportunities in this area. Some of 
the greatest possibilities might be constructed in Latin 
America, especially in Brazil. This article aims to present an 
overview 
about 
Smart 
Grid 
developments 
in 
Brazil.  
Furthermore, four cases are described to show the challenges 
that 
confront 
energy 
companies 
in 
constructing 
and 
implementing the base for an efficient and real Smart Grid.     
Keywords: Smart Grid; Research and development; Pilot 
Initiatives; Regulatory demands.  
I. 
CURRENT SCENARIO OF SMART GRIDS IN BRAZIL 
Latin America is also a region of the world that is 
showing significant Smart Grid activity. In many Latin 
American countries, utilities have undertaken pilot projects 
in Smart Grids. Since 2008, there has been a growing interest 
in smart energy technologies among Latin American 
countries, with Brazil leading the way. Currently, the 
concept of Smart Grid is the subject with the greatest 
emphasis in the Brazilian energy sector [1]. 
Brazil is identified as a country that recently has had and 
continues to have huge economic growth and, hence, the 
need for expansion and modernization of the electric power 
system, in order to cope with the increased energy demand. 
According with the Brazilian National Energy Plan for 2008-
2017, the government set a goal to build 54 gigawatts of 
installed capacity to attend the increase of the consumption 
expected in 60 percent [2]. 
In 2010, almost all Brazilian electric utilities began 
studying Smart Grid in order to prepare themselves and to 
strategically direct their investments in new infrastructure 
and Research and Development (R&D) projects towards the 
modernization of the Brazilian electric system.  
The following issues might be considered as motivating 
factors for Smart Grid implementation in Brazil: (i) reduction 
of non-technical losses; (ii) increase of the operational 
efficiency; (iii) expansion and automatization of the electric 
power system with standardized smart technologies; (iii) 
improvement of the system reliability and power quality, 
especially for industries and high-tech based companies. 
This paper aims to present an overview of Smart Grids in 
Brazil and is organized as follow. In Section 2, information 
about investments for R&D activities is provided. In Section 
3, some initiatives and challenges for the implementation of 
Smart Grid are presented. In Section 4, the most important 
Brazilian pilot projects are detailed. Finally, in Section 5, 
some final highlights of opportunities for Smart grid 
development in Brazil are presented. 
 
II. 
INVESTMENTS FOR RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT  
Due to a Brazilian law [3], all public service 
concessionaires of electric power distribution must invest 
approximately 1% of their operating revenues in research 
and development programs that could be conducted by 
universities, research centers and innovative companies.  
Most of the investment in addressing these issues is being 
made by energy companies (Generation, Transmission and 
Distribution). These initiatives are: (i) Research and 
Development Program; (ii) Energy Efficiency Program, that 
are coordinated by the energy companies which support 
practical actions; and (iii) Government Fund, that support the 
modernization of the Brazilian electric power system and 
other development projects. The data shown in Table 1 
represents how much companies must invest in each of the 
three initiatives.  
TABLE 1. INVESTMENTS IN EACH INITIATIVE 
 
Research and 
Development 
Energy 
Efficiency 
Government 
Fund 
Distribution 
0.2% 
0.5% 
0.3% 
Transmission 
0.4% 
- 
0.6% 
Generation 
0.4% 
- 
0.6% 
 
For this reason, the Brazilian Electricity Regulatory 
Agency (ANEEL) improved the segment’s R&D Program 
with the objective of encouraging the constant search for 
innovation and to confront the technological challenges of 
the electrical sector.  
A report prepared by the Brazilian Development Bank 
(BNDES) shows that overall investments in energy 
infrastructure will increase by 7.4% per year until 2013 [4]. 
Between 2010 and 2013, Brazil will invest around US$60 
billion in the electric system, solely taking into account 
93
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

projects that already have been granted or have had 
authorization given by the government. 
Other investments are being launched by private 
companies. Large companies such as IBM, Silver Springs 
Networks and GE are already making investments in this 
sector in Brazil. The Brazilian market for Smart Grids is seen 
as a potential for many countries and there should be great 
opportunities for business development, especially due 
Brazil hosting the World Cup of 2014 and Olympic Games 
of 2016. 
 
III. 
INITIATIVES AND CHALLENDGES 
The Brazilian Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME) has 
recently established a work group responsible for studying 
and planning the deployment of a Smart Grid in the country. 
The members of the work group, besides the MME, are 
representatives from the Energy Research Company (EPE), 
the Electric Energy Research Center (CEPEL), the ANEEL 
and the Operator of the National Electric System (ONS). The 
work group is expected to complete its work during the first 
half of 2011. This group has to review the technical studies 
and prepare an analysis with recommendations on measures 
that should be adopted, focusing principally on: (i) the 
consolidation of Smart Grid programs in Brazil; (ii) the 
adequacy of regulations and standards for distributors of 
electricity; (iii) the identification of resources for funding 
and promoting incentives for the production of equipment in 
the country; and (iv) the regulation of potential new players 
in the market, including consumers and distributed 
generation providers [5]. 
At the moment the main challenges related to the 
implementation of Smart Grid architecture in a Brazilian 
context are:  size of matrix energy in Brazil, remote areas 
like Amazon and rural areas, reliability standards, illegal 
connections and regulation of the sector.  
In Brazil Smart Grid is being implemented mostly 
through large scale adoption of electronic meters, as a 
strategy for distribution companies to increase operational 
efficiency through remote meter readings, and to reduce 
energy commercial losses. As an example, in 2009, the city 
of Rio de Janeiro’s total energy losses were about 21% 
which corresponds to 5TWh. Of this total, around 15% refers 
to commercial losses. In 2009, energy commercial losses in 
the whole country represented approximately US$5 billion in 
economic losses for distribution companies [6].  
In 2009, the ANEEL opened a public hearing on Smart 
Metering and also approved a regulation allowing the use of 
Power Line Communication (PLC) throughout the country. 
The agency ANEEL announced plans for replacing around 
65 million electromechanical energy meters, nowadays 
installed in residential and commercial buildings in Brazil, 
with new Smart Meters. In the near future, Smart Metering 
will enable the registration of the energy generated by 
residential consumer units by means of solar panels and 
residential wind turbines, for example. 
Another important challenge in Brazil is that there are not 
yet specific policies and regulations for free markets tariffs. 
The agency will invest in efforts to define the regulations 
that permit differentiated tariffs by time, which will enable 
consumers to manage their consumption.  
IV. 
PILOT PROJECTS IN BRAZILIAN COMPANIES  
Despite many financial and regulatory barriers, several 
national companies are already working on pilot projects. In 
this section we highlight four cases that were constructed by 
pioneer companies within Smart Grid. They are: CEMIG, 
AES Eletropaulo, COPEL and CELESC. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Some smart grids initiatives in Brazil. 
Case 1: Cities of the Future in Minas Gerais (CEMIG) 
The Companhia Energética de Minas Gerais (CEMIG) 
[7] has been working to construct the innovative solution to 
automate the infrastructure of energy distribution. In this 
model, the concept of the Smart Grid architecture contribute 
to modelling the integration of technical and commercial 
systems, providing an approach focused on client, on service 
quality, on ambiental sustainability and on energy market. 
For this reason, CEMIG adopted projects that are 
integrated with the categories of Smart Grid architecture. 
The main projects in course are Distribution´s automatization 
and City of the Future. 
In 2009, the project City of the Future was started. The 
project has the objective to validate products, services and 
innovative solutions applied to Smart Grid architecture, in an 
appropriate and representative scale for the company.  
The city that was chosen to start the implementation of 
this program is Sete Lagoas, located near Belo Horizonte. 
This is a municipality with a big diversity of economic 
activities in the industrial, agriculture and service sectors 
with a population of over 200,000 inhabitants and more than 
80,000 customers. Another point is that the location had the 
capacity to integrate experiments with consumers of 
telecommunication systems.  
The project City of the Future includes actions that cover 
all business processes focusing most notably in the following 
areas: (i) automation of consumers’ measurement, (ii) 
automation of substations, (iii) automation of energy 
distribution grid, (iv) telecommunications systems, (v) 
operational computer systems, and (vi) management and 
integration of distributed generation. In 2010, the R&D 
projects started and the first step for implementation was 
realized. 
94
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

For CEMIG, the principal difficulty in constructing 
Smart Grid architecture is that the rules for implementation 
were not defined for ANEEL. For this reason, the process to 
obtain financial resources has been difficult. However, the 
adopted practices for the implementation and the expected 
results are strategic for all stakeholders with emphasis for the 
company and governmental entities.   
The project City of the Future has as expected result: 
serve as a model for implementation of new real time tariffs 
and billing; reduce the energy costs and losses; improve 
efficiency of the power grid; optimize the management and 
control; improve quality of the services and promote R&D. 
Case 2: Smart Grid in Sao Paulo (AES Eletropaulo) 
Since 2007, AES Eletropaulo [8] has been conducting 
initiatives related to the comprehension and dissemination of 
Smart Grid concepts. In 2010, the company invested R&D 
resources in a pilot project to develop a smart distribution 
system integrating communications solutions, advanced 
equipment and information systems. At this stage, the project 
aims to monitor the electrical system and automate the 
process of power distribution.  
The Smart Grid pilot project is being implanted over a 
circuit that has 4.4 kilometers of overhead and underground 
cables which make up distribution grid, in Ipiranga, São 
Paulo. This region has 2,000 units consumption of low and 
medium voltage, in residential, commercial and industrial 
segments. In this region, electronic meters were installed to 
monitor the customers’ energy consumption, as well as 
monitor the energy balance in 39 secondary circuits and 
allow the remote execution of various services, such as 
power reading, cutting and reconnection. 
AES Eletropaulo started doing experiments that involve 
communication between electronic meters, substations, 
toggle switches and other equipment, as well as integration 
between the company systems. The company intends to 
analyse the information, obtained from the measurement 
system, and integrate it with the automation and operation 
systems of the concessionaire.  
To put the project into practice, various features of the 
intelligent grids’ concept are being tested and among them is 
“self-healing” (a tool that reduces recovery time from a 
failure in the electrical system). In the case of power failure, 
a voltage sensor detects the interruption and sends 
information to the distribution management system of the 
company, which will automatically identify an alternative to 
restore the power supply. If it was not feasible, the system 
will send an alert to the specific distributor's operations 
center, which will trigger a team to meet directly at the site 
identified. 
AES Eletropaulo has continuing investing in R&D 
initiatives and organizes a multidisciplinary committee to 
coordinate and analyze the activities.  
Case 3: Companhia Paranaense de Energia (COPEL) 
The COPEL [9] plans to invest more than $ 330 million 
in projects that are related to Smart Grids concepts until 
2014. The main view is to transform Curitiba into a digital 
city. The investments are directed towards infrastructure, 
including installation of electrical networks and adaptation 
of modern systems to energy transfer. Some projects are 
already being implemented, while others remain in the 
preparation and study stage. 
The technology platform, based on the Smart Grid 
concepts, is been tested in Fazenda do Rio Grande, in 
Metropolitan Region of Curitiba, covering 100 million 
consumers. 
The COPEL’s program is being formulated in 
coordination with other public services, under the 
coordination of the State Secretariat of Urban Development. 
The planned actions are intended to expand and modernize 
the electric system. 
Projects intend to spread the Smart Grid by 2020 to 
reduce the rates of equivalent duration of interruption per 
customer (DEC) and equivalent frequency of interruption 
per customer (FEC) [10]. The priority is to improve the 
supply. In addition, technical losses tend to fall from 6.5% 
to 4% and the commercial 1.5% to 0.5%. 
Over the next few years, COPEL will automate all 
operational keys and automatic reclosers installed that 
supply the 650,000 consumer units. This action will reduce 
the number of interruptions and shorten the time needed to 
restore services. The company also expects to build 700 km 
of new compact power grids. 
The idea for new projects incorporates sensing, 
monitoring, 
information 
technology 
and 
telecommunications for the best network performance. In 
the next step of implementation the system will be able to 
identify early failures and be able to reestablish itself, 
therefore improving performance. COPEL sees that the 
system itself, supplied by data and information collected by 
geoprocessing techniques, will identify the items that are 
being repaired, define the process of isolation and restore 
power within minutes. 
Another initiative related to Smart Grids concepts, in 
2010, was the launch of the first electric taxi at the Afonso 
Pena airport, in São José dos Pinhais, COPEL installed the 
first electric fueling station. The station that recharges the 
batteries will also be used within the project site for studies 
on vehicle performance and the impacts of its use on the 
electrical system. Today the charging time of this car is 8 
hours, but they expected to improve that performance. 
 
Case 4: Micro Grid of Sustainable Energy (CELESC) 
The CELESC [11] company is developing R&D pilot 
projects with the objective to build structures to 
accommodate the Smart Grid architecture. Accordingly, the 
projects are reported: (i) Demand Response in Florianópolis, 
(ii) Measurement system in Blumenau and (iii) Planning 
District Distribution Network and Generation of Sustainable 
Energy. 
To be approved by ANEEL, the project Demand 
Response in Florianópolis, Santa Catarina, has the objective 
to improve load factor of distribution systems, through the 
technology used for demand response. The project will 
95
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

install load control devices in 10,000 consumer units and 
smart meters in 3,500 consumer units. The company hopes to 
avoid the occurrence of blackouts and shutdowns, especially 
in critical times during the summer. The demand 
management and the most efficient use of the power system 
will reduce the costs.  
CELESC launched the Project Measurement system in 
Blumenau that aims to serve 3,670 consumers in the 
municipality.  The project uses PLC (Power Line 
Communications) 
technology 
to 
send 
and 
receive 
information through the power energy distribution grid. The 
project implementation consists of three steps: replace the 
mechanical meters for electronic meters, install a new 
communication system between each meter and the 
Blumenau´s substation and install a control center in 
headquarters in Florianopolis. 
Information regarding consumption will be obtained 
remotely. The installed meters are connected to a 
communication module, called transponder, which sends 
signals with information about electricity consumption. 
These signals are sent through a distribution network, before 
they reach the CELESC’s substation. In this place, special 
equipment receives and retransmits the signals to a central 
control, which analyses the collected data.  
The automated measurement system introduces many 
facilities and benefits for consumers, such as: automatic 
metering reading; remote connection and disconnection 
modules in meters and automatic restart after the cut-off; 
lifting load curve of consumption; automatic record of power 
failure, with date and time of occurrence; monitoring the 
voltage on the grid. 
A project will be started in 2011, Planning District 
Distribution Network and Generation of Sustainable Energy 
aims to achieve integration planning for alternative sources 
of generation energy (renewable, waste and sewage) in a 
distribution district. This project will be applied in Sapiens 
Park [12], in Florianopolis, with the purpose to be 
sustainable in generation and consumption. 
Sustainable Energy district networks are defined as local 
electrical systems (consisting of generators, loads, storage 
and distribution) but with different features as well as been 
sustainable. These systems provide connection to the current 
energy system in CELESC. The project will elaborate on the 
methodology for developing these networks and devised a 
test case. This project must justify the deployment of district 
networks in different environments of interest, promoting, 
for example: (i) energy efficiency and quality, supported by 
local management and operation of the system; (ii) 
opportunity in the market for Smart Grids and offering new 
services and rates; (iii) convergence of energy and 
environmental solutions. 
The 
results 
can 
be 
applied 
in 
different 
environments/districts that seek quality and energy and 
environmental sustainability. Moreover, it is noteworthy that 
the solutions studied in the project can be implemented to 
modernize the electrical system, even if initially these 
solutions are not grouped in the form of district networks. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In Brazil, the concept of Smart Grid has become the 
subject with greatest emphasis in the energy sector. The 
focus for now remains on Smart Meters. Very soon other 
smart solutions are expected to emerge on the national 
landscape with very positive forecasts for distributed 
generation, 
communication 
infrastructure 
and 
IT 
applications. 
The Brazilian market for Smart Grids is seen as a 
potential market for many countries. Moreover, even with 
many financial and regulatory barriers, several national 
companies are already working on pilot projects to increase 
the national energy capacity and define models for future 
deployment of Smart Grid in Brazil.  
Regarding the barriers for Smart Grid implementation in 
Brazil, most of them are the same as other countries. They 
are principally: (i) Market uncertainty and lack of policies on 
market structure and rules; (ii) Low public awareness and 
engagement; (iii) Interoperability and scalability assurance, 
(iv) Revenue uncertainty due to lack of regulatory 
definitions. In addition to these barriers, it is worth 
mentioning other particular issues in Brazil: (i) The electric 
power grid in Brazil is very large and it requires a huge 
amount of investment; (ii) More than 70% of the Brazilian 
energy matrix is hydropower and for this reason, another 
kind of renewable system is not easily accepted; (iii) In 
Brazil there are large and low density rural and remote areas 
and (iv) The electric energy and the telecom agencies are not 
aligned in relation to the roadmap for Smart Grid 
development in Brazil [5]. 
As described in this article, the companies have 
initiatives that explore the reality of Smart Grid. CEMIG are 
exploring a defiant idea of constructing a pilot in a city. AES 
Eletropaulo was the first to implement and integrate the 
Smart Metering in their systems. COPEL has worked to 
implement electrical vehicles and contributed to transform 
Curitiba into a digital city. And CELESC has been investing 
in new R&D projects that involve demand response.  
Therefore, it is understood that there is a great 
opportunity to R&D and do business in Brazil, a country that 
is prominent in the global economic environment, with 
opportunities for investors in both the energy sector, and 
Smart Grids. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
We had the pleasure to write this paper with the 
important contribution of: 
• 
Mr. Ricardo Van Erven, Director of Technology 
and Service, at AES Eletropaulo. He related the company’s 
experiences about pioneering projects in Smart Grid 
presented in Case 2: Smart Grid in Sao Paulo.  
• 
Mr. Daniel Senna Guimarães, at CEMIG, who 
discussed the challenges involved in implementing the 
project presented in Case 1: Cities of the Future in Minas 
Gerais. 
 
96
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

REFERENCES 
 
[1] Smart 
Grid 
Spotlight: 
Brazil. 
<http://www.itsyoursmartgrid.com/blog/2009_12_4_brazil.jsp>. 
March, 2011. 
[2] International 
Energy 
Outlook 
2010. 
<http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/ieo/electricity.html>. March, 2011. 
[3] Brazilian 
Electricity 
Regulatory 
Agency. 
Law 
Nº 
12.212. 
<http://www.aneel.gov.br/area.cfm?idArea=546&idPerfil=6>. March, 
2011. 
[4] PUGA, Fernando Pimentel. Visão do Desenvolvimento. Brazilian 
Development 
Bank.  
<http://www.bndes.gov.br/SiteBNDES/export/sites/default/bndes_pt/
Galerias/Arquivos/conhecimento/visao/Visao_81.pdf>. March, 2011. 
[5] ECOEE Energia Eficiente. Smart grid: moving from theory to 
practice and in the fast lane in Brazil & Latin America. Report  of the 
III Smart Grid Latin American Forum. Sept. 2010. 
[6] Brazilian 
Electricity 
Regulatory 
Agency. 
<http://www.aneel.gov.br/areaPerfil.cfm?idPerfil=13>. March, 2011. 
[7] Companhia 
Energética 
de 
Minas 
Gerais. 
(CEMIG).  
<http://www.cemig.com.br/sites/en/Pages/default.aspx>. 
March, 
2011. 
[8] AES Eletropaulo. <http://www.aeseletropaulo.com.br>. March, 2011. 
[9] Companhia 
Paranaense 
de 
Energia 
(COPEL)  
< http://www.copel.com/hpcopel/english/>. March, 2011. 
[10] DEC and FEC. <http://www.aneel.gov.br/cedoc/prt1978046.pdf>. 
March, 2011. 
[11] Centrais 
Elétricas 
de 
Santa 
Catarina 
(CELESC). 
<http://www.celesc.com.br/>. March, 2011. 
[12] Sapiens 
Parque 
in 
Santa 
Catarina. 
<http://www.sapiensparque.com.br>. March, 2011. 
 
97
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

