Enabling Distributed Meter Data Management Using Mediation 
System 
 
Nipun Sharma 
Research & Development, Center of Excellence 
Mediation and Device  
Ericsson India Global Services Private Limited 
Gurgaon, Haryana, India 
nipun.sharma@ericsson.com 
Sandeep Akhouri 
Research & Development, Center of Excellence 
Mediation and Device  
Ericsson India Global Services Private Limited 
Gurgaon, Haryana, India 
sandeep.akhouri@ericsson.com 
 
 
Abstract—This paper proposes the use of mediation system as a 
light weight embedded software module in Distributed Meter 
Data Management (DMDM) platform in Utility domain. In 
DMDM platform, a head end system would collect the 
information 
from 
all 
the 
connected 
devices 
in 
a 
house/neighbourhood, perform meaningful processing and 
forward the processed information to centralized repository 
(or centralized MDM) system. Mediation as a module would be 
embedded in each head end system to perform distributed data 
management and send the limited yet useful information to 
centralized repository reducing the processing and storage 
requirement on the whole. Processed data by mediation system 
at head end system would also be available to the end 
customer(s) for real time updates rather than waiting for 
processing of data at centralized MDM in batch process.   
Keywords-Meter Data Management; Smart Grid; Data 
Management; Mediation system 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Utilities sector is undergoing a massive transformation 
driven by government regulation and commercial factors. 
Global leaders across the world have committed to reduce 
emissions significantly by 2020. EU targets to reduce the 
CO2 footprint by 20% below 1990 level. United States 
targets to reduce CO2 footprint by 17% below 2005 level. 
China targets to reduce the CO2 level of GDP by 40 to 45 % 
from 2005 level. Smart grid deployments improve the 
efficiency within a utility’s network, open up new revenue 
streams and provide enhanced customer services. Over the 
past few years, the rollout of large-scale smart meter 
deployments and the Automated Meter Infrastructure (AMI) 
that supports connectivity and bi-directional information 
flow has become the most promising and well proven 
domain to modernize. 
 
Smart grid along with smart metering would play a 
leading role in achieving the defined targets. As per a leading 
research organization [2], global installation of smart meters 
will be more than 95 million in CY2013 primarily dominated 
by developed nations across North America and Europe.  As 
per projected growth, there would be more than 450 million 
smart meters deployed across the globe in CY2018 primarily 
lead by Asia. Investment for smart grids would exceed $278 
billion dominated by China, which accounted 22% of 
world’s electricity production in CY2011 [3]. On an average, 
Compounded Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) for utility space 
is expected around 12-17% annually [2]. Also, going from 
one meter reading a month to smart meter readings every 15 
minutes works out to 96 million reads per day for every 
million meters. The result is a 3,000-fold increase in data that 
can be overwhelming if not properly managed [6]. Telecom 
vendors, being established player in all communicating 
world, could play a pivotal role to further empower utility 
vendors with their existing expertize for effective and 
efficient deployments.  
 
The transition to the smart grid is fundamentally driven 
by market forces. The smart grid’s ability to make better use 
of existing assets, enhance reliability and minimize costly 
environmental impacts are all market forces that have 
substantial economic value for all the involved stakeholders 
like standardization bodies, government institutes, utility 
companies as well as end customer. 
 
From end customer perspective, Smart Meter enables 
customers with greater control over their energy use and 
costs by allowing them to monitor their energy use online 
and determining which activities are contributing to their 
bills. Customers can online view projected monthly bills 
based on their current usage allowing action to be taken 
before prior to bill generation. Near real-time processing of 
this information can provide valuable insight e.g., smart 
meters that collect information; say every minute can help 
identify appliances that consume the maximum electricity. 
 
Typically, Meter Data Management is centrally located 
where all the raw information from different smart meters 
are collected and saved for processing the information in the 
required format. This kind of centralized MDM solution 
leads to big requirement on storage as well as non-real-time 
update to end consumers.   
 
In this paper, we discuss the use of mediation systems as 
a data management platform for Distributed Meter Data 
Management. Mediation systems allow events generated in 
asynchronous as well as synchronous fashion to be collected 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

and processed. The events can be enriched and consolidated 
as per the requirement of ecosystem. Mediation system 
provides extensive capabilities for data management 
including DB support, archiving, complex data calculation, 
data analysis, auditing and version data management. Near 
real-time analysis and visualization of events can produce 
alerts and notifications that can be used as a feed back to end 
customer for real-time action. 
 
To summarize, we will start by introducing Mediation 
system and elaborate on the importance of mediation system 
in telecom and IT domain. We then discuss the challenges 
posed for Meter data management due to ever growing data 
from smart meters and how traditional features of mediation 
including data management and respective processing 
capabilities could lead to efficient and effective deployment 
of scalable Distributed Meter Data Management in utility 
space.  
II. 
MEDIATION SYSTEM 
 
Traditionally, a mediation system collect data from the 
network, enrich that data via processing and then delivers the 
enriched data to the desired system as highlighted in Figure 
1. Mediation system could be generalized as software 
component used for data transformation depending upon the 
business requirement. 
 
Operators manage a large computing infrastructure 
comprising of a diverse set of hardware, software and 
applications. Mediation system plays a critical role in 
accurate and timely charging & billing of a variety of 
services including voice, data and multi-media services 
provided by an operator. These systems operate in a highly 
complex, multi-vendor environment and provide reliable 
operations, high performance and secure access in a data-
intensive environment. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Overview of Mediation System. 
 
Mediation systems collect data from multiple networks - 
2G, 2.5G, 3G, IP, Fixed line. As part of basic processing, the 
events generated in different formats by different NE are 
decoded from XML, CSV, ASN.1, etc. to an internal data 
format for processing. Validation of event records is 
performed to ensure that they are received in the correct 
order [7].   
 
Events can be enriched with information from external 
databases e.g., subscriber profile information can be added to 
the usage data. Event records originating from the same NE 
can be aggregated by the mediation system e.g., a long 
running call might generate partial CDR that can be 
aggregated to produce a single billable CDR. Event Records 
that are generated across NE can be correlated using a unique 
key (say, MSISDN, IMSI) to stitch together the multiple 
event records into one billable CDR [7]. 
 
Since billing can be based upon duration, volume, 
content value, time, Quality of Service (QoS) or a 
combination of these parameters, custom processing logic 
can be written to define these business rules. The logic also 
defines interfaces with external systems, error handling and 
configures notifications and alarms that can be raised. 
 
Finally, the data records are encoded in a standardized 
format for downstream OSS/ BSS applications. Thus, these 
applications are completely abstracted from the multiple data 
formats, transmission protocols and receive standardized and 
complete records. 
 
Near real-time and real-time mediation systems handle 
events in a continuous streaming format. Real-time systems 
can process information between 1 to 10 milliseconds 
whereas near real-time systems take up to a second for 
processing. As soon as events occur, usage data can 
immediately flow through the mediation system towards 
billing, network planning, fraud management and / or other 
OSS/ BSS systems. 
 
Mediation system is software component which could 
easily be deployed, co-located with other telecommunication 
as well as IT based solutions on Commercial-off-the-shelf 
(COTS) hardware.  
 
 
III. 
SMART GRID & DISTRIBUTED METER DATA 
MANAGEMENT 
 
On high level, Smart Grid could be defined as 
convergence 
of IT, automation 
and communication 
technology in Energy Distribution Network. Smart grid is a 
modernized electrical grid that uses information and 
communications 
technology 
to 
gather 
and 
act 
on 
information, such as information about the behaviors of 
suppliers and consumers, in an automated fashion to improve 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

the efficiency, reliability, economics and sustainability of the 
production and distribution of electricity. 
 
Smart grids are intelligent energy networks which further 
add intelligence through new bi-directional communications 
and computer controls. There are many smart grid 
technology areas each consisting of sets of individual 
technologies that span the entire grid, from generation 
through transmission and distribution to various types of 
consumers like electricity, gas, etc. [9]. 
 
Meter data management (MDM) refers to a business 
process in the Smart Grid infrastructure primarily 
responsible for data management and VEE component as 
highlighted by Ericsson Smart Grid offering [4]. VEE 
component stands for Validation, Editing and Estimation 
modules. 
 
  
 
Figure 2.  Deployment view for Meter Data Management. 
As highlighted above, MDM is positioned between Head 
End systems collecting information from customer’s 
premises and operator’s backend system like Network 
operations, billing, load management system to name a few. 
In centralized MDM solution, all the raw information is 
collected at one centralized point and processed before 
forwarding it to respective backend system.  This leads to 
extensive data flow among various nodes in MDM solution, 
support to handle BIG data as well as delayed update to the 
end customers including consumed unit, consumption 
pattern, etc.   
 
MDM systems provide a database repository that 
automates and streamlines the complex process of collecting 
meter data from multiple collection points supported and 
deliver the data in an appropriate format to a utility billing 
system and other smart grid related applications. 
 
As per IEC standard [1], the meter data management 
system is used to provide a common repository, and point of 
management and access of meter data that is collected from 
disparate metering systems. In addition to data aggregation, 
quite often the MDM will also make an effort to scrutinize 
the data collected from the various metering systems, and 
provide a validating, editing, and estimating (VEE) 
capability. 
 
“VEE” means validation, estimating and editing of Meter 
Reads to identify and account for missed and inaccurate 
reads used to derive billing data. 
 
Data Management & Repository is key component in 
MDM module. Data repository consist of saving raw data as 
well as processed data in required formats for long term 
storage as part of legal requirement. Stored data would be 
further analyzed in case of conflicts/complaints. This data 
should also be used for estimation purpose. 
 
In real scenarios, more functions have been embedded in 
MDM module as highlighted in Figure 3. Various functions 
which are part of MDM solution offerings are Billing, 
Customer information, Revenue assurance and Auditing & 
Reporting, etc. 
 
  
 
Figure 3. Functional breakdown of Meter Data Management 
(MDM) processes. 
Billing customers is a critical process for a utility space 
and lot of resources, financial investment and time is 
invested since it is directly connected to revenue. Going 
forward, more efficient billing techniques would be 
implemented like Time of Use Billing, Critical peak pricing 
to reduce peak load and even out the load. 
 
Auditing and Reporting process is an absolutely 
necessary module to manage and be in control of all the 
events performed in the system. Auditing should record all 
the modification, involving processed data like when, how 
and why an action was performed. End to End auditing for 
all the historical data and respective reporting framework are 
important aspects of MDM module. 
 
One of the important advantages of Smart grid over 
traditional grid deployment is real-time meaningful update 
for the end consumers. MDM system interfaces with a 
number of different smart grid related applications 
supporting multiple interfaces. 
 
Revenue assurance is the module that ensures a Utility 
Service Provider (USP) to accurately capture revenue for all 
services rendered. Possibility to track events through the 
business logic or to report events from within the processing 
flows are few of the mandatory requirements of the domain. 
 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

In distributed MDM solution, primary responsibility of 
MDM module i.e. data repository and VEE component are 
migrated from centralized MDM platform to Head End 
system leading to win-win situation for all the stakeholders 
as highlighted in DMDM Patent  [5].  
 
 
  
Figure 4. Deployment view for Distributed Meter Data 
Management. 
 
IV. 
MEDIATION SYSTEM IN DISTRIBUTED METER DATA 
MANAGEMENT 
 
As highlighted, Meter Data Management (MDM) refers to a 
business process in the Smart Grid infrastructure primarily 
responsible for data management and VEE component. 
Mediation system provides the inbuilt capability, and 
flexibility to realize the business requirements of Distributed 
Meter Data Management in scalable manner.  In the below 
section, we will cover the two primary aspect of DMDM i.e. 
Data Acquisition and Delivery and Data Processing and 
how mediation system is a suitable fit for implementing 
DMDM module.  
 
A. Data Acquisition and Delivery  
 
Smart Grid Infrastructure is projected to expand rapidly, 
leading to complex network supporting new protocols, new 
technologies and new formats in real time.  
 
As IEC recommends [1] , the system interfaces of a 
compliant utility inter-application infrastructure has been 
defined using Unified Modelling Language (UML). The 
Extensible Markup Language (XML) is a data format for 
structured document interchange particularly on the Internet. 
One of its primary uses is information exchange between 
different and potentially incompatible computer systems. 
XML is thus well-suited to the domain of system interfaces 
for distribution management. Meter Data Management 
module is supposed to interact with almost all the logical 
entity modules including, but not limited to, Metering 
system, Planning and Scheduling, Customer Information and 
billing, Work management, Network Operations and Load 
Management System. 
 
Additionally, central to the customer benefit is the provision 
and presentation of data. Data can be presented in a number 
of different formats and on a number of different media 
(smartphone, web, customer bill, in-home display unit, and 
so on). Utilities with a commitment towards improving 
customers' visibility into their personal consumption 
behavior must ensure that Mediation system interfaces with a 
number of different applications supporting customer 
information.  
Mediation systems provide additional applications and open 
API standards to integrate into customer management 
systems, Traffic management and network monitoring. 
Mediation also provides the support for flow based real time 
protocols which are extensively used in network monitoring 
domain and to build over the top applications as per 
customer specific needs like netFlow and related flow based 
proprietary protocols [7]. 
  
Mediation systems could be used as light weight Service-
oriented architecture (SOA) application to communicate 
between multiple modules on different protocol like Web 
services, SOAP, FTP, and SFTP. Support for XML format is 
an integral part of the communication framework. 
 
In MDM deployment, the requirement on communication 
interfaces would be same, if not more, to support different 
technologies and products available at customer premises in 
future. 
 
As IEC suggests [1], MultiSpeak is also a distribution 
focused specification / standard that defines standardized 
interfaces among software applications commonly used by 
electric utilities. Also, it defines details of data that need to 
be exchanged between software applications in order to 
support different processes commonly applied at utilities. 
MultiSpeak recommends file based transfers and SOAP 
messages over HTTP, TCP/IP sockets. 
 
There is no specification on transport level communication 
however flow of the information should be via standard data 
format, named XML, which is ubiquitously used in IT 
domain. 
 
Web Services is widely used technique to send web request 
to support inter-operable machine-to-machine interaction 
over a network. It has an interface described in a machine-
process able format (specifically Web Services Description 
Language WSDL). The basic Web Services platform is 
XML + HTTP and both these technologies are well 
supported by Mediation System. 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Additionally, Mediation system also supports wide variety of 
data formats like ASN.1/BER, Comma-Separated-Value 
(CSV), XML, MIXED format to name few [4]. 
 
To minimize the amount of data transmission between 
different logical entities in utility domain mediation system 
also support transferring of compressed data using various 
standard techniques like zip, gzip, pkzip, etc. This will 
overall reduce the load on the network however without 
compromising the quality of the processing 
 
B. Data Processing 
 
Data processing is key responsibility of Meter Data 
Management allowing operator specific business logic to be 
implemented in faster and reliable fashion. Data processing 
includes, but not limited to, Validation, Estimation, Editing, 
Auditing, 
Billing 
data 
management, 
Version 
data 
Management & Revenue Assurance functionality. 
 
1) Validation, Estimation & Editing 
 
Validation process consists of various checks to ensure the 
integrity of the received data. The mediation system checks 
meter readings for anomalies. Validation process could 
further be broken down on syntactic check, semantic check 
and business logic related checks. Mediation system can 
check the syntax of each data transfer that is received from 
an AMI. This can be expected to include checking that the 
data structure is consistent with the required standards in 
utility space and respective checksum calculations. 
 
Mediation system can also verify the semantics of each data 
transferred that is received from an AMI. For efficiency 
(e.g. loading prioritization), the data in any one data transfer 
should be from the same meter and the data should also 
correlate with information in the respective header section. 
 
Also, Mediation system should perform checks to ensure 
that all meters for which data is provided are currently 
active. 
 
Once the data is received and validated by the Head end 
system, the raw information is stored in the Database 
module for further processing. Traditional use case of 
Mediation in IT domain is to perform Extract-Transform-
Load (ETL) functionality which is used for data integration, 
data migration, and data analysis and data management. 
ETL is an essential component used to load the data into the 
data warehouses from different sources in multiple formats 
across different domains. 
 
Each operator would need to define additional business 
logic as per specific utility operators need. Time gap check, 
Interval Data Management and missing Interval checks are 
three important issues encountered and are expected to be 
well handled by MDM system. 
 
Mediations system also support Record sequence number 
check, Time Gap, Zero byte file check, Scheduled 
Collection and Post collection actions which are best fit 
feature for supporting VEE module. 
 
Mediation system is capable of data estimation techniques 
when actual Meter Reads are not available in order to create 
estimated Meter Reads and Billing Quantities. The method 
of estimation shall be automated. 
 
Mediation system accommodates the ability to apply 
customized estimation techniques for non-conforming 
commercial and industrial loads, or for groups of smart 
meters that require special rules, or that should not have 
estimation applied to them. 
 
Estimation techniques could further be classified based on 
two different estimation techniques on 
 
 
Historical Data 
 
Linear Interpolation 
 
Historical estimation routine calculates average daily load 
shapes using data from historical reference days. It derives 
interval-by-interval averages from valid intervals from the 3 
nearest days of the same or like day of the week, accounting 
for holidays. 
 
In the event the correction occurs at the very beginning of 
the data being validated, Linear Interpolation will attempt to 
find the last interval from the previous reading group in 
order to use it as the starting “anchor point” for the 
estimation. If there is no earlier reading group, Linear 
Interpolation will use the value from the first good interval 
for all corrected intervals typically less than two hours [8]. 
Similarly, in the event the correction occurs at the end of the 
data set, the routine will use the value from the last good 
interval for all corrected intervals. 
 
Mediation system provides rich set of functions based on 
common language like Java where user could build the 
required business logic based on the specific required.  
 
Additionally, Database interfaces are also supported to store 
the required information and perform the logical operations 
using procedures based on database. Relation Databases is 
supported by mediation systems primarily supporting JDBC 
based database like Oracle, PostGreSQL, etc. 
 
Mediation system provides the editing capabilities of Meter 
data by both the MDM operator and authorized external 
users, though the mechanisms may vary. Viewing and 
editing of Meter data by the external entity will be restricted 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

to respective owners and related meter ID numbers for 
which the external entity has been identified as primary 
authority. 
 
2) Auditing, 
Version 
Management 
& 
Revenue 
Assurance 
 
Auditing is defined as step-by-step record by which 
accounting data can be traced to their source. Every change 
made to the raw as well as processed information is tracked, 
along with who made the change, why they made it, and 
references to problems fixed, or enhancements introduced, 
by the change. 
 
Auditing is an important, legal and operational requirement 
in the telecom and IT world. Mediation system provides 
detailed auditing capabilities with options to export the 
information to the external system for further analysis. 
 
Versioned Data management provides the capability to 
provide the snapshot of the meter load at particular time 
interval in the past to resolve billing and legal disputes. 
Mediation system provides log records indicating which 
user or VEE process made changes to the data. For example, 
if a reading changes five times, the MDM creates five 
versions of that reading, each of which also has a reference 
time period, indicating when it was the current version. 
 
Revenue assurance is a critical business process for utility 
industry 
since 
an 
efficient 
revenue 
assurance 
implementation could minimize the revenue leakage and 
maximize the revenue. Mediation system is integral part of 
revenue assurance function across OSS and BSS domain in 
Telecom. It provides inbuilt capabilities to store the 
selective information from the meter reads in the file or 
database, which could further be used for revenue assurance 
reports. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
 
Driven by market forces including rising energy costs and 
technological advancements, Smart Grid along with Smart 
meters are poised to be an important revenue stream for 
Information and Communication Technology provider. This 
paper highlights the inherent advantages, in terms of 
features, that traditional mediation systems would provide 
for handling metering data from Smart meters in Distributed 
Meter Data Management solution. 
 
Meter 
Data 
Management 
application 
is 
primarily 
responsible for data repository and management including 
Validation, Estimation and Editing. Mediation systems are 
already equipped to support centralized as well as 
distributed Meter Data Management.  
 
In the future, distributed meter data management, enabled 
using mediation system, would play a pivotal role for Smart 
grid deployments across the globe.  
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank Rakesh Pandey, Munish Agarwal 
and Manas Kumar Jena for their valuable feedback, support 
and guidance. 
 
REFERENCES  
 
[1] International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 61968-9 
Ed.1 Application integration at electric utilities – System 
interfaces for distribution management. 
https://webstore.iec.ch/Webstore/webstore.nsf/ArtNum_PK/4
8719?OpenDocument (Janurary 2014) 
[2] ABI research report “THE SMART GRID AS A SERVICE”. 
https://www.abiresearch.com/research/product/1013765-the-
smart-grid-as-a-service-a-game-changer/ ( October 2013) 
[3] ABI 
research 
report 
“SMART 
GRIDS”. 
https://www.abiresearch.com/research/product/1009947-
smart-grids/  (October 2013) 
[4] Smart Grid & Mediation product offering from Ericsson AB 
http://www.ericsson.com/ourportfolio/products/multi-
mediation (Novemeber 2013) 
http://www.ericsson.com/ourportfolio/energy-and-utilities-
industry/smart-grid-communications (Novemeber 2013)  
[5] Bruce Christopher Angelis, James Alexander Papp and 
Timothy James Driscoll on “Distributed Meter Data 
Management,” Patent Pub. No.: US 2012/0326883 A1 ( 
Octeber 2013) 
[6] IBM Software White paper “Managing big data for smart 
grids 
and 
smart 
meters”.  
www.smartgridnews.com/artman/uploads/1/IBM_anaytics_pa
per.pdf  (Janurary 2014) 
[7] M S Rohmad,R Kaspin,Mazani Manaf and Farok Azmat 
"Network Mediation for Future IP Billing System: An 
Overview" 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/abstractCitations.jsp?arnumber=
4339313 (Oct 2013) 
[8] Don Matheson,Chaoyang Jmg and Frank Monforte, "Meter 
Data Management for the Electricity Market " 8th 
International Conference on Probabilistic Methods Applied to 
Power Systems, Iowa State University, September 12-16,2004 
[9] Fadi Aloul, A. R. Al-Ali, Rami Al-Dalky, Mamoun Al-
Mardini and Wassim El-Hajj “Smart Grid Security: Threats, 
Vulnerabilities and Solutions”, International Journal of Smart 
Grid and Clean Energy, vol. 1, no. 1, September  2012 
 
 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

