 
 
 
 
 
Optimization of Power Usage Effectiveness for Heterogenous Modular Data Centers 
using Neural Network 
 
Vishal Kumar Singh 
College of Engineering and Computer Science 
University of Michigan-  
Dearborn, USA 
e-mail: vksingh@umich.edu 
Dr. Jinhua Guo  
College of Engineering and Computer Science 
University of Michigan-  
Dearborn, USA 
e-mail: jinhua@umich.edu
 
 
Abstract- With the rise of Internet of Things (IoT), it is 
becoming cheaper and easier to collect data from data center (DC) 
mechanical, electrical and control systems. These systems have 
complex interactions with each other. The static control logics and 
high number of configuration and nonlinear interdependency 
create challenges in understanding and optimizing energy 
efficiency. This is particularly challenging and expensive in 
medium size or smaller configurations like data suites or modular 
data centers. We utilize a learning engine that learns from 
operationally collected data to accurately predict power usage 
effectiveness (PUE) and create a control model to validate test 
results. Using the machine learning framework developed in this 
paper, we are able to predict DC PUE within 0.0004 +/¬ 0.0005. 
The results show that machine learning can improve data suite 
efficiency. The results also indicate that neural network based 
controller shows promise for practical implementation. 
Keywords— Machine learning; Neural Network; PUE;   Data 
center. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Data centers are recognized as an increasingly troublesome 
percentage of electricity consumption in the US. A recent 
revision of the Koomey report [1] puts this at 2% of all US 
power 
consumption 
and 
1.3% 
of 
worldwide 
power 
consumption. Rapid growth of cloud based systems is 
accelerating growth of data centers. Growing energy costs and 
environmental responsibility have placed the DC industry under 
increasing pressure to improve its operational efficiency. The 
development of metrics of data center efficiency (e.g., PUE) has 
focused attention on improving energy efficiency in data 
centers. Even large companies have scored low on Greenpeace 
report.  
 
 
Figure 1. Examples of containerized/modular data center 
 
Constructing data center space using traditional methods 
takes a long time. Speed of delivery of data center space has 
become a critical business factor for data center operators. This 
gave rise to modular data centers and containerized data 
centers. Figure 1. shows few examples of modular data center. 
Many companies build modular data center for inside building 
shell and standalone containers for outside [17] [18] [19].  
 
Aisle containment has improved efficiency of facility side 
cooling power usage (chiller and fan) and load balancing of 
virtual servers has improved server power usage consumed by 
servers (IT Load) [2].  
 
 
 
Figure 2. 2-D heterogeneous DC Experimental setup design 
Internet of Things (IoT) is rapidly growing with projected 
$7.1 trillion by 2020 [3]. This has allowed for significant 
changes in asset instrumentation to communicate via internet 
protocol (IP). By using IoT framework, it has become possible 
to collect and analyze granular data from uninterruptible power 
supply (UPS), computer room air conditioning (CRAC), 
circuits, power distribution unit (PDU) etc. This allows 
collecting data from smaller sections of data centers like aisle, 
suite or data pod. Instrumenting these microsystems has 
allowed to manage and control smaller environment ecosystems 
in a data center. Figure 2. shows a modular data suite 
architecture and data collection points in a midsize data center.  
 
At the given scale of power use, any incremental 
improvements in efficiency will produce notable cost savings 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
 
 
 
 
and reduce carbon emissions. Large data centers like Google, 
Microsoft and Amazon have homogenous standard systems as 
compared to smaller privately held multi-tenant data center that 
have heterogeneous (non-standard) systems. Aisle containment 
and efficient virtual server load management have attempted to 
improve energy efficiency in data centers [3]. Metrics devised 
more recently like Corporate Average Data Center Efficiency 
(CADE) have drawn attention more broadly to all power 
consumption in the data center, including both cooling systems 
and 
servers, 
showing 
that 
there 
is 
still 
significant 
underutilization in data centers [4]. Recently, more efforts are 
being made to optimize data center efficiency by utilizing 
machine learning [5]. 
 
This paper focuses on using neural network optimizing 
method to predict and optimize cooling power of a given load 
in a modular heterogeneous data suite to optimize overall PUE.  
 
In Section II we discuss related work. In Section III, we 
discuss the methodology of the neural network approach. In 
Section IV, we discuss results and discussion. In Section V, we 
discuss limitations of machine learning. Finally, we conclude in 
Section VI.  
II. RELATED WORK 
Increasing energy efficiency in a data center has been in 
great focus in the past few years. Efforts and have been made 
to optimize facilities by aisle containment [6]. There also has 
been work on managing virtual server loads to utilize energy 
efficiently [7]. There is work done in managing energy by 
combining building automation and virtualization together [2]. 
 
There are new demands around cloud computing, big data 
and infrastructure power efficiency. Furthermore, this change 
in the data center is being driven by more users, more data and 
a lot more reliance on the data center itself.  
 
With cloud technologies and the rapid growth in data 
leading the way within many technological categories — 
working with the right data center optimization technologies 
has become more important than ever [9].  Data center 
Administrators must understand where their current energy 
demands are allocated and how they can best optimize those 
resources. Every small amount of energy efficiency gains is 
improvement. Recently Microsoft and Google have used 
machine learning techniques for energy optimization. 
Microsoft is measuring server workload spikes and automating 
data center operations [8]. Google is exploring using machine 
learning techniques to optimize energy use data center at a 
building level [5]. There has been no application of machine 
learning techniques in a mid-size data centers. This is due to 
lack of instrumenting machines and implementing IoT platform 
to collect and store data. The facility side infrastructure has 
components 
that 
have 
complex 
interactions 
amongst 
themselves. Most of the existing optimization techniques use 
static method such as cold aisle set point temperature. 
Establishing an accurate mathematical model or obtaining 
characteristic parameters for a proportional–integral–derivative 
(PID) controller in practical control scenarios is challenging, 
thus limiting their practical applicability [20]. On the other 
hand, machine learning can be accurately modeled to represent 
true characteristics of a DC. All the related studies for midsize 
data centers have been using simulations, we show results by 
collecting data from practical operations in mid-size data 
center. This study is unique in applying machine learning 
energy optimization technique on facility side infrastructure 
operational data in midsize modular data center. 
 
This study relates to micro systems like data suites and 
modular data center in multi-tenant facility with heterogeneous 
server configurations, see Figure 2. This study is to further 
optimize micro facility environment related to a data suite for a 
given server load. 
 
III. METHODOLOGY- MACHINE LEARNING APPROACH 
Facility side infrastructure has components that have 
complex interactions amongst themselves. PID models do not 
accurately capture these interactions. Machine learning is well-
suited for the DC environment given the complexity of plant 
operations and the abundance of existing monitoring data. The 
modern large-scale DC has a wide variety of mechanical and 
electrical equipment, along with their associated set points and 
control schemes. The interactions between these systems and 
various feedback loops make it difficult to accurately predict 
DC efficiency using traditional engineering formulas. We are 
training the neural to produce optimal set of operating 
parameters. Rectified Linear Units (ReLU) is used for deep 
learning. The model is trained to optimize for lowest PUE. 
 
Neural Network is the machine learning approach which 
uses Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), Supervised Learning and 
Resilient Back Propagation Algorithm to make an efficient 
prediction of PUE 𝑃𝜃(𝑥) using the environmental variables 
𝑛 that surrounds heterogeneous DC, such as Cold Coil 
Temperature, Cold Aisle Temperature, Cooling Coil Chilled 
liquid flow, Fan Power, Chiller Power, Server Load, etc.  Let 
us consider an 𝑥 as a set of input   𝑚 × 𝑛 , where 𝑚 is the size 
of the dataset and n is the number of features.  The input matrix 
is then multiplied with the model parameter 𝜃 to give the hidden 
layer. The size and number of hidden layers can be varied based 
on the complexity of the model required. 
 
The Neural Network is adapted to DC through mathematical 
model framework for training DC energy efficiency models. 
Neural networks are a class of machine learning algorithms 
which adapt and react based on the behavior of neurons. They 
have best fit adaption, pattern searches and so on to 
accommodate the accuracy. The concept of machine learning is 
explained in detail with implementation. 
A. Multi Layer Perceptron 
The neural network algorithm used multi-layer perceptron, 
which is 
well applicable 
when 
modeling 
functional 
relationships. The underlying structure of an MLP is a directed 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
 
 
 
 
graph, i.e., it consists of vertices and directed edges, in this 
context called neurons and synapses [10]. The neurons are 
organized in layers, which are usually fully connected by 
synapses. The synapse can only connect to subsequent layers. 
The input layer consists of all covariates in separate neurons 
and the output layer consists of the response variables. The 
layers in between are referred to as hidden layers, as they are 
not directly observable. Input layer and hidden layers include a 
constant neuron relating to intercept synapses, i.e. synapses that 
are not directly influenced by any covariate. Figure 3 gives an 
example of a neural network with one hidden layer that consists 
of three hidden neurons. This neural network models the 
relationship between the two covariates A, B and the response 
variable Y. Theoretically allows inclusion of arbitrary numbers 
of covariates and response variables. However, there can occur 
convergence difficulties using a huge number of both covariates 
and response variables. 
 
 
Figure 3. Example of a neural network. 
To each of the synapses, a weight is attached indicating the 
effect of the corresponding neuron, and all data pass the neural 
network as signals. The signals are processed first by the so-
called integration function combining all incoming signals and 
second by the so-called activation function transforming the 
output of the neuron.  
 
The simplest multi-layer perceptron (also known as 
perceptron) consists of an input layer with n covariates and an 
output layer with one output neuron. 
It calculates the function 
 
𝑜(𝑥) = 𝑓(𝑤𝑜 + ∑
𝑤𝑖𝑥𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
) = 𝑓𝑤𝑜 + 𝑤𝑇𝑥                        (1) 
 
where 𝑤𝑜 denotes the intercept, w = (𝑤1,..., 𝑤𝑛) the vector 
consisting of all synaptic weights without the intercept, and x = 
(𝑥1,..., 𝑥𝑛) the vector of all covariates.  
B. Supervised Learning 
Neural networks are fitted to the data by learning algorithms 
during a training process which focuses on supervised learning 
algorithms [13]. These learning algorithms are characterized by 
the usage of a given output that is compared to the predicted 
output and by the adaptation of all parameters according to this 
comparison. The parameters of a neural network are its weights. 
All weights are usually initialized with random values drawn 
from a standard normal distribution.  
C. Backpropagation And Resilient Backpropagation 
The resilient backpropagation algorithm is based on 
the traditional backpropagation algorithm that modifies the 
weights of a neural network in order to find a local minimum of 
the error function [14].  
D. Implementation 
The machine learning algorithm used is Neural Network. 
The neural network utilizes 2 hidden layers and 0.01 as the 
regularization parameter. The training dataset contains 19 input 
variables and one output variable (the Suite PUE) as shown in 
the Figure 5b. The total size of the data samples used is 119421 
rows, which were collected from a heterogeneous data center 
sensor ports. The 70% of the dataset is used for training with 
the remaining 30% used for cross-validation and testing. The 
chronological order of the dataset is randomly shuffled before 
splitting to avoid biasing the training and testing sets on newer 
or older data [15].  
 
The 19 variables used for modelling are as follows. 
 
TABLE I. SELECTED VARIABLES 
 
 
Data normalization, also known as feature scaling, is 
recommended due to the wide range of raw feature 
values. The values of a feature vector z are mapped to the range 
[-1, 1] by: 
𝑧𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚 =
𝑧−𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛(𝑧)
max(𝑧)−min (𝑧)                                                            (2) 
 
The Block diagram explains the overall scenario acquired in 
the Data center for Predicting PUE, based on the Machine 
Learning Algorithm Neural Network Model.  
 
 
 
Figure 4. Block diagram of Neural Network Modelling 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Network Model with selected variables 
The block diagram as shown in Figure 4. represents the 
logic flow of neural network prediction model which evolves 
the processing of data retrieved from the sensor ports. The data 
variables are of different features which may or may not affect 
the SUITE PUE. The collected data is preprocessed through 
Generalized Linear Model (GLM) [11] and Random Forest 
(RF) [12] algorithm to find the effectiveness of the parameter 
with the coefficients. The variables are selected from the 
preprocessed data through positive skewness arrived with the 
target SUITE PUE. This achieved through the Generalized 
Linear Model (GLM), Random Forest (RF) and Experts 
Perception. 
 
The sampling process is done for the selected variables 
chosen for modeling, splitting into training and testing dataset. 
The training data set are used to train neural network model and 
the testing data is used for the prediction of the data sets through 
the neural network trained model for the evaluation of SUITE 
PUE. Note that many of the inputs representing totals and 
averages are actually metavariables derived from individual 
sensor data.  
 
Data preprocessing such as file I/O, data filtration and 
calculating metavariables, Variable Analysis was conducted 
using Excel, R. Both R and Matlab R2012a were used for model 
training, post processing and simulating results. 
IV. RESULT AND DISCUSSION 
The precise and robust PUE model offers many benefits for 
heterogeneous DC operators and owners. For example, in real 
time comparison of actual vs predicted heterogeneous DC 
performance for any given set of conditions can be used for 
automatic performance alerting, real-time plant efficiency 
assessing and troubleshooting. 
 
A precise efficiency model also enables DC operators to 
evaluate PUE sensitivity to DC operational parameters. For 
example, an internal analysis of PUE versus Cold Aisle 
Temperature(°F) conducted at a heterogonous DC suggested a 
theoretical 0.0005 reduction in PUE by increasing the cooling 
tower LWT and chilled water injection pump set points by 3F. 
This simulated PUE reduction was subsequently verified with 
experimental test results after normalizing for server IT load 
and wet bulb temperature [5]. Such sensitivity analyses drive 
significant cost and carbon savings by locating and estimating 
the magnitude of opportunities for further PUE reductions. 
 
Finally, a comprehensive DC efficiency model enables 
operators to simulate the DC operating configurations 
without making physical changes. Currently, it’s very difficult 
for an operator to predict the effect of a plant 
configuration change on PUE prior to enacting the changes. 
This is due to the complexity of modern DCs, and the 
interactions between multiple control systems. A machine 
learning approach leverages the plethora of existing sensor data 
to develop a mathematical model that understands the 
relationships between operational parameters and the holistic 
energy efficiency. This type of simulation allows operators to 
virtualize the DC for the purpose of identifying optimal plant 
configurations while reducing the uncertainty surrounding plant 
changes. 
A. Prediction Results 
Figure 6 depicts a snapshot of predicted vs actual PUE 
values at one of heterogonous DCs over one month during the 
summer. The neural network detailed in this paper achieved a 
mean Square error of 0.004 and standard deviation of 
0.001 on the test dataset. Note that the model error generally 
increases for PUE values greater than 1 .29 due to the shortage 
of training data corresponding to those values. The model  
 
 
Figure 6. Predicted vs Actual PUE values at heterogonous DC 
accuracy for those PUE ranges is expected to increase over time 
as additional data are collected on heterogeneous DC 
operations. 
B. Sensitivity Analysis 
The following graphs reveal the impact of individual 
operating parameters on the DC PUE. We isolate for the effects 
of specific variables by linearly varying one input at a time 
while holding all others constant. Such sensitivity analyses are 
used to evaluate the impact of set point changes and identify 
optimal set points. All test results have been verified 
empirically. 
 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7a represents shows, as the Cooling coil leaving 
temperature (°F) increases, the PUE decreases.  DC should be 
maintained with increasing the cooling coil leaving temperature 
with stabilizing other variables and making PUE more effective 
to reduce the cost. Similarly, Figure 7b suggests that the 
providing a system with cold aisle temperature (°F) over a 
period of time under different circumstance, the variation in the 
PUE is linearly increased as the cold aisle temperature 
decreases. 
 
Figure 7c represents a linear variation as the Cooling coil 
valve position increases the PUE also increases, as it is directly 
proportional the usage of power is more as it becomes big. 
Figure 7d indicates that when Cold coil out water temperature 
decreases eventually the PUE increases, so the temperature for 
this scenario is optimized and they are inversely proportional to 
each other. 
  
 
 
Figure 7a-7d: SUITE PUE vs Cooling Coil Leaving Temperature, 
Average Cold Aisle Temperature, Cooling Coil Valve Position and Cold Coil 
Out Water Temp 
 
Figure 8a represents that as the cooling coil chilled liquid 
flow increases significantly the SUITE PUE decreases so there 
is an inversely proportional to each other. 
 
Figure 8b represents a slightly sloppy curve for the SUITE 
PUE versus Heat reclaim coil leaving temperature (°F), says 
that PUE is in stabilized state when the temperature is in the 
optimal stage and also shows that they are inversely 
proportional as the temperature increases the PUE drops out. 
 
 
Figure 8a-8b: SUITE PUE vs Cooling Coil Chilled Liquid Flow and Heat 
Reclaim Coil Leaving Temperature 
fan power for controlling the PUE without exceeding drastic 
change in the power consumption. 
 
Figure 9a & 9b show that Fan Power and Fan Speed are 
directly proportional to SUITE PUE, where Figure 9a signifies 
a linear variation between the PUE and Fan Power but Figure 
9b depicts that there is an optimization in fan speed through an 
upper sloppy curve which creates a positive impact in the 
 
 
 
Figure 9a-9d: SUITE PUE vs Fan Power (KW), Fan Speed (KW), 
Absorption (KW) and Suite Server Load (KW) 
 
Figure 9c signifies that the Absorption (KW) which is the 
chiller power varies inversely to PUE, as chiller power 
increases PUE drops. It concludes that it creates a great impact 
in PUE, which relatively stabilized through the fan power and 
server load for better synchronization. 
 
Figure 9d specifies the variation of PUE with Suite Server 
Load (KW) is linear, which states that the PUE decreases 
exponentially as the server load decreases. Eventually as per the 
data samples trained most of the power in the heterogeneous 
DC station is consumed by server load 78%.    
 
Figure 10 represents that the accuracy of the Neural 
Network model with test cases empirically verified in matlab 
simulation [16]. The variation of PUE from the actual 
calculation with Neural Network trained model gives optimized 
results.  
 
Figure 10: Neural Network Based Controller Output for DC 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
 
 
 
 
The model simulation done in four different scenarios for 
PUE optimization, such as Neural Network predicting PUE, 
Optimizing Fan Power (FP), which feedback to Neural network 
to Predict PUE, Optimizing Chiller Power (CP) which feedback 
to Neural Network to predict PUE and finally the best accuracy 
is obtained from optimizing both Fan Power (FP) and Chiller 
Power (CP).  
 
Machine learning applications based on neural network 
based controller are limited by the quality and quantity of the 
data inputs. As one of important aspects to have a full range of 
DC operational conditions to precisely train the mathematical 
model. The model accuracy may decrease for conditions where 
there is less data. As with all empirical curves fitting, the same 
prediction results may be achieved for multiple model 
parameters θ. It is up to the analyst and DC operator to apply 
reasonable discretion when evaluating model predictions. 
V. CONCLUSION 
Accelerating growth in data center complexity and scale is 
making energy efficiency optimization increasingly important 
yet difficult to achieve. Though the model is simulated for 
heterogeneous data center environment where servers placed 
are of different kind, so the variation causes high end and low 
end rather than median. This made effective through machine 
learning and acquired best gain in PUE. Using the machine 
learning framework developed in this paper, we are able to 
predict DC PUE within 0.0004 +/- 0.0005. Using machine 
learning technique, you can further optimize power usage 
efficiency between 1% to 3%. This can translate is saving 
hundreds of thousand dollars in a datacenter. Actual testing on 
heterogeneous DCs indicates that machine learning is an 
effective method of using existing sensor data to model DC 
energy efficiency, and can yield significant cost savings. Model 
applications include DC simulation to evaluate new plant 
configurations, assessing energy efficiency, and identifying 
optimization opportunities.  
 
                                     ACKNOWLEDGEMENT   
I would like to thank the leadership of a midsize data 
center in Indiana, USA to help offer their facility of this 
experiment.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Jonathan Koomey. Growth in Data centerelectricity use, 2005 to 2010. 
Analytics Press, Oakland, CA, 2011. 
[2] Integrated Approach To Data Center Power Management Lakshmi 
Ganesh, Hakim Weatherspoon, Tudor Marian, Ken Birman Computer 
Science Department, Cornell University. 2012. 
[3] IBM 
Interconnect 
2015: 
A 
New 
Way. 
http://www.slideshare.net/ibm/ibm-interconnect-2015-asset-
management-and-the-internet-of-things, May 2016 
[4] http://www.data centerknowledge.com/archives/2011/11/15/pue-is-dead-
the-case-for-performance-per-watt/ , May 2016 
[5] Machine Learning Applications for Data Center Optimization Jim Gao, 
Google 2014. 
[6] Impact of Hot and Cold Aisle Containment on Data Center Temperature 
and Efficiency Revision 2 by John Niemann, Kevin Brown, and Victor 
Avelar. 
[7] Ramya Raghavendra, Parthasarathy Ranganathan, Vanish Talwar, Zhikui 
Wang, Xiaoyun Zhu.” No “Power” Struggles: Coordinated Multi-level  
Power Management for the Data Center”. 
[8] Automating Data center Operations Using Machine Learning by Peter 
Bod. 
[9] Uptime Institute. Data CenterIndustry Survey. 2013. 
[10] Frauke Gunther and Stefan Fritsch,” neuralnet: Training of Neural 
Networks,” The R Journal, Vol. 2/1, June 2010, pp 30-37. 
[11] C. Marschner, “glm2: Fitting Generalized Linear Models with 
Convergence Problems,” The R Journal, Vol. 3/2, December 2011, pp 12-
15. 
[12] Andy Liaw and Matthew Wiener, “Classification and Regression by 
randomForest,” The R Journal, Vol. 2/3, December 2002, pp 18-22. 
[13] Derrick , “Neural Network for self Learning control system,”  IEEE 
Control System magzine, Vol. 1, April 1990, pp 18-23. 
[14] Swarup, K.S. and Subash, “Neural network approach to voltage and 
reactive power control in power systems” Intelligent Sensing and 
Information 
Processing, 
Proceedings 
of  
International Conference, 2005. 
[15] Freeman J. A. and Skapura D. M.,. “Neural networks: Algorithm, 
Applications 
and 
Programming 
teaching 
techniques” 
AddisonWesley.1991. 
[16] Chengming Lee and Rongshun Chen,” Optimal Self-Tuning PID 
Controller Based on Low Power Consumption for a Server Fan Cooling 
System,” Senors, Vol 15,pp  11685- 11700,2015. 
[17] Deploying and using containerized/moular data center facilities, 
Christopher 
Kelley, 
Cisco 
Systems 
Jud 
Cooley, 
Oracle. 
https://www.thegreengrid.org/~/media/WhitePapers/WP42-
DeployingAndUsingContainerizedModularData 
centerFacilities.pdf?lang=en, May 2016 
[18] http://www.networkcomputing.com/data-centers/better-data-center-
standardization-through-pod-architecture-design/55918907, May 2016 
[19] http://dcblox.com/about-us/data-centers-2/ May 2016 
[20] Research of PID Control Algorithm Based on Neural Network Liu 
Luoren, Luo Jinling ESEP 2011: 9-10 December 2011, Singapore 
 
 
 
  
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-484-8
ENERGY 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

