A Qualitative Risk Analysis of Smart Grid Security Protocols
Mustafa Saed 
Electrical and Computer Engineering 
University of Detroit Mercy 
Detroit, USA 
email: saedma@udmercy.edu 
Kevin Daimi and Nizar Al Holou 
College of Engineering and Science 
University of Detroit Mercy 
Detroit, USA 
email: {daimikj, alholoun}@udmercy.edu
 
Abstract— Recently, smart grids have been attracting 
enormous interest as the Internet continues to rapidly expand. 
A smart grid embeds Information Technology (IT) in its 
transmission networks to become two way communications.  
This was achieved by installing dedicated devices, such as a 
smart meters and related software. A smart grid provides 
efficient usage of electric power and energy-saving that is 
passed down to the consumer. Furthermore, in a smart meter, 
which is an essential component of a smart grid, an 
individual's behavior can be indirectly understood, for 
example, by examining the utilization status of electric power 
at homes. However, such handling of a smart meter is 
problematic in terms of privacy protection and other security 
concerns. To this end, this paper performs a risk analysis of a 
number of proposed security protocols for smart meters in 
smart grid networks. In this analysis, four different 
vulnerability types are identified. These vulnerabilities are 
augmented by four types of attackers and seven types of 
attacks that exploit those them. After assessing the likelihood 
and impact levels for all the different combinations of 
vulnerabilities, attacks and attackers, a risk matrix for various 
risk levels is exploited. Overall findings include nine low risks, 
six medium risks, and three high risks in some of the proposed 
security protocols for smart meters in smart grid networks. 
Finally, appropriate mitigation techniques for different risks 
are suggested. 
Keywords— Risk Analysis; Communication Protocols; Smart 
Meters; Smart Grid; Risk Matrix 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
   In order to operate efficiently, power generation and 
distribution companies need to predict future energy 
consumption. This prediction is typically based on historical 
household energy consumption patterns [1][2]. Accurate 
prediction is essential to reduce unnecessary power 
generation, leading to financial savings and reduced carbon 
dioxide emissions. Different time periods for collecting 
energy data result in different electricity costs. The tendency 
of consumers to reduce their power demand in response to 
high electricity prices [3] is a useful tool for demand side 
managers. In addition, the bidirectional communication 
capability of smart meters enables the monitoring and 
control of all household appliances to reduce energy 
consumption at the customer site [1]. The analysis and 
prediction of energy consumption involves processing large 
amount of data from networks of smart meters. A smart grid 
network is a special type of an ad hoc network where smart 
meters are needed. Such a network is very appealing in the 
modern era since it allows for many amazing applications, 
such as event correlation (network and substation level of 
the power distribution of smart grid) and scheduled load 
shedding [4]. For this new type of networks, classical secure 
communication protocols over the Internet infrastructures, 
such as Transport Layer Security (TLS) [5] and IPsec [6], 
may not be sufficient due to the dynamic topology of these 
networks. There are a number of contributions to protect the 
two-way direct and indirect communication of smart meters 
with collectors in smart grid through the introduction of two 
cryptographic protocols based on PKI. Nonetheless, 
introducing new protocols always increases the attacking 
surfaces.  
   In network security, risk analysis is a process of defining 
and analyzing the threats to the security protocols, as well as 
the infrastructures and the entities that these protocols 
operate on [8]. It is a combination of identifying potential 
vulnerabilities and attacker, and accessing impacts of the 
attacks. The goal of such an analysis is to produce a 
qualitative risk analysis document and optionally a 
mitigation plan that offers guidance to security architects 
and related business decision makers. The National Institute 
of Standards and Technology (NIST) provide guidelines on 
how to perform a risk analysis [9].  This will be followed in 
this paper. 
   Risk analysis and management is an important field of 
research in network security. There are mainly two ways to 
conduct such analysis, namely qualitative and quantitative. 
   The approach taken in this work is of the qualitative type. 
Some work on quantitative analysis is presented in [10][11]. 
As emphasized in [10], current industry standards for 
estimating cybersecurity risk are based on qualitative risk 
matrices.  Lee et al. [12] performed an analysis of the risk of 
the bit-flipping attack, which might occur in LoRaWAN, a 
Media Access Control (MAC) protocol for Wide Area 
Networks, where one can change specific fields on 
ciphertext without decryption. Another interesting work is 
presented by Jacobson et al. [13] in which they dealt with 
risk analysis of a smart home automation system. Among all 
those efforts, the analysis in Cherdantseva et al. [14] is 
particularly interesting.  The authors introduced risk 
assessment methods for SCADA systems related to the 
underlying DNPsec protocol to be used in secure 
communication protocols. The DNPSec is a security 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

framework of Distributed Network Protocol Version 3 
(DNP3) [15][16]. DNP3 is an open and optimized protocol 
developed for the Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 
(SCADA) Systems supporting the utilities industries. 
   This paper attempts to facilitate the reduction of various 
risks associated with some proposed smart grid security 
protocols. To this end, a risk assessment method to 
comprehensively analyze a smart meter in smart grid and 
countermeasures for such risks is proposed. To achieve this, 
a list of vulnerabilities, attacks and attackers is created. This 
is followed by assigning the likelihood and impact of 
vulnerability, attack and attacker for each combination. 
Finally, a risk matrix is used to evaluate risks given the 
likelihood and impact levels.  Once all the risks have been 
evaluated, a necessary next step is to address all the medium 
and high risks. For completeness, some recommendations 
for managing low risks for these protocols are also stated. 
   The reminder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 
II provides an overview of a number of recently proposed 
smart meter security protocols together with the security 
tools, techniques, and methods used by them. Section III 
reviews the types of vulnerabilities, attackers, and attacks 
attracted by these vulnerabilities. Section IV describes the 
risk analysis of the security protocols. The countermeasures 
of proposed security protocol risks are considered in detail 
in Section V.  Finally, Section VI sets the conclusion and 
describes future work. 
 
II. SMART GRID PROTOCOLS OVERVIEW 
   Smart grids subsystems and components can be protected 
and their security enhanced via cryptographic software and 
hardware, and other security techniques.  In order to prepare 
the grounds for the risk analysis and mitigation 
methodologies introduced in the next sections, the security 
techniques, tools, methods and approaches followed by 
various researchers in the field of smart grid security will be 
briefly introduced.  These will represent the input to the 
qualitative analysis addressed by this paper. 
   Saed et al. [7] presented security protocols for smart 
meters in smart grid.  They proposed schemes for securing 
the 
direct 
and 
indirect 
smart 
meter-to-collector 
communications. The schemes are based on PKI. The 
authors proposed two different security protocols to enhance 
the security of the direct communication between smart 
meters and collectors in a smart grid. The first proposal 
secured direct communication without using the certificates 
and relied on public key cryptology. The second proposal 
protected the direct communication by using certificates and 
also depended on PKI. On both protocols, the substation is 
only directly connected to the collector. They further 
proposed an approach for the indirect communication 
between smart meters and collector. In this approach, the 
collector (gateway) should have initially received all the 
public keys and identities of the smart meters (user node). 
On the other hand, the smart meters should have the public 
key of the collector using any secure process. Furthermore, 
the predecessor and successor nodes are identified during 
installation and configuration of each smart meter.  These 
protocols are design to provide secure communications 
among the three entities: a server (Substation), which is a 
supervisory node acting as a centralized authentication 
center or a Certificate Authority (CA); multiple center 
gateways (Collectors) that provide connectivity to the user 
nodes (smart meters); and multiple nodes that are essentially 
smart meters.  The purpose of those communications is to 
allow a node (smart meter) to provide information, such as 
temperature readings, and electricity consumptions, to the 
gateways. 
To 
facilitate 
secure 
and 
authenticated 
communication between a node and a center gateway, the 
server acted as a Certificate Authority to authorize nodes 
and gateways. These protocols are expected to run over the 
DNPSec. 
   Dong et al. [17] proposed a protection scheme for the 
automation of smart grid system and patch distribution from 
the control center to data transmission security. Some of the 
functions were tested on the simulation platform through 
intrusion detection system and by using field devices, such 
as smart meter. Their proposal considered the security 
within smart meter but not for the smart meter 
communication, such as smart meter to smart meter and 
smart meter to collector [18]. Furthermore, their proposed 
protection system did not use digital signature to protect 
against forgery. 
   The sparse topology information of the smart grid was 
utilized by Giani et al. [19] to determine the attack meter 
sets. However, their work lacked the discussion of the 
system matrix acquisition. In fact, the design of the attack 
vector relied heavily on precise knowledge of the system 
matrix. In this case, it would not be easy to obtain such 
confidential information for an attacker who has limited 
access to the smart grid. Overall, a feasible unobservable 
attack scheme based on the incomplete system matrix has 
not yet been fully investigated. The authors in their proposal 
weren’t covering the smart meter communication attack. 
They only mentioned for the possible vulnerabilities related 
to attack meter in physical layer.  
   Li et al. [20] presented an efficient and robust approach to 
authenticate data aggregation in smart grids. Aggregation 
refers to the communication between the smart meters and 
the collector. This is achieved via deploying signature 
aggregations, implementing batch verification, and signature 
amortization schemes to reduce communication overhead 
and number of signing and verification operations and 
provide fault tolerance. The authors proposed an efficient 
authentication scheme for power usage data aggregation in 
Neighborhood Area Networks (NAN) and smart meter to 
collector communications. The contributions for this work 
were represented by deploying digital signatures so that 
when the collector is out of service, alternative or backup 
collectors can execute the authentication approach without 
any additional configuration or setup. Their research also 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

sought to reduce the number of signature and verification 
operations. 
However, 
the 
research 
is 
limited 
to 
authentication only. Thus, they are not securing the 
messages (readings) between smart meter and collector. 
   Many of the available schemes for both single-path and 
multipath routing are not suitable for meshed Advanced 
Metering Infrastructure (AMI) network [21]. Consequently, 
a security mechanism for multipath routing based on Elliptic 
Curve 
cryptology, 
digital 
signature, 
and 
Message 
Authentication Code (MAC) for such an AMI network was 
introduced. This approach allowed the Certificate Authority 
to execute a lot more work than it normally should do 
(issuing certificates).  The extra load included controlling 
the nodes’ creation of public and private key. In this 
scheme, nodes (smart meters) performed a number of 
computations despite their known limited computing power. 
This also tended to slow the system. Furthermore, having a 
smart meter sending its information to all the neighboring 
smart meters with no protection at all would introduce an 
immense threat. This provides a potential attacker the 
opportunity for attacking more than one target (smart meter) 
as they all have the information of the source meter. 
Therefore, the neighboring nodes acted as intermediate 
nodes, and consequently performed more calculations and 
broadcasting of the results. This means all other nodes 
(smart meters) have now the information. This implies, 
there are many nodes that the attacker can try and many 
nodes will be affected. 
   Yan et al. [22] introduced an interesting security protocol 
for AMI communications in smart grid where the smart 
meters are interconnected through wireless network. Their 
techniques indicated that the Public Key Infrastructure 
(PKI) is not desirable and relied on symmetric key 
cryptology instead. However, the number of symmetric keys 
used is large and possibly comparable to the number of keys 
should PKI have been followed. Furthermore, smart meters 
have limited capabilities, and therefore, verifying the MAC 
should have been left to the collector. The authors did not 
specify what would happen when the two MACs are not 
equal. This implies that the integrity of a meter’s reading is 
not handled correctly. 
   Seo et al. [23] discussed the use of public key 
infrastructure (PKI) in smart grid and what security 
requirements need to be implemented in smart grid 
architecture including the smart meter to secure the smart 
meter communication in the AMI. The authors did not 
propose any security technique/protocols to secure the smart 
grid network but only provided a survey. 
   Zhao et al. [24] provided the fundamental limit of cyber-
physical security in the presence of low sparsity 
unobservable attacks. It is shown in [25][26] that a complete 
system matrix can be identified using an independent 
component analysis method. Nevertheless, such attack 
schemes might not be easy to implement as all meter data 
are required to be known and all the meters are required to 
be controlled. On the other hand, several detection and 
defense schemes are provided based on the complete 
knowledge of the system matrix. The off-line method, based 
on the Kullback-Leibler distance, is proposed to track 
malicious attacks using historical data [27].  
   A distributed incremental data aggregation approach, in 
which data aggregation is performed at all smart meters 
involved in routing data from the smart meter to the 
collector unit, was introduced by Li et al. [28]. In this 
research, the authors presented an efficient information 
aggregation approach, in which an aggregation tree, 
constructed via breadth-first traversal of the graph and 
rooted at the collector unit, is deployed to cover all smart 
meters in the neighborhood. This protocol can let the control 
unit collect all smart meters’ information in the area. 
Furthermore, to protect users’ privacy, all information is 
encrypted by a homomorphic encryption algorithm. Since 
no authentication scheme is emphasized, the approach faces 
the potential risk that malicious smart meter can forge 
packets, thus causing the smart grid system to fail to detect 
or diagnose bogus data. Adversaries can maliciously forge 
their own data to manipulate the aggregation results. 
 
TABLE I. LIST OF ACRONYMS AND SYMBOLS 
Acronyms/Symbols 
Meaning 
A1 
MITM 
A2 
Impersonation 
A3 
Single Point of Failure 
A4 
Key Escrow 
A5 
Cryptanalysis and Quantum Computer 
A6 
Forward Secrecy 
A7 
Downgrade Attack 
CA 
Certified Authority 
DNP3 
Distributed Network Protocol Ver.3 
DNP3Sec 
DNP3 Security 
IKE 
Internet Key Exchange 
LoRaWAN 
MAC Protocol for WAN 
MAC 
Media Access Control 
MITM 
Man-in-the-Middle 
NIST 
National Institute for Standard & Technology 
OEM 
Original Equipment Manufacture 
PKI 
Public-Key Infrastructure 
QoS 
Quality of Service 
SCADA 
Supervisory control and Data Acquisition 
T1 
Clover Outsider 
T2 
Knowledgeable Insider 
T3 
Non-Profit Organization 
T4 
For-Profit Organization 
TLS 
Transport Layer Security 
V1 
Lack of Authenticity 
V2 
Centralized Topology 
V3 
Weak Cryptography 
V4 
Misuse of Public Key Cryptography 
WAN 
Wide Area Network 
 
 
 
III. TYPES OF VULNERABILITIES, ATTACKS AND ATTACKERS 
   In this section, the relevant building blocks of risk 
analysis are presented. First, the risk matrix, which 
determines the risk level given the likelihood and impact 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

levels of an attack being carried out by an attacker are 
introduced. Then, the different types of attackers, 
vulnerabilities and attacks are depicted. Some of the 
vulnerabilities presented here may not be applicable to these 
protocols but are otherwise common for other networks than 
smart grid. Table I presents a list of acronyms and symbols 
used in this paper. 
A. Security Concerns 
   There are several security concerns for these protocols. 
The list below describes the completeness: 
1) Loss of sensitive data: This could mean either user’s 
personal data, or server/gateways (Substation/Collector) 
private data, or even statistical data that should be kept 
secret. Those data could be ephemeral, such as one-time 
session keys, or could have long term impact, such as user’s 
credit card information or social security number. 
2) Financial loss: This could indicate that the user is 
overcharged for services that she/he did not receive. For 
gateways (collectors), this could mean that the gateway did 
not receive the credit for the service it provided. It could 
also mean a malicious modification to financial data at the 
gateway, which incurs financial loss. 
3) Denial of service (DoS): Certain attacks are able to 
disable partial or full part of the smart grid network, so that 
nodes (smart meters) do not receive services from gateways 
(collector). This kind of attacks may be localized, such as 
unauthorized access to specific smart meter at the same 
domain, or may also be global, such as unauthorized access 
to specific smart meter from different domain. Depending 
on the type of attack, DoS may last for a short or a long 
period. In addition, damage to the hardware is also a 
security concern here. However, this paper focuses on 
evaluating the secure communication protocol. Therefore, 
such a concern is beyond the scope of this paper. 
B. Types of Vulnerabilities 
   Below different types of vulnerabilities are presented: 
1) Lack of authenticity (V1): authenticity is missing in 
almost half of the protocol, namely, Section A of [7]. For 
the other half of the scheme, a certificate is used. 
2) Centralized topology (V2): the protocol uses a 
centralized structure, where a single server (substation) is 
responsible for handling enrollment and certificates for all 
collectors and smart meters. 
3) Weak cryptography (V3): A protocol may employ a 
weak cryptography that is vulnerable to cryptanalysis, or it 
may employ a strong cryptography that is secure against 
cryptanalysis today, but will be broken in the future. An 
example of the first case is SHA-1 hash function [29], and 
an example of the second case is RSA [30] or ECC [31] 
against cryptanalysis using quantum computer in the future. 
For the protocol to be analyzed, the underlying 
cryptography primitives are not specified [32]. That it 
deploys RSA or ECC based solutions is assumed, as well as 
SHA2 [33] or SHA3 [34] functions at a desired security 
level. This assures the protocol to be robust against today’s 
cryptanalysis, but still render to the vulnerability of 
quantum cryptanalysis in future. 
4) Misuse of public key cryptography (V4): the protocol 
uses 
public 
key 
cryptography 
to 
establish 
secure 
communication channels between entities. However, in 
modern cryptography [35], public key cryptography is 
usually used to establish a session key, rather than used 
directly for communication, in order to provide additional 
security features, as well as improved performances. 
C. Types of Attacks 
Attacks that exploit above mentioned vulnerabilities are 
described here: 
1) Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) (A1) 
   MITM attacks are one of the most classical attacks in 
cryptography and network security. In Moore [36], the 
author gives a tutorial of MITM attacks. In terms of the 
MITM attacks against analyzed protocol, the following are 
observed: 
a) Attacking strategy: the attacker secretly relays and 
possibly alters the communication between two parties, such 
as smart meter to collector who believe they are directly 
communicating with each other. 
b) Assumptions: it is reasonable to assume that the 
attacker is able to passively eavesdrop the communication 
between two entities; it is however hard or infeasible for the 
attacker to break the authentication within real time. 
c) Common vulnerability for this attack: lack of 
authentication methods, for examples, certificates and/or 
pre-shared keys. 
d) Consequences: the attacker makes independent 
connections with the victims and relays messages between 
them to make them believe they are talking directly to each 
other over a private connection, when in fact the entire 
conversation is controlled by the attacker. The attacker must 
be able to intercept all relevant messages passing between 
the two victims and inject new ones. 
2) Impersonation (A2) 
   Impersonation is another classical attack in cryptography 
and network security [37]. The secure communication 
protocols with impersonation attack are analyzed as follows: 
a) Attacking strategy: the attacker claims to be 
someone else, a legitimate user (smart meter) or a substation 
node. 
b) Assumptions: the attacker is able to get the public 
keys and IDs from all entities (smart meter, collector and 
substation); but has no access to the secret keys. 
c) Common vulnerability for this attack: lack of 
authentication methods, for examples, certificates and/or 
pre-shared key. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

d) Consequences: the attacker convinced entities that 
he/she is a legitimate owner of an ID. 
3) Single Point of Failure (A3) 
   Single point of failure attack is common in network 
securities [38]. The proposed protocols in [7] are analyzed 
with this attack due to the centralized network topology that 
the protocol employs: 
a) Attacking strategy: the server (substation) is a 
single point of failure. The attacker focuses its resources to 
attack this single point rather than the whole smart grid 
system. 
b) Assumptions: the attacker is able to break into the 
server (substation). 
c) Common vulnerability for this attack: having a 
centralized structure 
d) Consequences: 
Total 
compromising 
of 
the 
protocol. 
4) Key Escrow (A4) 
   Key escrow attacks, as described in OH et al. [39], is a 
common attack in cryptography as observed in the 
following: 
a) Attacking strategy: the server (substation) is 
responsible for authentication, so it is able to authenticate a 
fake user (smart meter) or revoke a legitimate user. 
b) Assumptions: the server (substation) is malicious, 
or is compromised by the attacker 
c) Common vulnerability for this attack: have a 
centralized structure 
d) Consequences: Total control of the protocol 
5) Cryptanalysis and Quantum Computing (A5) 
   This attack exploits the weakness in cryptography, using 
cryptanalytic methods, such as Shor’s algorithm [32]: 
a) Attacking strategy: use cryptanalytic tools (with 
quantum computers [20], if necessary) to break the existing 
cryptosystem. 
b) Assumptions: the underlying cryptosystem is 
vulnerable to cryptanalysis and quantum computers. 
c) Common vulnerability for this attack: RSA [30] 
and ECC [31] are both vulnerable to quantum computers. 
d) Consequences: Total capturing of the protocol. 
6) Forward Secrecy (A6) 
   Forward secrecy is a notion associated with network 
security and secures protocol designs [40]. The proposed 
protocols in [7], have the following properties: 
a) Attacking strategy: once the attacker gains control 
of a session (through other attacks, for example, MITM), the 
session key is used to learn previous and future keys. 
b) Assumptions: the attacker is able to learn the secret 
information of at least a single session. 
c) Common vulnerability for this attack: a bad key 
update schedule; usage of statistical keys; lack of short term 
(one time) keys. 
d) Consequences: 
the 
attacker 
steals 
secret 
information of entities (smart meter, collector and 
substation) causing all previous/future data to be at risk. 
   For completeness, the following attack is also presented. 
Currently, this is not applicable to the protocols in [7]. 
When these protocols will evolve in the future, and there 
will be more than one version available for use, this attack 
becomes applicable. 
7) Downgrade Attack (A7) 
   This type of attack exploits the fact that some earlier 
version of the protocol uses weaker cryptography. For 
historical and legacy reasons, the current protocol needs to 
be able to communicate with those earlier versions [41]. 
D. Types of Attackers 
   It is important to model the attackers, as different attackers 
have different likelihood to launch attacks, and the 
consequences, even for a same attack, may vary for different 
attackers. Therefore, four types of attackers are considered 
in this risk analysis [42]. 
1) Clever Outsider (T1): Examples include a high 
school student, hacker, and researcher. Those types of 
attackers are usually limited to their knowledge of the 
underlying cryptography and the topology of the network. 
They are also likely to be constrained by the hardware they 
can access. For example, they are not likely to be able to 
launch attacks from multiple computers in parallel. In most 
cases, they are honest but curious. It implies that they will 
only exploit vulnerabilities that are exposed to them; they 
will not actively look for vulnerabilities. The goal of their 
attack is usually financial gains or publicity. 
2) Knowledgeable Insider (T2): Examples include a 
disgruntled employee. Unlike outside attackers, inside 
attackers are much more knowledgeable of the required 
skills to launch attacks. They are also more capable of 
identifying critical point of the network in order to 
maximize the impact of the attack. However, inside 
attackers work alone, as they are not organized (c.f T3 and 
T4) and do not want to be identified. Therefore, just like T1 
attackers, they are also likely to be constrained by the 
hardware they can access. In addition, it is safe to assume 
that they are malicious. They know about all the 
vulnerabilities of the protocol. The goal of their attack is 
usually financial gains and vengeance. 
3) Non-Profit Organization (T3): Examples include 
research groups, and collaborators on the Internet. Those are 
potentially at large scale organized groups,. Therefore, these 
groups consist of experts in the related area. Since they are 
large scale organizations, they are able to launch distributed 
and parallel attacks. As non-profit organizations, the goal of 
their attack is usually research or charity oriented publicity. 
4) For-Profit Organization (T4): Examples include a 
competitor Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) and a 
tier-1 supplier. Similar to T3 attackers, being large 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

organizations means they have access to all sorts of 
resources related to the attack, including both the required 
skills and knowledge, and necessary equipment’s. In 
addition, since they are profitable organizations, it is also 
possible for them to hire/buy additional resources to 
maximize the impact of their attacks. Those attacks are 
usually profit-oriented. 
 
IV. RISK ANALYSIS 
   In this section the risk analysis of the security protocols 
will be described. 
A.    Risk analysis metrics 
   In carrying out the risk analysis, it is important to de-
couple the assessments of likelihood from that of impact, 
otherwise the same factor would be counted twice. 
However, doing this, in general, is rather difficult. The 
likelihood of an (vulnerability, attack, attacker) combination 
is assessed, and only look at factors like, for the level of 
difficulty needed by the attacker to exploit the vulnerability, 
and if the attacker requires some special tools/knowledge. 
On the other hand, when assessing the vulnerability of the 
combination (vulnerability, attack, attacker), it is already 
assumed that the exploitation of the vulnerability is 
possible, and then try to determine the impact in terms of 
loss in Quality of Service (QoS) or financial impact. The 
following metric are adopted in this paper: 
1) Low: Assigned when compromising a small part the 
network, and incurring minimal or no financial loss. 
2) Medium: Allocated when compromising a large part 
of or the whole network for a limited time, and incurring 
some financial loss; 
3) High: Vilified when compromising a large part or the 
whole network for a very long time or compromise of 
sensitive information like private keys, credit card numbers, 
and incurring significant financial loss. 
   Table II shows the risk matrix that maps a (likelihood, 
impact) combination to a risk, all of them have three levels: 
low, medium and high. Throughout this paper, this table 
will be used to determine the risk level [43]. 
 
TABLE II. RISK MATRIX 
Impact 
Likelihood 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Low 
Level=Low 
Level=Low 
Level=Medium 
Medium 
Level=Low 
Level=Medium 
Level=High 
High 
Level=Medium 
Level=High 
Level=High 
 
B. Detailed risk analysis 
   In the following subsections, a detailed risk analysis of 
every possible combination of vulnerabilities, attacks and 
attackers is carried out. A summary of the risk analysis is 
presented in Table III. It is worth mentioning that there are 
112 combinations (4 vulnerabilities x 7 attacks x 4 
attackers). As different combinations of vulnerabilities, 
attacks and attackers, vulnerabilities are not independent of 
attacks example, the combinationV1 and A3 is not a valid 
one since a single point of failure attack cannot exploit the 
protocols lacking authenticity vulnerability. This paper will 
concentrate on the most common combinations. 
1) (V1, A1, T1): To carry out an MITM attack, an 
attacker requires the knowledge of the underlying 
cryptography, network topology, and protocol design. A 
clever outsider is unlikely to possess all this knowledge. For 
example, if the attacker does not know the topology of the 
network, they cannot easily identify a gateway (collector), 
or the link from a smart meter to the collector. Therefore the 
likelihood is assigned to be low. In terms of impact, a clever 
outsider is unlikely to compromise more than one segment 
of the smart grid network at a time, which would incur 
minimal financial loss. Here, the impact to be also low. 
Hence, the risk is low. 
2) (V1, A1, T2): As stated in IV-B-1, this attack requires 
the knowledge of the underlying cryptography, network 
topology, and protocol design. A knowledgeable insider is 
likely to possess some, if not all, of this knowledge. The 
likelihood is assessed to be medium. Just like IV-B-1, a 
knowledgeable insider is unlikely to compromise more than 
one segment of the smart grid network at a time, which 
would incur minimal financial loss. So, the impact will be 
stated low. Accordingly, the risk is low. 
3) (V1, A1, T3): Compared to IV-B-2, a non-profit 
organization is also likely to possess some, if not all, 
knowledge of the underlying cryptography, network 
topology and protocol design. However, unlike IV-B-4, the 
motivation for such an attacker is not strong. Such an 
attacker is mainly interested in personal gains, such as 
producing research papers or personal publicity. Therefore, 
the likelihood is stated    to be medium. In terms of impact, 
a non-profit organization has the capability to compromise a 
large part of the smart grid network at a time, which would 
incur a non-negligible financial loss. The impact is assessed 
to be also medium. Hence, the risk is medium. 
4) (V1, A1, T4): A for-profit organization is likely to 
possess all the required knowledge for this attack. In 
addition, the motivation of such an attacker is quite strong. 
Usually, such an attacker will have financial interest and 
brand reputation. Therefore, the likelihood is high. Just like 
IV-B-3. A for-profit organization has the capability to 
compromise a large part of the smart grid network at a time, 
which would incur a non-negligible financial loss. 
Consequently, the impact is set to medium. Hence, the risk 
is high. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

5) (V1, A2, T1): Similar to an MITM attack, an 
impersonation 
attack, 
require 
an 
attacker 
to 
be 
knowledgeable of the underlying cryptography and protocol 
design. A clever outsider is unlikely to possess all this 
knowledge. This implies the likelihood should be low. The 
impact of this attack is also similar to that of MITM attacks. 
A clever outsider is unlikely to compromise more than one 
segment of the smart grid network at a time. A minimal 
financial loss is expected. The assessment of the impact is 
low. Hence, the risk is low. 
6) (V1, A2, T2): A knowledgeable insider is likely to 
possess some, if not all, of required knowledge, so, the 
likelihood is medium. Just like IV-B-5, a knowledgeable 
insider is unlikely to compromise more than one segment of 
the smart grid network at a time, which would incur 
minimal financial loss, Therefore, the impact is assessed to 
be low. Hence, the risk is low. 
7) (V1, A2, T3): A non-profit organization is likely to 
possess some, if not all, of the knowledge of underlying 
cryptography, as well as the protocol design. Nonetheless, 
the motivation of such an attacker is not strong, since the 
attacker is mainly interested in publicity gains rather than 
financial gains. So, the likelihood is assessed to be medium. 
In terms of impact, a non-profit organization has the 
capability to compromise a large part of the smart grid 
network at a time, which would incur a non-negligible 
financial loss.The impact is stated to be also medium. 
Hence, the risk is medium. 
8) (V1, A2, T4): As stated in IV-B-5, this attack requires 
the knowledge of the underlying cryptography, protocol 
design. A for-profit organization possesses this knowledge. 
On the other hand, for the motivation, is strong for such an 
attacker, due to potential financial gains or brand reputation 
gains. Therefore, the likelihood of such an attack will be 
high. In the meantime, a for-profit organization has the 
capability to compromise a large part of the smart grid 
network at a time, which would incur a non-negligible 
financial loss. The impact is assessed to be medium. Hence, 
the risk is high. 
9) (V1, A3, T1): This protocol has a single point of 
failure, a centralized server (Substation), that is responsible 
for authentication. An attacker can try to take it offline to 
cause disruption in service. Alternatively, if he/she can 
break the server (Substation), he/she can authorize 
unauthorized nodes, (smart meter, collector) or revoke 
authorized nodes (smart meter, collector). However, such an 
attack would require access to points of failure, which a 
clever outsider is unlikely to possess. The likelihood is 
assessed to be low. In terms of impact, if the attacker is able 
to launch this attack, then there will be significant disruption 
in smart grid service. However, it is unlikely that this attack 
alone would lead to loss of sensitive information. So the 
impact is assessed to be medium. Hence, the risk is low. 
 
10) (V2, A3, T2): Unlike IV-B-9, a knowledgeable 
insider will likely have access to the topology of the 
network. This will help him/her to gain access to the server 
(substation), which is a single point of failure. In addition, 
this attack does not require a lot of internal knowledge or 
resources. The likelihood is assessed to be high. For the 
impact of the attack, there is not much difference between 
this attack and that of IV-B-9. Hence, the impact is assessed 
to be medium. Hence, the risk is high. 
11) (V2, A3, T3): Just like IV-B-9, a non-profit 
organization is unlikely to have access to points of failure, if 
there are any. Such an access requires inside knowledge of 
the smart grid network. Therefore, the likelihood is assessed 
to be low. Compared to IV-B-10, it is quite interesting to 
notice that a more capable attacker has a lower likelihood to 
launch this attack. Similar to IV-B-9 and IV-B-10, a non-
profit organization will be able to significantly disrupt the 
service of the smart grid via this attack, without causing 
losses of sensitive information. As a result, the impact is 
assessed to be medium. Hence, the risk is low. 
12) (V2, A3, T4): Even though a for-profit organization 
may not have easy access to points of failure, such attackers 
usually have more resources available to them than a 
nonprofit organization. In addition, the motivation of a for-
profit organization is stronger than all other three types of 
attackers. The likelihood is assessed to be medium. The 
impact of this attack remains medium for the same reason 
stated before. Hence, the risk is medium. 
13) (V2, A4, T1-T4): The proposed security protocols 
in [7] have assumed that the server (Substation) is always 
trusted, so the likelihood is assessed to be not applicable 
(N/A). In terms of impact, if such an attack is successful 
then there will be a non-negligible financial loss. The 
impact is assessed to be medium. Still, the risk is (N/A). 
14) (V3, A5, T1-T2): Modern cryptographic schemes 
have strong mathematical foundations and are usually 
designed to be secure for the foreseeable future. 
Cryptanalyzing these schemes is extremely difficult, if not 
impossible. The likelihood is assessed to be low for now. 
With the recent research on quantum computers, it is 
possible that there will be usable quantum computers in the 
next couple of decades [44], which would mean that most of 
the existing cryptographic schemes could be broken. 
However, such a quantum computer, if it did exist, wouldn’t 
be easily accessible to a clever outsider or a knowledgeable 
insider. The likelihood is assessed to be medium for future. 
In terms of impact, if this attack is successful, the attacker 
will have access to sensitive information and there will most 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

likely be significant financial loss, so the impact is assessed 
to be high. 
15) (V3, A5, T3-T4): Just like IV-B-14, cryptanalyzing 
schemes is extremely difficult, if not impossible, even for 
large organizations. The likelihood is assessed to be low for 
now. If and when there will be a quantum computer, a large 
organization would be able to get access to it. The 
likelihood is assessed to be high for future. Just like IV-B-
14, if this attack is successful, the attacker will have access 
to sensitive information to the smart grid network and there 
will most likely be significant financial loss, so the impact is 
assessed to be high. 
16) (V4, A6, T1): To carry out this attack, an attacker 
requires the knowledge of the underlying cryptography, as 
well as the protocol design. A clever outsider is unlikely to 
possess all this knowledge. In addition, this attack is 
meaningful only if some other attack like MITM is also 
successful, so the likelihood is assessed to be low. In terms 
of impact, a clever outsider is unlikely to compromise more 
than one segment of the smart grid network at a time, which 
would incur minimal financial loss. The impact is assessed 
to be also low. Hence, the risk is low. 
17) (V4, A6, T2): A knowledgeable insider is likely to 
possess some, if not all, knowledge of the underlying 
cryptography and the protocol design. However, as stated in 
IV-B-16 this attack requires some other attack, such as the 
MITM to be also successful. Therefore, the likelihood is 
assessed to be low. In the meantime, a knowledgeable 
insider is unlikely to compromise more than one segment of 
the smart grid network at a time, which would incur 
minimal financial loss. The impact is assessed to be low. 
Hence, the risk is low. 
18) (V4, A6,T3): A non-profit organization is likely to 
be knowledgeable about cryptography and network design.  
However, the likelihood is assessed to be low for two 
reasons. First, as stated earlier, this attack is dependent on 
other attacks. Secondly, the motivation of such an attacker is 
not strong, since such an attacker is mainly interested in 
research publications or personal publicity. In terms of 
impact, a non-profit organization has the capability to 
compromise a large part of the smart grid network at a time, 
which would incur a non-negligible financial loss. The 
impact is assessed to be also medium. Hence, the risk is 
low. 
19) (V4, A6, T4): The likelihood for a for-profit 
organization to launch this attack is medium. Such an 
attacker maintains the required knowledge. It is also 
motivated since a successful attack will lead to financial 
gains. However, this attack depends on other attacks which 
reduce the likelihood of this attack. Just like IV-B-18, a for-
profit organization has the capability to compromise a large 
part of the smart grid network at a time, which would incur 
a non-negligible financial loss. The impact is assessed to be 
medium. Hence, the risk is medium. 
TABLE III. RISK ANALYSIS SUMMERY 
Attack 
Risk Analysis 
Likelihood 
Impact 
Risk 
(V1,A1,T1) 
Low 
Low 
Low 
(V1,A1,T2) 
Medium 
Low 
Low 
(V1,A1,T3) 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
(V1,A1,T4) 
High 
Medium 
High 
(V1,A2,T1) 
Low 
Low 
Low 
(V1,A2,T2) 
Medium 
Low 
Low 
(V1,A2,T3) 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
(V1,A2,T4) 
High 
Medium 
High 
(V2,A3,T1) 
Low 
Medium 
Low 
(V2,A3,T2) 
High 
Medium 
High 
(V2,A3,T3) 
Low 
Medium 
Low 
(V2,A3,T4) 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
(V2,A4,T1-T4) 
N/A 
Medium 
N/A 
(V3,A5,T1-T2) 
Low 
High 
Medium 
(V3,A5,T3-T4) 
Low 
High 
Medium 
(V4,A6,T1) 
Low 
Low 
Low 
(V4,A6,T2) 
Low 
Low 
Low 
(V4,A6,T3) 
Low 
Medium 
Low 
(V4,A6,T4) 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
V. RISK MITIGATIONS 
   The countermeasures of proposed security protocol risks 
are considered in detail in this section. 
A. Mitigations of Medium and High Risks 
1) (V1, A1, T3-T4), (V1, A2, T3-T4): A straightforward 
way to mitigate MITM and impersonation attacks is to use 
digital certificates, such as Public-Key Infrastructure (PKI) 
and secure the channel using protocols like Transport Layer 
Security (TLS) [5]. With authentications, when a sender 
sends packages to a receiver, the receiver will check the 
authenticator associated with the sender and the package. 
This can be done via a digital signature for the sender’s 
identical, signed by a Certificate Authority, and a MAC that 
binds the identity, the signature and the package. In this 
case, if one wishes to launch a MITM attack or an 
impersonate attack, he or she will have to break the 
underlying cryptography, which is prohibited by the given 
vulnerability, attack and attacker combinations. 
2) (V2, A3, T2), (V2, A3, T4): Forthright way to mitigate 
vulnerabilities like the single point of failure is to 
decentralize the server by replication of resources and 
sharing the cryptographic key materials. This effectively 
stops attacks on single point of failures as even if one server 
is compromised, there are still adequate number of servers 
remains to provide required functionalities. 
3) (V3, A5, T1-T4): To mitigate the medium current risk 
and possibly high risk in future, the use of cryptographic 
schemes that have at least 128-bit security is recommended 
(see, for example, NSA’s suite B Cryptography Standards 
[45]). Standardized 128-bit secure cryptography is believed 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

to be robust against any existing cryptanalysis. The number 
of operations to break the cryptography is over 2128 bit 
operations, which is beyond the capability of classical 
computers. A even better solution, nonetheless, is to use 
cryptographic schemes that are believed to be quantum-safe, 
such as New Hope Key exchange algorithms [46], NTRU 
cryptosystems [47], in a hybrid mode [48]. The hybrid mode 
means one uses a quantum-safe scheme, for example, 
NTRU, in parallel with a classical scheme, such as Diffie-
Hellman key exchanges. With a right configuration, the 
system will be as strong as the stronger scheme of the two. 
This provides sufficient security against classical attackers 
today, as well as potential quantum attackers in future. 
4) (V4, A6, T4): To mitigate the risk of forward secrecy 
attacks, the use of ephemeral keys instead of static keys are 
recommended. Connections via ephemeral keys are sort of a 
de facto method to design secure communication protocols, 
such as TLS [5] and IKE [49]. In those protocols, the 
session key that was used for communications are derived 
from a long time authenticated key and an ephemeral key 
generated at run time. Therefore, for each session, the key is 
different and independent from all previous ones. As a 
result, a leakage of either a session key or the long time 
authenticated key will only have localized effect. The 
attacker will learn information about the particular session 
only, not the entire sessions that the user has participated. 
B. Mitigation of Low Risks 
   In principle, there isn’t really any need to address the low 
risks in the system right away, but it is important to keep an 
eye on them, as those risks may become medium or high in 
future depending on several parameters like scientific, 
technological, and algorithmic developments. An example is 
that of cryptanalysis attacks using quantum computers, 
whose likelihood is rated as low at the moment because 
quantum computers don’t exist, but there is a non-negligible 
chance that quantum computers will become viable in the 
next decade or so, and therefore, the likelihood is rated as 
medium for future. The mitigations of low risks are given 
for the sake of completeness. It is worth noting that their 
mitigations are usually very similar to the medium/high 
risks in the same attack/vulnerability category. In a bit more 
details, (V1, A1, T1), (V1, A1, T2), (V1, A2, T1), and (V1, 
A2, T2) can be mitigated using techniques similar to Section 
IV-A-1. Those attacks rely on the lack of authenticity. As 
discussed earlier, with authenticators, one can effectively 
check the integrity and the authenticity of the packages it 
receives, and therefore, defeats those attacks. (V2, A3, T1) 
and (V2, A3, T3) can be mitigated using techniques similar 
to Section IV-A-2. They rely on single point of failure. So 
using a decentralized topology safely is assumed these 
attacks will fail. Similarly, using ephemeral keys will 
effectively stop attacks in (V4, A6, T1-T3) as shown in 
Section IV-A-4. With ephemeral keys, the leakage of a 
single key does no longer imply the leakage of all keys as 
suggested in. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
   Security protocols for the smart grid are designed and 
implemented to protect the communications between 
various components within the grid.  If these protocols 
reveal weaknesses, devastating consequences could take 
place.  Therefore, these protocols should be fully analyzed 
and studied to ensure they provide robust security.  In an 
attempt to participate in the effort of ensuring strong 
security implementation, this paper provides a framework 
for analyzing qualitative risk in smart grid security 
protocols. Risk factors are extracted together with their 
related issues.  This analysis concluded nine low risks, six 
medium risks, and three high risks in these protocols. 
Countermeasures are proposed, and appropriate mitigation 
techniques for the identified risks are suggested. 
    
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Depuru, L. Wang, and V. Devabhaktuni, “Smart meters for power 
grid: Challenges, issues, advantages and status,” Renewable and 
sustainable energy reviews, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 2736–2742, 2011. 
[2] S. Finster and I. Baumgart, “Privacy-Aware Smart Metering: A 
Survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, pp. 1088–
1101, 2014. 
[3] K. Herter, P. McAuliffec, and A. Rosenfeld, “An exploratory analysis 
of california residential customer response to critical peak pricing of 
electricity, ” Energy, pp. 25–34, 2007. 
[4] Future-Proofing 
Smart 
Grid 
Infrastructure 
Meter 
Designs.  
[Online].Available: 
https://www.microsemi.com/applications/industrial-m2m-
wireless/smart-metering, [retrieved: March 2018]. 
[5] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, “The Transport Layer Security (TLS) 
Protocol,” Version 1.2. Internet Engineering Task Force, 2008. 
[Online]. Available: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5246, [retrieved: 
March 2018]. 
[6] S. Kent and R. Atkinson, “IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP),” 
Internet Engineering Task Force, 1998. [Online]. Available: 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2406, [retrieved: March 2018]. 
[7] M. Saed, K. Daimi, and N. Al-Holou, ”Approaches for Securing 
Smart Meters in Smart Grid Networks,” International Journal on 
Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol. 10 no. 3&4, pp. 265-
274, Dec. 2017. 
[8] W. Stallings, “Network Security Essentials - Applications and 
Standards,” (4. ed., internat. ed.). Pearson Education, 2010. 
[9] NIST, “Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments,” National Institute 
of Standards and Technology, 2012. [Online]. Available: http: 
//doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-30r1, [retrieved: March 2018]. 
[10] L. Allodi, W. Shim, and F. Massacci, “Quantitative Assessment of 
Risk Reduction with Cybercrime Black Market Monitoring,” In 2013 
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops, pp. 165–172, 
May 2013, CA, USA. 
[11] L. Allodi and F. Massacci, “Security events and vulnerability data for 
cybersecurity risk estimation,” International Journal on Risk 
Analysis, vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 1606–1627, Aug. 2017. 
[12] J. Lee, D. Hwang, J. Park, and K.-H. Kim, “Risk Analysis and 
Countermeasure for Bit-Flipping Attack in LORAWAN,” in 2017 
International Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN), Jan 
2017, pp. 549–551. 
[13] A. Jacobsson, M. Boldt, and B. Carlsson, “A Risk Analysis of a 
Smart Home Automation System,” Future Generation Computer 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Systems, vol. 56, no. Supplement C, pp. 719–733, 2016. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167739X1500281
2, [retrieved: March 2018]. 
[14] Y. Cherdantseva et al. “A Review of Cyber Security Risk Assessment 
Methods for SCADA Systems,” Computers and Security, vol. 56, no. 
Supplement C, pp.1–27, 2016. 
[15] M. Majdalawieh, F. Parisi-Presicce, and D. Wijesekera, “DNPSec: 
Distributed 
Network 
Protocol 
Version 
3 
(DNP3) 
Security 
Framework,” Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 2006, pp. 227–234. 
[16] TriangleMicroWorks, “Modbus and DNP3 Communication Protocols 
,”2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://trianglemicroworks.com/docs/default-source/referenced-
documents/Modbus_and_DNP_Comparison.pdf, [retrieved: March 
2018]. 
[17] D. Wei, Y. Lu, M. Jafari, P. Skare, and K. Rohde, “An Integrated 
Security System of Protecting Smart Grid  Against Cyber -Attacks,” 
Innovative Smart Grid Technologies (ISGT), Gaithersburg, MD, 
USA, 19-21 January 2010. 
[18] M. A. Rahman, and H. Mohsenian-Rad, “'False Data Injection 
Attacks with Incomplete Information Against Smart Power Grids,'' In 
Proc. IEEE Conf. Global Commun. (GlobeCom), Dec. 2012, pp. 
3153-3158. 
[19] A. Giani, et al. “Smart Grid Data Integrity Attacks,'' IEEE Trans. 
Smart Grid, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 1244-1253, Sep. 2013. 
[20] D. Li, Z. Aung, J. R. Williams, and A. Sanchez, “Efficient 
Authentication Scheme for Data Aggregation in Smart Grid with 
Fault Tolerance and Fault Diagnosis,” Innovative Smart Grid 
Technologies (ISGT),  IEEE PES, pp. 1-8,  2012. 
[21] B. Vaidya, D. Makrakis, and H. Mouftah, “Secure Multipath Routing 
for AMI Network in Smart Grid,” In Proc. IEEE 31st International 
Conference on Performance Computing and Communications 
(IPCCC),  Austin, TX, pp. 408-415, 2012. 
[22] Y. Yan, Y. Qian, and H. Sharif, “A Secure and Reliable In-network 
Collaborative Communication Scheme for Advanced Metering 
Infrastructure 
in 
Smart 
Grid,” 
In 
Proc. 
IEEE 
Wireless 
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), Cancun, 
Quintana Roo, pp. 909-914, 2012. 
[23] J. Seo and C. Lee, “The Green Defenders,” IEEE Power and Energy 
Magazine, VOL.9, NO.1, pp. 82-90, January/February 2011. 
[24] Y. Zhao, A. Goldsmith, and H. V. Poor, “Fundamental limits of 
Cyber Physical Security in Smart Power Grids,'' In Proc. 52nd IEEE 
Conf. Decision Control, Florence, Italy, pp. 200-205, Dec. 2013. 
[25] Y. Huang, M. Esmalifalak, H. Nguyen, R. Zheng, and Z. Han, “Bad 
Data Injection in Smart Grid: Attack and Defense Mechanisms,'' 
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 27-33, Jan. 2013. 
[26] M. Esmalifalak, et al. “A Stealthy Attack Against Electricity Market 
Using Independent Component Analysis,'' IEEE Syst. J., to be 
published. 
[27] G. Chaojun, P. Jirutitijaroen, and M. Motani, “Detecting False Data 
Injection Attacks in Ac State Estimation,'' IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, 
vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 2476-2483, Sep. 2015. 
[28] F. Li, B. Luo, and P. Liu, “Secure Information Aggregation for Smart 
Grids Using Homomorphic Encryption,” In Proc. 2010 IEEE Conf. 
Smart Grid Communication, pp. 327-332. 
[29] X. Wang, Y. L. Yin, and H. Yu, “Finding Collisions in the Full Sha-
1,” In Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2005: 25th Annual 
International Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, California, 
USA, Proceedings, 2005, pp. 17–36, Aug. 2005. 
[30] R. L. Rivest, A. Shamir, and L. M. Adleman, “A Method for 
Obtaining Digital Signatures and Public-Key Cryptosystems,” 
Commun. ACM, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 120–126, 1978. 
[31] N. Koblitz, “Elliptic Curve Cryptosystems,” Mathematics of 
Computation, vol. 48, no. 177, pp. 203–209, 1987. 
[32] P. W. Shor, “Algorithms For Quantum Computation: Discrete 
Logarithms and Factoring,” In FOCS, 1994, pp. 124–134. 
[33] NIST, “FIPS180-4:Secure Hash Standard,” [Online]. Available: 
https://csrc.nist.gov/csrc/media/publications/fips/180/4/final/documen
ts/fips180-4-draft-aug2014.pdf, [retrieved: March 2018]. 
[34] M. J. Dworkin, “SHA-3 Standard: Permutation- Based Hash and 
Extendable-Output 
Functions,” 
2015. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.nist.gov/publications/sha-3-standard-permutation-based-
hash-and-extendable-output-functions?pub 
id=919061, 
[retrieved: 
March 2018]. 
[35] W. Mao, “Modern Cryptography: Theory and Practice,” Ser. Hewlett- 
Packard Professional Books, Prentice Hall PTR, 2003. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://books.google.com/books?id=OOUnYAAACAAJ, 
[retrieved: March 2018]. 
[36] S. Moore, “Meet-in-the-Middle Attacks,” 2010. [Online]. Available: 
http://stephanemoore.com/pdf/meetinthemiddle.pdf, 
[retrieved: 
March 2018]. 
[37] C. Adams, “Impersonation Attack. Boston, MA,” Springer US, 2011, 
pp. 596–596. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-
4419-5906-5 80, [retrieved: March 2018]. 
[38] K. Dooley, “Designing large-scale LANs,” Ser. O’Reilly Series. 
O’Reilly,2002.[Online].Available: 
https://books.google.com/books?id=xwBTAAAAMAAJ, [retrieved: 
March 2018]. 
[39] J. Oh, K. Lee, and S. Moon, “How to Solve Key Escrow and Identity 
Revocation 
in 
Identity-Based 
Encryption 
Schemes,” 
Berlin, 
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 290–303. [Online]. 
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/11593980 22, [retrieved: March 
2018]. 
[40] A. Menezes, P. C. van Oorschot, and S. A. Vanstone, “Handbook of 
Applied Cryptography,”  CRC Press, 1996. 
[41] Praetorian, “Man-in-the-Middle TlS Protocol Downgrade Attack,” 
[42] “Linux Security Threats: The 7 Classes of Attackers,” 2017. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.linux.com/news/chapter/Linux-security/linux-
security-threats-7-classes-attackers, [retrieved: March 2018]. 
[43] V. Dumbrav, “Using Probability Impact Matrix in Analysis and Risk 
AssessmentProjects,”2013.[Online].Available: 
http://www.scientificpapers.org/wp-
content/files/07_Dumbrava_Iacob-
USING_PROBABILITY__IMPACT_MATRIX_IN__ANALYSIS_A
ND_RISK_ASSESSMENT_PROJECTS.pdf, 
[retrieved: 
March 
2018]. 
[44] M. R. Bauer, “Quantum Computing is Going Commercial with the 
Potential to Disrupt Everything,” 2017. [Online]. Available: 
http://www. 
newsweek.com/2017/04/21/quantum-computing-ibm-
580751.html, [retrieved: March 2018]. 
[45] “NSA Suite B Cryptography - NSA/CSS.” [Online]. Available: 
https://www.nsa.gov/ia/programs/suiteb cryptography/, 
[retrieved: 
March 2018]. 
[46] E. Alkim, L. Ducas, T. P¨oppelmann, and P. Schwabe, “Post-
Quantum Key Exchange - a New Hope,” In 25th USENIX Security 
Symposium, USENIX Security 16, Austin, TX, USA, August 10-12, 
2016, 
pp.327–343. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity16/technical-
sessions/presentation/alkim, [retrieved: March 2018]. 
[47] J. Hoffstein, J. Pipher, and J. H. Silverman, “NTRU: A Ring-Based 
Public Key Cryptosystem,” In Algorithmic Number Theory, Third 
International Symposium, ANTS-IV, Portland, Oregon, USA, June 
21-25, 1998, Proceedings, 1998, pp. 267–288. [Online]. Available: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BFb0054868, [retrieved: March 2018]. 
[48] J. M. Schanck, W. Whyte, and Z. Zhang, “Circuit-Extension 
Handshakes for Tor Achieving Forward Secrecy in a Quantum 
World,” PoPETs, vol. 2016, no. 4, pp. 219–236, 2016. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://doi.org/10.1515/popets-2016-0037, 
[retrieved: 
March 2018]. 
[49] D. Harkins and D. Carrel, “The Internet Key Exchange (IKE),” 
Internet Engineering Task Force, 1998. [Online]. Available: https: 
//tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2409, [retrieved: March 2018]. 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

