 
Where Should a Utility Improve Tree Cutting to Reduce the Risk of Vegetation 
Coming into Contact with Power Lines? 
Vivian Sultan 
Claremont Graduate University 
Center For Information Systems & Technology 
Claremont, CA 91711 
Email: vivian.sultan@cgu.edu 
Brian Hilton 
Claremont Graduate University 
Center For Information Systems & Technology 
Claremont, CA 91711 
Email: brian.hilton@cgu.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Utility systems have come under attack from storms, 
trees, squirrels, fires, and firearms. 2018 was particularly bad 
for outages from wildfires in California. Fallen trees or tree 
limbs caused approximately 50% of the total minutes of service 
interruptions in 2017. In 2018, wildfires burned millions of 
acres. Regulators have struck back against utility companies, 
imposing tens of millions of dollars in fines related to wildfires. 
One issue is that the grid has many poles and wires that are 
vulnerable to falling trees and flying debris. To reduce the risk 
of wildfire and keep customers safe, electric utilities need to 
accelerate their vegetation-management work. The idea is to 
reduce vegetation below and near power lines that could act as 
fuel in a wildfire, as an added layer of protection, and to 
enhance defensible space. This study aimed to address the 
question, “Where should a utility improve tree cutting and 
trimming initiatives to foster operational excellence and reduce 
the risk of vegetation coming into contact with power lines?” 
To answer the research question, Insights for ArcGIS (a 
Geographic Information System) was used to build worksheets 
using a geographic information-systems-based application 
aimed at resolving current challenges faced by utilities to 
reduce the risk of power outages. A case study was developed 
to demonstrate the risk scenario that entails a utility company 
taking action and preparing for the unexpected. An artifact in 
Insights for ArcGIS was created using a design-science-
research methodology. This research proposes an elegant, 
interesting, and novel solution to aid in vegetation management. 
The artifact demonstrates that GIS can play an integral role in 
the problem resolution. 
Keywords—power failure; GIS model; Design-Science-
Research; vegetation management. 
I. INTRODUCTION AND PROBLEM DEFINITION 
The placement of a new automated distribution switch 
has long-term impacts on the reliability of the circuit in 
which it is installed [1]. Common placement strategies rely 
on manual processes and the inherited knowledge of the 
planning engineer regarding the configuration, past 
reliability performance, future load growth, planned 
distributed energy resources, and other protection-related 
schemes of the circuit being analyzed in order to select a 
new switch location [2]. Without optimization algorithms to 
account for the many operating parameters and outage 
scenarios, the planning engineer may select a less than 
optimal location. According to Jim Horstman, a utility-
industry consultant, a less than optimal placement may lead 
to less-than-optimal reliability performance and adversely 
affect customer satisfaction. 
The objective of this study was to provide instantiation 
of a Geographic Information Systems (GIS) model and an 
analysis framework developed in previous research by the 
authors of this manuscript. To instantiate is to create a real 
instance or a particular realization of an abstraction or a 
process [3]. Therefore, the solution offered in this paper 
could lead us to a GIS-based application prototype that 
identifies optimal grid location(s) that need inspection or 
infrastructure work, as well as detect regions where new 
components such as distribution switches may provide net 
benefits to the grid, considering the many operating 
parameters and outage scenarios. 
The Environmental Systems Research Institute [4] 
defined GIS as a class of tools for seizing, storing, analyzing, 
and demonstrating data in relation to their positions on the 
Earth’s surface. Analysts use GIS to view different objects’ 
locations and study their relationships. Satellite and tabular 
data can be entered into GIS for a single map display. GIS 
applications include recognizing site locations, mapping 
topographies, and developing analytical models to forecast 
events [4]. 
Though predictive modeling has existed since the 
inception of statistics, the penetration of GIS fostered a new 
approach to forecasting and data analytics. Predictive 
modeling is a process to determine a mathematical 
relationship between two or more variables [5]. Future 
dependent variables can derive if their relationships to 
independent variables become known. Predictive modeling 
with GIS has been applied in various sectors such as public 
health [6] and public-works asset management [7]. GIS is 
not limited to any specific field; it is only restricted by the 
availability of geospatial data. 
GIS is a catalyst for improving multiple facets of smart 
grids. For instance, Resch et al. [8] integrated GIS-based 
modeling into the energy system to address renewable-
energy-infrastructure planning. Sultan and Bitar [9] used 
GIS to optimize the locations of a distributed energy 
resource such as solar panels. Similarly, Sultan et al. [10] 
investigated power-grid reliability incidents/power outages 
and their correlation with infrastructure age by using GIS-
based modeling. Therefore, GIS enhances research inquiries 
in the smart-grid domain. Based on our previous research 
[9]-[10] we posit GIS can highlight the optimal locations for 
different components of the electric-power network 
including the new automated distribution switches. For this 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-713-9
ENERGY 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
research study, we designed an artifact: a GIS-based 
solution that resolves current challenges faced by utilities to 
improve tree cutting and foster operational excellence. 
Section II presents the study design and methodology. 
Section III illustrates the design principle. Section IV 
describes deployment. In Section V, we discuss research 
evaluation. In Section VI, we offer conclusions. 
II. STUDY DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY 
The artifact/solution uses a Design-Science-Research 
(DSR) methodology. Walls, Widmeyer, and El Sawy [11] 
conceived DSR and laid the foundations and arguments for 
DSR in behavior-centric information-systems research. 
March and Smith [12] elucidated DSR further by separating 
natural science from design science. A decade later, DSR 
was integrated into the fabric of information-systems 
research through several seminal publications [3][13]–[16]. 
Every DSR needs a design principle as guidance. Hence, 
for this study, we used the principle outlined in Peffers et al. 
[16]. The principle, collectively called DSR, was also used 
as a basis for another study [13]. Figure 1 depicts the DSR 
method. 
III. DESIGN PRINCIPLE 
The DSR method contains six activities. These 
activities interact sequentially. In addition, iteration through 
one or more activities is likely. The DSR method includes 
four possible entry points that indicate how a DSR project 
would start. 
A. 
Possible Entry Points 
Even though Peffers et al. [16] did not elucidate the 
four entry points—(1) problem-centered initiation, (2) 
objective-centered solution initiation, (3) design and 
development center initiation, and (4) client/context 
initiation—they did provide four case studies to demonstrate 
how each entry point works. Conceptually, researchers 
could start their research endeavors using any of the entry 
points, as long as the researchers defined all activities in the 
design science research method in their entirety. 
This research entry point is classified as an objective-
centered solution initiation. As noted above, our objective in 
this research was to reduce the risk of power outages by 
advancing tree cutting and trimming initiatives. Due to the 
rapidly changing nature of energy generation, new 
developments 
in 
the 
electric-power 
network, 
the 
incorporation of distributed energy resources into the grid, 
and circuit and equipment overloads, grid reliability 
research has been unable to keep pace. Power outages can 
be especially tragic in life-support systems in hospitals and 
nursing homes or systems in synchronization facilities such 
as airports, train stations, and traffic control. The economic 
cost of power interruptions to U.S. electricity consumers 
was $79 billion annually in damages and lost economic 
activity [17]. These facts highlight the need to investigate 
grid reliability, which is the objective of this research and 
the entry point to initiating an objective-centered solution. 
B. 
Process Guiding Design 
In conjunction with the design principle elucidated in 
the previous section, the research entailed using the process 
steps in Takeda, Veerkamp, and Yoshikawa’s [18] design 
cycle to create an artifact/solution. This cycle has five 
simple steps: awareness of the problem, suggestion, 
development, evaluation, and conclusion. The Takeda et al. 
design cycle demonstrates how DSR was embraced as a 
research paradigm for information-systems research projects 
[13]. We used the three DSR cycles of relevance, design, 
and rigor [14] to perform each of the Takeda et al. process 
steps leading to the final prototype in this paper. 
This study aimed to address the following question: 
“Where should a utility improve tree cutting and trimming-
related initiatives to foster operational excellence and reduce 
Figure 1. Design science research method [16]. 
Process Iteration
Nominal
process
sequence
Identify
Problem
& Motivate
Define problem
Show
importance
Define
Objectives of
a Solution
What would a
better artifact
accomplish?
Design &
Development
Artifact
Demonstration
Find suitable
Context
Use artifact to
solve problem
Evaluation
Observe how
effective,
efficient
Iterate back
to design
Communication
Scholarly
publications
Professional
publications
Inference
Theory
How-to Knowledge
Metrics, Analysis
Knowledge
Disciplinary
knowledge
Possible Research Entry Points
Problem-
Centered
Initiation
Objective-
Centered
Solution
Design &
Development-
Centered
Initiation
Client/
Context
Initiated
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-713-9
ENERGY 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
the risk of vegetation coming into contact with power lines?” 
To answer the research question, we propose a GIS-based 
application that would be an elegant, interesting, and novel 
solution to aid in vegetation management. This study 
illustrates how utilities can address current challenges to 
improve grid reliability. The artifact demonstrates that GIS 
can play an integral role in the problem resolution. 
We used a scenario-based methodology to evaluate the 
proposed solution. We extracted case episodes of actual site 
use by users (described as scenarios) to define the objectives 
of the target application. The key strength of the scenario-
based methodology is its ability to support investigation of 
phenomena such as power failures that are hard to research 
by more conventional means. Sugimura and Ishigaki [19] 
highlighted its potential, for example, to break down an 
extracted scenario into steps of actions and answer questions 
about the actions given as check items. To complete the 
evaluation, we elicited opinions from industry experts 
regarding the viability of the model. Getting expert feedback 
is helpful at this phase to see if the instantiation 
demonstrated the overall usefulness of the intervention. 
IV. DEPLOYMENT 
One of the newest technologies is Insights for ArcGIS, 
which is part of the new ArcGIS Enterprise family from the 
Environmental Systems Research Institute. Insights for 
ArcGIS can open doors for utilities to expand the use of 
asset-management data, for example, to support business-
related decisions. Insights for ArcGIS has transformed how 
researchers traditionally performed spatial analysis [20]. It 
is a web-based, data-analytics application with the 
capability to work with interactive maps and charts at the 
same time. 
In this research, we developed a case study to 
demonstrate the risk scenario/challenge that entails a utility 
company taking action and preparing for the unexpected. 
A. 
Utilities Case Study/Vegetation Scenario 
Utility systems have come under attack from storms, 
trees, squirrels, fires and firearms and 2018 was particularly 
bad for outages from wildfires in California. Regulators 
imposed tens of millions of dollars in fines against utility 
companies associated with wildfires, including $37 million 
for the 2007 Malibu fire; $14.4 million for the Witch, Rice 
and Guejito fires in the same year; and $8.3 million for the 
2015 Butte Fire [21]. Many poles and wires in the grid are 
vulnerable to falling trees and flying debris. 
Half of the total minutes of service interruptions in 
2017 accrued from fallen trees or tree limbs [22, p. 14]. 
According to the National Interagency Fire Center, in 2018 
more than 48,347 wildfires burned more than 7.3 million 
acres, as of late September [23]. Figure 2 shows some 
overall data on the total number of outages caused by 
weather/falling trees [24]. 
To reduce the risk of wildfire and keep customers safe, 
electric utilities need to accelerate their vegetation-
management work. Utilities are already working to meet 
new state vegetation and fire-safety standards. In California, 
for instance, the new standards require a minimum clearance 
of 4 feet around power lines in high fire-threat areas with 
clearances of 12 feet or more at the time of trim to ensure 
compliance year round [25]. However, accelerated wildfire 
Figure 2. Eaton’s Blackout Tracker [24]. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-713-9
ENERGY 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
vegetation-management work is still needed to address 
overhanging branches or limbs. The idea is to reduce 
vegetation below and near power lines that could act as fuel 
in a wildfire, as an added layer of protection and to enhance 
defensible space. Thus, the challenge for an electric utility 
in this case is, “Where should a utility improve tree cutting 
and trimming-related initiatives to foster operational 
excellence and reduce the risk of vegetation coming into 
contact with power lines?” 
B. 
Insights for ArcGIS Solution 
We created an artifact in Insights for ArcGIS using 
DSR methodology. Insights for ArcGIS workbooks were 
developed to explore and discover trends and details in a 
utility company’s data. The workbooks are templates that 
can be imported from a utility company’s analytics models 
built in Insights for ArcGIS. Having the data in Insights for 
ArcGIS provides powerful analysis that can be shared. 
In this research, we propose an elegant, interesting, and 
novel solution to aid in vegetation management, identifying 
optimal 
grid 
location(s) 
that 
need 
inspection 
or 
infrastructure work, and detecting regions where new 
components, such as distribution switches, may provide net 
benefits, considering the many operating parameters and 
outage scenarios. Because Insights is so easy to use, 
everyone at the electric utility, from personnel in the field to 
the chairman of the board, can take advantage of its 
capabilities. The following section describes one Insights 
worksheet we developed to demonstrate how the proposed 
solution might address the risk scenario/challenge examined 
in the previous section. 
V. SOLUTION: ARCGIS INSIGHTS VEGETATION 
SCENARIO INVESTIGATION WORKSHEET 
We selected the ArcGIS Insights tool to identify critical 
locations where a utility company needs to prune trees as an 
added layer of protection and to enhance defensible space. 
All relevant data were imported from the supervisory 
control 
and 
data 
acquisition/Outage-Management 
System/distribution-management system at a power utility 
into Insights for ArcGIS. 
Page 1: Developed to investigate trees-related outages 
and the reported right-of-way events shown in Figure 3. 
This page allows utility personnel to answer the following 
questions. 
1. 
What is the reported right-of-way event category 
contributing to the largest count of outage events? 
2. 
What is the reported right-of-way event category 
contributing to the longest duration of outages? 
3. 
What is the reported tree-related cause contributing 
to the largest count of customers’ calls? 
Page 2: Developed to investigate the relationship 
between tree-pruning time and outage events shown in 
Figure 4. This page allows utility personnel to answer the 
following questions. 
1. 
How many expected pruning staff hours are needed 
to eliminate vines-caused power outages? 
Figure 3. ArcGIS Insights Vegetation scenario investigation Worksheet Page 1 
Reported Count of Outage Events by Category (Cause)
Event Category Duration in Minutes
30 04 Tree Grew
into Line
30 01 Limb
on Line
30 01 Limb
on Line
30 02 Tree Fell
on Line
30 02 Tree Fell
on Line
3 3
30 03 Vines
Total:
3,189
Cause
Sum of Duration
Cause
Events Cause by Total Customer Calls
Tree-Related Outage Events
Right-of-Way Events
Gi_Bin Fix …
Sum of Total Calls
Count of Right-of-Way Events
200k
150k
100k
50k
0k
30 01 Limb on
Line
30 02 Tree Fell
on Line
30 03 Vines
30 04 Tree Grew
into Line
99,897
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-713-9
ENERGY 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
2. 
 How many pruning staff hours are needed to 
eliminate which category of right-of-way events? 
3. 
Based on actual pruning staff hours, which 
category of right-of-way events needs the greatest 
number of pruning staff hours, on average, to be 
eliminated? 
4. 
In which counties do you see the consecutive 
emerging power outage hot spots associated with 
trees? 
Page 3: Developed to investigate tree-related outages 
optimized and emerging hot spots shown in Figure 5. This 
page allows utility personnel to answer the following 
questions. 
1. 
In which counties do you mainly see tree-related 
outages optimized hot spots? 
2. 
In which counties do you mainly see tree-related 
outages sporadic emerging hot spots? 
3. 
How many sporadic emerging hot spots do you 
see? 
4. 
What pattern type of emerging hot spots do you 
mainly see in the optimized hot spots locations of 
outages? 
5. 
How many consecutive emerging power-outage hot 
spots are associated with trees? 
6. 
If you were to send crews (a limited resource) to 
prune trees, does this map guide you with respect 
to where you need vegetation management most? 
VI. EVALUATION 
The proposed solution in this paper brings forth an 
important contribution to help practitioners identify the 
optimal location(s) for the placement of smart-grid 
interventions while considering many operating parameters, 
outage scenarios, and potential benefits. The GIS model 
presented in this study can advance smart-grid reliability by, 
for example, elucidating the root cause of power failure, 
defining a solution for a blackout through data, or 
implementing the solution with continuous monitoring and 
management. 
This study illustrated how Insights for ArcGIS, a GIS-
based solution, can be used to perform quick analysis, 
produce illustrative maps and charts, and share that 
information with managerial staff on the utility side. 
Because Insights for ArcGIS is able to record workflows, 
utility personnel will be able to rerun analysis monthly, 
whenever inspection budgets become available or whenever 
a storm is expected to hit the service area. 
According to utility industry consultant Horstman, the 
solution offered here provides useful insights. However, 
Horstman pointed out that it still needs work because the 
terms used to describe hot spots, for example, are 
statistician’s terms, not layperson’s terms. Horstman 
commented that utilities are becoming more “analytical” 
and beginning to understand the value of this research. 
Doug Dorr, a research program manager at Electric 
Power Research Institute, confirmed the potential of this 
application offered by the prototype. According to the 
program manager, 
“ArcGIS Insights worksheets are very easy to use and 
understand. Other layers like where the lines run and 
where the customers are located would be an additional 
useful integration consideration. Utilities would need to 
do some customization in order to make it truly 
Figure 4. ArcGIS Insights Vegetation scenario investigation Worksheet Pages 2 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-713-9
ENERGY 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
actionable. Visual analytics and the ability to look at 
data over time is critically important. I really like the 
hot spots concepts.” 
 VII. CONCLUSION 
This study aimed to answer the question, “Where 
should a utility improve tree cutting and trimming-related 
initiatives to foster operational excellence and reduce the 
risk of vegetation coming into contact with power lines?” 
To answer the research question, we used Insights for 
ArcGIS to build worksheets using a GIS-based application 
aimed at resolving current challenges faced by utilities to 
reduce the risk of power outages. We developed a case 
study to demonstrate the risk scenario that entails a utility 
company taking action and preparing for the unexpected. 
We created an artifact in Insights for ArcGIS using a DSR 
methodology. This research proposes an elegant, interesting, 
and novel solution to aid in vegetation management. The 
artifact demonstrates that GIS can play an integral role in 
problem resolution. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Abiri-Jahromi, M. Fotuhi-Firuzabad, M. Parvania, and M. 
Mosleh, “Optimized sectionalizing switch placement strategy 
in distribution systems,” IEEE Trans Power Del, vol. 27, no. 1, 
pp. 362–370, 2012. 
[2] Electric Power Research Institute. “EPRI data analytics case: 
Optimal placement of automated distribution switches,” 
[retrieved: 
September, 
2017] 
http://smartgrid.epri.com/doc/DMD-Use-Cases/Optimal 
Placement of Automated Distribution Switches - Short 
Version.pdf 2017 
[3] A. Hevner, S. March, J. Park, S. Ram, “Design science in 
information systems research,” Manag. Inf. Syst. Q., vol. 28, 
no. 1, pp. 75–105, 2004. 
[4] ESRI 
Environmental 
Systems 
Research 
Institute. 
Understanding 
GIS--The 
Arc/Info 
Method 
[retrieved 
November, 2015] http://www.ciesin.columbia.edu/docs/005-
331/005-331.html, 1992. 
[5] D. Dickey, “Introduction to predictive modeling with 
examples” in SAS Global Forum Proceedings [retrieved 
October, 
2015] 
http://support.sas.com/resources/papers/proceedings12/337-
2012.pdf, 2012. 
[6] A. Idowu, N. Okoronkwo, R. Adagunodo, “Spatial predictive 
model for malaria in Nigeria,” J Health Informatics Dev. 
Ctries. 
[retrieved 
October, 
2015] 
http://www.jhidc.org/index.php/jhidc/article/view/34, 2009 
[7] D. Totman, Model Predictions: GIS Helps Public Works 
Manage 
Assets, 
retrieved 
October 
19, 
2015, 
from 
http://americancityandcounty.com/gis-amp-gps/model-
predictions-gis-helps-public-works-manage-assets, 2013. 
[8] B. Resch et al. “GIS-based planning and modeling for 
renewable energy: Challenges and future research avenues,” 
ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 662–692, 2014. 
Figure 5. ArcGIS Insights storm scenario investigation Worksheet Page 3 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-713-9
ENERGY 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

 
[9] V. Sultan and H. Bitar, “Geographic decision support systems 
to optimize the placement of distributed energy resources,” 
Proc. 22nd AMCIS, San Diego, CA, 2016. 
[10] V. Sultan, A. Alzahrani, H. Bitar, N. Alharbi, “Is California’s 
aging infrastructure the principal contributor to the recent 
trend of power outage?” Proc. 22nd Annual Cal. GIS Conf., 
Anaheim, 2016. 
[11] J. G. Walls, G. R. Widmeyer, O. A. El Sawy, “Building an 
information system design theory for vigilant EIS,” Inf. Syst. 
Res., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 36–59, 1992 
[12] S. T. March and G. F. Smith, “Design and natural science 
research on information technology,” Decis. Support Syst., 
vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 251–266, 1995. 
[13] S. Gregor A. R. and Hevner, “Positioning and presenting 
design science research for maximum impact,” Manag. Inf. 
Syst. Q, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 337–356, 2013. 
[14] A. Hevner, “A three-cycle view of design science research,” 
Scand. J. Inform. Syst., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 87–92, 2007. 
[15] A. R. Hevner and S. Chatterjee, Design Science Research in 
Information Systems [retrieved September 2018] from 
http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-1-4419-5653-
8_2, 2010. 
[16] K. Peffers, T. Tuunanen, M. A. Rothenberger, S. Chatterjee, 
“A design science research methodology for information 
systems research,” J. Manag. Inform. Syst., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 
45–77, 2007. 
[17] K. LaCommare and J. Eto, J. Understanding the Cost of 
Power Interruptions to U.S. Electricity Consumers, Berkeley, 
CA: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 2004. 
[18] H. Takeda, P. Veerkamp, H. Yoshikawa, “Modeling design 
process,” AI Magazine, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 37–48, 1990. 
[19] V. S. S. V. M. Sugimura and V. K. Ishigaki, “New web-
usability evaluation method: Scenario-based walkthrough,” 
FUJITSU Sci. Tech. J., vol. 41,  no. 1, pp. 105–114, 2005. 
[20] ESRI Environmental Systems Research Institute, Insights for 
ArcGIS 
[retrieved 
September 
2018] 
http://doc.arcgis.com/en/insights/, 2018. 
[21] California Public Utility Commission, Electric and Fire 
Related 
Fines 
[retrieved 
September 
2018] 
from 
http://cpuc.ca.gov/uploadedFiles/CPUC_Public_Website/Cont
ent/Safety/Electric_and_Fire_Related_Fines.pdf, no date. 
[22] Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, Pennsylvania 
Electric Reliability Report 2017 [retrieved September 2018] 
http://www.puc.pa.gov/General/publications_reports/pdf/Elec
tric_Service_Reliability2017.pdf, July 2018. 
[23] National Interagency Fire Center, Year-to-Date Statistics, 
[retrieved 
September, 
2018] 
https://www.nifc.gov/fireInfo/nfn.htm, September 2018 
[24] Eaton’s Blackout Tracker, Power Outage Annual Report, 
[retrieved July, 2018] https://switchon.eaton.com/blackout-
tracker, 2017. 
[25] State Board of Forestry and Fire Protection, 2018 Strategic 
Fire Plan for California [retrieved September 2018] 
http://cdfdata.fire.ca.gov/pub/fireplan/fpupload/fpppdf1614.p
df, August 2018. 
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-713-9
ENERGY 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

