A Systems Approach to the Smart Grid
Saraansh Dave∗, Mahesh Sooriyabandara∗, Mike Yearworth†
∗Telecommunications Research Lab
Toshiba Research Europe Limited, Bristol, UK
Email: saraansh.dave@toshiba-trel.com; mahesh.sooriyabandara@toshiba-trel.com
†Systems Centre, Faculty of Engineering, University of Bristol, UK
Email: mike.yearworth@bristol.ac.uk
Abstract—This paper presents the case for using a systems
approach to analyse the requirements and behaviours of the
Smart Grid as well as designing relevant solutions. By linking sys-
tems thinking to agent-based modelling, we discuss how a Smart
Grid can be modelled as Multi-Agent Systems by reviewing some
related state-of-the-art research. This paper goes on to outline two
research areas that we are developing, namely, demand response
using dynamic pricing and emergent behaviours of a Smart Grid.
Index Terms—Systems Thinking; Agent-Based Modelling;
Smart Grids;
I. INTRODUCTION
As the world pushes towards a more sustainable and resilient
electrical supply there is a shift towards smart technology to
revolutionise the electricity market. In Europe, one target of
the Strategic Energy Technology (SET) Plan [1] states that by
2020 the grid should be able to integrate up to 35% renewable
electricity effectively matching the demand to the supply. The
European Technology Platforms Strategic Deployment Docu-
ment for Europe’s Electricity Network of the Future [2] quotes
the International Energy Agency in approximating that EUR
500 billion will be invested by 2030 in electric grids. Without
the use of smart technology this expenditure will not be used
to move away from conventional centralised generation and
distribution that is characteristic of todays electricity market.
The smart technology in this context includes but is not limited
to smart-meters, electric-vehicles, distributed storage, micro-
generation, and bidirectional communications networks. Also,
a shift towards distributed generation and grid optimisation
is necessary to combat an increase in energy consumption
and alternative energy sources. Clearly this advancement of
distribution and generation will make the Smart Grid system
and energy industry more complex. Complexity of Smart
Grid could be deﬁned as consisting of components which
are distributed and interconnected with bidirectional ﬂow of
both energy and information. For instance, as the grid gains
autonomous behaviour of its components, it will lead to 2-way
communication between appliances, households, neighbour-
hoods, utilities, substations etc. As a complex socio-technical
system the Smart Grid is likely to exhibit emergent behaviours
suggesting the need for sophisticated theoretical studies now
and mitigating strategies during build out.
The concepts of Systems Engineering are well adapted to
approaching complex problems and could be beneﬁcial in
Smart Grid environments. Further, an agent-based modelling
approach, which is a tool in control systems and simulations,
is one method of estimating or observing any emergent be-
haviour. In this paper, we discuss how system thinking and
agent-based modelling approaches can be used when tackling
the problems of analysing Smart Grid systems, understanding
potential emergent behaviours and developing Smart Grid
functionalities involving multiple agents.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 and Section
3 will discuss the systems thinking approach using relevant
concepts of systems engineering, methods and limitations of
agent-based modelling. Several examples of applications of
agent-based modelling approaches to Smart Grid are discussed
in Section 4. Section 5 identiﬁes key research areas for
applying the systems thinking and ﬁnally formulates the tech-
nological problem surrounding demand response and emergent
properties.
II. SYSTEMS THINKING FOR A SMART GRID
Acknowledging the electricity sector as being complex leads
us to treat it as a ‘wicked’ problem as deﬁned by Rittel
and Webber [3]. Conklin’s adaptation [4] of wicked problem
characteristics is a useful standpoint from which to view Smart
Grid development. Conklin argues that solutions are unique
and must be approached that way; Smart Grid solutions may
vary by country or even by region.
In this context the design and deployment of the Smart
Grid is arguably a wicked problem as a whole and even the
Smart Grid sub-systems can be regarded as wicked due to
their interactive nature. Conklin goes on to say that while
understanding and learning about the problem environment is
important and natural it alone does not lead to a satisfactory
or timely solution. Alongside study and understanding, exper-
imentation and pilot programmes such as those undertaken by
the European Union are necessary. Another way of coping
with the complex problem of a Smart Grid is to simplify or
tame the situation [4]. This approach leads to a solution more
quickly but the conclusion/implementation is short lived as the
wicked problem re-emerges. Even if the technology exists for
some or all of the Smart Grid (e.g., technical architecture as
described in Deployment Priority 1 of the Strategic Deploy-
ment Document [2]) the challenge of integrating it as well as
understanding the consumers’ requirements still remains.
In an early paper, Doyle [5] expresses the lack of controlled
research on the effectiveness of systems thinking. He also
130
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

explains that such research would involve aspects of cognitive
psychology which would be complicated and time consuming.
However such a study would be necessary to determine or
quantify the effect of such an approach. In a more recent paper,
Maani and Maharaj [6] present an experiment they conducted
to determine a relationship between systems thinking and
complex decision making. Whilst the study was small in scale
and could be viewed as subjective, the results showed that the
relationship between systems thinking and complex decision
making is not obvious. Its evidence supported the view that
certain types of systems thinking may be more suited to im-
proving performance. The authors noted that another evident
reason for better performance was the approach taken to a
problem; understanding the system structure and relationships
(e.g., feedback) as well as observing outcomes of decisions
led to better performance.
Taking a systems view encourages a complete solution which
would include aspects such as user requirements and cross-
system integration.
III. MODELLING SMART GRID AS A MULTI-AGENT
SYSTEM
There are various enablers to make the transition from
systems thinking to systems modelling whereby quantitative
and qualitative understanding can improve. Simple tools such
as rich pictures (see Fig. 1) and system maps are used to
understand the constituents of the system. A picture can be
taken to another level of analysis using a system map which
allows boundaries to be deﬁned and system elements to be
placed in the correct domains. More formal tools such as
Uniﬁed Modeling Language (UML) can be useful in describ-
ing systems using standardised structure which can be easily
understood.
Fig. 1.
Component view of a Smart Grid
Agent-based modelling (ABM) can also describe a system
by allowing the user to deﬁne discrete ‘agents’ by their
characteristics and behaviours. Nwana [7] describes agents as
having a combination of the following three characteristics;
ability to cooperate, act autonomously and the ability to learn.
The speciﬁc combinations of these characteristics depends on
the function of the agent. The contextual environment for the
agents to act in can also be deﬁned. Setting up a simulation in
this style is a bottom-up approach as the constituent elements
have deﬁned behaviours whilst the system behaviour emerges
from the interactions of the constituent agents. This allows
emergent properties of a system to become apparent which
may or may not have been intuitive.
Whilst ABM creates a useful framework for development
of constitutive system elements it is through Multi-Agent
Systems (MAS) that agent interactions can be focused on.
It is due to these interactions that emergent behaviour arises.
Gabbai et al. [8] give a good deﬁnition for MAS: “a collection
of autonomous, social actors where, through local interac-
tion and social communication, emergent global behaviour
occurs.”
Even agents with simple functions can elicit complex
emergent behaviour through their interactions [9]. Albiero et
al. [10] apply simple behavioural rules to multiple agents to
create collective behaviour which would be difﬁcult to produce
using an algorithmic approach. Researchers in various ﬁelds
have used ABM as a means to simulate intelligence with
relative success. This paper suggests MAS as an appropriate
agent approach for describing and investigating the Smart Grid
domain.
There is a wide variety of software and tools to create ABMs
and the remainder of this section contains a brief overview
of some popular platforms (NetLogo, MATLAB, SWARM,
MASON, JADE).
For small scale ABMs the most suitable platforms include
MATLAB [11] and NetLogo [12]. Railsback et al. [13] recom-
mend NetLogo as a user-friendly tool with a large amount of
documentation and examples for beginners. Their study [13]
shows that even though NetLogo is simple to program and
run it can be applied to create sophisticated simulations for a
range of domains (see the NetLogo website for examples [12]).
However its lack of access to algorithms used by its commands
makes reproducibility difﬁcult which can deter some users.
For larger and possibly collaborative simulations it is ad-
visable to use a lower-language simulation tool for exam-
ple, SWARM, MASON and JADE. SWARM [14] has an
active user group and comes in JAVA and Objective-C based
platforms. Railsback et al. [13] appreciate its well organised
structure but point out that it can be a challenging environment
for beginners.
MASON [15] is comparable to SWARM in terms of scale
and was written with speciﬁc requirements in mind. Luke et
al. [15] explain that they required an environment which was
able to; run on different operating systems, stop mid-run, have
a separate visualization interface and be easily embedded into
larger libraries.
The Java Agent Development Framework (JADE) [16]
is a popular tool within research carried out in the Smart
Grid domain as it is compliant with the standards set by
the Foundation for Intelligent Physical Agents (FIPA). FIPA
(http://www.ﬁpa.org/) was created as the eleventh standards
committee for the IEEE in 2005 and seeks to promote inter-
operations of agents and their services.
The decision on which platform to use for ABM or MAS
131
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

modelling is dependent on several factors including; program-
ming experience of the user, complexity of the model required,
portability and the need for collaborative working. For smaller
models where a concept is being trialled or a quick prototype is
required, NetLogo would be most suited for all types of users.
If creating larger, more complex models then a low language
platform like JADE might be more appropriate. As JADE has
been used in various research papers and is FIPA compliant it
is the most appropriate for MAS within the Smart Grid.
IV. APPLICATIONS OF AGENTS IN THE SMART GRID
A Smart Grid can be viewed as a system containing various
agents. The actual agents used and their characteristics can
vary depending on what area is being researched or analysed.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
has written a report entitled ‘NIST Framework and Roadmap
for Smart Grid Interoperability Standards, Release 1.0’ [17]
which has a useful picture depicting the actors and domains
in a smart grid as shown in Fig. 2. This is an overview of
domains that could exist in a smart grid and is a good starting
point to understand the various stakeholders that exist in this
environment.
Fig. 2.
NIST domains and actors for a Smart Grid [17]
Agent-based designs for Smart Grids have been imple-
mented with Ghosn et al. [18] simulating a self-healing
network using JADE. In this example, six agent types were
used:
1) Device Agents
2) Distributed Energy Resource (DER) Agents
3) Consumer Agents
4) Intelligent Prevention Control Agents
5) Intelligent Response Control Agents
6) GUI Agents
These agents were chosen as the authors were primarily
concerned with self-healing problems associated with an in-
telligent grid.
Pipattanasomporn et al. [19] discuss a simulation using four
agents (listed below) as they focus on controlling a distributed
grid as opposed to solely analysing fault ﬁnding/ﬁxing:
1) Control Agent
2) DER Agent
3) User Agent
4) Database Agent
The paper focuses on the responsibilities of the control, user
and database agents. As well as discussing the theory behind
agent functions, they go on to develop a simulation environ-
ment to test the agent-based system. The MATLAB/Simulink
environment was used to create a simulated circuit which inter-
faces via Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) connections to
the multi-agent system. This demonstrates the capability that
exists whereby novel agent-control models can be simulated
in a circuit under various conditions (e.g., islanding).
Karnouskos and Holanda [20] give their appliance agents
consumption proﬁles that are based on a survey done by
the US Department of Energy. This allows simulation to be
based on known consumption patterns to test validity of agent-
based control systems. This type of analysis is non-trivial and
pivotal to increase conﬁdence in new control philosophies
that are required for the future. As the authors state, their
agent data is not sensitive enough to differentiate between
demand changes through the year, which could be dependent
on weather, holidays etc. Enhancements of these simulations
can be used to predict possible emergent behaviours that could
arise as the grid modernises.
A futuristic paper by Galus and Andersson [21] develops
the idea of energy hubs [22] by speciﬁcally looking at the
recharging of Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEV). The
problem space consists of consumers driving to a workplace
and plugging their cars in for charging. Obviously without
any control this would lead to a surge in power demand. The
authors suggest using a customer preference value (which is
unique for each consumer) to indicate how much consumers
are willing to pay for electricity. The customer preference
value allows the agent to establish the individuals’ perceived
beneﬁt of energy and so will start to buy energy only when
this is reﬂected in the price.
The European Union and various partners are involved in
a number of ﬁeld trials in different countries. Each trial has
a set objective and timeline associated with it. The aim of
running ﬁeld trials is to develop and test capability that can
be used in the Smart Grid. Results are then analysed and
published by the partners. Two such trials are discussed;
the SmartHouse/SmartGrid (SHSG) project and the Active
Distribution networks with full integration of Demand and
distributed energy Resources (ADDRESS) project.
The
European
Union
SHSG
Field
Trials
were
held
in
three
different
countries
(http://www.smarthouse-
smartgrid.eu/index.php?id=43)
and
focused
on
different
challenges:
1) The Netherlands (Hoogkerk)-This trial has twenty-ﬁve
interconnected houses which together create a virtual
power plant through various devices including smart
meters, heat pumps, hybrid vehicles and photo-voltaics.
The trial uses agent-based control software to negotiate
cheaper power and maximise beneﬁts for the consumers.
A major objective of this trial is matching demand and
supply from various resources on a mass-scale.
132
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

2) Germany (Mannheim)-This trial is focused on ﬂexible
electricity prices where customers can specify their
requirements for device operation through a customer
portal.
3) Greece (Meltemi)-This trial involves ten cottages in the
Meltemi Camp which are predominantly used in the
summer. Critical grid operations like islanding and load
shedding are being trialled at this small scale.
Agent-based controllers were utilised in Hoogkerk and
Meltemi to provide the microgrid with intelligence.
ADDRESS is a project that is founded by the European
Commission under the 7th Framework Programme. ADDRESS
(http://www.addressfp7.org) focuses on developing and vali-
dating solutions to enable active demand. The project started
in June 2008 and is planned to continue for four years until
2012. It aims to develop technical solutions at the consumer
and power system level to enable active demand. The ﬁrst
project results from 2009 focus on country-speciﬁc surveys,
scenario (or use case) approaches and conceptual architecture
for a smart grid [23]. The survey found the following:
1) The rise in Renewable Energy Sources (RES) is expected
to increase the need for Active Demand (AD) services.
2) Energy retailers will be the key agents to deploy AD.
The retail market is still linked to the distribution busi-
ness but there are no signiﬁcant barriers to decoupling
these two functions.
3) Smart meters will be a key enabler for AD development.
Individual country approaches to smart meters broadly
fall into three categories; one where the regulator has
deﬁned standards, one where the private sector has been
left to incentivize smart meters, and one where no
decision has been made.
4) The low level voltage networks in most European coun-
tries have the ability to accommodate the ADDRESS
concepts.
The ﬁrst conceptual architecture to emerge from AD-
DRESS [23] consists of four main sections as shown in Fig.
3:
1) Aggregators
2) Energy Box - interface between aggregator and the
consumer
3) Distribution System Operators
4) Markets and Contracts
Fig. 3.
ADDRESS conceptual architecture [23]
Within this architecture, the aggregators perform an impor-
tant function as the negotiator between the other sections. The
aggregator will collect signals from the market and power
suppliers and compare it to data from consumers. Real time
price signals and optimisation techniques will be used to meet
consumer demand. Clearly an agent-based approach following
principles as described by a number of research papers for ex-
ample Dimeas and Hatziargyriou [24] and Rahman et al. [25]
would be suited to this function.
These examples show a variety of agents that can be used
to simulate or portray the research challenge from various
perspectives. As current trials are utilising aspects of agent-
based methods this should aid in increasing conﬁdence of such
systems within industry.
V. RESEARCH AREAS
Agent-based methods can be used to create speciﬁc techni-
cal solutions as well as understand the interactions of various
elements. The authors are currently working on two areas:
Speciﬁc Agent Based Solutions: Various Smart Grid re-
searchers and organisations are using agents to create solutions
for speciﬁc Smart Grid applications. The authors are currently
developing agent methods to address demand response using
dynamic pricing. Game theory will be used as the basis to
achieve desired response patterns, for example; a group of
households collaborating to reduce their collective peak to
average ratio and hence gain a favourable tariff.
Emergent Properties of the Smart Grid: A Smart Grid
can be viewed as a system of systems where each system
is comprised of a diverse set of passive and active system
components; belonging to various stakeholders, that interact
with each other to provide a type of service or function. On the
distribution side, the low voltage electricity system (from super
grid side), energy management systems (e.g. home, building,
factory etc), billing systems, micro generation systems and
electric vehicle charging systems could be some examples
of such systems. Fig. 4 shows the Smart Grid comprising
of four systems; Generation, Distribution, Transmission and
Consumer. The consumer system is then broken down into a
further 5 constituent systems.
Fig. 4.
A system view of the Smart Grid with the Consumer sub-system.
133
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

The design of such systems is an unprecedented task which
presents many challenging research and engineering questions.
Continuing with the idea of systems within systems, emergent
properties resulting from the interaction of such components
have not been investigated. The authors propose to undertake
research whereby the Smart Grid is analysed from a top-
down as well as socio-technical perspective with the aim of
discovering emergent behaviour.
VI. CONCLUSION
Systems thinking helps to increase the understanding of
interfaces and challenges in developing a resilient Smart Grid.
Complex problems have been addressed using this framework
in a variety of ﬁelds however there has been no explicit
application to Smart Grids. As discussed, the use of agent-
based models is suited to both analyses of the system as
well as a tool to create practical solutions. Understanding
the constituents of this complex system and simulating their
collective presence will allow for the design of a Smart
Grid with desirable emergent properties. From a commercial
perspective this will also provide a rational focus on creating
new products and services. Other future research work to be
carried out by the authors will be to focus on using dynamic
pricing as a tool for demand management. The aim is to model
households and the utilities as agents with underlying game-
theoretic behaviour. The results will determine the market
conditions required and behaviour expectancy of households
to produce effective demand management.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by the EPSRC funded IDC in Sys-
tems (EP/G037353/1) and Toshiba Research Europe Limited.
REFERENCES
[1] European Commission, “A Technology Road Map for the Communi-
cation on Investing in the Development of Low Carbon Technologies
(SET-Plan),” 2009.
[2] European Commission, “European Technolgy Platform: Strategic De-
ployment Document for Europe’s Electricity Networks of the Future,”
2010.
[3] H. W. J. Rittel and M. M. Webber, “Dilemmas in a general theory of
planning,” Policy Sciences, vol. 4, pp. 155–169, June 1973.
[4] J. Conklin, Dialogue Mapping: Building Shared Understanding of
Wicked Problems, ch. 1. John Wiley & Sons, 2001.
[5] J. K. Doyle, “The cognitive psychology of systems thinking,” System
Dynamics Review, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 253–265, 1997.
[6] K. E. Maani and V. Maharaj, “Links between systems thinking and
complex decision making,” System Dynamics Review, vol. 20, no. 1,
pp. 21–48, 2004.
[7] H. S. Nwana, “Software agents : an overview,” The Knowledge Engi-
neering Review, vol. 11:3, pp. 205–244, 1996.
[8] J. M. E. Gabbai, H. Yin, W. A. Wright, and N. M. Allinson, “Self-
Organization, Emergence and Multi-Agent Systems,” in 2005 IEEE
International Conference on Neural Networks and Brain, pp. 1858–
1863, 2005.
[9] C. M. Macal and M. J. North, “Tutorial on Agent-Based Modeling and
Simulation,” in 2005 Winter Simulation Conference (M. E. Kuhl, N. M.
Steiger, F. B. Armstrong, and J. A. Joines, eds.), (Orlando), pp. 2–15,
2005.
[10] F. H. P. Fitzek, M. D. Katz, F. Albiero, F. Fitzek, and M. Katz,
Introduction to NetLogo, pp. 579–602. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands,
2007.
[11] “Matlab at http://www.mathworks.co.uk/,”
[12] U. Wilensky, “Netlogo. http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/,” 1999.
[13] S. F. Railsback, S. L. Lytinen, and S. K. Jackson, “Agent-based
Simulation Platforms: Review and Development Recommendations,”
Simulation, vol. 82, pp. 609–623, Sept. 2006.
[14] P. Johnson and A. Lancester, “Swarm user guide: Swarm development
group,” 2000.
[15] S. Luke, C. Ciofﬁ-Revilla, L. Panait, K. Sullivan, and G. Balan,
“MASON: A Multiagent Simulation Environment,” Simulation, vol. 81,
pp. 517–527, July 2005.
[16] “Java agent development framework (jade) at http://jade.tilab.com/,”
[17] “NIST Framework and Roadmap for Smart Grid Interoperability Stan-
dards , Release 1.0. United States National Institute of Standards and
Technology,” 2010.
[18] S. B. Ghosn, P. Ranganathan, S. Salem, J. Tang, D. Loegering, and
K. E, “Agent-oriented Designs for a Self Healing Smart Grid,” IEEE,
pp. 461–466, 2010.
[19] M. Pipattanasomporn, H. Feroze, and S. Rahman, “Multi-agent systems
in a distributed smart grid: Design and implementation,” 2009 IEEE/PES
Power Systems Conference and Exposition, pp. 1–8, Mar. 2009.
[20] S. Karnouskos and T. N. D. Holanda, “Simulation of a Smart Grid City
with Software Agents,” 2009 Third UKSim European Symposium on
Computer Modeling and Simulation, pp. 424–429, 2009.
[21] M. D. Galus and G. Andersson, “Demand Management of Grid Con-
nected Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicles ( PHEV ),” in IEEE Energy
2030, (Atlanta), 2008.
[22] M. Geidl, G. Koeppel, P. Favre-Perrod, B. Klockl, G. Andersson, and
K. Frohlich, “Energy Hubs for the Future,” IEEE Power & Energy
Magazine, no. January/February, pp. 24–30, 2007.
[23] E. Peeters, R. Belhomme, C. Batlle, F. Bouffard, S. Karkkainen, D. Six,
and M. Hommelberg, “ADDRESS: scenarios and architecture for ac-
tive demand development in the smart grids of the future,” in 20th
International Conference on Electricity Distribution, no. 0406, (Prague),
pp. 406–406, CIRED, 2009.
[24] A. Dimeas and N. Hatziargyriou, “A MAS Architecture for Microgrids
Control,” Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on, Intelli-
gent Systems Application to Power Systems, pp. 402–406, 2005.
[25] S. Rahman, M. Pipattanasomporn, and Y. Teklu, “Intelligent Distributed
Autonomous Power Systems (IDAPS),” 2007 IEEE Power Engineering
Society General Meeting, pp. 1–8, June 2007.
134
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

