Fostering Energy Awareness in Residential Homes
using Mobile Devices
Florian Reinhart∗, Kevin Schlieper∗, Michael Kugler∗, Elisabeth Andr´e∗, Masood Masoodian† and Bill Rogers†
∗Human Centered Multimedia
Augsburg University
Email: andre@informatik.uni-augsburg.de
†Department of Computer Science
The University of Waikato
Email: {masood, coms0108}@waikato.ac.nz
Abstract—There is considerable global effort being made towards
identifying ways of reducing energy consumption to cope with
growing demands. Although there is potential for energy saving
in many sectors, our focus is on reducing energy consumption in
residential homes. We have developed a system which combines
home automation and energy usage monitoring technologies. The
system offers a range of tools designed for mobile devices to
assist users with monitoring their energy usage and provides
mechanisms for setting up and controlling home appliances to
conserve energy. In this paper, we describe our system and a
user study we have conducted to evaluate its effectiveness. The
ﬁndings of the study show the potential beneﬁts of this type of
mobile technology.
Keywords–Ecological feedback technologies; user awareness of
energy consumption; user interfaces; information visualization.
I.
INTRODUCTION
People require energy every day, for heating their water,
for cooking their food, for cooling their houses, etc. Energy
is used not only for basic human needs, but also for making
people’s lives more enjoyable and comfortable. Since we are
using more and more energy for maintaining our life styles,
the worldwide energy demand is steadily growing. In general,
there are two trends that affect the energy supply industry:
growing demand and sustainable generation. While worldwide
energy consumption has been increasing over the past few
decades [1], so has our capability and willingness to generate
energy in a sustainable manner using renewable sources like
solar or wind energy. For instance, in the United States alone
the number of homes with photovoltaic installations grew by
40% in 2009 and this trend is likely to continue [2]. Although
using renewable energy reduces the output of greenhouse
gasses [3], these sources of energy are less reliable in terms of
generation, and therefore require better management in terms
of consumption.
Statistics show that about one-third (29%) of the energy
used in the European Union [4] is consumed by residential
homes (see Figure 1), which is very similar to other developed
regions. Although, there are other sectors like industry which
consume a lot of energy, private households offer a great
potential for saving energy.
29%
39%
29%
3%
Households
Industry
Services
Transport
Figure 1: Electricity usage in the European Union
Here, we propose two strategies for conserving energy in
private households. The ﬁrst strategy is to use an automated
system that controls home appliances, so that energy-wasting
behavior by users can be partly mitigated (e.g., automatically
turning off the heating when windows are left open). The
second strategy is to use mobile technology to assist residents
to save energy and encourage them to change their energy
consumption behavior. To do this, however, the users must
ﬁrst know how they can improve their usage behavior, and one
prerequisite for this is to be are aware of how much energy
they are consuming.
In general, the process of a non-automated approach to
energy saving in private households can be broken down
into two main parts. First, the residents must identify saving
potentials in their household, which requires them to be
aware of the energy consumption of individual appliances.
Second, once they know how and where energy is actually
being used, they need to be assisted and persuaded to change
their behavior to reduce their energy usage. Unfortunately,
however, there are some challenges in achieving both of these
two parts. In relation to the ﬁrst part, usually people know
their overall energy consumption, because that is what their
energy providers bill them for. Nevertheless, ﬁnding out how
much energy each device actually uses or how much of
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

the overall consumption each individual person in a house
has consumed, is very difﬁcult. As challenging as solving
this essentially technical problem may be, overcoming the
challenge of changing people’s behavior to save energy while
still living a comfortable life is even harder.
In this paper, we introduce a system, called Ubiquitous
Smart Energy Management (USEM), which not only provides
an automated solution for reduction of electricity usage, but
also caters for the non-automated approach by providing
detailed energy consumption information to users, and incorpo-
rates mobile tools to assist and encourage users to change their
energy consumption behavior. The focus of this paper is mainly
on these non-automated components of USEM designed for
mobile devices.
We start this paper with a review of related literature on
technologies for energy saving in general (Section II), and at
residential homes in particular (Section III). We then present
the mobile user interface components of USEM (Section IV),
and discuss a laboratory-based study we have conducted to
evaluate the usability of these mobile tools (Section V). Finally,
we brieﬂy provide the results of an analysis of the capabilities
of USEM against existing guidelines for the design of per-
suasive technology (Section VI), and draw some conclusions
(Section VII).
II.
ENCOURAGING ENERGY SAVING
Although one might assume that people would naturally be
inclined to save energy, not only because this is good for the
environment, but also because it leads to saving money, this
does not always seem to be the case. Therefore, in recent
years several technologies have been proposed to encourage
energy saving by fostering awareness of energy use. These
technologies can be categorised into those that utilize games
or social media, and those that rely on ambient devices.
A. Games and Social Media
Several systems have been developed to encourage people
to conserve energy and increase their energy use awareness
through games and social media. The Power Explorer [5]
game tries to help teenagers save energy. This mobile phone
game takes into account the changes in energy consumption
at home by the players. There are different game elements:
habitat, pile and duels. The habitat shows the user’s avatar in
a virtual climate environment, in which energy usage causes
CO2 clouds to appear, which is bad for the avatar. In the
pile view, players can see how they are ranked compared to
other players, and in the duels players compete directly against
each other. The goal of the duels is to increase the energy
awareness about the appliances, since players have to adjust
their household energy consumption to win. A study of Power
Explorer showed that a group players consumed about 20%
less energy than a reference group of non-players.
Other research has focused on integration of home energy
feedback into social networks. For instance, Mankoff and col-
leagues [6] demonstrated integration of energy usage feedback
to the MySpace social network to motivate people to conserve
energy. Similarly, Foster and colleagues [7] have developed a
Facebook application, and have shown in a study that energy
consumption can be reduced through social encouragement
and competition. Petkov and colleagues [8] expand the idea
of social comparison with their social application EnergyWiz
in which users can compare their energy usage with their own
history and that of others.
Midden and Ham [9], on the other hand, performed a
laboratory-based experiment in which participants could save
energy while using a simulated washing machine. This study
showed that social feedback provided by an embodied agent
was more effective than just factual feedback about the energy
savings made.
These types of social network related systems rely on
surveillance and self-monitoring techniques. However, they
generally only provide feedback at the household level and
not at the individual user’s level.
B. Ambient Devices
Kim and colleagues [10] outline design requirements for
ambient devices to create effective persuasion. In a study
they identify ten stages from raising awareness to behavior
change and the maintenance of behavioral changes. Based on
their ﬁndings, they then propose several persuasion methods
including virtual and visually attractive rewards, personalized
and tailored feedback, self-monitoring, and use of social media
to compare one’s own performance with others.
The Energy AWARE Clock [11] is an example of an
ambient device that visualizes current and past energy usage
of a household. The three design principles of complexity,
visibility and accessibility are used to reduce the complexity
of consumption data, make visible “hidden” or not directly
obvious electricity consumers, and have the consumption data
easily accessible. A three month user study of nine households
showed that the users developed a better awareness of their
energy use, and thought about changing their behavior to save
energy.
Other ambient devices have been developed to help users
save other resources such as water. Examples of these include
UpStream [12] and Shower Calendar [13]. Studies of these
systems have shown that these systems lead to reduction in
water consumption.
Ham and colleagues [19] conducted a study to see if ambient
technology has the capability of persuading people subcon-
sciously. In this study, the participants were asked to rate the
energy usage of three devices. The three groups of participants
either received supraliminal feedback (150 ms), subliminal
feedback (25 ms) or no feedback at all on their given answers.
The feedback was given in the form of smiley faces directly
after rating the consumption of a device. The results indicated
that both groups with feedback gave more correct answers on
average than the group without any feedback. Furthermore,
the subliminal feedback group gave comparable answers to the
supraliminal feedback group, and they also stated that they had
not consciously seen any feedback.
III.
ENERGY SAVING AT HOME
Technologies available to residential users to assist them
with saving energy at home can be divided into two broad
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

TABLE I: Comparison of existing energy usage monitoring and home automation systems
Energy usage monitoring
Controlling appliances
Manual task scheduling
Automatic task scheduling
Support for off-grid renewable energy
Support for off-the-shelf devices
Ease of installation
Extensibility
Solar Home [14]
yes
yes
no
no
yes
yes
difﬁcult
no
AIM [15]
yes
yes
yes
no
no
no
difﬁcult
no
Energy Aware Smart Home [16]
yes
no
no
no
no
no
moderate
no
Intel Home Energy Management [17]
yes
yes
yes
no
no
yes
easy
yes
HESS [18]
yes
yes
no
no
no
yes
difﬁcult
no
categories: energy use measurement and home automation
systems.
Energy use measurement systems are able to record the
energy usage for either individual home appliances or the
entire household. Energy consumption statistics can then be
generated and analyzed by the user to identify where energy
savings could be made. Examples of such systems are Current
Cost [20], the Energy Detective [21] and Wattson [22]. How-
ever, these systems only show users how much energy they
have consumed in the past, and at best make some general
suggestions about how to reduce energy usage in the future.
These types of systems cannot actively control appliances to
put energy saving tips into practice.
Home automation systems, on the other hand, can actively
control energy consuming devices in a household, usually
using a range of sensors that react to their environment (e.g., an
air-conditioning system can be automatically switched on/off
based on temperature sensor data). Examples of such systems
include HomeMatic [23], Gira [24] and Intellihome [25]. These
types of system however are not very widely used.
One of the reasons why home automation systems are not
used is because there are currently no universally adopted
standards for home automation. Although standards such as
KNX [26] exist, the majority of home appliances do not
conform to them. Without these standards, controlling off-
the-shelf devices is usually limited to switching them on/off.
Although this can be sufﬁcient for controlling simple devices
(e.g., lights), it is not useful for controlling more complex
appliances (e.g., a washing machine).
There are several energy related prototype systems for
residential homes that aim to deal with these problems. These
system provide either or both of home automation and energy
usage monitoring capabilities. Table I gives a summary of the
capabilities and limitations of these systems against a number
of important criteria. As can be seen, none of the systems
satisﬁes all the identiﬁed requirements.
IV.
USEM PROTOTYPE SYSTEM
We have developed USEM [27] to overcome some of the
limitations of the existing systems, as summarized in the
previous section. Like some of these systems, USEM supports
residential users in conserving energy by combining the func-
tionalities of home automation and energy usage monitoring
systems.
To make people aware of their energy usage, USEM pro-
vides detailed statistics about the household’s past energy
consumption. For example, the overall consumption can be
displayed for individual rooms, devices, or occupants of the
house. These statistics allow the users to analyse their con-
sumption history and, thus, identify saving potentials. In some
cases USEM might also be able to suggest actions that would
lead to a decrease of energy consumption. Furthermore, USEM
supports the user to put theoretical energy saving ideas into
practice. For instance, the user can schedule appliances to run
when varying energy rates are the cheapest, or USEM can
switch off devices when they are not needed (e.g., turning off
the printer whenever the PC is switched off). By providing an
intelligent scheduling for energy consuming tasks USEM is
also able to use energy when it is available in off-grid cases
(e.g., when the solar panels are generating electricity). Using a
combination of these techniques USEM attempts to ensure that
energy usage peaks are avoided, maximum renewable energy
is used when available, and overall power usage reduced in an
intelligent manner without necessarily reducing comfort levels.
To interact with USEM we have developed three differ-
ent user interfaces (1) a web interface for performing more
complex tasks such as managing manual and automatic task
scheduling, (2) a tablet interface acting as a control unit that
could be used from around the house, and (3) a mobile phone
interface that can be used to interact with USEM while on the
go.
The web interface has not speciﬁcally been tailored towards
mobile technology. As mentioned, it provides higher-level
access to the functionality of the system, and allows conﬁgura-
tion, scheduling, and visualization of relevant information. The
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Figure 2: Home screen of the tablet interface of USEM
web interface, along with the more intelligent components of
USEM required for task scheduling, etc. have been discussed
elsewhere [28]. The focus of this paper, on the other hand, is
on the tablet and mobile phone components of USEM.
A. Tablet Interface
The tablet interface acts as a control and access unit for
USEM. Although the current application has been developed
for an Apple iPad, it is envisaged that it could also in the future
be installed in ﬂat-panel displays incorporated into furniture,
picture frames or walls to act as an ambient device interface.
Figure 2 shows the home screen of the tablet interface
which is visible when the device is not being controlled by
the user. This allows the users to have a constant view of
the most important information about their household, which
encourages them to monitor their energy use. The home screen
is customizable with several widgets to display information
such as a list of currently running devices, up-to-date energy
prices when available, etc. This screen also shows the energy
usage target set by the user, the current usage level, to motivate
the user to keep their usage below their set target. If the target
is being threatened, for instance when the user turns on a
device, they get a warning from the system giving them the
option of turning off a device which is not being used (if any)
or not going ahead with their scheduled activity.
This interface also allows users to view their energy con-
sumption information over the past year, month, or day.
Figure 3 illustrates one of the energy usage visualization. This
information can be viewed in several different chart formats,
and in various categories such as for the entire house, different
rooms, all users, different users, all devices, different category
of devices, etc. This is another important element of the user
interface in terms of encouraging energy usage awareness.
Furthermore, the tablet interface gives energy saving recom-
mendations, based on the past and current energy consumption
data, to help users reduce their energy use. Figure 4 presents an
example energy saving tips screen. On this screen the system
suggests actions that would decrease the household’s energy
Figure 3: Usage information screen of the tablet interface
showing a pie chart
Figure 4: Energy saving recommendations and their
consequences if applied
consumption, as well as calculating the savings that could be
made if the advice is followed.
B. Mobile Phone Interface
The mobile phone interface, developed for Apple iPhone,
can be used to retrieve the status of home appliances or to
interact with them remotely. It also notiﬁes the user about
energy usage events that occur while the user is away (e.g.,
a scheduled task cannot be undertaken because there is not
enough renewable energy available). In such cases, the mobile
phone interface provides suggestions (Figure 5) about how the
problem could be resolved and gives the user the opportunity
to decide what to do (e.g., cancel a scheduled task, or turn off
another device).
Of course, the mobile phone interface can also be useful
while the user is at home. For instance, it can be used
to remotely access any of the devices connected to USEM
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Figure 5: Event notiﬁcation screen of the mobile phone
interface
Figure 6: USEM devices (left) and new device set-up (right)
screens of the mobile phone interface
(Figure 6, left). Users can also directly interact with home
appliances by scanning the unique barcode that is attached to
each device when they are added to USEM. For example, this
allows creating a new task for the washing machine right after
the user has put the laundry into the machine. The mobile
phone application also simpliﬁes the initial set-up procedure
for new devices, by mapping the barcode tags attached to
power sockets with those of devices connected to them through
a simple scanning process (Figure 6, right).
V.
USER STUDY OF USEM
We conducted a user study to evaluate the usefulness of
USEM and gauge if people would actually use a system like
USEM to save energy if they had access to it. In the following
sections, we describe this study and discuss some of its main
ﬁndings.
Figure 7: The set-up used for the user evaluation
A. Methodology
The study was conducted at a usability lab, where the
participants performed a series of tasks using the web, tablet,
and mobile phone interfaces. To do the tasks the participants
were provided with a laptop, an iPhone, an iPad, and model
of a dryer and a computer as two home appliances (each with
a barcode attached), as shown in Figure 7. We also attached
a barcode to a power socket to make it recognizable by the
mobile phone interface of USEM.
Each session started with a tutorial, which included some
sample tasks similar to the actual tasks that the participants
performed after the tutorial. The study session took about an
hour in total, and was divided into three parts covering the
use of the three interfaces of USEM. The sessions started
with the web interface, as this was the most general part of
the system and gave the user a comprehensive overview of
USEM (this part of the study is not relevant to this paper and
is not discussed here). This was followed by tasks that users
performed using the mobile phone and tablet interfaces.
At the end of each task the participants answered several
questions related to the task and the tool they had just used.
Further, at the end of the session the participants completed
a ﬁnal questionnaire covering some questions about the users’
overall impression of USEM.
B. Study Participants
Twenty participants took part in this study. They were
between 20 and 62 years old, with an average age of 35.
Five of them were female and 15 male; 11 were students, two
researchers, two managers, two ofﬁce administrators and one
housewife. Thirteen of the participants (65%) had previous
experience using a multi-touch screen; 11 (55%) owned a
smartphone and 4 (20%) owned a tablet device. All of the
participants used a computer daily, none had any previous
knowledge of USEM. Table II shows a summary of the
participants’ demographic data.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

TABLE II: Demographic of the study participants
No. of Participants
Percentage
Gender
Male
15
75.00 %
Female
5
25.00 %
Occupation
Student
11
55.00 %
Researcher
2
10.00 %
Other
7
35.00 %
Experience
Multi-touch screen
13
65.00 %
Daily PC usage
20
100.00 %
Own device
Smartphone
11
55.00 %
Tablet
4
20.00 %
Figure 8: Usage information screen of the tablet interface
showing a slopegraph
C. Study Tasks
As mentioned earlier, the study participants had to perform
speciﬁc tasks using each of the different USEM mobile device
interfaces. We asked the user to perform the following tasks
on the mobile phone:
1)
Adding a new home appliance to USEM.
2)
Controlling a home appliance remotely.
3)
Creating a new scheduled task to let USEM execute it
at a later time.
4)
Sending users a demo notiﬁcation and asking them to
react accordingly.
The participants then performed the following tasks using
the tablet interface:
1)
Controlling a home appliance remotely.
2)
Exploring energy consumption statistics using a bar
chart visualization.
3)
Exploring energy consumption statistics using a pie
chart visualization.
4)
Exploring energy consumption statistics using a slope-
graph visualization.
Figure 8 shows an example of type of slopegraph [29], Park
[30] used in this study.
D. Task Questionnaires
As mentioned earlier, after the completion of each task
the participants were asked to answer a questionnaire. Two
questions were common to all the task questionnaires. These
are:
1)
How easy was it to perform this task?
2)
How useful would it be to have this
functionality?
The participants answered these questions using a Likert
scale of 1-7, with 1 being the least positive and 7 the most
positive.
E. Final Questionnaire
To evaluate the participants’ overall impression of USEM
we asked them the following questions as part of a ﬁnal
questionnaire:
1)
How likely do you think it would be that you would
decrease your energy consumption with the help of the
visualizations on the iPad?
2)
Would you want visualizations like on the iPad to be a
permanent part of your home?
3)
How often would you use your mobile phone to control
your appliances remotely while you are away from
home?
4)
How often would you like to be notiﬁed on your mobile
phone about what is going on in your household in
terms of energy consumption?
5)
Would you adapt your daily routine in order to use more
renewable energy? (e.g., start cooking dinner an hour
later?)
6)
How useful do you ﬁnd the overall system with regard
to efﬁcient energy usage?
F. Study Results
1) Results for the mobile phone interface: Figure 9 provides
a summary of the average ratings given by the study partici-
pants for each of the two questionnaire questions for each of
the 4 tasks performed using the mobile phone interface. As the
results show, the participants generally found the tasks easy to
perform, and the functionality provided by the interface useful.
Task 3 was the only task that was considered as being
slightly more challenging than the other tasks. However, the
functionality needed to perform this task was still rated as
being useful. It is also important to note that this task was the
most abstract task, which relied on the intelligent scheduling
components of USEM.
2) Results for the tablet interface: Figure 10 shows a
summary of the average ratings given by the study participants
for each of the two questionnaire questions for each of the 4
tasks performed using the tablet interface. Since the difﬁculty
of the tasks steadily increased, the ease-of-use rating for the
tasks decreased slightly from Task 1 to Task 4.
However, in general all task have been rated as easy to
perform with average ratings ranging from 6.30 to 6.75. The
ratings given to the usefulness of the functionality provided
by the tablet interface for performing each of the tasks has a
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
Task 4
Ease of use
Usefulness
Figure 9: The average ratings given by the participants for
the tasks performed using the mobile phone interface
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
Task 4
Ease of use
Usefulness
Figure 10: The average ratings given by the participants for
the tasks performed using the tablet interface
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Q6
Figure 11: The average ratings given by the participants for
the questions of the ﬁnal questionnaire
similar trend to the difﬁculty of the tasks. Once again, overall
the participants found the functionality provided very useful.
3) Results of the ﬁnal questionnaire: The results of the ﬁnal
questionnaire are summarized in Figure 11. Perhaps the most
important ﬁnding we can conclude from the ﬁnal questionnaire
is that the participants believe that USEM would be useful in
helping them use energy more efﬁciently (Question 6). It is
also important to note that the participants believe they would
change their daily routines in order to use more renewable
energy (Question 5).
Functional
Roles
Tool
capabilities
• Target behavior easier to achieve
• Process leading people
• Motivating calculations/measurements
Medium
experiences
• Cause-and-effect relationships
• Motivating experiences
• Rehearsing of behaviors
Social Actor
relationships
• Rewards through positive feeback
• Deﬁne target behavior
• Social support
Figure 12: The roles computer technology can play in
persuasive context, as deﬁned by Fogg [32]
The following is a summary of some of the main points
made by the study participants in their comments to questions
of the ﬁnal questionnaire.
•
Many of the participants stated that they would like
to be able to determine what events they should be
notiﬁed about. They feared that they would get annoyed
or distracted by notiﬁcations if they did not have some
control over the notiﬁcations sent to their mobile phone.
•
Most of the participants especially liked the possibility
of controlling all the appliances using a single interface,
rather than using a variety of different user interfaces
for controlling different home appliances.
•
The participants conﬁrmed that they do not know how
much energy each of their appliances uses. They rate
their energy usage awareness as relatively low. They
liked the energy usage visualizations provided by US-
EM, and thought that these would assist them to better
understand the power usage of their appliances.
•
Several participants stated that they do not have a good
understanding of the kWh measurement unit. Instead
they would prefer some kind of visualization, which is
easier to understand and does not require any techni-
cal knowledge. They also suggested to display dollar
amounts, and setting the saving goal in dollars as well.
•
One participant commented that he would like rec-
ommendations for a saving goal. In this participant’s
opinion, it is difﬁcult to set a saving goal, since it might
be hard to determine a realistic energy consumption
limit. So, the system could provide a recommendation
for a feasible saving goal based on previous usage data.
VI.
PERSUASIVE ASPECTS OF USEM
It is important to note that tools and technologies, such
as USEM, which aim to assist people with changing their
behavior need to be “persuasive” in their approach. The idea of
computers as persuasive technology was introduced by Fogg
[31] to deal with the question of how interactive computer
technology could be used to persuade people to change their
behavior or attitude. The functional triad, as deﬁned by Fogg
[32], is a framework that illustrates three roles computers
can play in a persuasive context (Figure 12). These roles are
categorized as tool, medium and social actor.
In the context of the work presented in this paper, we
are mainly concerned with computers as persuasive tools.
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Tools increase capabilities by making the desired behavior
easier to achieve, by guiding people through processes, or by
calculations and measurements that motivate people to reach
their goals. There are seven different categories of persuasive
technology tools [32], which can be combined together in a
single system or application.
1)
Reduction: People can be persuaded by reducing com-
plexity. A good example of a reduction is the one-
click buy functionality provided by Amazon [33], which
reduces the ordering process to a simple button click.
2)
Tunneling: This is the process of leading a user step-
by-step through a speciﬁc procedure. An example of
tunneling is the ordering process of online shopping
sites. Such a guided process can provide opportunities
for persuasion along the way. For instance, an online
shopping site can suggest other items of interest to the
buyer during the ordering process.
3)
Tailoring: This approach persuades through custo-
mization, by providing only the type of information
which is relevant and interesting to the user. An ex-
ample of this is customized newsletters sent to users
offering them products that match their buying proﬁles.
4)
Suggestion: This means providing suggestions at the
right moment. An example of this is advertisements
along a highway, that for instance place an advert for a
restaurant near its physical location and not miles away.
5)
Self-Monitoring: People like to control themselves and
check whether they have reached a predetermined goal.
An example of this is a heart rate monitor that can be
used to monitor the heart rate during exercise.
6)
Surveillance: People tend to change their behavior
when they know that they are being observed. An
example of this is messages like “How am I driving?”
at the back of some delivery trucks, to ensure that
the drivers know people can complain about their bad
driving, so they drive more carefully.
7)
Conditioning: Giving positive, or negative, reinforce-
ment can have a persuasive effect. An example of
positive reinforcement is being on the high scorers list
in a computer game, which can persuade people to play
the game longer to improve their placement on the list.
To measure the success of a system as a persuasive tech-
nology clearly requires a long-term study of the use of the
system in real-life settings to see if it indeed assists its users
with changing their behavior. Although we are yet to conduct
such a study of USEM, we have attempted to analyze the ways
in which USEM might be able to play the role of persuasive
technology listed above. Below, we provide a summary of this
analysis.
1)
Reduction: USEM reduces the complexity of the lar-
ge volume of energy usage data, collected for many
devices over an extended period, by categorizing it, and
allowing the user to view it in a variety of forms.
2)
Tunneling: USEM provides step-by-step guidance for
dealing with the process of adding new appliances to
the system, dealing with notiﬁcations, managing energy
saving targets when they are breached, etc.
3)
Tailoring: Energy usage information provided is tai-
lored to individual users (i.e., their personal data),
energy saving recommendations provided are tailored to
each speciﬁc USEM installation and are always relevant
to the context.
4)
Suggestion: When USEM warns users about missing
their targeted saving goals, it suggests what actions
could be taken, for instance by giving a list of devices
that could be turned off. Also, when USEM sends
notiﬁcations to the mobile phone interface when sched-
uled tasks cannot be undertaken, it provides a list of
suggestions that the user can select from.
5)
Self-Monitoring: By measuring energy usage of each
individual (when possible), USEM allows them to
monitor their own current performance against targeted
saving goals, as well as allowing them to monitor their
past usage history in various statistical visualization
forms.
6)
Surveillance: Due to the ﬁne granularity of energy
usage data that USEM collects, the user knows (even
when living in a house with others) that their consump-
tion behavior is recorded and can be tracked by others
when allowed.
7)
Conditioning: By allowing users to compare their own
energy usage behavior to others, as well as their set
targets, USEM provides users with positive or negative
reinforcements depending on their performance.
VII.
CONCLUSION
This paper has presented the mobile interface components
of the USEM system, which aim to support the inhabitants
of residential homes with the process of monitoring their
energy usage, and making energy savings possible without
necessarily reducing their comfort levels. USEM allows its
users to connect and control their home appliances, as well
as analyze and understand energy consumption information by
those appliances using a range of scheduling, notiﬁcation, and
visualization tools speciﬁcally developed for mobile devices.
Our laboratory-based user evaluation of USEM has shown
the potential beneﬁts of its interface components for mobile
devices in providing the necessary means of assisting people
with saving energy, as well as encouraging them to monitor
and change their energy use behavior.
We have also brieﬂy analyzed the capabilities of USEM as a
persuasive technology, by examining some the features of its
mobile interface components against existing guidelines for
the design of persuasive technology. Although this analysis
shows that USEM satisﬁes these guidelines, it is important
to conduct a more formal real-life user evaluation of the
persuasive capabilities of USEM.
We are therefore planning to deploy USEM in residential
homes to carry out a long-term study to evaluate the effective-
ness of USEM in changing users’ behavior in terms of making
energy conservation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The user study presented in this paper was approved by
the Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Computing and Math-
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

ematical Sciences, The University of Waikato. We would
like to gratefully acknowledge the contributions of our study
participants.
This research has been supported by the IT4SE project,
funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and
Research (Grant number NZL 10/803 IT4SE) under the APRA
initiative. More information about the IT4SE project can be
found at http://www.it4se.net.
REFERENCES
[1]
U.S. Energy Information Administration, World Energy Use and Carbon
Dioxide Emissions, 1980-2001, April 2004.
[2]
L. Sherwood, “U.S. solar market trends,” in Proceedings of the Solar
Conference 2010, 2010.
[3]
J. K. Casper, Greenhouse Gases: Worldwide Impacts, ser. Global
Warming.
Infobase Publishing, December 2009.
[4]
E. Commission, Energy: Yearly statistics 2008.
Publications Ofﬁce of
the European Union, June 2010.
[5]
A. Gustafsson, M. B˚ang, and M. Svahn, “Power explorer: A casual game
style for encouraging long term behavior change among teenagers,” in
Proceedings of the International Conference on Advances in Computer
Enterntainment Technology, ser. ACE ’09, October 2009, pp. 182–189.
[6]
J. Mankoff, D. Matthews, S. R. Fussell, and M. Johnson, “Leveraging
social networks to motivate individuals to reduce their ecological
footprints,” in Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference
on System Sciences, ser. HICSS 2007, January 2007, pp. 87–96.
[7]
D. Foster, S. Lawson, M. Blythe, and P. Cairns, “Wattsup?: Motivating
reductions in domestic energy consumption using social networks,”
in Proceedings of the 6th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer
Interaction: Extending Boundaries, ser. NordiCHI ’10, October 2010,
pp. 178–187.
[8]
P. Petkov, F. K¨obler, M. Foth, and H. Krcmar, “Motivating domestic
energy conservation through comparative, community-based feedback
in mobile and social media,” in Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Communities and Technologies, ser. C&T ’11, June
2011, pp. 21–30.
[9]
C. Midden and J. Ham, “The persuasive effects of positive and nega-
tive social feedback from an embodied agent on energy conservation
behavior,” in Proceedings of the AISB 2008 Symposium on Persuasive
Technology, ser. AISB 2008, vol. 3, April 2008, pp. 9–13.
[10]
T. Kim, H. Hong, and B. Magerko, “Design requirements for ambient
display that supports sustainable lifestyle,” in Proceedings of the 8th
ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems, ser. DIS ’10,
December 2010, pp. 103–112.
[11]
L. Broms et al., “Coffee maker patterns and the design of energy
feedback artefacts,” in Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on
Designing Interactive Systems, ser. DIS ’10, December 2010, pp. 93–
102.
[12]
S. Kuznetsov and E. Paulos, “UpStream: Motivating water conservation
with low-cost water ﬂow sensing and persuasive displays,” in Proceed-
ings of the 28th international conference on Human factors in computing
systems, ser. CHI ’10, April 2010, pp. 1851–1860.
[13]
M. Laschke, M. Hassenzahl, S. Diefenbach, and M. Tippk¨amper, “With
a little help from a friend: A shower calendar to save water,” in CHI
’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser.
CHI EA ’11, May 2011, pp. 633–646.
[14]
N. Banerjee, S. Rollins, and K. Moran, “Automating energy manage-
ment in green homes,” in Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGCOMM
workshop on Home networks, ser. HomeNets ’11, 2011, pp. 19–24.
[15]
A. Capone, M. Barros, H. Hrasnica, and S. Tompros, “A new architec-
ture for reduction of energy consumption of home appliances,” in Pro-
ceedings of the European conference TOWARDS eENVIRONMENT,
March 2009.
[16]
M. Jahn et al., “The energy aware smart home,” in Proceedings of the
5th International Conference on Future Information Technology, ser.
FutureTech ’10, May 2010, pp. 1–8.
[17]
Intel Corporation, “Intelligent home energy management proof of con-
cept,” http://www.intel.com/embedded/energy/homeenergy/323157.pdf,
[retrieved: February, 2014].
[18]
K.-S. Choi et al., “Architectural design of home energy saving sys-
tem based on realtime energy-awareness,” in Proceedings of the 4th
International Conference on Ubiquitous Information Technologies &
Applications, ser. ICUT ’09, December 2009, pp. 1–5.
[19]
J. Ham, C. Midden, and F. Beute, “Can ambient persuasive technology
persuade unconsciously? Using subliminal feedback to inﬂuence energy
consumption ratings of household appliances,” in Proceedings of the 4th
International Conference on Persuasive Technology, ser. Persuasive ’09,
April 2009, pp. 29:1–29:6.
[20]
Current Cost Ltd., “Current Cost,” http://www.currentcost.com, [re-
trieved: February, 2014].
[21]
Energy
Inc.,
“The
Energy
Detective
(TED),”
http://www.
theenergydetective.com, [retrieved: February, 2014].
[22]
DIY Kyoto, “Wattson,” http://www.diykyoto.com, [retrieved: February,
2014].
[23]
eQ-3 AG, “HomeMatic,” http://www.homematic.com, [retrieved: Febru-
ary, 2014].
[24]
Gira Giersiepen GmbH, “Gira,” http://www.gira.de, [retrieved: Febru-
ary, 2014].
[25]
Intellihome
Automatisierungstechnik
GmbH,
“Intellihome,”
http://
www.intellihome.com, [retrieved: February, 2014].
[26]
KNX Association, “KNX Standard,” http://www.knx.org/knx-standard/
standardisation, [retrieved: February, 2014].
[27]
M. Kugler et al., “Architecture of a ubiquitous smart energy manage-
ment system for residential homes,” in Proceedings of the 12th Annual
Conference of the New Zealand Chapter of the ACM Special Interest
Group on Computer-Human Interaction.
New York, NY, USA: ACM,
2011, pp. 101–104.
[28]
——, “Assisting inhabitants of residential homes with management of
their energy consumption,” in Proceedings of the The 4th International
Conference on Sustainability in Energy and Buildings, ser. KES series
in Smart Innovation, Systems and Technologies, vol. 22.
Springer
Verlag, 2013, pp. 147–156.
[29]
E. Tufte, “Slopegraphs for comparing gradients: Slopegraph theory
and practice,” http://www.edwardtufte.com/bboard/q-and-a-fetch-msg?
msg id=0003nk&topic id=1, [retrieved: February, 2014].
[30]
C.
Park,
“Edward
Tufte’s
“Slopegraphs”,”
http://charliepark.org/
slopegraphs, [retrieved: February, 2014].
[31]
B. J. Fogg, “Captology: The study of computers as persuasive technolo-
gies,” in CHI ’97 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems: Looking to the Future, ser. CHI EA ’97, March 1997, p. 129.
[32]
——, Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What We
Think and Do.
Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.
[33]
P. Hartman, J. P. Bezos, S. Kaphan, and J. Spiegel, U.S. Patent 5960411:
Method and system for placing a purchase order via a communications
network.
Amazon.com, Inc., September 1999.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-332-2
ENERGY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

