Battery Storage Integration Into the Electric Grid 
Vivian Sultan, Ahmed Alzahrani, Hind Bitar, and Brian Hilton 
Claremont Graduate University CISAT 
Claremont, USA 
E-mail: Vivian.Sultan@cgu.edu 
Abstract - Energy storage is expected to flourish 
considerably, requiring large investments in tools and 
instruments that support its integration into the electric 
grid. This paper addresses the research question: “How 
can we determine the optimal locations for energy storage 
for proper integration into the electricity system?” 
Therefore, we have developed a conceptual framework for 
decision-making that caters to utilities for it considers the 
impacts of the energy storage placement on the grid, and 
the electric circuit capacity constraints. Additionally, we 
have built a prototype of Geographic Decision Support 
Systems (GDSS) to aid in the battery storage systems 
location choices and provide actionable information for 
utilities and other stakeholders who are concerned about 
the grid reliability and the urgency of energy storage 
deployment as a distributed energy resource.
Keywords- battery storage; electric grid; circuit capacity; 
optimal location; conceptual framework.
I. 
INTRODUCTION
Electric utilities in the United States face serious 
challenges, which have raised concerns about the uncertain 
future for America’s electric grid. The electricity demand is 
rising while the existing electric infrastructure is deteriorating. 
Environmental trends force regulators to institute new carbon 
restraints, and the penetration of distributed energy continues 
to grow exponentially. To employ the smart grid and resolve 
these challenges, utilities will need to integrate additional 
components into the grid. Smart meters, outage management 
systems, distribution managements systems, sensors, data 
management systems, and energy storage systems are all 
examples of the additional components to be incorporated into 
the grid [1].  
Grid reliability is the greatest concern resulting from 
challenges facing electric utilities. According to the North 
American Electric Reliability Council (NERC), reliability is 
“the degree to which the performances of the elements of the 
electric system result in power being delivered to consumers 
within accepted standards and in the amount desired" [2]. 
Osborne and Cornelia [3] view reliability as “the ability of the 
power system components to deliver electricity to all points of 
consumption, in the quantity and with the quality demanded by 
the customer” [3]. Reliability is measured by outage indices as 
illustrated by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE) Standard 1366. The argument is that today’s 
power systems cannot accommodate significant variable 
distributed energy generation, for instance, without failure [4].  
According to the United States Department of Energy, 
energy storage technology can help contribute to the overall 
system reliability as wind, solar, and other renewable energy 
sources continue to be added to the grid. Additionally, storage 
technology will be an effective tool in managing grid 
reliability and resiliency by regulating generation fluctuation 
and improving the grid’s functionality. Storage can provide 
redundancy options in areas with limited transmission 
capacity, transmission disruptions, or volatile demand and 
supply profiles [4]. In addition, the storage market might 
foster a strong manufacturing base of high-tech electric energy 
storage devices in the United States, and this capability can 
enhance America’s export opportunities [4]. Further, storage 
will help promote America’s energy independence and reduce 
carbon emissions by enabling more efficient adoption of 
renewable energy sources. 
An August 2013 White House report, written in 
conjunction with the Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy 
Reliability, detailed the vital role that energy storage would 
play in improving grid resiliency and robustness related to 
weather outages and other potential disruptions [5]. Energy 
storage is expected to flourish considerably, requiring large 
investments in tools and instruments that support its 
integration into the electric grid.  Different States have started 
new policy incentives and processes to address the integration 
need. The state of California, for example, has adopted a 
Roadmap which focuses on addressing three main challenges 
associated with energy storage adoption: “1) Expanding 
revenue opportunities 2) Reducing costs of integrating and 
connecting to the grid 3) Streamlining and spelling out 
policies and processes to increase certainty” [6]. As a result, 
Energy storage will be beneficial to all parts of the electricity 
system as shown in Figure 1 [7].  
Figure 1. Overview of Energy Storage Roles on the Electric Grid [7] 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

In this paper, we discuss energy storage systems as 
previous literature showed insufficient attempts by researchers 
to provide solutions that can assist in the undertaking of 
integrating storage systems into the grid. Considering that 
energy storage is a critical component to be added to the 
power network and the urgency of energy storage deployment, 
this paper addresses the research question: “How can we 
determine the optimal locations for energy storage for proper 
integration into the electricity system?”  
A Geographic Information System (GIS) provides the 
tools and integration ability to support the smart grid. GIS can 
used to highlight optimal locations for different components 
within the network. With the rollout of a smart grid, utilities 
need 
“to 
determine 
the 
right 
location for sensors, 
communication-marshaling cabinets, and a host of other 
devices” [1]. GIS provides the proper instruments to perform 
these design services, especially as the optimal locations 
depend greatly on the existing infrastructure. Considering the 
GIS current role in managing the electric grid and the previous 
research, we posit GIS will play a strong role in the placement 
of smart grid components such as battery storage systems. GIS 
can certainly contribute to the transformation of the grid “from 
a largely passive and blind system to an interactive, intelligent 
one” [1]. 
Hence, the objective of this research is to develop a 
prototype of GIS-based Decision Support System solution, 
which is an elegant, interesting, and novel solution to assist 
with the placement of battery storage systems by finding the 
optimal locations considering the electric grid constraints, the 
deployment requirements and the potential benefits to the grid. 
The paper is based on the process steps in Takeda, et. al.’s 
design cycle to create an artifact/solution [8].  The authors 
used the three design science research cycles of relevance, 
design, and rigor [9] to perform each of the Takeda, et. al., 
process steps leading to the final framework and prototype in 
this paper.  
Takeda et al. [8] cycle has five main steps/phases, which 
are the awareness of the problem, suggestion, development, 
evaluation, and conclusion [8]. This paper is organized based 
on the five phases. In introduction and literature review 
section, we discussed the awareness of the problem. In the 
conceptual framework and prototype sections, we covered the 
suggestion phase by explaining the decisions that we have 
made to develop the artifacts. In the research approach 
section, we have indicated the steps taken to develop and 
create the artifacts as outlined in the development phase. In 
the evaluation section of the paper, we evaluated the artifacts. 
In the last section, we concluded our research and offered 
future research directions. 
II. 
BACKGROUND LITERATURE REVIEW 
This section discusses the recent researches that had been 
conducted in the field.  
A. Energy Storage Technologies and Categories 
Energy storage can be defined as the capture of energy 
produced at one time for use at a later time [10]. It is required 
to level peak electricity generation. We can divide energy 
storage technologies into four categories based on discharge 
times [11]. These categories are useful in conceptualizing the 
role of storage on the grid. According to the International 
Electro technical Commission [11], either energy storage 
technologies can discharge enormous amounts of power, but 
only for a short time (energy storage with the highest power 
densities and lower energy densities), or it can discharge 
energy for a long time, but cannot provide massive amounts of 
power immediately (technologies with the highest energy 
densities and lower power densities) [11]. We summarized 
battery storage technology types in Table I based on their 
discharge time, use case, and energy-to-power ratio. 
Additional information about energy storage types can be 
found in Table A1 in Appendix 1 along with their definitions 
and examples. 
TABLE I. ENREGY STORAGE TECHNOLOGIES [11] 
Energy 
Storage 
Resourc
es
Use
Discharge 
Time
Energ
y-to-
Power 
Ratio
n 
(kWh/
kW)
Examples 
Short 
Discharg
e Time 
Provide 
instantaneous 
frequency 
regulation 
services to the 
grid 
Second or 
minutes 
Less 
than 1 
Double layer 
capacitors 
(DLCs), 
superconduc
ting 
magnetic 
energy 
storage 
(SMES), and 
flywheels 
(FES) 
Medium 
Discharg
e Time 
Useful for 
power quality 
and 
reliability, 
power 
balancing and 
load 
following, 
reserves, 
consumer-
side time-
shifting, and 
generation-
side output 
smoothing. 
May be 
designed so as 
to optimize 
for power 
density or 
Minutes 
to hours 
Betwe
en I 
and 10 
Lead acid 
(LA), 
lithium ion 
(Li-ion), and 
sodium 
sulphur 
(NaS), 
flywheels 
may also be 
used 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

energy 
density.   
Medium-
to-Long 
Discharg
e Time 
Useful 
primarily for 
load-
following and 
time-shifting, 
and can assist 
RE 
integration by 
hedging 
against 
weather 
uncertainties 
and solving 
daily 
mismatch of 
RE generation 
and peak 
loads. 
Hours to 
days 
Betwe
en 5 to 
30 
Pumped 
hydro 
storage 
(PHS), 
compressed 
air energy 
storage 
(CAES), and 
redox flow 
batteries 
(RFBs) 
which are 
particularly 
flexible in 
their design 
Long 
Discharg
e Time 
Useful for 
seasonal time 
shifting 
(storing 
excess 
generation in 
the summer 
and 
converting it 
back to 
electricity in 
the winter). 
Days to 
months 
Over 
10 
Hydrogen 
and synthetic 
natural gas 
(SNG) 
B. Types and growth of battery storage market 
In the United States, Lithium-ion batteries dominate the 
energy storage market, accounting for more than 90% of the 
market 
share. 
California, 
Delaware, 
Illinois, 
Indiana, 
Kentucky, Maryland, Michigan, North Carolina, Ohio, 
Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Virginia, West Virginia and the 
District of Columbia together account for about 81% of U.S. 
energy storage deployment in MW terms. Researchers expect 
the U.S. energy storage market in year 2021 to grow by almost 
eight times its 2016 market size [12]. Because of the market 
growth, there are many vendors competing in various 
segments. Figure 2 shows the latest taxonomy of energy 
storage vendors where Tesla and few other companies play a 
significant role in the U.S. market. 
Figure 2. Energy Storage Vendor Taxonomy [12]  
Battery storage can be classified into residential, 
nonresidential, and utility-scale storage types. There are 
different energy storage system vendors for different storage 
types. In this paper, we only focus on the medium and the 
medium-to-long discharge time technologies in the Utility 
scale segment. Utility-scale storage has been viewed as the 
key technology, which will help to bring the nation's utility 
grid into the 21st century. It will play a significant role in 
meeting the challenges facing electric utilities by improving 
the operating capabilities of the grid, lowering cost and 
ensuring high reliability, as well as deferring and reducing 
infrastructure investments. Utility-scale storage can be also 
instrumental for emergency preparedness because of its ability 
to provide backup power, as well as grid stabilization services 
[13]. 
C. Optimal locations 
Identifying optimal locations for energy storage is a 
problem that utility companies currently face. Several studies 
have tried to solve this problem using different methods. For 
example, Bose, Gayme, Topcu, and Chandy [14] conducted a 
study to optimally place large-scale energy storage units in 
power grids considering both conventional and wind 
generation [14]. The storage type and size played an important 
part in determining the optimal distributed storage location. 
The authors developed and tested an algorithm considering 
different portfolios of wind and conventional generation 
resources. The results showed that “changes in optimal storage 
siting configurations remain reasonably consistent regardless 
of the generation mix and these results are robust to changes in 
total storage capacity and transmission line limits” [14].   
Other scholars have also discussed the optimal location 
issue associated with the renewable energy sources. Another 
example was a study that conducted by Meneses de Quevedo, 
and Contreras [15]. According to the authors, the renewable 
energy sources are growing rapidly, which causes a problem in 
the network operation due to higher network constraints [15]. 
To solve the problem, an Energy Storage System (ESS) is 
considered as a solution. The authors in this study discussed 
the uncertainty associated with the nature of wind, network 
load, and price of ESS in optimizing distribution system costs. 
The researchers used a Mixed Integer Linear Programming 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

(MILP) approach as a method to identify the best locations for 
storage [15].  
Additionally, Fernández-Blanco et al. [16] discussed the 
problem of energy storage (ES) optimal locations in large 
transmission grids considering two perspectives: (1) a System 
Operator and (2) a profit-seeking ES owner [16].  A System 
Operator has the expertise to determine the locations and sizes 
of energy storage to minimize the investment and the 
operational costs. The researchers mainly focused on cost 
minimization, so they combined “the system costs of the 
[System Operator] and the profits collected by the ES owner 
into a single objective function subject to the technical 
constraints” [16]. The researchers solved the problem by 
applying MILP.  Then, they reengineered the problem into a 
multi-objective optimization with the perspective from both 
the system operator and the storage owner [16]. 
Energy storage can also reduce the variability, shift load 
time, and control ramping time. Xu [17] discussed and 
provided a solution to determine the optimal location of 
energy storage using the simulation tool MATPOWER [17]. 
This study developed a general procedure to optimize the 
location with the use of point estimation method in order to 
have more credible results.   
GIS is a catalyst for improving multiple facets of smart 
grids. For instance, Resch et al. have integrated GIS-based 
modeling into the energy system to address the renewable 
energy infrastructure planning [18]. Sultan et al. [19] used GIS 
to optimize the locations of a distributed energy resource such 
as solar panels [19]. Similarly, Sultan et al. [20] investigated 
the power grid reliability incidents/power outages and their 
correlation with the infrastructure age by using GIS-based 
modeling [20]. Therefore, GIS enhances the research inquiries 
in the smart grid domain. 
Nazaripouya et al. [21] urged researchers to consider 
tackling the nascent energy storage optimal location research 
area [21]. With the versatility of GIS, incorporating GIS to 
determine optimal locations of energy storage in the grid is 
essential for enhancing the knowledge base and provide a 
novel solution. Therefore, our paper employs a GIS-approach 
as the key research vehicle. 
III. 
THEORY AND RESEARCH APPROACH
The authors followed and used Hevner et al. [9] Design 
Science Research (DSR) framework to develop the conceptual 
framework for placement of utility scale energy storage. 
According to Hevner et al. [9], there are three important 
cycles in the DSR, which are relevance, design, and rigor 
cycles, as it shown in Figure 3 [9]. The authors used these 
cycles to develop the framework by searching the background 
literature. Moreover, applying the location theory, developing 
and evaluating the artifacts were the further steps taken by the 
researchers to determine the optimal locations for placement 
of utility scale energy storage. 
Figure 3. Design Science Research (DSR) Framework in Information Systems 
Research [8] 
Location theory is used to address questions of what 
economic activities such as energy storage should be located 
where and why [22]. This theory is based on microeconomics, 
which studies the behavior of individual and firms in making 
decisions concerning the allocation of limited resources. 
Firms, such as utility companies should choose locations that 
raise their profits and advance the benefits to the grid. 
Therefore, as is shown in Figure 4, we have chosen the 
location theory since it considers the firms’ perspective to 
answer what and where question, which matches our research 
goal. We have classified the site selection factors and 
structured the process of the energy storage site selection.  
Location theory’s key objective is to explain why specific 
economic activities prefer to establish themselves in particular 
areas and locations by allocates with what (energy storage) 
and where (area, location, or regions). 
Figure 4. Utility Scale Energy Storage Location Decision Guided by Location 
Theory 
A.
Artifact 1: Conceptual Framework 
The researchers used and studied the background 
literature as a research method to develop the conceptual 
framework for decision-making that caters to utilities, for it 
considers the impacts of the energy storage placement on the 
grid, and the electric circuit capacity constraints as is shown in 
Figure 5. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Figure 5. Conceptual Framework For Placement of Utility Scale Battery 
Storage 
Our framework has two main dimensions; the first one is 
the factors’ characteristic dimension, which has two main 
values: (1) battery and (2) grid. The second dimension is the 
factors that help in decision-making for the optimal location of 
battery storage. First, we searched in the literature, and the 
literature evaluation produced three factors that related to 
battery. Then we considered three more factors that related to 
grid. These factors assist in determining the optimal battery 
storages location for utilities. All six factors were developed 
from the background as is shown in Table II. 
TABLE II. BATTERY & GRID RELATED FACTOR 
Factor 
Definition 
Tech. 
Specification 
Resource 
Battery
Battery 
Storage size 
The battery’s 
capacity to 
hold energy 
Large centralized 
battery systems 
work better than 
smaller, 
distributed 
systems. 
 [23] 
[24] 
Excess 
Power 
Locations 
where there is 
potential 
excess solar 
and/or wind 
generation 
Statistically 
significant areas 
using kernel 
density estimation 
(KDE) where 
there is high 
potential solar 
and/or wind 
generation 
[25] 
Electricity 
demand 
versus 
supply 
The maximum 
amount of 
electrical 
energy that is 
being 
consumed 
compared to 
the energy that 
is being 
generated by a 
component 
(i.e., solar 
or/and wind 
energy 
The situation 
when energy 
supply is 
exceeding the 
demand 
[26] 
[27] 
resource) at a 
given time 
Grid
Nearby 
interconnecti
on points 
Locating the 
storage to 
closest voltage 
transmission 
interconnection
. It provides 
real-time 
generation 
balancing more 
effectively 
from a 
centralized grid 
resource. In 
addition, it 
saves cost by 
placing 
storages close 
to the voltage 
transmission 
Nearby 154-kV 
or 345-kV 
substations 
[28] 
Battery role 
Battery role on 
depends on 
what the 
battery will be 
doing, such as 
whether a BSS 
is intended to 
smooth output 
from renewable 
resources or 
designed to 
provide 
frequency 
regulation. 
Based on Table I 
“Energy Storage 
Technologies” 
[24] 
[11] 
Cost 
Effectivenes
s 
Placement 
decisions are 
based on the 
comparison 
between cost 
effectiveness 
and outcomes. 
Bundling 
battery storage 
system projects 
provides 
economic 
benefits of 
scaling. For 
example, It 
costs less to 
develop a 
single 24-MW 
project than 
two separate 
12-MW 
projects. 
Single centralized 
battery storage 
systems is 
preferred 
[24] 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

B.
Artifact 2: GDSS Prototype 
This study proposes a GDSS solution to assist in the 
placement of battery storage systems by finding the optimal 
locations considering the electric grid constraints, the 
deployment requirements, and the potential benefits to the 
grid. This solution can aid in the battery storage systems 
location choices and provide actionable information for 
utilities, state-level decision-makers, and other stakeholders 
who are concerned about the grid reliability and the urgency 
of energy storage deployment as a distributed energy resource. 
Though a GDSS can provide a solution to address the 
placement of all types of energy storage systems, we chose to 
focus on Utility-scale storage to instantiate the conceptual 
framework and to demonstrate how an interactive, computer-
based system can assist in decision-making considering the net 
and the potential benefits to the grid.  
1) Data Selection and Acquisition 

SCE’s DERiM Circuit Capacity Data: Southern 
California Edison’s distributed energy resource 
interconnection map includes power electric lines and 
the capacity analysis in kilowatts by circuit line. The 
data is retrieved from DERiM web map.

Solar Parcel Data: LA County is the data source for 
the solar parcel data. LA County solar map includes 
key data elements, such as: total roof area and area 
suitable for solar, potential solar system size, solar 
potential annual output, and potential cost savings. 

Electricity Household: Simply map is the source of 
data. The Electricity Household is in the average of 
the annual (yearly) consumption in dollar for each 
geographic region in 2016. Electricity is generally 
supplied by means of above or underground electric 
power lines. 
2) Data Preparation Steps 

DERiM Circuit Capacity Data was loaded into 
ArcGis 10.3.1. The first layer was locating the SCE 
substations (837 stations) across LA County Figure 6. 

Considering the Nearby interconnection points 
requirement, 
substations 
with 
circuit 
capacity 
constraints with less than 150 kilovolts were 
excluded.  
Figure 6.  SCE Substations Across LA 

According to Sultan et al. [20], the solar rooftop’s 
potential electricity output was calculated for each 
parcel by multiplying the rooftop’s solar panel area, 
the solar panel yield, the annual average solar 
radiation on tilted panels (constant for LA county, 
equal 
to 
2018.45), 
and 
the 
solar 
system’s 
performance ratio which is the coefficient for losses 
(used default value = 0.75). Two fields were added in 
ArcMap attribute table to perform these calculations. 
Considering the V2G technology/exploiting excess 
power factor, these calculations are required to 
predict areas with potential solar excess generation 
assuming maximum adoption of solar rooftops in LA 
County [22].  

The electricity household data was added as an 
indicator for the electricity consumption level to 
serve the supply vs. demand factor Figure 7. 
                   Figure 7.  Electricity Consumption in LA County 
 Potential Battery Location layer was created by 
joining the following map layers:
 The excess parcel level power data based on step 
3 to estimate the supply level.
 The electricity household data to assess the 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

demand level. The assumption was made that 
less than 1000 in electricity household 
spending a year were considered low demand. 
 The 
Substations 
data 
with 
the 
targeted 
requirements in step number 3 (more than 150 
kilovolts). Then, buffer tool with 500 feet 
distance from the substations and locations that 
overlaps with low demand and high supply 
were identified. 
3) Analysis and Findings 
Our findings suggested 12 potential location for battery 
storage in SCE electrical substations based on the three spatial 
factors in the conceptual framework in Table II: 1) Demand 
vs. Supply 2) Nearby interconnection points 3) Excess power. 
The locations are listed in Table III and are shown in Figure 
8. 
Figure 8. The Suggested Battery Storage Locations
TABLE III.  LIST OF LOCATION NAMES 
ID 
Substation Name 
Substation Type 
1 
WALNUT 
S -- Sub-transmission 
2 
ROSEMEAD 
D -- Distribution 
3 
GOULD 
S -- Sub-transmission 
4 
MESA 
S -- Sub-transmission 
5 
LAGUNA 
S -- Sub-transmission 
6 
BULLIS 
D -- Distribution 
7 
CENTER 
S -- Sub-transmission 
8 
CORNUTA 
D -- Distribution 
9 
LIGHTHIPE 
S -- Sub-transmission 
10 
SUNLIGHT P.T. 
A -- District Pole Top 
11 
HASKELL 
D -- Distribution 
12 
STADIUM 
D -- Distribution 
According to Jim Horstman, an industry consultant, pole 
top substation (Sunlight P.T.) included in Table III might not 
be used for batteries, as these are ‘substation’ built on a 
platform between poles.  Thus, we have a final count of 11 
potential locations for battery storage after excluding this one 
pole top substation. 
Figures 9, 10, 11, and 12, show that substations of 
Stadium, Walnut, Rosemead and Gould are locations for 
placing battery storages. To illustrate, the yellow circles 
represent the location of the substation and the red circles 
represent the suggested location where there is excess power, 
supply in electricity is actually more than the demand level, 
and lastly that location is near a substation territory.  
Figure 9. Suggested location of SCE Gould substation 
Figure 10. Suggested Location of SCE Rosemead Substation 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Figure 11. Suggested Location of SCE Stadium Substation 
Figure 12. Suggested Location of SCE Walnut Substation 
IV. 
EVALUATION
The project team applied a qualitative interview method 
to evaluate the prototype using socio-technical technique to 
assess the following metrics: propriety and utility. The 
researchers evaluated the different values held by the utilities 
by sending the following seven interview questions via email:  
1. How useful is the conceptual framework (Fig.5.) in 
your view?  
2. Is the framework complete from your perspective?  
3. Do you agree with the factors’ definitions in Table II?  
4. Do you agree with the factors’ technical specifications 
in Table II?  
5. Do you see potential solution offered by the GDSS 
prototype (shown in Fig.8.)?  
6. What 
changes 
would 
you 
recommend 
for 
improvement?  
7. Do you see the potential in this research direction? In 
this case, both EV drivers’ and utility executives’ 
perspectives were part of the evaluation process to 
ensure that their unique stances were understood? 
Feedback is currently being solicited from industry 
consultants and executives who can provide feedback from a 
utility perspective. Two participants responded with positive 
feedback and they highlighted the potential offered by the 
proposed artifact. According to Jim Horstman, a utility 
industry consultant, the conceptual framework is useful, 
complete, and it covers the relevant issues. Horstman mostly 
agree with the factors’ definitions. However, he views the 
framework dimensions to be causing some confusion. For 
example, “the battery role is under grid rather than battery and 
the excess power and supply & demand are under battery 
when they would seem more appropriate to grid. Further 
Excess Power is a function of Supply and Demand (i.e., 
Excess Power = Supply > Demand) so not clear that is a 
separate issue” Horstman said. The industry consultant 
suggested another consideration relative to the nearby 
interconnection points, which is the space available for the 
battery storage. “While many substations might have ample 
space for the batteries others may have restraints” he said.  
Horstman agreed with the technical specifications with 
the exception of including specific voltages (154 KV, 345 
KV) as “those are utility specific e.g., SCE could be 220/500 
KV for high voltage subs where it is stepped down to 133 KV, 
66KV, etc.,” The industry consultant recommended something 
more appropriate like high, medium voltage substations. In 
looking at the list in Table III, Jim Horstman saw that it 
includes sub-transmission and distribution substation that he 
believes would be categorized as medium and/or low voltage. 
V. 
LIMITATION AND FUTURE WORK
 The artifacts proposed in this paper aimed at providing 
a solution for decision-making to assist with the placement of 
battery storage systems by finding the optimal locations 
considering the electric grid constraints, the deployment 
requirements and the potential benefits to the grid. This could 
potentially save time and resources for developers and utility 
companies who are interested in the identification of optimal 
locations for the placement of storage systems.  
Potential locations for battery storage can thus be 
prioritized in locations with excess power, where supply in 
electricity is actually more than the demand level, and where 
there is nearby a substation territory. However, a limitation of 
the GDSS prototype proposed in this paper is that it only 
deliberated three of the six factors of the suggested 
framework.  Due to time and data availability constraints, the 
project team have chosen to build an artifact that addresses the 
placement of Utility-scale storage systems considering three of 
the six factors of the framework: 1) Demand vs. Supply 2) 
Nearby interconnection points 3) Excess power factor. We 
didn’t address the battery size, the cost effectiveness and the 
battery role factors of the decision-making framework. 
Another limitation is in the evaluation phase. It is 
important to recognize that the time constraint imposed 
limitations on the evaluation and what these limitations are.  
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

The project team doesn’t have the time to complete the 
evaluation phase and address the interviewees’ comments after 
the solution delivery. The researchers don’t have an 
opportunity to perform further iterations to improve the 
prototype. The project team needs to get and address the 
interviewees’ suggestions to complete the research.  
The utility and novelty of the solution is important to 
emphasize as the driving factors for this project.  By 
developing a conceptual framework for decision-making that 
previously didn’t exist, a great amount of time is reduced for 
utilities/grid operators who are interested in finding the 
optimal locations and the undertaking of integrating storage 
systems into the grid. The GDSS prototype can be regarded as 
an instantiation (to provide an instance of or concrete evidence 
in support) of the conceptual framework. So, it is important to 
realize that this prototype is only meant to serve as a good 
starting point for the illustration of how an interactive, 
computer-based system can assist in decision-making 
considering the net and the potential benefits to the grid. 
In future DSR cycles, the project team will address all of 
the suggestions from interviewees after they get their 
feedback. The project team will evaluate the GDSS prototype 
many times through multiple iterations to improve its utility. 
The 
next 
iteration 
will 
offer 
a 
custom 
tool 
for 
developers/utilities, so that they are better able to evaluate the 
results.  The prototype will run on a public server to give the 
research participants access to the application.   
Moreover, the project team will add quantitative methods 
in the evaluation such as System Usability Scale (SUS) and 
cognitive walkthrough. The usability of this prototype will 
increase since both methods measure the usability of any 
application. The SUS and cognitive walkthrough will be 
administered to all research participants. In this case, the 
evaluation will involve more participants who will be given 
access to the application to ensure the validity of the 
evaluation results.    
VI. 
CONCLUSION
 This study aimed at addressing “How can we determine 
the optimal locations for energy storage for proper integration 
into the electricity system?” To answer the research question, 
we have developed a conceptual framework for decision-
making that caters to utilities for it considers the impacts of 
the energy storage placement on the grid, and the electric 
circuit capacity constraints. The framework we offer in this 
paper is the first, to date, to address the research question. In 
addition, we have built a prototype of Geographic Decision 
Support Systems (GDSS), which is an elegant, interesting, and 
novel solution, to aid in the battery storage systems location 
choices and provide actionable information for utilities, state-
level decision-makers, and other stakeholders who are 
concerned about the grid reliability and the urgency of energy 
storage deployment as a distributed energy resource. 
From this research, we conclude that Battery Storage 
locations can be assessed geographically to minimize potential 
increases to overall electric system costs while still meeting 
customers’ needs. Our solution provides evidence that GIS 
can play an integral role in the problem resolution.  
REFERENCES 
[1]
Environmental Systems Research Institute. Enterprise GIS and 
the 
Smart 
Electric 
Grid. 
Available 
online: 
https://www.esri.com/library/whitepapers/pdfs/enterprise-gis-smart-
electric-grid.pdf (accessed on 5 February 2017).  
[2]
Hirst, Eric and Brendon Kirby. 2000. Bulk-power basics: 
reliability 
and 
commerce. 
Available 
online: 
http://www.esper.com/hirst/ (accessed on 5 February 2017). 
[3]
Osborn, Julie,  and Kawann, Cornelia. Energy Analysis 
Department Environmental Energy Technologies Division, Ernest 
Orlando Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of 
California Berkeley. Reliability of the U.S. Electricity System: 
Recent Trends and Current Issues (August 2001). Available online: 
https://emp.lbl.gov/sites/all/files/REPORT 
lbnl 
- 
47043.pdf 
(accessed on February 18 2017). 
[4]
United States Department of Energy (2015). Quadrennial 
Technology Review: An Assessment of Energy Technologies And 
Research Opportunities: Chapter 3 - Enabling Modernization of the 
Electric 
Power 
System. 
Available 
online: 
http://energy.gov/downloads/chapter-3-enabling-modernization-
electric-power-system (accessed on February 5 2017). 
[5]
The President’s Council of Economic Advisers, the U.S. 
Department of Energy’s Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy 
Reliability, and the White House Office of Science and Technology 
(August, 2013). Economic Benefits Of Increasing Electric Grid 
Resilience 
To 
Weather 
Outages. 
Available 
online: 
http://energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2013/08/f2/Grid%20Resiliency%2
0Report_FINAL.pdf (accessed on February 5 2017). 
[6]
California ISO (2014, December). Advancing and Maximizing 
the Value of Energy Storage Technology. Available online: 
https://www.caiso.com/Documents/AdvancingMaximizingValueofE
nergyStorageTechnology_CaliforniaRoadmap.pdf 
(accessed 
on 
February 5 2017). 
[7]
Kamath, Haresh (2013, September). Environmental Systems 
Research Institute. Electricity Storage in Utility Applications. 
Available 
online: 
https://www.usea.org/sites/default/files/event-
/EPRI Storage Presentation - USEA - 13 September 2013.pdf 
(accessed on February 22 2017). 
[8]
Takeda, H., Veerkamp, P., and Yoshikawa, H. Modeling 
design process. AI magazine 1990, 11(4), pp. 37. 
[9]
Hevner, A. A three-cycle view of design science research.  
Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems 2007 ,19 (2), pp. 87-
92. 
[10] Tullis, Paul. Brilliant new strategies for storing power 2013. 
Available 
online: 
from 
http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/alternative_energy
/2013/03/energy_storage_technology_batteries_flywheels_compress
ed_air_rail_storage.html (accessed on February 5 2017). 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

[11] International Electrotechnical commission Market Strategy 
Board. White Paper: Grid Integration of large capacity Renewable 
Energy Sources and use of large capacity Electrical Energy Storage 
2012. 
 
Available 
online: 
http://files.energystorageforum.com/IEC_Grid_Integration_of_Rene
wables_and_EES.pdf (accessed on February 5 2017). 
[12] Greentech Media, and Energy Storage Association.  Cleantech 
and Renewable Energy News and Analysis: U.S. Energy Storage 
Monitor 
Q4 
2016. 
Available 
online: 
https://www.greentechmedia.com/research/subscription/u.s.-energy-
storage-monitor (accessed on February 5 2017). 
[13] United States Department of Energy 2013. Grid Energy 
Storage. 
Available 
online: 
https://energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2014/09/f18/Grid%20Energy%20
Storage%20December%202013.pdf (accessed on February 5 2017). 
[14] Bose, S., Gayme, D. F., Topcu, U., and Chandy, K. M. 
Optimal placement of energy storage in the grid. In Decision and 
Control (CDC) 2012 IEEE 51st Annual Conference; pp. 5605-5612. 
IEEE. 
[15] Meneses de Quevedo, P., and Contreras, J. Optimal placement 
of energy storage and wind power under uncertainty. Energies 2016, 
9(7), pp.  528. 
[16] Fernández-Blanco, R., Dvorkin, Y., Xu, B., Wang, Y., and 
Kirschen, D. S. Energy Storage Siting and Sizing in the WECC Area 
and the CAISO System 2016.
[17] Xu, Y. Optimal location of electrical energy storage in a 
power system with wind energy 2014, Doctoral dissertation, Wichita 
State University.
[18] Resch, B. et al. GIS-based planning and modeling for 
renewable energy: Challenges and future research avenues. ISPRS 
International Journal of Geo-Information 2014, 3(2), pp.  662–692.  
[19] Sultan, V., Bitar, H., and Hilton, B. Geographic decision 
support systems to optimize the placement of distributed energy 
resources. International Journal of Smart Grid and Clean Energy 
2016, 5(3).  
[20] Sultan, V., Alzahrani, A., Bitar, H., and Alharbi, N. Is 
California’s Aging Infrastructure the Principal Contributor to the 
Recent Trend of Power Outage? Journal of Communication and 
Computer 2016, 13, pp. 225-233. 
[21] Nazaripouya, H., Wang, Y., Chu, P., Pota, H. R., and Gadh, R. 
Optimal sizing and placement of battery energy storage in 
distribution system based on solar size for voltage regulation. In 
Power & Energy Society General Meeting, 2015 IEEE (pp. 1–5).   
[22] Durlauf, S. N., and Blume, L. (Eds.). The new Palgrave 
dictionary of economics 2008. Volume 6, pp. 631-34. Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
[23] Jia, L., and Tong, L. (2016). Renewables and storage in 
distribution systems: Centralized vs. decentralized integration. IEEE 
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 34(3), pp. 665-674. 
[24] Overton, Thomas W., and  JD. Practical Considerations for 
Siting Utility-Scale Battery Projects 2016. Available online: 
http://www.powermag.com/practical-considerations-siting-utility-
scale-battery-projects/ (accessed on February 2 2017).  
[25] Chris Nelder, James Newcomb, and Garrett Fitzgerald 2016. 
Electric Vehicles as Distributed Energy Resources Rocky Mountain 
Institute. Available online: http://www.rmi.org/pdf_evs_as_DERs 
(accessed on October 2 2017). 
[26] Sultan, V. "Exploring Geographic Information Systems To 
Mitigate America’s Electric Grid Traffic Congestion Problem,” 
Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Computational 
and Business Intelligence 2016, Switzerland, September 5-7. 
[27] Sjödin, E., Gayme, D. F., and Topcu, U. Risk-mitigated 
optimal power flow for wind powered grids. In American Control 
Conference (ACC), 2012, pp. 4431-4437. IEEE.  
[28] Overton, Thomas. Publication Of Electric Power Conference: 
Practical Considerations for Siting Utility-Scale Battery Projects. 
Available 
online: 
http://www.powermag.com/practical-
considerations-siting-utility-scale-battery-projects/ 
(accessed 
on 
February 5 2017). 
[29] The California Independent System Operator (ISO), the 
California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC), and the California 
Energy Commission (2014, December). Advancing and maximizing 
the value of Energy Storage Technology. A CALIFORNIA 
ROADMAP. 
Available 
online: 
https://www.caiso.com/Documents/Advancing-
MaximizingValueofEnergyStorageTechnology_CaliforniaRoadmap.
pdf (accessed on February 22 2017). 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-635-4
ENERGY 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

