Next Generation Power Distribution System Architecture: The Future Renewable 
Electric Energy Delivery and Management (FREEDM) System  
Alex Huang, Xu She, Xunwei Yu, Fei Wang, and Gangyao Wang 
Future Renewable Electrical Energy Delivery and Management Systems Center   
North Carolina State University 
Raleigh, NC, US 
{aqhuang, xshe, xyu8, fwang5, gwang3} @ncsu.edu  
 
Abstract—This paper presents the envisioned next generation 
power distribution system architecture, the so called 
FREEDM system. The presented system enables the plug-and-
play of distributed renewable energy resources and distributed 
energy storage devices, therefore functions as the “energy 
internet”.  The recent technical developments are summarized 
in this paper, with emphasis on the distributed grid 
intelligence, solid state transformer, DC microgrid, and fault 
isolation device. It is demonstrated that the FREEDM system 
is a highly attractive candidate for the future power 
distribution system. 
Keywords-Smart grid; Microgrid; distributed generation; 
energy storage; DNP 3; Solid State Transformer. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The future renewable electric energy delivery and 
management (FREEDM) system center is a US National 
Science Foundation (NSF) generation-III Engineering 
Research Center (ERC) established in 2008 headquarters at 
North Carolina State University, US. The mission of the 
center is to develop the fundamental and enabling 
technologies for future power distribution system, which is 
called the FREEDM system [1]. 
Figure 1 shows the one-line diagram of the proposed 
FREEDM system, which integrates the advanced power 
semiconductor devices technology, power electronics 
technology, and information technology. The FREEDM 
system achieves seamless integration of distributed 
renewable energy generation and storage, therefore enables 
highly intelligent and distributed power grid architecture. 
Some key features of this innovative power grid are: 
1. Plug and play of distributed renewable energy 
resources (DRER) and distributed energy storage 
devices (DESD). 
2. Intelligent energy management (IEM) system through 
the revolutionary solid state transformer (SST) concept 
with direct interface to the distribution system. 
3. Intelligent fault management (IFM) system with fast 
fault isolation capability by adopting the solid state 
fault isolation device (FID). 
4. Distributed grid intelligence software embedded into 
the IEM and IFM. 
5. Reliable and secured communication infrastructure to 
enable real time monitoring and control of all the nodes 
in the system. 
 
Figure 1.  Electric grid diagram of the FREEDM system 
 
  In order to demonstrate the envisioned FREEDM system, 
recent efforts are made towards the living demonstration of 
a future home in the FREEDM system [2], as depicted in 
Figure 2.  In this diagram, the DGI and SST are integrated 
to function as IEM. SST delivers 380V DC to the plug-and-
play DC microgrid as well as 120/240V AC to the 
traditional AC load. FID is installed in the 12KV 
distribution line to isolate the fault current. Digital 
communication infrastructure based on DNP3 is also 
designed to enable the power management and condition 
monitoring of the whole system. Some breakthroughs have 
been achieved for the key components of such a system, 
including DGI, SST, DC microgrid, FID, and IEM.  
 
380V DC BUS
120/240V AC
DC microgrid
380V DC BUS
120/240V AC
380V DC BUS
120/240V AC
DC microgrid
 
Figure 2. Electric grid diagram showing the interface of a future home in 
the FREEDM system 
   
This paper summarizes and reports our newest progress 
in these areas. The hardware and software development of 
distributed grid intelligence was introduced in section II. In 
section III, two generations of solid state transformer are 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

presented with their characteristics highlighted. In section 
IV, the plug-and-play DC microgrid platform is illustrated. 
In section V, the development of Si based generation-I FID 
is presented. Lastly, the paper is concluded in section VI. 
 
II. 
DISTRIBUTED GRID INTELLIGENCE 
The DGI acts as the brain of the proposed FREEDM 
system. The diagram of DGI is shown in Figure.2, where 
green line represents the communication link, while black 
lines the electricity path. The main function of DGI is to 
collect information and manage power flow within a 
FREEDM hub or among multiple FREEDM systems over a 
wide area. Therefore, the hub is inherently distributed with 
components of the DGI algorithm executed on independent 
hardware within IEMs and IFMs. The DGI hardware is then 
required not only for localized control within each IEM and 
IFM, but also to implement control functions that must be 
handled collectively by groups of IEMs and IFMs. For DGI 
software, the main intelligence implemented is based on the 
multiple levels of control and time scales. The key 
challenge is to partition and distribute these controls as 
cooperating agents over multiple microprocessors within 
each IEM [3]. 
The distributed controller consists of a customized local 
controller that directly interacts with power converters and 
a 
commercial 
ARM 
board 
for 
communication 
implementation [4]. The division of hard real time and soft 
real time are therefore realized based on this hardware 
partitioning. A web based human machine interface (HMI) 
is also developed for system monitoring over the 
communication links. System operator can intervene the 
operation of SST by dispatching command through this 
HMI.  
 
A. DGI Hardware Platform 
 
The DGI hardware platform consists of three major 
components, namely, interface board, local controller board 
and ARM communication board, as shown in Figure 3. 
These three components can be stacked on top of each other 
to form a compact and reliable structure [4]. 
 
Figure 3. DGI hardware platform 
 
The interface board (the top one in Figure. 3) is equipped 
with PWM output, analog conditioning circuit and fault 
protection. On the left side, there are 40 channels of optical 
fiber output to transmit switching signal to power devices. 
These PWM signals are tied with fault protection signals in 
order to quickly turn off the power stage during fault 
situation. There are also 16 channels of analog conditioning 
circuit that has an output range of −10V to +10V. Fault 
signals are generated using voltage comparators to compare 
the outputs of the conditioning circuit with tuned threshold 
values. The number of these channels is adequately 
designed for most of our converter applications in 
FREEDM, which means this hardware platform is universal 
and little modification is needed for new deployment. 
Converter control is executed in local controller board 
(the middle one in Figure.3), which is able to work under 
both standalone and network modes. The circuit structure is 
based on combination of DSP and two FPGAs, as shown in 
Figure 4. With development of the IC technology, FPGAs 
have become the main stream in complex logic circuit 
design due to its flexibility, ease of use, and short time to 
market. In this structure, the major function of FPGA #1 is 
to implements PWM generation and interrupt the DSP 
periodically to evoke control loop. Once the DSP receives 
this external interrupt, an interrupt service route program is 
called and the control algorithm is executed. First step of 
the control algorithm is to sample converter voltage and 
current, this is done using FPGA #2 to generate AD control 
logic and pass the sampled value to DSP on data bus. 
 
Figure 4. Functional diagram of Controller board  
 
In order to transmit data to the ARM communication 
board, FPGA #2 is also implemented with a PC104 bus 
interface that can achieve fast and reliable data 
transmission. With the high performance bus access, the 
local controller is able to deliver measurement to and 
receive reference from the ARM communication board TS-
7800 (bottom in Figure.3). The TS-7800 board features a 
Marvell 500MHz ARM9 SBC, which provides high end 
peripherals including gigabit Ethernet. The ARM board 
runs Linux 2.6 kernel with a full Debian distribution in on-
board 
flash. 
PC104 
bus 
is 
one 
of 
its 
external 
memory/program peripherals. 
 
B. Design and Implementation of SST Communication 
 
The objective of the communication system is two-fold: 
(1) the SST can send acquired measurement to the control 
center; (2) the control center can also send control 
commands and reference to the SST. To achieve such 
bidirectional communications between the SST and the 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

control center, we designed a systematic architecture as 
shown in Figure 5 [5]-[6]. Based on the hardware structure, 
the SST communication system is composed of two 
domains: network domain and device domain. In the 
network domain, a control center is connected to the 
distributed controller via a Local Area Network (LAN) over 
a DNP3 protocol stack. Thereby, the collected data and 
dispatched control commands can be delivered via DNP3 
packets between devices. In terms of the device domain, it 
features aforementioned PC104 bus as data path to 
exchange data between the local controller and the ARM 
board. 
 
Figure 5. Communication schemes implemented at local DGI node 
 
Since DNP3 over TCP/IP is employed as the underlying 
communication protocol, the design principal of network 
applications is to leverage basic DNP3 functions for the 
SST 
monitoring. 
We 
then 
introduce 
the 
network 
applications setup in a top-down manner. Left block in 
Figure. 5 depicts the application design in the network 
domain. Since DNP3 commonly works in a master/slave 
mode, the applications setup is correspondingly divided into 
two parts for the master and the slave. We envision three 
basic tasks on the master, including data query, command 
distribution and log collection, which are mapped into three 
modules, data viewer, command distributor and log 
recorder respectively. To support data query and 
modification in Data Viewer and Command Distributor, a 
database is programmed to store data from the device or 
issued by the Command Distributor. Two data channels are 
furnished under the database to retrieve data updates from 
the DNP3 function blocks, or dispatch commands to 
function blocks. As DNP3 is overlaid over TCP/IP in the 
communication layer model, the generated DNP3 packet 
will be fed to the slave via a TCP/IP channel. On the slave 
side, the application design is the same with that on the 
master. 
 
III. 
SOLID STATE TRANSFORMER 
The SST is a power electronic device that replaces the 
traditional 50/60 Hz power transformer by means of high 
frequency 
transformer 
isolated 
AC-AC 
conversion 
technique, which is represented in Figure. 1 [7]. The basic 
operation of the SST is firstly to change the 50/60 Hz AC 
voltage to a high frequency one (normally in the range of 
several to tens of kilohertz), then this high frequency 
voltage is stepped up/down by a high frequency transformer 
with significantly decreased volume and weight, and finally 
shaped back into the desired 50/60 Hz voltage to feed the 
load. In this sense, the first advantage that the SST may 
offer is its reduced volume and weight compared with 
traditional transformers.   
 
Figure 6. Solid state transformer configuration 
 
It is further seen from the configuration of the SST that 
some other potential functionalities that are not owned by 
the traditional transformer may be obtained. First, the use of 
solid state semiconductor devices and circuits makes the 
voltage and current regulation a possibility; similarly to 
FACTS devices. This brings promising advantages such as 
power flow control, voltage sag compensation, fault current 
limitation, and others, which are not possible for traditional 
transformers. Therefore, the SST can enhance the stability 
and controllability of the power distribution grid. Second, 
voltage source converters connected from the secondary 
terminal of the SST could readily support a regulated DC 
bus, which could be connected to DC microgrids enabling 
the new microgrid architecture. 
As a benchmark, a laboratory prototype of a 7.2 kV, 
20 kVA single-phase, three-stage SST was built, which is 
named Generation-I (Gen-I) SST [8].  The topology of the 
Gen-I SST is illustrated in Figure 7.  
 
 
Figure 7. Topology of Gen-I SST based in Si IGBT 
 
Cascaded multilevel rectifier with three H-bridges is 
adopted as the front-end stage. Three dual active bridge 
(DAB) converters are connected to each DC link with 
secondary side parallel as the DC/DC step down stage.  In 
the last stage, the split phase inverter is adopted to provide 
both 120 and 240V AC. 
The hardware prototype is shown in Figure .8. 6.5kV, 
25A silicon based dual insulated gate bipolar transistor 
(IGBT) were customized and adopted for the rectifier and 
primary side of the DAB stages.  It was packaged by 
POWEREX with chips supplied by ABB.  600V 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

commercial intelligent power modules (IPM) were adopted 
for the secondary side of the DAB and inverter stage. Based 
on the chosen power device, the switching frequency for the 
high voltage side rectifier, medium voltage DC/DC stage, 
and low voltage inverter stage was 1.2 kHz, 3.6 KHz, and 
10.8 kHz respectively.  A Metglas AMCC 1000 core was 
paralleled and used for the high voltage and high frequency 
transformer at an operating frequency of 3 kHz. The 
transformer was naturally cooled with the maximum 
temperature around 45 0C. Based on the detailed test results 
of the power device used in the power stage, PLECS 
simulations were used to estimate the efficiency of the 
converter, and the efficiency for this prototype at full power 
rating was close to 88 %. 
 
Figure 8. 20KVA three-stage SST based on 6.5KV Si IGBT 
 
  In order to realize the remote control and monitoring of 
the SST, the designed DGI hardware shown in Figure .3 is 
adopted. In this condition, this unit can be utilized as the 
IEM in the FREEDM systems. A HMI is developed for the 
whole FREEDM system, and Figure 9 shows the page for 
the SST control and monitoring.  In this condition, all the 
data, including the command and the operating status 
information, can be transmitted between the DGI imbedded 
in the SST and the central controller server.  
 
 
Figure 9. Control center webpage 
 
Test result of the Gen-I SST is shown in Figure .10. The 
input AC voltage is 1.2KV, high voltage DC is 2.28KV, 
low voltage DC is 380V, and low voltage AC is 240V. The 
power rating is about 4KVA.  The delivered 380V DC bus 
is readily for use to the plug-and-play DC microgrid. 
 
Figure 10. Test waveforms of Gen-I SST 
 
The efficiency achieved was low mainly because of the 
relatively low power rating [9]. For MVA level design, the 
expected efficiency is higher than 95 %. In addition, the 
volume and weight of the SST was not effectively reduced 
compared with traditional transformers due to the relatively 
low operating frequency and large volume of power 
devices, heatsinks, and capacitors.  
The performance improvement of the SST could be 
carried out in the following aspects: 
1. Use of the SiC devices to increase the switching 
frequency as well as control the losses.  
2. Use of nanocrystalline core to operate the transformer 
at a higher switching frequency. 
Based on these considerations, another three-stage solid 
state transformer based on 15 kV SiC MOSFET was built, 
which was named Generation-II SST, as shown in Figure. 
11.  
 
  
 
(a) Front side: High voltage side; (b) Back side: Low voltage side 
Figure 11. 20KVA SST based on 15KV SiC MOSFET 
 
The newly developed 15 kV SiC MOSFET was adopted 
in the high voltage side and several low Rdson MOSFETs 
were paralleled to be used in the low voltage side [9]-[10]. 
A nanocrystalline core was used to assemble the 20 kVA 
high voltage transformer, which operates at 20 kHz. A 
certain soft-switching technique for the high voltage 
rectifier stage was adopted to solve the problem of high 
dv/dt introduced by the high switching speed. By using the 
measured loss data of the power devices, the estimated 
efficiency for the new Generation-II SST is close to 97 % 
[10]. In addition, its volume is about one third of the 
Generation-I SST. Therefore, the performance can be 
potential improved. 
 
 
 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

IV. 
PLUG-AND-PLAY DC MICROGRID 
 
The plug-and-play DC microgrid is one of the most 
attractive solution for future residential application due to 
its good scalability. As shown in Figure 12, the envisioned 
DC microgrid system is constructed. It includes: two 
DRERs (PVs) and DESDs (batteries), which are used to 
simulate multiple DRERs and DESDs, local loads and a 
SST, where the arrows show the modules power flow 
directions. Two unidirectional DC/DC converters are used 
for PVs to transfer power generated by PVs into the system, 
and two bidirectional DC/DC converters are used for 
batteries to balance the power differences between loads 
and the power supplied by PVs in islanding mode. The local 
load and the SST share a common 380V dc bus. The DC 
bus voltage can be enabled by the SST’s output or be 
regulated 
by 
the 
battery’s 
DC/DC 
converters. 
Correspondingly, when the SST disconnects from the 
microgrid system, the dc microgrid operates in the islanding 
mode; while the SST connects to the system, the microgrid 
enters into the SST-enabled mode. In SST-enabled mode, 
the batteries can be charged or discharged through their 
converters automatically based on their control algorithms.  
 
Figure 12. Diagram of plug-and-play DC microgrid 
 
In the following discussion, the system’s power 
management strategy is presented based on the Figure .11, 
including PV module control algorithm, battery control 
algorithm and plug and play function [11]. 
A. PV module control algorithm 
The Maximum Power Point Track (MPPT) [12] control 
algorithm is shown in Figure 13.  
 
 
 
Figure 13. PV control algorithm. 
Vpvis the PV panel’s actual output voltage and Vpvref is the 
voltage reference, which is based on the MPPT curve. The 
difference of the two values as input to a PI controller is 
used to control the PV DC/DC converter.  
 
B. Battery module control algorithm 
To control each module distributed, integrate more 
DESDs into the system conveniently and implement the 
plug and play function without the communication ports 
involves, the droop control [13] for the battery is adopted. 
Comparing to the other methods, the droop control has its 
own advantages when it applies to microgrid system, either 
in islanding mode, SST-enable mode or transient mode, 
because the module can be controlled independently based 
on its local information (its output voltage and current) and 
no need to be aware of other modules’ or system’s 
information. Their droop curves are shown in Figure 14 (a). 
380V is a critical value. When the DC bus voltage is greater 
than 380V, batteries are in charging mode; otherwise they 
are in discharging mode. 400V and 360V are the upper-
limit and lower-limit values for the DC bus voltage. In 
islanding mode, all battery modules share the current to 
balance the power difference between the PV generation 
and load, and regulate the DC bus voltage according to their 
droop curves. Generally, the bigger rating battery, which 
has smaller slope will share more current than the smaller 
one. In SST-enabled mode, the DC bus is regulated by the 
SST and the batteries can be still in droop control. Battery 
modules are in charging or discharging mode, which are 
determined by the bus voltage enabled by SST. As a result, 
when system is in transient mode, whether the system 
switches from the islanding mode to SST-enabled mode or 
on the other way, there is no need to change the batteries 
control algorithm. The droop control diagrams for batteries 
are shown in Figure 14 (b). 
 
vmax
v1ref
1ref
I
vmax
vnref
nref
I
v1out
1out
I
Inout
nout
v
      
(a)                                                        (b) 
Figure 14. (a) Batteries droop curve; (b) Batteries control algorithm 
C. Database 
To supervise the operation of the whole system, a control 
center is constructed and the communication architecture is 
shown in Figure.15. Considering the DESD and DRER 
might be far from the control center, wire communication is 
unrealistic, thus a wireless communication port is adopted. 
The communication board (TS7800) [14] is interfaced with 
the each DSP board and transforms the SCI signals into 
WIFI signals, then the WIFI signals are transited to the 
control center. As a result, the control center of the DC 
microgrid collects the whole system information and a 
database is built to store all information. On the front-end of 
control center, Java Server Pages (JSP) are used to build up 
the webpage, which shows the real time data from each 
device and module’s plug or unplug status, as shown in 
Figure 16(a). On the back-end of control center, a database 
is set up by Mosel to save all system history information in 
control center, as shown in Figure 16(b). This database can 
query the TS7800 board for the data based on the 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

customer’s required period and then display the history data 
on the webpage. Furthermore, these data will automatically 
store into the database in the specified space, because each 
device has its own space to save data in database according 
to their IDs. In addition, since each device has its own ID in 
the control center, when the device re-plugged into the 
system, it can be recognized by the control center then its 
data can be saved into the corresponding space. 
Furthermore, the dynamic arrows are added on the webpage 
to show the module power flow direction and the battery 
arrow direction are bidirectional since it operates 
bidirectional as discussed in section III. The webpage of 
control center is shown as followings. 
In order to verify the proposed power management 
strategy, experimental tests have been carried out on an 
experimental setup in a laboratory. A 380V DC microgrid  
is constructed, which consists of two PV panel modules, 
two batteries modules and one local resistor load bank, 
which share a common dc bus. A DC power supply is used 
to supply the DC bus voltage to emulate SST-enabled 
mode. 
 
Figure 15. Communication architecture for DC microgrid 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 16.  (a) Control center webpage; (b) system database. 
 
Case I: islanding mode to DC source-enabled mode 
Experimental results of the transition from islanding 
mode to DC source-enabled mode are shown in Figure 17. 
(a) and Figure 17.(b). Initially the system is in the islanding 
mode and the DC bus voltage is regulated by the batteries. 
Based on the Figure 17 (b), the PV panels’ output power is 
almost equal to the load needed, so the bus voltage is 380V 
and the average values of batteries output currents are 
almost zeros. When the system connects to the DC source, 
there is no obvious change of the DC bus voltage, but the 
batteries output current have a very small drops because the 
DC source output voltage has a small oscillation. 
 
 
(a)                                                  (b) 
Figure 17. (a) Battery currents and bus voltage; (b) PV currents and 
voltages 
Case II: DC source-enabled mode to islanding mode 
Figure 18(a) and Figure 18(b) show the experimental 
results of the transition from DC source-enabled mode to 
islanding mode.  
 
(a)                                                      (b) 
Figure 18. (a) Battery currents and bus voltage; (b) PV currents and 
voltages 
 
When system is in the DC source-enabled mode, the DC 
bus voltage is regulated by the DC source. Since the DC 
source’s output voltage is 380V so the batteries are almost 
in stand-by status (output current average value is zero). 
When the system goes into the islanding mode, batteries are 
responsible to regulate the bus voltage. Since the power 
generated by PVs is less than the load needed, the DC bus 
voltage is a little bit smaller than 380V and the batteries 
output very small current.   
V. 
SOLID STATE FAULT ISOLATION DEVICE 
FID is an indispensable part of FREEDM system. The 
FID must provide ultra-fast isolation to fast restore the 
system voltage and therefore to minimize the required ride 
through capability of the system. It requires for a very fast 
operation (faults clearing within a few
S
) in this power 
electronics based system. In the developed hardware test 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

bed, the FID is in series with a 12 KV distribution system. 
Considering the limitation of the available high voltage 
IGBT (6.5KV rating), the adopted topology consists of 
three IGBT modules connected in series, with each module 
containing two emitter-connected 6.5KV, 200A IGBTs 
together with free-wheeling diodes [14]. To absorb the over 
voltage caused by high di/dt in the turn-off process, mental 
oxide varistor (MOV) is adopted shown in Figure 19.  
  
 
Figure 19. Gen-I FID with series connected IGBT 
 
Test results of the developed FID prototype interrupting a 
4A (peak) current in a single phase 7.2KV system is 
demonstrated in Figure 20. Figure 20 (a) shows the fast turn 
off process of the current and figure 20 (b) shows the re-
closer of the FID when the fault is cleared. It is shown that 
the developed FID can interrupt the fault current in a short 
time. 
 
 
(a)                                              (b) 
Figure 20. Test results of FID in the single phase 7.2 KV line 
 
  The Gen-II FID in FREEDM system will be focused on 
adoption of SiC power devices, such as SiC Emitter Turn-
off Thyristor (ETO), together with hybrid switch concept to 
future reduce the on-state voltage, and therefore minimize 
the losses of the FID in the normal operation.  
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presents the promising future power 
distribution system architecture: the FREEDM system. As a 
major step towards the envisioned FREEDM system, this 
paper summarizes the recent development of some key 
technologies, including distributed grid intelligence, solid 
state transformer, plug-and-play DC microgrid, and fault 
isolation device. The proposed FREEDM system is an 
efficient electric power grid integrating highly distributed 
and scalable alternative generating sources and storage with 
existing power systems. Therefore, to facilitate a green and 
sustainable energy based society, mitigate the growing 
energy crisis, and reduce the impact of carbon emissions on 
the environment. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by the National Science 
Foundation under the Award Number EEC-0812121.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Q. Huang., M. L. Crow, G. T .Heydt, J. P .Zheng, and S. J .Dale, 
“The Future Renewable Electric Energy Delivery and Management 
system: The Energy Internet,” in Proc. IEEE, vol.99, no.1, Jan. 2011, pp. 
133-148. 
[2] X.She, A.Q.Huang, S. Lukic, and M. Baran, “On integration of solid 
state transformer with zonal DC microgrid,” IEEE Trans. Smart grid, vol.3, 
no.2, June 2012, pp.975-985. 
[3] M.L.Crow, B.Mcmillin, W.Y.Wang, and S.Bhattacharya, “Intelligent 
energy management system of FREDM system,” in Proc.IEEE.PES 
general meeting, 2010, pp.1-4. 
[4] F.Wang, X.Lu, W.Y.Wang, and A.Q.Huang, “Development of 
Distributed Grid Intelligence Platform for Solid State Transformer,” in 
Proc.IEEE Smart Grid Comm., 2012, pp.481-485. 
[5] X.Lu, W.Y.Wang, A.Juneja, and A.Dean, “Talk to transformer: An 
empirical study of device communications for the FREEDM system,” in 
Proc.IEEE.Smart Grid Comm., 2011, pp. 303-308. 
[6] X.Lu, Z,Lu, W.Y.Wang, and J.F.Ma, “On network performance 
evaluation toward the smart grid: A case study of DNP3 over TCP/IP,” in 
Proc.IEEE. Global  Comm., 2011, pp.1-6. 
[7] X.She, R.Burgos, G.Y.Wang, F.Wang, and A.Q.Huang, “Review of 
solid state transformer in the distribution system: from implementation to 
filed application,” in Proc.IEEE.ECCE, 2012, pp.4077-4084. 
[8] G.Y.Wang, S.Baek, J.Elliott, A.Kadavelugu, F.Wang, X.She, and A.Q. 
Huang, “Design and Hardware Implementation of Gen-1 Silicon Based 
Solid State Transformer,”in Proc.IEEE.APEC. 2011, pp.1344-1349. 
[9] G.Y.Wang, A.Q.Huang, and C.S.Li, “ZVS range extension of 10A 
15KV SiC MOSFET based 20KW Dual Active Half Bridge (DHB) DC-
DC converter,” in Proc.IEEE ECCE 2012, pp. 1533-1539. 
[10] Annual report of Future Renewable Electrical Energy Delivery and 
Management system center, US, 2012.  
[11] X.W.Yu, F.wang, and A.Q.Huang, “Power management strategy for 
plug and play DC microgrid,” in Proc. IEEE.PES.ISGT., 2012, pp.1-6. 
[12] N. Femia, G. Petrone, G. Spagnuolo and M. Vitelli, “Optimization of 
Perturb and Observe Maximum Power Point Tracking Method,”IEEE 
Trans. Power Electron., vol. 20, no. 4, 2005, pp. 963-973. 
 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-259-2
ENERGY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

