Synchronisation Challenges within Future Smart Grid Infrastructure 
Jonathan Shannon, Hugh Melvin, Ronan O hOgartaigh, Antonio Ruzzelli  
College of Engineering and Informatics, NUI Galway Ireland 
ESB Networks, Ireland 
CLARITY, University College Dublin, Ireland 
shannon.jonathan@gmail.com, hugh.melvin@nuigalway.ie, ronan.ohogartaigh@esb.ie, ruzzelli@ucd.ie  
 
Abstract— Synchronisation of computer systems is a challenging 
task when the systems communicate across a dynamic and 
variable latency network but becomes especially challenging 
when the network contains wireless communication links. The 
success of the evolving smart grid project will depend hugely on 
Information and Communication Technologies to revolutionise 
the traditional power grid and will place various demands on 
current synchronisation techniques. Utilisation of wireless 
communication systems within the smart grid infrastructure 
seems inevitable, thus, if the project is to reach its full potential 
then some of the shortfalls of current synchronisation techniques 
over wireless must be remedied. This paper reviews the vital role 
of synchronisation within current and future smart grid 
infrastructures and outlines some proposals to remedy the 
shortfalls of current time synchronisation techniques. In 
particular, we focus on improving the implementation of the 
Network Time Protocol over 802.11 networks along with an 
optimisation technique to reduce the energy usage of a common 
Wireless Sensor Network synchronisation protocol.  
Keywords-802.11, NTP, PTP, Synchronisation, WSN. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The current grid is a real-time system whereby generation 
must always match demand. In any real-time system, time is a 
critical 
factor 
and 
when 
the 
system 
is 
distributed, 
synchronisation of its various elements is essential. Current 
grid infrastructures employ synchronisation techniques to 
permit such functions as fault detection, protection testing, load 
balancing, scheduling and analysis. Supervisory Control And 
Data Acquisition (SCADA) [1] systems play a very significant 
role in grid operation and through the use of synchronised time 
also permit logging of data which, can prove useful in 
determining the events leading up to and during disturbance 
events. In distributed power generation, geographically 
distributed generators supply power to the grid and 
synchroscopes ensure that they do so safely by synchronising 
frequency and phase.  
In recent years, more advanced ICT (Information and 
Communication 
Technologies) 
systems 
based 
on 
synchronisation techniques have evolved. These include fault 
detection systems such as the Fault Location Acquisition 
Reporter (FLAR) [2] system developed by the Bonneville 
Power Administration (BPA) in the US and PMUs (Phasor 
Measurement Units) [2] that utilise precisely synchronised 
phasor measurements to produce an instantaneous picture of 
the entire state of the grid in real time.  
Looking to the future and the evolving Smart-Grid/Smart-
Networks project, the role that time, timing and phase 
synchronisation will play will greatly expand. Smart grid will 
rely on advanced ICT technologies to revolutionise the 
traditional electricity grid. Smart grid will by definition 
significantly increase the complexity of the current grid’s static 
design by transforming it into a much more dynamic network 
where the distinction between producer and consumer will 
often be blurred. The composite elements of this complex 
system 
will 
place 
significant 
demands 
on 
current 
synchronisation technologies in order to meet its full potential.  
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. 
Section II outlines the role of synchronisation techniques 
within the traditional grid. Section III highlights some of the 
possible synchronisation requirements of future smart grid 
systems. Section IV details some of the synchronisation 
techniques employed in current ICT systems and highlights the 
challenges of deploying these techniques over wireless 
communication links. Section V outlines some solutions to 
meet these challenges. Section VI concludes the paper. 
II. 
ROLE OF SYNCHRONISATION IN CURRENT GRID 
INFRSTRUCTURE 
Current grids operate using a demand-response scheme 
whereby electrical energy is generated in response to real-time 
demand. SCADA systems play a key role, performing four 
distinct 
functions, 
namely, 
data 
acquisition, 
data 
communication, data presentation and control. In relation to 
data logging, data collected using a SCADA system must be 
time stamped in order to determine the correct sequence of 
events. This is performed by Remote Telemetry Units (RTU) 
which, timestamp sensor data, typically to within a few 
milliseconds of global time. 
A. Advanced Grid Synchronisation Topics 
In recent years, the role of time synchronisation within grid 
infrastructures 
has 
evolved. 
One 
particular 
advanced 
application of synchronisation is transmission cable fault 
detection. In the case of a cable fault, manual inspection can be 
impractical, time consuming and costly. Some impedance 
based automatic fault location systems are prone to error. 
When a power cable is damaged an electromagnetic noise burst 
is propagated out which, can be detected and timestamped by 
fault detection units at substations on each end of the cable.  
Subsequent analysis of the reception times can deduce the 
position of the fault based on signal Time of Arrival (TOA). 
This system is only effective if the devices on each end are 
synchronised 
to 
within 
a 
microsecond 
or 
better. 
Synchronisation of this granularity allows the location of the 
fault to be determined to within 300 meters. The Fault Location 
Acquisition Reporter (FLAR) developed by BPA in US is 
102
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

based on this scheme. The FLAR system has fault detection 
units located at numerous substations, each synchronised using 
GPS.  
Another example is Phasor Measurement Unit (PMU) 
technology. A PMU is a device which, provides phasor 
information associated with a particular point on the power 
grid. This information describes the magnitude and phase angle 
of a sinusoidal waveform. If a number of PMUs are placed at 
various locations within the power grid and synchronised to 
within a microsecond of each other they can provide precise 
real-time information regarding the state of the grid. This 
proves invaluable for monitoring grid activity. PMUs 
employed in this manner are referred to as synchrophasors and 
form an integral part of a fully functional phasor network. A 
complete phasor network consists of dispersed PMUs together 
with Phasor Data Concentrators (PDC) to aggregate PMU data 
and a SCADA system to monitor the accumulated data. In a 
typical deployment PMUs are synchronised through the use of 
integrated GPS receivers. Each PMU sample is time stamped 
and transmitted to a PDU using a standard protocol. The PDU 
correlates samples from multiple PMUs based on time stamps 
and forms a measurement set for that particular segment of the 
grid. The PDU then provides a direct output to a SCADA 
system which, provides a real-time visualisation of that grid 
segment.  
Finally, many line protection systems are based on 
precisely synchronised data for correct operation. Loss of 
synch can cause inadvertent (false positive, false negative) 
operation. For example, a utility might incorporate dedicated 
fiber links between grid sensing devices and a central 
aggregator. The propagation time of data via these links would 
be constant and known allowing data to be time stamped solely 
at the aggregator. If these links were to be replaced by leased 
lines incorporating deferent communication technologies and 
subject to varying traffic loads then time stamping solely at the 
aggregator would most likely be problematic. 
III. 
SMART GRID 
The smart grid project aims to revolutionise the current grid 
infrastructure 
in 
order 
to 
reduce 
inefficient 
energy 
consumption, to facilitate the move towards renewable energy, 
and to better utilise the grid’s capacity so as to accommodate 
growing electricity demand. A key driver for this will be 
through integration of ICT into the electricity grid, from 
generators through transmission right down to consumers. The 
current grid is based largely on one-directional power flows in 
a demand-response scheme. The system is designed to handle 
peak demand by adding additional and less efficient “peaking” 
capacity, thus adding to the overall cost. A smart grid system 
will use a variety of technologies to monitor and better control 
consumer demand, possibly incentivised through real-time 
pricing structures. A core objective is to level the current peak 
demand curve thus reducing total costs and ensuring that 
additional grid capacity is used to its full potential. The extent 
to which, consumers will be motivated to control/minimise 
energy usage either due to environmental concerns or (more 
likely) economic cost remains to be seen and will dictate the 
success or otherwise of demand side management (DSM) 
strategies.  
It must of course be borne in mind that the smart grid is not 
an end in itself, but a means to an end, and if there are other 
approaches which, meet the goals of increased fuel security 
(from local renewable resources) and reduced emissions (from 
decreased usage of fossil fuels) these should also be considered 
e.g., reconductoring transmission lines in High Temperature 
Low Sag (HTLS) Conductor to provide an extra 50% capacity. 
Additionally, smart grid can only operate where there is an 
existing Grid, and where this Grid has the capacity or 
“headroom” to operate as flexibly as smart grid system 
dynamics require.  
As such, a smart grid system may facilitate generation from 
independent suppliers utilising different generation techniques, 
renewable or otherwise. These might include Combined Heat 
and Power (CHP), solar/wind/ocean energy, micro-generation 
as well as more futuristic sources such as Vehicle to Grid 
(V2G). Smart Metering at each consumer premises has a key 
role to play in this.  
Technologies incorporated within the core of the grid will 
thus include HTLS conductors for efficient electricity 
transmission, storage units to house generated surplus energy 
and advanced PMU-based power flow monitoring for real-time 
grid activity monitoring. Within such a smart grid system the 
scale and complexity of SCADA systems will increase in 
orders of magnitude from current systems. Such SCADA 
systems may operate at a macro grid level or localised within 
micro-grids. Already, we have seen large strides in Energy 
Management Systems (EMSs) for end customers that seek to 
minimise/manage energy use. Currently, these communicate 
internally via a Home Area Network (HAN) with a multiplicity 
of devices to manage demand. In future, these will also be 
integrated within smart grid as they have an important role to 
play, leading to a merging of smart building, smart metering 
within the smart grid umbrella. We briefly describe both smart 
metering and smart buildings in later sections. 
The evolution of smart grid systems will also extend to the 
transport sector. For many reasons, electric vehicles will be a 
key driver of DSM at customer level by incentivising charging 
in valley periods. Looking further to the future, vehicle-to-grid 
(V2G) systems may materialise allowing vehicles to take on 
the role of both an energy consumer and supplier within the 
grid.  
While a wide variety of technologies will be essential to 
make a smart grid system a reality, one fundamental aspect will 
be the synchronisation technologies employed to glue the 
system together. A smart grid system will effectively be a large 
real-time distributed system and as such time and frequency 
will play a key role in its correct operation. Synchronisation of 
various elements of the system will be vital for effective 
monitoring and control of energy flow from suppliers to 
consumers, see Fig. 1. 
103
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

 
Figure 1- Synchronisation of Grid Elements 
A. Smart Metering 
An effective smart grid system can only be realised by 
means of precise real-time monitoring and control of power 
usage down to the end-consumer. Real-time monitoring of 
power usage permits accurate analysis of daily demand and 
allows for construction of an efficient energy plan based on 
real-time pricing. Recent years have seen the wide scale 
deployment of so-called smart meter trials in numerous 
countries across the globe. In contrast to traditional meters a 
smart meter provides a more comprehensive report of power 
consumption in addition to bi-directional communication 
capabilities. In a future scenario, smart meters could provide 
real-time data to a Home Area Network (HAN) that manages 
an internal Energy Management System; the HAN in turn will 
communicate externally with the smart grid. As such, meters 
must be synchronised to Universal Coordinate Time (UTC). 
HAN communication methods that have been used include 
Power Line Communication (PLC), Wired LAN, Wi-Fi and 
licensed radio networks. Undoubtedly, smart metering will 
play a key role in the development of future smart grid.  One 
might envisage a multiplicity of smart meters within a 
commercial or industrial building each monitoring the activity 
of a power intensive system, for instance, a heating or air 
conditioning system. Each of these smart meters would be 
synchronised to a global time reference for use by the 
consumer’s EMS. Analysis by the EMS would provide a 
means to construct a schedule to better optimise, from a cost 
perspective, the operation of these systems. Such a system 
would also permit DSM incentivised schemes including 
automatic load shedding in low frequency situations brought 
about by sudden loss of generation. Such notifications to the 
HAN will likely use both broadcasting and unicasting 
techniques, the former to reach multiple aggregated consumers 
where low priority loads could be removed at short notice, and 
the latter to manage larger individual loads.  
A more elaborate scheme within a building might integrate 
networks of sensing devices to provide in-depth analysis of 
individual systems. For instance, sensing devices capable of 
measuring temperature, airflows could be dispersed around a 
building and networked together to form a Wireless Sensor 
Network (WSN). Data collected from sensors within a WSN 
needs to be time stamped effectively. Thus, use of WSN 
synchronisation techniques such as the Reference Broadcast 
Synchronization (RBS) algorithm [3] or the Flooding Time 
Synchronization Protocol (FTSP) [4] will be essential though 
the extent of synchronisation required is application dependent. 
B. Smart Buildings 
As described, both smart building and smart metering 
technologies are essential in the evolution of smart grid. Smart 
building is a term used to describe a building automation 
system with advanced automatic systems for controlling 
heating, cooling, lighting, security and various other functions. 
A smart building home controller may take the form of a PC 
with the required hardware and software to communicate with 
and monitor the systems. Communication between different 
devices might also be facilitated through emerging standards 
such as BACnet [5] or KNX [6]. As described, HAN 
communication between a home controller and various 
automated systems might be performed using a Power Line 
Communication protocol or some wireless protocol such as 
ZigBee or Wi-Fi. Coordination of the automatic systems within 
a smart building will typically be performed by defining 
various operating modes via the home controller. An operating 
mode may define the lighting, heating, air-conditioning and 
security requirements for a particular time of the day which, is 
subsequently activated automatically at that time by the 
synchronised home controller. The use of smart meters 
together with building automation systems would provide a 
means to better define operating modes that would meet an 
individual’s desired demand profile. 
C. Electric Vehicles 
Electric vehicles (EVs) have a key role to play in smart grid 
by facilitating national strategies for reducing reliance on fossil 
fuel energy and moving to renewable electricity based on 
wind/ocean/biomass etc. Besides the environmental benefits, 
the use of indigenous sources of energy will eliminate external 
dependence, however, it will require a large initial investment 
and the benefits may not be observed for many years. Currently 
the main disadvantages of EVs are the low energy density and 
lengthy recharging time of their batteries, issues which, are 
likely to be remedied in future years. While it is largely agreed 
that EVs have a key strategic role to play in reducing fossil fuel 
dependency and fostering DSM (through off peak charging 
tariffs), it also appears possible that they may also take on the 
role of suppliers through vehicle-to-grid (V2G) technologies. 
Similar 
to 
the 
situation 
described 
above 
with 
smartmetering/smartbuildings, 
a 
V2G 
system 
will 
communicate via HAN to the grid and would allow EVs to 
provide electricity to the grid during critical events or during 
peak hours, thus helping to reduce need for traditional spinning 
reserve and inefficient peaking plant. A V2G system could also 
act as the main supplier to a residence in the event of an 
outage.. Ireland has a very ambitious target for electric vehicle 
penetration with a strategy to achieve 10% all-electric vehicles 
by 2020 with 3,500 charge points by 2011 underway [7]. 
104
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

IV. 
SYNCHRONISATION OVER ICT 
The future scenario of a smart grid facilitated through smart 
metering and smart buildings will place huge demands on the 
supporting ICT infrastructure. As detailed, the current scale of 
SCADA will increase in orders of magnitude and such 
SCADA, operating at macro or micro scale will be IP based. 
For example, the SCADA system operated by ESB Networks, 
the Irish Distribution System Operator for the whole country 
currently communicates with < 1000 Medium/Low voltage sub 
stations connected largely through dedicated radio and roughly 
1000 pole mounted devices with third part GPRS connectivity. 
Contrast this with possible future smart grid deployment that 
will see at a minimum each consumer smart meter and HAN 
connected. In addition to this, it is likely as outlined that via a 
the consumer’s HAN, multiple devices such as secondary 
smart meters, vehicles, and various appliances will be 
connected, To facilitate this scenario, each node will have its 
own IP address to facilitate management within the HAN and 
also outside as they interact with smart grid. As such, the scale 
of the required infrastructure for a small country with just over 
1m homes represents a huge step in SCADA scope. 
Realistically, a hierarchical network of SCADA systems will 
be deployed to distinguish between critical infrastructure i.e., 
substations and less critical. For example, in an Irish context, 
there are approximately 12,000 MV/LV substations of 200kVA 
and over. Moving to IP will ease some complexity but has 
already raised serious security and privacy concerns. Within 
the high, medium and low voltage grid, where power flows will 
be much more dynamic, the architecture of monitoring, control 
and protection systems will all have to be redesigned to meet 
the changing requirements.  
Synchronisation of various elements of a smart grid system 
will be vital for effective monitoring and control of energy 
flow from suppliers to consumers. Smart grid will thus most 
likely incorporate the synchronisation techniques utilised by 
current ICT systems. The motivation for sync can be attributed 
to the imperfections in current computer system clocks which, 
typically utilise inexpensive quartz crystals as their frequency 
standard. While systems such as Oven Crystals and Global 
Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) (GPS, Glonass and 
Galileo) act as a very reliable and accurate source of time, they 
are not a practical or cost effective time sync solution in many 
scenarios As such the use of a software based synchronisation 
protocol is favored. 
A. NTP & PTP 
At present NTP (Network Time protocol) [8] and PTP 
(Precision Time protocol) [9] are the de-facto synchronisation 
protocols utilised over wired networks. NTP is designed for 
dynamic and variable latency packet switched wide area 
networks and can attain low-millisecond accuracies if well 
managed. PTP can attain microsecond accuracies over LANs, 
thus, meeting the precision requirements of applications that 
NTP cannot, but at the cost of requiring a tightly managed 
network and specialised time stamping hardware.  
B. Synchronisation Errors 
NTP and PTP use pair-wise synchronisation to synchronise 
the clocks of computer systems whereby a host wishing to be 
synchronised sends a time request to a reference node and 
records the transmission time t1. The reference node replies 
with the reception time of the request message and 
transmission time of the reply message, t2 and t3 respectively. 
The host node records the reception time of the reply message 
t4 and uses the four timestamps to calculate the propagation 
time and, thus, determine its clock offset from the reference. 
(1).  
  
This technique operates on the assumption that the each-way 
message delays between a sender and receiver are symmetric. 
If this is not the case, which, in reality is often true, then the 
calculation of a clock’s offset from its reference will be 
inaccurate. The different sources of synchronisation errors can 
be attributed to the different components of a synchronisation 
message’s latency. These components can be categorised as 
the send time, access time, propagation time and receive time. 
The send time represents the time taken for a host to construct 
a synchronisation message and transfer it to the network 
interface. The access time corresponds to the delay incurred 
by the network interface while waiting to gain access to the 
communication medium. The propagation time is simply the 
time taken for the message to travel to the receiver once it has 
left the sender while the receive time represents the time taken 
for the receiver’s network interface to receive the message 
from the communication medium, decode it and notify the 
host application that it has arrived. It is important to note that, 
with pair-wise synchronisation, the magnitude of a message’s 
delay is not the factor which, results in a clock error but rather 
the difference between the delays of a request message and a 
response message.  
NTP and PTP use different techniques to mitigate the 
effects of non-deterministic delays on time estimation. NTP 
references multiple time sources and utilises a suite of 
statistical algorithms to deduce the most probable clock offset. 
Conversely, PTP takes advantage of the fact that its operating 
environment 
is 
managed 
and 
employs 
PTP-aware 
internetwork nodes and hardware time stamping to increase 
precision. While these techniques prove very effective it is 
important to note that both NTP and PTP were designed to 
operate within the wired domain, and as such, wireless links 
pose greater challenges. 
C. Wireless Issues 
A wireless network utilizes a shared medium that must be 
allocated to individual nodes in a protocol-dependent fashion. 
Depending on the technique used and the traffic load at a 
particular time, transmission of packets between two particular 
nodes may be subject to large contention delays. The most 
accepted and widely implemented set of standards for wireless 
communication over LANs is defined by IEEE 802.11. The 
basic 802.11 specification defines both the physical and data 
link layers for communication across a wireless network. 
Access to the wireless medium as defined by the 802.11 MAC 
layer is controlled by the distributed coordination function 
(DCF) which, controls access by using a CSMA/CA (carrier 
sense multiple access with collision avoidance) mechanism. It 
105
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

operates by first checking that the medium is clear using 
carrier sensing functions and if so begins transmission. If the 
medium is in use the station backs off for a random time 
interval to avoid a collision. In the case of an 802.11 network, 
all nodes including the access point conform to the same 
access rules. Since the access point (AP) carries out extra 
work, an NTP host operating over an 802.11 network with 
competing nodes can experience significant asymmetric 
round-trip delays and, thus, accumulate significant clock 
errors. In relation to a smart building with time sensitive 
devices running NTP implementations and communicating via 
the building’s Wi-Fi LAN this would prove problematic. 
D. Wireless Sensor Networks 
As mentioned in section III, WSNs will most likely form a 
significant segment of smart grid, particularly at the consumer 
side. The greatest issue concerning WSNs is their limited 
energy supply. Thus, techniques to ensure optimal use of 
power consuming sensor components by synchronization 
algorithms will be required.  
V. 
CONTRIBUTION 
To summarise previous sections, future smart grid systems 
will be highly complex and dynamic and will require a 
comprehensive ICT support infrastructure for stringent 
monitoring and control of demand in real-time. These systems 
will require various degrees of synchronisation from 
generation down to the consumer premises. Within the latter, 
communication between nodes may be over wired or wireless 
networks. Wi-Fi is currently the most popular form of wireless 
communication due to ease of operation and installation. 
However, as described, contention delays can severely 
decrease the accuracies achievable by current time protocols 
and as such solutions must be found. In addition to this, the 
use of WSNs within smart grid systems will require that 
energy saving techniques are incorporated into WSN 
synchronization protocols to prolong battery life whilst 
maintaining adequate synchronisation levels. 
A. Synchronisation over 802.11 
One solution to asymmetry being implemented by the 
authors  entails the use of 802.11 acknowledgement frames 
(ACKs) and special probe frames to deduce and eliminate the 
non-deterministic medium access times at the host and access 
point. Unlike many data link layer protocols, 802.11 
incorporates positive acknowledgements. All transmitted 
frames must be acknowledged by the receiving party via an 
acknowledgement frame or the transmission is considered a 
failure. The transmission of data and reception of an 
acknowledgement is an atomic operation and must be 
completed fully or not at all.   
As illustrated in Fig. 2, if the sender of a time message 
records the reception time of its corresponding ACK frame 
that sender could largely eliminate the non-deterministic send 
time, and more importantly, the medium access time of that 
message. The result would be the elimination of the effects of 
traffic contention and sender delays in the upload direction of 
the time message. While this method would be beneficial to 
some degree it would not address the larger issue of non-
deterministic delays in the download direction. Larger 
download delays can be attributed to the fact that users in 
general download more data than they upload and more 
importantly, an access point must compete with all other 
wireless nodes equally. To estimate download delays the 
sender could send a special probe request frame to the access 
point that would initiate a corresponding response frame. The 
reception times of the request frame’s acknowledgement and 
the response frame could then be used to estimate the send and 
access delays at the AP at that point in time, thus, reducing 
asymmetry errors. 
Another possible solution being explored is improving 
synchronisation accuracy by real-time analysis of network 
related data. Analysis of past data can help to quickly identify 
network trends and make predictions about the state of the 
network. Both statistical techniques and more elaborate 
methods such as artificial neural networks are being 
investigated. A statistical approach might involve analysing 
network related data and forming a probability model to infer 
the most probable behavior of the network at a particular point 
in time. In addition, analysis of the correlation between a time 
packet’s round trip delay and the corresponding estimated 
offset could be used to identify and correct for probable 
asymmetric delays. An artificial neural network could provide 
an even more effective solution by recognising patterns in the 
network and using this to improve NTP performance. 
At an abstracted level, both approaches can be viewed as a 
module that can be linked to some synchronisation protocol 
and used to mitigate the asymmetric effects of wireless 
contention. For instance, an intermediate MAC to NTP 
interface module could provide one or both of the above 
techniques depending on the condition of the wireless network. 
(Fig. 3). 
Time Application
Send Time
AP
Host
ACK Reception Time
Time Frame
ACK
SIFS
Probe Request 
Frame
Probe Response 
Frame
ACK
Host
Send & Access
Time
Probe Response 
Recieve Time
AP
Send & Access
Time
T1
T2
T3
T4
T2 – T1 - SIFS  ≈
T4 – T3  ≈
Probe Request 
Send Time
  
Figure 2.   Determination of send and MAC delays 
106
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

MAC
NTP
AP
Host
FRAME
ACK
Medium Access
Determination
Data Analysis
 
Figure 3.   MAC to NTP interface module 
B. Energy  Conservation in WSN  
At present FTSP is the de facto synchronisation protocol used 
in WSNs. To retain the precision requirements of a WSN 
application, FTSP nodes must broadcast messages at a 
predetermined periodic interval, the value of which, is 
influenced by the nodes operating environment and to a lesser 
extent their clock characteristics. These periodic transmissions 
allow nodes to determine their clock skew relative to an 
elected root node. In most cases this transmission interval is 
not optimal resulting in needless radio transmissions and, thus, 
energy wastage.  
 
δ = F(φMAX, ε)
φ - Drift
δ - TX Interval
ε - Error Bound
δ
δ
δ
φ
φ
φ
 
Figure 4. Dynamic FTSP 
 
A solution the authors are currently implementing is to have 
an FTSP node alter its transmission interval based on the 
overall precision requirements of the WSN application and the 
rate of change of skew of neighboring nodes. A node’s 
transmission interval would therefore be dictated by its most 
unstable neighboring node. This technique will result in a 
significant reduction in transmissions particularly in a variable 
operating environment (Fig. 4) and allow an administrator to 
customise the synch level for the application domain.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has explored the vital role that synchronisation 
currently plays in electrical grids and has highlighted the 
importance of synchronisation in the evolving smart grid 
project. It is certain that future smart grid systems will rely 
heavily on current ICT technologies and synchronisation 
techniques. This paper has briefly outlined two research 
projects to improve synchronisation performance over 
wireless networks. The first focuses on NTP performance over 
Wifi whereas the second has developed a novel extension to 
the FTSP protocol for sensor networks that will deliver quality 
synchronization at reduced energy cost.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Our research is funded by IRCSET (The Irish Research 
Council for Science, Engineering & Technology) and is being 
undertaken in collaboration with the Performance Engineering 
Lab (PEL) (http://pel.it.nuigalway.ie/). We also wish to 
acknowledge the assistance and contributions from ESB 
Networks, the Irish Distribution System Operator in realising 
this paper. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]   Daneels, A. and  Salter, W., “What is SCADA?”, (ICALEPCS), 1999. 
[2] Martin, K. E., “Precise Timing in Electric Power Systems,” IEEE 
International Frequency Control Symposium (IEEE), pp. 15-22, 1993. 
 [3] Elson, J., Girod, L. and Estrin, D., “Fine-Grained Network Time 
Synchronization using Reference Broadcasts,” The Fifth Symposium on 
Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI), pp. 147–163, 
2002. 
[4] Maróti, M., Kusy, B., Simon, G. and Ákos Lédeczi, “The Flooding Time 
Synchronization Protocol,” Proceedings of the 2nd international 
conference on Embedded networked sensor systems (SenSys), pp. 39-49, 
2004. 
[5]   www.bacnet.org (last accessed – 18 Mar, 2011) 
[6]   www.knx.org (last accessed – 18 Mar, 2011) 
[7] www.esb.ie/main/press/press-release399.jsp (last accessed – 18 Mar, 
2011) 
[8] Network Time Protocol (NTP). http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1305.html 
(last accessed – 18 Mar, 2011) 
[9] IEEE-1588 - Standard for a Precision Clock Synchronization Protocol 
for Networked Measurement and Control Systems. 
[10] Mills, D. L., “Internet time synchronization: the network time protocol,” 
IEEE Trans. Communications, vol. 39, no. 10, pp. 1482–1493,1991. 
[11] Allan, D. W., Ashby, N. and Hodge, C. C., “The Science of Timekeeping, 
Technical report”, Hewlett Packard Application Note 1287, 1997. 
[12] Römer, K., Blum, P. and Meier, L., “Time Synchronization and 
Calibration in Wireless Sensor Networks”, In: Stojmenovic, I. (ed.) 
Wireless Sensor Networks, Wiley and Sons, Chichester, 2005. 
[13] ITU-T G.810, “Definitions and Terminology for Synchronisation 
Networks”, International Telecommunication Union, 1996. 
[14] Melvin, H., O Flaithearta, P., Shannon, J. and Beloqui Yuste, L., “Time 
Synchronisation at Application Level: Potential Benefits, Challenges and 
Solutions”, Intl. Telecom Synchronisation Forum (ITSF), 2009. 
[15] Shannon, J. and Melvin, H., “Synchronisation Challenges for Wireless 
Networks”, Digital Technologies (DT), 2009. 
 
107
ENERGY 2011 : The First International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-136-6

