Constraint-based Modeling of Smart Grid Services in ICT-Reliant Power Systems
Frauke Oest
Department of Computer Science
University of Oldenburg, Germany
Email: frauke.oest@uni-oldenburg.de
Sebastian Lehnhoff
Department of Computing Science
University of Oldenburg, Germany
Email: sebastian.lehnhoff@uni-oldenburg.de
Abstract—The future Information and Communication Tech-
nology (ICT) infrastructure in distribution grids requires a
significant network and computational resources for potentially
running all so-called Smart Grid Services (SGS). The insufficient
infrastructure may create network and computational conges-
tions and resource shortages, which can lead to e.g., delayed
critical messages in the power system and thus affect the power
system stability. This paper presents a model for the configuration
of SGSs with consideration of the underlying ICT infrastructure
as a constraint satisfaction problem. This model is studied in a
nominal and overvoltage scenario. The resulting over-constrained
problem in the second scenario is relaxed by SGS data-rate
reduction, SGS migration or SGS distribution. We show that
an over-constrained problem can be relaxed with our proposed
strategies.
Keywords—smart grids; information and communication tech-
nology; quality of service; constraint satisfaction problem
I. INTRODUCTION
The operation of modern energy systems is based on a
number of measurement, control and automation tasks for
monitoring and operating extensively distributed resources,
e.g., voltage stability monitoring or state estimation, for which
different Quality of Service (QoS) requirements must be
guaranteed. They serve as the basis for higher optimization
functions that realize reliable, efficient and forward-looking
overall system operation. In transmission systems, a dedicated
and high-performance real-time communication infrastructure
guarantees timing behavior and allows parallel execution of
these communication-intensive functions and services with
very heterogeneous and homogeneous latency requirements
and communication demands. Such requirements range from,
e.g., 10 ms up to several minutes maximum latency [1]. Due
to the expansion of renewable energies at lower voltage level
distribution networks and the shift of system responsibility to
(operators of) these systems, similar functions and services
must also be implemented in distribution systems – so-called
Smart Grid Services (SGSs) with similar QoS requirements
and guarantees. In addition, the future smart distribution
system will be supplemented by additional SGSs comprising
market and user-based applications, which may use the same
communication infrastructure to enable a synergetic use [2].
This would require, similarly to transmission systems, a ded-
icated, over-provisioned communication infrastructure to run
planned and future SGSs. Due to economical reasons, such
infrastructure is not likely to be available soon (if ever) for
smart distribution grids. Other solutions like wireless-based
dedicated infrastructures or the usage of public networks do
not provide sufficient and reliable resources to ensure QoS
requirements of all potentially running SGSs. Additionally,
the behavior and criticality of SGSs may change in different
states of the power grid and thus QoS requirements may
vary. For instance, in case of sudden changes of fluctuating
renewable feed-in, the power grid may enter a critical state
in which SGSs (e.g., feed-in management, voltage control,
or congestion control) need to stabilize the system. In such
critical situations, a reconfiguration might be necessary to
meet new QoS requirements, e.g., due to higher sampling
rates for increased measurement precision [3]. A solution to
this problem could be the reconfiguration of SGS in the ICT-
system with regards to the power system. Such reconfiguration
can include a controlled reduction of data rates, migration of
SGS to another server or a change in the overlay topology.
This implies, that besides network QoS, also computational
demands of SGSs must be considered to avoid congestion on
servers. These SGS requirements and the limitations of the
physical ICT infrastructure (i.e., computational resources on
server, maximum line bitrates in the communication infras-
tructure) can be denoted as constraints and hence, this may be
modeled as constraint satisfaction problem.
A. Related Work
Several aspects of flexibilization of communication for
smart grids can be found in the literature. Virtualization con-
cepts like Software-Defined Networking (SDN) may build the
foundation to enable such flexibilization. In SDN, the network
control (running on the SDN controller) is separated from the
data flow (running on SDN devices). The infrastructure com-
ponents (SDN devices) will be more quickly and adaptively
configurable through abstract SDN applications in the SDN
controller. One of the central features of SDN is the rapid
adaptability of flows and packet routes and the implementation
of QoS mechanisms [4]. In smart grids, the use of SDN has
enhanced the reliability of field device communication through
fast migration of functionality from a failed device towards a
redundant device [5] and enabled a power system-dependent
prioritization of SGS communication triggered by one SGS
[6]. Another approach to virtualization in the communication
system is called Network Function Virtualization (NFV), in
which the network functions (e.g., routing, firewall, load
balancer) are virtualized as an entire function and can thus
be flexibly moved and multiplied [7]. This has been applied
in smart grid communication where it demonstrates how this
flexibility in communication may increase the dependability of
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-967-6
ENERGY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

metering communication [8] or functionality may be moved
towards the edge of the network near field devices in order
to reduce traffic and communication delays [9]. Similar to
NFV, the Grid Function Virtualization (GFV) concept enables
the migration of SGSs. This concept has been studied in a
simulation in case of server failures with a running SGS for
voltage control. The affected SGS could be migrated after the
failure, improving the voltage quality much faster compared to
non-GFV simulations [10]. In another study, GFV was used
to decrease the data rates of a non-prioritized SGS to favor
QoS requirements of the prioritized SGS [11].
B. Contribution
This paper presents a constrained-based model for SGS con-
figurations considering QoS and computational requirements
for the underlying ICT infrastructure, which can be solved
by using constraint satisfaction programming. This model is
studied in a use case with two power system-based scenarios
in which one scenario leads to non-satisfiability of constraints.
With this, the usage of SGS flexibilities, such as data-rate
reduction, migration and distribution, is motivated as a better
controllable form of problem relaxation.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: The
constraint-based model is defined in Section II. In Section III
this model is integrated into an experimentation environment
and scenarios with exemplary SGSs are defined. Furthermore,
flexibilities of SGSs are introduced to resolve the constraint
satisfaction problem if the scenario is over-constrained (e.g.,
due to changes in QoS of one SGS). Section IV presents the
results for the nominal scenario and different over-constrained
scenarios with and without using SGSs flexibilities showing
the selected solutions and the computational performance of
the process. Finally, Section V summarizes the paper, draws
a conclusion, and presents ideas for future research.
II. CONSTRAINT-BASED MODEL
A Smart Grid Service (SGS) is an application serving the
operation of the power grid. It contains field devices, such
as sensors and actors in the power grid, and may contain a
central server for processing field device data. SGSs impose
requirements on the ICT infrastructure, such as maximum
latency or minimum bitrate requirement, and minimum com-
putational resources. The allocation of SGSs require a feasible
path configuration of the single SGS in a given communication
infrastructure and with regards to QoS requirements of SGSs.
Therefore, this can be categorized as a combinatorial problem
(such as other resource allocation problems) and may be
formalized as a Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP). Our
problem formalization is based on the definition of CSPs as
described in Bartak et al. [12]. For this, the i-th SGS from a
set of n SGSs will be associated with a decision variable xi. In
the following description, we continue to denote i for the SGS
i specifics. The domain of each decision variable comprises a
set of tuples di,j ∈ Di and represents a set of feasible solution
candidates for SGS i, in which a single solution candidates
di,j can be selected by xi. The solution candidate di,j can be
denoted as follows:
di,j = (phs, mhs, shs, amax, B) with di,j ∈ Di.
(1)
The constraints C = {c1, c2, . . . , cp} may be defined by n-ary
functions, which limit the values from the domain that can be
assigned to the decision variable. The domain is determined
by the parameterization of the SGS i and therefore, regards
the field devices Hfi and server hsi belonging to this SGS,
as well as network (latency αi, bitrate βi) and computational
QoS requirements (CPU pi, memory mi, storage si) and
the configured overlay topology (centralized or distributed).
In a centralized topology, field devices are connected to the
central server in a star topology, whereas in the distributed
topology, field devices are directly connected, creating a fully-
meshed topology. The computational properties are defined as
CPU demand phs, memory demand mhs and storage demand
shs, which are applied to the server node hs ∈ Hsi. The
network properties are determined by maximum path latency
amax and by the bitrate demands for all edges B which are
determined by the paths representing the routing or data flow
in the underlying ICT infrastructure. The ICT infrastructure
is represented by the physical graph G(V, E) defined by
vertices V
and edges E. A weighted edge is defined as
e = (v′, v′′, a, b), with v′ as a source node connected to
v′′ with the edge weight properties a as line propagation
latency and b as maximum line bitrates. The set of vertices V
includes infrastructure nodes (e.g., router) R and hosts, such as
server nodes Hs and field nodes Hf. To construct the network
properties of a solution candidate, subgraphs of the physical
graphs are constructed, which contain one feasible simple path
for each end-to-end connection. This end-to-end connection is
defined by the overlay topology and the host nodes of the SGS
i. To create such subgraphs, the paths have to be determined
first (e.g., by depth-first search). A path from the source h1 to
the target h2 is determined by
p(h1, h2) = (h1, r1, . . . , rq, h2)
(2)
where r ∈ R and h1, h2 ∈ Hs∪Hf. The path p(h1, h2) is part
of the set P(h1, h2) comprising all potential paths from h1 to
h2, which occur if there are cycles in the physical graph. In a
preliminary step, a set of path combinations Zi is constructed
comprising one feasible path per end-to-end connection, i.e.,
one path combination zi contains the topological information
to construct subgraphs connecting all host nodes h ∈ Hi of
SGS i. For this, all end-to-end connections per SGS i are
defined by the set of tuples Qi = {(h1, h′
1), . . . , (hn, h′
n)}
with h, h′ ∈ Hi. The set of path combinations can then be
constructed as a cartesian product by
Zi =
Y
q∈Q
P(q).
(3)
Based on this, the subgraph fi,j can be built by adopting the
edge latency of the physical graph G(V, E) if the vertices
(v′, v′′) ∈ zi,j ∈ Zi are also v′, v′′ ∈ V (G). The edge bitrates
e(b) are determined for the edge (v′, v′′) ∈ zi,j by the bitrate
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-967-6
ENERGY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

QoS requirement βi of the SGS i for the solution candidate
j, such that
fi,j(e(b)) = e(b) + βi.
(4)
This implies, that an edge in this subgraph is used by multiple
simple paths, the bitrate weight is adjusted by summing the
bitrate weight with the number of paths containing this edge.
The bitrate resource B of the solution candidate di,j can be
derived from the subgraph fi as an adjacency matrix Badj.
The end-to-end latency amax of the solution candidates di,j is
determined by
amax =
max
h1,h2∈Hi


X
e∈E(Ph1,h2)
e(a)

 .
(5)
The amount of SGSs running on a server h ∈ Hs is limited
by its server resources for cpu hp, memory hm and storage
hs. As xi chooses a solution candidate di,j, the information
can be accessed by the function phs(xi) for using the CPU
usage on server hs of this solution candidate. This also
applies to mhs(xi) and shs(xi). Therefore, the server resource
constraints are defined by the constraints cp, cm, and cs
cp :=
X
xi∈X
phs(xi) ≤ hp
(6)
cm :=
X
xi∈X
mhs(xi) ≤ hm
(7)
cs :=
X
xi∈X
shs(xi) ≤ hs
(8)
The network constraints are defined by the latency constraint
ca and the bitrate constraint cb, which should not exceed the
maximum physical bitrates of the weighted adjacency matrics
Eadj of G with bitrates as weights.
ca := amax(xi) ≤ αi
(9)
cb :=
X
xi∈X
Badj(xi) ≤ Eadj
(10)
In this constraint model, constraints can be relaxed by manu-
ally adjusting the SGS parameterization, such as the overlay
topology, network or computational QoS requirements.
III. METHODOLOGY
The aforementioned constrained-based model is integrated
into a constraint satisfaction program and then exemplary
scenarios are defined based on a physical graph and five
SGSs with network and computational requirements. These
requirements considered in the scenarios depend on the state
of the power system (e.g., nominal or overvoltage). The
overvoltage scenario leads to a non-solvability of the problem.
Therefore, relaxation strategies are presented at the end of this
section.
A. Experimentation Setup
The constrained-based model is implemented using Net-
workX [13] for solution candidate generation and Minizinc
[14] for constraint satisfaction programming and solving. For
this, the physical graph is modeled in NetworkX comprising
all nodes and edges with latency and bitrate properties. SGSs
can be defined by the QoS requirement parameters (latency,
bitrate, CPU, memory, storage), the assigned field devices and
server, and the overlay topology (centralized or distributed).
NetworkX is used to determine the simple paths in order to
create subgraphs containing all end-to-end connections to all
host nodes (i.e., server and field devices) of an SGS. These
subgraphs can be transformed to adjacency matrices for easier
bitrate calculation in Minizinc. Thus, NetworkX is used to
determine the adjacency matrix for bitrate calculations and the
corresponding end-to-end path latency as part of the solution
candidate. The SGSs and physical constraints are implemented
as a Minizinc model, the solution candidates are integrated via
a python interface to Minzinc as a model instance. Gecode
[15] is used as a solver in Minizinc. The output of Minizinc
consists of a feasible solution candidate for each SGS, which
can be visualized in NetworkX.
The model of the physical communication network in Fig-
ure 1 is based on the modeling of field devices in the CigreMV
power grid [11]. The inner communication infrastructure is
adjusted with regards to bitrates and latency. Routers are con-
nected in three subnetworks and one core network linking the
subnetworks, which creates a hierarchical infrastructure [16]
[17]. The core network is defined by the routers R10, R20 and
R30; the subnetworks comprise the routers R11 - R12, R21 -
R23 and R31 - 32. The edge of the network is modeled by
the 17 field devices (F11 - F16, F21 - F26, F31 - F35) and the
two servers S1 and S2. The modeled infrastructure is the most
powerful in its core network, followed by the subnetworks and
the edge network. Therefore, the core network is modeled with
200 kByte / s bitrate resource and a propagation delay of 20 ms
on each edge. The subnetwork is defined with 100 kByte / s
bitrate and a latency of 25 ms and the edge network is denoted
with a bitrate and latency property of 25 kByte / s and 30 ms.
The server S1 contains 6 CPU cores, 16 GB memory and
50 GB storage. The server S2 is modeled with 4 CPU cores,
8 GB memory and 20 GB storage capacity.
B. Scenarios
We test our model from Section II with two scenarios
representing two states of the power system. In both scenarios,
we consider the SGSs Adaptive Relaying (AR), Coordinated
Voltage Control (CVC), Line Monitoring (LM), State Esti-
mation (SE) and Virtual Power Plant management (VPP).
The first scenario describes the nominal state of the power
system, in which the power system properties (voltage, active
and reactive power, temperature of the operating equipment)
are within the ideal range, so that grid critical services only
need the minimum computational and network resources. The
bitrate and latency requirements for SGS AR and LM are
based on [18] and the requirements for the SGSs CVC and
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-967-6
ENERGY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Figure 1. Physical graph with bitrates and latency on the edges.
SE are based on [19]. The bitrate requirements are derived
from the sampling rates. For this, we estimate the size of a
TCP / IP packet including payload to 100 Byte per sampling
value. The QoS requirements for the SGS VPP are derived
from the assumptions and results of [20].
The computational demands of SGSs are very dependent
on the implementation of the service. Therefore, we try to
categorize the demands based on a likely implementation. For
this, we determine the computational demands into the cate-
gories low, medium and high for each computational demand
characteristic. In Table I, these categories are translated into
concrete requirements. The CPU resources are modeled as
proportions (as millicpu) of one hyper thread on a bare-metal
Intel processor. These computational demands are idealized
abstractions but may work as a rough estimate.
TABLE I. COMPUTATIONAL RESOURCE DEMANDS FOR SGSS.
Resource demand
low
medium
high
CPU
500m
1.0
4.0
Memory
200MB
2GB
8GB
Storage
500MB
4 GB
16GB
The SGS demands for computational resources are esti-
mated based on some implementation characteristics, e.g.,
whether historical data is needed, if the SGS can be par-
allelized (by, e.g., a multi-agent system or some machine
learning methods) or the amount of measurement data. There-
fore, SGS demands are determined based on the following
assumptions: The purpose of the SGS LM is the evaluation of
(a limited amount of) measurement data against a threshold
[21]. The computational resource demands should be low in
each category. The SGS SE for distribution grids is often based
on a weighted least-squares approach and thus, needs pseudo-
measurements to approximate missing measurements. Those
can be achieved by a trained machine learning model [22].
Hence, we estimate the CPU demand as high, the memory de-
mand as medium, and the storage demand as low. For the SGS
AR, knowledge about topology, load flow, and characteristics
of DGs are needed as an input for, e.g., a machine learning
or linear programming-based approach [23]. Therefore, we
assume high CPU demand, and medium memory and storage
demands. The SGS CVC is threshold-based but needs short-
term load and generation forecasts to avoid unnecessary con-
trol and switching signals, which may be caused by weather-
dependent generators [24] [25]. For this, we assume that
weather forecasts are included in the voltage calculation.
Therefore, the resource demands are medium in each category.
For the SGS VPP, we assume it to be implemented as a
multi-agent system that can be run either centralized on a
server or distributed by each agent representing a distributed
generator. To find an optimal combined operational schedule,
each agent may choose a schedule from a pre-defined set of
feasible schedules for each generator participating in this VPP.
[20]. The resources demands are assumed to be high for CPU,
memory and storage. The resulting parameterization for SGSs
can be taken from the following Table II.
TABLE II. PARAMETERIZATION OF SGSS FOR THE NOMINAL SCENARIO.
SGS
β
α
c
m
s
field devices
server
Byte / s
ms
cores
GB
GB
AR
2.5
100
1
2
4
F36
S2
CVC
3
500
1
2
4
F16, F22, F35
S1
LM
1
1
0.5
0.2
0.5
F12, F24, F32
S2
SE
0.5
1000
1
2
0.5
F11, F15, F21,
F23, F33, F34
S1
VPP
2
800
4
8
4
F13, F14, F25,
F31
S1
The second scenario is describing an overvoltage situation in
the power grid. Therefore, the QoS and computational require-
ments of CVC increase leading to a bitrate requirement of at
least 6 kByte/s, a maximum end-to-end latency of 200 ms and
a CPU demand of 4 cores. The CSP cannot be solved anymore,
as this introduces a bitrate shortage from R12 to S1, all paths
P(F35, S1) exceed the latency requirement and server S1
cannot supply enough computational resources. We propose
the following SGS flexibilities to relax this overconstrained
problem:
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-967-6
ENERGY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

Reduction: Reduction
of
QoS
requirements
of
a
non-
prioritized SGS. In this scenario, the bitrate requirement
of SE is reduced to β=1 kBit / s
Virtualization: Migration of an SGS to another server. In this
scenario, the SGS CVC is migrated from S1 to S2.
Distribution: Change of overlay topology of an SGS. In this
scenario, the SGS VPP switches from centralized to dis-
tributed operation, which does not need communication
to any server.
We have conducted one experiment for the nominal scenario
and six for the overvoltage scenario testing each constraint
violation with and without relaxation.
IV. RESULTS
We have conducted seven experiments and present the
resulting solutions (each as a possible SGS configuration) and
the accompanied solution process data, such as the number of
solution candidates per SGS and the calculation time of each
step. The experiments are enumerated as follows:
1) Nominal case.
2) Overvoltage case, bitrate demand of CVC is increased,
no problem relaxation.
3) Overvoltage case, bitrate demand of CVC is increased,
SE communicates with reduced bitrate requirements.
4) Overvoltage case, latency demand of CVC is increased,
no problem relaxation.
5) Overvoltage case, latency demand of CVC is increased,
CVC is migrated to another server.
6) Overvoltage case, CPU demand of CVC is increased, no
problem relaxation.
7) Overvoltage case, CPU demand of CVC is increased,
VPP operates in the distributed mode.
A resulting feasible configuration is displayed in Figure 2
for each SGS. The chosen topologies for the SGSs AR (2a,
CVC (2b), LM (2c, SE (2d), and VPP(2e) are displayd by the
experiment number on the edge of the graphs. Following the
idea of a CSP, the first valid solution for the experiment is
used. Therefore, often the same first valid solution candidate
is chosen. Experiment 1 shows a feasible solution for the
nominal scenario in which all constraints can be fulfilled and
hence, no relaxation is needed. This experiment is used to
illustrate topological changes in the following experiments. In
case of overvoltage without a problem relaxation with SGS
flexibilization, no solutions can be found. For this reason,
experiments 2, 4, 6 cannot be visualized in Figure 2. The
successful problem relaxations are visible in experiments 3,
5 and 7. The bitrate reduction of SGS SE conducted in
experiment 3 lead to the same topology as in the nominal
scenario. In experiment 5, SGS CVC shifted the end-to-end
connectivity from the field devices from server S1 to server
S2, visible by the edge from R21 to S2. In experiment 7, SGS
VPP Management does not have a connection from R12 to
S1.
Table III shows the number of generated solution candidates
per SGS, the accompanied time to generate solution candidates
(a) AR
(b) CVC
(c) LM
(d) SE
(e) VPP
Figure 2. The resulting SGSs configurations as solutions of the CSP.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-967-6
ENERGY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

TABLE III. SIZE OF THE SET OF SOLUTION CANDIDATES AND TIME MEASURES OF THE SOLUTION FINDING PROCESS.
exp.
number of solution candidates
generation time of solution candidates (s)
solving duration (s)
ID
AR
CVC
LM
SE
VPP
AR
CVC
LM
SE
VPP
mean
std.
1
2
128
32
8192
256
0.0011
0.0355
0.0101
3.3635
0.0857
18.2850
0.4118
2
2
128
32
8192
256
0.0011
0.0348
0.0100
3.5954
0.0884
18.1686
0.3248
3
2
128
32
8192
256
0.0011
0.0346
0.0099
3.5270
0.1037
18.0044
0.2305
4
2
128
32
8192
256
0.0011
0.0355
0.0101
3.5528
0.0775
10.4416
0.2333
5
2
16
32
8192
256
0.0011
0.0061
0.0223
3.5493
0.0821
18.0519
0.3075
6
2
128
32
8192
256
0.0011
0.0347
0.0101
3.5908
0.0740
16.7446
0.4263
7
2
128
32
8192
32768
0.0011
0.0355
0.0099
3.4880
14.5952
84.9177
1.0081
and the mean time and standard deviation to find a solution
for the problem created in the experiment. It shows the change
of generated solution candidates for SGS CVC and VPP in
experiments 5 and 7, where a topology change was conducted
by migration or the switch to a distributed topology. In ex-
periment 5, only 16 CVC solution candidates were generated,
whereas in experiment 7, 32768 VPP candidates were created,
which is 128 times the size of the centralized VPP topology.
These differences are caused by the placement of field devices
and the server in this example physical graph. In experiment
5, the size decreases due to the decrease of hops per end-to-
end connection. The fully-connected topology in experiment
7 leads to six end-to-end connections, which may include 3
cycles in the physical graph. As each traversed cycle creates
2 possible paths, this leads to 8 paths for 5 of 6 end-2-end
connections (there is only one possible path for P(F13, F14).
This results in a total of 32768 solution candidates.
The time measurements for the generation of solution candi-
dates and the solving are conducted on an Intel Xeon CPU E5-
2680 with 4 × 2.40 GHz and 24 GB RAM. The solving process
was performed 25 times and all time measures are in seconds.
The time to generate solution candidates is similar in each
experiment apart from experiment 5 and 7, where the duration
for CVC decreases and the duration for VPP increases. Also,
the time to solve the CSP is similar in experiments 1, 2, 3, 5
and 6. The decrease of solving time in experiment 4 is caused
by the definition of the latency constraint, as this violation is
easy to detect. The increase in solving time in experiment 7
is determined by the size of potential solution candidates.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have presented how to flexibilize SGSs
and we have shown the potential of this approach by creating
a sporadically occurring high ICT-demand situation on a small
communication network with five SGSs. We have formalized
ICT demands as a constraint satisfaction problem considering
communication network requirements (latency and bitrates),
and computational requirements (CPU, memory and storage
usage). For this, we have studied 7 experiments based on
two scenarios: nominal operation and overvoltage. The first
scenario serves as a baseline experiment. The latter is defined
by an increase of several requirements of the service CVC,
leading to an over-constrained problem. We have conducted
experiments with each individual adjusted requirement and a
corresponding problem relaxation strategy using the flexibil-
ities of SGSs, such as reduction of requirements, migration
to other servers or switching to a distributed communication
topology. By using these flexibilities, the new requirements of
CVC could be fulfilled.
These findings show the potential of such SGS flexibilities
to operate the power system resiliently under QoS considera-
tions without the need for a strong over-provisioned dedicated
communication infrastructure. SGS flexibilities may improve
the maximization of the number of SGS requirements fulfilled
by migration or distribution of some SGSs and a controlled
degradation of requirements of low prioritized SGSs. The
proposed approach needs further extensions in future work. So
far, we only distinguish between the two categories prioritized
and non-prioritized SGS. Furthermore, there is no optimized
selection of the most suitable relaxation strategy. The approach
can be enhanced by integrating a fine-grained order of SGSs
based on pre-defined power system states and refining our SGS
model by defining an order of SGS flexibilities with regard to
performance degradations. For larger scale experiments based
on larger physical networks and an increased amount of SGSs,
we consider refining our constraint-based model and search
space modeling (e.g., by pre-filtering the solution candidates)
to improve the solving time. We will integrate those ideas to
an adaptive process, which will be evaluated in a simulation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
schaft (DFG, German Research Foundation).
REFERENCES
[1] D. Griffith, M. Souryal, and N. Golmie, “Wireless networks for smart
grid applications,” Smart Grid Communications and Networking, vol.
9781107014, pp. 234–262, 2010.
[2] B. Sörries, S. Lucidi, L. Nett, and M. Wissner, “Gutachten: Digi-
talisierung der Energiewende. Topthema 3: TK-Netzinfrastruktur und
TK-Regulierung [Report: Digitization of the energy transition. Topic
3: Telecommunications network infrastructure and telecommunications
regulation],” Wissenschaftliches Institut für Infrastruktur und Kommu-
nikationsdienste, Tech. Rep., 2019.
[3] P. Das, A. Narayan, D. Babazadeh, P. Baboli, and S. Lehnhoff, “Real-
time context-aware operation of digitalized power systems by reporting
rate control of pmus,” in 2021 IEEE Madrid PowerTech, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[4] M. H. Rehmani, A. Davy, B. Jennings, and C. Assi, “Software defined
networks-based smart grid communication: A comprehensive survey,”
IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2637–2670,
2019.
[5] F. von Tüllenburg, P. Dorfinger, A. Veichtlbauer, U. Pache, O. Langth-
aler, H. Kapoun, C. Bischof, and F. Kupzog, “Virtualising redundancy
of power equipment controllers using software-defined networking,”
Energy Informatics, vol. 2, pp. 1–20, 2019.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-967-6
ENERGY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

[6] N. Dorsch, F. Kurtz, S. Dalhues, L. Robitzky, U. Häger, and C. Wietfeld,
“Intertwined: Software-defined communication networks for multi-agent
system-based smart grid control,” in 2016 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), 2016, pp. 254–
259.
[7] R. Mijumbi, J. Serrat, J. L. Gorricho, N. Bouten, F. De Turck, and
R. Boutaba, “Network function virtualization: State-of-the-art and re-
search challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, pp.
236–262, 2016.
[8] M. Niedermeier and H. de Meer, “Constructing Dependable Smart Grid
Networks using Network Functions Virtualization,” Journal of Network
and Systems Management, p. 449–469, 2016.
[9] F. Kurtz, N. Dorsch, and C. Wietfeld, “Empirical comparison of vir-
tualized and bare-metal switching for sdn-based 5g communication in
critical infrastructures,” IEEE NETSOFT 2016 - 2016 IEEE NetSoft Con-
ference and Workshops: Software-Defined Infrastructure for Networks,
Clouds, IoT and Services, pp. 453–458, 2016.
[10] C. Krüger, A. Narayan, F. Castro, B. Hage Hassan, S. Attarha,
D. Babazadeh, and S. Lehnhoff, “Real-time test platform for enabling
grid service virtualisation in cyber physical energy system,” in 2020 25th
IEEE International Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory
Automation (ETFA).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 109–116.
[11] S. Attarha, A. Narayan, B. Hage Hassan, C. Krüger, F. Castro,
D. Babazadeh, and S. Lehnhoff, “Virtualization management concept
for flexible and fault-tolerant smart grid service provision,” Energies,
vol. 13, no. 9, 2020.
[12] R. Barták, M. A. Salido, and F. Rossi, “Constraint satisfaction techniques
in planning and scheduling,” Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, p.
5–15, 2010.
[13] “NetworkX - network analysis in python,” https://networkx.org/, ac-
cessed: 2022.04.06.
[14] “Minizinc,” https://www.minizinc.org/, accessed: 2022.04.06.
[15] “Gecode,” https://www.gecode.org, accessed: 2022.04.06.
[16] J. F. Kurose, Computer networking : a top-down approach.
Addison-
Wesley, 2017, ch. Network Layer, p. 335.
[17] G. Bedürftig, J. Kapanen, E. M. Metsälä, and J. T. Salmelin ha, LTE
backhaul: planning and optimization.
John Wiley and Sons, 2016, ch.
LTE Backhaul, pp. 3–45.
[18] C. Samitier, Field Device to Central Platform Applications.
Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2017, pp. 29–36.
[19] L. E. Miller, A. Silverstein, D. Anand, A. Goldstein, Y. Makarov,
F. Tuffner, and K. Jones, “PMU Data Quality: A Framework for the
Attributes of PMU Data Quality and a Methodology for Examining
Data Quality Impacts to Synchrophasor Applications,” U.S. Department
of Energy, Tech. Rep. 3, 2017.
[20] F. Oest, M. Radtke, M. Blank-Babazadeh, S. Holly, and S. Lehnhoff,
“Evaluation of communication infrastructures for distributed optimiza-
tion of virtual power plant schedules,” Energies, vol. 14, no. 5, 2021.
[21] D. Douglass and et al., “Ieee standard for calculating the current-
temperature relationship of bare overhead conductors (ieee std 738™-
2012 ),” IEEE Power and Energy Society, Tech. Rep., 2013.
[22] K. Dehghanpour, Z. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Yuan, and F. Bu, “A survey on
state estimation techniques and challenges in smart distribution systems,”
IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 2312–2322, 2019.
[23] C. Chandraratne, T. Logenthiran, R. T. Naayagi, and W. L. Woo,
“Overview of adaptive protection system for modern power systems,”
in 2018 IEEE Innovative Smart Grid Technologies - Asia (ISGT Asia),
2018, pp. 1239–1244.
[24] K. E. Antoniadou-Plytaria, I. N. Kouveliotis-Lysikatos, P. S. Georgilakis,
and N. D. Hatziargyriou, “Distributed and decentralized voltage control
of smart distribution networks: Models, methods, and future research,”
IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 2999–3008, 2017.
[25] G. C. Kryonidis, E. O. Kontis, A. I. Chrysochos, C. S. Demoulias, and
G. K. Papagiannis, “A coordinated droop control strategy for overvoltage
mitigation in active distribution networks,” IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 5260–5270, 2018.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-967-6
ENERGY 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies

