Interactive Data Exploration Supporting Elderly Care Planning
Harry F. da Cruz∗, Marie Gebhardt†, Felix Becher∗∗ and Matthieu-P. Schapranow∗
∗Hasso Plattner Institute, Digital Health Center,
Rudolf-Breitscheid-Str. 187, 14482 Potsdam, Germany
{harry.freitasdacruz|schapranow}@hpi.de
†Data Experts GmbH, Allee der Kosmonauten 33G, 12681 Berlin, Germany
marie.gebhardt@data-experts.de
∗∗Gesundheitswissenschaftliches Institut Nordost der AOK Nordost, Wilhelmstr. 1, 10963 Berlin, Germany
felix.becher@nordost.aok.de
Abstract—Over the past decades, improvements in healthcare
resulted in longer life expectancies and growing demand for
specialized long-term care services for the elderly. Detailed up-
to-date indicators describing the demographic status quo in
order to enable adequate planning to meet the requirements
of this population are missing. Today, these data are either
scattered across different sources or only available in highly
aggregated form. In the given paper, we share details about
our interactive data exploration tool, which incorporates routine
data from a large German health insurance to derive speciﬁc
elderly care indicators, while ensuring scalability, data actuality
and separation of data and visualization. Thus, governmental
experts can access up-to-date data for elderly care planning in a
structured and harmonized way.
Keywords–Elderly care planning; key indicators; data explo-
ration; on-line analytical processing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Life expectancy has been increasing steadily in recent
decades, particularly in high-income countries [1]. Coupled
with declining birth rates, industrialized nations are faced with
an ever-older population [2]. Competent authorities need to
plan accordingly in order to meet changing societal needs,
e.g., in terms of employment, pension funds, and health
care provision. Although this is a widespread phenomenon
in the developed world, Germany’s position is particularly
unfavorable: it ranks as the country with the oldest population
in Europe and the second oldest worldwide [3].
While data on demographical developments in the form of
census are usually available, data concerning elderly care, for
instance the number of dementia patients in a given municipal-
ity, are scarce and/or insufﬁcient, often lacking in quality and
spread across different sources. This fact substantially hampers
governmental planning efforts to this extent. Nevertheless,
access to such data is crucial in devising adequate public
policies that meet the needs of the elderly. In particular, a
growing trend can be ascertained to support ‘aging in place’,
that is, close to one’s home and/or community, which is widely
considered a more desirable alternative when compared to
institutional care [4].
Healthcare data, e.g., in insurance companies can help
bridge these data gaps, providing the basis for informed
decision making. Figure 1 depicts the individual components of
our tool modeled as a Fundamental Modeling Concepts (FMC)
block diagram [5]. It builds on a combination of de-identiﬁed
routine data from a large German health insurance together
Figure 1. Software system architecture of the elderly care data exploration
tool depicted as a FMC block diagram.
with statistical data provided by governmental bodies, both of
which can be interactively explored by expert users. Data is
integrated and harmonized in an In-Memory Database (IMDB),
which provides On-line Analytical Processing (OLAP) cubes
for a number of visualization tools. Governmental users, i.e.,
social planners, then can use such tools to explore the available
data. Our tool is part of the project Smart Analysis Health
Research Access (SAHRA) [6]. The consortium consists of
industry and academia partners who aim to explore the op-
portunities inherent to data generated by healthcare actors
to address research questions relevant for policymaking and
health care provision.
The remainder of this work is structured as follows: Sec-
tion II introduces our motivation, and objectives of our tool. In
Section III, we set our work in the context of existing initiatives
concerning elderly care planning, whilst our software architec-
ture, incorporated data sources and data visualization tools are
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

outlined in Section IV. Software requirements are detailed in
Section V. Our contributions are shared in Section VI and their
impact is discussed in Section VII. Our work concludes with
an outlook in Section VIII.
II.
MOTIVATION
In the following, we present the motivation and the objec-
tives pursued within the development of the elderly care data
exploration tool.
In Germany, municipalities are often aggregated into dis-
tricts for administrative purposes. Districts serve therefore
as an intermediate governmental entity between the German
states and the municipal governments themselves [7]. However,
information on elderly and nursing care needs from the census
and other sources is often provided not at the municipality
level, where facilities and personnel are needed, but rather
at an aggregated level (district or state) - if available at all.
This information gap hinders planning efforts carried out by
districts, which must rely on incomplete, partial information
or commission expensive data collection from private enti-
ties. Furthermore, the data collection process and subsequent
generation of reports is often resource-intensive and time-
consuming, since it takes place manually and data sources are
scattered in different providers.
Health and nursing care insurance companies possess a
wealth of detailed routine information on their insured patients,
e.g., where they live, what services they have used, relevant
diagnoses, demographics, how long they have been cared for, if
they are in an inpatient or outpatient facility, and so forth. The
opportunity to bridge the existing data gap by the secondary
use of routine data was the starting point for the elderly care
data exploration tool within the SAHRA consortium.
The overall objective of our proposed solution is to support
the planning and decision-making process concerning elderly
and nursing care needs within German districts and munic-
ipalities. To this end, relevant elderly care indicators, such
as number of inhabitants with nursing needs, percentage of
individuals in an in-patient facility, among others, needs to be
identiﬁed. For the pilot project, two administrative districts in
Northeastern Germany have been selected. They provided the
requirements for the solution and subject-matter experts were
available for feedback. The names of the respective districts
will not be disclosed for data protection reasons. Finally, it
was necessary to ensure that data extraction and analysis are
carried out in an automated and privacy-compliant fashion.
As such, the speciﬁc objectives of the solution presented in
this paper are 1) deﬁne a set of relevant care indicators, 2)
extract and anonymize pertaining routine insurance data and
3) develop a web platform for interactive exploration of the
deﬁned indicators with automatic data ﬂows and compliance
with privacy regulations. In Section IV, we provide speciﬁc
details on how these objectives have been achieved.
III.
RELATED WORK
Research on Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) tools used for elderly care is often focused on supporting
care delivery processes, for example via collaboration tools
and data exchange. Since a patient will be treated by a
number of different professionals across the care continuum,
it is vital that they cooperate effectively [8]. Technologies
for Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) and Building Automation
(BA) represent another line of active research [9].
In contrast, our tool is targeted at providing high-quality
data to support policy and decision making. For effective poli-
cies to be devised, a prerequisite is access to high-quality, up-
to-date, precise information. Initiatives to this extent include
information portals put together by governmental statistics
services, for instance, the German Statistical Ofﬁce’s elderly
care indicators [10] or the Healthy Aging Data Portal by the
Center for Disease Control [11]. Likewise, the National Board
of Health and Welfare in Sweden provides information on the
state of its elderly population [12]. Moreover, a solution devel-
oped by a Portuguese software company provides operational
management for nursing care homes on the cloud [13]. While
it could potentially provide detailed aggregated information on
elderly patients, it lacks the coverage necessary since nursing
homes are only one of the actors in the care continuum [14].
Such initiatives have a number of weaknesses compared
to our presented approach. Firstly, the content they provide
is largely static and does not enable user-driven exploration.
Exception to this rule is CDC’s portal [11] and the PORDATA
Contemporary Portugal Database on the elderly [15]. In both
tools the user can interactively select indicators of interest and
generate visualizations, albeit limited to few options.
Secondly, the scope of the indicators available on those
platforms is rather limited, e.g., PORDATA offers four in-
dicators while the CDC has nine. We have gathered more
than 30 indicators of interest, which are extensible with ease.
Third, the level of granularity of the current solutions is
restricted either to the national or state-level, being therefore of
reduced use for social planners in a district or municipality, for
whom only ﬁne-grained information is relevant. Forth, unlike
existing solutions, the platform presented offers different strat-
iﬁcation dimensions, e.g., according to legal criteria such as
care level. Finally, automated data processing and compliance
with privacy regulations ensure that up-to-date information is
presented to the user once it was made available through the
data provider.
IV.
METHODS
In the following, we share details about the incorporated
research methodology. Section IV-A outlines the approach
utilized for requirements engineering, while Section IV-B
expounds upon the tool’s technical infrastructure.
A. Requirements Engineering
We followed the design thinking methodology to create
a user-centered prototype via interviews with subject-matter
experts for elderly care planning [16]. In subsequent work-
shops, the team distilled the interview results into personas
and user stories. Personas are a generic entity that represents
a typical user of the solution. In particular, two personas
have been identiﬁed. The ﬁrst is the head of the district’s
social department, in charge of interfacing with numerous
political entities and providing, among other tasks, guidance
on elderly care issues. The second is a specialized ofﬁcer
or social planner, responsible to carry out data analyses and
elaborate the elderly care plan, i.e., a comprehensive document
containing an appraisal of the status quo on elderly care and
a number of recommendations. User stories establish the aims
pursed by the personas and often take the form of ‘as persona
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

X, I want feature Y to achieve purpose Z’. This generated a
catalog of user stories that has guided the implementation of
the tool. They laid out the foundation for a set of functional
and non-functional requirements as per the ISO/IEC/IEEE
24765:2017 [17], which are dealt with in detail in Section V.
B. IMDB Technology
One of the centerpieces of our tool is the incorporated In-
Memory Database (IMDB) technology, which enables real-
time data processing and analysis of the stored data [18].
We refer to IMDB technology as a toolbox of Information
Technology (IT) artifacts to enable processing of data in real-
time in the main memory of server systems [19]. Our incorpo-
rated IMDB backend has been proven to be an adequate tool
providing real-time analysis features for big medical data [20].
In the following, we introduce selected building blocks of the
IMDB technology incorporated in our SAHRA platform to
enable real-time analysis of data relevant for interactive elderly
care planning by governmental users.
1) Column-Oriented Data Layout:
Most modern rela-
tional database systems fall into the category of transactional
databases and store their data in a row-oriented format, i.e.
all attributes of a record are stored in adjacent blocks [21].
This is advantageous when all data attributes of a single row
have to be processed at once. In contrast, analytical database
systems store and process data column-wise, i.e., all entries
per column are stored in adjacent blocks, which is beneﬁcial
when only selected attributes of a data set are accessed [22].
The incorporated IMDB system supports both database layouts
on a per table basis. Since user queries access only a subset of
available attributes, in our tool tables are stored in columnar
format. Thus, only a fraction of data needs to be processed.
2) Lightweight Compression:
Lightweight compression
refers to a data storage representation that consumes less disk
space than its original pendant [19]. Storing data column-wise
facilitates lightweight compression techniques, such as run-
length encoding, dictionary encoding, and difference encod-
ing [23]. Thus, the overall main memory footprint is reduced
and the processing of data accelerated as existing CPU caches
are used more efﬁciently. Since the elderly care exploration
tool shall cover millions of inhabitants of a given region over
many time periods, data size can quickly become an issue.
For example, lightweight compression applied to our dataset
results in an average compression of 5:1.
3) Partitioning: Our incorporated IMDB system provides
vertical and horizontal partitioning [24]. The former addresses
large database tables by splitting them up into multiple
column-wise subsets that can be distributed across individual
servers [25]. The latter handles large data sets by dividing
them into smaller chunks of data row-wise, which supports
parallel search operations and improves scalability [19]. Taking
advantage of this approach, data belonging to different districts
can be distributed and accessed across different server nodes
on demand.
4) Multi-Core and Parallelization: Modern computer sys-
tem architectures are designed to provide multiple CPUs with
each of them having multiple individual CPU cores. For this
capacity to be fully exploited, application execution must be
parallelized, thereby resulting in maximum processing speed.
Our IMDB system supports parallelization on various levels,
e.g., parallelization both on inter and intra-operation level [19].
For instance, user queries spanning across multiple municipali-
ties can be processed across different computing nodes, leading
to faster response times.
C. On-line Analytical Processing Cubes
An OLAP cube is a multidimensional dataset containing
different measures that can be aggregated/summarized across
multiple dimensions [26]. In spite of their widespread adoption
in Business Intelligence (BI) applications and data warehouse
solutions, traditional OLAP cubes are often materialized,
meaning they must be re-created every time new data is
available [27]. In the IMDB cubes are virtual, allowing set
operations, such as join, union, projections, etc., without the
use of persistent, ﬁxed aggregates [28].
V.
SOFTWARE REQUIREMENTS
The software requirements were derived from interviews
with subject-matter experts as outlined in Section IV-A. Fol-
lowing ISO 24765:2017, we were able to identify a set of
functional and non-functional requirements, which will be
related in detail in the following sections [17].
A. Functional Requirements
Functional requirements establish the set of functions that
a system must deliver to the user in terms of inputs, process-
ing and outputs, commonly expressed as ”the system shall
do” [29]. The functional requirements the elderly care tool
must fulﬁll are:
•
F1: Data Privacy. Since the tool is based on sensitive
health data, appropriate measures shall be taken to
ensure patients cannot be re-identiﬁed.
•
F2: Pre-deﬁned Elderly Care Indicators: A stan-
dardized list of elderly care indicators must be avail-
able in the tool covering the most relevant aspects for
care planning.
•
F3: Fine-grained Exploration: The proposed solu-
tion shall provide ﬁne-grained, as well aggregated
information using different aggregation dimensions,
such as gender, care level and municipality.
•
F4: Access to Latest Data. The tool shall employ
automatic data ﬂows from the provisioner to the
analysis tool to ensure access to latest data at all times.
•
F5: User-deﬁned Visualizations: The tool shall en-
able the user to ﬂexibly create his own reports using
available elderly care indicators.
•
F6: Visualization Sharing: The tool shall enable the
user to share a given visualization with another user
in digital form.
•
F7: Geographical Data Exploration: The tool shall
provide the user with the ability to generate carto-
graphic visualizations based on the relevant adminis-
trative units.
•
F8: Long-term Forecasts: The tool shall provide
forecasts on all available elderly care indicators in 5
year time spans (e.g., for 5, 10, 15 and 20 years ahead).
The forecasts must take into account demographic
trends, as well as socioeconomic variables of interest.
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

B. Non-functional Requirements
Non-functional requirements are concerned with the overall
properties of a system, as opposed to its functions, often
written as ”the system shall be” [30]. In the following, non-
functional requirements of our tool are listed:
•
NF1: Ease of Use. The user interface shall be made
of modern, self-explainable interaction components,
which are familiar to the user, ensuring ease of use.
•
NF2: Fast Response Time. The tool shall be designed
so that even querying large amounts of sets does not
result in a response time higher than an empirical
threshold of two seconds to ensure interactive user
experience [31].
•
NF3: Device Independence.The tool shall be acces-
sible from different device classes, e.g. from desktop
computers and mobile devices.
•
NF4: Ease of Extensibility of Indicators. Given that
user needs are constantly evolving, the set of elderly
care indicators shall be easily extensible, without the
need to shut-down the tool for updates.
VI.
CONTRIBUTIONS
In the following, we share details about our software
system architecture, incorporated data sources and set-up of
data exploration tools, while pointing out how the requirements
deﬁned previously are met.
A. Software Architecture
The software system architecture of our tool is depicted
in Figure 1. It is hosted within the SAHRA platform, which
complies with pertinent data privacy regulations (F1) [6].
Governmental users responsible for elderly care planning in the
districts, i.e., social planners have different data visualization
tools at their disposal. A social planner can access one or more
visualizations tools and created content can be shared with
other users and user groups (F6).
1) Data Visualization Tools: Based on the infrastructure
presented, different data visualization tools can be employed as
long as they can consume IMDB OLAP cubes. We used a pro-
prietary business intelligence suite for this purpose [32]. The
suite makes extensive use of HTML5 and modern Javascript
libraries, ensuring ease of use (NF1). Furthermore, it provides
a web-based interface that is also accessible from mobile
devices, being therefore device-independent (NF3).
2) Virtual OLAP Cubes: The use of virtual OLAP cubes
ensures that as new data is available, analytical applications,
such visualization tools, are updated in real time (F4). Another
advantage provided by the use of virtual OLAP cubes is
extensibility: new measures and dimensions can be added
from new data sources or from calculations performed on
existing measures (NF4). The analytical cubes were built upon
relational database tables that were harmonized and integrated
within the IMDB system.
3) IMDB System: The incorporated data sources, which
cover de-identiﬁed routine data from the insurance company
along with statistical data are integrated and harmonized within
the IMDB. The building blocks discussed in Section IV-B
namely column-based storage, lightweight compression, par-
titioning and parallelization ensure a fast response time for
the tool even with a large data foundation (NF2).
TABLE I. Excerpt of elderly care indicators
Category
Indicator
Nursing care (NC)
Patients with NC needs
Patients in a NC home
Patients in home NC
Patients receiving a NC allowance
Patients using a nursing service
Respite care (RC)
Patients entitled to RC
Patients who used RC
Days with RC per patient
Day care (DC)
Patients entitled to DC
Patients who used DC
Days with DC per patient
Short-term care (SC)
Patients entitled to SC
Patients who used SC
Days with SC per patient
Dementia-related
Patients with dementia diagnosis
Patients in nursing homes
Patients in nursing services
Patients cared for by relatives
B. Incorporated Data Sources
Based on routine data collected from insured patients
from a given district, the health insurance partner extracted
and consolidated a dataset of different data columns into a
relational database table, each corresponding to a speciﬁc
elderly care indicator, according to patient, reference year
and a number of other attributes. This formed the standard
list of elderly care indicators (F2). The resulting dataset is a
sparse table indicating whether a given indicator applies for a
speciﬁc patient or not. Furthermore, demographical statistics
and prognostics compiled for the federal states to which
the pilot districts belong were incorporated. They contain
demographics by age segment (0-100) and gender for each of
the municipalities in a district [33]. Routine data and statistical
data can thereby be joined on year, municipality, age segment
and gender.
C. Exploration Measures and Dimensions
Interactive exploration is enabled by a combination of
measures and dimensions. Measures correspond to the elderly
care indicators themselves. They cover, amongst others, num-
ber of people with nursing care needs, percentages of home,
in-patient or out-patient care and aggregation by age group,
gender and care complexity, offering ﬁne-grained exploration
options (F3). A partial list of the indicators identiﬁed is
provided in Table I for illustration purposes.
The complete set of deﬁned measures contains more than
30 indicators.The consolidated dataset also covers regional
information, e.g., municipality of residence, that can be used to
enable geographical exploration (F7). Dimensions encompass
grouping attributes that can be arbitrarily combined to generate
visualizations. Table II provides an overview of the exploration
dimensions available on the platform.
D. Separation of Visualization from Data
To illustrate this characteristic of the tool, consider that
a social planner in a district is interested to analyze age
group distribution for dementia patients stratiﬁed according
to different care levels (German: Pﬂegestufen). They are used
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 2. Different alternative representation modes are available to the user. Image depicts age group distribution of dementia patients according to care levels:
heat map (left) vs. tabular (right). With the platform, more time can be spent on interpreting data rather than manually building the required visualization.
TABLE II. Exploration dimensions
Category
Dimension
Patient-related
Age group
Patient gender
Dementia diagnosis
Nursing dependent
Patient dead
Regional
Federal state
Municipal association
Municipality
District
Municipality type
Social region
Nursing care-related
Reference year
Has nursing care needs
Level of nursing care
Grade of nursing care
Type of nursing care
by insurance companies, among other purposes, to establish
reimbursement guidelines [34]. By selecting the appropriate
measure and dimensions on the platform via drag and drop,
the heatmap depicted in Figure 2 (left) can be generated. It
can be readily ascertained that dementia patients are more often
assigned care level 1 (German: Pﬂegestufe 1), particularly after
70 years of age. If another mode of presentation is desired, the
same information can be displayed in tabular form (right).
VII.
EVALUATION AND DISCUSSION
The tool developed meets the requirements put forth in
Section V as follows. From a functional perspective, it provides
a privacy-compliant framework (F1) and covers more than
30 pre-deﬁned indicators (F2) and ﬁne-grained aggregation
criteria (F3). The data foundation is updated automatically,
without a manual extraction, transform and load step, that
is, as soon as new data are available (FR4). Furthermore, it
allows users to create their own visualizations without any
IT-knowledge (F5) and share them with other users (F6).
In addition, the database was augmented with geographic
coordinates to generate map-based visualizations (F7), not
displayed here for the sake of brevity. Forecasting is provided
by means of a linear regression of past indicators (F8).
Considering non-functional requirements, ease of use
(NF1) is ensured by extensive use of HTML5 and modern
Javascript libraries [35]. Besides, the use of the IMDB platform
enables a fast response time even with a large underlying
database (NF2), since data resides in the main memory [19].
Furthermore, the elderly care tool can be accessed from desk-
top and mobile devices alike (NF3). To support extensibility
(NF4), the necessary calculations are performed using the
IMDB’s calculation views. They allow complex set operations,
such as join, union, projections, etc., without the use of per-
sistent, ﬁxed aggregates, which must be re-created whenever
requirements change [28].
Our tool is currently being evaluated in two administrative
districts in Germany for user feedback. The tool has a number
of advantages over existing portals offering statistics on elderly
care, particularly in terms of its exploratory capabilities with
different stratiﬁcation dimensions, scope of the indicators
available, level of information granularity (down to the munic-
ipality level), as well as automatic data ﬂows within a privacy-
compliant environment. As new districts are added to the tool,
we expect a steep increase in data and user workload, which
might impact system performance and response time, specially
considering analytic queries. The building blocks of the IMDB
technology discussed in Section IV-B such as lightweight
compression, partitioning and multicore parallelization make it
possible not only to use available resources more effectively,
but also to add more computing power to the system without
disrupting current operations, ensuring scalability.
However, from a technological standpoint, since the plat-
form is based on proprietary technologies, it might pose a
challenge for other institutions aiming to establish a similar
solution. The principles and strategy which have guided the
development of this tool can notwithstanding be utilized in a
landscape based on open-source software tools, for example
SpagoBI [36] or Pentaho with MySQL [37].
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We shared details of our software approach, the user re-
quirements and the technical infrastructure that was developed.
The data foundation is comprised routine healthcare data
generated by the partner insurance company. The platform
presents the user with a number of pre-deﬁned measures
and dimensions that allow for interactive exploration and
generation of arbitrary visualizations.
Future work concerns three major aspects. The ﬁrst aspect
entails integrating available datasets with data generated across
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the entire care delivery continuum, including hospitals, nursing
homes and out-patient services. Second, the tool currently
provides linear regression forecasts based on the values of
past indicators. However, this approach does not account for
complex interactions between long-term socioeconomic and
demographic variables. We aim to develop a more sophis-
ticated forecasting model. Finally, user evaluation shall take
place to assess the impact of the tool on current processes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Parts of the given work were generously supported by a
grant of the German Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs
and Energy (01MD15005).
REFERENCES
[1]
C. D. Mathers, G. A. Stevens, T. Boerma, R. White, and M. Tobias,
“Causes of International Increases in Older Age Life Expectancy,” The
Lancet, vol. 385, no. 9967, feb 2015, pp. 540–548.
[2]
S. H. Preston and A. Stokes, “Sources of Population Aging in More
and Less Developed Countries.” Population and development review,
vol. 38, no. 2, jun 2012, pp. 221–236.
[3]
W. He, D. Goodkind, and P. Kowal, “An Aging World: 2015,” in
International Population Reports.
US Census Bureau, 2016.
[4]
N. L. Fields and H. Dabelko-Schoeny, “Aging in Place,” in The
Encyclopedia of Adulthood and Aging.
Hoboken, NJ, USA: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., dec 2015, pp. 1–5.
[5]
A. Kn¨opfel, B. Gr¨one, and P. Tabeling, Fundamental Modeling Con-
cepts: Effective Communication of IT systems. J. Wiley & Sons, 2005.
[6]
M.-P. Schapranow et al., “Towards an Integrated Health Research
Process: A cloud-based approach,” in 2016 Int’l Conf. on Big Data.
IEEE, dec 2016, pp. 2813–2818.
[7]
E.
Pappermann,
“Der
Status
der
Gemeinden
und
Kreise
als
Gebietsk¨orperschaften [The Status of Municipalities and Districts as
Regional Entities],” in Handbuch der kommunalen Wissenschaft und
Praxis.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 1981, pp. 299–315.
[8]
A.
Duner,
“Care
Planning
and
Decision-making
in
Teams
in
Swedish Elderly Care: A Study of Interprofessional Collaboration and
Professional Boundaries,” Journal of Interprofessional Care, vol. 27,
no. 3, may 2013, pp. 246–253.
[9]
Y. Evchina and J. L. Martinez Lastra, “An ICT-Driven Hybrid
Automation System for Elderly Care Support: A Rehabilitation Facility
Study Case,” Journal of Housing For the Elderly, vol. 30, no. 1, jan
2016, pp. 52–74.
[10]
S. Bundesamt, “Pﬂege im Rahmen der Pﬂegeversicherung Deutsch-
landergebnisse [Care within Nursing Care Insurance, Germany Out-
comes],” in Pﬂegestatistik 2015.
Statistisches Bundesamt, 2017.
[11]
CDC, “Healthy Aging Data,” https://www.cdc.gov/aging/agingdata/
index.html [retrieved: Feb 2, 2018], 2017.
[12]
Socialstyrelsen, “Statistics on Care and Services for the Elderly
2015,” http://www.socialstyrelsen.se/publikationer2016/2016-4-29 [re-
trieved: Feb 2, 2018], 2015.
[13]
N. Loureiro et al., “A Web-based Platform for Quality Management
of Elderly Care: Usability Evaluation of Ankira,” Procedia Computer
Science, vol. 64, jan 2015, pp. 666–673.
[14]
R. Perley, Managing the Long-Term Care Facility: Practical Approaches
to Providing Quality Care.
Wiley, 2016.
[15]
PORDATA, “Base de Dados Portugal Contemporˆaneo,” http://www.
pordata.pt/Portugal/Indicadores+de+envelhecimento-526 [retrieved: Feb
2, 2018], 2016.
[16]
H. Plattner, C. Meinel, and L. Leifer, Design Thinking Research, ser.
Understanding Innovation.
Springer, 2012.
[17]
International
Organization
for
Standardization,
“ISO/IEC/IEEE
24765:2017 - Systems and Software Engineering – Vocabulary,”
https://www.iso.org/standard/71952.html
[retrieved:
Feb
2,
2018],
Geneva, Switzerland, 2017.
[18]
P. Prassol, “SAP HANA als Anwendungsplattform f¨ur Real-Time
Business,” HMD Praxis der Wirtschaftsinformatik, vol. 52, no. 3, jun
2015, pp. 358–372.
[19]
H. Plattner, A Course in In-Memory Data Management: The Inner
Mechanics of In-Memory Databases.
Springer, 2014.
[20]
H. Plattner and M.-P. Schapranow, Eds., High-Performance In-Memory
Genome Data Analysis: How In-Memory Database Technology Accel-
erates Personalized Medicine.
Springer-Verlag, 2014.
[21]
T. A. Halpin and T. Morgan, Information Modeling and Relational
Databases.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2008.
[22]
D. J. Abadi, P. A. Boncz, and S. Harizopoulos, “Column-oriented
Database Systems,” Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, vol. 2,
no. 2, aug 2009, pp. 1664–1665.
[23]
P. Svensson, “The Evolution of Vertical Database Architectures – A
Historical Review,” in Proceedings of the 20th Int’l Conf on Scientiﬁc
and Statistical Database Management.
Springer-Verlag, 2008, pp. 3–5.
[24]
S. Lightstone, T. Teorey, and T. Nadeau, Physical Database Design: The
Database Professional’s Guide to Exploiting Indexes, Views, Storage,
and more.
Morgan Kaufmann, 2007.
[25]
J. M. Hellerstein, M. Stonebraker, and J. Hamilton, Architecture of
a Database System, Foundation and Trends in Databases.
Now
Publishers, 2007, vol. 1.
[26]
S. Chaudhuri and U. Dayal, “An Overview of Data Warehousing and
OLAP Technology,” ACM SIGMOD Record, vol. 26, no. 1, mar 1997,
pp. 65–74.
[27]
C. Koncilia and R. Wrembel, Data Warehouses and OLAP: Concepts,
Architectures, and Solutions.
Irm Press, 2006.
[28]
A. Pattanayak, “High Performance Analytics with SAP HANA Virtual
Models,” Journal of Computer and Communications, vol. 05, no. 07,
2017, pp. 1–10.
[29]
C. Dickerson and D. N. Mavris, Architecture and Principles of Systems
Engineering.
Auerbach Publications, 2016.
[30]
G. Koelsch, “Nonfunctional Requirements,” in Requirements Writing
for System Engineering.
Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2016, pp. 107–149.
[31]
J. Nielsen, Usability engineering.
Academic Press, 1993.
[32]
S. DuttaRoy, “SAP BusinessObjects BI Platform,” in SAP Business
Analytics.
Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2016, pp. 55–69.
[33]
Jens
R¨umenapp,
“Kleinr¨aumige
Bev¨olkerungsprognose
f¨ur
den
Landkreis Vorpommern-Greifswald [Small-scale Populational Forecast
for the District Vorpommern-Greifswald],” Gertz Gutsche R¨umenapp
GbR, Tech. Rep., 2014.
[34]
E. Gr¨aßel, C. Donath, J. Lauterberg, C. Haag, and S. Neubauer,
“Demenzkranke und Pﬂegestufen: Wirken sich Krankheitssymptome
auf die Einstufung aus? [Dementia Patients and Care Levels: Do Disease
Symptomes Affect the Classiﬁcation?],” Das Gesundheitswesen, vol. 70,
no. 3, mar 2008, pp. 129–136.
[35]
J. Duckett, JavaScript and JQuery: Interactive Front-End Web Develop-
ment, 1st ed.
Wiley Publishing, 2014.
[36]
M. Franceschini, “How to Maximize the Value of Big Data with the
Open Source SpagoBI Suite through a Comprehensive Approach,”
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, vol. 6, no. 11, aug 2013, pp.
1170–1171.
[37]
R. Bouman and J. van. Dongen, Pentaho Solutions: Business Intelli-
gence and Data Warehousing with Pentaho and MySQL.
Wiley, 2009.
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

