SmartNursing - a mobile application to improve communication in home care
Mads Nyborg, Khurram Bashir, Asta Maknickaite
DTU Informatics
Technical University of Denmark
Building 321, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Email: mn@imm.dtu.dk, bashir.khurram@live.com, maknasta@gmail.com
Abstract—This paper presents SmartNursing system and dis-
cusses how increasing capabilities of smartphone could beneﬁt
employees in working environment. A SmartNursing system is
developed for home nurses working environment to fulﬁl their
needs. The solution helps to improve communication among
nurses, provide customized information and increase work
efﬁciency. Developed system consists of mobile application, web
based server and database. This article discusses the solution
SmartNursing from design to implementation.
Keywords-home nursing; public health; mobile application;
web server.
I. INTRODUCTION
Domiciliary care is provided by licensed personnel who
constantly visit patients at their home and assists with daily
tasks, such like giving medicine, bathing and cleaning.
Domiciliary care is recommended for elderly generation
that needs special care. People that needs care prefer home
environment over nursing home [1]. Home adaptation and
assistive technology substitute traditional health care in
medical institutions reduce the costs [2]. This fact conﬁrms
a growing need for caregivers for people living in home en-
vironment. Eurostat projections (Europop2010) reveal that,
over the next 50 years, the number of elderly people will
grow dramatically [3], consequently, it rises new needs
for home nurses. Current problem is a lack of interest of
working as a home nurse. This job is seen as hard and
tiring, every 5th home-nurse is emotionally exhausted and
stressed [4]. In order to satisfy increasing needs of licensed
personnel and provide better service to elderly people, it is
vital to focus on home nurses.
A. Analysis
This chapter discusses the potential users of the system
i.e. nurses and their needs. The use case of home nurses in
Frederiksberg municipality in Denmark is explored in order
to identify requirements for the system [5]. Interviews with
the project manager of Frederiksberg Hjemmepleje and
conversations with the home nurses illustrate the fact that
communication among colleagues, access of information
relevant to work, process of planning and organizing daily
work need to be improved.
Administration of home nurses work is done by their
leader. The leader of nurses is responsible for coordination
of care to elderly and the patients that are in need of
domiciliary care. It could be transportation, house cleaning,
personal hygiene, meals, and other health and wellness
related activities. Also, the leader distributes responsibilities
for the nurses, thus every nurse provides care to several
patients and in that way each patient gets different nurses to
visit. The leader also prepares daily reports with information
as required. Daily meetings with employees have signiﬁcant
role in planning and organising work. Every morning before
the actual work stars, all nurses gather to discuss work
experiences, working schedules, substitutes and to get a
paper with relevant information for the next visitation. This
manner of work requires extra time and is inconvenient for
the nurses.
Communication among nurses that is other than during
the meetings, is complicated, especially when the nurse
wants to contact her colleague, who visits the patient after.
Currently, either calling, messaging manually or contacting
a group leader is necessary in order to convey a message to
another nurse. It requires too much time and concentration,
therefore communication tends to be avoided. Same is
the case with information handling, if a nurse needs any
information then she has to carry papers, when she loses
the paper then she loses the information.
Furthermore,
the
job
is
physical
and
requires
full
concentration,
therefore
nurses
cannot
be
distracted
by side tasks such like making notes during the shift.
Intuitive, easy to use and communication tool is necessary
in order to improve home nurses working environment
work. We live in the world that is so connected, most
of the nurses have smart phones, but very rarely have
any mobile applications supporting their work. Usually,
they need to report and document important accidents
that have happened during their shift and they do that
when they return to the ofﬁce. In addition to this, different
users document in different, often incompatible, ways that
makes hard to keep consistency in overall documentation.
Home-nurses need a system that could improve working
environment and tackle the problems mentioned above.
265
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The idea that is evolved in this article is to create an
innovative and well-designed application for smartphone
considering the home nurses working environment, add
different components and features that can improve commu-
nication and make daily work easier. After the introduction,
this article is organized in this way: the survey of exist-
ing applications in the market is discussed in section II,
and SmartNursing application is represented in sections III
and IV, including modelling, design and implementation of
application. Conclusion and suggestions for future work is
covered in section V.
II. RELATED WORKS
There are many existing applications for nursing. Almost
every application is focusing on medical approach and in
their applications they provides a drug guide (Rx:), diseases
and disorders (Sx, Dx, Tx), diagnosing tools etc. But still
it is hard to ﬁnd smartphone applications for the home-
nurses working environment. Some well known applications
for nursing are described below:
A. Nursing Constellation Plus
This application is developed by Skyscape Inc. and is
probably the most expensive application for nursing in apple
/ android market that costs $179.95. The application includes
drug guide, and laboratory & diagnostic tests handbook. In
technical words they have managed to bring the medical
database into the smart devices. [6]
B. Abbo EMR
Abbo EMR is an electronic medial record program used
for both patients and doctors. Doctors can dictate instruc-
tions, and a patient can listen it on his phone. In this
application the target group is both patients and doctors.
This application is developed by ZCO Corporation. [7]
C. Cell Trak
This application is made for home-care companies and
includes a scheduler for the nurses, patient care plan, billing
and pay role system. This application is made for those
countries where home-care system is privatized for example
USA. [8]
D. Intelligent home applications
In addition to mobile domain, intelligent home envi-
ronment is an attractive subject for the research and de-
velopment. For instance, INHOME project [9] introduces
intelligent services at home (alarm-and-notiﬁcation system,
refrigerator), that control living environments so that enable
independent living of elderly people at home and improve
quality of life. AMIGO applications [10], such like Home
Care and Safety, Home Information and Entertainment are
based on home networking and connection among several
devices, for example lighting system, mobile phones and PC.
It has beneﬁts in providing interoperability between services
and devices and provides the users with communication that
is independent from location and device. Furthermore, new
studies focuses on grid technology that is necessary to pro-
vide high quality medical services in home environment[11]
[12]. The grid is primarily targeted towards applications
with high computing demands, that are used in hospital at
home. There is still a need of applications and solutions
for Home care. All the above mentioned applications are
created for a country where the working environment is
different from Nordic countries. The drugs guide vary from
country to country, thus such applications cannot be used in
Nordic countries, in our case Denmark. Existing solutions,
that target intelligent home environment, usually requires ad-
ditional equipment pieces, sensors to be integrated into home
environment. This paper focuses on the home nursing and
utilizes smart phone capabilities to improve nursing services
and daily nurses’ work. The application automates common
tasks, suggest better work organization and provides unique
functionality to communicate by voice messages.
III. DESIGN
In the previous chapter the brief overview of existing
applications is given. This chapter is focused on our de-
veloped SmartNursing system. The design, structure, dif-
ferent components and their functionalities are discussed.
While designing application, consideration is showed for
user experience and suitable interface. Figure 1 is a use-case
diagram for SmartNursing system. Diagram is visualizing
the users that are interacting with the system and the func-
tionalities they perform. All functionalities are represented
subsequently.
A. Proﬁler
Proﬁler is a functionality that is aware of the application’s
context. System starts with a proﬁle based on context
information. User can always change the proﬁle if it does
not suits the context. Purpose of the proﬁler is to provide
customization. The user can select the settings for every
proﬁle and when a proﬁle is changed the settings will be
fetched from the database and applied. The user (home
nurse) could make settings for speciﬁc working environment,
for example, sound settings as silent or vibrate. Contrary
the settings will be different for non working environment,
such like home usage. In such way the functionalities are
customized. Internal database is used to manage the proﬁles.
Smartphone sensors fetch context information i.e. data from
external system and based on context change the proﬁles.
User status is very important for the home nurses to share
information about availability of each nurse. A status of a
person provides also an abstract glimpse of the situation
of an employee before someone contacts. The idea is to
embed the status of each contact in the address-book in order
to provide an overview before someone actually contacts
someone.
266
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 1.
System use-case diagram
B. Voice messenger
Voice messenger is a functionality proposed to make easy
communication among nurses and keep track of patient’s
history. Nurses can record a voice message from her mobile
device and repeat the process again until the she is sure
that the correct message is recorded. Then the nurse saves
the message and it is saved on the home-nursing web-server.
When the nurse from another shift arrives she can then listen
to the recorded message and process it. Voice messenger
is beneﬁcial for work organisation purpose, because all
messages are available for the user accessing the system
with web interface. Leaders are able to listen to the messages
and add important information in the patients history, so that
it could reach the nurses as information about the patient.
This functionality brings value preposition in saving time,
offering better care of a patient, and improving communi-
cation among nurses. In order to avoid the nurses spending
less time with the patients than they have to and using the
work time doing their personal tasks, the application asks
the nurse to check-in when she arrives at the patient’s home
and check-out when she leaves. Figure 2 shows the overview
of voice messenger. This diagram represents the functions
that a user can perform in this functionality. For example a
nurse can record a message and upload it to the server, so
that her colleague could listen that message.
C. Colleague locator
Colleague locator is a functionality to display the col-
leagues of the nurse in a list format or a map view. On
selecting a speciﬁc colleague it is possible to see the further
details of a selected colleague like contact information. The
purpose of this functionality is to locate the colleagues either
by viewing their details and calling them or by viewing them
Figure 2.
Oveview of voice messenger functionality
on maps. On user request the system will fetch the contact
list from the web-server and display the list to the nurse.
Further she can click on any contact to make a call. In case
of viewing the colleagues on a map, the application gets the
coordinates of all the colleagues from the web-server and
displays them using Google Maps API.
D. Scheduler
Scheduler could be used to contain information about the
meetings, and events that a nurse has to attend during the
day. Smartphone automatically fetches the schedule from
the web-sever, tasks are saved in calendar as events and
displayed in the day scheduler. The functionality is beneﬁcial
for the nurse, because she could prepared for the work before
she actually starts the work. Group leader of the nurses is
responsible to create of all the nurses in her group. Leader
could access the system using web interface and she creates
a schedule. On the smartphone application the nurse can
check her schedule and get details of a patient who is in the
list. Nurse can see a schedule of the speciﬁc date, that is
created on the server. By default the system will show the
schedule of current date.
E. User interface design
The application was designed applying Tracy Leonard
all times rule of design that encourages the developers to
remember personal experiences in order to evaluate design
of applications and choose the best ones to be used as
design guidelines [13]. Well-designed applications such like
267
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Evernote, Twitter, and Foursquare etc. have interfaces that
provides desirable user experience, therefore for inspiration
we have employed some features from their design.
In the past software was designed regardless of the usability
issues, so the user has to adapt the system somehow. This
design approach is not appropriate today because the system
must adapt to the user. That is why design criteria for
mobile applications are so important. We have followed
5 steps principle to design the application [13]. These
ﬁve steps include navigation, information visualisation, on
screen interaction, notiﬁcations and responsiveness as well
as emotion and expression. Subsequently, all of them are
described in this section.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
This section represents architecture of implemented sys-
tem and technologies that were chosen for implementation.
The system provides two user interfaces: one is for smart-
phone application and other one for web based interaction
with a server. Smartphone interface is developed in android
platform using Gingerbread version 2.3.3. As our target
group is home-nurse, so the mobile interface is designed
to be used by the nurses. Whereas web-interface has admin-
istration functionality and can be used by leader of nurses
allowing her to create, replace, update and delete stored data.
Web - server is necessary to overcome limited resources
of smartphone and execute functionalities for smartphone
[14]. The communication between the server application and
smartphone client is based on JSON using RESTful web-
services. We preferred REST over SOAP because it is light
weight, human readable, and easy to build.
On the server side we are using Play! framework which
is Java based web-server that connects with the database
to to performs insert, delete, update and select operations.
We preferred Play! server over other open source servers
because of it’s structured environment and usability. We are
using MySQL as database to store the data on the server.
It is very important to choose the right technologies to
make the product reliable and meet the requirements of the
system. The technologies are selected based on the open
source licensing, past development experience, reliability of
software, and promising future of software. The paragraph
continues with brief summaries of technologies used in
implementation process.
A. Smartphone platform
We have selected Android as the smartphone platform.
The market share of Android takes almost half market and
has been increasing signiﬁcantly [15]. Apart from market
share there are many other advantages of Android develop-
ment and few of them are mentioned below.
• Android applications are not restricted to one distribu-
tion channel.
• On Android market application is distributed and in the
market quickly i.e. without any reviewing process.
• Android applications are written in Java with w set of
libraries.
• Android platform give access to many physical and
virtual sensors.
Based on above mentioned reasons we choose Gingerbread
i.e. Android 2.3.3 version to implement our prototype.
B. System deployment diagram
The deployment diagram, see Figure 3, represents struc-
ture of SmartNursing system that illustrates the components
of the system and visualize the communication between
these components.
C. Relational Database Management System (RDBMS)
MySql RDBMS is open source and is the most popular
database with 65,000 downloads per day. MySql also pro-
vides MySql Workbench - a tool for designing and modelling
database. Reason for choosing this RDBMS is to have a
stable database among other open source databases and
moreover it is simple to use.
D. Web-server
Play Framework is chosen as a web based server de-
velopment platform. The reason is that the main scope of
application is to develop a mobile application, therefore
preference web-server is the one with simplicity, easy to use,
and Java support. Play Framework has these advantages:
• The biggest advantage of Play framework over other
Java web applications is usability. For example you do
not need to restart the server on static changes [16].
• Play framework jobs provide a way of running program
logic in the background.
• With the help of CRUD, administrator’s UI can build
easily.
• It supports different IDE’s integration for example
Eclipse, ItelliJ IDEA.
E. 3rd party API
ZXing (”zebra crossing”) is an open source, bar-code
scanning library developed in Java. We have embedded
ZXing API version 2.0 into our project for the scanning
of bar-codes to identify a patient.
Google Maps is a web mapping service application and
technology provided by Google, that powers many map
based services. In SmartNursing application Google Maps
is used to display the location of nurses on a map.
F. Graphical User Interface
As discussed in the last chapter that we have focused
on the usability issue and we provide simple and useful
design based on the requirements of the nurses. We have
used dashboard concept to bring the idea of home-screen and
268
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 3.
System deployment diagram
link to the major functionalities are provided on the main
screen. We have also embedded the proﬁler functionality on
the main screen to make our dashboard more usable. We
avoid the option menu to bring simplicity in the application.
Our target users are nurses and it should require minimum
time and efforts to use application. Therefore, we have
tried to avoid hidden things and make the functionalities
accessible. Figure 4 shows the main screen of application.
Main screen is combination of core functionality i.e. proﬁler
and dashboard with link to other key functionalities. It is
visualising the context information of the nurses from the
selected proﬁle. Voice messenger system with possibility to
record a message is illustrated in the Figure 5. Functionality
is designed to improve communication among nurses and
get easy access to information about patients. First of all, a
nurse needs to identify a patient by a unique identiﬁcation.
We have used barcodes to identify the patients. Nurses can
Figure 4.
Main-screen components
Figure 5.
Voice messenger functionality
scan the barcode from smartphone to get the id of the
patient. On identiﬁcation of the patient, system ﬁnds the
patient in the database and sends the patient’s information
and related messages to the smartphone application. All
unprocessed messages are displayed to the nurse. To record
a new message there is a custom dialog that allows the nurse
to record the message. After recording the nurse can listen
to the recorded message. If she do not like the recorded
message then she can record again, in that case before
recorded audio ﬁle will be overwritten.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper shows how capabilities of smartphone could
improve working environment for home nurses. Imple-
mented functionalities maximise beneﬁts of smartphone at
working place. They make daily work easier, reduces the
stress and the nurse could do work with full concentration.
Solution provides information that is needed at the time
and improves process of communication among nurses by
suggesting an easy, more convenient and time saving way
269
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

to convey information via recorded messages. Our future
research focuses on usability study of implemented appli-
cation. The idea is to test performance of application by
distributing it among targeted users - home nurses. Taking
into account user experience and their suggestions, the
system could be improved to make it more user friendly and
efﬁcient to use. Furthermore, security, utilization of more
sensors to fetch context information and implementation of
more functionalities. Possible future functionalities might be
tracking of detailed patient history, calculation of working
hours and scheduler for the patient, access based on context
information etc. In addition to this, graphical interface of our
application can be improved by providing more assistance
to the nurses with interactive communication.
REFERENCES
[1] “Palliative care: the solid facts,” WHO Regional Ofﬁce
for Europe to: Publications, World Health Organization.
[Online]. Available: http://www.euro.who.int
[2] P. Lansley, C. McCreadie, and A. Tinker, “Can adapting the
homes of older people and providing assistive technology pay
its way?” Age and Ageing, Oxford Journals, pp. 571–576,
2004.
[3] G. Lanzieri, “The greying of the baby boomers, a century-
long view of ageing in european populations,” Eurostat Statis-
tics in focus, pp. 4–8, apr 2011.
[4] J.
B.
Schmidt,
“Massiv
mistrivsel
i
aeldreplejen,”
http://www.ugebreveta4.dk, Sep. 2012.
[5] “Webside
of
Frederiksberg
municipality,
home
care,”
http://www.frederiksberg.dk/hjemmeplejen, Sep. 2012.
[6] “Skyscape product details,” http://www.skyscape.com, Sep.
2012.
[7] “Zco corporation website,” http://www.zco.com/news, Sep.
2012.
[8] “Celltrak
technologies
website,”
http://www.celltrak.com,
Sep. 2012.
[9] D. Vergados, A. Alevizos, A. Mariolis, and M. Caragiozidis,
“Intelligent services for assisting independent living of elderly
people at home,” New York, NY, USA, pp. 79/1–4, 2008. [On-
line]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1389586.1389677
[10] “Amigo
-
ambient
intelligence
for
the
net-
worked
home
environment,”
http://www.hitech-
projects.com/euprojects/amigo/index.htm, Nov. 2012.
[11] T. M. Burkow and P. A. Bakkevoll, “The grid as an enabler for
home based healthcare servicesr,” in in Proceedings of MIE
2005 Connecting Medical Informatics and Bio-Informatics,
R. Engelbrecht et al. (Eds.).
ENMI, 2005, pp. 1305–1310.
[12] P. Rajasekaran, M. Radhakrishnan, and S. Subbaraj, “Sensor
grid applications in patient monitoring,” Future Gener. Com-
put. Syst., Amsterdam, The Netherlands, The Netherlands, pp.
569–575, Apr. 2010.
[13] G. Venturi, “Android design patterns,” Closertag - design
agency, 2011.
[14] Y. Natchetoi, V. Kaufman, and A. Shapiro, “Service oriented
architecture for mobile applications.”
[15] E. Schonfeld, “Android phones pass 700,000 activations
per
day,
approaching
250
million
total,”
website:
http://techcrunch.com/2011/12/22/android-700000/,
Tech.
Rep., 2011.
[16] “Play!
framework
website,
documentation,”
http://www.playframework.org, Sep. 2012.
270
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

