eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013. ISBN: 978-1-61208-252-3
121
ePatient and eNurses Tools Based on Tactile Interfaces Applications  
for Nursing Home Residents and Nurse Team Support 
Extension to Ambient-Assisted Living Semiotic Command Interfaces  
Fabien Mas, Amélie Rémondière, Pierre-Alexandre 
Cocherau, Emilie Rouleau, Pascal Dartoux 
EHPAD (nursing home) Les Signolles 
Ajain, France 
e-mail: emilie.rouleau@ehpadajain.fr 
Laurent Billonnet, Christelle Aupetit-Berthelemot, 
Jean-Michel Dumas 
ENSIL engineering school, semioTIC lab,  
Xlim research institute, University of Limoges 
Limoges, France 
e-mail: laurent.billonnet@unilim.fr
Abstract—This article shows what usage can be made of touch 
screens to monitor elderly activities and health parameters. 
The system is based upon a classical 10-inch tablet on which a 
portal allows to access several activities for communications, 
cerebral activities through games, electronic mailbox, and 
multimedia applications. Statistical results can be used by the 
medical team to follow the mental and medical state of the 
resident, and to adapt the daily activities. The graphic 
interface and the game types are derived using a semiotic 
approach taking into account the biography of the person 
through the memory of gesture.  
Keywords-Touch screen interface; semiotic approach; 
cerebral training; health statistics; nurse team support 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT 
Surveys shows that only between 6% and 15% of people 
over 70 years use touch interfaces, against 83% for those 
under 35. The main cause is a lack of information leading to 
a lack of interest, the fear of not being able to use it because 
of missing skills or health problems, or a wrong idea on the 
cost of equipment. However, another French survey shows 
that, if the mobile phone is the tactile object most commonly 
owned today, the most wanted tactile devices are equipments 
for elderly and disabled people (71%) before classical 
comfort home automation [1]. 
To improve tactile interfaces design and usage, it is 
important to take into account the memory of gestures, 
especially for people with reduced autonomy because the 
gesture used to interact with the interface is not always 
obvious. This implies that the functional signs (icons, 
buttons) and gestural modes of interaction (gestures required 
for a particular action) are fully embedded in their memories 
of daily practices. Because each handicap situation is unique, 
customable, adaptable and updatable interfaces based on 
physical and mental skills of each user must be designed. To 
help disabled people to take possession of the interface and 
to reactivate their memory of gestures, several parameters 
must be taken into account: the continuous aspect of the 
gesture (to increase the sense of proximity to the object), a 
maximum contextual speed response with a minimum delay 
in the resulting action, the accuracy of the response to the 
gesture, the adequate feedback and acknowledgment of the 
interface. Depending on the level of autonomy and the ability 
of the person, the adequate interface can generate an effect of 
continuity between the user and his environment, an effect of 
harmony between his body and the interface. The interface is 
then experienced as an extension of the body of the user. 
This can be done using the semiotic approach. We first 
define semiotics for ICT and health, and then describe our 
touch screen demonstrator for people with loss of autonomy 
using this approach. We further extend the concept for the 
monitoring of home automation equipments.  
II. 
SEMIOTICS OF THE INFORMATION AND 
COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES (ICT) & HEALTH 
In his Cours de linguistique générale, De Saussure 
wished to elaborate a science, which could study the “life of 
signs within the social life [2]”. Semiotics actually describes 
texts, images, objects, spaces, etc 
Semiotics of ICT includes two main themes: (i) the 
multimedia, multimodal and hypertextual context and 
graphical and (ii) material interfaces; we can quote the work 
carried out by the University of Limoges in both areas [3-7]. 
In both instances, the semiotician examines how a text or an 
object which is intended to support interaction with a digital 
service and/or device is perceived. What understanding of 
service is suggested to the user by a text, or an object? On 
what mode(s) of perception should a digital support service, 
for a specific health need, be based? Finally, the semiotician 
raises the question of understanding both the sensory and 
cognitive appropriation of the meaning (of the text or object 
and the support it provides). To globally sum up, semiotics 
will be the innovative tool to efficiently optimize the 
parameters that lead to the best appropriation of the 
technologies by the end-user and to the best assessment of 
the associated impacts, for the end-users, the medical actors 
with a feedback to the policy makers. 
Semiotics of ICT in the field of health is focused on the 
way that the user, with the current skills and the gestural and 
cultural experiences he developed in the course of the 
practices of his everyday life, perceives digital objects that 
are intended to help him. In this particular case, it is not only 
a question of questioning the relevance for a given user (the 
shape, the size, the colour of an interface), but also of 
questioning the efficacy of the mode of gestural interaction 
that the device proposes.  

eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013. ISBN: 978-1-61208-252-3
122
How to facilitate an effective interaction with an 
object/device based on the user perception? This is this 
question that we will answer. 
Thus, appropriation of ICT objects under a semiotic 
approach will carry out the following topics: 
• 
Social, organizational, ethical and legal aspects; 
• 
Efficacy and effectiveness of technologies; 
• 
Better understanding of their use. 
III. 
TOUCHSCREEN TABLETS FOR PEOPLE WITH LOSS OF 
AUTONOMY IN HOSPITAL 
An experiment has been carried out in a nursing home 
(EHPAD in French), in Ajain, (department of Creuse). This 
structure hosts more than 200 residents and an important 
medical and nursing staff including a psychologist. 
A. ICT architecture and targets 
Figure 1 shows the ICT network structure that has been 
set up in the EHPAD. 
 
 
Figure 1.  ICT network architecture  
Such architecture has been designed to create and 
manage: 
• 
A database system; 
• 
An administration interface (account management, 
contents development…) for the EHPAD staff; 
• 
A statistic interface which allows a real-time resident 
follow-up by the EHPAD staff; 
• 
A family interface which permits to communicate 
with the family; 
• 
A resident interface (portal) designed according to a 
semiotic approach. 
Figure 2 shows the main portal screen. 
 
B. The applied procedure  
The different icons and related pages have been defined 
in a collaborative work between the residents, the 
psychologist and the semiotician. 
It is important to note the presence of games (Jeux). It is 
recognized that people regularly in stimulating their mental 
activities (reading, learning, playing memory games, etc.) 
delay the effects of age [8]. Games for each specific 
cognitive domain have been developed always guided by a 
semiotic approach: memory, attention, executive and 
visuospatial functions, competition aspect…   
 
 
Figure 2.  Resident personal interface main page  
Through the statistic interface, the EHPAD staff can 
evaluate the progression of the resident: date, time per game, 
number and levels of errors… and proposes feedback 
solutions. Figure 3 shows the graphical evaluation of the 
resident results for a game consisting in reconstituting words 
from pieces. Green and blue bars compare the time taken by 
the resident and the average time of all the participants 
(vertical axis) depending on the difficulty level (horizontal 
axis from 1 to 9). Red and orange bars compare the number 
of error of the resident to the average errors of all the 
participants. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Statistical results 
C. Studied sample and major results  
Nine residents participated to 16 individual sessions over 
7 weeks. The residents were from 74 to 86 years old and 
suffered from different pathologies: Alzheimer (weak) and 
Parkinson 
diseases, 
cognitive 
disabilities, 
depressive 
syndrome, various disorientations, etc. 

eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013. ISBN: 978-1-61208-252-3
123
From a technological point of view, the graphic chart, 
navigation system, games scenarios and interactivity have 
been validated. A touch pen is often preferred to the finger 
touch. 
From a human point of view, all residents showed 
enthusiasm: 
• 
Always voluntary. No refusal. 
• 
They directly go to the games screen after switching 
on the table. 
• 
An efficient signage has facilitated learning 
(contribution of the semiotic approach). 
• 
They absolutely want to finish the game with the 
pride of success. 
This shows that these experiments have provided a “well-
being” to the residents and facilitated the work of the 
EHPAD staff. 
IV. 
APPLICATION OF THE TOUCH SCREEN TABLET FOR THE 
MONITORING OF HOME AUTOMATION EQUIPMENTS BY THE 
RESIDENTS IN THEIR PRIVATE APARTMENT  
A. Description of the prototype  
The prototype is presented in figure 4 and consists in a 
touch screen associated with radiofrequency modules.  
The 
low 
cost 
and 
low 
consumption 
ZigBee 
radiofrequency link has been chosen for the monitoring of 
equipments In addition, it is open source and nowadays 
becomes a standard. 
A synthesis image has been designed using an open 
source graphic software. The image reproduces in detail the 
apartment rooms. The resident is able to recognize all his 
furniture, light switches, windows… and to identify himself 
to his daily environment as illustrated in figure 5. This 
allows a better appropriation of the touch screen icons by the 
resident. 
B. Operating mode and improvements  
Touching an icon simply activates the corresponding 
equipment. The result of each action is immediately fedback 
on the screen: lights are switched on or off, shutters are 
opened or not, etc.  
If the resident uses the classical equipment, the action 
result is also fedback to the tablet graphical environment. 
At the next step, ZigBee modules will be miniaturized 
and embedded into the touch screen device and equipments. 
A 3D photo of the apartment taken with a fish eye camera 
will give a more realistic image of the housing environment. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Prototype touchscreen with ZigBee modules  
Synthesis image 
ZigBee modules 
Receiver + Sensor & Emitter 

eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013. ISBN: 978-1-61208-252-3
124
 
Figure 5.  Detailed synthesis image   
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this article, we show what usage can be made of 
touch screens to monitor elderly activities and health 
parameters. Our experimentation is based upon a classical 
10-inch tablet on which a portal allows to access several 
activities. The originality of the interface, at this step, is 
that the graphic interface and the game types are derived 
using a semiotic approach taking into account the 
biography of the person through the memory of gesture.  
Next step will focus on the design itself of the graphic 
interface, to integrate home automation application using 
the same approach. This command interface will be based 
upon the use of 3D-picture of the housing environment of 
the person. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] www.marsouin.org, 2010. 
[2] De Saussure, F., “Cours de linguistique générale”, Payot,  
1916. 
[3] M. Delvigne, L. Billonnet and J.-M. Dumas, “Using color 
codes through ICT and home automation technologies in 
the housing environment context for people in loss of 
autonomy”, 9th International Conference on Smart Homes 
and Health Telematics, pp. 200-204, Montreal, Canada, 
2011. 
[4] N. Pignier, D. Tsala-Effa, L. Billonnet, A. Geslin-Beyaert 
and J.-M. Dumas, “On the semiotic appropriation of ICT 
tools for people in loss of autonomy”, Invited paper, 23rd 
Digiworld Summit, Montpellier, France, 2011. 
[5] B. Bourdillon, L. Parizot, J. Vincent, E. Desbordes, N. 
Pignier, L. Billonnet and J.-M. Dumas, “Applications of 
tactile interfaces to home automation for people in loss of 
autonomy : training for memory gestures”, Medetel 2011, 
The International eHealth, Telemedecine and Health ICT 
Forum 
For 
Education, 
Networking 
and 
Business, 
Luxembourg, 5 – 8 April 2011,. pp.126-129. 
[6] N. Pignier, “Le plaisir de l’interaction entre l’usager et les 
objets TIC numériques”, Hermès-Lavoisier, 2012. 
[7] C. Duteil-Mougel, A. Beyeart-Geslin, N. Pignier, D. Tsala-
Effa, L. Billlonnet and J.-M. Dumas, “Semiotics and 
semantic : tools for an effective appropriation of 
information, communication and health technologies”,  
Medetel 2012, The International eHealth, Telemedecine 
and Health ICT Forum For Education, Networking and 
Business, Luxembourg, 17 – 20 April 2012. 
[8] See for example the Nun study from the University of 
Minnesota, www.healthstudies.umn.edu/nunstudy. 
 
Lights switched on 

