Use of Electronic Tools in Norwegian FACT Youth Teams: A User Perspective 
 
Erlend Bønes, Conceição Granja, Terje Solvoll 
Norwegian Centre for E-health Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
Faculty of Nursing and Health Sciences 
Nord University 
Bodø, Norway 
email: {erlend.bones, conceicao.granja, terje.solvoll}@ehealthresearch.no 
 
 
 
Abstract— Flexible Assertive Community Treatment (FACT) 
youth teams deliver integrated services to youths aged 12-25 
with mental health issues. There has been reported challenges 
with use of e-health solutions for FACT teams targeting an 
adult population. The objective of this study was to examine 
challenges with e-health solutions for FACT youth teams, with 
a special focus on the electronic whiteboards they use. We did 
semi-structured interviews in 3 Norwegian FACT youth teams. 
We identified challenges with the electronic whiteboards, 
electronic health records and team calendar solutions. There is 
a need for improved e-health solutions for FACT youth teams 
in Norway.  
Keywords- FACT; FACT youth; mental health; electronic 
whiteboard; electronic health records; e-health. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Flexible Assertive Community Treatment (FACT) is a 
model for delivering integrated services to persons with 
long-term mental illness [1]. The model was developed in 
the Netherlands in the early 2000s and is a variant of 
Assertive Community Treatment (ACT). While ACT is 
designed to provide continuously intensive health services to 
all their patients, FACT is targeted at patients that require 
intensive services in some periods, but less intensive in 
others [2]. FACT teams work with a shared caseload on 
patients when they require intensive services, and individual 
case management when the patients are stable [1]. This 
makes FACT better suited to areas with lower patient 
populations, that do not have a high number of patients that 
requires continuously intensive health services.   
Most FACT teams target adult patients, but some teams 
target youths. The Netherlands have had FACT youth teams 
since 2005, and there are around 60 FACT youth in the 
Netherlands today [3].  
Traditional health services in Norway have had problems 
reaching youths with complex issues. Cooperation between 
levels of health care is affected by unclear responsibilities, 
and there is a lack of integration of services [3]. The goal of 
FACT youth teams is to meet these challenges, by providing 
integrated services for their patient population [3]. The target 
group for Norwegian FACT youth teams are youths aged 12-
25 years old. FACT youth teams are multidisciplinary and 
should consist of a team leader, team coordinator, child and 
youth psychologist, child and youth psychiatrist, family 
therapist, user specialist, and a work/education specialist. In 
2021, there were 3 FACT youth teams in Norway, and 
around 70 FACT teams targeting adults.  
In Norway, specialist mental health services are the 
responsibility of the government. The services are delivered 
by hospitals or community mental health centers, that are 
owned by one of the four Regional Health Authorities.  
Primary care and local services are delivered by the 356 
municipalities. Most FACT teams in Norway are organized 
as a cooperation between specialist care and one or more 
municipalities [4].  
Standardized patient pathways were introduced for all 
mental health services in Norway in 2019 [5]. The goals of 
the standardized patient pathways were to reduce variance in 
treatment, 
ensure 
user 
participation, 
and 
improve 
coordination between various health services. Thus, all 
patients in Norwegian FACT teams should be in a 
standardized patient pathway.  
FACT teams have daily meetings, where they discuss 
status and plan further follow-up of patients that require 
intensive treatment [1]. The teams use an electronic 
whiteboard to display an overview of these patients. This 
makes the electronic whiteboard one of the most important 
tools for the FACT teams. Patients who receive case 
management are discussed less frequently by the team, 
usually once a week. 
Electronic health records (EHRs) are an important tool 
for health care workers to get relevant information about 
their patients and document treatment the patient get. 
Specialist health care in three of the four Norwegian health 
care regions use the EHR system DIPS AS, while the fourth 
are using DocuLive provided by Siemens AS. There are 
several different EHR systems in primary care.  
There have been reported challenges with information 
and communication (ICT) solutions for FACT teams 
targeting adults in Norway. This includes issues with 
electronic whiteboards, EHRs and calendars [4][6]. The goal 
of this study was to examine FACT youth teams perspectives 
on electronic whiteboards and other ICT solutions in 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Norwegian FACT youth teams. These results can be used to 
inform how an electronic whiteboard solution for FACT 
youth teams should be designed.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the methods used. Section III shows the results. 
Section IV presents the discussion. Section V describes the 
conclusions, including future work. 
II. 
METHODS 
Three Norwegian FACT youth teams were included in 
the study. The teams chosen were the 3 FACT youth teams 
operating in Norway at the time of the study. Team 2 and 3 
was organized as a cooperation between primary care and 
specialist care. Team 1 was established by a municipality, 
and was therefore mainly based in primary care, but they had 
a psychologist employed by specialist care. All 3 teams were 
situated in urban areas. Table 1 shows the characteristics of 
the teams included. 
Building on a Computer supported cooperative work 
framework [7][8], we conducted semi-structured interviews 
with the teams. The interviews were conducted during the 
fall of 2021 by one researcher. We invited all members of 
the teams to participate in the interviews, but for various 
practical reasons not all team members were present during 
the interviews. The number of participants in each interview 
was from 1 to 3, for a total of 7 participants. We used an 
interview guide and presented predefined use cases as a 
starting point for open-ended discussions about use of the 
electronic whiteboard and other ICT solutions.  
The interview guide focused on how an ideal electronic 
whiteboard would look, if the electronic whiteboards should 
be integrated with the EHR or other systems, and if it would 
be useful to be able to extract statistics from the electronic 
whiteboard. See Fig. 1 for the list of interview questions. The 
use cases showed different scenarios where the electronic 
whiteboard or other ICT solutions were involved. The use 
cases discussed during the interviews were referral of 
patients to FACT youth teams, use of the whiteboard during 
the daily meetings, updating of the whiteboard after meeting 
a patient, transfer of patient from intensive follow-up to case 
management, end of treatment of patient from FACT youth 
team and use of the team calendars. See Fig.2 for the use 
cases discussed. The interview guide and use cases were 
developed based on experiences from a previous study of 
ICT solutions for FACT teams for adult patients [9].  
TABLE I.  
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TEAMS 
Characteristics of the teams 
Team 
Coverage area 
Team organization 
Number of 
interviewees 
1 
One 
municipality 
Mainly primary 
care 
3 
2 
One city 
district 
Primary and 
specialist care 
3 
3 
One city 
district 
Primary and 
specialist care 
1 
 
Figure 1.  Interview guide questions 
The interviews were recorded and transcribed.  In 
addition to this, the researcher took some notes during the 
interviews, and wrote a memo after each interview. This 
memo contained ideas and thoughts from the interview. One 
of the researchers read the transcripts and memos several 
times. Based on this we developed preliminary themes of 
data for the data analysis.  
III. 
RESULTS 
The themes of data identified in the preliminary analysis 
of the data matched the main ICT solutions used by the 
teams; electronic whiteboards, calendars and EHR. 
The electronic whiteboards used by the teams were 
standalone solutions made in Microsoft Excel. The electronic 
whiteboards did not have any integration to the EHR or other 
systems. All 3 teams reported that they would like the 
electronic whiteboard either integrated to the EHR or as a 
part of the EHR. Team 2 said that because of the lack of 
integration, the electronic whiteboard is mainly a tool for 
coordination, and they still must do all the documentation in 
the EHR. Team 3 said that it was important to have the same 
diagnoses in the EHR and electronic whiteboard, since the 
teams often work with tentative diagnoses.   
Team 1 reported that they wanted the whiteboard to be 
more oriented towards the users’ family and network, since 
this is an important part of how FACT youth teams work. 
The interviewer asked the teams if it would be useful for 
them to extract statistics about their users from the 
whiteboard solution. Team 1 said that they had no large need 
of this, because they had a good overview of their patients 
due to a small number of patients. Team 2 wanted to be able 
to extract statistics. The reason for this was that they wanted 
to justify what they did and the results they were getting. 
Ideally, they wanted to use the statistics to estimate how 
many inpatient days they prevented for their patients. Team 
3 also said that they wanted to be able to extract statistics. 
They wanted information about the number of patients, 
number of patients on compulsory treatment, number of 
 
• How do you use the electronic whiteboard today? 
• Do you want to use the electronic whiteboard for 
other purposes? 
• Is there any kind of integration between the electronic 
whiteboard and EHR solutions? If no, is this 
something you want? 
• What team members should have access to the 
electronic whiteboard? 
• Do you have a need to extract reports and statistics 
from the electronic whiteboard? If yes, what kind of 
reports and statistics? 
• What calendar solutions do the teams use? Is there a 
need for better calendar solutions? 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 2.  Use cases discussed 
patients with specific diagnoses and number of patients who 
get follow-up from child welfare services.  
The teams also pointed out that they wanted the 
electronic whiteboard to highlight deadlines related to 
standardized patient pathways and treatment plans. Team 2 
wanted deadlines related to treatment plans updated 
automatically in the electronic whiteboard. Team 3 said that 
they are in favor of the implementation of standardized 
patient pathways in Norway, but it can be a lot of work to 
keep track of where the patients are in the pathways.  
The teams also reported some issues with the use of 
calendars. One issue is that they have several different 
calendars they use, this includes calendar in EHR for 
specialist care and Outlook calendars for specialist and 
primary care. The calendars available to each team member 
was based on their employment. Team 1 said that they 
absolutely have a need for a common calendar, that would 
make it easier to coordinate a shared caseload. They would 
also like to have the calendar functionality connected to the 
whiteboard. Team 2 reported that the calendar in the EHR 
for specialist care is hard to use on mobile devices. Team 3 
said there is a simple overview of plans for the current week 
for patient on their whiteboard. This overview be seen as a 
calendar for the patient. Some adult FACT teams have 
reported that calendars are useful for safety purposes [9]. The 
FACT youth teams reported that this was not relevant for 
them at this time. Team 1 said that this is not relevant for 
their current patients. Team 3 said that their patients receive 
voluntary treatment, and that the team do not intrude on the 
patients, so this is not an issue for them. 
One dilemma that several teams brought was how 
information regarding family members should be written in 
the EHR. Health issues of the other family members might 
be related to the youths’ issues. However, since it is only the 
youth that is the teams’ patients, health information about 
other people should not be written in their EHRs. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
An important issue reported by all three teams is a lack of 
integration between the electronic whiteboards and the EHR 
systems. An ideal solution would allow information from the 
EHR systems to be directly included in the electronic 
whiteboard. This could include patient IDs, diagnoses, and 
other relevant information. Data from the whiteboard should 
also be transferred to the EHR. In a study of FACT teams for 
adults [9], it was shown that also adult teams wish 
integration between the electronic whiteboards and EHR.  
One team wished that the electronic whiteboard should 
be more focused on the patients’ family and network, to 
reflect the way the teams work. Some whiteboard solutions 
already contain basic text fields for information about family 
and network. However, this solution might be improved 
upon. How the electronic whiteboards can be better adapted 
to working with the patients’ family and network could be a 
topic for further research.  
Two of the teams stated that they wanted to be able to 
extract statistical information from the whiteboards about 
number of patients and diagnoses. The statistics could be 
used for various administrative purposes, including being 
better able to justify the work the teams do for their funders. 
A solution that shows basic statistics about patients and 
diagnoses should be straightforward to implement in an 
electronic whiteboard solution. One team also wished to be 
able estimate how many inpatient days they save. 
Investigating if a whiteboard solution can assist in this 
beyond providing basic information could be a topic for 
further research. 
One issue related to use of the EHR is the dilemma about 
what should be written in the EHR about family members of 
the patient. The health issues of family members might be 
relevant to the issues of the youths. However, it is only the 
youth that is a patient for the FACT youth teams. It is 
unlikely that this challenge can be solved directly by an ICT 
solution, but it is an issue with the use of the EHR we think it 
is important to highlight.  
The teams reported that they use several different 
calendars, but at the same time also have some issues finding 
information about the availability of other team members. 
These results are similar to results from FACT teams 
targeting adults [9]. A common calendar for the whole team 
could be a useful solution. However, this requires that the 
new calendar becomes the preferred solution and not just 
another calendar that adds to the confusion. Since the 
electronic whiteboard is the daily tool of the teams, it would 
be natural to connect the calendar to the whiteboard.  
The teams also said that they wished that the electronic 
whiteboard displayed deadlines for standardized patient 
pathways and treatment plans. This would make it easier to 
for the teams to keep track of the different deadlines. This 
shows that the teams have many different deadlines to 
administer, and they wish that the whiteboard help them 
keep track of these.   
Many of the issues we found about FACT youth teams 
are the same as issues found in FACT teams for adults [9]. 
This includes challenges with the electronic whiteboard and 
calendars. One apparent difference between teams for youths 
and adults is a higher emphasis on family and network for 
youth teams. Electronic whiteboards for FACT teams for 
adults can also display information about family and 
network, and involving family members is often important 
for these teams. However, the emphasis on this is higher in 
FACT youth teams, and FACT youth teams have some 
unique issues, like the dilemma regarding family members 
and the EHR as described above. Despite these differences, 
we believe that an improved electronic whiteboard could be 
• Referral of patients to FACT youth teams  
• Use of the whiteboard during the daily meetings  
• Updating of the whiteboard after meeting a patient 
• Transfer of patient from intensive follow-up to case 
management 
• End of treatment of patient from FACT youth team 
• Use of the team calendars 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

designed to serve both FACT youth teams and FACT teams 
for adults. 
A. Study limitations 
There were only 3 FACT youth teams included in this 
study. These were all 3 FACT youth teams that was 
operating in Norway at the time of the study. Because of this, 
these results should be seen in conjunction with results for 
FACT teams targeting adults, while being aware of any 
differences between the types of teams.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This study shows that FACT youth teams have several 
issues with their current electronic whiteboards and other 
ICT solutions. Many of these issues are the same as issues 
found in FACT teams targeting adults [9]. Better ICT 
solutions are needed for both types of teams. 
In the future we will analyze these results together with 
results regarding electronic tools for FACT teams targeting 
adults. Together, they will form the basis of a detailed 
description of requirements for e-health solutions for FACT 
teams. Any differences for requirements for teams targeting 
youths and adults will be highlighted.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the FACT youth teams 
participating in this study. We would also like to thank 
Trond Hatling at the National Resource Center for 
Community Mental Health (NAPHA), for helping us get in 
touch with the teams. 
The study has been funded by the Norwegian Directorate 
of Health and the Research council of Norway. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. R. van Veldhuizen, "FACT: a Dutch version of ACT," Community 
Ment Health J, vol. 43, pp. 421-433, May 2007. 
[2] 
G. R. Bond and R. E. Drake, "The critical ingredients of assertive 
community treatment," World Psychiatry, vol. 14, pp. 240-242, June 
2015. 
[3] 
Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Concurrent Substance Abuse 
and Mental Health Disorders, "FACT Ung Modellbeskrivelse," 
[FACT youth model description], February 2022. (In Norwegian). 
[4] 
A. Landheim and S. Odden, "Evaluering av FACT-team i Norge – 
Sluttrapport " [Evaluation of FACT teams in Norway], April 2020. 
(In Norwegian). 
[5] 
M. Ådnanes, J. R. Høiseth, M. Magnussen, K. Thaulow, and S. L. 
Kaspersen, "Pakkeforløp for psykisk helse og rus–brukere, pårørende 
og fagfolks erfaringer," [Standardized patient pathways for mental 
health and addiction - the experiences of users, relatives and 
professionals], January 2021. (In Norwegian). 
[6] 
E. Bønes, C. Granja, and T. Solvoll, "Implementation of the Flexible 
Assertive Community Treatment (FACT) Model in Norway: eHealth 
Assessment Study," Journal of medical Internet research, vol. 24, pp. 
e32220, January 2022. 
[7] 
G. Fitzpatrick and G. Ellingsen, "A review of 25 years of CSCW 
research in healthcare: contributions, challenges and future agendas," 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), vol. 22, pp. 609-
665, June 2012. 
[8] 
W. Pratt, M. C. Reddy, D. W. McDonald, P. Tarczy-Hornoch, and J. 
H. 
Gennari, 
"Incorporating 
ideas 
from 
computer-supported 
cooperative work," Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 37, pp. 
128-137, April 2004. 
[9] 
E. Bønes, C. Granja, and T. Solvoll, "Use of e-health in Norwegian 
FACT teams: a user perspective," Medical Informatics Europe (MIE 
2022), in press. 
 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

