Figure 1. Modular structure of the system
Telediagnostics of Back Curvature and Posture for 
Elderly Patients and Remote Access to 3D Data
W. Glinkowski, B. Glinkowska, A. Górecki
Chair and Department of Orthopaedics and 
Traumatology of Locomotor System, Center of 
Excellence “TeleOrto”, Medical University of Warsaw
Warsaw, Poland
w.glinkowski@teleorto.pl
J. Michoński, R. Sitnik, M. Witkowski
Institute of Micromechanics and Photonics
Warsaw University of Technology
Warsaw, Poland
Abstract — Telemedicine services for the ageing population are 
expanding recently. Postural screening assessment is usually 
focused  on  children  and  adolescents.  Elderly  population  is 
endangering  on  kyphotic  deformations  due  to  osteoporotic 
fractures. Yearly three dimensional (3D) examinations may be 
applicable to monitor postural deterioration among elderly. 
Remote assessment of back shape seems to be an option to 
measure kyphosis angle and postural worsening. The aim of 
this study is to present the archiving and assessment system 
and  its  applicability.  The  proposed  system  has  two  main 
components:  measurement  module  with  data  analysis  and 
storage one. The measurement module is based on structured 
light method. The technique for 3D imaging of back shape is 
based on temporal phase shifting and Gray codes. Acquired 
“images”  are  transferable  to  Telediagnostic  Center. 
Preliminary analysis was performed on selected cases from 
database  of  patient’s  cohort.  The  average  age  of  analyzed 
patients  group  was  72  years.  Bone  mineral  density  in  the 
analyzed group was below 80 mg/cm3. Kyphosis angle was 
measured in the range of 32 to 60 degrees, assessed by the 
clinical team. Shape of the elderly patient’s backs was acquired 
and sent over the Internet connection. Presented, originally 
developed system combines postural telediagnostic screening 
and  monitoring.  The  development  of  automatic  anatomical 
structures detection shall be able to prompt final diagnostic 
procedure and make draw of the trend of measured values 
changes over the time. The safety and procedure of presented 
examination method was highly accepted by elderly patients. 
Keywords-telediagnostics;  posture;  kyphosis;  osteoporotic 
vertebral compressive fracture.
INTRODUCTION
Telemedicine  services  for  the  ageing  population  are 
expanding recently. Postural screening assessment is usually 
focused on children and adolescents. Among teenagers round 
back is observed in up to one third of examined population. 
Elderly population is endangering on kyphotic deformations 
due to osteoporotic fractures. Yearly three-dimensional (3D) 
examinations  may  be  applicable  to  monitor  postural 
deterioration  among  elderly.  Remote  assessment  of  back 
shape seems to be an option to measure kyphosis angle and 
postural  worsening.  The  proposed  system  has  two  main 
components:  measurement  module and  data analysis  and 
storage one (Fig. 1). The measurement module is based on 
structured light method. The technique for 3D imaging of 
back shape is based on temporal phase shifting and Gray 
codes.  Measurement  process  consists  of  projection  of 
sequence of raster images on surface under investigation and 
their simultaneous acquisition. The hardware components are 
designed in a way that allows for easy transportation and 
mobility.  Acquired  “images”  are  transferable  to 
Telediagnostic Center. The aim of this study is to present the 
archiving and assessment system and its applicability.
In the second part of the paper the technology used for 
capturing  3D  shape  of  human  body  and  flexible  data 
archiving  is  described.  The  third  part  presents  how  the 
designed database structure was used in the particular case. 
Next, the calculation and diagnosis support is covered along 
with some early results and finally the applicability of the 
system to the diagnosis of hyperkyphosis and osteoporosis in 
elderly is presented. 
MEASUREMENT SYSTEM
The measurement system consists of four modules which 
simultaneously  measure  patient’s  skin  surface  from  four 
directions. Each directional module is an optical full-field 
3D scanner based on structured light projection method. The 
main components of each module are: projection unit, which 
is a Digital Light Processing (DLP) projector, detection unit 
which  is  a  Charge  Coupled  Device  (CCD)  or  a 
Complementary  Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor  (CMOS) 
camera and a PC-class computer. During the measurement 
175
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

Figure 2. Mechanism of data storage – XML documents translated into 
records in a relational database
process  the  patient  is  placed  inside  a  calibrated 
measurement volume while a series of patterns is projected 
onto  his  or  her  body  surface.  These  patterns  include 
sinusoidal fringes  and modified  binary  Gray  codes.  The 
shape  of body surface  is calculated  based  on the raster 
deformation  according  to  the  Temporal  Phase  Shifting 
(TPS) method [1]. Dataset produced by the measurement 
system  is  in  the form  of a set  of (x,  y,  z) points that 
represent the sampled surface of patient’s body. The electro-
optical hardware setup utilizes TDP-MT700 projectors by 
Toshiba  Corp.  and  Flea  B&W  cameras  by  Point  Grey 
Research Inc. In order to avoid interferences caused by the 
overlapping  of  raster  images  originating  from  adjacent 
projectors  spectral  filters  are  mounted  on  projector  and 
detector  lenses.  This  allows  projecting  raster  images 
simultaneously  and  conducting  measurements  using  all 
modules  at  the  same  time.  Directional  point  clouds 
originating  from  measurement  modules  are  merged 
automatically  basted  on  a  global  calibration.  The 
metrological  values  of  the  measurement  system  are  as 
follows: 
Measurement volume size: scalable from 1.0m x 1.0m x 
1.0m to 1.5m x 1.5m x 2.0m, 
Accuracy:  0.2mm  to  0.4mm  (depending  on  the 
measurement volume size), 
Data acquisition time: 0.7s (all modules simultaneously), 
maximum number of points: 4 million. 
Depending  on  the  size  and  position  of  the  calibrated 
measurement  volume  the  resulting  point  cloud  may 
represent patient’s thoraco-abdominal region or the whole 
body surface. 
Measurement data acquired with use of the measurement 
system  along with patient’s textual data are stored  in a 
dedicated database. The database is the heart of the system 
and  serves  two  main  purposes  –  archiving  of  data  and 
guarding it from unauthorized access. All operations on the 
database are performed using a specially designed XML 
interface,  which  makes  the  system  independent  of  the 
underlying database implementation (Fig. 2). The interface 
fulfills  different  functions,  including  user  authentication, 
data  import  and  user  queries.  The  structure  within  the 
database can be in full defined using XML without any 
necessary knowledge about the system itself and can be 
extended on the fly in case any additional information or 
data are required. This database can be seen as a document-
oriented one, which is built upon a relational system. The 
interface thus has to be able to translate the tree structure of 
the data (described in XML documents) into tables within 
the actual database taken into account, possibly numerous, 
changes of the structure definition. 
Total dissimilarity of the structures makes it difficult to 
store the data efficiently – the actual data are kept in the 
leafs of the XML tree, but still the path to each leaf from the 
root of the tree is what differs it from other leafs. The 
solution might be to introduce a separate definition of the 
structure in the database which is stored only once, keeps 
the whole tree and can be extended easily, and a separate set 
of records which store the actual data, at the same time 
keeping  reference  to  the  leaf  of  the  tree  which  it  is 
representing. The structure should also have the knowledge 
about types of each leaf in order to be able to perform type 
checking. One does not have to limit oneself to the types 
defined within the RDBMS, but can define arbitrary types 
for the structure intended for the specific application which 
could be either decomposed into built-in types or validated 
by some predefined  rule. If  the structure is broken into 
separate elements, each of which being a semantic entity, a 
way to  connect  elements  between  each  other  should  be 
provided.  This  supplies  a  robust  method  of  defining 
complex  relationships  between  elements  and  creating  a 
hierarchy. 
Moreover, the queries system mustn’t limit the broad 
possibilities given by SQL used in the relational database. 
Such a system has to connect the ease of definition which 
parts of the structure are the constraints and what type of 
relation should be applied, and which parts of the structure 
are requested by the user – this strongly implies that the 
queries should also be built using XML. Additionally, the 
system should provide cascade queries in order to facilitate 
the construction of sophisticated queries and an extra set of 
constraints concerning the linkage between  elements. All 
these features provide a robust and easily-extendable system 
of data management. However, if such a system was to be 
available  over  the  network,  some  sort  of  access  control 
should also be given. If the system was used on a larger 
scale,  with a number of users  accessing  it, a distinction 
should be made between users that are able to modify the 
structure within the database, users that are able to import 
new  or  edit  existing  data  and  ones  that  have  read-only 
access. Additionally, some elements may be said to be more 
significant (so shouldn’t be modified by the same set of users 
that are able to modify other data) or confidential (so should 
be  viewed  only  by  certain  users).  This  leads  to  the 
176
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

Figure 4. C1 parameter and weights from Voronoi diagram, landmarks 
shown in white
Figure 3. Structure designed within the database
conclusion that the authorization system should be defined as 
access relationship between each element and each user in 
the  database  and  separated  between  data  and  structure 
access. These features altogether form a complete system 
which can be securely used over any network, be it a local 
area network (LAN) or the Internet. 
DESIGNED STRUCTURE
 Data can be assigned to three main groups – objects, 
which are the core entities keeping data universal during 
system's lifetime, data elements, which are supposed to be 
assigned  to  each  object,  keeping  information  variable  in 
time, and additional elements which are all kinds of data 
derived from the original data elements. The elements can 
further be linked with each other in an arbitrary way, thus 
creating a hierarchical structure. The structure (division into 
groups and linkage of elements) used in this case is shown in 
Fig. 3. 
Communication between modules is performed over the 
TCP/IP protocol, incorporating two different channels for 
each client, dedicated to two kinds of data – text channel, for 
transmission of the XML documents and binary channel for 
the transfer of large binary objects, such as clouds of points 
or photographs. Such a structure is asynchronous and allows 
performing traffic inexpensive operations such as user logon 
or  querying  for  text  data  independently  of  binary 
transmission, very costly in terms of network transfer. To 
further decrease this cost data compression was implemented 
and was also incorporated in data storage. 
The  data  gathering  and  analysis  module  provides  a 
complete interface for the database, allowing the user to 
manage the information and perform certain operations on 
the archived measurements. It supports automatic analysis – 
so called pattern calculation – a series of operations that can 
be automatically performed on a subset of data according to 
a predefined scheme. The module is constructed in a way 
which  assures  that  no  data  becomes  overwritten  –  any 
number of derived information can be saved in the database 
and  linked  to  the  parent  measurement,  thus  keeping  it 
consistent and easy to browse. It also makes it possible to 
compare different measurements, allowing the estimation of 
patient's  improvement  in  time.  This  requires  good 
repeatability of measurement and a method to correlate two 
measurements of the same patient in space. System's vertical, 
additionally measured for every configuration of the setup 
and assigned to measurement, and two points within the 
measurement  are sufficient  for absolute alignment.  Since 
fine alignment uses two landmarks (dimples of pelvis) for 
accurate positioning, it is preceded by a coarse operation 
which detects the general position of the body. 
CALCULATION AND DIAGNOSIS SUPPORT
Analysis can be carried out in two ways – discrete, based 
on a set of landmarks on the surface of the body or on a more 
global shape analysis. The discrete analysis itself can be 
performed either using manual indication of points or an 
algorithm of automatic landmark detection. Such algorithms 
are  currently  under  development,  at  the  moment  the 
landmarks are acquired from a team of trained physicians, 
which will help in the development process and provide the 
assessment of algorithms' reliability. Additionally, the points 
provide interesting information about the interobserver and 
intraobserver  reliability  for  evaluated  measurements.  A 
preliminary algorithm for automatic landmark extraction is 
built  upon  a  modified  back  diagram  for  a  number  of 
predefined landmarks, of which starting positions are pre-
calculated using an averaged set of manually selected points, 
scaled for each measurement with respect to a simple 2D 
bounding box generated around it. Such a processing path is 
easily extendable to an arbitrary number of characteristic 
points, thus providing a versatile detection method. 
The method assigns an area to each landmark, within 
which the exact position of the landmark is searched for. The 
3D shape contained in each cell is analyzed based on maps 
of parameters C1 and C21. These parameters were developed 
in order to accurately and efficiently describe surface shape 
of full 3D point clouds [2]. The C1 parameter describes how 
much the surface in the neighborhood of the considered point 
deviates from a plane, its values are positive for convex 
areas, negative for concave areas and zero for planes. The C2 
parameter describes the distribution of normal vectors in the 
neighborhood of the considered point in a way allowing 
distinguishing  areas  of  unidirectional  curvature,  such  as 
cylindrical  areas,  and  omnidirectional  curvature,  such  as 
spherical areas and takes values equal to zero for planes and 
1 Names C1 and C2 must not be confused with the designation of cervical 
vertebrae
177
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

Figure 5. Cloud of points from measurement, frontal and sagittal plane, 
landmarks shown in white
cylindrical surfaces and positive for other surface types. The 
highest values of C2 are obtained for sphere and for saddle 
shapes. The analysis of distribution of C1 and C2 parameter 
values allows discrimination of various surface types in a 
way similar to used with mean and Gaussian curvatures, yet 
the former are faster to calculate and more resistant to noise 
in the analyzed dataset. 
Division of the back into subregions makes it possible to 
avoid global analysis of the back surface. Moreover, the 
landmarks are in reality not single points, but rather regions 
on  the  surface  of  various  scale  and  as  such  require 
computation of the C1 and C2 maps with different input 
parameters. Each landmark also exhibits specific properties 
depending on the type of posture which implies the use of 
different  detection  paths  and  an  algorithm  which  would 
provide some general, coarse information about the posture 
of the patient, or possibly an adaptive path of detection 
which would modify its parameters based on some overall 
properties of the shape of the back. An additional potentially 
interesting feature is the possibility of comparison of the 3D 
shape with volumetric data, such as a CT scan. Exemplary 
map of C1 parameter and weights calculated on the basis of a 
Voronoi diagram are shown in Fig. 4. 
EARLY RESULTS
Clinical evaluation of patients body was performed from 
August 2008 till march 2009. The average age of analyzed 
30 patients group was 72 years. Bone mineral density in the 
analyzed group was below 80 mg/cm3. Kyphosis angle was 
measured in the range of 32 to 60 degrees, assessed by the 
clinical team. Average time for assessment was calculated 
from logs of user entering the system. Shape of the elderly 
patient’s  backs  was  acquired  and  sent  over  the  Internet 
connection. The average 3D image size for each examined 
patients was 5 MB, which takes about 20 seconds to transfer 
using a broadband connection. Average time for assessment 
was  estimated  to  be  around  3-4  minutes  based  on 
information gathered by the analysis client module. Patients 
were  asked  about  discomfort  during  the  structural  light 
examination. No patient reported side effect or discomfort 
during the 3D examination. All patients declared positive 
attitude towards next follow up 3D examination.
DISCUSSION ON KYPHOSIS
Spinal  sagittal  curvatures  and  their  deformities  are 
described in relation to the anatomical planes of the body 
which are the coronal (frontal) plane, the sagittal (lateral) 
plane and horizontal (transverse or axial) plane (Fig.  5). 
There  are  natural  curvatures  in  the  sagittal  plane. 
Hyperkyphosis,  colloquially  called  “dowager’s   hump”, 
refers to excessive kyphotic, or anteriorly concave, curvature 
of the thoracic region of the spine. A kyphosis angle over 
40° - the 95th percentile value for young adults - is currently 
used to define hyperkyphosis [3]. It is often observed in 
elderly due mostly to osteoporosis. Most of the studies refer 
to normal values of kyphosis among older adults at 20% to 
40%.  Hyperkyphosis  is  not  only  a  cosmetic  back 
deformation but it may impair pulmonary decreased physical 
function capabilities,  increase risk of future fractures [4-6]. 
Kyphosis can be measured clinically or from radiographs. 
Several  devices  have  been  developed  for  kyphosis 
measurement  like  Debrunner  kyphometer,  goniometer, 
inclinometer,  flexible  ruler  and  various  optical  methods 
[4,7,8].  Thoracic  kyphosis  can  be  measured  on  lateral 
radiographs  of the thoracic  spine globally  (T1–T12) and 
regionally  (T4–T9)  using  Cobb  and  vertebral  centroid 
angles.  Surface topography evaluations utilizing structural 
light technique was used to evaluate kyphosis angle and 
lordosis  angle.  The  kyphosis  angle  was  measured  from 
prominent vertebra to lower neutral zone of inclination (VRS 
method) as described by Weiss and Elobedi [9]. Patient’s 
back surface 3D image was obtained using a high-accuracy 
optical markerless 3D measurement system for non-invasive, 
quick  and  relatively  inexpensive  assessment  of  back 
deformity [10]. Optical methods like photogrammetry and 
structural light method are currently under development [9]. 
The second method allows snapping ideal surface shape of 
the back in digital format. Traditionally, the Cobb angle is 
measured  from  standing  lateral  spine  films  because 
measurement  in  the  lying  position  may  underestimate 
kyphosis. The slight overestimation of Debrunner method 
versus the Cobb angle was found but the mean difference 
between the 2 measures was only 4° [4]. Postural changes 
affecting the cervical, lumbar, and sacral spinal areas and 
postural flexibility may influence thoracic curvature.  The 
simple  method  of  thoracic  kyphosis  based  on  that 
observation  was  utilized  in  cohort  Rancho  Bernardo 
studies [11]. 
Osteoporosis and a history of fragility fractures are both 
associated  with  age  of  75  years  and  over  and  thoracic 
kyphosis.  Ettinger et al. [12] measured thoracic curvature, 
using an architect's flexicurve. Their study suggested that 
kyphosis  is associated  with  decreased  BMD and  loss of 
height  but does not cause substantial chronic back  pain, 
disability, or poor health in older women. Only tendencies 
were confirmed by this study. Ensrud et al. [13] estimated 
that kyphosis increased by 4.4 per decade of additional age. 
Milne  and  Lauder  [14]  reported  a  20%  increase  in  the 
kyphosis index per decade in women aged 62 to 90 years. In 
older adults, the mean kyphosis angle rises to about 50° in 
women and about 44° in men  [13,15-17]. In a study by 
Singer et al. [18] of women aged 50 to 90 years, kyphosis 
ranged from 40.9 to 57.5° and the highest values were found 
in  the  oldest  women.  In  many  studies,  kyphosis  was 
measured clinically using the Debrunner kyphometer [8] or 
the flexicurve ruler [14]. In the study by Cortet et al. [18] 
patient's mean kyphosis was measured 59°. Further studies 
178
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

are  needed  to  determine  the  correlation  between  spinal 
curvatures and spinal bone density measurements to allow 
physicians to better predict patient’s risk of fractures and 
better plan for surgical or medical intervention.
CONCLUSIONS
Presented,  originally  developed  system  combines 
postural  telediagnostic  screening  and  monitoring.  The 
development  of automatic anatomical  structures  detection 
shall be able to prompt final diagnostic procedure and make 
draw of the trend of measured values changes over the time. 
The safety and procedure of presented examination method 
was highly accepted by elderly patients.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The project is supported by grant number NR13-0020-
04/2008 from the Ministry of Science and Higher Education.
REFERENCES
[1]
Sitnik R., Kujawińska M., and Woźnicki J. Digital fringe projection 
system for large volume 360 deg shape measurement Opt. Eng. 2002; 
41(2), 443-449
[2]
Witkowski M., Sitnik R., Kujawińska M., Rapp W., Kowalski M., 
Haex B., and Mooshake S.  4D measurement system for automatic 
location of anatomical structures Proc. SPIE, 2006; v. 6191, 61910H, 
131-141
[3]
Fon G.T., Pitt M.J., and Thies A.C. Thoracic kyphosis,  range in 
normal subjects. Am J Roentgenol. 1980, 134, 979–983
[4]
Kado  D.  M.,  Christianson  L.,  Palermo  L.,  Smith-Bindman  R., 
Cummings S.R., and Greendale G.A. Comparing a supine radiologic 
versus standing clinical measurement of kyphosis in older women: 
the  Fracture  Intervention  Trial.  Spine  (Phila  Pa  1976).  2006; 
15;31(4):463-7
[5]
Kado D.M., Huang M.H., Karlamangla A., Barrett-Connor E., and 
Greendale G.A. Hyperkyphotic posture predicts mortality in older 
community dwelling men and women, A prospective study. J Am 
Geriatr Soc 2004, 62, 1662–1667
[6]
Silverman S.L., Minshall M.E., Shen W., Harper K.D., and Xie S. 
The relationship of  health-related quality of life to prevalent and 
incident  vertebral  fractures  in  postmenopausal  women  with 
osteoporosis,  results  from  the  Multiple  Outcomes  of  Raloxifene 
Evaluation Study. Arthritis Rheum. 2001, 44, 2611-2619
[7]
Lundon K.M., Li A.M., and Bibershtein S. Interrater and intrarater 
reliability in the measurement of kyphosis in postmenopausal women 
with osteoporosis. Spine (PhilaPa 1976). 1998; 15;23(18):1978-85
[8]
Korovessis P., Petsinis G., Papazisis Z., and Baikousis A. Prediction 
of  thoracic  kyphosis  using  the  Debrunner  kyphometer.  J  Spinal 
Disord. 2001;14(1):67-72 
[9]
Weiss  H.R.  and  Elobeidi  N.  Comparison  of  the  kyphosis  angle 
evaluated  by  video  rasterstereography  (VRS)  with  x-ray 
measurements. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2008, 140, 137-9
[10] Sitnik  R.,  Glinkowski  W.,  Licau  M.,  Załuski  W.,  Kozioł  D., 
Glinkowska B., and Górecki A. Screening Telediagnostics of spinal 
deformities  based  on  optical  3D  shape  measurement  system  and 
automated data analysis – Preliminary report Proceedings of the XI 
International  Conference  Medical  Informatics  &  Technology  Ed, 
Piętka E, Łęski J, Franiel S. MIT, 2006, 241–245
[11] Huang M.H., Barrett-Connor E., Greendale G.A., and Kado D.M. 
Hyperkyphotic Posture and Risk of Future Osteoporotic Fractures, 
The Rancho Bernardo Study J Bone Miner Res 2006, 21, 419–423
[12] Ettinger B., Black D.M., Palermo L., Nevitt M.C., Melnikoff S., and 
Cummings S.R. Kyphosis in older women and its relation to back 
pain, disability and osteopenia, the study of osteoporotic fractures. 
Osteoporos Int. 1994, 4, 1, 55-60
[13] Ensrud K.E., Black D.M., Harris F., Ettinger B., and Cummings S.R. 
Correlates of kyphosis in older women. The Fracture Intervention 
Trial Research Group. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1997, 45, 682-7
[14] Milne J.S. and Lauder I.J. The relationship of kyphosis to the shape of 
vertebral bodies. Ann Hum Biol 1976, 3, 173-9
[15] Schneider D.L., von Muhlen D., Barrett-Connor E., and Sartoris D.J. 
Kyphosis does not equal vertebral fractures, the Rancho Bernardo 
study. J Rheumatol. 2004, 31, 747-52 
[16] Cowan N.R. The frontal cardiac silhouette in older people. Br Heart J. 
1965, 27, 231-5 
[17] De Smet A.A., Robinson R.G., Johnson B.E., and Lukert B.P. Spinal 
compression  fractures  in  osteoporotic  women,  patterns  and 
relationship to hyperkyphosis. Radiology.1988, 166, 497-500 
[18] Singer  K.P.,  Jones  T.J.,  and  Breidhal  P.D.  A  comparison  of 
radiographic  and computer-assisted measurements of thoracic and 
thoracolumbar sagittal curvature. Skeletal Radiol 1990, 19, 21-6
[19] Cortet B., Roches E., Logier R., Houvenagel E., Gaydier-Souquières 
G., Puisieux F., and Delcambre B. Evaluation of spinal curvatures 
after a recent osteoporotic vertebral fracture Joint Bone Spine 2002, 
69, 201-8
179
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

