Roadmap for Collaborative eHealth Service Architectures for Homecare  
General eBusiness Requirements 
 
Assoc. prof. Niels F. Garmann-Johnsen, Ph.D 
Dept. of Information Systems, 
Faculty of Social Science, University of Agder 
Kristiansand, Norway 
e-mail: niels.f.garmann-johnsen@uia.no 
Assoc. prof. Santiago Martinez, Ph.D 
Dept. Nursing and Health Sciences 
Faculty of Health and Sport Sciences, University of Agder 
Grimstad, Norway 
e-mail: santiago.martinez@uia.no
 
 
Abstract— In many industrialized countries, such as the 
Scandinavian, one of the main goals for eHealth innovation is 
to use information and communication technologies to avoid 
the approaching inflection point in healthcare: it is estimated 
that by 2025 the demand of care could not be sufficiently 
attended based on today’s healthcare delivery. eHealth services 
and business models for enabling older people in need of care 
and patients with chronic conditions may increase efficiency of 
healthcare and improve Quality of Life for residents. However, 
eHealth business models are known by their fast speed of 
change, what results in the need of a methodology to rapidly 
adapt technical requirements to these typical inter-agency 
changes. This work presents a research roadmap for 
collaborative eHealth Service Architectures for homecare. The 
research focused on the business requirements in service 
architectures (eBusiness, Enterprise systems), whose findings 
can inform eHealth research in general, health professionals 
and vendors.   
Keywords-eHealth; Service architecture; Business models; 
Enterprise systems; technology innovation; technology adoption. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In many industrialized countries, such as Norway, one of 
the main goals for eHealth innovation is the use of 
information and communication technologies (ICT) and 
information systems (IS) to avoid the inflection point in 
healthcare: it is estimated that by the year 2025, the demand 
of care could not be sufficiently covered based on today’s 
healthcare delivery [1]. Change and innovation are needed 
for treatments maintaining the quality of care within 
assigned budgets, where the resources needed transcend 
those of one singular organization. Technology that helps 
people with care needs to stay safely, longer at home and 
out of institutions and hospitals may be a strategy to reduce 
the total healthcare costs of society [2]. 
The authors present a roadmap for service design and 
architecture 
development 
in 
collaboration 
across 
organizations in healthcare. The research focuses in the 
home care, leaving clinical care outside the scope of this 
study. A challenge associated to the home care is that it 
presents a broad spectrum of user requirements within the 
same information technology (IT) infrastructure. Research 
in eBusiness models may inform future strategies and 
research in eHealth service design, especially in homecare, 
see Fig. 1. In this first paper, the authors reviewed the 
literature related to (e-)business models and eHealth to then 
offer propositions on service design. 
Studies 
of 
stakeholder 
requirements 
in 
eHealth 
innovation and pre-procurement [3] underline the need for 
increasing stakeholder involvement. Furthermore, design 
principles for business models that can facilitate such 
involvement are here elicited. The need in homecare is to 
develop an adaptive framework that allows front-line 
personnel (e.g., nurse, general practitioner) and other end-
users to dynamically manage and (re-) configure business 
processes, patient services and health treatment clinical 
pathways, with the purpose creating service-oriented 
solutions whose core elements are patient autonomy and 
interactivity.  
The authors have designed a three-step research 
roadmap with a peer-reviewed research article associated to 
each step (see Fig. 2). This article represents the first step, 
where we present the literature review on (e-) business 
models in the domain described followed by general 
business propositions. In the second step, a case study on 
the process of eHealth innovations will serve as a test of the 
elicited general (e-) business propositions and requirements 
of a design-process through action research in projects in a 
 
Figure 1. eHealth ontology, teleology and scope of the research  
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Living Lab research methodology. In the third step, we seek 
to generalize the findings from the second step into a unified 
architecture or design model: an innovation and pre-
procurement roadmap towards a technical architecture for a 
dynamic service management infrastructure that meets these 
requirements, enabling co-creation of eHealth services with 
end-users. Our level of analysis in the organization varies 
with each step. In the first one, we take a holistic view of the 
business model. In the second one, we focus on transitions 
in end-users’ life, downstream activities and their 
consequences for collaboration with eHealth technology-
vendors. In the third one, we apply findings from the two 
previous steps to induce a general design model for the 
architecture 
of 
ICT 
applications 
and 
infrastructure 
integrations, see Fig. 3 at the end of this article. 
The main research question in this article is to find in the 
research literature general business requirements that 
influence eHealth services in home care. This lead to the 
two research questions addressed in this paper:  
RQ 1. What are the business requirements for Enterprise 
Systems that create value for users in the context of 
eHealth? 
RQ 2. What are user preconditions to gain benefits from 
new Enterprise Systems and increase efficiency and quality 
in eHealth adoption? 
The paper is structured in different sections. A 
theoretical framework is presented in Section 2. The method 
employed is described in Section 3. Section 4 presents the 
results, with the answers to the research questions. The 
paper ends with the conclusion and future work in Section 5. 
II. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
There is a variety of business models, but Hwang 
proposes three main types or business model templates that 
explain the business processes of modern enterprises better 
than the traditional Value Chain model of the firm [4] does 
alone [5]: 
1. Solution shop. A place where customers describe 
their problem and it is fixed. For example, general 
practitioners and hospitals curing patients. 
2. Value-adding process (comparable to the Value 
Chain) 
typical 
of 
manufacturing 
enterprises; 
comparable to Porters’ [4] model of the firm. For 
example, pharmaceutical producers. 
3. Facilitated user networks (Value Networks) to 
connect users and services. For example, different 
web communities (most communication- and 
internet-based businesses fall under this category). 
With regard to these models, Hwang [5], building on 
works by Stabell and Fjeldstad [6], states that the facilitated 
user network is under-represented in the health sector—and, 
thus, represents growth potential: as more businesses move 
online, facilitated user networks represent a business model 
template of increasing significance, including eHealth. Thus 
the authors will explore these concepts further in relation to 
eHealth service architecture. Frameworks for analyzing 
value creation in e-Business (e.g., Amit and Zott, [7]) are 
relevant for understanding the eHealth landscape because 
many eHealth systems contain elements of e-Business 
models which belong to the category of Value Networks.  
Amit and Zott’s [7] e-business value creation model 
categorizes the sources of value creation into four main 
groups: efficiency, novelty, lock-in and complementarity. 
These groups are relevant to e-business models that often 
implement instances of the facilitated user network 
archetype of business models, and inter-organizational 
process collaborations. According to Amit and Zott, 
efficiency has been one of the primary driving forces for the 
transition to a more digital economy in all phases of the 
transaction. Complementarities that arrive from the bundle 
of goods provide more value to the users than the sum of 
values provided by each good alone. Complementarity and 
novelty imply collaboration and innovation—both themes of 
significance in healthcare. Novelty means that there is a 
“first” here, either in the service itself or in the way that it is 
conceived or delivered. Combining or connecting two or 
more previously unconnected parties, domains or methods 
often achieves this. A lock-in value is created through users’ 
reuse of one-time transactions costs (e.g., for registration 
and service customization). 
Seddon et al [8] proposed a model that explains how 
organizations, such as municipalities, can overcome 
organizational inertia and successfully adopt new enterprise 
systems and obtain benefits, e.g., quality and efficiency. 
Enterprise systems support processes, information flows, 
reporting and business analytics within and between 
organizations and individuals. Specifically, these processes 
support organizations’ business models. Business models 
are models of how enterprises create value for themselves 
and other, while also capturing value. An organization can 
have more than one business model, and business models 
can include more than one organization.  
Since RQ 2 aims to explore the affordance of ES in 
realizing emergent business models in eHealth, the authors 
have chosen to use Seddon et al.’s model of key factors 
affecting Organizational Benefits from ES (OBES) [8]: 
 
Figure 2. Research design, steps and expected research outcomes 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

1. Short term/On-going business improvement 
projects: 
a. 
Functional fit (FF) 
b. Overcoming organizational inertia 
(OOI) 
2. With the addition of long-term organizational 
benefit factors: 
a. 
Integration 
b. Process optimization 
c. 
Improved access to information 
Functional fit of software means that the processes 
supported by the ES are efficient and effective for the 
organization and that they help people to finish their tasks. 
Overcoming organizational inertia is the extent to which 
organizations’ members are motivated to learn, use and 
accept new systems. Integration refers to the unification of 
systems and/or data from resources within and outside an 
organization. Tailoring the information systems to an 
organization’s goals help to achieve process optimization. 
This often necessitates improved access to information. 
III. 
METHOD 
The authors searched through scientific literature about 
business models in eHealth using Amit and Zott’s 
framework [7] for value creation in eBusiness to answer RQ 
1., and conceptualize the requirements. Then, we analyze 
concepts found in the review with the model proposed by 
Seddon et al [8] to answer RQ 2., and produce general 
propositions for information system design with special 
regards to primary care and homecare.  
The literature search was performed in spring 2014 
using the search engines ProQuest and EBSCOhost. The 
search engines targeted science and social science 
disciplines. The authors used truncations *health* AND 
(*ecommerce* OR *reward*) AND “business models” in 
the search terms. The search included scholarly papers and 
trade journals, choosing to include the latter due to the 
“newness” of the area in explored. The authors found 286 
papers that matched the search criteria. However, a 
screening showed that 246 of the found papers were not 
related with eHealth business models. These papers were 
excluded. The excluded papers were concerned with topics 
such as: clinical trials, environmental issues, other non-
health-related issues and management issues at large. 
The remaining 40 papers (34 found through ProQuest 
and 6 found through EBSCOhost) were rated as relevant to 
the research topic and, thus, analyzed. A table showing the 
results and list of the searched and reviewed articles is 
included in the appendix. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Answer to RQ1 
This section shows the findings from the systematic 
literature review (for details, see appendix), which were 
aggregated and conceptualized following the guidance of 
Webster and Watson [9], and then sorted according to Amit 
and Zott’s model. The authors added the category “Other” 
to collect concepts that were not easily sorted under Amit 
and Zott’s four main sources; these were predominantly 
societal and public policy factors. These other sources 
stemmed from the special public or semi-public financial 
context of eHealth in countries like the British and 
Scandinavian.  
1) Efficiency concepts 
Easier scaling and sharing: new eHealth concepts 
leverage the efficiency and cost-flexibility of cloud 
computing. Cloud computing facilitates the use of 
intelligent algorithms to detect heightened risks of 
worsening conditions and supports the triage classification 
of patients (triage is an assessment of urgency of treatment). 
Such capabilities can be shared and utilized by several 
organizations. Standardizations and reductions in the 
number of product lines greatly reduce overhead cost ratios. 
Companies 
must defend low costs against overly 
personalized service.  
Transaction 
cost 
efficiency: 
through 
e-business’ 
transaction efficiency, doctors can now charge costs 
associated to phone calls and online consultation. Cloud 
computing also creates the opportunity for self-service 
solutions. Online solutions also enable easier care and 
quality coordination.  
Easier 
sourcing: 
cloud 
services 
provide 
easier 
possibilities for sourcing support functions (e.g., system 
running).  
2)  Novel concepts 
Rapid customization and co-innovation: the cloud model 
allows for rapid prototyping and innovation in processes, 
products and services. Co-innovation and co-creation 
generate new organizational and shared values. Surplus 
innovation can be sold-off, generating rent (commercial 
profit). Moreover, the possibility of doctor “visits” via 
secure video-conferencing enthuses patients. Partnerships 
with 
educational 
providers 
provide 
focused 
and 
personalized professional training.   
3) Lock-In concepts 
Revenue and reward splits: cloud services can store user 
preferences, which can enable product and service 
customization. Offering consumers, a choice of market 
channels can be mutually beneficial for all channels, due to 
the aggregation of products and services. For instance, the 
Hello Health website [10] negotiates a revenue split of 
subscriptions with physicians. Sharing information across 
organizational borders creates better possibilities for 
personalized health coaching.  
Fun and belonging: online solutions can leverage the 
network and “gamification” (i.e., comparing progress with 
peers) effects of social media. Algorithms for the content 
and sentiment analysis of entries in online communities can 
suggest alternatives or interest groups that might be 
beneficial to join. Corporations should link medical plans 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

for employees with corporate strategies, which could, for 
example, reward the use of fitness facilities and programs.  
4) Complementarity concepts 
Aggregating services: Internet offers possibilities for 
aggregating and sourcing services and finance. For instance, 
a combination of many travel-related and medical 
businesses and services can facilitate medical tourism).  
Shared 
development 
risk: 
alliance 
management 
capabilities have positive effects on research and 
development 
capabilities. 
For 
example, 
in 
targeted 
medicine, there is a call for cross-business collaboration. 
Targeted medicine makes it possible to treat rare, previously 
untreatable conditions; however, the cost per patient is high, 
and some governments may refuse reimbursement. By 
reducing development time through improved collaborations 
between test laboratories and pharmaceutical companies, 
targeted medicine can be achieved at manageable costs. 
Pharmaceutical companies must learn how to fit into other 
companies’ business models. All actors need to be satisfied, 
for example with “win-win” scenarios.  
Management coordination: primary and secondary care 
must be better coordinated. Companies’ external and 
internal resources must be aligned in order to facilitate the 
internalization of knowledge. Many user networks’ business 
models are without profit or low profit; however, as a 
potential source of empowerment of patients, they represent 
ideal opportunities for business models for treating chronic 
diseases. These are costly treatments and are not well suited 
to the traditional business model of hospitals and 
physicians.  
5) Other effects: Public and Societal concepts 
New reimbursement schemes for better coordination: 
payment models in health should encourage coordination. 
Reimbursement models should encourage preventive 
measures, such as Healthy Outlook [11]. They should also 
reward the results of coherent treatment over “pay-per-
consultation” systems. New reimbursement schemes may 
pose new challenges for financial reporting. 
Knowledge management: knowledge benefits from 
exchange, rather than protection. The best “players” build 
“invisible” information infrastructures for developing, for 
example, cancer-focused IT system and evidence-based 
medicines.  
Ethical compliance: Ethical compliance management is 
of growing significance in a changing eHealth business 
environment. Better management can be achieved through 
collaboration and democratic governance.    
B. Answer to RQ2 
Based on the business concepts induced from literature 
and rendered in the previous section, the authors propose the 
following propositions as design principles for a Municipal 
eHealth architecture: 
Proposition 1. Shared e-commerce solutions: E-
commerce solutions shared among collaborating partners, 
such as Hello Health [10], enable easier scaling and sharing, 
greater transaction cost efficiency and easier sourcing of 
non-strategic support functions, such as system running 
(i.e., application-server management). Shared e-commerce 
solutions support short-term functional fit and long-term 
business 
benefits, 
providing 
integration, 
process 
optimization and improved access to information. 
Proposition 2. Co-creation with partners and clients (and 
patients): by providing customers and partners alternatives 
for customizing their services and by encouraging and 
proactively collecting feedback on services, it is possible to 
distinguish patterns that provide an impetus for improving 
services and creating new ones. Co-creation may produce 
positive short-term effects and long-term effects. 
Proposition 3. Aligning internal and external resources: 
to overcome organizational inertia, structural changes may 
become necessary. Internal organizational resources should 
be dedicated to match external resources (business partners) 
in order to extract and embed external knowledge within an 
organization. This process is linked to propositions 4, 5 and 
7. 
Proposition 4. Aligning price and reward (bonuses and 
revenue sharing): aligning rewards and bonus schemes 
through the delivery chain and throughout user levels 
encourages the achievement of goals for treatment and 
health policies.  
Proposition 5. Iterations for the economic alignment of 
interests: throughout a delivery chain, there is information 
asymmetry with regard to knowledge of processes and costs. 
Over time, all actors in the chain experience a learning 
curve; thus, collaborative iterations are needed to optimize 
business processes and to maintain win-win situations 
throughout the delivery chain. The role of ES is to provide 
accurate, reliable and comparable data for collaborative 
decision-making, thereby 
stimulating and supporting 
organizational learning. 
Proposition 6. Social media integration and capabilities: 
to ensure that users and patients choose digital solutions and 
achieve the efficiency benefits that such solutions provide, 
the digital solutions should ideally be socially oriented and 
easy and fun to use. Gamification allows users to compare 
their personal data in fitness or treatment programs—and, 
thus, encourages and motivates users/patients to adapt and 
use solutions. Gamification can be developed and stimulated 
through social networks. Actors in healthcare (e.g., 
hospitals, primary care) need to develop their social media 
strategies [12].  
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Proposition 7. Alignment of incentives: a strong 
reallocation of Intellectual Property Rights and revenue 
sources may be necessary to encourage more efficient 
research and development and to achieve joint goals for 
development, thereby lowering the costs of new treatments 
(e.g., targeted medicine).  Increased use of public-private 
collaboration contracts around research and development 
might be potentially considered. 
Proposition 8. Transparency (sharing information across 
different levels): often, the patient is not the one who pays 
the full price for a medical service. In many economies, the 
state or voluntary or compulsory insurance or company 
medical plans pay for such services. Demographic changes, 
combined with improving treatment options, have led to 
rising costs of healthcare. To counter this, reimbursement 
schemes increasingly seek possibilities to pay for results 
rather than consultations. For health providers, this calls for 
increased information 
sharing, and transparency of 
treatment results. This proposition is linked to proposition 9. 
Proposition 9. Linking performance measurement and 
finance: the enterprise/planning systems of medical 
providers and vendors must increasingly be able to provide 
data for quality performance and financial performance to 
both the market and the government. Business intelligence 
and balanced scorecard systems are needed for quality and 
performance management, and they can be directly linked to 
reimbursement schemes in the future. 
Proposition 
10. 
Democratic 
governance: 
ethical 
compliance is gaining importance in many areas, and it has 
great significance in eHealth [13]. A proactive strategy for 
compliance management, involving consistent policies for 
handling legal, quality and treatment deviations or 
complaints, including privacy and security issues, may 
benefit an organization in the long term. This may help 
overcoming barriers to e-Health adoption [14]. Actively 
involving users and employees in this work through 
democratic governance can enable such a result [13]. 
V. 
 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This study has answered the two research questions 
(RQs) by eliciting business models and enterprise systems 
design 
principles 
that 
may 
inform 
future 
eHealth 
architectures and applications. Although these principles are 
not exhaustive, they illustrate the need for flexibility and 
capability of co-creation with users at all levels. 
In the future, the authors will test the found propositions 
in a Living Lab test setting [15], with special regard to 
adaptability, flexibility and facility for user-co-creation in 
design of eHealth services. Based on the empirical findings 
from these case-studies, we will seek to generalize a pre-
procurement design process-model; a roadmap, in step 
three, which allows for a co-creation process that combines 
the 
goals 
of 
all 
stakeholders; 
application-vendors, 
municipalities and their constituents and end-users (see Fig. 
3). The connection between innovations in local media and 
applications 
and 
central 
information 
infrastructures 
(Software as a Service, cloud computing solutions) will also 
be explored. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. M. Gaba, “The future vision of simulation in health care, ” 
Simulation in Healthcare 2, no. 2, pp. 126-135, 2007. 
[2] N. F. Garmann-Johnsen, “What seems to be the problem?—a 
study of connections between national contexts and regional 
e-health strategies,” Health Policy and Technology, vol. 4, 
issue 2, pp. 144-155, 2015. 
[3] N. F. Garmann-Johnsen, Ø. Hellang, editors, “Collaborative 
Process Modelling and evaluation in e-health,” Scandinavian 
Health Informatics, Norway, 2014. 
[4] M. E. Porter, “Towards a dynamic theory of strategy,”  
Strategic management journal, vol. 12, suppl. 2, pp. 95-117, 
1991. 
[5] J. Hwang, “The innovator's prescription: an examination of 
the future of health care through the lenses of disruptive 
innovation,” Archives of pathology & laboratory medicine, 
vol. 133, issue 4, pp. 513-20, 2009. 
[6] C. B. Stabell, and Ø. D. Fjeldstad, “Configuring value for 
competitive advantage: on chains, shops, and networks,” 
Strategic management journal, vol. 19, issue 5, pp. 413-437, 
1998. 
[7] R. Amit, and C. Zott, “Value creation in e-business,” Strategic 
Management Journal, vol. 22, issue 6-7, pp. 493-520, 2001. 
[8] P. B. Seddon, C. Calvert, S. Yang, “A multi-project model of 
key factors affecting organizational benefits from enterprise 
systems,” MIS quarterly, vol. 34, issue 2, pp. 305-328, 2010. 
[9] J. Webster, and R. T. Watson, “Analyzing the past to prepare 
for the future: writing a literature review, ” MIS quarterly, pp. 
xiii-xxiii, 2002.  
[10] R. L. Kravitz, “Improvement happens: a commercial IT 
solution for reviving primary care? An interview with Hello 
Health CEO Nathanial Findlay and colleagues,” Journal of 
general internal medicine, pp. 1-5, 2013. 
[11] P. Micheli, M. Schoeman, D. Baxter, K. Goffin, “New 
business models for public-sector innovation: successful 
technological 
innovation 
for 
government,” 
Research-
Technology Management, vol. 55, issue 5, pp. 51-57, 2012. 
[12] R. Effing, and T. A. Spil, “The social strategy cone: towards a 
framework 
for 
evaluating 
social 
media 
strategies,” 
International journal of information management, vol. 36, 
issue 1, pp. 1-8, 2016. 
 
Figure 3. A general model of Municipal/Homecare eHealth Service 
Design: Level of analysis in each research step 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[13] C. L. Rossi, “Compliance: an over-looked business strategy,” 
International Journal of Social Economics, vol. 37, issue 10, 
pp. 816-831, 2010. 
[14] I. Pirillo, G. Ricci, F. Amenta, “The Future of e-Health,” The 
Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and 
Social Medicine, eTELEMED 2014, pp. 280-284, 2014. 
[15] M. Pallot, B. Trousse, B. Senach, D. Scapin, editors, “Living 
lab research landscape: from user centred design and user 
experience towards user cocreation,” First European Summer 
School Living Labs, 2010.  
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

