Open Source Home Care Technology 
Technical design and development, user research, cost-benefit analysis, and business modeling 
 
Marike Hettinga, Elles Gyaltsen-Lohuis, Ander de 
Keijzer, Jan M. Nauta 
Research group IT Innovations in Health Care 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
{m.hettinga, ege.lohuis, a.de.keijzer, jm.nauta} 
@windesheim.nl 
 
 
Rens Balkenende, Niels Donninger 
VAC Thuistechnologie 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
{r.balkenende, n.donninger}@vacbv.nl 
Guido van Alphen 
Stichting TriVici 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
g.alphen@trivici.nl 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents the work in progress for the 
Hightech@home project. The aim of this project is to develop 
technology and knowledge concerning open source home care 
technology, utilizing open standards. Currently, there is 
limited availability of high tech sensor and communication 
technology while costs are high. By producing open source 
technology we aim at providing a starting point towards 
interoperability. Hence, increasing availability and lowering 
costs by avoiding vendor lock-ins. The Hightech@home project 
consists of five tracks. The first track, the technical design and 
development, focuses on a portal being generically available 
through any web browser. The portal will facilitate video 
contact and transmit and receive data from sensors located in 
the house, or on the body of the user. Technical design and 
development is iteratively informed by the user research in the 
second track. The iterative cycles start with small scale 
experiments with mock-ups leading to a field study when 
robust prototypes are available. During this field study, data 
will also be retrieved to perform a cost-benefit analysis, the 
third track of the project. To ensure the structural embedding, 
viable business models are developed in a fourth track. Finally, 
a fifth track focuses on the facilitation of bachelor students in 
the Hightech@home project in particular and in eHealth 
research in general. 
Keywords-home care technology; open source; WebRTC; 
sensortechnology; user research. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The aim of the Hightech@home project is to develop 
technology and knowledge concerning open source home 
care technology, utilizing open standards. The choice for 
open source is based on the current lack of low-cost, high 
quality, high tech, plug and play home care technology. The 
choice for open protocols enables interoperability: which 
most literally unlocks the consumer technology we already 
have in our homes and which we already carry around. 
As far as high tech sensor and communication 
technology is available for home care, the costs are high. 
Potential users with the greatest need for this type of 
technology, e.g. elderly, chronically ill, often lack the 
required financial means. Vendor lock-in (mostly through 
the use of closed protocols) is one of the reasons for the high 
pricing. Customers are dependent on one vendor after an 
initial choice for home care technology. When there is, for 
instance, a wish for extending the current technology with 
additional sensors customers appear to be dependent on the 
original vendor. Hence, low-cost alternatives are not an 
option. Although completing a single project will not break 
through an established vendor lock-in, we aim at producing 
open source technology and knowledge, thus providing a 
starting point towards interoperability.  
Existing home care technology often requires a 
technician to install. This not only results in extra costs, but 
also raises the threshold for people to start using it. Our aim 
is to design and develop plug and play technology by means 
of a co-creation process with potential end-users. This co-
creation process ensures that customers (clients or patients), 
informal carers, and carers are able to install the equipment. 
Furthermore, having interoperability at the centre of 
development, allows for (re-)use of already existing 
technology and therefore enable specific use cases which are 
otherwise not possible or viable. 
Designing and developing open standards and open 
source technology in a co-creation process with potential 
end-users will not be the only focus of the Hightech@home 
project. A main research theme of the research group IT 
(Information Technology) Innovations in Health Care at 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences, is the structural 
embedding of innovations in routine care. The end of an 
innovative project should not imply the end of the 
innovation. Too often this is still the case [1]. Initiating the 
development of a viable business model in an early stage of 
the project enhances the chance on structural embedding the 
innovation. The Hightech@home project aims to include this 
business modelling, also adding a cost-benefit analysis. 
In this paper we describe the approach of the five tracks 
of the Hightech@home project, followed by the preliminary 
results in the next section. We complete the paper with a 
conclusion and a description of future work. 
 
267
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II. 
APPROACH 
The project is structured around four research topics and 
a fifth goal concerning the structural embedding of eHealth 
research in the education of our students. The approach of all 
five tracks is briefly outlined in this section. 
A. Technical Design and Development 
We envision a portal, to be used at home bringing 
communication 
capabilities 
centred 
around 
health-
communication. The portal is a framework which can be 
used to offer different, in general communication, 
capabilities to the user. The portal should be available 
through any generic web browser and should be capable of 
transmitting and receiving video, audio and data streams. 
The video and audio data streams allow the users to make 
video calls to other users, whereas the data stream can be 
used to communicate data from sensors in the house, or on 
the body. The information gathered from sensors, possibly 
coupled with the audio and video information can be used by 
healthcare professionals to remotely assist the user. To 
realise the above, the design and development consists of 
fourth tracks. 
In the first track we aim to embed open standards based 
and license free video communications in an open source 
portal already being developed and partially made available 
by TriVici Foundation for the community (see [2] – in 
Dutch). The video communication added to this portal is 
based on WebRTC (Web Real-Time Communications) [3] 
and WebSockets for signalling.  
Secondly, we will develop and implement secure transfer 
of sensor signalling and data over WebRTC, with the goal to 
enable easy and reliable connections using open standards / 
protocols based sensor technology that is currently available 
in the (consumer – prosumer) marketplace. This will give 
meaning to the overall goal of interoperability. 
The third track is to interface with the currently under 
development Smart Optical Sensor and to implement 
WebRTC and VP8/VP9 to its capabilities. For more 
information, please see [4]. 
The fourth track is utilizing newly developed single chip 
radar technology as a sensory device. This technology is still 
in its early development phases, and we have yet to 
determine the goals of this part of the project. 
B. User Research 
User research is iteratively integrated in the design and 
development process, leading to a co-creation process. User 
research starts with the inventory of user requirements and 
contextual conditions. During early stages of design we use 
mock-ups in interviews and focus groups. When first 
prototypes are available potential users will experiment with 
them in our Telecare Skillslab.  
During these interviews and experiments the focus is not 
only on the technology, but additionally also on important 
issues such as privacy, legislation, and embedding the 
technology in daily routines. 
When a robust prototype is available, a field study will be 
carried out. Such a study is the final test for functionality, 
reliability and usability. Furthermore, during the field study 
it is explored whether end-users intend to keep using the 
technology and to what price. A final aim of the field study 
is to investigate whether the use of the technology leads to 
the intended effects: more indepency in living at home 
leading to the same or higher quality of care against lower 
costs. 
The facilities to perform relevant user research have 
recently been extended. The research group IT Innovations 
in Health Care established the Telecare Skillslab, not only to 
contribute to education in eHealth, but also to facilitate 
telecare research. The Skillslab actually consists of two 
locations both situated at the campus of Windesheim, 
separated about 200 m. One of the locations has been 
furnished as a living accommodation which makes it 
possible to experiment with domestic applications of sensors 
in a realistic manner. The other location typically aims at 
facilitating formal or informal carers, providing care at a 
distance. Camera’s installed in the ceiling provide the 
researchers with possibilities for non-obtrusive observation. 
In addition to this interviews and focus groups can be hosted 
in an informal setting in the living room part of the Skillslab. 
C. Cost-benefit Analysis 
To ensure the structural embedding of the developed 
technology in routine care, costs and benefits need to be 
balanced. Not only should overall costs be evened out with 
overall benefits, but balance between costs and benefits of 
single stakeholders within the care chain should also be 
pursued. 
The 
goal 
of 
the 
cost-benefit 
analysis 
in 
the 
Hightech@home project is to provide insight in the costs and 
benefits on the level of single stakeholders within the 
involved care chain. Relevant data will be collected during 
the field study. 
D. Business Modeling 
IT-related business model innovations have become key 
factors in achieving structural innovation in healthcare [5]. 
Hence, in former projects [6] we developed a business model 
approach to be used as an instrument to bridge the gap of 
innovative eHealth ideas to successful IT-based care 
services. A main component of this approach is the online 
webtool, the eHealth innovation Matrix ([7] – in Dutch). 
When using open source technology, new business 
models need to be developed. Therefore we will use this 
eHix-approach during the Hightech@home project. This 
implies the application of relevant instruments and 
knowledge as included in all five distinguished phases of the 
eHix. See Figure 1 for the five phases and examples of 
knowledge and instruments per phase. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. eHix: innovation phases and examples 
  
  
Design & 
Development 
Experimental  
Pilot 
-Usability 
-Start design  
  business model 
-Invest in  
  resources 
-Reliable  
  technology 
-Training facilities 
-User support 
-Evidence based  
  medicine 
-Business model 
Inventory 
Implementation 
-Openness 
-Technology and 
  market scan 
-Needs research 
268
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

E. eHealth research in education 
Being a University of Applied Sciences, it is important to 
include students in our research. In this project bachelor 
Information Technology students are involved both in 
technical design and development as in the above mentioned 
research. User research is also performed by Bachelor Health 
and Welfare students. 
To facilitate future involvement of students in our 
eHealth-projects, an additional aim of the Hightech@home 
project is the design and development of a digital learning 
environment. This environment will facilitate students with 
easy access to all relevant knowledge to provide them with a 
head start. 
 
III. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
The project Hightech@home started in June 2013 and 
will conclude at the end of 2014. Hence, at the time of 
writing the first four months of the project can be considered. 
This section highlights some preliminary results and lessons 
learnt from these four months. 
 
A. Technical Design and Development 
The portal contains video and audio capabilities to 
communicate with care professionals and friends. Since the 
portal itself is made available through the web browser, the 
video and audio capabilities should also be available there. 
The benefit of this set-up is that no additional software is 
required. We use WebRTC [8] to facilitate video and audio 
in the browser. At this moment WebRTC is available in at 
least Google Chrome, but implementations in other browsers 
are likely to be completed in the future. WebRTC makes it 
possible to communicate peer-to-peer , without the need for a 
central server. Currently, in our set-up we assume both 
clients to use the same codec, which makes a translation of 
the data stream unnecessary. The result is a fully peer-to-peer 
audio and video connection between two clients. 
Setting up this connection between peers, however, 
requires some administration. We used the Session Initiation 
Protocol (SIP), with a central Asterisk server for this 
purpose. After initiation, the connection is completely peer-
to-peer and the central server is no longer needed. 
B. User Research 
Top priority of the involved user researchers, is the 
selection and inclusion of a specific end-user target group. 
So far we were not successful in obtaining full commitment 
of a care organisation, despite principles concerning the 
involvement of end-users. This puts pressure on the intended 
co-creation process. Due to political developments in The 
Netherlands, care organisations need their full attention, 
available time and staff to focus on their primary processes. 
Innovation activities are cut back. Hence, involvement in a 
project like Hightech@home becomes less likely. At the 
moment of writing we are still aiming at the commitment of 
a care organisation. Furthermore we are considering 
alternative options concerning informal carers. 
C. Cost-benefit Analysis 
To provide insight in the costs and benefits on the level 
of single stakeholders within the involved care chain, a cost-
benefit analysis will be drafted in the Hightech@home 
project. The relevant data for this analysis will be collected 
during the field study where the prototype will be tested for 
functionality, reliability and usability. It is only after 
exploration whether end-users intend to keep using the 
technology and to what price and whether the use of the 
technology leads to the intended effects that this cost-benefit 
analysis can be drawn up. 
D. Business Modeling 
Menko et al. described the eHealth innovation Matrix and 
illustrated the application of its business model framework 
with an example of an eHealth innovation, namely the 
DiMove service [6]. In the Hightech@home project the eHix 
will be applied as well. Both the eHix Scan and the Library 
will be utilized. The Scan consists of a questionnaire which 
allows users to determine the status of their project. The 
Library contains, among other things, templates and 
checklists to facilitate the innovation process. 
Not only will the eHix be applied in the Hightech@home 
project, but the use of the eHix will also be studied in order 
to discover opportunities for further improvement and 
enhancement of the approach. Technical action research 
(TAR) [9, 10] has been selected to study the use of the eHix 
in practice. In this approach, the researcher plays three 
logically separate roles: the developer and the investigator of 
(in this case) the eHix approach together with a role in which 
the client is supported in using the eHix to improve the 
client’s eHealth innovation process. In these three roles the 
eHix will be applied, studied in practice, and possibly 
improved. 
 
E. eHealth research in education 
The project activities of the project Hightech@home are 
carried out by researchers, lecturers and students from both 
the programs Bachelor of IT and Bachelor of Health Care. 
This creates integration of education and research and a 
multidisciplinary approach. The activities in the various 
Hightech@home projects should provide a structural 
assurance in the educational curriculum of IT training. 
Therefore, after careful consideration of the various forms of 
imbedding the Hightech@home project activities in the 
educational curriculum at the start of the project, one of the 
deliverables of this project is a sustainable learning 
environment for IT students in the field of e-health and home 
care technology. Compatible with the current trend in 
education, this deliverable will take form in a digital learning 
environment (DLE) created by and for Bachelor of IT 
students.  
The DLE consists of three levels - macro, meso and 
micro level. The macro level gives the context of e-health 
and the documentation contains general introductions to e-
health in the IT domain. The micro level consists of 
information on home care technology in the Netherlands. At 
269
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the 
micro 
level 
all 
documents 
regarding 
the 
Hightech@home project are presented. 
The DLE has many benefits. It ensures that students of 
Information Technology (IT) have access to a high quality 
of information related to e-health and open high-tech home 
technology in a quick and in a pleasant way. Using open 
technology of d-wiki, the DLE is easy to access and has as 
low cost start up and maintenance [11]. Through 
independent study of this learning environment the IT 
student can quickly prepare and act in any e-health project 
and an open home care technology project almost 
independently, with less preparation time and little 
guidance.  
After in-depth interviews with various groups of IT 
students, consultation with researchers and lecturers and 
after thorough desk research on digital learning, two IT 
students have drafted the requirements analysis and set up 
the technical structure of the DLE. The next two months 
these students will sample the content and present the 
documentation on the DLE in the appropriate way. In 
January 2014 the first version of the DLE will be released 
after formal approval by the project group. Ready for use 
this DLE will be evaluated and updated methodologically 
by the next group of IT students working on the 
Hightech@home project. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper we described the Hightech@home project’s 
ambition to develop technology and knowledge concerning 
open source home care technology utilizing open standards, 
to perform user research with prototypes, to draft a cost-
benefit analysis, and to develop a viable business model. We 
also presented the first months of progress of the 
Hightech@home project. 
The main conclusion to be drawn from the current 
progress is that WebRTC seems both very promising to 
realise our ambitions and feasible to work with. With 
guidance from our researchers, the students were able to 
realise a fully peer-to-peer audio and video connection 
between two clients. 
A second conclusion concerns the high ambitions of the 
project. For a project lasting only 18 months with limited 
resources we are quite demanding with our goals set on five 
different topics: Technical Design and Development, User 
Research, Cost-benefit Analysis, Business Modelling, and 
eHealth research in education. Nonetheless we think we can 
realise our ambitions and hence make a difference in home 
care by providing low cost plug and play home care 
technology. 
Future work on the project concerns the plans on all five 
tracks as described, with a high priority focus on including a 
care organisation in the project team. Beyond the described 
plans, future work concerns scaling up the project. Several 
eHealth companies have already shown interest in joining 
the team if a follow-up project will be funded and started. 
We conclude from this interest, that open source home care 
technology is a wanted technology to further develop and 
investigate. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank TechForFuture, Centre of 
Expertise HTSM (http://www.techforfuture.nl) for its 
financial support. The centre is an initiative of Saxion and 
Windesheim, universities of applied sciences and was 
established with the support of the Province of Overijssel.  
We thank IT students Infrastructure Design and Security 
for their work on the homecare portal: Ashley Fennema, 
Patrick van der Graaf, Jeroen van der Linde, Robbert 
Mulder, Andries Roodbergen, Martijn Rotman. And we 
thank the IT students Business IT and Management for their 
work on the Digital Learning Environment: Emiel Hofstede 
and Jesse Lantinga.  
We also thank OpenXs and Castbasics for their 
cooperation in the Hightech@home project. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Broens, T.H.F., et al., Determinants of successful telemedicine 
implementations: a literature study. Journal of Telemedicine 
and Telecare, 2007(13): p. 303-309. 
[2] 
OpenPortaal. 
 
[27-01-2014]; 
Available 
from: 
www.openportaal.nl. 
[3] 
WebRTC. 
 
[27-1-2014]; 
Available 
from: 
http://www.webrtc.org/. 
[4] 
OpenXS.  [27-1-2014]; Available from: www.openxs.eu. 
[5] 
Haaker, 
T., 
Business 
modellen 
voor 
ICT-intensieve 
zorginnovatie., 2010, Nictiz Kennisartikel 10025. 
[6] 
Menko, R., et al., Applying the Stof Business Model Framework 
in eHealth Innovations, in eTELEMED 2013: The Fifth 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social 
Medicine2013: Nice, France. 
[7] 
eHix.  [27-1-2014]; Available from: www.eHix.nl  
[8] 
Johnston, A.B. and D.C. Burnett, WebRTC – APIs and 
RTCWEB Protocols of the HTML5 Real-Time Web2012: Digital 
Codex LLC. 
[9] 
Wieringa, R.J. and A. Morali, Technical Action Research as a 
Validation Method in Information Systems Design Science., in 
Seventh International Conference on Design Science Research 
in Information Systems and Technology (DESRIST). LNCS 
7286., K. Peffers, M. Rothenberger, and B. Kuechler, Editors. 
2012, Springer. p. 220-238. 
[10] 
Wieringa, R.J., Designing technical action research and 
generalizing from real-world cases., in 24th International 
Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering, 
CAiSE2012: Gdansk, Poland. 
[11] 
DokuWiki. 
 
[27-1-2014]; 
Available 
from: 
https://www.dokuwiki.org/dokuwiki. 
 
 
270
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

