Co-designing Assistive Technology with and for Persons Living with Dementia 
 
Dympna O Sullivan, Jonathan Turner 
School of Computer Science 
Technological University Dublin 
Dublin, Ireland 
Email: dympna.osullivan@tudublin.ie, 
johnathan.turner@tudublin.ie 
Siobhan O’Neill, Michael Wilson, Julie Doyle 
NetwellCASALA,  
Dundalk Institute of Technology 
Dundalk, Ireland 
Email: siobhang.oneill@hse.ie, michael.wilson@dkit.ie 
julie.doyle@dkit.ie 
 
 
Abstract: 
Dementia 
is 
a 
chronic 
and 
progressive 
neurodegenerative illness, which can lead to significant 
difficulties in a person’s capacity to perform activities of daily 
living (ADLs) and engage in meaningful activities. There is an 
acute need, which digital health technologies can potentially 
fulfil, to provide proactive support for persons living with 
dementia (PLwD) and their caregivers. However, there is 
limited involvement of PLwD in the design of technology that 
could be used to support their personal plans for independent 
living at home. In this paper, we describe how we are 
employing a co-design methodology to support engagement in 
an assistive technology toolkit for managing ADLs for people 
living with the early stages of dementia.  
Keywords-co-design; assistive technology; dementia. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
It is estimated that close to 50 million people globally are 
living with dementia and that each year there are 9.9 million 
new cases of dementia worldwide [1]. According to research 
carried out by the Alzheimer Society of Ireland (ASI), an 
estimated 64,000 people are living with dementia in Ireland 
[2]. Increasing age remains the strongest risk factor for 
dementia, with prevalence rates nearly doubling every five 
years over the age of 65. With an aging population, the 
number of people with the condition will more than double 
in the next 25 years to over 150,000 by 2045, representing 
2.5% of the Irish population [2]. PLwD have higher 
utilization of healthcare services and higher healthcare costs 
than those without dementia [3]. From a carer perspective, 
half a million people in Ireland have a family member with 
dementia. The care burden associated with dementia is 
significant and a recent meta-analysis found dementia family 
caregivers to be significantly more stressed than non-
dementia caregivers and to suffer more serious depressive 
symptoms and physical problems [4]. The Irish Health 
Service Executive and ASI advocate that people with 
dementia who want to remain in their own homes should be 
supported to do so for as long as possible with high quality 
home care services. 
There is an acute need, which digital health solutions can 
potentially fulfil, to provide proactive support for PLwD and 
their caregivers. However, there is limited involvement of 
people with dementia in the design of technology that could 
be used to support their personal plans for independent 
living. The majority of dementia technology is focused on 
monitoring, security and safety [5]-[7]. The primary user of 
these types of technologies is typically the carer, while the 
PLwD is often a passive user.  
Our research aims to bring together a multidisciplinary 
team to co-design new assistive technologies with and for 
PLwD. Specifically, we are focused on developing a digital 
toolkit to support someone living with mild-to-moderate 
dementia, together with their informal carer(s) to plan and 
monitor personalized care goals, with targets derived from 
care plans, existing models of daily activities, as well as 
activities described as meaningful by the individual PLwDs 
and their carers. The toolkit will include a visual application 
for tasks, such as setting up care plans and goals for ADLs. 
This paper discusses the importance of co-design methods to 
support PLWDs’ engagement in the design of technology to 
support their care.   
II. 
BACKGROUND 
A. Quality of Life (QoL) 
Lawton’s model of QoL [8] has been highly influential in 
QoL and dementia research and has driven the approach to 
and development of QoL instruments. This model suggests 
assessment should involve both subjective and objective 
factors and it identifies four main dimensions that contribute 
to QoL: psychological well-being, behavioral competence, 
objective environment and perceived QoL. 
B. Activities of Daily Living (ADLs) 
Independent living tasks can be categorised into ADLs, 
which concern basic activities relating to personal care and 
hygiene, as well as Instrumental Activities of Daily Living 
(IADLs) which are more complex and concern activities 
needed to function and reside independently in the 
community [9]. IADLs can be categorised as follows: 
transportation 
shopping, 
finances, 
meal 
preparation, 
housekeeping, managing communication and medications.  
C. Meaningful Activities 
Both PLwDs and their carers have reported that daytime 
activities, social contact, as well as issues relating to 
psychological distress comprise the areas of life which are 
most negatively affected by dementia. To design programs 
which both satisfy psychosocial needs and improve QoL for 
PLwD, it is therefore crucial to establish what their views 
and experiences are regarding meaningful activities. The 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

sense of meaning attached to these activities comes from a 
sense of pleasure, connection, participation or autonomy. 
These feelings are apparent and relevant regardless of 
cognition and dependency levels [10]. 
III. 
METHODS 
A. Recruting Participants 
We aimed to recruit individuals with a diagnosis of Mild 
Cognitive Impairment (MCI) or early-stage dementia. 
Participants were recruited through two sources: the ASI or 
through a local outpatient referral centre for older adults. 
Recruited Occupational Therapists (OTs) all worked at the 
same outpatient referral centre, which specializes in 
assessing and managing cognitive impairments, most 
common types of dementia, frailty syndromes, as well as a 
variety of other diseases associated with ageing. Information 
leaflets describing the study were provided and clinicians 
made the first approach to potential participants. The aims, 
procedures, risks, and benefits were outlined, and the 
clinicians provided an overview of the study. Participants 
needed to be able to understand the study requirements and 
give informed consent. We recruited five PLwD and five of 
their informal carers, as well as five healthcare professionals 
Prior to the study, ethical approval was received from the 
university and health service research ethics committees. 
B. Data Collection 
Participants initially took part in interviews or focus 
groups to explore requirements in detail. Following a review 
of the literature, data was collected from participants about 
the following topics - what constitutes QoL for them, how to 
maintain QoL, the relationship between engaging in daily 
activities and maintaining QoL, and which activities bring 
meaning and why. Participants’ discussed how technology 
could support them in engaging in and maintaining ADLs for 
better QoL. Interviews and focus groups with healthcare 
professionals provided a clinical perspective of what is 
important for self-care and care planning for PLwDs and 
their carers and how technology can support self-care and 
care planning for dementia. PLwD and informal carer 
participants also took part in a series of four co-design 
workshops to co-design the toolkit. Interviews and focus 
groups 
were 
conducted 
face-to-face 
in 
individual 
participant’s homes as well as online due to Covid-19 
restrictions. Participants had the option to participate in the 
interview with their informal carers and four out of five 
participants opted to do this. Sessions were audio recorded 
using Zoom or using a dictaphone for face-to-face sessions. 
Co-design workshops took place in a research centre and 
involved all of the PLwD and informal carer participants 
together.   
C. Data Anaylsis 
Analysis is currently ongoing. Transcripts are being 
thematically analyzed in NVivo (qualitative data analysis 
software) following the six-step approach outlined in Braun 
and Clarke [11], to provide a framework for identifying the 
themes or patterns within the data. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Technologies for self-management for PLwD need to 
consider not only compensation for deficits, but also ways in 
which positive and meaningful experiences can be 
highlighted and encouraged We are developing an assistive 
technology toolkit for PLwD for maintaining ADLs and 
meaningful activities. The toolkit will be evaluated in a field 
trial later this year and a series of questionnaires, including 
CASP19 for QoL [12], will be used to evaluate effectiveness 
of the toolkit for managing ADLs for PLwD. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This material is based upon works supported by the 
Science Foundation Ireland under Grant No. 19/FFP/6917. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M Prince et al. World Alzheimer Report 2015. “The global 
impact of dementia. An analysis of prevalence, incidence, 
cost and trends”, Alzheimer’s Disease International, 2015. 
[2] Alzheimer’s Society of Ireland, https://alzheimer.ie/creating-
change/awareness-raising/dementia-in-the-media/, 
Accessed 
20 March. 2023 
[3] M. Aranda et al. “Impact of dementia: Health disparities, 
population trends, care interventions, and economic costs”, J 
Am Geriatr Soc, vol. 69, pp.1774-1783, 2021. 
[4] C. Sheung-Tak C, “Dementia Caregiver Burden: a Research 
Update and Critical Analysis”, Curr Psychiatry Rep, vol 19,  
pp. 64-72, 2017. 
[5] S. Enshaeifar et al. “Health management and pattern analysis 
of daily living activities of people with dementia using in-
home sensors and machine learning techniques”, PLOS ONE 
vol. 13, pp. 1-20, 2018. 
[6] A. Qadeer, J. Seigneur, M. Choukou,  “Recognition system 
for behaviour and activities of daily living among patients 
with dementia using smart algorithms and assistive 
technology”, The 13th Augmented Human International 
Conference (AH2022), 2022, pp.1-2. 
[7] N. Tung Ly, A. Serna, A. Aknine, J Hurtienne, “Towards 
supporting caregivers to monitor the whereabouts of people 
with dementa”, The 9th Nordic Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction (NordiCHI ’16), 2016, pp. 1-4. 
[8] M. Lawton, “A multidimensional view of quality of life in 
frail elders”, In J.E. Birren et al. (Eds.) The Concept and 
Measurement of Quality of Life in Frail Elderly,1991, pp. 3–
27. 
[9] W. Spector and J. Fleishman, “Combining activities of daily 
living with instrumental activities of daily living to measure 
functional disability”, Journals of Gerontology – Series B 
Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, vol. 53, pp. 46-
57, 1998. 
[10] A. Han, J. Radel, J. McDowd, D. Sabata, “Perspectives of 
People with Dementia about Meaningful Activities”, 
American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease and other 
Dementias, vol. 31, pp. 115-123, 2016. 
[11] V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Using thematic analysis in 
psychology”, Qualitative Research in Psychology, vol. 3, pp. 
77–101, 2006. 
[12] M. Hyde, RD. Wiggins, P. Higgs, DB. Blane, A measure of 
quality of life in early old age: The theory, development and 
properties of a needs satisfaction model (CASP-19), Aging & 
Mental Health, vol. 7, pp. 186-194, 2003. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

