 
 
A Practice-oriented Approach to Participatory Design 
Designing Health Information Systems for Healthcare Networks 
Øivind Skeidsvoll Solvang a, Sonja Cassidy a, Ove K. Lintvedt b, Conceição Granja b,c and Terje Solvoll b,c 
 
aDepartment of Architecture and 
Innovation 
Helse Vest IKT AS 
Bergen, Norway 
 
 
 
bNorwegian Centre for e-health 
Research 
University Hospital of North 
Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
 
cFaculty of Nursing and Health 
Sciences 
Nord University 
Bodø, Norway 
 
 
e-mail: oivind.skeidsvoll.solvang@helse-vest-ikt.noa, sonja.cassidy@helse-vest-ikt.noa, ove.lintvedt@ehealthresearch.nob, 
conceicao.granja@ehealthresearch.nob,c, terje.solvoll@ehealthresearch.nob,c 
 
Abstract—Active user involvement is crucial to designing a 
Health Information System (HIS) consistent with users’ 
expectations 
and 
needs. 
Many 
design 
projects 
use 
Participatory Design (PD), involving users as active co-
designers, to promote the democratization of work and 
empower the workers. While this design approach has worked 
in local contexts, there is an open question on how to broaden 
participatory design to healthcare networks in need for 
coordinating their services for patient-centric care. In patient-
centric healthcare, various providers at different healthcare 
levels must coordinate their actions. In this paper, we discuss 
different challenges when PD applies to a healthcare network 
and how practice-oriented approaches can contribute to 
mitigating these challenges. 
Keywords-Participatory Design; Practice Theory; Health 
information systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The increasing demand for healthcare services in several 
countries [1] puts pressure on health care providers [2] to 
increase throughput and quality of care, without increasing 
resources [2]. This pressure has caused more workload, 
stress, and dissatisfaction among clinicians, resulting in 
burnout and higher turnover [3]. Health Information 
Systems (HIS) can have a role to play in supporting 
clinicians to reduce their workload. However, many 
information systems fail when introduced [4] due to user 
resistance as a central contributing factor [5]. For the 
context of this paper, a HIS is a general term for digital 
information systems that assist clinicians in collecting, 
processing, 
and 
communicating 
health 
information 
internally and externally [6].  
Recent studies on barriers and facilitators to HIS 
adoption indicate a compatibility gap between clinicians’ 
expectations and the final solution [7]. Such a gap might 
occur when the final solutions are not consistent with their 
values, needs, past experiences, and work practices [8]. 
However, clinicians’ needs and knowledge are sometimes 
hidden or hard to articulate [9]. In other situations, clinicians 
are not aware of their needs, or the needs change during the 
design process [9]. Thus, to narrow the gap between their 
real needs and the final solution, it is crucial to involve 
clinicians actively during the design process [4][7]. In this 
paper, we follow the definition by Ehn [10] that design is “a 
concerned social and historical activity in which artifacts 
and their use are anticipated; an activity and form of 
knowledge that is both planned and creative, and that deals 
with the contradiction between tradition and transcendence”.  
Participatory Design (PD) has a particular attention to 
hidden knowledge, needs and advocates an active 
involvement of users as co-designers [11]. Through active 
participation, users build competencies, are empowered and 
stimulated to meaningful work  [12][13]. PD involves 
design and redesign of workplaces, jobs and technologies 
[14]. PD is a mutual learning process where participants and 
designers bring their unique expertise [13]. The designers 
learn about the work practices from the practitioners to give 
advice of future technological possibilities. The practitioners 
learn from the designers to be empowered to design their 
future work. 
Much focus has been on situated and local learning in 
PD, with limited considerations of evolving the learning to 
broader arenas [14]. The coordination of activities and the 
need to share knowledge among practitioners across 
providers and levels of care (healthcare network) increases 
as the attention on patient-centric care evolves. The question 
is how to approach PD in a healthcare network, with 
boundaries among providers and practitioners, potentially 
containing an uneven distribution of responsibilities, 
resources, power, and decision rights. 
Practice-oriented approaches also study knowledge 
emerging through mutual interaction. However, practices 
are the basic unit of analysis in these approaches. New ways 
of understanding social and organizational phenomena are 
possible when studying the performance of practices' 
actions [15]. Through practice-oriented approaches, situated 
relations between practices and the arrangements keeping 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
the practices together are analyzed and used for further 
studies of variations in practices at other sites and contexts 
[16]. In addition, by changing the arrangements that keep 
the practices together, this approach is also a resource for 
change [17]. 
Currently, we are working on a project, Valkyrie [18], 
where the aim is to promote healthcare service coordination 
for patient-centric care across healthcare levels. The 
ambition is to collect, coordinate, and present health data 
records from several heterogeneous Electronic Health 
Record (EHR) systems as a coordinated, standardized, 
virtual electronic health record system. The project involves 
clinicians from different autonomous practitioners across 
primary care (general practitioners and municipalities) and 
specialist care (hospitals). While boundaries exist between 
the providers, the broader healthcare network is dynamic 
and changes according to the individual patients’ pathway. 
We expect to uncover conflicting needs among providers 
and practitioners during this project. Thus, active user 
involvement in the design process is crucial for the success 
of this project. 
Many 
design 
research 
methods 
rely 
on 
user 
involvement. To our knowledge, PD is the only approach 
with the active participation of users co-designing their 
work future. To meet the challenges in the Valkyrie project, 
we decided to focus on the PD approach. 
However, because of the known weaknesses of the 
method in PD, we wanted to see if a practice-oriented 
approach could help enrich the method to avoid some of its 
weaknesses. From earlier research, we were aware of the 
use of practice-oriented approaches in telemedicine [15], 
Sociomateriality [16], as well as in the study of educational 
and nursing practices [19]. However, we were unaware of 
studies using practice-oriented approaches in PD to expand 
the design process in a healthcare network, and to help 
overcome known weaknesses in PD.  
In this paper, we discuss different challenges with using 
PD in a healthcare network and elaborate on how practice-
oriented approaches can contribute to mitigating these 
challenges. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes methods and results from the brief literature 
search. Section III starts with a description of PD and 
practice-oriented approaches, and ends with a discussion of 
how practice-oriented approaches can help mitigate PD’s 
challenges. Finally, Section IV gives a summary of the 
research and highlight its contribution and future work.  
II. 
METHODS AND RESULT 
We conducted a search in Scopus, without any limit on 
year of publication, with the query string: TITLE-ABS-
KEY ("participatory design"  AND  practice  AND ( 
healthcare  OR  "health care") AND ("information system"  
OR  "electronic health record system"  OR  telemedicine )), 
limited to title, abstract, and keywords. To verify our search, 
we used the same search terms in Google Scholar.  
The search in Scopus identified 33 papers. We screened 
the papers based on their abstracts, and we decided not to 
include any of them since the abstracts did not indicate any 
use of practice-oriented approaches in PD. 
The search in Google Scholar identified 19 papers. We 
screened the papers based on their abstracts, and we decided 
to include one paper. This paper introduces a practice-
oriented approach to bridge ethnography with design 
research, including PD, for the healthcare domain [20]. 
Because of the limited results from the search, we did 
not consider any inclusion or exclusion criteria necessary. 
III. 
DISCUSSION 
The brief literature search conducted for this study did 
not show any significant use of practice-oriented approaches 
combined with PD. However, there are chances that we 
could have identified more papers by using other search 
terms. Searching for “participatory design” or “practice” 
would have resulted in more papers. However, we assume 
that such an approach would not have helped us identify 
more papers intersecting the two research fields. 
This section discusses some challenges with using PD in 
a healthcare network and elaborates on how practice-
oriented approaches can mitigate some of these challenges.  
A. Participatory Design 
PD emerged as a political protest movement in Norway 
[12], advocating active user involvement in design as means 
to increased empowerment [12], build competencies and 
stimulate meaningful work [13]. This design approach 
views knowledge as being created through the interaction 
among people, practitioners and artifacts [12]. It is 
pragmatic in that the design should also contribute to 
improvements for the research subjects [12]. Thus, PD is 
action oriented. In order to design for change, envisioning 
and enacting possible futures are necessary. As PD has 
evolved, techniques and tools are developed, such as 
stakeholder 
analysis, 
to 
find 
relevant 
stakeholders 
influencing the design or influenced by the design [13]. 
Tools and techniques such as personas, scenarios, mock-
ups, simulations, future workshops and cooperative 
prototyping are commonly used in PD to help participants 
substantiate future possibilities with practical discussions 
[21].   
Three basic steps for mutual learning and design are 
usually present in PD. First is the initial exploration of 
work, where practitioners and designers meet and explore 
workflows, routines and how technologies can support 
practitioners in their practice. Second is the discovery 
process, envisioning the future workplace and prioritizing 
tasks. The last step is prototyping an envisioned solution, 
involving several iterations of sketches, drawings, and 
descriptions, gradually evolving the prototype in a lab or at 
the workplace. The iterations allow participants to examine, 
reflect and discuss incremental redesigns at each iteration 
[12]. 
While PD can positively affect design outcomes, it can 
also introduce some challenges. Democratization of work, 
for instance, entails that each participant’s voice is equally 
valued, even those that offend others or argue out of self-
interest [13]. There is also a risk that certain practitioners 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
use power to influence design decisions, and such 
challenges can cause tension and conflicts with not 
necessarily an optimal design result.  
Another challenge is to establish an environment for 
mutual learning. In PD, the activities that directly engage 
participants in the design are in the foreground, while 
understanding and learning becomes a natural part of the 
design work [22]. In contrast, ethnography starts with 
understanding work practices, which involves detailed 
workplace studies. As PD has evolved, designers have 
started to use techniques from ethnography to learn about 
current problems and work practices before they meet 
participants. However, it is not always clear when 
ethnography stops and design starts, and how designers can 
benefit from the contributions of ethnography [22].  
The third challenge with PD is to involve the suitable 
candidates as participants and co-designers to ensure that 
the information system to be designed is well integrated into 
practitioners’ work practices [21], thus more likely to be 
accepted as valuable. 
The fourth challenge with PD is how to broaden the 
learning from one particular site to a design of HIS that is 
perceived valuable and accepted by practitioners in broader 
areas [21]. With the growth in providers and practitioners, 
variances in work practices and needs are likely to increase. 
The same applies to the risk of conflicts and tension among 
practitioners and providers. Finding participants that can 
look beyond their work are essential [21]. However, this 
also calls for attention to differences in organizational 
structures [23], such as roles, regulations, hierarchies and 
power relations, internally and across providers. 
B. Practice Theory 
Practice theory is one way to study organizational 
phenomena. Practice theory views organizations as 
consisting of practices that produce an outcome. A 
healthcare organization, in this view, is both the physical 
place and the result of the practices’ work activities [15]. 
Following this view, a hospital, for instance, consists of 
different practices. All perform necessary actions at the 
physical place for the outcome of a healthy patient, such as 
cleaning rooms and beds, diagnosing the patient, delivering 
food to the patient and so on. The actions are of particular 
interest in this research field since actions together 
constitute the practice [24].  
Practice-oriented approaches do not follow a single, 
unified theory. However, they all have in common that 
practices, not individuals or practitioners, are the basic unit 
of analysis for understanding organizational phenomena 
[15]. New ways of understanding social and organizational 
phenomena are possible by studying the performance of 
actions by practices [15]. Another aspect that practice 
theories generally have in common is the recognition of 
materiality, communication, and symbols as essential parts 
of the practice composition [19]. 
Practice theories usually follow Schatzki’s site ontology, 
stating that practices consist of language (sayings) and 
activities (doings), always situated within a site or sites [25]. 
Knowing is sustained and manifested in practice and 
through practices in the happening (situated) [26], which 
marks parallels to PD, with its focus on knowledge 
construction through the interaction among people and 
artifacts [12].  
Sociomateriality is a practice-oriented notion that views 
the performance of activities that mutually shape and 
reshape materiality (physical and digital material) and social 
phenomena [23]. In this perspective, the boundaries between 
materiality and social phenomena are inseparable and not 
pre-defined [27]. Through sociomaterial practice, which is 
the space for human and material agencies, objects emerge 
as sociomaterial configurations [23]. Caused by differences 
in performance, the sociomaterial configurations can take 
different 
forms, 
with 
varying 
social 
and 
material 
consequences, intended or unintended [27]. Following the 
sociomaterial tradition, Nicolini studied the mutually 
shaping of practices and telemedicine [15]. Orlikowski 
found that organizational norms affect people’s decisions on 
using information systems, but when in use, people start 
shaping the system and seek new possibilities [16][23]. 
While Sociomateriality often studies current relations, 
design 
is 
future-oriented 
[20]. 
By 
introducing 
Sociomaterial-Design, Bjørn and Østerlund are concerned 
with bringing Sociomateriality closer with practical design 
research, including PD, for the healthcare domain [20]. 
Their studies show how Sociomaterial-Design can bridge 
ethnography and design, which can be a valuable 
contribution to design research. 
However, Sociomaterial-design and Sociomateriality, in 
general, suffer from treating organizational structures 
implicit. According to Leonardi [23], sociomaterial practice 
is similar to a technical subsystem from a socio-technical 
system perspective. Leonardi [23] reminds us that 
organizations are socio-technical systems consisting of a 
technical and social subsystem. The social subsystem 
consists of constructs such as roles, statuses, hierarchies, 
and power relations. While humans and materiality mutually 
shape each other in a technical subsystem, there is also an 
ongoing mutual shaping of the social and technical 
subsystems. In healthcare, the social subsystem is strong 
and affects knowledge sharing and collaboration between 
organizational and professional boundaries [28]. When 
designing a HIS for a health care network, it is crucial to 
understand both the social and the technical subsystems and 
how they affect each other.  
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
In contrast to Sociomateriality, the theory of practice 
architecture expands on Schatzki’s site ontology, making 
power and politics (Relatings) explicit, together with 
language (Sayings) and activities (Doings). Developed 
initially for studying educational practices, the theory of 
practice architecture has gradually evolved in other practice 
fields, such as nursing, teacher mentoring and professional 
learning at universities [19]. To our knowledge, no studies 
so far have used this theory in PD. 
The theory of practice architecture (Figure 1) is domain-
neutral and represents a view of what constitutes and shapes 
the practices. Practices in this theory, are human actions 
composed of what they say (Sayings), what they do 
(Doings) and how they relate (Relatings) [19][24]. These 
actions are interconnected and not reducible to one of these 
actions in isolation [29].  
Projects bundle actions (left side in Figure 1) and 
contain the intentions that motivate the practice, the aims to 
achieve, and the practitioners' dispositions. When a nurse is 
engaged in nursing, one such project is to support the 
recovery of patients after surgery. The specific activity is 
justified through particular sayings and social relatings, with 
the intention and aims of the nursing practice. Through 
actions, aim, intention and disposition, practices can be 
examined and give insight into how and why others perform 
the practice differently.  
There is also a continuous mutual shaping between the 
practices and the context. The context manifests itself in 
aspects of what is sayable, doable, relationships, rules, 
regulations and expectations. Through the theory of practice 
architecture, context emerges in the foreground. It becomes 
tangible through the practice architecture consisting of three 
interconnected arrangements, cultural-discursive, material-
economic and social-political (right side in Figure 1) 
[19][24]. The practise architecture are the preconditions, 
traditions, constraints and enablement of the practices, by 
occurring in or brought to a particular site [19]. 
Transformation of practices' actions can also occur by 
bringing in new arrangements or creating new arrangements 
at the site [30]. For instance, rearranging the inside of a 
hospital building or creating a new information system can 
promote changes in the practices' actions. 
The relations between practices and practice architecture 
emerge through three intersubjective spaces (Figure 1): 
interrelated semantic space, physical space-time, and social 
space. Through these spaces, practitioners come together in 
a shared language, material reality, power and solidarity 
[17] for mutual learning, acceptance and maintenance of the 
practice, and shaping and reshaping the practice [29].  
The theory of practice architecture can be a valuable 
theoretical resource providing a concise language for 
interpretation and description [17]. It can explain situated 
dynamics and relations at one particular place, transferrable 
to study relations in other situations and contexts [16]. The 
theory can also serve as an analytical tool for identifying 
actual empirical connections between practices and the 
practice architecture, focusing attention on local variations 
in the mutual shaping of practices and the arrangements. 
Finally, it can be used as a resource for change, 
transforming the arrangements that keep the practices 
together [17]. 
C. How can practice-oriented approaches contribute to 
mitigate the challenges of participatory design in 
Valkyrie? 
1) Equal voice and power relations 
Democratization of work entails that every participant's 
voice is equally valued. Researchers have criticized this core 
value for letting those voices offend others and argue out of 
self-interest to be equally valued [13]. Since practice-
oriented approaches use practices as the basic unit of 
analysis, they can help participants shift perspectives and 
view organizational phenomena from other angles. This 
shift in focus may help practitioners broaden their view, 
Actions
Intersubjective spaces
Practice architecture
Material-economic arrangements
Actions performed by 
practices and bundled 
together in projects.
Arrangements that enable and constrain 
interactions, bundled together in practice 
landscapes and traditions at particular sites.
Sayings
Doings
Relatings
Semantic space 
(medium of language)
Physical space-time 
(medium of activity and work)
Social space
(medium of power and solidarity)
Social-political arrangements
Cultural-discursive arrangements
 
Figure 1.  A simplified illustration of the theory of practice architectures [19] 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
thus reducing arguments out of self-interest. However, we 
should also remember that PD projects promote change that 
hypothetically leaves some better off while worsening the 
situation for others. Arguing out of self-interest is, therefore, 
not always a bad thing. Sometimes, such arguments can lead 
to new insight and new ways to approach the design.  
Change can also affect current power relations. To 
empower workers means a distribution of power from 
others. Power relations, hierarchies, statuses and roles are 
embedded in healthcare practices [28]. Power is exercised 
between practitioners internally in a healthcare organization 
and between 
organizational 
boundaries, 
representing 
barriers to effective coordination and knowledge sharing 
[28]. Tension and conflicts may arise if the design implies 
changes to current balances. In Valkyrie, it is necessary to 
understand current power relations since we are working 
with different groups of healthcare professionals and with 
providers at different care levels. Likewise, it is crucial to 
understand how design changes might affect current power 
relations, hierarchies, statuses and roles. The theory of 
practice architecture can provide us with both a framework 
and a vocabulary to study the empirical relatings, sayings 
and doings at particular locations. Learning of these 
relations can move to broader areas to design a HIS to 
promote service coordination for a healthcare network. 
However, the theory of practice architecture will not solve 
this alone. After all, the willingness to design for change 
rests with the practitioners, which is why we want to 
involve them as active co-designers in Valkyrie. 
2) Selection of practitioners as co-designers  
It is crucial to involve suitable participants in the project 
since PD relies heavily on expert users as active co-
designers. Ideally, participants should both represent their 
profession and be open-minded to learn from others to 
contribute to the design of their future work.  
Stakeholder analysis, a method used in PD [13], 
supports the discovery of relevant stakeholders influencing 
or influenced by, directly or indirectly, the design project. 
Stakeholder analysis is relevant to Valkyrie, but finding 
relevant stakeholders in a healthcare network gets 
complicated since 
we also need 
to consider the 
organizational boundaries. We believe that the theory of 
practice architecture can contribute to the stakeholder 
analysis in at least two ways.  
First, the focus on practices adds a layer to the 
stakeholder analysis, otherwise oriented towards individuals 
and organizational roles. This move introduces a domain-
neutral 
perspective 
across 
boundaries, 
relevant 
for 
discovering 
stakeholders, 
especially 
those 
indirectly 
influenced by design.  
Second, the practice layer is also a change tool to plan 
for future practices. The view of future practices can lead to 
the discovery of future users and stakeholders considered 
relevant to the project. 
While the theory of practice architecture contributes to 
the stakeholder analysis to discover relevant stakeholders to 
Valkyrie, it does not provide any mechanism to choose 
individuals suitable as active co-designers in the project. 
      
3) Establishing an environment for mutual learning 
Both PD and the theory of practice architecture focus on 
change and understanding. However, they have different 
starting points. The theory of practice architecture starts 
with understanding the mutual shaping and reshaping of 
practices and the practice architecture and eventually uses 
this insight for possible future rearrangement and change. 
PD has the change as a starting point, while understanding 
becomes a natural part of mutual learning during the design 
process.   
To understand participants’ work practices and needs, 
designers must first learn their language and how they think 
and act, indicating that the initial exploration of work in PD 
may take up much time. However, time is often a limiting 
factor for clinicians, who otherwise would use their time on 
treating patients. In Valkyrie, we believe that an 
ethnographic workplace study with open-ended interviews 
and observations of clinicians in their natural work setting 
can contribute to a better environment for mutual learning 
later on in the PD project. Clinicians can benefit from this 
by reducing additional time, creating a more focused mutual 
learning process, and lowering the risk of frustration and 
tension.   
However, how detailed the ethnographic study should be 
is a question to be explored further. This is also ongoing 
discussions in the PD research community. Ethnography 
and design research seem to overlap, which is why we find 
the Sociomaterial-Design approach appealing. This practice-
oriented approach bridges ethnography with design research 
to incorporate understanding and learning with action and 
change. However, we miss the sensitivity towards 
organizational constructs such as roles, statuses, hierarchies, 
and power relations. We find this highly relevant in HIS-
design for a healthcare network, such as for Valkyrie. The 
theory of practice architecture can provide us with such 
perspective at a particular site and in broader areas. 
However, the theory of practice architecture does not 
provide any intersection between understanding and design 
that Sociomaterial-Design provides. In Valkyrie, we will 
further explore how practice-oriented approaches can 
contribute to PD projects in the healthcare domain.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have discussed some challenges related to 
Participatory Design (PD) when designing an information 
system for a health care network. Further, we have 
discussed how practice-oriented approaches can help 
mitigate these challenges.   
Practice-oriented approaches do not mitigate all aspects of 
the recognized challenges. However, they can contribute 
with a vocabulary and a way of thinking that can help 
inform the design through different phases of the research 
project. They can also help to identify actual empirical 
connections between practices and materiality to interpret 
and explain practice variation.   
One of the practice-oriented accounts, the theory of practice 
architecture, provides a framework to understand the 
practices’ actions through language, activities, power, and 
politics. Power and politics are relevant in healthcare and 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
essential to move the design from local sites to broader 
healthcare networks. 
This paper contributes to practice-oriented approaches in 
technology design by adding the dimension of power and 
politics. This paper also contributes to the ongoing 
discussions in the research community on how to evolve PD 
to meet the future needs of ubiquitous healthcare data in 
patient-centric healthcare.  
In order to understand how practice-oriented approaches can 
contribute to mitigating the challenges of PD, we will 
explore this further as part of the Valkyrie project. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] World Health Organization (WHO), "Depression and other 
common mental disorders: global health estimates," World Health 
Organization (WHO), Geneva, 2017. 
[2] G. P. Martin, E. Sutton, J. Willars, and M. Dixon-Woods, 
“Frameworks for change in healthcare organisations: a formative 
evaluation of the NHS change model,” Health services 
management research, vol. 26, no. 2-3, pp. 65-75, 2013. 
[3] A. A. Wright and I. T. Katz, “Beyond burnout—redesigning 
care to restore meaning and sanity for physicians,” N Engl J Med, 
vol. 378, no. 4, pp. 309-311, 2018. 
[4] M. Berg, “Patient care information systems and health care 
work: a sociotechnical approach,” International Journal of Medical 
Informatics, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 87-101, 1999/08/01/, 1999. 
[5] J. G. Anderson, C. E. Aydin, and S. J. Jay, Evaluating Health 
Care Information Systems: Methods and Applications: London: 
Sage Publications, 1993. 
[6] M. M. Yusof, A. Papazafeiropoulou, R. J. Paul, and L. K. 
Stergioulas, “Investigating evaluation frameworks for health 
information systems,” International journal of medical informatics, 
vol. 77, no. 6, pp. 377-385, 2008. 
[7] C. Granja, W. Janssen, and M. A. Johansen, “Factors 
determining the success and failure of eHealth interventions: 
systematic review of the literature,” Journal of medical Internet 
research, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. e10235, 2018. 
[8] L. G. Tornatzky and K. J. Klein, “Innovation characteristics 
and innovation adoption-implementation: A meta-analysis of 
findings,” IEEE Transactions on engineering management, no. 1, 
pp. 28-45, 1982. 
[9] J. Blomberg, M. Burrell, and G. Guest, "An ethnographic 
approach to design," The human-computer interaction handbook: 
fundamentals, evolving technologies and emerging applications, 
pp. 964–986: L. Erlbaum Associates Inc., 2002. 
[10] P. Ehn, “Work-oriented design of computer artifacts,” 
Arbetslivscentrum, 1988. 
[11] C. Frauenberger, J. Good, G. Fitzpatrick, and O. S. Iversen, 
“In pursuit of rigour and accountability in participatory design,” 
International journal of human-computer studies, vol. 74, pp. 93-
106, 2015. 
[12] C. Spinuzzi, “The Methodology of Participatory Design,” 
Technical Communication, vol. 52, pp. 163-174, 05/01, 2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[13] B. Friedman and P. H. Kahn Jr, "Human values, ethics, and 
design," The human-computer interaction handbook, pp. 1267-
1292: CRC press, 2007. 
[14] S. Bødker and M. Kyng, “Participatory design that matters—
Facing the big issues,” ACM Transactions on Computer-Human 
Interaction (TOCHI), vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 1-31, 2018. 
[15] D. Nicolini, Practice theory, work, and organization: An 
introduction: OUP Oxford, 2012. 
[16] M. S. Feldman and W. J. Orlikowski, “Theorizing practice 
and practicing theory,” Organization science, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 
1240-1253, 2011. 
[17] S. Kemmis, R. McTaggart, and R. Nixon, The Action 
Research Planner: Doing Critical Participatory Action Research, 
2014. 
[18] "Valkyrie - distributed service-oriented architecture for 
coordinated healthcare services," [Retrieved: February, 2022]; 
https://ehealthresearch.no/en/projects/valkyrie-distributed-service-
oriented-architecture-for-coordinated-healthcare-services. 
[19] K. Mahon, S. Francisco, and S. Kemmis, Exploring education 
and professional practice: Springer, 2017. 
[20] P. Bjørn and C. Østerlund, Sociomaterial-Design: Bounding 
technologies in practice: Springer, 2014. 
[21] F. Kensing and J. Blomberg, “Participatory design: Issues and 
concerns,” Computer supported cooperative work (CSCW), vol. 7, 
no. 3, pp. 167-185, 1998. 
[22] D. J. Blomberg and H. Karasti, "Ethnography: Positioning 
ethnography within participatory design," Routledge international 
handbook of participatory design, pp. 106-136: Routledge, 2012. 
[23] P. M. Leonardi, “Materiality, sociomateriality, and socio-
technical systems: What do these terms mean? How are they 
different? Do we need them,” Materiality and organizing: Social 
interaction in a technological world, vol. 25, pp. 10.1093, 2012. 
[24] S. Kemmis and T. J. Smith, Enabling Praxis: Challenges for 
Education: Brill, 2008. 
[25] T. R. Schatzki, The site of the social: A philosophical account 
of the constitution of social life and change: Penn State Press, 
2002. 
[26] D. Nicolini, “Knowing in practice. The case of telemedicine,” 
OLKC (Organizational Learning, Knowledge and Capabilities), 
Warwick, March, pp. 20-22, 2006. 
[27] B. Doolin and L. McLeod, “Sociomateriality and boundary 
objects in information systems development,” European Journal of 
Information Systems, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 570-586, 2012. 
[28] G. Currie and O. Suhomlinova, “The impact of institutional 
forces upon knowledge sharing in the UK NHS: the triumph of 
professional power and the inconsistency of policy,” Public 
Administration, vol. 84, no. 1, pp. 1-30, 2006. 
[29] C. Edwards-Groves and P. Grootenboer, “Praxis and the 
theory of practice architectures: Resources for re-envisioning 
English education,” Australian Journal of Language and Literacy, 
The, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 150-161, 2015. 
[30] A. Edwards, Being an expert professional practitioner: The 
relational turn in expertise: Springer science & business media, 
2010. 
 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

