Disrupting the market for workplace health: The case of OfficePhysio 
 
René Bohnsack 
Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences  
International Business School 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
r.bohnsack@hva.nl 
 
 
Abstract— Today’s societies face increasing health care costs 
due to a growing world population, an aging society, and rising 
prices for health care. A new breed of health care 
entrepreneurs tries to conceive new ways to deliver health care. 
One area in which entrepreneurial ventures seek to 
revolutionize today’s health care is workplace health, 
providing electronic solutions over the internet. This study sets 
out to explore whether and how an eWorkplaceHealth 
program can disrupt the market. The findings—based on an 
explorative single case study—suggest that eWorkplaceHealth 
is a disruptive business model that may have already 
‘overshot’ the product performance of traditional workplace 
health.  
Keywords: eHealth, business models, disruptive innovation, 
workplace health 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Today’s societies face increasing health care costs due to 
a growing world population, an aging society, and rising 
prices for health care. A new breed of health care 
entrepreneurs tries to conceive new ways to deliver health 
care. One area in which entrepreneurial ventures seek to 
revolutionize today’s health care is workplace health, 
providing electronic solutions over the internet. This study 
sets out to explore whether and how an eWorkplaceHealth 
program can disrupt the market. The findings—although 
based 
on 
a 
single 
case 
study—suggest 
that 
eWorkplaceHealth is a disruptive business model that may 
have already ‘overshot’ the product performance of 
traditional workplace health. 
  
II. 
DISRUPTIVE BUSINESS MODELS  
Health care has been a prominent example of disruptive 
innovation [1]. However, eHealth services are a recent 
phenomenon that emerged with the rise of the internet. These 
services differentiate themselves from traditional health 
services in that they create and capture value in significantly 
different ways [2]. Hitherto scholars have examined how 
eHealth business models can be modeled and tested a priori 
[3], studied the opportunities for developing countries [4] or 
investigated how privacy concerns are accounted for [5]. 
However, to the knowledge of the author, few have 
examined the disruptiveness of eHealth services compared to 
traditional ways of workplace health. Thus, in the following I 
briefly review the literature on business models and business 
model innovation and juxtapose traditional modes of 
workplace health with an eWorkplaceHealth service to 
determine its disruptiveness.  
Literature on business models and business model 
innovation is relatively young and emerged in liaison with 
the dot.com era in the 1990s [2], [6].  In that period, new 
means of communication allowed making available and 
transacting information in an unprecedented speed, which 
gave rise to new forms of businesses, blurring the boundaries 
of industries [7], [8].  
Due to its interdisciplinary nature [2], it is difficult to 
pinpoint a definition for business models or even what 
business models are. In fact, business models neither fit 
economic theory, nor organizational theory [2]. Foundations 
of the construct can be found in business strategy [9], 
building upon frameworks such as the value chain, resource-
based theory, strategic networks, and transaction cost 
economics [9]. Due to its nascent state no uniform definition 
has emerged [6], [9], [10]. 
One area of business model research targets ‘e-
commerce’ which is concerned with describing emerging 
businesses due the internet. In other words, scholars seek to 
understand how emerging telecommunication practices 
enable novel ways of creating value. Recent findings 
suggests that the internet enabled new sources of value 
creation, that is it creates efficiencies, complementarities, 
novel approaches and lock-in situations [11]. Using the 
business model as an analysis framework allows to clearly 
illustrating the transactions, its governance, content and 
structure. Thus, business models are a way of describing 
emerging phenomenon of e-businesses and their sources of 
value. 
Recently, scholars found that business model innovation 
holds the promise to create a competitive advantage and even 
disrupt industries [12]. Johnson et al. [13] point to business 
model innovation being a source of competitive advantage 
and emphasize its game-changing character. Similarly for 
Nidumolu et al. [14] business model innovation refers to 
“find[ing] novel ways of delivering and capturing value, 
which will change the basis of competition.” Mitchell and 
Coles [12] distinguish two types of altering existing business 
models: business model improvement (incremental change) 
and business model innovation (disruptive change). Four out 
of the seven dimensions of a business model—that is the 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

who, what, when, why, where, how and how much of 
delivering value to customers of the existing business 
model—need to change to constitute disruptive change [12]. 
Incremental change refers to changing less than four 
dimensions. I apply this framework to determine whether 
workplace health delivered electronically is a disruptive 
business model.  
 
III. 
 TRADITIONAL WORKPLACE HEALTH VS. 
EWORKPLACEHEALTH 
One area in which entrepreneurial ventures seek to 
revolutionize today’s health care is workplace health. Many 
jobs today require largely monotonous work behind the 
computer which is in fact counter the human nature. Typical 
workplace related health problems are for instance the 
burnout syndrome or back related problems. Particularly the 
latter causes significant harm to employees and costs for 
employers. Until today, employees would mostly only go to 
the doctor or physiotherapist when problems arise, i.e. when 
it is too late. In Germany, for instance, more than 23% of all 
sick days are due to back related problems. However, simple 
interventions at the workplace—such as brief exercises and 
minor behavioural changes—can prevent problems, alleviate 
existing computer work related problems, and improve the 
health and motivation of employees in general. Consequently 
also the costs of companies can be reduced. Traditionally 
these interventions were provided by physiotherapists that 
would come into office places, educate employees about 
ergonomics at the workplace and conduct exercises together. 
The problem is that this way of intervention is time 
intensive, difficult to offer to the entire workforce and also 
requires facilities that not all companies might be able to 
provide.  
Recently, a new way of providing workplace health has 
been adopted by companies which has the potential to 
disrupt the prevalent practice of companies, i.e. inviting 
physiotherapists 
to 
their 
premises 
[15]. 
So 
called 
eWorkplaceHealth has been pioneered by a few companies 
[16]. New information and communication technologies such 
as video over the internet, communities and interaction 
enabled companies to design new customized ways of 
delivering workplace health. Because these services are 
online based, users benefit from personalized programmes 
and the flexibility to do exercises whenever it suits them. 
Also employers profit because every additional user only 
causes marginal additional costs.  
Table 1 juxtaposes traditional workplace health services 
with eWorkplaceHealth services on the aforementioned 
seven dimensions of business models [12]. It shows that all 
dimensions are altered by eWorkplaceHealth services. 
Instead of selected employees, all employees can be reached. 
Whereas physiotherapist would largely focus on exercises or 
alleviate pain, eWorplaceHealth besides providing exercises 
and (limited) possibilities to heal minor health issues (e.g. 
stiff neck) adds an educational component that gradually 
creates knowledge and awareness. The why is the only 
dimension that is somewhat similar. Both approaches intend  
 
TABLE I.  
DISRUPTIVENESS OF EWORKPLACEHEALTH 
Business 
model 
dimensions 
Traditional workplace 
health 
eWorkplaceHealth 
Who 
Selected employees 
All employees 
What 
Dispersed: various 
separated interventions, 
e.g. back school, 
instructions, gym 
All-inclusive: information, 
exercises, guidance to 
healing  
When 
Fixed: set times or after 
work 
Flexible: whenever an 
employee has time 
Why 
To conduct exercises, 
alleviate problems, 
partially build 
workplace health 
competences 
To build comprehensive 
workplace health 
competences, mobilize, 
motivate, support healing 
and inform 
Where 
Fixed: dedicated places, 
e.g. community room or 
gym 
Anywhere: at the 
workplace, but also at home 
or in the hotel 
How 
Personal: delivered by 
an instructor 
Virtual: delivered by online 
videos, descriptions and 
eLearning tools 
How much 
Expensive: per hour rate  
Inexpensive: small fee per 
employee per month 
 
to build workplace health competences (e.g. how to sit 
properly). However, eWorkplaceHealth extends this for 
instance to related topics such as concentration, breathing or 
behavioural patterns, i.e. is more comprehensive. One of the 
significant advantages is that eWorkplaceHealth can be 
conducted anywhere and is not fixed to a certain place. This 
is due to the fact that it is provided over the internet on any 
device (mostly PC, but also tablet PCs or smart phones). 
Last, the price point is significantly lower than traditional 
approaches as each additional user only causes marginal 
costs.   
Consequently, eWorkplaceHealth appears to have the 
character of a disruptive business model. In order to 
understand whether eWorkplaceHealth can disrupt the 
industry, first it needs to be explored whether users perceive 
benefits of these services. Therefore I conducted an 
explorative case study. In the following sections I describe 
the methodology, report the findings and discuss the 
implications. 
 
IV. 
 METHOD AND CASE SELECTION  
In order to inform the overarching research question: 
Whether and how can eWorkplaceHealth services disrupt the 
industry of traditional workplace health? I conducted a 
single explorative case study to evaluate how users perceive 
the benefits of these services. Single case studies suffer from 
low external validity [17]. However, they may enable 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

multiple levels of analysis [18]. This study intends to explore 
the phenomenon and is intended to be extended 
subsequently. In order to gain insights in the application at 
one organization, I selected a government agency that 
implemented an eWorkplaceHealth service.  
The 
case 
organization 
that 
implemented 
the 
eWorkplaceHealth program named OfficePhysio1 is a state 
agency in Hannover, Germany. This agency provides already 
different traditional workplace health services such as that 
they have a group that regularly does exercises together and 
they conduct breaks during the work time in which interested 
employees actively relax.  In order to verify whether the 
organization would introduce OfficePhysio for all employees 
as an alternative to traditional means, it conducted a test for a 
period of four weeks with a small group. A questionnaire to 
inquire the effectiveness was circulated afterward. The data 
of this test period was available for this research. The 
organization has about 300 employees. The test was 
conducted by 20 employees. Twelve users filled out the 
questionnaire.  
 
OfficePhysio (see screenshots in Fig. 1 in the 
appendix) is developed—based on medical studies and in 
collaboration 
with 
certified 
experts—as 
an 
eWorkplaceHealth service which provides different modules, 
that is an eLearning module which gradually educates users 
about all workplace related health issues and its solutions, an 
eMoving module which provides video tutorials for exercises 
that targeted different problem areas, such as shoulder-neck, 
lower back, but also eyes, and RSI (so called mouse arm). In 
addition, an eHealing module provides practices via online 
tutorials to treat minor health problems such as a stiff neck. 
Different customized emails remind users about doing their 
exercises, inform users with workplace related health 
knowledge and give small tasks that users can do as 
‘homework’. It takes five to ten minutes a day to conduct an 
exercise and read the information.  
 
V. 
 FINDINGS 
In the following I present the results as they have emerged 
from the data (see Table 2). First, 75% of the sample had 
workplace health related problems. The most reported 
problems were shoulder-neck problems, followed by eye 
fatigue. Some also just mentioned general back problems. 
The users tested the program for four weeks and 92% were 
very positive about the usability. Just 8% regarded the 
program as ok, none as mediocre. Interestingly all of the 
participants found the program motivating. Yet, despite the 
program being motivating, only 25% managed to do their 
exercises when they were reminded by email. However, the 
strength of the programme is that the reminder email remains 
in the inbox and can be deleted once the user has done the 
respective task or exercises—which also underlines the 
flexibility the programme provides, because in daily working 
life often unexpected tasks need to be done which are of 
higher priority. 
 
                                                           
1 The author of this paper is affiliated to OfficePhysio as a co-initiator. 
TABLE II.  
RESULTS OF THE QUESTIONNAIRE  
Question 
Result 
Did you have workplace 
health related problems? 
Yes: 75%  No: 25% 
Usability of the programme 
Good: 92%  Ok: 8%  Mediocre: 0% 
Is the programme 
motivating? 
Yes: 100%  No: 0% 
Do you conduct your 
exercises when you receive 
your reminder email? 
Yes: 25%  Partially: 17%  No: 58% 
Were you disturbed by your 
colleagues? 
Yes: 33%  No: 58%  N/A: 8% 
Would you permanently use 
the programme? 
Yes: 67%  No: 33% 
Were your workplace related 
health problems alleviated? 
Yes: 50%  No: 25%  N/A: 25% 
Would you recommend the 
programme? 
Yes: 92%  No: 8% 
 
Another challenge of these programs is that for some 
modules, such as exercises at the workplace, users might be 
embarrassed. However, only 33% felt disturbed by their 
colleagues. Moreover, 67% answered that they would 
permanently use the eWorkplaceHealth program. With 
regard to the (subjective) health results, 50% said that their 
problems were alleviated and only 25% felt no difference. 
Finally, 92% would recommend the program to others.  
Furthermore, an analysis of the individual respondent 
results reveals that two of the respondents that had not 
problems would not continue to use the program 
permanently. Despite the small number it might be an 
indication that prevention is not as popular and that only if 
problems are present, users are willing to engage which is in 
line with previous research [16]. What is more, those that 
had no back problems were also less motivated to conduct 
the exercises in a timely manner. Last, all of those that had 
problems would recommend the eWorkplaceHealth program 
to others. 
Open questions with regard to how such a program could 
be improved showed that some users would like to have 
more variety of exercises (the program provides 65 video 
tutorials). Moreover, some respondents would like get the 
same video tutorials as their colleagues in the same room so 
that they can conduct the exercises together in a team which 
might be a solution to the fact that users might feel disturbed 
or embarrassed by other colleagues. 50% of the respondents 
that felt disturbed/embarrassed requested to have the same 
exercises at the same time. One respondent suggested 
improving the written instructions (the video tutorials are 
without sound to avoid disturbing other colleagues).  
In summary, the findings indicate that users are very 
positive about the eWorkplaceHealth program. Most that had 
problems felt better after the test period. What is more all 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

respondents felt motivated which is in line with results of 
studies on web-based dietary that showed that the retention 
was significantly higher than for instance paper based 
interventions [19]. Also, almost all would recommend the 
program. 
Challenges prevail 
with 
regard 
to being 
embarrassed in front of colleagues.  
 
VI. 
 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
This paper set out to understand whether and how 
eWorkplaceHealth services can disrupt traditional businesses 
of providing workplace health. This study conceptually 
developed that eWorkplaceHealth programmes create new 
efficiencies and enable new approaches to providing health 
services [20]. Because eWorkplaceHealth programmes reach 
all employees and seem to be effective and motivating, they 
can have a game changing character for the industry [13]. 
Due to its novel approaches on all dimensions compared to 
the traditional business model it can possibly disrupt the 
industry [12].  
Interestingly, 
our 
study 
suggests 
that 
eWorkplaceHealth—due to its flexibility, low price point but 
most importantly comprehensiveness and effectiveness—
appears to be superior to traditional practices on most 
dimensions. In that sense eWorkplaceHealth appears to 
‘overshoot’ the product performance of traditional practices 
soon or even immediately (see Figure 1 below). This 
suggests that some disruptive innovation could overshoot the 
market right away, a phenomenon that needs further research 
but could tentatively be called ‘born overshooter’—similar to 
born globals in the international business literature. These 
findings are in contrast to findings in health education that 
suggest that video or eLearning services are inferior [21]. 
However, although eWorkplaceHealth has an educational 
element, it has different requirements and different targets.  
Despite the limitation of the small sample size and single 
case 
study, 
this 
exploratory 
study 
indicates 
that 
eWorkplaceHealth 
is 
accepted 
by 
users, 
improved 
(perceived) health conditions and was motivating. Thus, the 
conceptual and empirical results on eWorkplaceHealth 
illustrate that these programmes could disrupt the industry. 
What would accelerate the process would be more variety in 
the video tutorials and simultaneous exercises in offices—yet 
this needs to be validated in further research. Thus, 
eWorkplaceHealth may have the potential to disrupt the 
industry of traditional workplace health. Furthermore, 
eWorkplaceHealth programs can be a means of large 
organizations to provide workplace health support to all their 
employees. In order to avoid the innovator’s dilemma [15], 
traditional workplace health provider could adopt a strategy 
in which they offer eWorkplaceHealth as a complementary 
service.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I appreciate valuable comments by Sally Russell, 
Johannes Heering and four anonymous reviewers. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
C. Christensen, R. Bohmer, and J. Kenagy, “Will 
disruptive innovations cure health care?,” Harvard 
Business Review, no. Sept-Oct., p. e9, 2000. 
[2] 
D. Teece, “Business Models, Business Strategy and 
Innovation,” Long Range Planning, vol. 43, no. 2–3, pp. 
172–194, Apr. 2010. 
[3] 
T. Spil and B. Kijl, “E-health business models: from pilot 
project to successful deployment,” IBIMA Business 
Review, vol. 1, pp. 55–66, 2009. 
[4] 
A. Iluyemi and J. Briggs, “eHealth and Global Health: 
Investments Opportunities and Challenges for Industry in 
Developing Countries,” Electronic Healthcare, vol. 4, pp. 
182–185, 2009. 
[5] 
D. McGraw, J. X. Dempsey, L. Harris, and J. Goldman, 
“Privacy as an enabler, not an impediment: building trust 
into health information exchange.,” Health Affairs, vol. 
28, no. 2, pp. 416–427, 2009. 
[6] 
S. Shafer, H. Smith, and J. Linder, “The power of 
business models,” Business Horizons, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 
199–207, May 2005. 
[7] 
A. Osterwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C. L. Tucci, “Clarifying 
business models: Origins, present, and future of the 
concept,” Communications of the Association for 
Information Systems, vol. 16, pp. 1–25, 2005. 
[8] 
C. Zott and R. Amit, “The fit between product market 
strategy and business model: implications for firm 
performance,” Strategic Management Journal, vol. 29, 
no. 1, pp. 1–26, 2008. 
[9] 
M. Morris, M. Schindehutte, and J. Allen, “The 
entrepreneur’s business model: toward a unified 
perspective,” Journal of Business Research, vol. 58, no. 6, 
pp. 726–735, Jun. 2005. 
[10] 
C. Zott, R. Amit, and L. Massa, “The Business Model: 
Recent Developments and Future Research,” Journal of 
Management, vol. 37, pp. 1019–1042, May 2011. 
[11] 
R. Amit and C. Zott, “Value creation in E-business,” 
Strategic Management Journal, vol. 22, pp. 493–520, Jun. 
2001. 
[12] 
D. Mitchell and C. Coles, “The ultimate competitive 
advantage of continuing business model innovation,” 
Journal of Business Strategy, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 15–21, 
2003. 
[13] 
M. W. Johnson, C. M. Christensen, and H. Kagermann, 
“Reinventing your business model,” Harvard Business 
Review, vol. December, pp. 57–67, 2008. 
[14] 
R. Nidumolu, C. Prahalad, and M. Rangaswami, “Why 
sustainability is now the key driver of innovation,” 
Harvard Business Review, vol. 87, no. 9, pp. 56–64, 2009. 
[15] 
C. Christensen, The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New 
Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail. Boston, MA: 
Harvard Business School Press, 1997. 
[16] 
S. M. Kelders, J. E. W. C. Van Gemert-Pijnen, A. 
Werkman, N. Nijland, and E. R. Seydel, “Effectiveness of 
a Web-based intervention aimed at healthy dietary and 
physical activity behavior: a randomized controlled trial 
about users and usage.,” Journal of Medical Internet 
Research, vol. 13, no. 2, p. e32, Jan. 2011. 
[17] 
R. K. Yin, Case study research: Design and methods, 2nd 
ed. Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 2009. 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[18] 
K. Eisenhardt, “Building theories from case study 
research,” Academy of Management Review, vol. 14, no. 
4, pp. 532–550, 1989. 
[19] 
R. F. Cook, D. W. Billings, R. K. Hersch, A. S. Back, and 
A. Hendrickson, “A field test of a web-based workplace 
health promotion program to improve dietary practices, 
reduce stress, and increase physical activity: randomized 
controlled trial.,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, 
vol. 9, no. 2, p. e17, Jan. 2007. 
[20] 
R. Amit and C. Zott, “Value creation in E-business,” 
Strategic Management Journal, vol. 22, no. 6–7, pp. 493–
520, Jun. 2001. 
[21] 
C. M. Christensen and E. G. Armstrong, “Disruptive 
technologies: A credible threat to leading programs in 
continuing medical education?,” Journal of Continuing 
Education in the Health Professions, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 
69–80, Jan. 1998.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Screenshots of the eWorkplaceHealth program OfficePhysio (Top left: startpage; top right: health information email; bottom left: dashboard 
including customization; bottom right: video exercise) 
 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

