Guiding People with Early Dementia Home with the TalkMeHome Service 
Jan M. Nautaa, Lammie van den Boscha, Cristian Hesselmanb, Jeffrey Brangertc, Martine de Jongc, Marcel Roestd, 
Matti Grootd, Marike Hettingaa 
a ICT-Innovations in Healthcare, Windesheim University of Applied Sciences, Zwolle, The Netherlands 
bNovay, Enschede, The Netherlands 
cCarint Reggeland Groep, Hengelo, The Netherlands 
dVerklizan BV, Sliedrecht, The Netherlands 
jm.nauta@windesheim.nl, l.vanden.bosch@windesheim.nl, cristian.hesselman@novay.nl, 
j.brangert@carintreggelandgroep.nl, m.dejong@carintreggelandgroep.nl, meroest@verklizan.nl, mgroot@verklizan.com, 
m.hettinga@windesheim.nl 
 
 
 
Abstract—People suffering from mild dementia may get lost 
during a walk, which can be dangerous for them and adds to 
the anxiety felt by their informal caregivers. TalkMeHome is a 
new service that allows these people to get home safely in such 
situations using their mobile phone. They can call a remote 
care professional who will guide the lost person home. To 
accomplish this, the professional caregiver is able to follow the 
person’s GPS-location on a map and in Google Streetview. 
This paper reports on four experiments with TalkMeHome to 
assess the effectiveness and user experience of the service. In 
all four cases the participants were guided home satisfactorily, 
even under suboptimal conditions. The experiments further 
revealed that talking people home is demanding for the care 
professional and that they need adequate ICT support. The 
contribution of our work is that we evaluated this new service 
with real patients and real professional care givers in a semi-
controlled environment.   
Keywords-dementia; 
location-based 
services; 
global 
positioning system (GPS); remote care; lost person; care 
professional; user test.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
It has been estimated that in 2010 there were 35.6 million 
people living with dementia worldwide. Expectations are 
that this number will increase to 65.7 million by 2030 and 
115.4 million by 2050 [1]. For people suffering from 
dementia, out-of-door mobility is an essential element of 
their quality of life [2]. However, these people are at 
considerable risk of getting lost during a walk, which can 
lead to hazardous situations [3, 4]. Moreover, the thought 
that their loved ones could be involved in an accident as a 
result of their disease adds to the burden felt by informal 
caregivers. To protect people suffering from dementia and to 
relieve the anxiety experienced by their informal caregivers, 
a number of interventions can be performed, such as locking 
doors to prevent a person with dementia (PwD) from leaving 
the house [5]. Such measures are however very disruptive 
and reduce the quality of life of people with dementia. 
It has been recognized that the use of the Global 
Positioning System (GPS) may help to solve the problems 
experienced by caregivers and people with early dementia in 
a less disruptive manner [6]. Using this type of technology, 
the PwD typically carries a GPS tracking device. At home, 
an informal caregiver may then log into a secure 
environment (a website) to determine the location of the 
carrier of the GPS device [7, 8]. Some of the available 
trackers can be switched to two-way voice communications, 
which are commonly activated using the alarm button on the 
device. In case somebody suffering from dementia is unable 
to find the way home, an informal caregiver may, after 
obtaining the location of the PwD, go outside and bring the 
loved one home.  
Despite the obvious benefits of the application of 
tracking devices (increased mobility for PwDs, fewer 
worries for informal caregivers), this technology has several 
shortcomings. For example, in many cases the main 
caregiver is an elderly person, often a spouse [1], who may 
not be able to physically get the PwD and take him home. 
Moreover, other informal caregivers such as adult children 
may not always be available because they live too far away 
or because they are bound by other obligations. Finally, not 
all caregivers may feel comfortable using new technology, 
such as a secure website.  
TalkMeHome [9] is a new mobile service that overcomes 
these problems through a healthcare professional (see Figure 
1). This person  works from a care center and is specialized 
in remote care for people with dementia. PwDs can call the 
professional from their mobile phone when they are lost, 
which results in an “alarm” on the computer system that the 
professional uses. The professional accepts the call and talks 
someone home by providing instructions on how to walk 
(“turn left here”, “turn right at next intersection”). To 
accomplish this, the professional‟s computer system provides 
a special dashboard that shows the PwD‟s location in real-
time on a map and in Google Streetview. TalkMeHome 
works on a wide variety of mobile phones, as long as they 
have a GPS receiver and a UMTS data connection to stream 
the PwD‟s coordinates to the care professional. The service 
is primarily intended for people with early-stage dementia 
who live at home. TalkMeHome is a commercial service that 
PwDs will pay for. TalkMeHome also allows informal 
caregivers to follow the location of a PwD, but this part of 
the service out of scope for our work. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
Figure 1. Main actors in the TalkMeHome service. 
 
In this paper, we discuss the evaluation of TalkMeHome. 
The goal of the evaluation was to assess the effectiveness 
and user experience of this novel service before it will be 
made available commercially and to investigate how PwDs 
and care professionals experience the service. 
The novelty of our work is that we evaluated the service 
with real PwDs and real professional care givers in a semi-
controlled environment. In recent years, a number of pilot 
studies on the use of GPS for dementia patients have been 
carried out [7, 8, 10-13], but not for a service like 
TalkMeHome. These studies do however endorse the 
potential benefits of the use of GPS technology. At the same 
time, they also point out that the technology used should 
function sufficiently reliably. Furthermore, the need for a 
very simple tracking device is stressed [7] plus that these 
devices are mainly considered suitable for patients in the 
early stage of their illness [10]. It has been shown that not 
only informal caregivers who have experience with the use 
of tracking devices feel positive about the application of GPS 
technology, but formal caregivers as well [11]. Another 
application of GPS technology for lost people is the use of an 
adapted TomTom, which they can use to find the way back 
home [12, 13].  
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. 
Section II discusses the user requirements that served as an 
input for the development of the service. Section III presents 
the technical setup for our experiments, followed by the 
applied method in Section IV. Section V gives an overview 
of the results of our evaluation, followed by a discussion in 
Section VI. Section VII concludes the paper.  
 
II. 
USER REQUIREMENTS 
Before TalkMeHome was developed, we identified what 
the PwD (a possibly lost person) and the care professional 
guiding the PwD home would require from the service. To 
find these requirements, desk research was conducted, 
including a literature study and writing scenarios. Moreover 
a senior care professional was consulted, an employee of 
“Carint Reggeland”, which is a care organization in the East 
of the Netherlands.  
Also the researchers carried out a number of small 
experiments in which conventional trackers were used, 
combined with an additional mobile phone to simulate the 
anticipated implementation as close as possible [14].  
A. Persons with Dementia 
The requirements of the PwDs pertained to the mobile 
device they would have to use. Three options for such a 
device were discerned:  
 
A conventional tracking device, which enables the 
localization of the PwD as well as two-way voice 
communication.  
 
The combination of a mobile phone (not necessarily 
equipped with GPS) and a separate tracking device 
which the PwD may, for instance, wear on a belt.  
 
A mobile phone using the 3G standard (UMTS) and 
GPS.  
To the best of our knowledge, no conventional tracking 
device was available which allowed voice communication 
and localization updates simultaneously, a conditio sine qua 
non for the TalkMeHome service. For that reason, the first 
option was rejected. The second option was regarded less 
desirable because in this case the informal caregiver must 
ensure that the PwD carries two devices, and both need to be 
charged as well, which was considered too cumbersome. 
Hence we chose the third option. An advantage of using a 
mobile phone is that such a device is not stigmatizing as 
nowadays almost everyone carries a mobile phone. 
Especially PwDs using a walker may want to carry the phone 
on a strap around the neck. For the same reason hands-free 
operation of the phone must be possible. It goes without 
saying that the mobile phone used should be as simple and as 
light as possible.  
The second point of attention from the PwD‟s point of 
view were the GPS location updates. The aforementioned 
experiments with existing trackers showed that the typical 
interval of one minute between two GPS location updates 
was too long because even with a walker, walking velocities 
of elderly people may range from 0.9 to 1.1 m/s [12].  
B. Care Professionals 
The care professional who guides a lost person home 
must have a map showing the position of the person. This 
map should be extended with images of the surroundings of 
the guided person, when available, so that it becomes easier 
to formulate adequate instructions. A trace of the path taken 
thus far by the PwD as well as a route planner suitable for 
pedestrians were seen as needed to further support the 
professional in guiding the PwD home. These new functions 
should augment the basic functions available to a care 
professional, such as being able to answer a call (i.e., handle 
an alarm) and get (medical) information on the PwD who is 
calling.  
III. 
TECHNICAL SETUP 
We ran the 
experiments 
with a prototype 
of 
TalkMeHome, which integrates into the Universal Alarm 
Receiver (UMO) from Verklizan, a company based in the 
Netherlands. The UMO is an existing commercial product 
for care centers that is widely in use across Europe, but as 
yet without support for guiding people home. It provides an 
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

elaborate dashboard for care professionals to handle alarms, 
which we extended with TalkMeHome-specific functions. 
For the location updates, we used the services of FindWhere, 
also a Dutch company. We connected their location server to 
the UMO, thus making real-time location information 
available to care professionals.  
Figure 2 depicts the implementation of the TalkMeHome 
service in more detail. The most important components are:  
 
A dashboard, used by the care professional to guide 
PwDs home. When an alarm is received, the 
dashboard displays (medical) information about the 
PwD as well as the location of the PwD. For this 
purpose, Google Maps with Street View was used. 
The dashboard also enables the voice connection 
with the PwD.  
 
A smartphone, used by the PwD to make contact 
with the care professional. For the test described 
below a Nokia 5230 was selected because of its 
uncomplicated user interface and favorable pricing. 
FindWhere‟s 
application 
iFindWhere 
(version 
6.07.05) was installed on the smartphone and the red 
button of the Nokia served as the alarm button to be 
used by the PwD in order to establish the contact.  
 
A location server, which keeps track of the position 
of each smartphone, provided that the smartphone is 
registered properly. In the test version of the 
software used to update the GPS location, the time 
interval between two updates was set to 18 seconds.  
 
IV. 
METHOD 
The goal of our evaluation was to answer two questions: 
(1) how effective is the TalkMeHome service in guiding 
PwDs home and (2) what is the user experience during the 
process of talking someone home, both for PwDs and for 
care professionals. 
A. Participants 
As has been noted by other researchers, getting 
participants (people with dementia) was not easy [10]. The 
customer database of Carint Reggeland was consulted, 
medical coworkers were invited to recommend participants 
and local newspapers published information about the 
service tested. In addition, we used a set of inclusion criteria 
to determine if PwDs fall in the target group of 
TalkMeHome (see below).  
Eventually four participants took part in the evaluation, 
as well as the two care professionals (Figure 3, taken from 
[15]). All participants came from the region of Twente, in the 
Eastern part of the Netherlands.  
The inclusion criteria we used for the participants were:  
 
Suffering from mild dementia.  
 
Lives more or less independently at home. 
 
Is quite able to follow instructions.  
 
Must be able to use the available smartphone.  
 
Is able to walk a longer distance.  
 
Signed an Informed Consent (and the informal care 
giver as well). 
 
 
Figure 2. Organization of the TalkMeHome service. 
 
Two experienced care professionals took part in the test. 
Both of them were employees of Carint Reggeland, one of 
whom also provided input during the user requirements 
phase (see Section II). It should be noted that prior to the 
tests the care professionals had not had an opportunity to 
gain experience in guiding a person with mild dementia 
home.  
 
B. Talking Someone Home 
For the actual evaluations, each participant was visited at 
home. Then it was determined first whether the participant 
met the inclusion criteria. If this was the case, the participant 
was invited to go out for a walk, accompanied by two 
researchers from our team. After walking a certain distance 
(typically 500 m.) the actual test began by pushing the alarm 
button, simulating the PwD being “lost”. This established a 
connection with the care professional. After that, the care 
professional guided the participant back home. One of the 
researchers observed the participant while the main 
responsibility of a second researcher was to ensure the 
safety, for instance regarding traffic, of the participant. 
 
 
Figure 3. One of the care professionals guiding someone home.  
 
While the participants were being talked home, data was 
collected in a number of ways. First, the observations made 
were written down. Moreover, the conversation between the 
participant and the care professional was digitally recorded. 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

After talking someone home, a short interview with each of 
the participants was conducted asking their opinion about the 
ease of use of the smartphone, their feelings regarding safety 
and security, and their motivation to use a smartphone. After 
each TalkMeHome session, the care professional also 
completed a questionnaire containing questions about the 
hardware and software used (e.g. the experienced usability), 
work load (e.g. whether it was possible to do other tasks 
while guiding somebody home), how the communication 
with the participant was experienced, and finally how 
comfortable the care professional felt when guiding a person 
home. After completion of all tests, the data were assembled, 
analysed and discussed by the researchers. In a second 
meeting the views held by the two participating care 
professionals were put forward.  
V. 
RESULTS 
In this section, we present a short summary of the results 
of the four TalkMeHome sessions. We discuss the 
effectiveness of the service and the user experience in 
Section VI. 
A. Participant #1 
The first participant was an elderly lady in her seventies. 
Together with her husband she lives in a small town with 
7000 inhabitants. She was diagnosed with Alzheimer four 
years ago. Sometimes her right-left discrimination is poor. 
Establishing a connection between participant and care 
professional took place without difficulties. But after a few 
minutes the transmission of GPS locations came to a halt, 
most likely due to insufficient UMTS coverage. However, 
this participant was able to describe her surroundings 
accurately, including street names and characteristic features 
such as buildings and parking lots. Based on this 
information, the map and corresponding satellite images, the 
care professional was able to satisfactorily guide the 
participant through her home town. Only once the participant 
took the wrong direction but this was corrected by the care 
professional after 20 meters. Right-left confusion occurred 
only once. The care professional knew on which wrist the 
participant wore her watch, which could have been helpful if 
necessary. 
B. Participant #2 
 The second participant lives on her own in a larger city 
(130,000 inhabitants). She has been known to suffer from 
Alzheimer‟s disease for some time. She walks with a walker 
and for that reason the smartphone was used hands-free. 
Despite this use of the smartphone, the communication 
between the participant and the care professional went 
smoothly during the test. Only once the participant took the 
wrong direction but again this could be corrected after 20 
meters. The map used, however, turned out to be incomplete 
and inaccurate as the apartment of the participant was not on 
the map yet. But as she was familiar with the immediate 
vicinity of her home she still could be guided home 
successfully.  
C. Participant #3 
The third participant lives in a city of more than 70,000 
inhabitants. She has suffered from dementia for some years. 
She already got lost once.  
This test started under the trees of a small park. GPS 
locations got through to the care center only after a restart. 
The walk began with a straight road of about 100 meters 
with no crossroads. Because apparently no information was 
needed, the care professional stopped talking for a while. 
Then, somewhat confused, the participant stopped walking. 
When the conversation was resumed, the participant 
responded very well to instructions. Difficulties were 
observed at a road construction site. It took a while before 
the care professional understood the situation. After that, she 
guided the participant home taking a detour.  
D. Participant #4 
The fourth and final participant lives with his spouse in a 
village (over 7,000 inhabitants). He has been diagnosed with 
a mild form of Alzheimer‟s disease by a gerontologist.  
Again, at the start of the walk, there were some 
difficulties establishing the connection between the care 
professional and the participant. Also, the participant broke 
the connection once unintentionally. As in the previous tests 
no technical problems were encountered after that. Contrary 
to the findings of the other three tests, this participant 
sometimes gave erroneous information, such as incorrect 
street names, which made the care professional‟s task harder, 
particularly since for this area Street View was not available. 
This participant interrupted the walk for a short chat with a 
friend. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
We discuss the results of our evaluation in terms of the 
two questions we are addressing: (1) how effective is 
TalkMeHome and (2) what is the user experience during the 
process of talking someone home. We also discuss the 
limitations of our results. 
A. Effectiveness 
In all four tests the participants were guided home 
satisfactorily. The start of a walk posed a specific problem: 
as the viewing direction of the participant was unknown, and 
the participant was not walking yet, the meaning of the terms 
left and right were not clear. In the experiments this was 
solved by asking the participant simply to start walking. If 
the direction turned out to be wrong, the participant was 
subsequently asked to turn around. Apart from this issue 
only a couple of easily corrected mistakes were observed 
during the tests.  
The experiments showed that conditions for the 
TalkMeHome service are optimal if three conditions are met: 
a reliable map is available, GPS locations are updated 
frequently (preferably with interval of less than 10 seconds, 
as experiments showed), and PwDs are giving a good 
description of their surroundings during a walk. However, if 
only two of the three conditions are met, guiding a PwD 
home may still be possible. For example, the PwD‟s 
description is not really necessary as guiding a PwD home 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

based on a reliable map and GPS locations turned out to be 
possible as well. Moreover, it is still possible to guide a PwD 
home if the update of GPS locations should (temporarily) 
come to a halt, provided an initial location is available, the 
PwD is able to describe his or her surroundings sufficiently, 
and a reliable map is available, Finally, a small difference 
between reality and the map used is not necessarily 
insurmountable. 
The test showed the value of relevant information, such 
as on which hand a (wedding) ring is worn in case of a right-
left confusion. It should be investigated how such 
information can be made available to the care professional 
and how it can be kept up-to-date.  
B. User Experience 
The contact between the PwD and the care professional 
was found to be good as became apparent from the 
completed questionnaires and the digitally recorded 
conversations. There were few misunderstandings between 
them. If possible, the participant and the care professional 
had a chat, for example about the weather conditions, which 
contributed to a relaxed atmosphere while maintaining the 
necessary contact.  
The evaluation further revealed that guiding somebody 
home is a demanding task for the care professional because a 
great deal of information needs to be processed quickly by 
them. As there is always a certain time delay the care 
professionals should anticipate the situation ahead. A higher 
update frequency for the GPS locations resulting in a more 
fluid motion, and more precise locations would be helpful. 
There appeared to be little time for other tasks, such as 
looking up additional information about the PwD. This 
suggests that the user interface of the dashboard needs to be 
optimized for TalkMeHome. 
C. Limitations 
The focus of the evaluation described in this paper is the 
actual process of guiding people home. How the 
TalkMeHome service will be incorporated into everyday life 
of the PwD, including the question whether PwDs are able to 
contact the care center autonomously, was not taken into 
consideration. A PwD who has difficulty to contact the care 
center may benefit from alternative scenarios, for instance a 
scenario in which a worried informal caregiver contacts the 
care professional, who then establishes the contact with the 
PwD.  
The PwDs who participated in the evaluation were not 
really lost, but accompanied by researchers who paid 
attention to safety issues. It is unclear how PwDs would react 
to the TalkMeHome service in a more stressful situation. The 
meeting 
with 
the 
care 
professionals 
revealed 
the 
professionals‟ concerns regarding these matters. How should 
they act if a PwD is unable to respond properly? How can an 
unsafe situation (e.g. in traffic) be avoided? Issues regarding 
their (legal) responsibility should be looked into.  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We discussed TalkMeHome, a novel mobile service that 
allows people with early-stage dementia to get home safely 
when they are lost. With the single press of a button, they 
can call a remote care who is specialized in (remote) care for 
people with mild dementia. This care professional uses the 
TalkMeHome dashboard to follow the lost person‟s location 
on a map and to provide instructions (directions) for this 
person how to get home safely. The service‟s added value is 
that it increases the quality of life of people with mild  
dementia (increased level of mobility) as well as that of the 
informal care giver (fewer worries). It also allows people to 
live at home longer, which reduces the load on intramural 
care facilities. 
We evaluated the service with four people with early-
stage dementia. Our goal was to assess how effective 
TalkMeHome is and how the users (PwDs and care 
professionals) would experience it. The novelty of our work 
is that it involved real PwDs and real professional care givers 
in a semi-controlled environment  
As for effectiveness, all four participants were guided 
home satisfactorily, technical imperfections set aside. Only a 
few easily corrected mistakes were noticed. The evaluations 
further showed that guiding a PwD home is possible even 
under suboptimal conditions (unreliable information of the 
PwD, missing location updates or an incomplete map). This 
suggests that TalkMeHome is an effective service, which 
increases our confidence that it can be made available as a 
commercial service. It also shows that a technology that is 
not 100% accurate can still provide an added value. 
Regarding the experiences of the users, both PwDs and care 
professionals, we conclude that the contact between both was 
easy but guiding somebody home is a demanding task for a 
care professional.  
Additional research may focus on optimizing the use of 
the service in everyday life as well as alternative scenarios.  
In terms of user experience, our work revealed the 
difficulty of the care professional‟s task. This suggests that 
the user interface of the dashboard needs to be optimized for 
TalkMeHome and that it is of paramount importance to offer 
proper education for care professionals, both in regular 
education and continuing training. With an aging population 
the demand for appropriate support will only increase. For 
this reason the research group „ICT-Innovations in 
Healthcare‟ will take the initiative for a „Skills Lab‟, a 
laboratory equipped with the necessary hardware and 
software to facilitate research and training with regard to the 
skills of a care professional, for instance in terms of 
protocols for care professionals to guide someone home. 
This research and training will not be limited to the actual 
TalkMeHome service presented in this paper. The Skills Lab 
will support the necessary research and training facilities.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
TalkMeHome 
was 
developed 
by 
Novay, 
Carint 
Reggeland Groep, Windesheim University of Applied 
Sciences, and Verklizan B.V. in cooperation with 
FindWhere. The project TalkMeHome is part of the 
innovation program for ICT-based services of the Province 
of Overijssel. The project website is at www.talkmehome.nl. 
We thank Toke Bonekamp, Johannes de Boer, Henri ter 
Hofte, and Rob Hermans for their contributions. Above all, 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

we wish to express our gratitude to our test participants and 
their informal caregivers for their participation in the project. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Wimo and M. Prince, "World Alzheimer Report 
2010," ed: Alzheimer‟s Disease International, 2010. 
[2] 
N. Shoval, G. K. Auslander, T. Freytag, R. Landau, F. 
Oswald, U. Seidl, H.-W. Wahl, S. Werner, and J. Heinik, 
"The use of advanced tracking technologies for the 
analysis of mobility in Alzheimer's disease and related 
cognitive diseases," BMC Geriatrics, vol. 8, 2008. 
[3] 
R. McShane, K. Gedling, J. Keene, C. Fairburn, R. 
Jacoby, and T. Hope, "Getting Lost in Dementia: A 
Longitudinal 
Study 
of 
a 
Behavioral 
Symptom," 
International Psychogeriatrics, vol. 10, pp. 253-260, 
1998. 
[4] 
M. A. Rowe, S. S. Vandeveer, C. A. Greenblum, C. N. 
List, R. M. Fernandez, N. E. Mixson, and H. C. Ahn, 
"Persons with dementia missing in the community: Is it 
wandering or something unique?," BMC Geriatrics, vol. 
11, 2011. 
[5] 
S. M. C. Rasquin, C. Willems, S. De Vlieger, R. P. J. 
Geers, and M. Soede, "The use of technical devices to 
support 
outdoor 
mobility 
of 
dementia 
patients," 
Technology & Disability, vol. 19, pp. 113-120, 2007. 
[6] 
C.-C. Lin, M.-J. Chiu, C.-C. Hsiao, R.-G. Lee, and Y.-S. 
Tsai, "Wireless Health Care Service System for Elderly  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
With Dementia," IEEE Transactions on Information 
Technology in Biomedicine, vol. 10, pp. 696-704, 2006. 
[7] 
J. Van der Leeuw, C. Willems, and F. Van der Heide, 
"Zoeken en gevonden worden?! De inzet van gps voor 
mensen met dementie," ed: Vilans, 2009. 
[8] 
F. Miskelly, "Electronic tracking of patients with 
dementia 
and 
wandering 
using 
mobile 
phone 
technology," Age & Ageing, vol. 34, pp. 497-499, 2005. 
[9] 
C. 
Hesselman. 
http://www.talkmehome.nl/ 
.  
Retrieved: November, 2011 
[10] 
S. Horjus, B. Willemse, and A. M. Pot, "Zorgen op 
afstand," ed: Trimbos Instituut, 2009. 
[11] 
M. Runneboom, "GPS technologie: een ondersteuning 
voor 
verzorgers 
van 
mensen 
met 
dementie?," 
Masterthesis, Psychologie, Universiteit Twente, 2010. 
[12] 
J. De Boer, "Auditory Navigation for Persons with Mild 
Dementia," Master thesis, Faculty of behavioral sciences, 
University of Twente, Enschede, 2008. 
[13] 
M. Hettinga, J. De Boer, E. Goldberg, and F. Moelaert, 
"Navigation for People with Mild Dementia," in Medical 
Informatics in a United and Healthy Europe, K.-P. 
Adlassnig, B. Blobel, J. Mantas, and I. Masic, Eds., ed: 
IOS Press, 2009, pp. 428–432. 
[14] 
H. Ter Hofte, L. Van den Bosch, M. De Jong, and J. 
Nauta, "Gebruikerseisen TalkMeHome," ed: internal 
report, 2010. 
[15] 
TalkMeHome. 
Veilig 
op 
pad 
met 
dementie.  
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IDq7YpxLcVY. 
Retrieved: November, 2011.  
 
  
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

