A Personalised Lifestyle Management Framework for Decision Support System in 
Mental Health
Sakirulai Olufemi Isiaq  
Department of Computing 
Southampton Solent University 
Southampton, United Kingdom 
email:femi.isiaq@solent.ac.uk 
Katie Hamling 
Department of Computing 
Southampton Solent University 
Southampton, United Kingdom 
email:katie.hamling@solent.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract— According to the World Health Organisation 
(WHO), over 600 million people suffer a form of mental health 
associated symptoms and about 350 million people are affected 
by depression, worldwide. Although symptoms such as 
restlessness, isolation and lack of confidence among many 
others have been attributed to the causes of depression, its 
alleviation has proven challenging over the years. Therefore, 
depression has become one of the most challenging health 
difficulty to manage in recent times. While common depression 
alleviation techniques include antidepressant medications and 
various therapies, such as Cognitive Behaviors Therapy (CBT), 
this work embraces a technology-based lifestyle management 
approach to effectively manage depression, in terms of 
Diagnosis, Prevention and Alleviation (DPA). A robust 
iterative-Documents 
and 
Stakeholders 
Analysis 
for 
Development (i-DaSAD) methodology was adopted to develop a 
Framework for Lifestyle and Depression Management – 
FLaDM.  This framework underpins a decision support system 
that revealed its suitability for the development of lifestyle 
management system for depression, particularly in the area of 
early diagnosis, prevention and alleviation. 
Keywords - eHealth; stakeholders; depression management; 
diagnosis; prevention; alleviation; i-DaSAD; FLaDM. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In recent years, mental health conditions have 
increasingly become a reckoning factor. In the United States, 
one in five adults (44.7 million in 2016) suffers a form of 
mental health disorder [1] i.e., a failing of certain aspects of 
human health, such as intelligence, imagination and thought. 
Similarly, according to EPIBUL [2],  one in five residents 
has experienced some common form of mental issues during 
their lifetime.  
Recent records have shown between 7 and 12 per cent of 
the adult population lives with mental health maladies such 
as depression and anxiety and a significant proportion of 
these sufferers do not get any form of intervention. 
Currently,  about 322,000,000 people suffer from depression 
and 264,000,000 people experience anxiety worldwide [3]. 
By 2020, depression has been predicted to be the second 
most impactful condition with estimated annual mental 
illness cost of about 6 trillion USD by 2030, thereby, 
doubling its cost in 2010 [4]. In developed nations, 
depression has not only become one of the most common 
health disorder but it is also responsible for a greater burden 
of disability than any other cause [5]. Currently, depression 
is responsible for more loss of years at work than any other 
disability or health conditions. By 2026, it is expected to cost 
up to 3 billion USD in England [4]-[6]. 
As the demand for mental health treatment becomes 
higher, the gap between treatment and accessibility is 
increasingly becoming wider, estimated between 35% and 
50% [7]. Although a significant number of mental health 
conditions remained widely undiagnosed and untreated, the 
causes and alleviations techniques are not unknown. Moreso, 
only fewer than half of those diagnosed receive treatment 
due to reasons substantiated to stigma, ineffective therapies 
and inadequate access to mental health supports and 
resources amongst other reasons.  
Conventionally, the diagnosis of mental health disorders 
such as depression involves the utilisation of tools like the 
DSM-5 [8] criteria by healthcare practitioners (GP or a 
psychiatrist) to determine the presence of depression 
symptoms. Subsequently, medications and/or prescriptions 
are recommended as appropriate. However, more than half 
of the world’s population lives in a country with two 
psychiatrists per hundred thousand people [9]. In additions, 
other diagnostic tools such as the Beck Depression Inventory 
(BDI) [10] requires a level of sophistication (minimum of 
fifth or sixth grade) to sufficiently comprehend the tool items 
[11]. Besides, a clinical study conducted in 2006 about 
conventional treatment indicated common antidepressants 
produce responses in just under half of the participants and 
was only able to achieve 28% full remission [12]. 
Conversely, effective lifestyle changes and management 
have proven to lift people out of mental health conditions 
such as depression without the possibility of reoccurrence or 
known side effect. Since the demand for mental health 
treatment clearly outnumbers the available practitioners, the 
demand for support tools and/or potent approach of 
treatment remains undoubtedly imperative. 
The recorded advances in technology have been 
influencing the pivotal role played by technology in the daily 
management of human activities. Perhaps, it is not improper 
to 
consider 
technological 
approaches 
for 
proactive 
management of human mental health states. For example, 
smartphone technology combines mobile communication 
and computation in a handheld device, facilitating mobile 
computing as a point of care [13]. Nowadays, mobile devices 
and the internet facilitate different health activities and 
communication online. For instance, a computer-based CBT 
program via the internet has proven to be clinically effective 
just like face to face [7]. Therefore, this approach is 
becoming increasingly popular due to associated benefits 
that include the ability to reach larger audiences with low 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

cost among others[14]. Nevertheless, the lack of known 
technological standards raises potential questions about the 
reliability and acceptability of this approach. For example, 
online tests and BDI for depression face difficulties such as 
exaggeration or misunderstanding, which can sway diagnosis 
thus, constituting a negative effect. This paper proposed a 
research-oriented Framework for Lifestyle and Depression 
Management - FLaDM to eliminate such anomalies. The 
framework is based on a robust i-DaSAD methodology, 
which considers stakeholders and other components 
necessary for the development of a personalised support 
system for depression management. The remainder of this 
paper is divided into sections as follows: Section II covers 
related work while Section III and IV discuss i-DaSAD 
methodology and the framework (FLaDM) respectively. The 
framework was evaluated using a developed decision support 
system in section V, while the conclusion and future work 
are presented in Section VI. 
II. RELATED WORK 
Easy accessibility and affordability increase the 
deployment of mobile devices for the management of mental 
health conditions. Mobile devices now play valuable roles in 
regular face-to-face therapy [7] making such service 
accessible from anywhere at any time. Evidence emerging 
indicates that psychotherapy delivery via video conferencing 
and telephone gives equivalent efficacy to face-to-face 
delivery [15]. Therefore, with fewer psychiatrists indicated 
in Section I, sufferers of mental health conditions may access 
psychotherapy treatments anytime from any part of the 
world. Over the years, significant advances have been 
recorded in the application of technology for health 
management and decision-making. For example, the 
traditional approach of measuring blood alcohol, nicotine 
and vitamin D levels will soon be substituted with other 
technological advances in the near future. Although yet to be 
widely adopted, devices such as PROOF alcohol tracking 
wearable [16], BACtrack alcohol tracker [17], SmartStop 
wearable device [18], and Chrono Band [19] are gaining 
prominence in carrying out these activities. 
In recent times, internet-based CBT protocols are 
becoming more prominent for treating common mental 
disorders [14] and have proven impactful and useful, 
particularly in reaching out to a larger number of people. In 
addition, behavioural intervention technologies (BITs) - a 
technological application of behavioural and psychological 
intervention to address behavioural, cognitive and affective 
targets - are commonly used to support physical and 
behavioural mental health [15]. More recently, mobile 
applications are used to trigger momentary interventions to 
assist mental health candidates in difficult and stressful 
situations, particularly when treatment is urgent. To 
expressly explain the technological applications of lifestyle 
management in terms of Diagnosis, Prevention and 
Alleviation (DPA) of mental health, this work laid emphasis 
on depression as a case study. While various depression 
applications are readily available for users, many are less 
robust in terms of managing depression symptoms. 
Importantly, many depression applications are prone to the 
risk of misdiagnosis causing the users a potential health 
retrogression through incorrect health management. 
A few of the highly rated and readily available 
applications include Depression Test [20], which presents 
users with diagnosis and progress tracking functionalities. 
While Moodtrack diary [21] and Depression screening test 
[22] allows activities progress tracks and diagnosis 
respectively, applications, such as Pacifica [23] and Relieve 
depression PRO [24] provide prevention and alleviation 
functionalities, although without diagnosis or personalisation 
features. To the best of our knowledge, most applications 
have not been able to successfully combine all the necessary 
aspects of lifestyle management in terms of Diagnosis, 
Prevention, Alleviation, Personalisation and Tracking, 
DPA/PT. Hence, our proposition of a Framework for 
Lifestyle and Depression Management - FLaDM as a 
standard framework for the development of a depression 
management decision support system. Following, Section III 
explains iterative-Document and Stakeholders Analysis 
Development, i-DaSAD, methodology adopted for the 
development of FLaDM framework. 
III. ITERATIVE-DOCUMENT AND STAKEHOLDER ANALYSIS 
DEVELOPMENT (I-DASAD)  
To adequately replicate the process of development, 
study methods need to be clearly defined. Kothari [25] 
highlighted various methodologies including descriptive 
versus analytical, quantitative versus qualitative, and 
conceptual versus empirical among others. This work 
considered a mixed-method approach that combines 
elements of multiple methodologies from the initiation 
phase of defining a generic area of interest, to the final 
phase of artefact development. Document analysis and 
stakeholder analysis were carried out in conjunction with 
other scientific methods to develop the FlaDM artefact. The 
methodology combines different suitable techniques or 
methods in each of its five phases to derive a robust artefact. 
The first phase of the methodology, defining a generic area 
of interest, is explained as follows. 
A. Defining Generic Area of Interest (G-AoI) 
The i-DaSAD methodology commences with the 
identification of a generic area-of-interest. This generic area 
of interest is usually instigated by investigators' curiosity, 
research questions or matters arising that require resolutions. 
For instance, an area of interest can be as general as 'mental 
health' triggered by questions such as: why is mental health 
becoming increasingly prevalent? A substantial study of 
literature is expected at this stage to build a context around 
the history and state-of-the-art of the topic in question. 
Document analysis including publications, primary and 
secondary research and white papers certainly leads to the 
definition of a specific area-of-interest. For instance, 
exploring the body of knowledge about mental health can be 
narrowed to an area of focus such as eating disorder, anxiety 
or depression. An output of this phase is usually specifics of 
the general area of interest. Although there can be multiple 
specifics from a general interest, each specific are treated 
independently to improve clarity. For example, while mental 
health is a generic area of interest, its specifics include 
depression and anxiety among others. These specifics are 
examined independently in separate iterations. 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

B. Evaluating Specific Area of Interest (S-AoI) 
In this phase, further document exploration is conducted 
on the identified specific area-of-interests. For example, if 
the area of interest has been narrowed down to depression, 
barriers, symptoms and alleviation of depression amongst 
other attributes are evaluated at this stage. An outcome of 
this phase is a comprehensive knowledge and data about the 
specifics. Data acquisition and statistical analysis about the 
specific area of focus are also carried out at this stage. For 
instance, statistical analysis of secondary data about 
depression from multiple sources is carried out at this stage. 
A pyramidal approach is adopted, i.e., having more general 
information at the bottom up. For example, if depression is 
the main focus, at the bottom will be statistics about 
depression followed by the type, method of diagnosis, 
prevention and alleviation and associated limitations 
respectively. Having comprehensive knowledge about the 
specific area-of-interest will help accomplish a robust 
analysis in the following phase (Identify Stakeholders, 
Problems & Solutions). Statistics about depression, 
diagnosis, 
prevention, 
alleviation 
and 
associated 
technologies were identified at this stage. 
C. Identifying Stakeholders, Problems & Solutions 
Further data analysis is performed on the outcome of the 
preceding phase  (evaluating specific area-of-interest).  A 
stakeholder analysis is conducted to identify all stakeholders. 
Problems and potential solutions about the specific area-of-
interest are then derived from the previous phase of data 
collection. For example, in our analysis, we identified 
stakeholder categories to include poor people, students, 
career, medical practitioner among others. Following is the 
identification of potential solutions for the identified 
stakeholders' problems. For instance, one of the identified 
problems derived from the knowledge evaluation is 
stigmatisation and a corresponding solution is the increase of 
awareness and making the process of contacts and supports 
easier. Techniques such as root cause analysis are employed 
to identify similarities between symptoms and causes in 
order to define the hierarchy of importance. Findings in 
terms of problems and solutions will then be validated using 
tools such as questionnaires, surveys, interviews or focus 
group amongst others to improve stakeholders' involvement. 
In this case, participants regarded as potential stakeholders 
were asked to complete a 'seventeen-question' survey via an 
online medium. Results of the survey were used to 
authenticate the designed stakeholders, problems and 
potential solutions about depression. The validation exercise 
of this phase provides clarity on the level of the importance 
of the stakeholders, problems and potential solutions. 
D. Mapping Stakeholders, Problems and Solutions 
Knowledge about the identified stakeholders, potential 
problems and solutions are mapped based on the priority of 
importance or interest in this phase. Techniques such as 
priority matrix and rate and ranking scale are used to 
formulate stakeholders’ solutions for an intended artefact. 
For instance, symptoms of depression include 'recurrent 
thoughts of suicide', 'recurrent thought of self-harm', 
'affected sleep pattern', 'reduced mood' and 'affected appetite' 
etc. The ultimate consequence of these symptoms is death. 
The closest to death among these symptoms is a 'recurrent 
thoughts of suicide', followed by 'recurrent thought if self-
harm'. A ranking and rating scale is utilised to rank and rate 
these symptoms in the order of impacts. Also, a priority 
matrix is used to determine the influence of these symptoms 
on the system functionalities. Further validation techniques 
such as focus groups and interviews are used to validate the 
proposed stakeholders' solutions. In this case, a survey result 
of 114 respondents was evaluated to validate the proposed 
framework components. For example, a question such as 
'will you like to see an update of your mental wellbeing' 
validates the necessity of a 'progress track' as a measure of 
state in the implied framework. 
E. Developing the Artefact 
The final stage is the development of the artefact based 
on the needs of the stakeholders, corresponding problems 
and intended solutions. Key defined components are 
integrated at this stage to produce an artefact. After the 
ranking and validation of important components, the 
uppermost components are composed using techniques such 
as associative rules. To make a system a whole, self-
dependent and more generalised components are placed at 
the uttermost layer while dependent or associated 
components are further embedded with their corresponding 
associated components. Taking that the processes within the 
methodology (in Figure 1) are iterative, multiple and various 
techniques, methods, approaches can be adopted in different 
phases until all requirements of each phase are satisfied. A 
clear benefit of the i-DaSAD methodology is its element of 
robustness, which allows the necessary requirements to be 
satisfied iteratively. See Figure 2 for FLaDM components 
and their corresponding layers. Section IV below explains 
the FLaDM and the corresponding components as derived 
artefact of the i-DaSAD process.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Schematic representation of i-DaSAD 
IV. FRAMEWORK FOR LIFESTYLE AND DEPRESSION 
MANAGEMENT  (FLADM) 
Artefact realised through i-DaSAD methodology as 
discussed in section III is the Framework for Lifestyle and 
Depression Management (FLaDM). An iterative process of 
survey and analysis of the literature on mental health, 
depression systems and stakeholders yielded the framework, 
which serves as a base for the development of a depression 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

management system. Our proposal is that FLaDM based 
systems will consider the core components of the framework 
for the development an effective depression management 
system 
in 
terms 
diagnosis, 
prevention, 
alleviation, 
personalisation, and progress tracking, DPA/PT. 
 
Fig 2. Framework for Lifestyle and Depression Management (FLaDM) 
A. Diagnosis (Presence & Severity) 
The diagnosis component of the framework comprises of 
two sub-components (primary and secondary). The primary 
sub-component focuses on examining the presence of 
depression symptoms in a user and secondary sub-
component considers its severity if present. A flexible 
approach is embraced in order to allow developers adopt a 
preferred standard diagnostic tools, questionnaire or criteria. 
For example, we adopted the DSM-5 [8]  as diagnostic tools 
for the presence of depression and the Beck Depression 
Inventory, BDI is utilised to determine its severity. Other 
tools such as ICD 10, PH9 [26] and GAD7 [27] may be 
flexibly adopted by the developer for depression and anxiety 
respectively. As earlier discussed in Section II (related work) 
that a minimum level of sophistication is required to 
comprehensively utilise the BDI tool, it is expected that a 
decision support system caters for its simplification. In this 
case, users with a basic smartphone operation should find it 
easy to consume the information meaningfully. 
B. Prevention/Alleviation 
The Prevention and Alleviation components consider the 
lifestyle change required for a potential or identified 
depressed candidate. Similar to the diagnosis, these 
components 
allow 
development's 
flexibility 
thereby, 
providing system developers with the opportunity to 
determine the lifestyle activities they classify suitable for 
depression management. As discussed in Section III, 
comprehensive document analysis was used to derive key 
lifestyle activities associated with depression. For instance, 
the study of 1046 women by Jacka et al., [28] reflected an 
odds ratio of 0.87 and 0.08 lower for depression with diets 
of fresh fruit and vegetables, grains and meats, than heavily 
processed diet respectively. This study provides the 
associative significance of diets with depression and its 
management. Analysis by Tanaka et al., [29] in the Komo-
Ise study found that 1.3% fewer men had depression with 
exercise, and positive associations with sleeping 6-9 hours 
per night, small amounts of alcohol consumption as 
compared to an 'over' or ‘under’ alcohol consumption, and 
negative associations with poor physical health and chronic 
disease. Similarly, Gregory et al., [30] analyses of 1556 
participants on wave-4 G1219 and G1219 twins longitudinal 
studies found a significant correlation between poor sleep 
and depression/anxiety symptoms. Also, the lack of sleep 
may prevent brain repair, making it exceedingly prone to 
various symptoms of depression [31]. Analysis of these 
works paves way for the consideration of lifestyle activities 
management such as stress, sleep, diet and exercise amongst 
others. While the framework permits the inclusion of other 
activities to be managed, these activities are considered 
fundamental lifestyle for our system. 
C. Personalisation & Progress Tracking 
Forasmuch as FLaDM considers depression management 
from the perspective of lifestyle management, a significant 
consideration is given to lifestyle variation. Therefore, 
personalisation is considered as a prerequisite component for 
Diagnosis, Prevention and Alleviation. This is similar to the 
action of a conventional practitioners while dealing with 
individual cases. Personalising recommendation of lifestyle 
changes will not only improve the effectiveness of the 
system but it will also help enhances the decision support 
process of the system. In doing so, such systems are 
expected to retain the capability of tracking the progress of 
corresponding activities to provide effective supports. For 
example, in this case, progress tracking is accomplished 
using CESD-R scale [32] to measure the users' progress in 
specific areas of the scale. 
D. DPA/PT Wrapper 
The DPA/PT Wrapper is the outermost layer shielding all 
other components of the framework. The wrapper consists of 
four basic features namely; design and research, contacts, 
ethics, and security. The features are expected to be 
considered for any decision support management system in 
mental health. Considering the state of mental health 
stakeholders, particularly the mentally ill candidate, it is 
expected that any adopted management for diagnosis, 
prevention or alleviation is highly intuitive, supportive, less 
demanding, moderately automated. Perhaps, such a system 
should be undoubtedly simple so as not to aggravate the state 
of stakeholders in any way. Therefore, the design of such 
systems requires utmost consideration of simplicity and 
usability of the system. Concepts including impacts of 
colours, fonts, navigation and overall comprehension of such 
system are expectedly thought through. That is, a significant 
research needs to be considered in the process of design. 
Also, the importance of the topic in terms of sensitivity to 
stakeholders necessitate the adoption of robust ethics and 
security architecture. For example, in considering the process 
of data handling within the system, issues such as user 
privacy, encryption and access level are thoroughly 
considered. In taking cognisance that a decision support 
system is not expected to replace practitioners, FLaDM 
based systems are expected to make provision for easier 
communication between stakeholders, i.e., the practitioner 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(GP, psychiatrist, career) and patients’ communications must 
be uncomplicated. 
V. FLADM- BASED DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM 
In order to evaluate the framework, a FLaDM based 
decision support system was developed to measure its 
effectiveness and usability. A Hierarchical Task Analysis 
(HTA) approach is utlised for definition of system tasks. A 
schematic representation of the system hierarchical layout is 
shown in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3. Hierarchical Representation of FLaDM-based DSS 
 
Test metrics were designed to measure the effectiveness of 
the framework. The test activities were carried in a usability 
laboratory. It is noteworthy that the test was conducted to 
measure the suitability of the framework for system 
implementation. Since all usability problems can be derived 
from conducting the test with five participants, not so much 
will be derived from any more participants [33]. Effectively, 
five participants were recruited for the usability test of a 
FLaDM based system. A supplementary 'ten-question' pre-
test 
questionnaire 
and 
'fifteen-question' 
post-test 
questionnaire were completed by the participants to 
investigate the system's effectiveness, particularly in terms 
of diagnosis, prevention and alleviation. Examples of Pre-
test and post-test questions are as shown in table I. 
 
TABLE I. EXCERPT OF QUESTIONS FROM TEST QUESTIONNAIRE  
 
Five test metrics were designed to evaluate area of 
concentration including Registration (setting up the user), 
Diagnosis (presence and severity), Lifestyle management 
and recommendations (symptom prevention and alleviation) 
and Contacts (stakeholder communication). During the test, 
participants were requested to provide a self-rating 
perception of the tasks completed under each metric using a 
rating scale of 1-10 with 10 being the highest and 1 being 
the lowest. To ensure participants’ actions correlates with 
the task and their rating, a ‘eye-tracking software’ was 
utilised to track participant's eye movement as seen in 
Figure 4. The red dot indicates the user's area of 
concentration at a specific time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Eye tracking system indicating users concentration 
Results of evaluations indicated appropriate diagnosis with 
overall users rating of 93.5% accuracy. It is interesting to 
note 
that 
all 
participants 
believed 
the 
lifestyle 
recommendations for prevention and alleviation are 
appropriate with 97% accuracy. Table II. represents the test 
metrics with a corresponding user rating of functional 
accuracy in terms of DPA/PT and ease of use. 
TABLE II. TEST METRICS VERSUS USER RATINGS. 
Metrics 
No 
Test Metrics 
Overall 
participants 
rating 
1 
Registration 
 96.5% 
2 
Diagnosing for  Presence (DSM-5) 
93.5% 
3 
Diagnosing Severity (BDI) 
93.5% 
4 
Lifestyle change and progress track 
97% 
5 
Emergency contacts and ease 
82% 
 
Although with a smaller sample size, usability problems are 
experienced with great variation among the test participants. 
Three of the participants are confirmed to suffer depression 
as established in the post-test question, one participant was 
confirmed not depressed and one was on the verge of being 
depressed. All participants are correctly diagnosed. Also, 
the test participants were of varied genders, ages and 
backgrounds, yet all participants were able to use the 
application for DPA. In addition, all participants expressed 
confidences in the recommended lifestyle activities to help 
alleviate their situations. All participants agreed that the 
most important feature is the emergency contact mechanism 
that connects them with the relevant support authority (GP 
and career, etc.) when needed. Most participants expressed 
that the emergency contact feature should be more intuitive 
and accessible from any part of the system. 
No 
Pre-test Questions 
Post-test Questions 
1 
Have you ever been 
diagnosed with 
depression 
Do you feel the application should 
ask for more personal information? 
2 
Are you at risk of 
suffering from depression 
in future? 
Do you think three emergence 
contacts is suitable for the 
application? 
3 
What make you at risk of 
depression in future? 
How do you find the process of 
diagnosis in general? 
4 
When were you 
diagnosed with 
depression? 
Do you think the emergency 
contacts should include medical 
practitioners? 
5 
What are your known 
symptoms of depression? 
Have you been correctly diagnosed 
using the application? 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

VI  
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
The study conducted by Trivedi, M. H. et al. [12] 
indicated a normal antidepressant produces responses just 
under half of the participants and only achieved 28% full 
remission; hence, the need for other treatment options. This 
work adopts a lifestyle change approach for the development 
of a framework for lifestyle and depression management that 
underpins a decision support system. The  approach involves 
extensive document and stakeholder analysis to identify the 
necessary stakeholders and their requirements for depression 
management DSS. The framework was evaluated in a 
usability laboratory to appraise the ease of use, intuitiveness 
and effectiveness. Results evidenced the suitability of the 
framework’s adoption for the development of DSS for 
depression management. Further work will be carried out on 
expanding the framework to other categories of mental 
health disorder. Also, the system evaluation will be 
conducted with a larger sample. In additions, the adoption of 
machine learning and artificial intelligence techniques in the 
recommendation of change in lifestyle activities will be 
explored in the area of decision support system development. 
REFERENCES 
[1] National 
Institute 
of 
Mental 
Health, 
(NIMH). 
“Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental 
illnesses”. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/mental-
illness.shtml. [retrieved: 2019.01.03]. 
[2] Samele, Chiara, Stuart Frew, and Norman Urquia, 
eds. Mental Health Systems in the European Union Member 
States, Status of Mental Health in Populations and Benefits 
to be Expected from Investments Into Mental Health: 
European Profile of Prevention and Promotion of Mental 
Health 
(EuroPoPP-MH):[main 
Report]. 
European 
Commision, Executive Agencz for Health and Consumers 
Tender, 2013. 
[3] World Health Organization, "Suicide data," [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
www.Who.Int/Mental_health/Prevention/Suicide/Suicidepr
event/En, 2015, [retrieved: December, 2018 
[4] D. E. Bloom, E. T. Cafiero, E. Jané-Llopis, S. Abrahams-
Gessel, L. R. Bloom and S. Fathima, "The Global Economic 
Burden of Noncommunicable Diseases (World Economic 
Forum, Geneva)," 2011. 
[5] M. Lech, L. Low and K. E. Ooi, "Detection and prediction 
of clinical depression," in Mental Health Informatics, 
Springer, 2014, pp. 185-199. 
[6] P. R. McCrone, S. Dhanasiri, A. Patel, M. Knapp and S. 
Lawton-Smith, Paying the price: the cost of mental health 
care in England to 2026, King's Fund, 2008, . 
[7] D. Becker, "Acceptance of mobile mental health treatment 
applications," Procedia Computer Science, vol. 98, pp. 220-
227, 2016. 
[8] American 
Psychiatric 
Association, 
"Diagnostic 
and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders," vol. 2018, "". 
October 1, 2018. 
[9] K. Smith, "Mental health: a world of depression," Nature 
News, vol. 515, pp. 180, 2014. 
[10] Psych Congress, "Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II)," 
vol. 2018, "". 2018. 
[11] G. Groth-Marnat, Handbook of psychological assessment, 
John Wiley & Sons, 2009, . 
[12] M. H. Trivedi, A.J. Rush, S. R. Wisniewski, A. A. 
Nierenberg, D. Warden, L. Ritz, G. Norquist, R. H. 
Howland, B. Lebowitz and P. J. McGrath, "Evaluation of 
outcomes 
with 
citalopram 
for 
depression 
using 
measurement-based care in STAR* D: implications for 
clinical practice," Am.J.Psychiatry, vol. 163, pp. 28-40, 
2006. 
[13] R. Alnanih, O. Ormandjieva and T. Radhakrishnan, 
"Context-based user stereotype model for mobile user 
interfaces in health care applications," Procedia Computer 
Science, vol. 19, pp. 1020-1027, 2013. 
[14] S. Rosenbaum, J. M. Newby, Z. Steel, G. Andrews and P. 
B. Ward, "Online physical activity interventions for mental 
disorders: a systematic review," Internet Interventions, vol. 
2, pp. 214-220, 2015. 
[15] D. C. Mohr, M. N. Burns, S. M. Schueller, G. Clarke and 
M. Klinkman, "Behavioral intervention technologies: 
evidence review and recommendations for future research 
in mental health," Gen.Hosp.Psychiatry, vol. 35, pp. 332-
338, 2013. 
[16] PROOF(TM) Weables, "Alcohol Tracking Wearable," 
[Online]. Available from: www.proofwearable.com/. 
[17] BACtrack, 
2018 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
www.bactrack.com 
[18] Digital Health Age, "SmartStop wearable to help smokers 
quit," 2016, [Online]. Available from: digitalhealthage.com 
[19] Vandrico Inc, "Chrono Solution, 2018" [Online]. Available 
from: www.vandrico.com. [retrieved: 2018.12.10]. 
[20] Psych Central, "Depression Test," vol. 2018, "". 2018. 
[21] PsyberGuide, "MoodTrack Diary:Mood Tracker," vol. 
2018, "". 2018. 
[22] BC Partners for Mental Health and Addictions Information, 
"Online Screenings," vol. 2018, "". 2018. 
[23] Pacifica, "Pacifica is more than a meditation app," vol. 
2018, . 
[24] L. Surf City Apps, "Relieve Depression Pro," vol. 2018, "". 
2018. 
[25] C. R. Kothari, Research methodology: Methods and 
techniques, New Age International, 2004, . 
[26] Caremark, 
"Patient 
Health 
Questionnaire—PHQ-9," 
www.Psycho-Oncology.Info/PHQ9_depression.Pdf, 
"August ". 2003. 
[27] Psychiatric Times, "GAD-7," vol. 2018, "Apr 26, ". 2013. 
[28] F. N. Jacka, J. A. Pasco, A. Mykletun, L. J. Williams, A. M. 
Hodge, S. L. O'reilly, G. C. Nicholson, M. A. Kotowicz and 
M. Berk, "Association of Western and traditional diets with 
depression and anxiety in women," Am.J.Psychiatry, vol. 
167, pp. 305-311, 2010. 
[29] H. Tanaka, Y. Sasazawa, S. Suzuki, M. Nakazawa and H. 
Koyama, "Health status and lifestyle factors as predictors of 
depression in middle-aged and elderly Japanese adults: a 
seven-year follow-up of the Komo-Ise cohort study," BMC 
Psychiatry, vol. 11, pp. 20, 2011. 
[30] A. M. Gregory, F. V. Rijsdijk, T. C. Eley, D. J. Buysse, M. 
N. Schneider, M. Parsons and N. L. Barclay, "A 
longitudinal twin and sibling study of associations between 
insomnia and depression symptoms in young adults," Sleep, 
vol. 39, pp. 1985-1992, 2016. 
[31] Pallab Ghosh, "Why do we sleep?" vol. 2018, "May, 2015. 
[32] Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale, CESD-
R, “Depression”, "". 2018. 
[33] R. Molich, K. Bachmann, J. Biesterfeldt and W. 
Quesenbery, "Five users will find 85% of the usability 
problems," in and other myths about usability testing. 
Proceedings of the Usability Professional's Association-
International Conference, 2010. 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

