Design of a Mobile Phone App Prototype for 
Reflections on Perceived Stress
Åsa Smedberg 
The Department of Computer and Systems Sciences 
Stockholm University 
Kista, Sweden 
asasmed@dsv.su.se 
Hélène Sandmark 
School of Health, Care and Social Welfare 
Division of Public Health Sciences 
Mälardalen University 
Västerås, Sweden 
helene.sandmark@mdh.se 
 
 
Abstract— In working life today, people often experience high 
levels of stress and display strong reactions to different stressors. 
Those who are exposed to high levels of stress for a long time face 
an increased risk for deterioration in physical and mental health 
often leading to sick leave and high consumption of healthcare. 
To prevent this, continuous support is needed. Development of 
IT-tools for continuous stress management is, however, in its 
early stages. We present a prototype of a mobile phone app for 
self-reflection, a tool that is also integrated in a larger web based 
stress management system built on research of social networks 
for increased well-being. The mobile phone app aims at helping 
people become more aware of patterns of stressful events. It logs 
and displays basic information about self-perceived stress 
situations, such as location and time, and the user can add 
information about the situations and perceived stress levels. As 
the app constitutes a part of the web based stress management 
system, not only self-reflection but also reflection together with 
peers and stress experts is possible. The prototype of the mobile 
phone app has been qualitatively evaluated using stress 
management criteria, and the paper also exemplifies its utility in 
the context of the larger system. 
Keywords-mobile phone app; stress management; self-
reflection; stress situation; web based stress management 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Stress and stress management have become important 
issues in today's society. High demands from work life 
constitute one of the factors that can make people experience 
unhealthy levels of stress. Also, it is difficult for many to 
achieve a balance between work and family. As for other health 
problems, the Internet offers various solutions for people who 
want to improve their situation and cope with stress exposure. 
Different kinds of applications for self-help are available on the 
Internet. There are health information resources of various 
kinds, intervention programs and forums for peers. More 
recently, a number of mobile tools have also emerged in the 
field of stress management, both to measure stress levels and to 
support people in stressful situations. However, there is still no 
system that takes a holistic approach, combining various forms 
of support, from different sources and stakeholders, and that 
links mobile apps with web based stress management systems. 
In this paper, we present the design of a newly developed 
mobile phone app that aims at supporting self-reflection on 
stressful everyday situations. The app is also prepared to 
become a complementary part of a holistic stress management 
system (see e.g., [1]-[2]). With this extension, the overall 
system 
integrates 
self-documentation, 
self-reflection, 
information sharing, communication and support among 
different actors to a working whole. It allows for both 
individual learning and group supported learning among 
different actors who contribute with knowledge and 
experiences about stress and how to cope with stress.  
Next section presents theories of stress and stress 
management that have had implications for the design of the 
mobile phone app and the overall stress management system. 
Thereafter, the basic design of the web based part of the stress 
management system will be presented briefly. The sections 
that follow introduce the prototype of the mobile phone app 
for self-reflection and the way it is integrated in the overall 
stress management system. At the end, we reflect upon our 
results and present some future actions. 
II. 
STRESS AND STRESS MANAGEMENT 
A. Stress 
Stress involves both physiological and psychological 
components, and is about how we perceive the demands 
placed on us as well as our ability to manage them. The term 
"stress" can either be used to relate to the cause and act as a 
stressor on the human body and mind, or be seen as an effect, 
a stress-reaction, of an event or thought [3]. Those who are 
exposed to high stress for a prolonged period of time are at 
increased risk for physical and mental health problems which 
can lead to sickness and high consumption of healthcare [4]-
[5]. Stress factors related to the profession, such as a 
frustrating work situation, or imbalance in work-life, are 
important causes of psychological and physiological stress, 
mental illness and psychosomatic conditions [6]-[7]. Also high 
levels of engagement at work can lead to increased stress 
levels [8]-[9]; overcommitted employees tend to suffer from 
perceptual distortion of demands that prevent them from 
assessing cost-gain relations and to set limits [8].  
B. Coping Strategies 
Coping ability can help to manage a stressful situation. 
Work control, such as flexibility at work and control over 
243
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

work tasks can help people to cope with high levels of work 
stress. Coping strategies can be effective in helping people in 
stressful conditions, such as poor sleep quality and work-
related stress experiences. Coping is classified as either 
problem-focused, which is when the individual confronts the 
problem directly, or emotion-focused, meaning that the 
individual focuses on controlling emotional reactions. The 
concept of coping has also been classified in terms of active 
coping, such as planning and pacing activities, and passive 
coping, which is resting and taking medications [10]. 
C. Self-Reflection 
Aukes et al. (2007) declare that personal reflection is the 
examination of one’s experiences to help clarify and create 
meaning of the experiences, and to promote learning [11]. 
They propose that personal reflection in care settings has three 
elements: self-reflection, empathetic reflection and reflective 
communication. 
Keeping track of past experiences can also help someone 
with stress symptoms to recognize progression, i.e., positive 
results of changes made in life patterns, training, etc. [12]. 
This is regarded helpful for encouraging further changes.  
Daily stress logs can be supportive in finding sources of 
stress and to look for effects from stress [13]. “Some scholars 
and practitioners distinguish between diaries, logs (a record of 
information that is a highly structured factual account 
maintained over time), and journals, which combine the 
objective aspect of a log with the personal aspect of the diary, 
but with a more reflective learning slant.” [14, p 205]. The 
reflection in diaries or journals emphasizes the process of 
learning more than the product. The reflection activities itself 
helps to increase awareness. 
In order to effectively document a situation, information 
about when and where the situation took place are needed, as 
well as situational context, level of stress experienced and 
emotions experienced as a result of the situation [15]. 
D. Self-Management and Social Support 
Disease prevention and early interventions are essential in 
order to help groups of people from becoming patients of 
healthcare and from being forced to sick leave and long-term 
sickness absence. In order to achieve long-term and 
sustainable changes, interventions and support activities have 
to be continuous. Ongoing social support has shown to be 
crucial to develop a lifestyle that lasts [16]-[17]. It is in this 
context that e-health platforms can play an important role, 
since they can provide continuous interaction and information 
exchange between health professionals and also between 
people with lifestyle issues, who share a certain type of health 
concern. 
Online support groups have shown to empower patients 
and citizens who suffer from different health problems. 
Through these online groups new relationships are developed, 
both strong tie relationships with friends and weak tie 
relationships with people who attend the online setting less 
often [18]. These groups support sharing of experiences and 
advice on particular health issues. The online groups enhance 
decision-making skills for people who are in distress, and they 
also foster well-being, a sense of control, self-confidence and 
overall help to increase abilities to handle specific conditions 
[19]. A crucial characteristic is their ability to foster social and 
empathical communication [20]-[21]. Previous studies have 
also shown that medical experts and peers contribute to 
knowledge sharing in different ways; while the experts offer 
detailed information and information on particularly rare 
issues, peers complement by giving practical advice and 
reflections based on experiences [22]. 
III. 
SOCIAL AND MULTIPLE HELP WEB BASED STRESS 
MANAGEMENT (CONTEXT) 
It is not always an easy task to manage stressful life 
situations and to develop and maintain a healthy living. It 
involves learning how to balance perceived demands from 
working and personal life, and to question underlying thoughts 
and beliefs. E-health communities can assist in this process 
through continuous interactions between community members. 
Previous studies have shown that combining knowledge of 
health experts and the experiences of peers can create a good 
synergy. The use of question-response functions between 
citizens and experts and conversations among peers have seen 
to offer different and complementary support [22]-[23]. This 
section will shortly describe a web based system developed for 
stress management that considers social interaction and the 
integration of different actors and functions. It serves as 
background to the design of the mobile phone app to be 
presented in the coming sections. 
The web based system for stress management is based on a 
holistic view of actors – both stress experts and peers - and the 
different types of support they can contribute with. The system 
offers the user information in the form of research and real life 
stories, practical exercises (both text- and video-based), and 
the opportunity to interact with stress experts and peers. Since 
different actors and functions are combined in one system, we 
call this a multiple help online system for stress management 
[1]-[2], [22] (see Fig. 1 for an illustration).  
The web based system is also divided into four different 
stress intervention areas: sleep, work and studies, balance in 
life, and physical wellbeing [1]-[2], based on previous 
research [6]-[9]. This division makes it possible to organize 
conversations, counseling sessions, exercises and information 
around specific stressors and stress reactions. “Sleep” is a 
period of active recovery for the head and body; at the same 
time, it has been concluded that stress is strongly linked to 
disturbed sleep, insomnia and impaired awakening. “Work and 
studies” relates to exposure to stressful job conditions such as 
heavy workload, infrequent rest breaks, long work hours, shift 
work, and interpersonal relationships, as well as inappropriate 
perceptions of demands and fail in their coping ability. 
“Balance in life” refers to the challenges of coping with 
demands and to set limits to manage work, leisure time 
activities and time spend time with family and friends. 
“Physical wellbeing” is about individual interventions in the 
area of dysfunction due to negative stress exposure. Responses 
to stress are often manifested in body tension, and by using a 
combination of techniques; muscle relaxation and cognitive-
244
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

behavioural skills, health promotion and prevention of stress-
related disorders can be achieved.   
A prototype of the web based stress management system is 
also available at: http://stress.dsv.su.se/. 
IV. 
DESIGNING A MOBILE PHONE APP FOR SELF-
REFLECTION 
To continue the research work of the stress management 
system, and to extend it with a tool for self-reflection, a 
prototype of a mobile phone app was recently developed. This 
section will describe the artifact and the research process.   
A. 
Design Science 
Design science research is of importance to create 
successful artifacts [24], and it is a paradigm that looks to 
“extend the boundaries of human and organizational 
capabilities by creating new and innovative artifacts” [25, p 
75]. Hevner et al. (2004) argue that effective design-science 
research is based on seven guidelines: design as an artifact, 
problem relevance, design as a search process, research rigor, 
research contributions, design evaluation and communication 
of research. Our work to create a mobile phone app for the 
stress management system was characterized by the ideas of 
design science. In the following sections, we introduce the 
developed prototype of the mobile phone app outgoing from 
the seven design science guidelines. 
B. Design as an Artifact 
In the area of information systems, design science is 
applied to come up with purposeful IT artifacts. The artifact 
can be a construct, a model, a method or an instantiation. In 
our research work, the purpose was to create an instantiation 
in the form of a prototype of a mobile phone app in the stress 
management area.  
C. Problem Relevance 
The problem domain that the mobile phone app is to be 
operating in is self-management and self-reflection for people 
with mild to medium stress symptoms. Since people with 
stressful lives can benefit from documenting real life situations 
and to reflect upon them, a mobile phone app developed for 
this purpose is regarded as a tool that could serve a purpose in 
stress management. The fact that the mobile phone is available 
in almost all situations during the day makes it easy to keep 
track of real-life stress situations while taking part in everyday 
life. The mobile phone app is also expected to be part of the 
larger stress management system that supports social 
interaction between different actors (described previously in 
section III). The overall stress management system therefore 
also serves as environment to the mobile phone app.  
D. Design as a Search Process 
The design science research is essentially a search process 
to find an effective solution to a problem. In search of an 
effective solution to the problem, the process needs to be 
iterative. Crucial to the design science research is abstraction 
and representation of appropriate ends, means and laws. 
During the iterative process, these things are refined. Design 
alternatives are generated and tested against requirements and 
constraints in The Generate/Test Cycle. In our search process, 
generation of new versions of the prototype were made 
regularly and tested against stress management requirements. 
E. Research Rigor  
Fundamental for design science research is to address two 
questions: “What utility does the new artifact provide?” and 
“What demonstrates that utility?” The artifact needs to solve 
the problem, map adequately to the real world, be unique in 
some sense and be demonstrated (evaluated) in a proper way. 
We will address these questions in the sections to come. 
F. Research Contributions – the Prototype 
As a ‘stand alone system’, the mobile phone app offers the 
user a tool for self-reflection. The features were designed in 
accordance with results from research in stress and stress 
management. The system design considers also the connection 
with the overall web based stress management system which 
brings possibility of having group reflection activities as a 
complement to the personal reflections.  
The mobile phone app has two main parts (see Fig. 2 for 
screenshot in Swedish). The upper part is for registration and 
management of stress situations and the lower one for 
displaying statistical data about the situations. There are four 
functions related to the first part, i.e., to the registration and 
management of stress related situations: one function to 
register a situation, one for listing all situations in order to 
look at specific information and also to add information about 
Multiple 
Help
Online
Ask an 
Expert 
Practical 
Tools,
Exercises
Stories 
Told & 
Research
Group 
Counseling
Forum for
Peers
Figure 1. Web Based Social and Multiple Help Stress Management 
System. 
Tools,
Figure 2. Prototype of mobile phone application for self-
reflection (start menu). 
245
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

situations, another one to list situations per month to be able to 
navigate in larger amounts of situations, and a fourth to send 
information to the web system, which means that stored 
information about situations are sent to the web based stress 
management system.  
In order to document a stressful situation, the user only has 
to press the button register a situation and save the registration 
(see Fig. 3 for screenshot in Swedish). When this is done, the 
app will automatically log time and location of the situation 
(current location is determined by using GPS). More 
information about the situation, such as contextual data, 
photos of the scene, perceived level of stress and reflections of 
experienced emotions are manually put into the system. 
Perceived level of stress is defined on a scale from “low” to 
“high” (1-100). Photos are taken by using the phone camera 
and stored together with the other information about the 
situation. The manual information can be added at the same 
time as the registration of a situation, or it can be added later 
when the user is not in a stressful mode. The exception to this 
is the perceived level of stress that should be documented at 
once to avoid difficulties recalling it later. 
There are four ways to present statistics of stress situations 
from the past: number of documented situations per month, 
number of situations during the hours of a day, perceived 
stress levels and locations of stress situations to be presented 
on a map (see Fig. 4 for two screenshots of statistics). 
G. Design Evaluation 
The app prototype has been evaluated qualitatively. The 
evaluations considered usability for the target group, i.e., 
people with mild to medium stress levels, and effectiveness 
regarding self-reflection and connectedness with the bigger 
stress management system. The design process leading to the 
prototype of mobile phone app was supported by recurrent 
evaluations, when the programmer demonstrated the app 
through simulations. The research group, including medical 
and stress expertise, evaluated the app from a stress 
management perspective. Through an iterative process of 
evaluation, feedback, improvements, new evaluations and new 
feedback the prototype was developed. Continuous technical 
testing was done to ensure that the mobile phone app was 
technically sound. The prototype was also demonstrated 
through a scenario, to illustrate its utility when connected to 
the overall stress management system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1) 
Simulations 
In the first version of the mobile phone app, the 
registration of situations prompted the user to add information 
about the situation. When simulating this function, the stress 
expert of the research project expressed that it might be 
difficult to get a person with ongoing stress symptoms to 
manage more information. This feedback led to a couple of 
new attributes in the app. First and foremost, it became clear 
that it must be easy to register a stress situation to increase the 
likelihood that the app is used. Automatic registration of time 
and location of a situation was introduced. It made it possible 
to record a stress situation with just a couple of buttons to 
press. In order to clarify the situation, additional functions 
made it possible to add manual information at a later time. 
Another iteration concerned the menu system, that it should be 
as simple as possible, with few hierarchies, to lessen the 
mental load. Simulations of new versions of the prototype 
were made regularly during the development process, 
approximately every 10 day.  
2) 
Evaluation of Stress Management Properties 
To ensure that features of the mobile phone app meet the 
goals, they were qualitatively evaluated against stress 
management criteria (see Table 1).  
H. 
Communication of Research 
To communicate research effectively, it is important to 
define the target audience. For the programmers who are 
supposed to implement a certain design, or improve existing 
implementation, technical details are necessary in the 
communication. For a broader research community that 
includes systems scientists and health practitioners as well, 
communication has to focus on the instantiation of a health 
management idea and the system utility in this health domain. 
In this paper, our intention has been to address this latter 
group. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Screen of the form for registration of stress 
situations. 
Figure 4. Sample screens of displayed stress situations:
locations (left) and distribution during the hours of a day (right).
 
246
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
TABLE 1. EVALUATION USING STRESS MANAGEMENT CRITERIA 
Stress Management Criteria 
Mobile Phone App Feature 
Information 
about 
experienced 
stress events over time helps the 
one with stress symptoms to 
reflect upon unhealthy patterns 
(e.g., [12], [14]) 
Statistical presentations of stress 
situations over a period of time 
Information about stress reactions 
occurring at different times during 
the 
day 
constitutes 
valuable 
feedback on recurrent everyday 
activities 
Statistical presentation per 2 hours 
during the day 
Information should include when 
and where the situation took place, 
the level of stress, context and 
emotions that were experienced 
[15] 
Automatic registration of time and 
place  
 
Additional 
information 
being 
manually registered: perception of 
stress level and description of the 
situation 
Results of taken actions should be 
able to be measured, to motivate 
further actions [12] 
Statistical data displaying changes 
in number of stress situations, 
levels, etc., over time 
Continuous 
social 
support 
is 
important to change patterns [16]-
[17] 
Information can be sent to the web 
based 
system 
for 
ongoing 
conversations with peers 
Personal reflection helps clarify 
and 
create 
meaning 
of 
the 
experiences to promote learning 
[11], [14] 
Personal reflections on stressors 
and their impact can be described 
in the text field connected to the 
logged stress situation 
 
Information can be sent to the web 
based system for help from experts 
and peers in creating meaning of 
the experienced  stress situations 
Things that cause increased stress 
and mental load have to be 
avoided 
Easy to register  a stress situation: 
the system automatically logs time 
and place 
 
Hierarchy of menu system is low 
 
V. 
RELATION TO THE WEB BASED STRESS MANAGEMENT 
SYSTEM 
In this paper we have outlined the design and 
implementations of two interconnected prototypes: one web 
based stress management system and a newly developed 
mobile phone app for self-reflection. The mobile phone app 
will also be a complementary tool to the web based system 
(see Fig. 5). Technically, the mobile phone app uses Json 
objects to be able to send information from the app. This 
information can then be used in the web based system, after  
necessary adjustments in the web based system have been 
made.  
The new mobile phone tool will contribute to the overall 
system in several ways; it will support the connection to the 
physical world and to everyday situations of the users, and 
bring support for personal self-reflection to the system. The 
overall system becomes extended due to this new tool. The 
strengths as a tool for reflection are enhanced through the 
connectedness with the overall stress management system.  
 
 
Multiple 
Help
Online
Ask an 
Expert
Practical 
Tools, 
Exercises
Stories 
Told & 
Research
Group 
Counseling
Forum for 
Peers
 
 
Figure 5. Mobile phone app - a tool of the stress management system. 
 
 
While the mobile phone app collects and presents information 
about the user stress image, the actors present in the web based 
system can contribute with reflections on the stress images. 
The user can therefore start to reflect upon the stress image on 
a personal basis, and then engage in learning activities and 
reflections together with others. The social aspect of learning 
will be handled by the web based system. 
The overall web based stress management system enables 
different actors to contribute with their different knowledge 
and experiences. The users with stress symptoms are thereby 
enhanced as reflection peers and not only receivers of expert 
advice. Information and advice can be shared with other users 
of the web based system.  
The mobile phone app provides user support in everyday 
situations and continuous feedback on stress situations. It 
keeps track of the number of stress situations, stress levels and 
descriptions/reflections allowing the user to learn about how 
stress characterizes one's life. Users' position history from the 
app can serve as a basis for ongoing conversations about 
registered problem situations, for example. The users can then 
become aware of their own learning processes through 
questions 
and 
conversations 
on 
practical 
situations, 
experienced and foreseen difficulties as well as motivational 
issues. 
In general, the data from the mobile phone app could be 
used to initiate a variety of interventions. The mobile phone 
app in itself has no support for interventions, only for 
monitoring. Based on the picture of the documented stress 
situations, a stress expert in the web based stress management 
system can recommend relevant exercises and stress areas to 
work with.  
There are individual differences due to diversity of 
personal stressors and reactions. This is reflected in the 
documented stress situations in the mobile phone app. This 
diversity needs also to be handled by the overall system. 
Information from the app could be processed through different 
stress intervention areas in the web based system based on the 
personal information sent.  
The stress management system should include learning 
from the users. Users' logs of situations from the mobile phone 
247
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

app can be used as a basis for adjusting the overall system. For 
example, stress patterns can trigger new types of exercises or 
even new areas of stress interventions in the web based 
system.   
By comparing changes in stress patterns with the actual 
usage of the stress management system, it is also possible to 
get valuable information for system evaluation as well. This 
could be a good complement to other types of measurements, 
such as self-reported health status in questionnaires and user 
evaluations. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Today, mobile phones are available in daily life. The 
presented phone app serves as a bridge between the physical 
and digital world of the ones with stress symptoms. It conveys 
stressful situations digitally, as text-based information, 
location positions, photos, and visually through diagrams. On 
its own, the app lets the user log perceived stress situations, 
and to reflect upon patterns of stress situations. 
Technically, the mobile phone app is prepared to send 
information to the web based stress management system. 
However, the web based system needs to be adjusted as to 
present this information in a suitable way. Future research will 
discover how information from the user’s app can be 
displayed as to form the basis of web based conversations with 
experts and peers.  
So far, the system development has resulted in prototypes 
evaluated by qualitative methods within the research project. 
Next, the prototypes will be evaluated by a user group, and 
both qualitative and quantitative analyses will be carried out.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Smedberg, Å. and Sandmark, H. 2010. Multiple help online: an 
integrated e-health system for stress management. In Proceedings of 
IADIS International Conference E-Health (Freiburg, Germany, July 29-
31, 2010). 151-158. ISBN: 978-972-8939-16-8. 
[2] Smedberg, Å. and Sandmark, H. 2011. Stress intervention online - 
Designing for self-help through multiple help. In Proceedings of the 
Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social 
Medicine. (Guadeloupe, France, February 23-28, 2011). 120-125. ISBN: 
978-1-61208-003-1. 
[3] McEwen, B.S., 2000. The neurobiology of stress: from serendipity to 
clinical relevance, Brain Res. 886, 172-89. 
[4] Levi, L. 2005. Working life and mental health - A challenge to 
psychiatry?, World Psych. 4(1), 53-57. 
[5] Kalia, M. 2002. Assessing the economic impact of stress--the modern 
day hidden epidemic, Metabolism, 51(6 Suppl 1), 49-53. 
[6] Sandmark, H. 2007. Work and family: associations with long term sick-
listing in Swedish women. BMC Public Health 2007, 7:287. 
[7] Sandmark, H. 2009. Job mismatching, unequal opportunities and long-
term sickness absence in female white collar workers in Sweden. Scand 
J Public Health. 37, 43-49. 
[8] Preckel, D., von Känel, R., Kudielka, B.M. and Fischer, J.E. 2005. Over 
commitment to work is associated with vital exhaustion. Int Arch Occup 
Environ Health. 78:117–22. 
[9] Siegrist, J. and Marmot, M. 2004. Health inequalities and the 
psychosocial environment—two scientific challenges, Soc Sci Med, 58, 
1463–73. 
[10] Folkman, S. and Lazarus, R.S. 1988. Coping as a mediator of emotion, J 
Pers Soc Psychol. 54, 466–475. 
[11] Aukes, L.C., Geertsma, J., Cohen-Schotanus, J., Zwierstra, R.P., and 
Slaets, J.P.J. 2007. The development of a scale to measure personal 
reflection in medical practice and education. Medical Teacher. 29, 
177−182. 
[12] Bolger, N., Davis, A., and Rafaeli, E. 2003. Diary methods: Capturing 
life as it is lived. Annual Review of Psychology. 54, 579–616. 
[13] Attwood, M., Curtis, A., Pitts, J. 2006. Professional Development: A 
Guide for Primary Care. John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
[14] Travers, C. 2010. Unveiling a reflective diary methodology for exploring 
the lived experiences of stress and coping. J. Vocational Behavior. 
79(1), 204-216. DOI= http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jvb.2010.11.007. 
[15] Brozovich, F. and Heimberg, R.G. 2008. An analysis of post-event 
processing in social anxiety disorder. Clinical Psychology Review. 28, 
891-903. DOI=  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2008.01.002. 
[16] K. Baughman, E. Logue., K. Sutton, C. Capers, D. Jarjoura, and W. 
Smucker, 2003. Biopsychosocial characteristics of overweight and obese 
primary care patients: do psychosocial and behavior factors mediate 
sociodemographic effects? Preventive Medicine, No. 37, 129-137, 
Academic Press. 
[17] G. J. Norman. 2007. A review of ehealth interventions for physical 
activity and dietary behavior change. Am J  Prev Med., 33(4), 336-345. 
[18] Haythornthwaite, C. Social networks and online community. In A. 
Joinson, K. McKenna, T. Postmes & U-D. Reips (Eds.), The Oxford 
handbook of Internet psychology (pp. 121-137). United Kingdom: 
Oxford University Press, 2007. 
[19] Barak, A., Boniel-Nissim, M. and Suler, J. 2008. Fostering 
empowerment in online support groups. Computers in Human Behavior. 
24(5), 1867-1883. DOI= http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2008.02.004.  
[20] Preece, J. 1999. Empathic communities: balancing emotional and factual 
communication. Interacting with Computers. 12, 63-77. 
[21] Preece, J. 2000. Online communities – designing usability, supporting 
sociability, Wiley & Sons. 
[22] Smedberg, Å. 2008. Online Communities and Learning for Health - The 
Use of Online Health Communities and Online Expertise for People with 
Established Bad Habits. Doctoral Thesis.  Department of Computer and 
Systems Sciences, Stockholm University. ISBN: 978-91-7155-689-9. 
[23] Smedberg, Å. 2007. To design holistic health service systems on the 
Internet. In Proceedings of World Academy of Science, Engineering and 
Technology, November 2007, 311-317.  
[24] Peffers, K., Tuunanen, T., Rothenberger, M.A. and Chatterjee, S. 2007. 
A design science research methodology for information systems 
research. J. Management Information Systems. 24(3), 45-78. 
[25] Hevner, A.R., March, S.T., Park, J. and Ram, S. 2004. Design science in 
information systems research. MIS Quarterly. 28(1), 75-105. 
248
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

