Intelligent Insulin Pens 
A luxurious instrument or an essential gadget ? — A qualitative study 
 
Mohammed Kalkattawi, Tatsuo Nakajima 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Waseda University 
Japan, Tokyo 
e-mails: {M.Kalkattawi, Tatsuo}@dcl.cs.waseda.ac.jp  
 
 
Abstract—Insulin pens were first introduced in 1985. Since 
their introduction, insulin pens have been remarkable for their 
simplicity and accuracy. They have played a major role in the 
Multiple Dose Injection therapy (MDI). Until today, insulin pens, 
along with insulin pumping therapy, have been considered the 
only two reliable methods for external insulin delivery. 
Nevertheless, there has been always a wide gap between the two 
from the technological perspective. While pumps were enhancing 
through the utilization of several technologies, insulin pens have 
not had any major upgrades for a long period. Just recently, a 
couple of specialized diabetes companies have just introduced 
new types of intelligent insulin pens to the diabetes market. In 
this paper, we gave a brief introduction about the intelligent 
insulin pens technologies, and then we drew some general 
technological comparison between insulin pens and pumping 
equipments. In addition, we wanted to evaluate the current status 
of intelligent insulin pens technology among diabetic community, 
we went through a number of case studies among patients and 
obtained some feedback from their sides. We summarized the 
results from the case studies, and then we followed that by some 
discussions regarding the current technologies and our future 
vision for intelligent insulin pens. We believe that rather than 
focusing only on the development of intelligent insulin pens itself, 
we suggest that developers should give more focus on utilizing 
current ubiquitous technologies (i.e., smart devices, cloud 
computing, wearable computing, etc.). The main focus should 
aim on creating applications that can ease the diabetic 
management mission, and promote a better diabetic patients' 
compliance.  
Keywords—Electronic Medicine; Diabetes Mellitus; Insulin 
Therapy; Ubiquitous Computing; Cloud Computing 
I. INTRODUCTION  
A. Brief History 
Insulin pens were first introduced in 1985 by the Danish 
company Novo Nordisk [1]. From that time, insulin pens have 
managed to promote a better adherence to insulin medication, 
and despite their high costs compared to regular syringes, 
insulin pens have always been remarkable for their accuracy 
and simplicity. Consequently, this led them to be the most 
convenient instrument for Multiple Dose Injection therapy 
(MDI) [2]. During their lifecycle, insulin pens had a series of 
several upgrades—mostly, minor ones (i.e., size, smoothness, 
shapes, etc.), but none of them had any major upgrades with 
high-tech functions [3]. The cycle has remained like that until 
Eli Lilly and company came in 2007 and introduced their 
HumaPen® Memoir™ model. It was the first model that had 
electronic components and memory ability within its system. It 
could record time, date and dosage amount for a certain 
number of taken doses [4]. This encouraged Novo Nordisk in 
2012 to release their own version of memory function in two of 
their models NovoPen® 5 [5] and NovoPen Echo® [6]. 
Although the previous models had electronic components 
within their systems, the dosing action remained totally 
mechanical (i.e., force-driven motor). The Intelligent Insulin 
Pen Pendiq®, produced by the German company Pendiq 
GmbH, and manufactured by the Korean company Diamesco 
Co.,Ltd, was the first model to come and change the concept 
from “mechanical dosing” into “electronic dosing” (i.e., 
electronic driven-motor). In addition to that, the pen introduced 
several useful functions, which never existed before in any 
models [7]. Until today, it remains the only insulin pen model 
available with high-tech features within its system.   
B. Comparisons Between MDI and Pump Therapies  
For many years, there were several attempts to invent new 
methods for insulin delivery, but till this moment, only MDI 
and insulin pump have remained the most preferred methods 
among insulin dependent patients. Each one of these two 
methods has its own positive and negative aspects; yet from the 
technological side, there has been a wide gap between them. 
Table I summarizes the general comparisons between insulin 
pens and insulin pumps.  
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON BETWEEN INSULIN PENS AND INSULIN PUMPS 
Comparison between insulin pens and insulin pumps 
Features 
Insulin Pens 
 Pumps 
Level of accuracy and precision 
Lower 
Higher 
Flexibility and convenience 
Higher 
Lower 
Costs 
Lower 
Higher 
Performance and glycemic control 
Lower 
Higher 
Level of risks 
Lower 
Higher 
Ease of mastering 
Higher 
Lower 
Level of complexity 
Lower 
Higher 
Hight-tech and upgradability    
Lower 
Higher 
217
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 1. Total number of participants & age groups 
 
Overall, insulin pumps have always been featured with 
high-tech type of equipments, while MDI, using insulin pens, 
have remained just simple without any sophisticated parts. 
Nevertheless, the technological nature of insulin pumps have 
made them highly extendable; for example, modern pumps 
right now can show you the current level of insulin within 
body, calculate bolus (i.e., meal doses) from an internal 
carbohydrates database, create reports from the collected data 
and transfer data (e.g., reports or records) to other devices (i.e., 
PCs or smart phones) [8]. One notable example, which shows 
the extendibility of pumps technologies, is the utilization of 
wireless technologies within pump devices. Some pumps now 
are embedded with wireless modules to make them tubeless 
and packed as one complete unit—contains the pump, cannula 
and medication. Once they are placed on the skin, they can be 
operated wirelessly through an external remote. The advantage 
here is that the skin is prevented from the exposure to the outer 
environment, and at the same time, it does not hinder daily 
activities and movements [9]. The researches on enhancing the 
operation of insulin pumps are still going on till today, and the 
latest trend is focusing on creating what is called a closed-loop 
artificial pancreas (i.e., a fully automated system for insulin 
dosing) [10]. 
The notable downside about pumps is that they require 
much dedication and training to master their operation, while 
on the other hand, insulin pens are still considered simple and 
easy to master. In addition to that, insulin pens do not require 
on-body attachment—taken when they are just needed, while 
pumps in contrast require constant on-body attachment, which 
is considered bothersome for some patients.   
We can consider the German Pendiq® insulin pen model as 
the first attempt in creating a solution between pumps and 
regular insulin pens. It borrowed some of the sophisticated 
features existing within pumps, such as precise scales and dose 
recording, and at the same time it kept the simplicity and 
convenient features of insulin pens.   
Here, we can raise a question: “Is this type of in-between 
solution essential for diabetic management?” We conducted a 
couple of survey and qualitative analysis among individuals 
from the diabetic communities. The main aims were evaluating 
the importance of intelligent insulin pens within diabetic 
management, and then guiding these kinds of researches 
toward new approaches, which promote a better diabetic 
patients' compliance. 
The paper is organized in the following manner: In Section 
2, we present our research method and summary of results. In 
Section 3, we present a brief discussion and analysis based on 
the obtained results. The discussion highlights the status of 
current technologies and our vision for future solutions. 
Finally, in Section 4, we conclud this paper by summarizing its  
contents and outcomes, and then pointing to the limitation and 
future directions within this research.  
II. ASSESSMENT AND QUALITATIVE STUDY AMONG DIABETIC 
PATIENTS 
A. Research Method 
We conducted qualitative surveys and interviews among 
individuals in diabetes communities either by sending them 
direct emails, or recruiting them through diabetes Internet 
groups. The total number of participants was 76 individuals.  
We surveyed only individuals who were under insulin 
therapy as part of their medication. We excluded all the cases 
that reported they were not using insulin during the time of 
study. We directed the questions to either the patients 
themselves or their caring persons; this also included 
practitioners, who were related to diabetic healthcare. The 
questions focused on the following information: patients’ 
diabetic profile (i.e., age, gender, period of diagnoses, diabetes 
types, etc.); patients’ diabetic management (i.e., types of 
insulin therapy, data tracking, data management, etc.); patients’ 
diabetic 
daily 
condition 
(i.e., 
Hypoglycemia 
vs. 
Hyperglycemia). The last two parts from the study focused on 
surveying current technologies of smart insulin pens (i.e., best 
two functions features, expected improvement in their diabetic 
management or overall impression) and on surveying patients’ 
views about future technologies (i.e., communication with 
smart devices and ubiquitous technologies).  
B. Summary of Results 
Patients’ profile: The majority of our participants were 
from the middle age groups 45%, i.e., between the age of 20s 
and 40s, while young and teenage groups came in the second 
place 40%. The remaining groups were people in their 50s or 
above 15% (Figure 1). Female groups were about 61% and 
male groups were about 39%. The majority were from the 
Type1 groups 80%.  
Patients’ diabetic management: For insulin delivery, 67% 
of participants reported that they were using insulin pens (and 
syringes sometimes), while patients, who were using syringes 
only, were about 22%. Insulin pump users were about 15%. 
58% of participants reported that they either frequently or 
sometimes were running into some mistakes with their insulin 
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 2. 
Importance of intelligent insulin pens 
 
 
 
Figure 3. 
Connectivity with smart devices through different methods 
 
 
medication (i.e., missing doses, double doses, inaccurate 
dosage, etc.). For diabetic daily management, 66% of 
participants were keeping tracks of glucose level data, 26% of 
participants were keeping tracks of nutrition data and 53% of 
participants were keeping tracks of insulin doses. 42% of 
participants reported that they were preferring paper format 
(i.e., physical dairies) for keeping their records, while 34% of 
them were preferring digital format. Only 21% of participants 
reported that they preferred both (digital and paper) formats at 
the same time. The remaining 3% of participants indicated 
another preferences other than the two methods, such as the 
usage of voice memo or self-memory. We surveyed about 
smart devices utilization for diabetic management as well; we 
found out that most of the participants were regularly using 
smart devices 79%, but only few were using them for diabetic 
management 29%.    
Patients’ diabetic daily condition: As per diabetic daily 
conditions, 79% of participants reported that they either 
frequently or sometimes were encountering episodes of 
Hypoglycemia, while 84% of participants reported that either 
sometimes or frequently were encountering episodes of 
Hyperglycemia. 
The 
noted 
reasons 
for 
encountering 
Hypoglycemia were due to: 50% insufficient amount of 
carbohydrates in meal, 29% excessive activities, 20% over 
medication or mistakes and only 1% indicated other reasons 
(i.e., not from the specified list), such as illness, high insulin 
sensitivity or oversleeping. On the other hand, the noted 
reasons for Hyperglycemia were due to: 58% extra amount of 
carbohydrates in meal, 21% lack of activities, 12% insufficient 
amount of insulin or mistakes and and 9% indicated other 
personal reasons (i.e., not from the specified list), such as 
stress, illness or poor control. 
Patients’ 
views 
about 
intelligent 
insulin 
pens 
technologies: 
We 
presented 
the 
patients 
with 
latest 
technologies of intelligent smart pens through demonstration. 
visual aids and few usability studies. We found out that the 
majority of the patients 79% never heard of or used smart 
insulin pens before this survey. After that, we highlighted the 
current features available within current models through a list, 
and then we asked the participants to pick the most preferable 
features considered essential for the diabetic management. The 
highlighted features were (ranked by the highest collected 
scores from patients’ sides):  
1) Memory feature (i.e., keeping records of doses, date and 
time). 
2) Alarming system (blockage, dripping and low battery) 
3) Transferring data to PC through diabetic management 
software. 
4) Precise scale (i.e., 0.1 unit scale).  
5) The ability to switch between manual and digital mode in 
case of emergency (e.g., in case of battery outage). 
6) Pre-saving time period and amount for doses  (i.e., 
automatic repeatable dosing process). 
 
As one can see in the list, the memory feature was ranked 
as the most useful feature within current technologies. 
Following that, we questioned the patients about the expected 
improvements after using this type of technology. The majority 
of the participants were expecting to encounter less 
Hypoglycemia 
and 
Hyperglycemia 
episodes. 
Easier 
management and data collection came in the second place. 
precise dosing capability for each meal and then encountering 
fewer mistakes came as the last two expected improvements in 
the rank.  
We asked the patients what types of hindrances would 
prevent them from obtaining this type of technology. The top 
hindrance went to the high cost. Availability within the local 
market came as the second one. Complexity and then 
compatibility with insulin brands came as the least two 
reasons.    
Finally, we asked the patients to rate the importance of 
intelligent pens for diabetic management. Overall, 67% of 
participants thought that smart insulin pens were either 
essential or useful for diabetic management, while only 9% 
thought they were not necessary or useless for diabetic 
management.  The rest 24% were neutral about them (Figure 
2).   
Patients’ views about future technologies: In the last 
section, imagining that intelligent insulin pens could have the 
ability to communicate with smart devices through various 
methods, and they could manage to provide the following 
functions (Figure 3):  
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 4. Importance of the connectivity with smart devices 
 
1) Automated reminders and confirmation for doses  
2) Automated data collection and synch with software 
managers 
3) Warning and error detectors while dosing 
4) Remote controlling through smart devices 
 
We asked our participants once again how they would 
evaluate the importance of using smart devices under this 
vision. 75% of the participants rated this type of 
communication as either essential or useful, while only  13% 
the participants considered this as either not necessary or 
useless. The rest 12% were neutral to the idea (Figure 4).  
We also asked the participants which feature from the 
above could be considered essential for their managament. The 
automated reminder and collection features were ranked as the 
first and second respectively, while the warning and remote 
controlling features were ranked the third and fourth 
respectively.  
III.  DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
A. Opinions about Current Technology 
In general, although the collected data showed that most of 
the participants had little knowledge about intelligent insulin 
pens, but the idea of using them, as a part of the diabetic 
management routine, was still welcomed among them. 
However, it is difficult to infer the absolute popularity of the 
insulin pens, as compared with the pumping equipments, from 
this current survey of patient feedback.   
First, let us observe the current features in the latest 
intelligent insulin pens models, the memory function was 
ranked as the most useful feature, at the same time, over half of 
the participants 58% reported about having mistakes with their 
doses. This could explain why this feature was considered 
significant and ranked higher than the other features. 
Nevertheless, the remaining percentage, for those who reported 
no mistakes, is quite large too. Also, if we go and look back at 
the results related to the causes leading to Hypoglycemia and 
Hyperglycemia episodes among participants, it was found that 
dosage mistakes were marked third in place among the other 
causes for both cases. This can imply that the memory feature 
could be essential only for certain group (i.e., for those who are 
having serious issues with their own memory), but for the rest, 
it could be a convenient feature to raise the assurance factor 
[11]. Similarly, for the precise scale (0.1 U), this feature is 
critical for those who are having high insulin sensitivity, 
children as an example [12], but not necessarily it is the same 
case for other patients. Precise scale feature was ranked as the 
fourth in place; probably, this feature did not get a higher rank 
because the majority of participants were from the middle age 
group (i.e., insulin sensitivity is not critical among this group). 
Data transfer is similar to the previous two; it only eases the 
process for those who would like to keep records about their 
doses. In our data, this was only less than half of the 
participants, which  explains why this feature did not get a 
higher rank. The other features mainly ease the dosing process, 
but they do not necessarily help promote a better adherence to 
the insulin medication itself, for example, unlike the same 
feature available in latest pumps, patients cannot keep tracks of 
the current level of insulin while using intelligent insulin pens.  
We can conclude here that the current technology of 
intelligent insulin pens can be a convenient instrument, but not 
an essential solution for the general type of patients, who are 
under insulin therapy. This means that they can offer useful 
features, but they might not guarantee a better management for 
insulin therapy. In contrast, if we go back and look at the 
pumps features in the previous section regarding the 
comparison between MDI and pump technologies, many of the 
pumps features promote a better management process, which, 
as a result, leads to a better adherence to insulin medication. 
Achieving a high level of insulin adherence can help achieve a 
tight glycemic control as well. (i.e., few episodes of 
Hypoglycemia\Hyperglycemia). If we return to the results 
section, and then observe the results related the expected 
improvements after using intelligent pens, we will find most of 
the participants were concerned about the encounter of 
Hypoglycemia and Hyperglycemia episodes. This is actually a 
common issue among diabetic patients. Generally, we will find 
many concerned patients, who are looking for convenient ways 
that would help them minimize the fluctuation in their glucose 
readings.  
B. Next Steps in Technology Development 
Dr. John Walsh gave an interesting design for intelligent 
insulin pens in his own website [13]. If we want to follow the 
same suggested model by adding some high-tech features, such 
as carbohydrate calculator or insulin level tracker, there is a 
high risk that this would cause a negative impact on the unit 
cost and simplicity of use.    
Cost was ranked as the highest hindrance within our 
collected data. If we compare the unit price of the intelligent 
insulin pens and average price of regular insulin pens, you will 
find a noticeable difference between the two. Nevertheless, 
high cost does not necessarily imply a product failure.  For 
example, pumps have always been known for their high 
costs—even under insurance coverage, but many patients still 
favor pumps over MDI for their performance and remarkable 
outcomes [14]. So, this implies that patients are willing to pass 
on costs as long as they can achieve a better level with their 
glycemic control.  
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Simplicity was always a wining factor in insulin pens, and 
at the same time, it could be the main reason for their slow 
movements within the technological development [15]. When 
we did a comparison between the intelligent insulin pens and 
regular insulin pens, it was obvious that the intelligent insulin 
pens way of use was slightly more complicated than the usual 
ways, but it was not as complicated as pumps , which require 
longer training to master. The point here is that when you add 
more functions to a certain device, you will need to add more 
controls to it, and the more controls you would have, the more 
complex it would become [16].   
 An alternative approach to the previous solution is to focus 
on the communication with smart devices and ubiquitous 
technologies. Smart devices today (e.g., Apple®’s iPhone and 
iPad or Android based devices) are remarked for their 
simplicity of use—even among non-technical users [17][18]; 
moreover, they have a powerful processing capability with a 
multiple way of communication (e.g., WiFi, Bluetooth and 
cloud computing). In the next sections, we will go through 
some details regarding this point; this will be followed by a 
suggested example to support our argument.  
C. Smart Devices and Diabetes  
Current smart devices have high connectivity and 
processing capabilities. They offer different types of functions, 
and allow achieving multiple kinds of tasks instantly (i.e., 
phoning, gaming, music players, photographing, Internet 
surfing, etc.).  As a result, people have become more attached 
to them more than before. Nowadays, smart devices 
connectivity is being utilized to create smart systems with 
unique features. For example, Google created their own Smart 
Glasses system by utilizing the connectivity between smart 
phones and wearable computing [19].  
Within diabetic management, there are multiple types of 
applications available within smart phones, which have been 
created to help patients to manage their diabetic daily routines; 
however, if you would go back and look at the summary  of 
our results, you would find that 79% of the participants were 
using smart devices, but only few of them 29% were using 
them for diabetic management. In one of our study, after 
conducting a couple of reviews to these applications, we found 
that the most notable reason, for that low usage,  was they were 
actually adding extra workload rather than saving.  Most of 
these applications lack intuitive features and require a lot of 
dedication from the patients’ side; for example, some of these 
applications require patients to enter their daily information 
manually each time; they lack the automated entry capability. 
The task for managing diabetes by itself is exhausting and 
require so much dedication; so if the tools are not going to be 
intuitive and smart enough, they are just going to be 
bothersome rather than helpful.  
In the result section, you remember that the participants 
gave generally a positive rating to the communication of smart 
devices with intelligent insulin pens. This was under the 
conditions that smart devices could provide a couple of useful 
functions for diabetic management. If the patients could not 
sense a benefit from this type of communication, they would 
simply be neutral or negative about this idea. So we can 
conclude that unless smart devices would provide practical 
functions 
that 
would 
help 
effectively 
with 
diabetic 
management, they are just going to remain an optional tool for 
diabetic management.  
D. Connectivity of  Smart Devices and Intelligent Insulin Pens  
A US company, called Telcare Inc. [20], released a cellular 
based glucometer, named by the same name as the company 
(Telcare BGM). As soon as the patient makes a blood glucose 
test, it will automatically send the record to all the registered 
devices through the cloud server. The good part here is that 
rather than downloading the data from the glucometer into the 
personal devices each time, all the data can be automatically 
available for the patient anytime in any of the patient’s 
personal device.  
Imagine that same above feature can be applied within 
intelligent insulin pens. So as soon as the patient would take 
the required dose, the intelligent pen will send that record 
automatically into the cloud server, and then from the cloud 
server into the diabetic manager software installed in the 
patient’s devices. This will ease the process for creating the 
daily diabetic trend (i.e., glucose level data associated with 
other information), which is considered valuable information 
for diabetic management. As we have mentioned before, the 
use of diabetes management apps might not be that beneficial 
for all patients, but with technologies like the cloud, the 
process of entering patient's daily data can be totally 
automated, and as a result, it will save the time and efforts.  
There are several types of communications today, which 
allow a direct communication between different types of 
devices (e.g., Bluetooth, ZigBee, WiFi, etc.), but the current 
trend and most promising one is the communication through 
cloud 
technology. 
Although 
a 
lot 
of 
sectors 
(e.g., 
communication, gaming, e-commerce, etc.) are already 
utilizing the cloud computing technology effectively today, the 
healthcare sector is still a little bit slow in adapting this 
technology [21]. The reasons might go back to the differences 
between regulations in handling healthcare data globally [22], 
or the risks associated with the multiple threats surrounding the 
cloud technology [23]. Nevertheless, we cannot ignore how 
useful the cloud computing have become in handling our daily 
data; there is actually a huge grow in the size of usage because 
of that. Healthcare can also benefit from the cloud technology 
either through the cost reduction, better health service at home 
or continues processing of medical data [24]. The good news is 
that experts are aware of this potential and they are trying 
multiple ways to overcome the sensitivity within the healthcare 
data.  
We are suggesting here some applications, as an example, 
which can utilize the cloud technologies and smart devices to 
encourage a better diabetic routines: 
The suggested system (Figure 5) is similar to the current 
iOS “Reminders” cloud-based system; in the Apple®’s 
“Reminders”  app, as soon as the user would set a reminder, it 
will be activated in all the devices associated with the user’s 
iCloud account. The user can deactivate (i.e., check the 
reminder) from any device available in hands at that moment. 
Imagine that we can apply the same concept for doses 
221
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 5. A cloud-based doses reminder system for MDI therapy 
 
reminder; however, rather than letting the patients deactivate 
the reminder alarm manually, the device should check the 
collected records and verify if the patient has taken the required 
dose or not. If the device could not find the required record, it 
would keep snoozing until it would make sure that the patient 
has taken the required dose. This system can be useful for the 
daily basal type of doses (i.e., background insulin dose such 
Glargine or Detemir). This type of doses requires to be taken 
within a fixed period of time (within 12 or 24 hours) in order to 
assure a better glycemic control [25].  Applying this type of 
systems can encourage the patient to follow a better adherence 
to the medication. Remember in our collected data, patients 
ranked the reminder system and automated collection of dose 
records 
as 
the 
most 
desirable 
features 
within 
the 
communication between intelligent insulin pens and smart 
devices.  
Diabetic technology has probably advanced a lot in the last 
recent years, but diabetic researchers might need to expand 
their vision by utilizing technologies, such as cloud computing 
and smart systems, and offer more smart ways to manage the 
diabetes milieus.     
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Since their early days, insulin pens have been known for 
their simplicity and accuracy among MDI therapy adopters. 
Nevertheless, insulin pens were too slow in catching up with 
their counterpart, the pumping therapy, which have been 
known for their continues enhancements all the way long. 
Intelligent insulin pens models have recently been introduced 
to the market—as a new attempt to raise insulin pens 
technology to the next level. In order to evaluate the necessity 
of this technology, we conducted a couple of case studies 
among a group of insulin dependent patients. The case studies 
involved a couple of questions related to diabetes mellitus 
management itself among this group, and the evaluation of 
current and future vision about intelligent insulin pens. We 
thought that the current technologies could be an optional 
instrument for general patients, and only essential for those 
who have serious issue with their active memory, or for those 
who have high insulin sensitivity. We concluded that future 
enhancement of intelligent insulin pens should target general 
patients and focus on easing the diabetic management 
activities—for example, adding features like carbohydrate 
calculators or insulin level trackers; however, we have some 
concerns regarding this point, we think that enhancing the 
technology within pens themselves might cause a negative 
impact on the final product—elevation of unit price and 
complexity of use. We suggest an alternative approach that 
focuses on the utilization of current ubiquitous technologies, 
such as smart devices and cloud computing. Smart devices 
today are featured with high utilities and processing power. 
Cloud technology as well has grown effectively in the recent 
years.  In our particular case—the diabetes milieus—we 
believe that these types of technologies can be utilized to 
provide many useful applications for diabetic management, 
which could help saving a lot of workload associated with 
diabetic management routines.  
Finally, we want to point that our conducted study was too 
limited. First, the sample size was a small number. Results 
from small sample size are not representative. So if we want to 
have an absolute opinion about replacing regular pens with 
intelligent insulin pens, we need to collect a larger sample size, 
which can be enough for conducting a statistical analysis. 
Second, the collected data were mostly from online 
communities. This means that the data will exclude patients 
who have limited technological background, or who have 
limited access to the wide world network. A Future move can 
focus on recruiting people through medical centers and clinics, 
and let them doing the surveys during their regular visits. 
Lastly, the participants' feedback was based on demonstration, 
visual aids and few usability studies. This type of feedback 
cannot uncover all the pros and cons related to the usage of 
intelligent insulin pens. More longer and deeper usability 
studies are needed in order to provide a full picture about the 
effectiveness of of intelligent insulin pens for insulin therapy.  
Future studies should also focus on the importance of using 
technologies, 
such 
as 
smart 
devices, 
within 
diabetic 
management, and how to make them more accessible for most 
patients. Also, in order to support the argument concerning the 
communication of intelligent insulin pens with smart devices, 
we suggest creating prototypes that utilize latest technologies, 
such as cloud computing, and test their usability among 
diabetic patients. We hope that these findings would provide a 
positive contribution toward simplifying the complexity of 
diabetic management. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
Our thanks to DiabetES FB group and all the people who 
helped us with survey recruitment process. Also, our thanks to 
Ms. Hadia Nusrat for her consultation.   
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Rex, K. H. Jensen, and S. A. Lawton, "A review of 20 years’ 
experience with the Novopen® family of insulin injection devices," 
Clinical drug investigation, vol. 26, no.7, July 2006, pp. 367-401.  
[2] 
B. M. Wright, J. M. Bellone, and E. K. McCoy, "A Review of Insulin 
pen Devices and Use in the elderly Diabetic population," Clinical 
medicine insights, Endocrinology and diabetes, vol. 3, Nov. 2010, pp. 
53. 
[3] 
J. Selam, "Evolution of diabetes insulin delivery devices," Journal of 
diabetes science and technology, vol. 4, no.3, May 2010, pp. 505-513. 
222
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[4] 
R. L. Hall, T. Willgoss, L. J. Humphrey, and J. H. Kongsø, "The effect 
of medical device dose-memory functions on patients’ adherence to 
treatment, confidence, and disease self-management," Patient Preference 
and Adherence, vol. 8, May 2014, pp. 775-788. 
[5] 
L. Xue and K. H. Mikkelsen, "Dose accuracy of a durable insulin pen 
with memory function, before and after simulated lifetime use and under 
stress conditions," Expert opinion on drug delivery, vol.10, no.3, Mar. 
2013, pp. 301-306. 
[6] 
B. S. Olsen, S. K. Lilleøre, C. N. Korsholm, and T. Kracht, "Novopen 
Echo® for the delivery of insulin: a comparison of usability, 
functionality and preference among pediatric subjects, their parents, and 
health care professionals," Journal of diabetes science and technology 
vol.4, no.6, Nov. 2010, pp. 1468-1475. 
[7] 
A. Brown et al., “ CLOSERLOOK” (Report presented at the 47th annual 
meeting for European Association for the Study of Diabetes, Lisbon, 
Portugal, September 12-16, 2011). 
[8] 
G. Scheiner, Until There Is a Cure: The Latest and Greatest in Diabetes 
Self-Care, Michigan: Spry Publishing LLC, 2013. 
[9] 
H. Anhalt and N. J. V. Bohannon, "Insulin patch pumps: their 
development and future in closed-loop systems," Diabetes technology & 
therapeutics, vol. 12, no. S1, June 2010. pp. S-51. 
[10] R. Hovorka, "Continuous glucose monitoring and closed ‐ loop 
systems," Diabetic medicine, vol. 23, no. 1, Jan. 2006, pp. 1-12. 
[11] S. D. Breslin, D. A. Ignaut, and D. E. Boyd, "Lessons Learned during 
the Development of HumaPen® Memoir™, an Insulin Pen with a 
Memory Feature," Journal of diabetes science and technology, vol. 4, 
no. 3, May 2010, pp. 540-546. 
[12] C. Klinkert, R. Bachran, B. Heidtmann, M. Grabert, R. W. Holl, and 
DPV-Initiative, "Age-specific characteristics of the basal insulin-rate for 
pediatric patients on CSII," Experimental and clinical endocrinology & 
diabetes, vol. 116, no. 2, Feb. 2008, pp. 118-122. 
[13] J. Walsh, "The Smart Insulin Pen," Diabetesnet.com, 2004, accessed 
August 13, 2014,  
http://www.diabetesnet.com/diabetes-technology/blue-skying/smart-
insulin-pen 
[14] R. P. L. M. Hoogma et al., "Comparison of the effects of continuous 
subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) and NPH‐based multiple daily 
insulin injections (MDI) on glycaemic control and quality of life: results 
of the 5‐nations trial," Diabetic Medicine, vol. 23, no. 2, Feb. 2006, pp. 
141-147. 
[15] L. Heinemann, "Insulin Pens and New Ways of Insulin Delivery," 
Diabetes technology & therapeutics, vol. 16, no. S1, Feb. 2014, pp. S-
44. 
[16] J. H. Choi and H. Lee, "Facets of simplicity for the smartphone 
interface: A structural model," International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, vol. 70, no. 2, Feb. 2012, pp. 129-142. 
[17] A. L. Culén and A. Gasparini, "iPad: a new classroom technology? A 
report from two pilot studies," INFuture Proceedings, Nov. 2011, pp. 
199-208. 
[18] C. Stößel, H. Wandke, and L. Blessing, "Gestural interfaces for elderly 
users: help or hindrance?," In Gesture in Embodied Communication and 
Human-Computer Interaction, pp. 269-280, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
2010. 
[19] T. Starner, "Project glass: An extension of the self," Pervasive 
Computing, IEEE, vol. 12, no. 2, Apr. 2013, pp. 14-16. 
[20] M. Elawad, "Demonstration of Telcare’s cellular and cloud based," 
iMedicalApps, 2014, accessed August 13, 2014,  
http://www.imedicalapps.com/2014/03/telcare-cellular-glucometer/ 
[21] B. Eastwood, “Healthcare Finally Warming to Cloud Technology,” CIO, 
November 18, 2013, accessed August 13, 2014,  
http://www.cio.com/article/2380823/healthcare/healthcare-finally-
warming-to-cloud-technology.html 
[22] J. J. M. Seddon and W. L. Currie, "Cloud computing and trans-border 
health data: Unpacking US and EU healthcare regulation and 
compliance," Health policy and technology, vol. 2, no. 4, Dec. 2013, pp. 
229-241. 
[23] N. Pitropakis, E. Darra, N. Vrakas, and C. Lambrinoudakis, "It's All in 
the Cloud: Reviewing Cloud Security," In Ubiquitous Intelligence and 
Computing, 2013 IEEE 10th International Conference on and 10th 
International Conference on Autonomic and Trusted Computing 
(UIC/ATC), IEEE, Dec. 2013, pp. 355-362. 
[24] A. M. Kuo, "Opportunities and challenges of cloud computing to 
improve health care services," Journal of medical Internet research, vol. 
13, no. 3, Sep. 2011, e67, doi:10.2196/jmir.1867. 
[25] M. Peyrot, A. H. Barnett, L. F. Meneghini, and P. M. Schumm-Draeger, 
"Insulin adherence behaviours and barriers in the multinational Global 
Attitudes of Patients and Physicians in Insulin Therapy study," Diabetic 
Medicine, vol. 29, no. 5, May 2012, pp. 682-689. 
 
223
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

