Specialist Decision Support for Patients with Ventricular Assist Devices 
 
M.G. Tsipouras, A.T. Tzallas, E.C. Karvounis, 
Biomedical Research Institute – FORTH 
Ioannina, Greece  
Unit of Medical Technology and Intelligent Information 
Systems, Dept. of Material Science & Engineering, 
University of Ioannina 
Ioannina, Greece 
markos@cs.uoi.gr, atzallas@cc.uoi.gr, ekarvouni@cc.uoi.gr  
 
J. Terrovitis 
3rd Cardiology Department, School of Medicine University 
of Athens 
Athens, Greece 
john.terrovitis@gmail.com  
N.S. Katertsidis,Y. Goletsis, K. Stefanou, D.I. Fotiadis 
Biomedical Research Institute – FORTH 
Ioannina, Greece 
Unit of Medical Technology and Intelligent Information 
Systems, Dept. of Material Science & Engineering, 
University of Ioannina 
Ioannina, Greece 
nkaterts@cc.uoi.gr, goletsis@cc.uoi.gr, kstefan@cc.uoi.gr, 
fotiadis@cs.uoi.gr  
M.G. Trivella 
Istituto di Fisiologia Clinica-CNR  
Pisa, Italy  
trivella@ifc.cnr.it  
 
Abstract—This work presents the Specialist’s Decision Support 
System (SDSS), which is one of the main components of the 
SensorART platform. SensorART focuses on the management 
and remote treatment of patients which suffer from heart 
failure and are treated with ventricular assist devices (VADs). 
SDSS is a Web-based application that assists specialists on 
patient’s management, offering a plethora of tools for 
monitoring, designing the best therapy plan, analyzing data, 
extracting new knowledge and making informative decisions.  
Keywords-Ventricular 
assist 
devices; 
decision 
support 
system; web aplications 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Heart failure (HF) is an inability of the heart to fill with 
enough blood or pump with enough force or both the human 
body. It develops over time as the pumping action of the 
heart grows weaker and can affect the left side and/or the 
right side of the heart. The most common causes of HF 
include: high blood pressure (hypertension), coronary heart 
disease, heart valve disease, and cardiomyopathy. HF is the 
most increasing cause of death in developed countries; 
approximately 2% of the adult population suffers from HF, 
although it mainly affects elderly people (6-10% of people 
over the age of 65 years will develop HF) [1]. Hence, 
together with the difficulty of having a sufficient number of 
donor organs, it is recognized that the VADs will assume an 
increasingly important role in treating the growing number of 
patients with advanced HF, not only as bridge to transplant, 
but also as destination therapy, by considering also the 
ageing population. 
Over the past three decades, technological advancements 
have led to the development of a series of implantable and 
external VADs for patients of every age and body size. 
However, most of these commercial VADs still share a 
common drawback. They do not provide to the specialists 
remote monitoring and/or controlling possibilities. The 
patient must visit the hospital, in order for the specialist to 
assess his/her condition. Continuous automatic remote 
monitoring systems and database systems are in the early 
stage of development with only a few relevant research 
studies reported [2-5]. 
SensorART aims to provide a set of technologies for 
heart assistance, supporting patients with chronic HF, treated 
at home without renouncing to access high medical 
expertise, and healthcare specialists keeping under control 
the performance of cardiovascular implanted VAD by 
remote control services. This platform moves from the 
concept of realizing an “upgraded device”, thus starting from 
a VAD that is a mechanical device with the plan of 
developing an intelligent device.  
In general, the SensorART platform consists of five main 
parts: (i) Sensor component, (ii) Signal Acquisition 
component, (iii) Hardware Controller, (iv) Remote Control 
Framework, and (v) Specialist’s Decision Support System 
(SDSS), which is described in this paper. SDSS assists the 
specialists on deciding the best treatment strategy for a 
specific patient. It includes: a VAD-heart simulation 
component that gives to the specialists the possibility of 
modeling the behavior of a patient before and after VAD 
implantation, as well as a Decision Support System 
providing data analysis and projection tools.  
II. 
SDSS PLATFORM 
The SensorART SDSS is a Web-based platform that 
enables specialists with advanced data-driven and expert-
knowledge techniques, in order to effectively assess and 
exploit real patient data (from the Specialist’s Monitoring 
Application), as well as simulated patient data (from the 
VAD-Heart Simulation Platform) through the following 
components: (i) Knowledge Discovery, (ii) Monitoring, (iii) 
Treatment, (iv) Weaning, (v) VAD Suction, and (vi) VAD 
Speed. The modules menu in the SensorART Web-platform 
is presented in Fig. 1.  
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 1.  Specialist’s Tools menu in the SensorART platform. 
A. Knowledge Discovery 
The knowledge discovery module includes two sub-
modules; the association rules tool and the statistics tool.  
1) Association Rules Tool: The Association Rules Tool 
allows the extraction of association rules from the database, 
enabling thus the extraction of new knowledge from 
multiple and heterogeneous archived data. The procedure 
depends on the patients selection, the examined features, the 
observation period and the support/confidence for the rule 
mining technique, which is the the Apriori algorithm [7]. 
All the above are defined from the specialist, who: (i) 
selects some or all patients from the database, (ii) defines 
the features (and, if needed, corresponding threshold values) 
to be examined, (iii) sets an observation period and 
appropriate values for support and confidence. Based on the 
above selections, associations hidden in the data are derived 
in the form of “if – then” rules, with the features (variables 
from the database) and conditions in the “if” and “then” 
parts defined by the user. The features that can be selected 
are categorized as: (i) demographic – comorbidities, (ii) 
heart related, (iii) sensor related, and (iv) laboratory 
measurements. The outcome of the Association Rule Tool is 
presented in Fig. 2. 
2) Statistics Tool: The statistics tool provides all the 
necessary tools for the analysis and interpretation of patient 
data through powerful statistical techniques. These include 
descriptive statistics (mean, standard deviation, median, 
variance) along with statistical functions such as hypothesis 
testing (one Sample and two-Sample t-test, pair-sample t-
test, Welch corrected t-test), analysis of variance (ANOVA), 
nonparametric tests (Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA, Wilcoxon 
test for one sample and paired Sample) and survival analysis 
(Kaplan-Meier estimator). A sample for the Kaplan-Meier 
survival analysis is presented in Fig. 3. 
 
Figure 2.  Association Rules Tool outcome. 
 
Figure 3.  Kaplan-Meier survival analysis from the statistics tool.  
 
 
 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

B. Monitoring 
The monitoring module provides a graphical tool for 
examining the day-to-day VAD and patient parameters along 
with any adverse events that may have occurred. The patient 
and the parameters that will be included in the graph are 
selected by the specialist. The features that can be selected 
are: pump flow/speed/power, pulse index, temperature, 
systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulses, weight, INR 
and drug dosage (warfarin/acenocoumarin), while the 
adverse events that are recorded include: death, cerebral 
bleeding, gastrointestinal bleeding, ischemic stroke, transient 
ischemic attack, ventricular tachycardia and heart failure. A 
snapshot of the patient and parameters selection along with 
the graphical result of the monitoring module is presented in 
Fig. 4. 
Furthermore, the Monitoring module is able to provide 
assessment for future adverse events appearance. The main 
idea is to analyze the day-to-day data for the last three days 
and assess the possibility of adverse event appearance in the 
next day. Subsequently, the functionality is available only if 
data for the last three days exist. The assessment model has 
been developed using data from the SensorART database in 
order to train a decision tree. Currently data from 8 patients, 
that generate 1026 prototypes have been used for the 
decision tree induction, however, the model is constantly 
updated as new data are stored in the database (i.e. retained 
with larger datasets).  
 
 
Figure 4.  Monitoring module outcome. 
C. Treatment 
 
The treatment module can provide risk analysis based on 
known risk scores, in order to support effective treatment of 
patients. These include:  
• 
the Heart Failure Survival Score (HFSS), 
• 
the Seattle Heart Failure Model (SHFM), 
• 
the Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) 
(due to its potential prediction on survival and need 
for blood transfusion), 
• 
the Right Ventricular Failure Risk Score (RVFRS) 
to predict right failure that constitutes a serious 
complication.  
D. Weaning  
The Weaning module combines expert knowledge with 
fuzzy modeling, in order to support the specialists in the 
selection of patients that may be removed from the VAD 
therapy. The main idea is to achieve a mixture-of-experts 
approach, in terms of having multiple models for weaning in 
the module. These include all state-of-the-art medical 
knowledge-based models presented in the literature. In 
addition, the specialist can create and modify additional 
models (collection of if-then rules), using the build-in model 
generator. Furthermore, the module incorporates an 
automated fuzzy model generator [8], aiming on an efficient 
way of automatically transforming crisp models (either from 
the literature or user-defined) into fuzzy ones.  
The knowledge-based models that have been included 
from the literature are the ones presented by Santelices et al. 
[9] and Birks et al. [10]. The user can either view or execute 
one of the existing models or create a new one, which is 
subsequently added in the list of existing models and can be 
also viewed/executed. Also, the user can modify all user-
defined models, but not the ones from the literature. A 
snapshot of the view/execute model screen is presented in 
Fig. 5. 
 
Figure 5.  Model selection in the Weaning module. 
E. VAD Suction  
The VAD suction module provides to the specialists a 
powerful assistant in their attempt to effectively analyze their 
simulation sessions from the VAD-Heart Simulation 
Platform in terms of the suction phenomenon. Used in 
combination with the VAD-Heart Simulation Platform, it 
enables specialists to further analyses data from simulation 
sessions recognizing suction events (Fig. 6).  
 
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 6.  Visual representation of suction module results. 
F. VAD Speed  
The VAD speed module provides to the specialists a 
powerful assistant in their attempt to effectively plan the 
treatment strategy for a patient. It proposes adjustments to 
pump speed settings according to the required cardiac output 
and pressure perfusion. Used in combination with the VAD-
Heart Simulation Platform and VAD suction module, it 
enables specialists to further analyse data from simulation 
sessions, identify different pump states and possible issues, 
as well as draw conclusions regarding the most appropriate 
pump speed settings. 
III. 
CONLUSION 
In this paper, the SDSS platform of the SensorART 
project is presented and all major tools and functionalities 
are illustrated. The SDSS has been specifically designed with 
close collaboration with medical experts, in order to address 
all major issues and provide all necessary tools for specialists 
treating VAD patients, in a single platform. In the same 
context, it includes all medical models and all available 
medical knowledge regarding VADs and patients with 
VADs. However, instead of being just a simple collection of 
medical and technical knowledge, in SDSS these are 
harmonically merged with computational intelligence, data 
mining and fuzzy modeling techniques, along with the first 
specially built database for VAD patients, thus leading to a 
powerful tool that can support specialists to any decision 
needed regarding the optimal management of VAD patients. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This study is partially supported by the SensorART 
project (“A remote controlled Sensorized ARTificial heart 
enabling 
patients 
empowerment 
and 
new 
therapy 
approaches”, FP7-248763). 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. J. McMurray and M. A. Pfeffer, “Heart failure,” Lancet, 
vol. 365(9474), pp. 1877–1889, 2005. 
[2] E. Okamoto, E. Iwazawa, S. Suzuki, S. Fukuoka, and Y. 
Mitamura, “Feasibility of a remote monitoring system for 
patients with an implantable left ventricular assist device 
using Personal Handy-Phone System telecommunication 
technology,” J. Artif. Organs, vol. 4(3), pp. 172–179, 2001. 
[3] R. Kosaka, Y. Sankai, R. Takiya, T. Jikuya, T. Yamane, and 
T. Tsutsui, “Tsukuba Remote Monitoring System for 
Continuous-Flow Artificial Heart,” Artif. Organs, vol. 27(10), 
pp. 897–906, 2003. 
[4] J. Chung, J. H. Lee, J. Choi, J. Lee, W. G. Kim, K. Sun, and 
B. G. Min, “Home care artificial heart monitoring system via 
internet,” Int. J. Artif. Organs, vol. 27(10), pp. 898–903, 
2004. 
[5] J. Choi, J. W. Park, J. Chung, and B. G. Min, “An intelligent 
remote monitoring system for artificial heart,” IEEE Trans. 
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 9(4), pp. 564–573, 2005. 
[6] K. W. Nam, J. J. Lee, C. M. Hwang, S. W. Choi, H. S. Son, 
and K. Sun, “Personal digital assistant-based, internet-enabled 
remote communication system for a wearable pneumatic 
biventricular assist device,” Artif. Organs, vol. 31(11), pp. 
842–845, 2007. 
[7] R. Agrawal and R. Srikant. “Fast algorithms for mining 
association rules in large databases,” Proc. 20th Int. Conf. 
Very Large Data Bases, Sept. 1994, pp. 487-499.  
[8] M. G. Tsipouras, T. P. Exarchos, and D. I. Fotiadis, “A 
methodology for automated fuzzy model generation,” Fuzzy 
Sets and Systems, vol. 159(23), pp. 3201-3220, 2008. 
[9] L. C. Santelices, Y. Wang, D. Severyn, M. J. Druzdzel, R. L. 
Kormos, and J. F. Antaki, “Development of a Hybrid 
Decision Support Model for Optimal Ventricular Assist 
Device Weaning,” Ann Thorac Surg 90 (2010), 713-720. 
[10] E. J. Birks, R. S. George, and M. Hedger, T. Bahrami, C. T. 
Bowles, C. Webb, R. Bougard, M. Amrani, M. H. Yacoub, G. 
Dreyfus, and A. Khaghani, “Reversal of severe heart failure 
with a continuous-flow left ventricular assist device and 
pharmacological therapy: a prospective study,” Circulation, 
vol. 123, pp. 381-390, 2011. 
 
 
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

