An Enhanced Approach for the Prioritisation in Patent Ductus Arteriosus (PDA) 
Services Using Data Mining Techniques 
Noura Alzeer, Hessah A. Alsalamah, Alaaeldin Hafez 
College of Computer and Information Sciences, King Saud University 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
e-mail: noura.alzeer@gmail.com, {halsalamah, hafez}@ksu.edu.sa 
 
Abstract— The past few decades have witnessed a huge 
increase in the number of heart disease patients globally.  An 
estimated 17.7 million people died from Cardio-Vascular 
Diseases (CVDs) in 2015, representing 31% of all global deaths. 
Saudi Arabia is no exception when it comes to the growing 
number of CVDs patients. The most common CVDs in Saudi 
Arabia is Patent Ductus Arteriosus (PDA), which is a persistent 
opening between two major blood vessels leading from the 
heart. Unlike many other fields of medicine, PDA is time-
related and cannot be delayed.  Thus, there is a need to have a 
Decision Support System (DSS) that can analyze the crucial 
statistics in deciding the level of urgency for each child that 
requires PDA surgery. This research proposes an approach to 
classify the PDA patients according to their urgency level based 
on their current conditions and the results of scans and tests 
they have undergone. An enhanced approach, which uses Data 
Mining (DM) techniques, is proposed to manage waiting lists 
and determine the priority among patients, as well as diagnosis 
of certain diseases. This approach aims to support early 
prevention and intervention to increase life expectancy and 
well-being of PDA patients. Our proposed approach achieved 
an accuracy of 99.15%. 
Keywords- Data Mining (DM); Healthcare; Patent Ductus 
Arteriosus (PDA); Waiting Lists Management.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 The alarming growth in pediatric and adult CVDs is now 
a major threat to world health [2]. The causes of CVDs 
include, but are not limited to diet through bad eating habits, 
obesity, and modern day lifestyle included stress. Other 
reasons may include general heart disease which can be 
hereditary, age and routine life pressure which can all be 
contributory to CVDs. There are at least eighteen distinct 
types of congenital heart defects that are recognized, with 
many additional anatomic variations [3]. 
 This study focuses on one type, called PDA. In pre-term 
babies, the closure of the Ductus Arteriosus (DA) may be 
delayed after birth and is influenced by factors, such as 
gestation and development at birth, Respiratory Distress 
Syndrome (RDS), artificial mechanical ventilation, infection 
and lack of antenatal steroid treatment. These risk factors 
are more common amongst babies who require intensive 
care [2]. Persistent patency of the DA is therefore more 
common in pre-term infants; in over 50-60% of cases where 
babies are born at less than 29 weeks’ gestation, the DA 
does not naturally close. This is known as a PDA [3]. 
In Saudi Arabia, physicians undertake a detailed medical 
examination of all pre-term infants, including examining the 
infant specifically for any PDA symptoms [4]. If any such 
symptoms are discovered, the newborn infant will receive 
immediate treatment.  However, in full-term healthy babies, 
conditions, such as PDA are rarely checked.  It is only if 
physicians or parents notice any PDA symptoms or if the 
child’s non-diagnosed condition becomes critical to the 
point when it require prompt medical intervention that any 
treatment for PDA is given. Because of the increasing 
numbers of PDA patients in Saudi Arabia, it is important to 
raise the awareness of this disease and to educate parents, 
explaining the symptoms of this disease to ensure that 
patients are diagnosed as early as possible and thus receive 
the proper treatment as early as possible. It is also important 
for hospitals, once a patient is diagnosed with PDA, to 
ensure the patients have access to treatment in a timely 
manner. DM techniques, especially classification, have been 
used in many different medical fields, such as managing 
waiting lists and determining priorities among patients, as 
well as the diagnosis of certain diseases. In this research, we 
propose a hybrid approach of classification, clustering and 
association rules to determine not only life and death cases, 
but also cases which are both urgent and not urgent, and the 
urgency level within each category using the association 
rules. A DSS is used when scheduling patients or pre-
planning a date for their scheduled treatment, procedure or 
surgery, and it is believed to have a positive impact on the 
current process.  
The paper is organized as follows. Section II explains 
the importance of this work. Section III describes the 
theoretical background. Section IV presents related works to 
this research. Section V outlines the proposed research 
methodology, followed by Section VI, which shows how 
DM is used to build a model to diagnose PDA patients 
according to their urgency level. Section VII discusses the 
results obtained from the proposed model. Finally, the 
conclusion and future work of this research are found in 
Section VIII. 
II. IMPORTANCE OF THE STUDY 
Many guidelines have been published to determine the 
importance of diagnosing the urgency of PDA.  This 
urgency can be summarized into two categories; life and 
death.  Any delay in diagnosing the urgency could have a 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

tragic fatal outcome, but early diagnosis and intervention 
can result in the increased life expectancy and well-being of 
the patient. 
This study uses DM techniques to study and analyze 
PDA patients’ records collected from King Fahd Medical 
City (KFMC) in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, to build a new 
standard model to diagnose PDA and determine the urgency 
levels of PDA patients, depending on their existing medical 
condition, via results of scans and other tests carried out. It 
also presents recommendations for testing newborn babies 
for any PDA symptoms. This will help parents to receive 
the appropriate timely treatment for PDA for their infant 
before the condition worsens and requires surgery. The 
model is tested on new patients and its results are compared 
to those results provided by the physicians at KFMC to 
determine its accuracy. The model is also presented to 
further specialist heart physicians from different hospitals in 
Saudi 
Arabia 
to 
be 
tested. 
Their 
comments 
and 
recommendations are used to modify the original model to 
reach its final result.   Having a DSS, which uses a standard 
model to provide an accurate urgency level for each PDA 
case, will save patients and their family time and money 
instead of trying to obtain various consultations from 
different physicians in different hospitals.  Ultimately, there 
is also the cost-saving factor to the physician and hospital to 
be considered in reducing multiple appointments, as well as 
reducing 
multiple 
tests. 
 
The 
mere 
reduction 
in 
appointments alone opens up the availability of allocating 
an appointment to another patient.  Overall, the hospital will 
also save large sums of money from the reduction of 
multiple examinations, tests and procedures, some of which 
are unnecessary as they may well be repetitive and thus not 
conducive to the well-being of the patient. 
III. RELATED WORK 
Extensive research has been conducted studying the long 
waiting list problems, especially within medical fields. 
Some research focused on how to arrange priorities of these 
waiting lists and others dealt with how to reduce the general 
waiting times.   Either way, what is definitive is that, 
generally, there is far greater demand over supply that 
results in waiting times and more extensive waiting lists.   
A recent study [5] used statistical techniques to compare 
waiting lists for hip and knee arthroplasty at Groote Schuur 
Hospital in Cape Town in South Africa with the waiting 
lists kept by the surgeons at that hospital. The results 
showed that the hospital’s waiting list is inaccurate because 
of the poor data management; for example, in many cases, 
the list did not have the current contact details of the 
patients. It also identified unfairness of waiting times among 
the patients. The research recommended the use of a 
scoring-based prioritization system which uses clinical 
diagnosis and tests results, radiographic and societal 
parameters to manage the waiting lists fairly.  
A significant amount of research focused on using DM 
techniques in general in the healthcare sector [6]-[9] showed 
the benefits of applying different types of DM techniques in 
disease diagnosis and finding side effects of certain 
medicines, for example. However, they did not focus on one 
type of disease or on the type of DM techniques. Other 
studies used one or more DM techniques to predict or 
diagnose one type of disease; for example, recent research 
[10] used Naïve Bayes and WAC (Weighted Associated 
Classifier) to predict whether a patient has a risk of heart 
diseases or not. The study used factors, such as age, sex, 
whether 
diabetic, 
height, 
weight, 
blood 
pressure, 
cholesterol, fasting blood sugar and hypertension to predict 
the possibility of having heart diseases. In another study, the 
focus was on using DM techniques in oral cancer patients 
[11] and the authors showed that all the models built for 
predicting the survivability of oral cancer patients show 
similar results and performance.  However, they did prove 
that the TreeBoost model is slightly better than the others as 
all 18 predictors they used in their research are considered 
for each spit. They showed the experimental results of 
probability adjustment, threshold analysis and lift-gain are 
also slightly better in the TreeBoost model.   Therefore, they 
concluded that the TreeBoost classiﬁcation model is an 
effective system for determining the survival rate of oral 
cancer patients. Rogers and Joyner [12] shows a special type 
of DM technique, called SAS software (Statistical Analysis 
Software), that can be utilized as a solution for the 
increasing costs in the healthcare sector and to improve the 
quality of service and care provided by hospitals and 
healthcare centers. The authors of the study discussed the 
DM methodology used in SAS software and applied it when 
studying the factors affecting the healthcare industry. It was 
shown that it can be used to solve serious and critical 
problems in the healthcare sector. This research is an 
example of applying types of DM (Statistical Analysis in 
this case) on medical data sets. Finally, in a closely-related 
study to this research topic [13], the authors submitted a 
survey of current techniques of knowledge discovery in 
databases, using DM techniques that are used in today’s 
medical research, particularly in Heart Disease Prediction. 
When predicting a heart attack, 15 characteristics are listed 
and with basic DM technique, other approaches, such as 
Artificial Neural Network (ANN), Time Series, Clustering 
and Association Rules and soft competing approaches can 
also be combined.  
     This research focuses on using the basic information 
about the patient, such as age and results of scans, to 
provide an initial diagnosis of PDA. This helps to predict 
PDA cases as early as possible, especially in small towns 
which are far from large hospitals in major cities. It helps 
hospitals schedule urgent cases of PDA in waiting lists 
according to their urgency level. 
IV. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
     In this study, DM techniques are used to diagnose PDA 
and to arrange patients according to their urgency level. To 
gain a better understanding of this study, it is important to 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

first understand what PDA is, what DM techniques are and 
how they work.  
A. Patent Ductus Arteriosus (PDA) 
PDA is “a persistent opening between two major blood 
vessels leading from the heart. The opening, called the 
ductus arteriosus, is a normal part of a baby's circulatory 
system before birth that usually closes shortly after birth. If it 
remains open, however, it is called a patent ductus 
arteriosus.” [14]. This opening allows a great deal of blood to 
enter the lungs and heart, causing extra blood pressure on the 
lungs and enlarging and weakening the heart. There are no 
clear causes for this disease, but genetics may play a role. A 
defect in one or more gene could prevent the DA from 
closing normally after birth [14]. Symptoms of PDA depend 
on the size of the defect. While small PDA can have no signs 
sometimes, large PDA can be detected as a result of different 
causes.  These include poor eating habits and consequently 
very slow growth, tiring and sweating during crying or 
eating, a rapid heart-beat and fast breathing [14]. Treatment 
for PDA can vary from medication or catheter-based 
procedures to surgery, depending on the age of the child and 
the size of the PDA [14] [15].  As PDA patient numbers 
increase, the pressure on hospitals to provide urgent care 
grows, whether this be interventional care or damage repair.  
Unlike other fields of medicine, in PDA, time is of essence 
and intervention cannot be delayed.  Thus, the need to create 
a system that can speedily analyze the statistics is crucial in 
determining the level of urgency for each child that requires 
PDA-related surgery.  
B. Data Mining (DM) 
DM is a process, which finds useful patterns from large 
quantities of data [16]. It is the core step of the knowledge 
discovery process [16].  These steps are: 
• 
Data selection:  This is the selection of applicable 
data and records from the one or more databases 
applicable to the relevant study. 
• 
Data preprocessing:  This step involves the removal 
of irrelevant items and data entries that are not 
connected 
to 
the 
work 
environment. 
Data 
preprocessing allows the transforming of the 
original data into a suitable shape to be used by a 
mining algorithm, before starting the process of DM 
algorithm analysis [17]. 
• 
Data transformation and enrichment process: This 
step 
contains 
the 
calculating 
of 
the 
new 
characteristics from the existing characteristics. 
• 
Data Mining: The application of DM techniques to 
the data to obtain new patterns and models. 
     DM can be carried out using numerous methods, 
depending on the type of data used and the result required 
from DM.  In this study, the focus will be on three DM 
techniques: Classification, Clustering and Association Rule.  
 
 
1) Classification: 
As the main process [18] that is included in DM 
systems, this maps the various types of data into well-
defined subgroups and classes. Another name for the 
classification process is Supervised Learning. Supervised 
Learning consists of two main stages; the first phase is a 
model construction and the second is model usage. Model 
construction: This phase contains the operations of building 
the used model in the structures of the attributes.  
Model usage: All the operations that are used in utilizing the 
model. 
2) Clustering: 
Clustering is a process of grouping physical or abstract 
objects into classes of similar objects. Clustering and 
Classification are both grouping methods. Clustering is an 
unsupervised classification, whereas Classification is a 
supervised grouping. Classification and Prediction are also 
related techniques. Classification predicts class labels [19] 
whereas Prediction predicts continuous-valued functions. 
The major clustering algorithms are: 
• 
Partitioning algorithms: Construct various partitions 
and then evaluate them according to certain criteria.  
• 
Hierarchy 
algorithms: 
Create 
a 
hierarchical 
decomposition of the set of data (or objects) using 
certain criteria.  
• 
Density-based: Based on connectivity and density 
functions.  
• 
Grid-based: Based on a multiple-level granularity 
structure.  
• 
Model-based: A model is hypothesized for each of 
the clusters and the idea is to find the best fit of that 
model for each other. 
     In this research, a portioning technique called K-Means 
is used [19]. This works with numerical values only, which 
suit the numerical measurements of the PDA scans. 
3) Association Rule Mining (ARM): 
The concept of ARM is considered to be one of the main 
studies in DM methods. Such rules associate one or more 
attributes of a dataset with another attribute, producing an 
if–then statement concerning attribute values. The original 
problem is the market basket analysis which tries to find all 
the interesting relations between the bought products. 
Sequential pattern mining attempts to find inter-session 
patterns, such as the presence of a set of items followed by 
another item in a time-ordered set of sessions or episodes.  
The association rule is an implication expression of the form 
X ! Y, where X and Y are disjoint item sets. The strength 
of the association rule can be measured by its support and 
confidence. Support determines how often a rule is 
applicable to a given dataset, while confidence determines 
how frequently items in Y appear in transactions that 
contain X [20].  
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

V. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
In this research, DM techniques are used to solve the 
problem of diagnosing and determining the urgency level of 
PDA patients.  DM can assist in classifying patients 
according to the urgency of their cases in order to 
recommend the correct course of treatment, or pre-plan a 
date for their scheduled treatment, procedure or surgery. 
Within this study, data relating to PDA patients will be 
gathered from patients’ records at KFMC, including their 
test results, image scans, medical history and physicians’ 
diagnosis. This data will be stored in tables after being 
checked and cleansed to eliminate any incomplete records 
and to transform the data into numeric values or classify it 
into categories to prepare it for the application of different 
DM techniques.  
Meetings with cardiology physicians at KFMC were 
initially conducted to discuss their approach to determine 
the urgency level for each PDA case. Physicians explained 
the main tests they carry out and scanned the images PDA 
patients have undertaken. Physicians provided a detailed 
explanation for each test and scan result, whilst showing the 
circumstances under which these results are considered 
normal, abnormal or critical.  This helped gain an initial 
understanding of exactly how the urgency of PDA patient’s 
urgency level is determined.  Afterwards, DM techniques 
were applied to this data to find one standard model to 
classify patients according to their urgency level. In this 
research, Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis 
(WEKA) application was used to apply DM techniques. 
WEKA contains tools for data pre-processing, classification, 
regression, clustering, association rules, and visualization 
[21], which facilitates the application of different DM 
techniques on the data and compares the results in order to 
understand the relationships between the patients’ attributes 
(details such as age, weight, height and test results) in order 
to obtain the most accurate model to classify patients 
according to the urgency level. Following this, testing was 
carried out on new patients using the proposed model. The 
results were compared to the results carried out by 
cardiology 
consultant 
physicians 
to 
ascertain 
its 
effectiveness and success. In case the proposed model yields 
inaccurate results, it was automated into a useful and easy to 
use tool. Otherwise, DM techniques were applied again to 
obtain an improved model, which was then tested again.  
The proposed DSS can help in classifying the urgency 
level of PDA patients as speedily and efficiently as possible 
based on their test results, sometimes without the need to be 
examined, at this stage, by a physician. The measures to test 
the effectiveness of the system are based on two aspects: 
• 
Time needed to determine the urgency level for a 
specific PDA case. Currently, physicians at KFMC 
meet for 30-60 minutes to consult on a single case 
and make a decision. Therefore, the new suggested 
tool should allow for considerably less time.  
• 
Accuracy of the urgency level suggested by the 
tool. The tool will be used to determine the 
urgency level for new PDA patients. The 
consultant physicians at the hospital determine its 
accuracy and check the results given by the tool.  
VI. USING DM TO BUILD MODEL TO DIAGNOSE PDA 
PATIENTS 
In this research, DM techniques are applied on PDA 
patients’ records. 
A. Applying Classification on PDA Patient Records 
After collecting PDA patients’ records from KFMC, the 
data was stored in an Excel file in Comma Separated Values 
(CSV) format, which can be used in WEKA. The records 
included a copy of ultrasound scans photos. The details 
about the PDA dimensions are kept in a separate database, 
which is accessed, only by the physicians. The patient’s 
record stores the PDA size as small, moderate or large. 
Attributes of the records are explained in Table 1. 
After applying classification using decision tree 
classification, the tree in Fig. 1 was generated. The correctly 
classified instances are: 234, whilst the incorrectly classified 
are only 2 records, giving this model a very high accuracy 
percentage of 99.15%. 
The main attribute for classifying the patients in the tree is 
the current age. 
TABLE I. ATTRIBUTES IN PDA PATIENTS’ RECORDS FROM KFMC 
 
Attribute 
Name 
Type 
Values 
 
Sex 
Nominal  
F or M 
Current age  
Numerical  
Integers from 0 for new born  
Height 
Numerical  
Integers 
Weight  
Numerical  
Decimal numbers 
Heart rate 
Numerical  
Integers  
PDA 
last 
size 
Nominal  
Non: the patient does not have 
previous scan 
Small, Mod, Large 
PDA 
current size 
Nominal 
Small, Mod, Large 
Change  
Nominal  
Yes 
No 
New: if the patient does not have 
previous scan 
Period 
to 
monitor  
Numerical  
Integers  
Decision  
Nominal  
Wait: 
the 
patient 
gets 
medical 
treatment and waits for another scan 
after 3 or more months 
Urgent: if the patient needs Surgery 
or Catheter Procedure  
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
1. If the age of the patient is older than 30 months, then it 
is an Urgent case. This is applied in 20 cases.  
2. If the child’s age is less than, or equal to, 30 months 
and the current size of PDA is small then the patient 
receives medical treatment and waits for 3 months for a 
further scan. This is applied in 72 cases. 
3. If the age of the patient is less than, or equal to, 30 
months of age and the current size of PDA is moderate 
then there are two cases depending on the current age: 
• 
If the age is less than, or equal to, 9 months 
then the patient receives medical treatment and 
waits 3 months for another scan. This is 
applied in 40 cases, with the exception of one 
case where the decision was revealed as 
Urgent.  
• 
If the age is more than 9 months, then the 
patient case is urgent. This is applied in 20 
cases, except for one case whereby the 
decision was to receive medical treatment and 
wait for 3 months for a further scan.  
4. If the age is less than, or equal to, 30 months and the 
current size of PDA is large then there are 3 cases 
depending on whether there was a change on the PDA 
size. 
• 
No change: the case is classified as Urgent. 
This is applied in 32 cases 
• 
There was change: there are 2 cases based on 
the age: 
i. Age less than, or equal to, 5 months: 
receive medical treatment and wait 3 
months for new scan. This is applied 
in 16 records 
ii. Age is greater than 5 months: it is an 
Urgent case. This is applied in 4 
cases. 
 
 
 
 
• 
The change = New, which denotes a new 
patient with no previous record. There are 2 
cases based on the current age: 
 
 
i. Age less than, or equal to, 6 months: 
receive medical treatment and wait 3 
months for new scan. This is applied 
in 16 cases. 
ii. Age is greater than 6 months: it is an 
Urgent case. This is applied in 16 
cases. 
     The previous model uses the PDA size and patient age to 
provide an accurate initial diagnosis of PDA.  
B. Applying Clustering on PDA Patient Records 
One of the clustering techniques provided by WEKA is 
called Simple K-Means [21]. WEKA uses the mean of the 
attributes to group the records into K groups or clusters, 
such that the records in each group are closer to each other 
(similar to each other) than they are to records in other 
groups. Clustering works better with numerical attributes 
than with nominal attributes. The records of PDA patients 
collected from KFMC have both numerical attributes, such 
as, age, height and weight, and nominal attributes, such as, 
PDA size, and gender.   In order to apply a Simple K-Means 
algorithm, nominal attributes should be changed into 
numerical attributes.  
The specialists from KFMC who were consulted for this 
study explained that gender is not a major attribute in 
deciding the urgency level of PDA patients. Research and 
publications of study articles related to PDA treatments also 
suggest that although PDA is more common in girls than 
boys, gender does not affect the diagnosis of the disease. 
For these reasons, sex attribute is not used in the clustering 
Figure 1. Decision Tree resulting from applying classification on PDA patients’ records. 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

technique. The other nominal attribute is PDA size, and it is 
replaced with the average size as follows: 
• 
Small less than 1.5mm. Therefore, it is replaced by 
1.25. 
• 
Moderate between 1.5mm and 2mm, so it is 
replaced by 1.75. 
• 
Large greater than 2mm, so it is replaced by 2.25. 
     Applying simple K-Means making K = 2, which means 
the results will give 2 clusters, one for patients who receive 
treatment and wait for 3 months to have another scan and a 
class for patients who need urgent treatment. The two 
clusters are shown in Table 2. 
TABLE II. RESULTS OF APPLYING CLUSTERING ON PDA 
PATIENTS’ RECORDS 
Attribute 
Cluster #1 
Cluster #2 
Current age in months  
15.5109      
7.0625 
Height                       
71.9565     
62.7451 
Weight 
10.6685      
6.9181 
Heart rate  
115    
108.3333 
PDA last size  
1.2391       
1.125 
PDA current size  
1.9457      
1.6111 
Decision                          
Urgent         
Wait 
Number of records 
92 
144 
The table shows that: 
• 
Older patients (average 15.5 months) are more 
likely to be classified as urgent, while younger 
patients (average 7.1 months) receive treatment and 
remain under observation. 
• 
As expected, older patients have higher height and 
higher weight, so height and weight averages are 
related to the same clusters as age. 
• 
Higher heart rate was related to Urgent cases while 
lower heart rate is related to patients who receive 
treatment to remain under observation. 
• 
The important attribute here is the current size of 
PDA: average 1.9 (which means moderate or large 
PDA) means Urgent case, while smaller PDA with 
average 1.6 is not urgent. 
     These results comply with the results obtained from the 
decision tree used in the classification. 
C. Applying Association Rule on PDA patient records 
Association rule technique is applied to those patients 
whose cases are classified as “Urgent” to determine the 
urgency level. Doctors determine the urgency level of the 
patient based on many factors, such as age, size of PDA, 
tests and ultrasound scans. There are three levels of 
urgency:  
• 
Level1: needs immediate surgery. 
• 
Level2: needs surgery within a month or two. 
• 
Level3: needs to undergo more tests and scans to 
determine a time for surgery. 
     To apply the association rule, all the attributes should be 
nominal, so the patient’s age is transformed into age group. 
Also, the heart rate was transformed from numbers into 
nominal: low, normal, and high. The height and weight were 
also transformed into nominal values.  
• 
Group a: less than 6 months 
• 
Group b: between 6-12 months 
• 
Group c: between 12-36 months 
• 
Group d: older than 36 months 
     These ranges are based on the physicians’ suggestion at 
KFMC. After applying association rule on the patients’ 
records, the following rules were obtained:  
• 
PDA Current size =large 103 
 ==> urgency level=level1 103     
• 
Age group=a 95 
 ==> urgency level=level1 95     
• 
Age group=a PDA Current size =large 39  
==> urgency level=level1 39     
• 
Age group=b PDA Current size =large 30  
==> urgency level=level1 30     
• 
Age group=b PDA Current size =mod 12  
==> urgency level=level2 12     
• 
Age group=c PDA Current size =mod 51  
==> urgency level=level1 51     
• 
Age group=c PDA Current size =large 45 
==> urgency level=level1 45     
• 
Age group=c PDA Current size =small 64  
       ==> urgency level=level3 64     
• 
Age group=d 72  
       ==> urgency level=level1 72     
• 
Age group=a change =no 39  
       ==> PDA Current size =large 39     
     All the above rules have a confidence = 1, which means 
they are 100% true based on the PDA patients’ records from 
KFMC. Table 3 shows a summary of these rules.  
TABLE III. RESULTS OF APPLYING ASSOCIATION RULE DM 
ON THE URGENT CASES OF PDA PATIENTS 
Urgency 
level 
Cases 
Level1 
PDA Size = Large or Age is less than 6 months 
or Age between 12-36 months and PDA size = 
Mod or Age older than 36 months 
Level2 
Age between 6-12 months and PDA size = Mod 
Level3 
Age between 12-36 months and PDA = small 
 
VII. RESULTS 
DM classification and clustering techniques were used to 
diagnose PDA and classify patients into two categories: 
urgent cases and non-urgent, which are referred to here by 
Wait cases where the patient receives medical treatment and 
waits for another check-up after 3 or more months.  Urgent 
cases were then arranged into three levels of urgency using 
association rule DM techniques.  The models presented by 
this research were tested by cardiology specialists at KFMC 
who subsequently approved them. They suggested using age 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

range instead of actual age in months to make the diagnosis 
more general.  The suggested age groups are: 
a: 0-6 months / b: 6-12 months / c: 12-36 month / d: older 
than 36 months 
After applying the specialists’ recommendations, the 
resulting model is shown in Table 4. 
TABLE IV. THE RESULT OF APPLYING DM TECHNIQUES ON 
PDA PATIENTS’ RECORDS 
Case Description  
Diagnosis 
Urgency 
level 
Age group = a, b & PDA current size = Small 
Wait 
 
Age group = a & PDA current size = Large & 
Change = yes 
Wait 
 
Age group = b, c & PDA current size = Large 
& Change = yes 
Urgent 
Level1 
Age group = a, b, c & PDA current size = 
Large & Change = no 
Urgent 
Level1 
Age group = a & PDA current size = Large & 
Change = new 
Wait 
 
Age group = b, c & PDA current size = Large 
& Change = new 
Urgent 
Level1 
Age group = a & PDA current size = Mod 
Wait 
 
Age group = b & PDA current size = Mod 
Urgent 
Level2 
Age group = c & PDA current size = Mod 
Urgent 
Level1 
Age group = c & PDA current size = Small 
Urgent 
Level3 
Age group = d 
Urgent 
Level1 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
     This study presented a hybrid approach to diagnose PDA 
as early as possible using simple tools.  The introduction of 
an ultrasound scan that is readily available in almost all 
medical centers in Saudi Arabia is one method of detection 
and diagnosis.   This study also recommends increasing the 
awareness of PDA amongst first time parents, as well as 
parents with more than one child, as early as possible, to 
ensure that they are educated to understand what PDA is 
and to seek medical help as soon as they notice any 
symptoms in their baby, such as shortness of breath, 
sweating while feeding, struggling to breathe and nurse at 
the same time or quite simply being too attached to nursing.   
To a parent, some of these symptoms may not appear to be 
any obvious cause for alarm, but with prior knowledge of 
PDA, early diagnosis and intervention could quite well 
positively impact on health and life expectancy. Ultimately, 
the goal is to produce a longer living and healthier Saudi 
population.  
     It is expected that when increasing the awareness of 
PDA, this will, in turn, increase the number of PDA patients 
in Saudi Arabia.   The result will create a strain on already 
struggling hospitals and also substantially increase the 
number of patients needing to go onto a waiting list to see a 
consultant as well as those patients who have already 
received a diagnosis but require ongoing medical treatment 
to prevent surgery, as well as to maintain their health.   
Overall, the burgeoning hospital outpatient clinics for those 
patients with PDA will need to be overhauled to ensure that 
all patients are attended to in timely and appropriate 
manner. 
     While working on this research, we faced many 
difficulties. For example, the details of the scans, such as 
the dimensions of the PDA, were not saved in the patients’ 
records. This information was saved in special files which 
can be accessed by the physicians only. This made 
collecting the information needed for the patients extremely 
difficult. It was not easy to meet the specialists at KFMC for 
any length of time as they were tremendously busy all the 
time.  
     Regarding future work, further study and analysis should 
be carried out on more patients from different hospitals to 
obtain a more accurate model to diagnose PDA and 
determine its urgency level. Additional data should be added 
to the patients’ records to show all the detailed 
measurements taken from the ultrasound scan. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
     The authors extend their deep appreciation to the 
Deanship of Scientific Research at King Saud University for 
funding this work. 
REFERENCES 
[1] World Health Organization. [Online]: http://www.who.int, 
[February 2018]. 
[2] World Heart Federation. [Online]: http://www.world-heart-
federation.org   [February 2018]. 
[3] National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, “What is the heart?” 
[Online]: 
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/health-
topics/topics/hhw/, [February 2018]. 
[4] Saudi Ministry Of Health website, “Cardio-Vascular Diseases”. 
[Online]: 
http://www.moh.gov.sa/HealthAwareness/EducationalContent/Dis
eases/Heartcirculatory/, [February 2018]. 
[5] T. Kavalieratos, M. Nortje, and R. N. Dunn. “Hip and knee 
arthroplasty waiting list - how accurate and fair?” South African 
Medical Journal, Apr 2017. 
[6] R. Zhang and Y. Katta. "Medical Data Mining, Data Mining 
and Knowledge Discovery,” in SPIE, 2002, pp. 305-308.  
[7] H. Wang and S. Wang. “Medical Knowledge Acquisition 
through Data Mining,” in IEEE, 2008, pp. 1-4.  
[8] L. Passmore, J. Goodside, L. Hamel, L. Gonzales, T. 
Silberstein, and J. Trimarchi, Assessing decision tree models for 
clinical in-vitro fertilization data. Technical Report TR03-296, 
Dept. of Computer Science and Statistics, University of Rhode 
Island, 2003. 
[9] S. Patel and H. Patel, “Survey Of Data Mining Techniques 
Used In Healthcare Domain.” International Journal of Information 
Sciences and Techniques, vol. 6, 2016. 
[10] A. Patel, S. Gandhi, S. Shetty, and B. Tekwani. “Heart 
Disease Prediction Using Data Mining.” International Research 
Journal of Engineering and Technology, vol. 4, 2017. 
[11] N. Sharma and H. Om, “Data mining models for predicting 
oral cancer survivability,” Netw. Model. Anal. Heal. Informatics 
Bioinforma., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 285-295, 2013.  
[12] G. Rogers and E. Joyner, “Mining your Data for Health Care 
Quality Improvement,” SAS Institute, Inc., January 2009. 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[13] J. Soni, U. Ansari, and D. Sharma, “Predictive Data Mining 
for Medical Diagnosis: An Overview of Heart Disease Prediction.” 
International Journal of Computer Applications, March 2011.  
[14] Mayo Clinic, [Online]: http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-
conditions/patent-ductus-arteriosus/basics/definition. 
[February 
2018]. 
[15] University of California, Department Of Surgery. [Online]: 
http://pediatric.surgery.ucsf.edu/conditions--procedures/patent-
ductus-arteriosus.aspx, [February 2018]. 
[16] Mrs. Bharati M. Ramageri, “Data Mining Techniques and 
Applications”, 
Indian Journal of Computer Science and 
Engineering, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 301-305. 
[17] W. Klosgen and J. Zytkow, Handbook of data mining a 
knowledge discovery. Oxford University Press: New York, 2002. 
[18] B.K. Bharadwaj and S. Pal, “Data Mining: A prediction for 
performance Improvement using classification”, International 
Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, vol. 9, pp. 
136-140, 2011. 
[19] J. Han, M. Kamber, and J. Pei, Data Mining: Concepts and 
Techniques, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco, 3rd 
edition, 2013. 
[20] R. Agrawal, T. Imielinski, and A. Swami, “Mining association 
rules between sets of items in large databases,” In Proceedings of 
the 1993 ACM SIGMOD international conference on management 
of data, pp. 207–216, 1993. 
[21] WEKA. [Online]: www.weka.com, [February 2018]. 
 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

