Region-Based Bed Capacity mHealth Application for Emergency Medical Services:  
Saudi Arabia Case Study
Khulood Alghamdi 
King Saud University Medical City 
King Saud University (KSU) 
Riyadh,  
KSA 
e-mail: kmalghamdi@ksu.edu.sa 
Shada Alsalamah 
Information Systems Department 
College of Computer and Information Sciences, KSU 
Riyadh, KSA. e-mail: saalsalamah@ksu.edu.sa 
 Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, U.S. e-mail: shada@mit.edu
Ghada Al-Hudhud 
Information Technology Department 
College of Computer and Information Sciences, KSU 
Riyadh, KSA. e-mail: galhudhud@ksu.edu.sa 
Thamer Nouh 
Trauma and Acute Care Surgery Unit, Department of 
Surgery, College of Medicine, KSU 
Riyadh, KSA. e-mail: tnouh@ksu.edu.sa 
Ibrahim Alyahya 
Emergency Medical Services 
Saudi Red Crescent Authority 
Riyadh, KSA. e-mail: imyahya@srca.org.sa 
Sakher AlQahtani 
Department of Pediatric Dentistry and Orthodontics 
College of Dentistry, KSU 
Riyadh, KSA. e-mail: asakher@ksu.edu.sa
 
 
Abstract—One of the major causes of death in trauma cases is 
ambulance diversion due to the unavailability of resources 
(bed and specialists) in the closest hospital. To date, there are 
no solutions in the literature that link Emergency Medical 
Services (EMS) with trauma centers in Saudi Arabia to avoid 
Emergency Departments (EDs) crowding and shortages in 
terms of inpatient bed capacity. Therefore, this study aims to 
bridge the gap by helping paramedics deliver patients to the 
nearest trauma center with available resources in the shortest 
possible time, as well as to monitor ambulance diversion data. 
This is achieved by regionalizing the availability of resources in 
the nearest hospitals using a mobile health (mHealth) 
application and two algorithms: Dijkstra and Fusion. The 
former helps route the ambulance’s path taken, while the latter 
predicts inpatient bed capacity. The solution is an effective and 
time-optimizing application for the rescuer or paramedic, ED 
Support Officer (EDSO), and EMS administrator. It should 
help optimize EMS resources, reduce ED crowding, and 
increase the quality of urgent care services. 
Keywords- Emergency medical services; Operating room; 
Emergency department; Electronic health record; mHealth. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Ambulance diversion is a strategy often used by 
overcrowded hospitals and Emergency Departments (EDs) 
with unavailable beds or resources. EDs that do not have 
available inpatient beds for emergency patients due to 
inefficient processes or environmental disaster, often have to 
divert ambulances to another hospital. In this case, the 
targeted hospital notifies the ambulance to go to another ED 
at any other hospital. This increases the total time it takes the 
ambulance to transport the patient and, thus, can have 
negative consequences on the patient’s health and safety, 
especially in cases of urgent care when every second is 
crucial and could mean life or death. This is evidenced in 
trauma treatment guidelines which state that to reduce risks, 
it is strictly suggested that the total time should be under 60 
min for trauma victims. In research published in the Journal 
of the American Medical Association [1], researchers found 
that victims of a heart attack are more likely to die when 
their nearest hospital had high diversion rates of more than 
12 hours diversion per day in contrast to other heart-attack 
victims who happened to be near a hospital and without any 
need for diversion [1]. Therefore, to eliminate the need for 
ambulance diversion and reduce the time it takes to reach the 
nearest available emergency department, there is an urgent 
need for a continuous, stable process that connects both the 
ED and the ambulance services together.  
Furthermore, an arriving patient may be declined or 
placed on hold by Medical Care Utilization (MCU), if there 
is no bed available to accommodate the patient in the unit.  
In such cases, the patient may be subject to similar health  
risks  due  to  the necessity  of finding  an  alternative  health  
care  provider  or waiting  until  a  bed  becomes available. 
From the hospital’s perspective, the potential revenue is  
either  lost  or delayed,  which  may  lead  to  some  financial 
inefficiencies.  Similarly, an arriving patient may be accepted 
for treatment but can be accommodated in another MCU 
(e.g., an arriving obstetrics patient can be boarded in 
neurosurgery), and hence there is the chance that it may not 
be possible to move admitted patients from the ED due to an 
inpatient bed problem. This forces the ED to board admitted 
patients until inpatient beds are available, effectively 
reducing the ED’s capacity to care for new patients. 
Boarding of inpatients in the ED has also been cited as the  
most  important  determinant  of  ambulance diversion.  
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

In addition to time and systems integration factors, cyber 
attacks on healthcare infrastructure for a deliberate 
interruption of healthcare services could leave hospitals no 
choice but to divert ambulances. Global attacks on electronic 
service providers in healthcare, business, and government 
sectors have been witnessed in recent times and there has 
been a wave of deliberate attacks using WannaCry Virus. 
WannaCry is a malware of Trojan virus called Ransomware. 
The virus holds the infected computer hostage and demands 
that the victim pays a ransom to regain access to the files on 
his/her computer. Ransomware, like WannaCry, works by 
encrypting most or even all of the files on a user’s computer. 
Hence, the software demands that a  ransom  be  paid  in  
order  to  have  the  files  decrypted. The episodes of 
Ransomeware attacks [2] have had  a massive  scale  effect  
on around 150 countries, targeting not only home computers    
but also healthcare, communications infrastructure, logistics,  
and  government entities for financial  gain. This challenged 
healthcare providers’ deployment of their computerized 
complex systems to maintain and keep patients’ records and 
patient diversion data at critical times and so paralyzing 
healthcare services totally in some targeted health trusts in 
many countries, such as the British’s National Health Service 
(NHS) [2]. Hospitals across England and Scotland’s NHS 
reported that the cyber attack was causing disruptions to their 
health services by “affecting X-ray imaging systems, 
pathology 
test 
results, 
phone 
systems 
and 
patient 
administration systems” [2]. 
This project aims to address ambulance diversion issues 
in 
Emergency 
Medical Services (EMS) 
and 
monitors 
ambulance diversion data. Therefore, it focuses on finding a 
practical solution to facilitate the delivery of EMS across all 
EDs without ambulance diversion to reduce the time it takes 
them to reach the nearest ED with the available inpatient 
beds and the right resources for treating the patient. The 
remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the background, while Section III discusses related 
work. Section IV presents our methodology, and conclusions 
are drawn in Section V. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
The Saudi Arabian government has accorded high 
priority to healthcare services. According to the Basic Law 
of Saudi Arabia Rights of the Saudi Citizen, the government 
guarantees the right to healthcare for citizens and their 
families and the government is responsible for providing 
public health care services to all Saudi citizens [3].  In recent 
years, healthcare services in Saudi Arabia have improved 
tremendously in terms of both quantity and quality, and this 
is evident in the literature and government white papers in 
general, and reflected in the total number of hospitals in 
Saudi Arabia in particular. Back in 2015, there were 462 
hospitals in Saudi Arabia with a capacity of 69,394 beds, 
with an increment of 49 hospitals in comparison with their 
number in 2011. The governmental sector owns nearly 70 
percent of hospitals and the rest are owned by the private 
sector [4]. 
A. ED Crowding  
ED crowding and inpatient bed capacity are pressing 
problems facing healthcare worldwide. ED Crowding is 
defined as:  
“A situation in which the ED function is impeded 
by the number of patients waiting to be seen, 
undergoing assessment and treatment, or waiting for 
departure, exceeding the physical or staffing 
capacity of the department.” [5] 
Instead of managing ED crowding as a standalone problem 
in order to eliminate it, contributing factors must also be 
examined. First, patients’ long wait until an inpatient bed 
becomes available and the increased inpatient waiting time 
for care are also indications of ED crowding. Second, the 
lack of hospital inpatients bed capacity could lead to ED 
boarding, which is a significant cause and one of the main 
reasons for ED crowding [6]. ED boarding is the practice of 
keeping patients in the ED waiting area due to the lack of 
available inpatient beds, even after their admission to the 
hospital. This results in many issues, including ambulance 
diversion, extended patient waiting periods, delays in 
treatment and longer waiting times for other patients who do 
not require admission to be treated [7]. Finally, there is an 
urgent need for a solution to eliminate ED crowding and 
ambulance diversions resulting from unavailable inpatients 
bed capacity and ED boarding. This is to provide emergency 
patients with speedy and reliable healthcare and reduce the 
time it takes the ambulance to reach the nearest available 
emergency department. To address the above issues, there is 
a need for a continuous, stable process that requires a 
system-wide support among all healthcare related parties, in 
order to connect and work with both the emergency 
departments and the ambulance services together. 
B. Hospital Bed Capacity Planning  
Hospital bed capacity planning is crucial in healthcare 
because it is essential for managing hospital resources and 
hospital staff and personnel. In addition, it could be the 
deciding factor between a patient’s life and death.  In some 
countries, such as Finland, New Zealand and Germany, the 
unit for measuring hospital care and its capacity is bed 
occupancy rate [9], which is defined as “the number of 
hospital beds occupied by patients expressed as a percentage 
of the total beds available in the hospital” [8]. This rate 
remains an essential unit in hospital capacity planning. 
Nevertheless, using bed numbers and occupancy as a 
measurement in hospital capacity planning will not foretell 
the hospital’s future demand; neither will it provide a valid 
estimate of hospital services [9]. 
In research published by the World Health Organization, 
the researchers propose using strategies that focus on the 
benefits of using systematic processes in hospital capacity 
planning. They argue that it is not beneficial to look at the 
hospital from the perspective of beds and its occupancy rates, 
but rather it is necessary to focus on processes and the path 
taken by the patients inside the hospital. One of the strategies 
mentioned is to design hospital flows around “care 
pathways” instead of counting beds; the strategy works by 
identifying the variety of pathways the patients take inside 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the hospital, as well as the factors that can cause delays in 
patients’ treatment and this could be displayed in the form of 
a bottleneck [10]. 
Therefore, the key to successful capacity planning is to 
try to eliminate any possible future cause of a bottleneck; 
sometimes this could be the number of inpatients’ available 
beds, ineffective allocation of existing patients among 
different medical service units and sometimes it could be 
other hospital departments attempting to enhance their 
performance without realizing how this might affect others. 
Guaranteeing that there are as few bottlenecks as possible 
will, in turn, result in minimizing the delay in patients’ 
treatment, separating patients into two streams based on 
complexity rather than urgency, and creating a fast-track 
patient stream for patients who can be treated and discharged 
more or less immediately [9]. 
C. International Hospital Statistics  
Despite hospital planning strategies, this section 
highlights some international statistics for acute hospital bed 
shortages around the globe [11], along with a definition of 
hospital beds in such countries [11] (summarized below in 
Table I). In Austria, hospital beds have an average length of 
stay of 18 days or less. This includes some day care beds. In 
Germany, acute hospital beds are those other than psychiatric 
and long-term beds, and that exclude any day care beds. In 
Iceland, acute hospital beds are calculated from bed-days, 
assuming 90% occupancy rate; beds in medicine and 
surgeries of main hospitals and mixed facilities are available 
in small hospitals that do not include any day care beds. In 
Italy, acute hospital beds include in-patient beds of 
psychiatric hospitals and in-patient beds of psychiatric wards 
of other hospitals; these do not include any day care beds. In 
Spain, acute hospital beds include general hospitals, 
maternity, other specialized hospitals, and health centers; no 
day care beds. Last but not least, in the UK, acute hospital 
beds include NHS acute medical, surgical, and maternity 
beds (excluding Northern Ireland). 
TABLE I.  
DEFINITIONS OF HOSPITAL BEDS IN SELECTED 
COUNTRIES [11] 
Country 
Content 
Austria 
Beds in hospitals with average length of stay of 18 days 
or less 
Germany 
Beds other than psychiatric and long term beds 
Italy 
In-patient beds of psychiatric hospitals and in-patient 
United 
Kingdom 
National Health Service acute medical, surgical and 
maternity beds (excluding Northern Ireland) 
Spain 
General hospitals, maternity, other specialized hospitals, 
health centers 
Sweden 
Beds for short term care run by county councils and 3 
independent communities (short-term includes medical, 
surgical, miscellaneous medicine/surgery, admission 
department and intensive care) 
Turkey 
Public hospitals, health centers, maternity hospitals, 
cardiovascular and thoracic surgical centers 
orthopaedic surgery hospitals 
III. 
LITERATURE 
A. Bed Capacity Planning Approach 
Healthcare, like any other industry, faces huge pressure 
to improve efficiency and reduce costs. A study by 
McKinsey [5] points out that the U.S. spends at least $600 - 
$850 billion on healthcare annually. One area that can be 
leveraged in healthcare is the support of informed decision-
making processes. This is to allow the end user (namely, 
hospital administrators or clinical managers) to assess the 
efficiency of existing healthcare delivery systems. 
Discrete-Event Simulation (DES) is a widely used 
technique for the analysis of systems with complex 
behaviors [13]. DES has been widely applied in healthcare 
services [13] to study the interrelationships between 
admission rates, hospital occupancy, and several different 
policies for allocating beds to MCUs. Lewis [14] studied bed 
management in Germany’s hospitals, and decision support 
systems were presented depending on mathematical 
approaches and computer-based assistance designed to 
improve efficiency and effectiveness of admission planning 
and bed assignment. The study interviewed professionals in 
bed management to identify aspects that must be respected 
when developing the decision system, ensuring that patients’ 
treatment priorities and individual preferences are respected 
[14]. Patient admission and assignment is based on up-to-
date and flexible length of stay estimates, being taken into 
aggregated contingents of hospital beds, treatment priorities, 
patient preferences, and a linkage between clinics and wards 
[14].  
The main reason for using DES for modeling a 
healthcare clinic instead of other mathematical modeling 
tools (such as linear programming and Markov chain 
analysis) is the ability to simulate complex patient flows 
through healthcare clinics, and to play “what if” games by 
changing the patient flow rules and policies [14]. Such 
flows are usually in emergency rooms, where patients can 
be seen without appointments, and require treatment for 
various sets of ailments and conditions [14]. These disorders 
can range from mild injuries to serious medical 
emergencies. 
Although 
the 
number 
of 
patients 
is 
unpredictable, medical staff can control the treatment by 
minimizing patient waiting times and increasing staff 
utilization rates [15]. 
In emergency rooms, to reduce waiting times of low 
priority patients, Schmidt et al. [15] analyzed the effects of 
using a fast track lane. As emergency rooms are prioritized 
according to the level of patient sickness, low priority 
patients may have to wait for exceedingly long periods of 
time [15]. A simulation model was used to classify daily 
occupancy distributions; it helps in studying the swapping 
of overflow and bed capacity levels, and it investigates the 
effects of various changes. ED overcrowding principally 
results from the incapability of admitted patients being 
transferred to ward beds in a timely manner [19]. Most 
experts agree that a greater inpatient capacity is required in 
order to relieve access block and decrease ED overcrowding 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[15]. Schmidt et al. collected real data from a single month 
at a single hospital, and a computer model was developed to 
examine the relationship between admissions, discharges 
and ED overcrowding (the number of hours admitted 
patients waited in ED before transfer to an inpatient bed). 
Meanwhile, Schmidt et al. proposed in [15] a facility 
location model to locate ER services on a network and 
determine their respective capacity levels, such that the 
probability of diverting patients is not larger than a 
particular threshold.  
Lin [16] presents a conceptual model of ED 
overcrowding to help administrators, researchers, and 
policymakers. The ED conceptual model recognizes at least 
three general categories of care delivered in the ED: 
emergency care, unscheduled urgent care, and safety net 
care. The outputs are patients who are unable to obtain 
follow-up care and often return to the ED if their condition 
does not improve or deteriorates [16]. The throughput 
component of the model identifies patient length of stay in 
the ED as a potential contributing factor to ED crowding. 
The ED crowding is then measured based on two phases; 
the first includes triage, room placement, and the initial 
provider evaluation. While the second phase of the 
throughput component includes diagnostic testing and ED 
treatment. The triage phase is used to objectively identify 
patients suitable for treatment by emergency nurse 
practitioners [16]. Since emergency nurse practitioners show 
high diagnostic accuracy, the emergency nurse practitioner 
model of care is considered an important strategy in 
reducing the length of stay of ED patients and may prevent 
ED crowding [16]. 
The input-throughput-output conceptual model of ED 
crowding may be useful for organizing research, policy, and 
operations management agenda to alleviate the problem 
[16]. This model illustrates the need for a systems approach 
with integrated, rather than piecemeal, solutions for ED 
crowding [16]. In the study, there are four general areas of 
ED crowding that require future research. First, research 
must consider developing valid and reliable measures of ED 
crowding. These measures should be sensitive to changes 
throughout time. Second, research in the field should 
identify the most important causes of ED crowding from 
each component of the model. Third, the effect of ED 
crowding on the quality of patient care must be assessed. 
Finally, interventions to reduce ED crowding need to be 
evaluated.  
Infective allocation of existing bed capacity among 
different medical service units can lead to service quality 
problems for the patients along with operational and/ or 
financial inefficiencies for the hospitals [16]. Most health 
care managers apply relatively simple approaches, such as 
the use of target occupancy level with average length of 
stay, to forecast bed capacity required for a hospital or an 
MCU [16]. Yet, the failure to adequately consider 
uncertainties associated with patient arrivals and the time 
needed to treat patients by using such simple approaches 
may result in bed capacity configurations where a large 
proportion of patients may have to be turned away. The 
application of queuing theory allows for the evaluation of 
the expected (long-run) performance measure of a system 
by solving the associated set of flow balance equations [16]. 
Other research considers the hierarchical relation 
between care units. For example, after a mother-to-be 
delivers her child in the labor and delivery unit, she should 
be moved to the postpartum unit for recovery [16]. If the 
ability downstream is insufficient, patients must stay within 
the current care units with typically more costly equipment, 
thereby meaning the full capacity is reached at these 
upstream care units [16]. To take the interactions among 
care units in a hospital into account, Lin [16] first applies 
queuing network methodology (without blocking) to 
discover a balanced bed allotment, which is obtained 
through trial-and-error work. Then, Lin uses simulation 
analysis to estimate the blocking behavior and patient 
sojourn times. The authors [16] develop a mathematical 
programming formulation to address this problem and the 
system uses a different approach by integrating results from 
queuing 
theory 
into 
an 
optimization 
framework. 
Specifically, the model with each MCU in a hospital has an 
M/M/c/c queuing system to estimate the probability of 
rejection when there are beds. 
B. International Bed Management System (BMS) 
Hospitals should use BMS that provides a real-time 
display of hospital occupied beds, along with the available 
beds, as well as the current status of each one [16]. 
Therefore, by using a BMS system, the hospital staff would 
be able to view the status of each bed, whether the bed was 
occupied, vacant or being prepared for a patient. Also, the 
hospital staff would be able to view the patient's status; if 
the patient was going to be discharged, had already left, or 
was being transferred. Moreover, by using the system, 
nurses can utilize more of their time in caring for the 
patient, 
instead 
of 
handling 
bed 
assignment 
tasks 
manually.  This Bed Management Unit used at Alexandra 
Hospital provides critical benefits to both patients and staff; 
indeed, by using the system, patients’ waiting times have 
been decreased by 30 percent [17]. Singapore General 
Hospital (SGH) is another hospital that has benefited from 
the use of technology to manage hospital beds. The SGH 
uses BMS technology to help improve hospital capacity and 
care. BMS is a web-based system that allows hospital staff 
and administration to access information related to patient 
flow anywhere in the hospital. The BMS user interface has 
been configured to display the location of patients in the 
hospital as well as the primary physician. The system also 
allows the hospital staff to view and track information, 
records and any specific actions related to the patient's 
needs, and any follow-up movements required.  The system 
gives nurses and bed-management staff a full overview of 
the bed status and patient needs, which allows them to take 
action immediately.   
The way this system works is as follows: when the 
patient is admitted to the hospital, they receive a Radio 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Frequency Identification (RFID) tag with a unique identifier 
that will identify and track the patient's location during their 
stay at the hospital. The system then searches for a bed that 
best fits the patient’s needs, based on their condition before 
assigning that bed to the patient.  The system also uses a 
real-time location system to help identify the location of the 
patient through the tag and display; this creates a workflow 
related to the patient’s movements.  Hospital departments 
are also provided with Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) panels 
that display BMS dashboard with real-time patient RFID 
location, which shows the patient's' information and bed 
statuses automatically in real-time. Once the patient is 
discharged, the BMS system will notify the housekeeping 
staff through their Personal Digital Assistant (PDA) to clean 
and prepare the vacated bed, and once the bed is ready, the 
housekeeping staff updates the bed status [18]. 
C. Nature of Trauma 
In physical medicine, major trauma is an injury or a 
damage to a biological organism caused by physical harm 
from an external source [28]. Major trauma is also an injury 
that can potentially lead to serious long-term outcomes, such 
as chronic pain or other lifelong ailments. There are different 
types of trauma [28]: 
1) Birth trauma: an injury to the infant during the 
process of being born. In some psychiatric theories, the 
psychic shock is produced in an infant by the experience of 
being born [28]. 
2) Psychic 
trauma: 
a 
psychologically 
upsetting 
experience that produces an emotional or mental disorder or 
otherwise has lasting negative effects on a person’s 
thoughts, feelings, or behavior [28]. 
3) Risk for trauma: a nursing diagnosis accepted by the 
North American Nursing Diagnosis Association, defined as 
accentuated risk of accidental tissue injury, such as a 
wound, burn, or fracture.  
The initial evaluation of a trauma patient is a challenging 
task and time-critical as every minute could be the 
difference between life and death. Over the past 50 years, 
the assessment of trauma patients has evolved because of an 
improved understanding of the distribution of mortality and 
the mechanisms that contribute to morbidity and mortality 
in trauma [27]. On the one hand, early deaths may occur in 
the minutes or hours after the injury. These patients 
frequently arrive at a hospital before death, which usually 
occurs because of hemorrhage and cardiovascular collapse 
[27]. On the other hand, late trauma mortality peaks in the 
days and weeks after the injury and is primarily due to 
sepsis and multiple organ failure [27]. Therefore, systems 
supporting trauma care focus on the treatment of a patient 
from early trauma mortality, whereas critical care is 
designed to prevent late trauma mortality. This is the reason 
why it is important to find beds prior to trauma cases [28], 
and therefore, our proposal strives to address this matter. 
D. Hospital Bed Capacity Globally and Saudi Vision 2030 
Hospitals’ provision for accommodating the increasing 
numbers of emergency admissions is a matter of 
considerable public and political concern and has been the 
subject of widespread debate [25]. When discussing a 
hospital’s bed capacity, a number of questions are often 
raised. First, what is a hospital bed? A bed is merely an item 
of furniture on which a patient can lie. For a bed to make any 
meaningful contribution to a healthcare facility’s ability to 
treat someone, it must be accompanied by an appropriate 
hospital infrastructure, including trained professional and 
managerial staff, equipment and pharmaceuticals [12].  
For several years, hospital managers have been under 
pressure to reduce bed capacity and increase occupancy rates 
for operational efficiency, especially in the Hajj season (i.e. 
Annual Islamic pilgrimage to Mecca, Saudi Arabia) [25]. 
More recently, public concern has arisen in cases where 
patients could not gain access to a local hospital or were 
subjected to extended delays for the availability of vacant 
beds [20]. Many countries now struggle to provide cost-
effective, quality healthcare services to their citizens [23]. 
Saudi Arabia has experienced high costs along with concerns 
about the quality of care in its public facilities [26]. To 
address these issues, Saudi Arabia is currently restructuring 
its healthcare system to privatize public hospitals and 
introduce insurance coverage for both its citizens and foreign 
workers [26]. These changes provide an interesting and 
insightful case for the challenges faced when radically 
changing a country’s healthcare system. The situation also 
demonstrates a unique case in the Middle East for greater 
reliance on the private sector to address rapidly escalating 
healthcare costs and deteriorating quality of care [26]. The 
complexity of changing a healthcare system is discussed 
with the many challenges associated with the change. 
According to Saudi Vision 2030 [22], the healthcare 
system has benefited from substantive investment in recent 
decades. As a result, we now have 2.2 hospital beds for every 
1,000 people, world-class medical specialists and an average 
life expectancy rising from 66 years to 74 years in the past 
three decades [24]. Work is currently underway to build and 
develop 38 news hospitals with a total capacity of 9,100 
beds, in addition to two medical sites accommodating 2,350 
beds [24]. During the current fiscal year, 1437/1438, 23 new 
hospitals (4,250 beds) in various regions across Saudi Arabia 
were built [24]. 
E. Availability of Beds in Saudi Hospital ED 
Implementing a Saudi Arabia-wide system would allow a 
patient’s referral from one healthcare provider/ facility to 
another. This includes the ability to electronically transfer 
patient-related data in either a structured (namely, organized 
and well-maintained information that can be obtained in a 
simple click), or non-structured fashion (namely, data which 
is energy consuming and hard to handle data). Alternatively, 
pointers to electronic health accessible data could be used, 
including patient diagnosis and treatment, referral notes, 
medication lists, laboratory test results, radiology reports, 
digital images, audio and video files. This solution would 
enable integration of information on the availability of the 
facility, bed, provider or specialty. In addition, such a 
solution supports optimizing the search for best-fit resource 
utilization. The proposed work supports: 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

• 
Riyadh hospital’s bed management program with 
automation, including integrated interfaces with 
Hospital Information System (HIS) “as an element 
of health informatics that focuses mainly on the 
administrational needs of hospitals.”  
• 
Centralized query capabilities for both head quarters 
and regional administrators. 
• 
Operational support to hospitals and primary health 
care practitioners providing patient referrals.  
• 
Support full inpatient bed management cycle-
interface with multiple systems, including registries, 
HIS, 
and 
communication 
systems. 
Generate 
messages to hospital housekeeping. 
• 
Emergency bed requirements and other hospital 
departments across Saudi Arabia’s regions to inform 
of status - full reporting and analytical capability 
[24] (See Table II below). 
TABLE II.  
HOSPITALS ESTABLISHED IN SAUDI ARABIA 
(2010-2013) [24] 
Regions 
No. of Hospitals 
Established 
No. of Beds 
Riyadh 
8 
1,400 
Makkah 
8 
2,386 
Eastern 
7 
1,150 
Al Madinah 
5 
650 
Hail 
3 
180 
Qassim 
4 
475 
Northern Border 
3 
400 
Asir 
8 
800 
Tabuk 
3 
350 
Jouf 
5 
550 
Baha 
2 
100 
Jazan 
6 
400 
Najran 
3 
150 
New 
45 
6,521 
Upgraded/Replacement 
65 
2,470 
Total 
175 
17,982 
F. Regionalization Vs. Bed Capacity 
In a healthcare service facility, when an ER is full or all 
intensive care beds are occupied, hospitals send out a divert 
status. When a hospital is on divert status, incoming patients 
might be sent to hospitals which are further away or kept at 
the hospitals where they currently are that yet may not be 
able to provide adequate service. For a critical trauma victim, 
the consequence of divert status can be the difference 
between life and death. Therefore, the healthcare service 
facility needs to construct a facility location model that can 
simultaneously determine the number of facilities opened, 
their particular locations, and their capacity levels. This 
should ensure that the probability of all servers in a facility 
gets busy does not exceed a pre-determined level.  
To achieve such capabilities in a facility location model, 
some solutions in the literature incorporate queuing systems 
into facility location models to consider the chance of 
servers’ availability and focus on reducing the demand lost 
due to the shortage of capacity or system congestion. 
However, to date there are no available region-based bed-
capacity systems in the literature for Saudi Arabia. 
Therefore, this project aims to bridge this gap by locating ER 
services across Riyadh City on a network and determine their 
respective capacity levels such that the probability of 
diverting patients is not larger than a particular threshold. 
This proposal should enhance the performance of EMS in 
Saudi Arabia in general, and Riyadh City in particular. In 
Addition, it should reduce the total number of deaths 
resulting from trauma diversion. 
IV. 
 METHODOLOGY 
This research uses a mixture of qualitative research methods 
for data collection and system design. First, a total of 34 
hours of semi-structured interviews with 23 multi-
disciplinary experts were conducted. The sample of 
interviewees included 1 trauma surgeon, 1 physician, 2 
health informatics experts, 4 information security experts, 8 
computer scientists, and 7 Saudi Red Crescent Authority 
(SRCA) representatives with information technology and 
medical backgrounds, including the General Manager of 
Emergency Medical Services, SRCA. Through those 
interviews, primary data was collected about all trauma 
centers in Riyadh, the number of states in emergency, the 
data assessment sheet EMS personnel uses today (in paper 
format) that needs to be sent to hospitals with notification 
along with patient ID number, and the challenges faced by 
the ED. Second, soft systems methodology was used to 
design the proposed system and produce an architectural 
design (See Figure 1).  
A. Region-Based Bed-Capacity System Framework 
The SRCA EMS personnel interviews (mainly with the 
Business Analyst [30]) provided substantial evidence that 
hospital beds can reduce deaths during emergencies and 
delay treatment of many patients in emergency by devolving 
the bed capacity system. Therefore, this research aims to 
devolve web services (See Figure 1) that connect the 
proposed mHealth application with any Electronic Health 
Record (EHR) in any hospital to show the bed capacity. 
Furthermore, to learn more about ED process, we 
interviewed Dr. Thamer Nouh [31], Trauma Surgeon at 
King Khalid University Hospital, to identify the criteria 
relating to emergency department bed capacity in trauma 
care in one of the large tertiary hospitals in Riyadh (namely 
King Khalid University Hospital). 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 1.  Proposed System Overview. 
B. System Functional Requirements 
Based on two sets of interviews the following solution is 
proposed:  
• 
The EMS rescuer/paramedic can view information 
about hospitals across the city of Riyadh. 
• 
The information available in the application must be 
dynamic and in real-time, which means that the 
paramedic can see the available and current 
information about the hospitals at any time and 
anywhere across Riyadh. 
• 
The EMS rescuer/paramedic can view each 
hospital’s exact location, bed capacity and the 
available medical resources to suit a patient’s case. 
• 
The EMS paramedic can view available inpatient 
bed capacity in real-time for the hospitals. 
• 
The EMS paramedic can find the nearest suitable 
hospital location for a patient’s case with the right 
medical services for this patient’s emergency 
situation, to guarantee a transfer in a speedy manner 
that would prevent negative implications to the 
patient and, at the same time, provide the right health 
care at the right time in a speedy manner. 
• 
The 
Emergency 
Department 
Support 
Officer 
(EDSO) [32] receives notification of the new patient 
and can view their assessment information. 
• 
The administrator of EMS can view reports about 
every EMS rescuer/paramedic case and patient 
information. 
C. Workflow Design  
Based on the collected data, four criteria are used to 
decide on bed availability: 
• 
Available bed in radiology department, 
• 
Available bed in Intensive Care Unit (ICU) 
• 
Available bed for inpatient 
• 
Available bed in Operation Room (OR) 
A final criterion would be existing specialists in one of 
the three fields (Orthopedic surgery, Neuro surgery, and 
Emergency surgery). However, the EMS cannot decide 
which patient needs to go to the radiology department for 
examination unless the specialist visits the radiology 
department. Hence, the system will be in green mode, then 
the EMS rescuer/paramedic can choose a suitable hospital. 
Accordingly, ER can be available if there are enough beds 
in the radiology department, ICU, inpatient and OR (See in 
Figure 2). The system has two components: 
§ 
In the first part of the system, an attempt is made to 
construct module web services integration with each 
internal hospital system to decide ability of ER to 
receive the new patient; this depends on the criteria that 
are mentioned above. 
§ 
On the other hand, EMS regenerates bed capacity of 
Riyadh hospitals in trauma cases to decide on a suitable 
hospital, depending on the following: 
o 
Shortest way from the hospital location that 
guarantees a speedy transfer that would 
prevent negative implications. 
o 
Hospitals have the medical resources to treat 
the patient’s case. 
o 
Hospitals have specialized personnel to treat 
the patient’s case. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Proposed System workflow. 
 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

D. Process Algorithms 
The goal of this phase is to build a decision support 
model that is powerful, robust, comprehensible, optimal, 
and effective. There are many different search algorithms 
that can run the best diction support model (for example, 
Fusion [33] and Dijkstra's [34]). The best algorithm to be 
chosen depends on the collected data.  
On the one hand, Fusion Algorithm [33] is used in many 
tracking and surveillance systems. One method for the 
design of such systems is to employ a number of sensors 
(perhaps of different types) and to fuse the information 
obtained from all these sensors on a central processor. Past 
efforts to solve this problem required the organization of 
feedback from the central processor to local processor units. 
This can be used by the hospitals for proper surveillance of 
accidents on the roads. It can also reduce the time necessary 
for bringing the patient to the hospital [32]. 
On the other hand, Dijkstra's Algorithm [34] finds the 
shortest path from a starting node to a target node in a 
weighted graph. This algorithm is a graph search one that 
solves the single-source shortest path problem for a graph 
with nonnegative edge path costs, producing a shortest path 
tree. It is used in routing and as a subroutine in other graph 
algorithms. It can also be used for finding the costs of 
shortest paths from a single vertex to a single destination 
vertex by stopping the algorithm once the shortest path to 
the destination vertex has been determined. For example, if 
the vertices of the graph represent cities and edge path costs 
represent driving distances between pairs of cities connected 
by a direct road, then Dijkstra’s Algorithm can be used to 
find the shortest route between one city and all other cities. 
It can also be used by hospitals for ambulances in case of 
emergency to find the shortest available path. The algorithm 
creates a tree of shortest paths from the starting vertex, the 
source, to all other points in the graph. The algorithm exists 
in many variants; Dijkstra's original variant found the 
shortest path between two nodes, but a more common 
variant fixes a single node as the “source” node and finds 
the shortest paths from the source to all other nodes in the 
graph, producing a shortest-path tree [33]. For this, the 
following are points, which are necessary for Dijkstra’s 
Algorithm in hospitals: [34] 
§ 
Existence of a widespread roads system that connects 
all parts of the city. 
§ 
Availability of sufficient VANET modules in the 
routes in order to detect traffic congestion. 
§ 
Infrastructure, such as GPS, communication links and 
two way radio are provided.  
§ 
Presence of a Dispatch Centre (DC) that serves the 
purpose of information exchange. 
§ 
Existence of an updated database of the roads and 
hospitals. 
§ 
Existence of Road Side Units (RSU) at suitable 
locations that might be inaccessible due to restrictions 
for propagation of signal. 
E. Interface Design 
In the proposed mHealth application, there are three 
potential users: rescuer or paramedic front-end, EDSO, and 
EMS administrator for the back-end. The rescuer or 
paramedic is the main user of the mHealth application. They 
can view a list of suitable nearest hospitals then choose one 
of them; they can also send the trauma-victim’s assessment 
sheet containing key information on patients to the chosen 
hospital. On the other hand, the EDSO can view the 
assessment sheet of patients before they arrive (See Figure 
3). An EMS dashboard administrator can view reports about 
every rescue/ paramedics operations and we can also search 
by rescue/ paramedics name, code number or hospital name 
(See Figure 4). 
 
 
Figure 3.  Hospital Bed Capacity Webpage Interface. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Emergency Dashboard Interface. 
 
A menu in Figure 4 below shows all suitable hospitals 
arranged by location and available beds. This is a color-
coded scheme of availability: Red icon: Not Available, and 
Green icon: Available.  
• 
First icon from the right is:  Available bed.  
• 
Second icon from right is: Available Orthopedic Surgery 
specialist.  
• 
Third icon from right is: Available Neuro Surgery 
specialist.  
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

• 
Fourth icon from right is: Available Emergency Surgery 
specialist.  
The screen in Figure 5 appears after choosing suitable 
hospitals from the previous screen. A "field set" of patient’s 
attributes should be completed. A Next button transfers the 
user to the next page (confirmed page). A Back button 
transfers the user to the previous screen. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  mHealth Application 
Interface (1st Screen). 
Figure 5.  mHealth Application 
Interface (2nd Screen). 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
The work presented in this paper described the proposed 
solution to a major problem facing healthcare services. The 
proposed mobile health (mHealth) application solution is an 
attempt to solve the issue of major causes of deaths in 
trauma cases: ambulance diversion due to the unavailability 
of resources (namely beds and specialists) in the nearest 
hospital. The proposed application focuses on linking 
Emergency Medical Services (EMS) to trauma centers in 
Riyadh to help the paramedic to deliver the patients to the 
nearest trauma center with available resources in the 
shortest possible time to save the lives of patients. The 
evaluation results of the application have shown that the 
proposed solution provides regional-based availabilities of 
resources in nearest hospitals in order to avoid Emergency 
Departments (ED) crowding and shortages in inpatient bed 
capacity. The proposed application uses two algorithms: 
Dijkstra Algorithm for routing the ambulance path taken 
and Fusion Algorithm for predicting inpatient bed capacity. 
Results show an effective mHealth application to be used by 
3 system users. First, EMS rescuer/ paramedic user to view 
a list of suitable nearest hospitals then chooses one of them; 
they also send the trauma-victim’s assessment sheet 
containing key information on patients to the chosen 
hospital. Second, EDSO user to view the patients’ 
assessment sheet before they arrive to the nearest trauma 
center that is ready to reduce the average time of 1 hour it 
takes for preparation prior to trauma victim arrival [31]. 
Finally, EMS administrator user to view a dashboard that 
reports about all EMS rescue/paramedics’ actions. This 
mHealth application should optimize resources in EMS in 
Riyadh city to improve the ambulance diversion issue in 
particular and the quality of urgent care service delivery to 
Saudis in general. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors extend their appreciation to the Deanship of 
Scientific Research at King Saud University for funding this 
research through research group No (RGP-1438-002). 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Shen, "Association Between Ambulance Diversion and 
Survival Among Patients With Acute Myocardial Infarction", 
JAMA, vol. 305, no. 23, p. 2440, 2011. 
[2] "WannaCry 
ransomware: 
Everything 
you 
need 
to 
know", CNET, 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.cnet.com/news/wannacry-wannacrypt-uiwix-
ransomware-everything-you-need-to-know/. [Accessed: 11- 
Mar- 2018]. 
[3] Ministry of Foreign Affairs. "The Basic Law of Governance" 
Kingdom of Saudi. 1992. 
[4] Ministry of Health, "Kingdom of Saudi Arabia - Ministry of 
Health 
Portal", 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/Ministry/Statistics/book/Pages/def
ault.aspx. [Accessed: 16- Mar- 2017]. 
[5] Indexmundi. "Hospital bed density - Country Comparison", 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.indexmundi.com/g/r.aspx?v=2227. [Accessed: 6- 
Mar- 2018].  
[6] Van der Linden, M. C. "Emergency department crowding: 
Factors influencing flow",2015 
[7] National Association of EMS Physici, "Ambulance Diversion 
and Emergency Department Offload Delay", Prehospital 
Emergency Care, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 543-543, 2011. 
[8] ACEP,"Definition of Boarded Patient",2017. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.acep.org/Clinical---Practice-
Management/Definition-of-Boarded-Patient-2147469010/. 
[Accessed: 7- Mar- 2018]. 
[9] Encyclopedia. "bed occupancy - Dictionary definition of bed 
occupancy", Encyclopedia.com, 2017. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.encyclopedia.com/caregiving/dictionaries-
thesauruses-pictures-and-press-releases/bed-occupancy. 
[Accessed: 7- Mar- 2018] 
[10] B. Rechel, S. Wright, J. Barlow and M. McKee, "Hospital 
capacity planning: from measuring stocks to modelling 
flows," Bulletin of the World Health Organization, vol. 88, 
no. 8, pp. 632-636, 2010. 
[11] World Health Organization, "Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs), 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs290/en/. 
[Accessed: 7- Mar- 2018]. 
[12] M. McKee, "What are the lessons learnt by countries that 
have had dramatic reductions of their hospital bed capacity?" 
HEN synthesis report on reduction of hospital beds", Health 
Evidence Network (HEN), 2003. 
[13] Jun, S. Jacobson and J. Swisher, "Application of Discrete-
Event Simulation in Health Care Clinics: A Survey", The 
Journal of the Operational Research Society, vol. 50, no. 2, p. 
109, 1999. 
[14] Dawn M. Lewis,” A Qualitative Case Study: Hospital 
Emergency Preparedness Coordinators’ Perspectives Of 
 
 
 
 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Preparing For And Responding To Incidents”, Capella 
University, 2015 
[15] R. Schmidt, S. Geisler and C. Spreckelsen, "Decision support 
for hospital bed management using adaptable individual 
length of stay estimations and shared resources", BMC 
Medical Informatics and Decision Making, vol. 13, no. 1, 
2013. 
[16] Chin-I Lin. "Optimization Models For Capacity Planning In 
Health Care Delivery.” (Doctoral Dissertation). University of 
Florida, Gainesville, USA. 2008.  
[17] B. Asplin, D. Magid, K. Rhodes, L. Solberg, N. Lurie and C. 
Camargo, "A conceptual model of emergency department 
crowding", Annals of Emergency Medicine, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 
173-180, 2003. 
[18] Cisco Systems. “Singapore Hospital Modernizes Bed 
Management.” [Accessed: 7- Mar- 2018] [Online]. Available: 
http://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/solutions/industries/docs/
healthcare/AlexandraHospital.pdf. 2006. 
 
 
 
[19] Groundbreaking Bed Management Technology Helps SGH 
Improves Capacity and Care. [Accessed: 7- Mar- 2018] 
[Online]. Available:, from https://www.sgh.com.sg/about-
us/newsroom/news-
release/2010/Pages/GroundbreakingBedManagementTechnol
ogyHelpsSGHImprovesCapacityandCare.aspx 
[20] M. Ribbe, G. Ljunggren, K. Steel, E. Topinkova, C. Hawes, 
N. Ikegami, J. Henrard and P. JONnson, "Nursing Homes in 
10 Nations: A Comparison Between Countries and 
Settings", Age and Ageing, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 3-12, 1997 
[21]  Kerr E, Sibrand V. Health care systems in transition: 
Belgium. Copenhagen, European Observatory on Health Care 
Systems, 2000. 
[22] S. Hussain, "Full Text of Saudi Arabia’s Vision 2030 | Saudi 
Gazette", 
Saudi 
Gazette, 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://saudigazette.com.sa/saudi-arabia/full-text-saudi-arabias-
vision-2030/. [Accessed: 7- Mar- 2018]. 
[23] Ministry of Finance. “Ministry of Finance 2017 Budget of 
Kingdom 
of 
Saudi 
Arabia.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.mof.gov.sa/en/budget2017/Documents/The_Nati
onal_Budget.pdf. [Accessed: 7- Mar- 2018]. 
[24] Ministry of Health. "Achievement of Ministry of health 
2013", 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/ministry/statistics/book/documents
/1433.pdf [Accessed: 7- Mar- 2018]. 
[25] Ministry of Health. "News - Ajyad Hospital in Makkah 
Shows 
Continuous 
Readiness 
for 
the 
Hajj 
Season", Moh.gov.sa, 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/hajj/news/pages/news-2014-09-22-
002.aspx. [Accessed: 7- Mar- 2018]. 
[26] S. Walston, Y. Al-Harbi and B. Al-Omar, "The Changing 
Face of Healthcare in Saudi Arabia", Annals of Saudi 
Medicine, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 243-250, 2008. 
[27] A. Bagust, M. Place and J. Posnett, "Dynamics of bed use in 
accommodating emergency admissions: stochastic simulation 
model", BMJ, vol. 319, no. 7203, pp. 155-158, 1999. 
[28] Emedicine.medscape. "Initial Evaluation of the Trauma 
Patient: Overview, Triage and Organization of Care, Initial 
Assessment", Emedicine.medscape.com, 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/434707-
overview. [Accessed: 7- Mar- 2018]. 
[29] A. Bagust, M. Place and J. Posnett, "Dynamics of bed use in 
accommodating emergency admissions: stochastic simulation 
model", BMJ, vol. 319, no. 7203, pp. 155-158, 1999. 
[30] Momammed  Alouad, Business Analyst, Emergency Medical 
Service, Saudi Red Crescent Authority (SRCA), Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia, 2017. 
[31] Dr. Thamer Nouh, Trauma and Acute Care Surgery Unit, 
King Khalid University Hospital, King Saud University 
Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2017.  
[32] New South Wales (NSW) Health. "Emergency Department 
Support Officer", NSW Health eRecruit, 2017. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://nswhealth.erecruit.com.au/ViewPosition.aspx?Id=2704
27. [Accessed: 7- Mar- 2018]. 
[33] Yuemin Li, Renbiao Wu, Tao Zhang, "Multi-scale fusion and 
estimation for multi-resolution sensors", Signal Processing 
(ICSP) 2012 IEEE 11th International Conference on, vol. 1, 
pp. 193-197, 2012, ISSN 2164-523X. 
[34] P. Singal and R. R.S.Chhillar, "Dijkstra Shortest Path 
Algorithm using Global Position System", International 
Journal of Computer Applications, vol. 101, no. 6, pp. 12-18, 
2014. 
 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

