A Common Platform for AAL Services and a Common Future – The 
universAAL Project 
Lenna Maria Broberg 
Region of Southern Denmark & Medcom 
Odense, Denmark 
Lmb@medcom.dk. 
 
 
Michele Girolami, 
ISTI-CNR and Department of Computer Science 
Pisa, Italy 
Michele.girolami@isti.cnr.it; girolami@di.unipi.it
 
Abstract -- universAAL is a European project set in motion 
to push and aid the market for AAL services and products. 
Its main objective is to make it technically possible and eco-
nomically affordable to develop AAL services by providing 
a common, open, European platform, which sets up a mar-
ket for buyers, sellers and users to meet and by supplying 
tools, a reference architecture and software components 
which aid the developing process. Simultaneously, a com-
munity is being established to foster interest and to gain 
widespread adoption of the universAAL platform. 
 
Keywords – AAL; platform; interoperability.  
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The demographic challenges are rising as the Europe-
an population ages. More support is and will be needed 
with fewer hands to cater for these needs. A large EU pro-
ject has been established to make new Ambient Assisted 
Living (AAL) services technically feasible and economi-
cally viable to develop [1]. 
 
The potential benefits of AAL solutions have already 
been clearly recognized with a huge market potential, 
while societal trends indicate that they will be attractive to 
a large and increasing number of people. This potential 
has not yet been fulfilled and uptake and implementation 
of AAL solutions have so far been limited because it re-
quires large resources to be committed. The few products 
and services made available on the market are often stand-
alone solutions and not interoperable and have, therefore, 
had limited success. 
 
With these challenges in mind, the universAAl project 
was initiated in order to standardize the approach to de-
veloping AAL solutions. 
There have previously been several other funding ini-
tiatives within the EU to create a platform, services among 
others. However, this is the first to gather and group all 
the needs from within the AAL community under one sin-
gle project [2]. universAAL is built upon previous EU 
funded projects, such as PERSONA, AMIGO, MPOW-
ER, SOPRANO, OASIS, VAALID, GENESYS [3] 
The project has 19 partners from allover Europe with 
the aim of developing an open, common European IT 
platform for AAL solutions and services. 
 
 
 
 
II. 
OBJECTIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The main objective [4] for the project is to make it 
technically feasible and financially viable to develop, de-
sign and launch new and innovative AAL solutions. Part 
of this strategy entails the development of a full suite of 
software components which can compose an environment 
for developing and running AAL applications for compa-
nies, private individuals, institutions etc. This will be done 
through the establishment of e.g. the universAAL devel-
oper depot and the uStore. In addition, the project aims at 
gaining widespread adoption and acceptance of the plat-
form and to expand the number of companies which de-
velop AAL solutions. 
  
An overall goal for the project, and especially the plat-
form, is that companies and other actors can use it for 
free, for incorporating into intelligent systems for e.g. el-
derly homes, care facilities, hospitals and hereby boost the 
market for AAL by opening up for more digital services. 
 
III. 
THE PLATFORM 
The platform will be produced by a mixture of new 
developments and consolidation of state-of-the-art results 
from existing initiatives and entails 3 main parts, as seen 
on the Figure 1 below: runtime support, development sup-
port, and community support. 
 
Runtime support is a software environment which of-
fers core output and services within AAL, making it easy 
to construct applications such as fall detection, alarms, 
GPS (global positioning system) detectors, etc. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Facts about universAAL: 
Full Name:  
UNIVERsal open platform and refer-
ence Specification for Ambient As-
sisted Living 
Start date: 
01.02.2010 
Duration: 
48 months 
Budget:  
13.980.164 €  
 
 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. universAAL platform 
 
 
Development support includes documentation, tools, 
and an online depot of several development resources 
such as software components, which are open and should  
make the integration and development of AAL services 
and applications easier. 
 
Community support includes training and an online 
one-stop-shop which offers easy access to services and 
applications. 
 
The online one-stop-shop is called uStore and func-
tions as the market place where suppliers can offer their 
services (both hardware and software and human re-
sources) so that others can find them. In addition, this 
platform supports the use of several existing platforms and 
allows interoperability with existing systems and domains. 
IV. 
THE UNIVERSAAL NOVELTIES 
The universAAL project presents some novelties with 
respect to other AAL platforms. We distinguish between 
the technological and academic aspects. 
The Technological Aspect: universAAL has been de-
signed and implemented by following a 3-level approach: 
 
Reference model (RM): the consortium fist 
concentrated on the definition of the common 
understanding of the AAL domain. The ref-
erence model defines the relevant concepts 
and relationships among them. 
 
Reference architecture (RA): this architecture 
provides a high-level structure of the univer-
sAAL components. The RA has been de-
signed in order to be independent from the 
enabling technologies and protocols. The RA 
defines the role of the components of the uni-
versAAL project and the functionalities that 
are provided. 
 
Concrete architecture (CA): the CA is a con-
crete implementation of the universAAL plat-
form inspired from the RA. The universAAL 
consortium has released the official CA in 
order to demonstrate the real benefits of the 
universAAL platform. 
 
The benefit of this approach is the design of a unified 
AAL platform that takes advantage from a high-level 
modeling independently from specific technologies.  
 
V. 
THE ACADEMIC ASPECT 
The project comprises the runtime, the development 
tools and the community support. This makes univer-
sAAL a useful toolkit for academic lecturers and semi-
nars. Students interested in developing new AAL service, 
are supported by the universAAL tools (a notable example 
is the universAAL AAL Studio). Such tools allow follow-
ing the developers during all the steps: designing, coding, 
testing and integration by reducing the learning curve of 
the universAAL platform. 
 
VI. 
THE COMMUNITY  
  
As part of the strategy of achieving the above men-
tioned objectives and to gain a widespread implementa-
tion and adoption of the universAAL platform, univer-
sAAL has started AALOA – an AAL Open Association 
together with other projects – see figure 2. The idea with 
AALOA is to create a non-profit organization open to in-
dividuals, institutions, and industry. It provides a meeting 
point for the industry and academia and will be able to 
catalyze interests and efforts around AAL, promoting 
standardization and identify key areas of interest. AALOA 
works independently from the universAAL project. 
 
Figure 2. AALOA overview 
 
In connection with the Open Association AALOA, an 
annual AAL competition has been created and is called 
EvAAL (Evaluating AAL Systems through competitive 
benchmarking). The competition has been established to 
foster interest from the research and development envi-
ronments within the many disciplines of AAL and to de-
velop new metric systems to measure, test and evaluate 
AAL systems. 
  
 
 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

VII. 
WHAT UNIVERSAAL SOLVES 
 
universAAL has brought experts, end users, and de-
velopers together to address the growing need for a com-
mon reference architecture within AAL applications as 
well as creating a virtual meeting point for developers and 
users, initiating a common standard to heighten the quality 
as well as interoperability with the health care sector.  
 
In short, this project has the goal of initiating and 
boosting the market for AAL as well as creating a com-
mon standard so that interoperability can be secured and 
costs will decrease. 
  
It is the vision of the project partners that it should be 
simple for users to download and setup AAL services as it 
is to download and install software application on modern 
operating systems. 
  
VIII. 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE PROJECT TO DATE 
 
While the goal of the project is to have all the above 
mentioned objectives ready by the end of the project peri-
od, with around 1 years left of the project, it has at this 
point already released first versions of uStore, the market 
place in which it is possible to search for and download 
applications (but not yet to install it), and developer depot 
which will be further enhanced during the project period. 
The middleware is under construction, some of it ready, 
while AALOA has been created and has already hosted 2 
successful EvAAL events. 
 
IX. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Ingeniørforeningen  IDA, report on health technology 
”Sundhedsteknologi 2020”, 2011  
[2]  S. Hanke, C. Mayer, O. Hoeftberger, H. Boos, R. Wichert, M. 
Tazari, P. Wolf, and F. Furfari, “universAAL – an open and 
consolidated AAL platform”; Ambient Assisted Living: 4. AAL 
Kongress; 2011 Berlin, Germany, January 25-26, 2011 
[3]
 
http://universaal.org/index.php?Itemid=14&option=com_content
&view=article&id=10&lang=en&catid=24 (retireved: September, 2012)  
[4] 
 S. Hanke, V. Eisenberg, S. Tazari, F. Furfari, M. Mosmondor, Y. 
Peres, and R. Wichert, ”universAAL 
– An open Platform and Reference Specification for Ambient 
Assisted Living” , Med-e-Tel 2011, Luxemburg, Conference 
Proceedings 
 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

