RoboChain: A Secure Data-Sharing Framework for Human-Robot Interaction
Eduardo Castell´o Ferrer*1, Ognjen (Oggi) Rudovic*1, Thomas Hardjono2, Alex ‘Sandy’ Pentland1,2
1MIT Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
2MIT Connection Science & Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
Email: {ecstll, orudovic, hardjono, pentland}@mit.edu
∗these authors contributed equally to this work
Abstract—Robots have potential to revolutionize the way we
interact with the world around us. One of their largest potentials
is in the domain of mobile health where they can be used
to facilitate clinical interventions. However, to accomplish this,
robots need to have access to our private data in order to
learn from these data and improve their interaction capabilities.
Furthermore, to enhance this learning process, the knowledge
sharing among multiple robot units is the natural step forward.
However, to date, there is no well-established framework which
allows for such data sharing while preserving the privacy of
the users (e.g., the hospital patients). To this end, we introduce
RoboChain - the ﬁrst learning framework for secure, decentral-
ized and computationally efﬁcient data and model sharing among
multiple robot units installed at multiple sites (e.g., hospitals).
RoboChain builds upon and combines the latest advances in
open data access and blockchain technologies, as well as machine
learning. We illustrate this framework using the example of a
clinical intervention conducted in a private network of hospitals.
Speciﬁcally, we lay down the system architecture that allows
multiple robot units, conducting the interventions at different
hospitals, to perform efﬁcient learning without compromising the
data privacy.
Keywords–Distributed Robotics; Data Privacy; Blockchain; Fed-
erated Learning; Distributed Robotics; Mobile Health Technologies.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recent advances in mobile and robotic technology have
found applications in many domains including entertainment,
education and health [1]. In particular, Socially Assistive
Robotics (SAR) [2] has emerged as a research ﬁeld that aims
to create robots that can empower humans in a number of
activities. This has brought various types of social robots:
from humanoid robots to medical devices and responsive home
appliances [3]. One of the main potentials of this type of robots
is their ability to monitor and improve human well-being and
health [4]. More speciﬁcally, in the health domain, robots have
been used to improve clinical interventions for individuals
with neurodevelopmental conditions such as autism [5], and
also for monitoring and assisting people with conditions such
as dementia [6], among others. As part of the intervention,
robots need to be able to establish naturalistic and engaging
interactions with humans. Since these robots are typically
equipped with a number of sensors including audio-visual
sensors, and also have access to vast ’prior’ data (different
types of interactions tested in different contexts), they have
potential to constantly learn and improve their interaction ca-
pabilities [7]. This, in turn, could lead to more effective health
and well-being interventions as the robots will constantly be
improving by learning from data. This is also true in the case of
alternative mobile health technologies [8] (e.g., mobile phones,
tablets and computer monitors), however, the three dimensional
embodiment of robots is typically perceived more human-like
and engaging by target patients [9].
Until recently, this process was limited due to the inefﬁ-
ciency of existing learning techniques (e.g., most of human-
robot interactions would be pre-scripted). The increase in
available human data (‘big data’) and progress in Machine
Learning (ML) [10] (in particular, ‘deep learning’ [11]), have
enabled to automate parts of health interventions [12], al-
lowing the robots to learn more efﬁciently and customize
the interventions. However, this requires the use of personal
and highly sensitive data, especially when working in clinical
settings [13][14]. The main downside of existing solutions is
that these data are highly isolated, thus, not shared among
different sites (e.g., hospitals). This is mainly because of data
privacy issues and their potential misuse by untrusted parties.
This limits the knowledge sharing that could otherwise beneﬁt
clinical interventions enhanced by robots. Consequently, this
constraints the learning and adaptation of the robots to existing
and new contexts, hindering the progress toward more efﬁcient
health interventions. Even though the SAR is moving rapidly,
to date, there is no a well-established framework that addresses
the challenges mentioned above, while exploiting the full
potential of personal and other sensitive data in an open,
secure, decentralized, and efﬁcient manner.
Over the last decade, it has been shown that open access
datasets have been extremely useful to extract knowledge
in diverse ﬁelds such as urban planning [15], environmental
monitoring [16], and health care [17]. However, as the ubiquity
of these data increases, it might also become less secure. In
contrast, siloing data can provide a measure of security, but
raises issues of inter-operability [18]. There is also increasing
interest by governments [19], societies [20], and industry [21]
to share knowledge based on data. However, this needs to be
balanced with the right to preserve the privacy of the subjects
represented in the data [22]. To provide a viable solution to
this trade-off, novel platforms like MIT OPen ALgorithms
(OPAL) [23] have proposed a change of paradigm: rather
than moving data into a centralized location, so that it can be
queried, analyzed, and processed by an algorithm, the queries
are delivered to the nodes containing the datasets of interest
instead. In other words, the algorithm needs to be ‘sent’ to
the data. Then, queries would be executed by the relevant
node, with the results being reported back to the querier –
who would merge the results into a meaningful analysis. In
this way, the raw data never leaves its physical location and
the owner never looses control over it. Instead, nodes that
carry relevant datasets execute queries and report the results.
Importantly, security and privacy becomes more manageable
in this paradigm because each node controls its own data store
and monitors the privacy entropy of released answers.
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Likewise,
the
emergent
technologies
such
as
blockchain
[24],
a
chronological
ledger
of
transactions
that ensures the integrity of the information included, can be
used to capture and log both queries and its correspondent
answers. Blockchain provides a useful mechanism to support
post-event audits [25], enhanced privacy, and availability [26]
in the systems that rely on sensitive data. These characteristics
of the system increase its transparency and have already been
proven useful in medical applications [27][28], as well
as distributed robotics scenarios [29][30]. Moreover, the
blockchain technology offers practical means to safely and
securely store and track the use of personal data as well as the
parameters of the ML models used for the robot intervention.
This increases the users’ trust in the system and provides a
rich source of information that can be used to better design
future interventions. It is also worth noting that our framework
deploys blockchain technology but is independent of any
speciﬁc implementation. We seek to cater to a broad set of
deployment scenarios. As such, RoboChain can be deployed
with (i) public blockchains (ii) semi-private blockchains, or
(iii) private/permissioned blockchains. We deﬁne a public
blockchain as one where anyone can read/write to the
blockchain, and as such has the ability to read and validate
transaction entries. We deﬁne a semi-private blockchain as one
where anyone can read and validate transaction entries, but
only authorized entities are able to create or write transaction
to the blockchain. Finally, we deﬁne a private/permissioned
blockchain as one where only authorized entities are able
to read/write to the blockchain. In the following, we simply
refer to the blockchain regardless of the type used.
To address the challenges of the private data inclusion
in Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) and, more speciﬁcally, as
part of health/clinical interventions, we propose a secure and
efﬁcient framework aimed at addressing the following aspects
of target HRI interactions: (i) how to achieve an effective
and efﬁcient data-driven HRI based on patients’ data from
clinical interventions without breaching the data privacy. This
includes mechanisms to notarize, verify, and account for all
inﬂows/outﬂows of the data involved in the process. (ii) How
to achieve an efﬁcient way to train and continuously improve
ML models, being a part of the robot’s perception during the
intervention [13], using the interaction data collected in (i).
(iii) Finally, we address how to efﬁciently update and share the
learned ML models obtained in (ii) among different robot units
connected in a sparse network (e.g., multiple hospitals). To this
end, we introduce a novel framework for secure data-driven
HRI, named RoboChain, which builds upon and combines the
latest advances in OPAL, blockchain, and ML technologies.
We illustrate its potential utility in the context of health domain
and clinical interventions as part of autism therapy. However,
the framework is applicable to any HRI where the use of
personal data and their sharing is critical for the task. The
key to the RoboChain approach is that users (e.g., patients)
have the possibility to check what information was generated
and/or captured during the interaction with the robot (e.g., the
therapy), and conﬁrm that this information do not compromise
their privacy. Furthermore, we show how the secure sharing
of the knowledge of the robots connected in a network can
increase the efﬁcacy of a decentralized learning process.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section
II presents an overview of how assistive robots carry out
health interventions and the different elements involved in
the process. Section III describes in detail the RoboChain
architecture and its information workﬂow. Section IV describes
the combination of RoboChain and federated learning. Finally,
we conclude this work in Section V with the discussion,
limitations and future work.
II.
ASSISTIVE ROBOTS FOR HEALTH INTERVENTIONS
To illustrate our approach, we use as a running example
the HRI in an occupational therapy (“the intervention”) for
individuals with autism (“the patient”), where a humanoid
robot NAO (“the robot”) is used as an assistive tool. Engaging
patients with autism in an intervention is a challenging problem
as they easily lose their interest and often quickly disengage
from the intervention activities. However, the majority of these
patients ﬁnd robots quite engaging because of their, in contrast
to humans, consistent behavioural expressions. This, in turn,
allows them to sustain the patient’s engagement and perform
the intervention more effectively. The latter is achieved via
a number of pre-scripted activities by the robot, aimed at
improving socio-cognitive skills of the patients. Namely, these
patients have, among others, challenges in interpreting be-
havioural cues of emotions of other individuals. The goal of the
robot intervention is then to assist the therapist in teaching the
patients to recognize/imitate these expressions. For instance, as
part of the intervention, the robot may play an imitation game
with a patient by asking the patient to show his/her expression
of joy. Then, the robot conveys the same emotion via his voice
and bodily movements programmed to show the expression of
joy of typical individuals. In this way, the patient learns to
identify typical expressions of various emotions, with the aim
to use that knowledge in future interactions with his/her peers.
In what follows, we outline three key elements of the robot-
assisted intervention that need be considered in the proposed
RoboChain architecture.
A. Interaction Model (IM)
This refers to the set of activities and behaviours, deﬁned
by the domain experts, that need be performed by the robot
as part of a target intervention for autism. Speciﬁcally, IMs
rely on the high-level interaction modules controlling the exe-
cution of target behaviours by the robot. These behaviours are
implemented to simulate the typical steps that an experienced
therapists would perform as part of an intervention. However,
an IM also contains the robot sensing and perception modules,
which deploy pre-trained ML models to automatically estimate
the key metrics needed to modulate the intervention. These
may include the models for automatic detection of the pa-
tient’s low-level behavioural cues such as head pose and gaze
direction, as well as high-level metrics such as engagement
levels. To this end, the robot uses locally stored and pre-trained
ML models. For instance, the robot can use Deep Learning
Models (DLM) [11] designed for detection and interpretation
of the patient’s behavioural cues directly from the image data
recorded using a robot-embedded camera. However, the key
challenges in this process are: (i) how to efﬁciently update
the IMs, and thus their DLMs, (ii) how to safely share these
models across multiple sites (e.g., hospitals) and (iii) how to
assure that the current IMs/DLMs are the best among existing
ones for analysis of the patient’s target behavioural cues.
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

B. Interaction Data (ID)
This refers to the data that can be harnessed using the
robot’s embedded sensors such as cameras and microphones,
as well as from other sensors installed at the site. As these
encode personal data of the interacting patient, they should
not leave the site in their raw form as it can compromise the
patient’s privacy. On the other hand, ID pose a great value
for improving the performance of the ML models (DLMs)
used by the robot. Furthermore, by consolidating the data
from multiple sites, more effective IMs/DLMs can be built
from these large datasets, compared to the data accessible
only locally (e.g., within a single hospital). Brieﬂy, one way
to improve the models without sharing the raw data across
different sites is to re-train the IM/DLMs at the target site, and
then share the models’ updates with the other sites. To improve
the models, experienced therapists/clinicians provide feedback,
for instance, on how well the robot performed during the
therapy, also sometimes in terms of manual correction of the
robot’s estimates of the metrics of interest for the therapy (e.g.,
engagement levels for a speciﬁc patient). Once this information
is accumulated locally in the form of the Therapist Feedback
(TF) data paired with the raw ID, the IMs/DLMs can be
updated/re-trained. For instance, this can be accomplished by
ﬁne-tuning the DLM weights using local processing servers or
even on the robot hardware. The next key step is to securely
share this newly acquired knowledge across multiple sites.
C. Background Data (BD)
In contrast to the ID acquired as the therapy progresses,
the BD concerns the medical records of the patient, along
with his/her demographics, and any other relevant (contextual)
information. The latter may be the result of health and be-
havioral assessments of that particular patient, including, for
instance, the family history, school reports, previously used
medication and diagnoses, etc. These are typically stored as
part of government and other public institution data, including
educational centres and schools. However, instead of providing
patient-identiﬁable data to the robot, these sites rather provide
aggregated data, thus preserving the data privacy. By having
access to these data and the local expert knowledge, the
robot can customize its IM/DLMs to the target patient. In
what follows, we describe how each of these key components
(IM/DLMs, ID and BD) can efﬁciently and safely be used
within the RoboChain framework to optimize the intervention,
and, thus, its outcomes and the patient’s experience.
III.
THE SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
Figure 1 lays out the communication architecture of an
individual robot deployed within a clinical intervention on the
target site. This architecture outlines how the robot can gain
access to safe BD about the target patient in order to adapt the
therapy. It also shows how the access to this information is
accounted for, and ﬁnally, how the resultant IM can be shared
among different robot units in the RoboChain to increase their
usability. We break down the proposed data ﬂow into three
main components as described below.
A. Background Data Service
1 - The robot is equipped with a list of secure ‘vetted’ al-
gorithms to build its queries. The goal here is to ensure that the
algorithms used are free from any kind of bias (e.g., the culture
Figure 1. System architecture and data ﬂow. The proposed system involves
three main sections where (A) safe data is retrieved from protected databases
using the OPAL paradigm, (B) the pairs of queries/answers are stored in the
blockchain for accountability and transparency reasons, (C) the data derived
from the therapy is used as an input to train and share ML models. All the
procedures within the black rectangles are carried out in a local fashion (i.e.,
at the robot’s own hardware).
and gender discrimination, or other types that do not comply
with ethical norms). They should also prevent any unintended
side effects (e.g., the exposure of the patient’s behavioral or
condition severity). To accomplish this, the ‘vetted’ algorithms
must be veriﬁed beforehand by domain experts. For instance,
the robot may query the general physical condition of the
patients undergoing similar clinical interventions in order to
adapt the interactions, which otherwise could adversely affect
the patients. It is also important to note that this vetting does
not guarantee the quality of the output which is a function of
the quality of the input data. As an example, a set of hospitals
that the robot is intending to query about the patient may
possess detailed information about the mental wellbeing of
similar patients, but may not return the BD in its original form.
Rather, it provides the information about what to be avoided
during the intervention instead of providing the exact details
to the robot.
2 - Queries using one of the ‘vetted’ algorithms are sent
to the data server. These queries may contain information
obtained during the therapy. Speciﬁcally, the queries may be
designed based on the expert input (by the caregiver or thera-
pist) and/or by the robot’s sensing of the environment including
the patient. For the former, the caregiver administering the
intervention at the site may inform the robot about the patient’s
condition and the type of information needed to execute/choose
the current intervention. For our running example, i.e., the
autism therapy, the therapist can decide that the patient needs to
work on speciﬁc skills (e.g., practicing the eye-gaze exchange).
The robot will then try to retrieve relevant information (through
the queries of BD) that can assist him to better adapt the target
IM to this type of social exercise.
To date, the majority of patients’ BD are stored in different
datasets scattered across the Internet: belonging to govern-
ments, public institutions, private corporations, etc. Conse-
quently, the most recent advances in network data analysis
are starting to address the challenge of creating value from
those datasets without breaching anyone’s privacy. OPAL is
a framework that proposes a change of paradigm: instead of
copying or sharing raw personal data, algorithms in the form
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

of queries are sent to the datasets containing the personal in-
formation/data. Then, the queries are executed behind existing
ﬁrewalls and only anonymous/aggregated information is sent
back to the querier. In Figure 2, a complete patient proﬁle
which may include the patient’s medical, educational, and/or
governmental data, is employed to assist the intervention. Each
one of these databases is controlled by a trusted party, and
personal and sensitive data is stored in a ‘raw’ format from
which the BD is retrieved. Then, queries are sent to each
target database and aggregated information is returned (Figure
2). As mentioned in Section II-C, the aggregated information
contains the group-level information about the patient (e.g.,
demographics such as culture, age and gender, and aggregated
behavioral assessment scores). This information allows the
querier (i.e., a robot) to obtain knowledge about the target
patient needed to select the most appropriate IM/DLMs. The
key here is that from the returned information, the patient
cannot be identiﬁed nor his/her personal data compromised
during the knowledge exchange. In addition, there is a number
of parameters that the robot can passively observe prior to
forming the query. For instance, the robot can use computer
vision algorithms to automatically infer the patient’s age,
gender, and the motor abilities.
Figure 2. Data ﬂow: Trusted parties (e.g., doctors, educators, public institu-
tions, etc.) have access to the Background Data (BD) of patients. The BD
are stored in protected databases that accept queries from trusted data servers.
Data servers receive the ‘answers’ to those queries in the form of aggregated
information. Aggregation is a useful mechanism to anonymize the information
returned.
3 - An answer with aggregated information is received
at the robot’s side. Then, the robot can tailor the IM based
on this. For instance, suppose that the answer is given in the
form: “For this type of patients, the propensity to negative
emotional reactions is n% higher than in other groups when
exercise x is applied.” By knowing this, the robot can adjust
the IM and, therefore, minimize the risk of exposing the patient
to experiencing negative emotions.
B. Background Data Auditing Service
4
Before the question-answer pair, which is obtained
during the background data service phase, can be passed to the
robot, the background auditing service section of the proposed
model captures the pair to archive it on the blockchain.
5 Once the question-answer is stored, the system checks
how to include this information in a blockchain transaction.
This requires to encapsulate the information within the right
data structure, depending on the type of blockchain employed.
Note that here (a) the blockchain only holds the hash-value,
and (b) the complete question-answer is kept by the data
service where the raw data is located (as most of today’s
blockchains cannot encrypt large amounts of data).
6
The pair of queries-answers used in the system is
included in the blockchain. Then, anyone auditing the clinical
interventions can inspect the pair of questions-answers used
during the patient’s therapy. This increases the accountability
and transparency of the HRI system, thus, improving its
trustworthiness with all parties involved.
C. IM/DLM Learning and Sharing Service
7 As explained in Section II-A, the robot relies on the
DLMs, being part of the target IM, when conducting a clinical
intervention. Speciﬁcally, the robot checkouts the current DLM
from its local hub (Figure 4 (A)) and uses it to conduct
the intervention. During this, the robot stores the information
captured by its sensors, producing the ID (e.g., the audio-
visual recordings of the patient and his/her responses to the
IM). Together with the available BD and TF, these data allow
the robot to update/improve the existing DLM models. It
is worth to note that updating the IMs is also feasible at
this point, however, it requires more input from the domain
experts as it concerns the intervention protocols. Speciﬁcally,
a supervised ML approach is adopted: the ID/BD are used as
input to the DLMs, while the TF (e.g., patient’s engagement
levels) as the target output. Then, the ﬁne-tunning of the DLM
parameters to the newly acquired data is accomplished using
the standard back-propagation technique and by selecting an
optimizer (e.g., Adadelta) [11]. With these new parameters, the
robot is expected to increase its competences and adaptability
to target interventions and patients [13]. An example of the
data ﬂow to/from IM and its DLMs is depicted in Figure 3.
Figure 3. Interaction Model (IM). In this example, the robot provides audio-
visual recordings of the patient as input to the IM. These are then processed
using target DLMs, being part of the existing IM. The outputs of the DLMs
(e.g., the patient’s stress level and other behavioral cues) are fed into the IM
scripts designed for the target intervention. This is further enhanced by the
BD and, later, TF, both of which are then used to re-train (update) the DLMs.
The output of the IM is the optimal interaction strategy to be performed by
the robot as part of an ongoing intervention.
8 The patient data (ID, BD, and TF) collected by robot
units at a single site (e.g., a hospital) are being stored at a local
hub (Figure 4). In this scenario, a hub represents the computing
infrastructure of the hospital, care center, etc., where the
robot is performing the intervention. After the intervention,
the patient data and TF are used together to improve the IMs
by re-training their DLMs (as described in 7 ). This can be
done directly on the hardware of local robot units, and/or
on the data-processing servers of the local hub. To this end,
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

different learning strategies can be adopted. For instance, the
robots can create, store, and update the target models after
each intervention, or after a sufﬁcient amount of data has been
collected. The design of speciﬁc learning strategies depends on
the intervention type, and it is out of the scope of this paper.
Then, these new models are committed and stored in the local
repository (Figure 4 (B)) of the local hub. Once created and
stored, it is assumed that these new IM/DLMs cannot be used
to recreate the raw input data (ID) of the patients. Therefore,
all personal data (e.g., images, audio, etc.) remain safe as they
do not leave the hub. Furthermore, they are deleted after the
models are updated.
The stored IM/DLMs are further deployed locally and
assigned a cumulative score based on the TFs derived by
validation of this model within new local interventions. As
a result, a new Candidate Model (CM) along with its per-
formance score is then created and locked on the local hub.
To allow knowledge sharing – one of the key ingredients of
the RoboChain framework – this new CM is then evaluated
by the robot peers operating at other sites, i.e., different hubs
within a clinical network. To this end, the local repository
(hub) publishes the changes (Figure 4 (C)) (e.g., the difference
between the previous version of the model and the new one).
Finally, the hub announces the update to the entire network
(Figure 4 (D)). The goal of this is to assure a fair validation
of the CM before it can be adopted as the new version of the
IM/DLMs for target intervention.
Figure 4. A group of robots commit/checkout changes from/to their local
repository. Robots publish/subscribe to local hubs in order to send/get new
updates on their DLM. One of the main advantages of this approach is that
learning always take place locally, while the resultant knowledge is distributed
globally. Having a local repository with the capabilities of a modern source
control system (e.g., git or mercury) allows robots to calculate differential
changes on the DLM structure, topology, etc., but also being able to roll back
to previous versions.
IV.
ROBOCHAIN AND FEDERATED LEARNING
The key property of the RoboChain framework is its ability
to perform ML operations of the IMs/ DLMs without the need
to store the data, acquired during interventions, in a centralized
location (e.g., a shared hub within a network of hospitals).
This is achieved using the notion of “Federated Learning”
(FL) [31], which allows for smarter models, lower latency, and
less power consumption, while ensuring the patients’ privacy.
Furthermore, FL allows the new models to be deployed im-
mediately on the robot units from other sites such as different
hospitals in a private network.
Figure 5. A global RoboChain network. Robots connect to local hubs,
which are interconnected in a sparse network. Robots publish and receive
notiﬁcations whenever new therapy sessions are conducted. CMs are proposed
by individual robots and validated by the network in future therapies. After
feedback is provided by different peers, a consensus process starts and the
utility of the CM is evaluated. If the CM outperforms previous solutions, the
model is acknowledged as the new standard.
Figure 5 depicts the FL approach employed in the
RoboChain network. First, as mentioned in Section III-C,
the source hub/robot (R(s)) ‘advertises’ the new CM by
announcing the IM/DLM updates to the entire network. Then,
the destination robots (R(d,i)), where i = 1 . . . N denotes the
target sites/hubs, are notiﬁed by their local hub that there is
an update available in the network (Figure 5 (I)). This can
be achieved by the subscription pipeline they have with their
local hub (Figure 4 (E)). In case the updates are available, the
robots can retrieve and apply them to their working directory.It
is worth to note that this does not mean that the robots are
committing the received updates to their local repository yet.
Once the CM (M s
(c)) is adopted from the source hub by the
destination robots, the latter will start its evaluation, quantiﬁed
by the therapists at the destination sites in terms of the TF
scores (F(R(d,i),M s
(c))). Additionally, in order to leverage the
new local data, the destination hubs can also return the model
updates to the source site (obtained in a similar fashion as when
creating the CM). These, in turn can be used to construct the
new model at the source hub. An example of this approach, but
applied in the context of mobile phones, can be found in [31].
The next stage in RoboChain is to consolidate the feedback
information from the destination hubs/robots (Figure 5 (II)).
This can be achieved using time-constraints (i.e., waiting for
a pre-deﬁned period of time to receive the feedback), and/or
when a target consensus is achieved. For instance, if the
feedback score for the CM (M(c)) is higher than for the
currently accepted model (M(j)), i.e., F(i,M s
(c)) > F(i,M(j)).
If this is fulﬁlled, R(s) creates a new model (M(j+1)), which
is then published to all connected hubs, and committed to
their robots’ local repositories (Figure 5 (III)). In this way,
the new baseline model for future interventions is endorsed by
the network. This process can be implemented via modern
control version systems (e.g., git, mercurial, etc.) in order
to store and share the resulting model conﬁgurations (e.g.,
the DLM topology, hyper-parameters, etc.) obtained after new
interventions. This is an important feature of RoboChain since
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

it allows the robots to rollback to the last consensual version
of the model (M(j)), in case a consensus did not take place
within the network. Moreover, since the robots keep the list
of all changes in their local repository, there is a promising
research approach in analyzing the metadata available in the
updates applied to the repository.
Figure 6. Once a R(s) obtains a new candidate model validated by the network,
R(s) is responsible to send a transaction to a blockchain including the key
information to verify the consensus process. Important information such as
timestamps, hash of the new model, and encrypted data is provided. Even
though this transaction is included in a public blockchain, the information
within is only readable by the participants of the private clinical network.
In order to notarize and log the creation of the new models
and their consensus processes within the network (Figure 6),
R(s) is required to send a transaction to a blockchain (public,
semi-public, or private) including information such as the
timestamp of the global update broadcast (Figure 5 (III)), a
hash string that encapsulates the information about the model
update (e.g., differences in the weights, hyper-parameters,
etc.), and an encrypted data ﬁeld signed by R(s) containing
information such as the public IDs of the robots that took
part in the consensus process and their correspondent feedback
scores. This transaction on the blockchain is necessary to allow
participants within the private network (e.g., hospitals, care-
centers, etc.) to prove/validate how models were created, who
participated in their consensus process, and when did those
transaction take place. It is also important to highlight that
the hash string included in this transaction is useful to check
and conﬁrm that the models acquired by robots are indeed
the version agreed upon by the network, and not a corrupted
version from a third-party agent. In addition, the encrypted
data ﬁeld signed by R(s) contain sufﬁcient information to allow
the users to conﬁrm their participation in the consensus process
and check that R(s) was not biased at the moment of promoting
M(j). This information is readable by any participant in the
private clinical network, since they know the public identiﬁer
(i.e., public key) of R(s). By contrast, the peers connected to
the blockchain but not members of the private clinical network
do not have the means to decrypt this information or identify
the nodes involved in the consensus process. This is because
all required public/private keys remain within the boundaries
of the clinical private network. Finally, note that the whole
consensus reaching process could have been implemented
directly on the blockchain via ‘smart contracts’ in order to
prevent intruders from ‘attacking’ the network; yet, we assume
here that the network access is protected.
V.
DISCUSSION, LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Until recently, the creation and training of DLMs have been
a computationally-hungry process (e.g., requiring expensive
dedicated hardware such as GPU chips). Because of this, the
adoption of these models in embedded devices (e.g., robots)
has been a challenging task, especially for low-cost robot units.
However, not long ago, new platforms such as TensorFlow
Lite [32] have paved the way for deployment of machine
learning inference algorithms directly on target devices. This
has been made feasible via an improved scheduling process.
For instance, the DLM training happens only when the device
is idle, plugged in, and counts with an open connection to
the Internet, so there is no impact on the robot’s main tasks.
Tools such as TensorFlow Lite provide a lightweight solution
for DLMs allowing also the federated learning approach, as
proposed in this paper.
The federated learning network interconnecting the par-
ticipant parties (e.g., hospitals, care centers, etc.) and its
correspondent robot units is not public. Thus, it requires a
permission of one (e.g., governmental institutions) or several
parties to join and start contributing to the DLM learning
process. We opted for this design approach since we under-
stand that some form of trust is required in the institutions
that deal with a sensitive task such as autism therapy. For
these reasons, we assume there are no byzantine peers (e.g.,
malicious partners) within the network trying to bias or hinder
the system operation. However, due to the inclusion of both
transactions in the blockchains, the OPAL query/answer pair
and the announcement of a new DLM adoption, we provide
the necessary means to allow all the participants to check and
prove the integrity of the interaction and learning process in
RoboChain. Note also that our current framework assumes
that the new models (IM/DLMs) are published by one party
at the time; yet, multiple sites can propose new candidate
models at the same time. This could easily be managed by
introducing ‘smart contracts’ on the blockchain to attain the
synchrony among the sites. Also, we illustrated our framework
using a single intervention, but the RoboChain should leverage
data from multiple interventions occurring simultaneously at
different sites. To tackle this, IMs/DLMs could be structured
in a modular form, enhancing each other as more patient data
become available.
One of the aspects left for future work is the adaptation
of the proposed system to different ethical frameworks for
working with human data [33]. As mentioned in Section III-A,
the use of ‘vetted’ algorithms ensures that the queries created
during the therapy are fully aligned with the ethical policies
of the relevant regulatory bodies (e.g., Institutional Review
Boards (IRB)). This is particularly important when working
with healthcare data [34], as envisioned in RoboChain. It is
also important to emphasize that in RoboChain both queries
and answers are stored on a blockchain instance, which allows
all interested parties to verify the compliance of these ethical
norms. However, further research is needed to develop robot
controllers that protect the safety (“by default”) of the patients
(e.g., due to hardware malfunctioning and/or software bugs).
For instance, robot controllers should always ensure that
regardless of what type of information/DLMs are obtained
through the RoboChain, the physical and mental states of the
patients should not adversely be affected in any way.
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

To summarize, in this paper, we proposed RoboChain -
the ﬁrst learning framework for tackling the privacy issues in
the use of personal data by multiple robots during HRI. We
illustrated this framework using autism therapy as an example
of an intervention conducted simultaneously by robot units at
multiple hospitals. While the RoboChain proposed here offers
the main principles for secure data and models sharing between
multiple robot units and their sites, in future we plan to
empirically evaluate this concept. To this end, in the ﬁrst stage
we aim to collect the intervention data from several hospitals
in order to test the RoboChain framework in a simulated data-
exchange scenario. In the second stage, we aim to have the
RoboChain system running in real time on a private network.
One of the main challenges that we envision in this process is
how to enable efﬁcient and real-time learning of IMs/DLMs.
We expect that for this, existing ML approaches will need to be
adapted so that they can efﬁciently communicate/be integrated
with the OPAL and blockchain technologies. Also, how to
extend the RoboChain framework so that it can simultaneously
handle multiple private networks, in order to further increase
the learning efﬁcacy or interface with mobile health devices,
are other promising directions to pursue.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This project has received funding from the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme un-
der the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 751615
and No. 701236.
REFERENCES
[1]
H. I. Christensen, A. Okamura, M. Mataric, V. Kumar, G. Hager, and
H. Choset, “Next Generation Robotics,” Tech. Rep., jun 2016.
[2]
M. J. Matari´c, “Socially assistive robotics: Human augmentation versus
automation,” Science Robotics, vol. 2, no. 4, mar 2017, p. eaam5410.
[3]
B. Adams, C. Breazeal, R. Brooks, and B. Scassellati, “Humanoid
robots: a new kind of tool,” IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 15, no. 4,
jul 2000, pp. 25–31.
[4]
L. D. Riek, “Healthcare robotics,” Communications of the ACM,
vol. 60, no. 11, oct 2017, pp. 68–78.
[5]
O. Rudovic, J. Lee, L. Mascarell-Maricic, B. W. Schuller, and R. W.
Picard, “Measuring Engagement in Robot-Assisted Autism Therapy: A
Cross-Cultural Study,” Frontiers in Robotics and AI, vol. 4, no. 36, jul
2017.
[6]
M. Valent´ı Soler et al., “Social robots in advanced dementia,” Frontiers
in Aging Neuroscience, vol. 7, no. 133, 2015.
[7]
P. Liu, D. F. Glas, T. Kanda, and H. Ishiguro, “Data-Driven HRI
: Learning Social Behaviors by Example From Human – Human
Interaction,” IEEE Trans on Robot., vol. 32, no. 4, 2016, pp. 988–1008.
[8]
C. Free et al., “The Effectiveness of Mobile-Health Technologies to
Improve Health Care Service Delivery Processes: A Systematic Review
and Meta-Analysis,” PLoS Medicine, vol. 10, no. 1, 2013, p. e1001363.
[9]
W. A. Bainbridge, J. W. Hart, E. S. Kim, and B. Scassellati, “The
beneﬁts of interactions with physically present robots over video-
displayed agents,” International Journal of Social Robotics, vol. 3, no. 1,
2011, pp. 41–52.
[10]
M. I. Jordan and T. M. Mitchell, “Machine Learning: Trends, perspec-
tives and prospects,” Science (New York, N.Y.), vol. 349, no. 6245,
2015, pp. 255–260.
[11]
Y. Lecun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521,
no. 7553, 2015, pp. 436–444.
[12]
OECD, Data-Driven Innovation Big Data for Growth and Well-Being:
Big Data for Growth and Well-Being.
OECD Publishing, 2015.
[13]
O. Rudovic, J. Lee, M. Dai, B. Schuller, and R. W. Picard, “Personalized
machine learning for robot perception of affect and engagement in
autism therapy,” arXiv:1802.01186, 2018.
[14]
S. Alsalamah, W. A. Gray, J. Hilton, and H. Alsalamah, “Information
security requirements in patient-centred healthcare support systems,”
Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, vol. 192, no. 1-2, 2013,
pp. 812–816.
[15]
J. Dong, W. Cheng, and L. Xin, “Data Augmented Design: Urban
Planning and Design in the New Data Environment,” in 2017 IEEE
2nd International Conference on Big Data Analysis (ICBDA), 2017,
pp. 508–512.
[16]
B. L. Sullivan et al., “Using open access observational data for con-
servation action: A case study for birds,” Biological Conservation, vol.
208, no. May, 2017, pp. 5–14.
[17]
P. Kostkova et al., “Who Owns the Data? Open Data for Healthcare,”
Frontiers in Public Health, vol. 4, no. February, 2016.
[18]
R. M. Frey, T. Hardjono, C. Smith, K. Erhardt, and A. S. Pentland, “Se-
cure sharing of geospatial wildlife data,” in Proceedings of the Fourth
International ACM Workshop on Managing and Mining Enriched Geo-
Spatial Data - GeoRich ’17.
New York, New York, USA: ACM Press,
2017, pp. 5:1–5:6.
[19]
J.-N. Lee, J. Ham, and B. Choi, “Effect of government data openness
on a knowledge-based economy,” Proceedings of Computer Science,
vol. 91, no. Supplement C, 2016, pp. 158–167, promoting Business An-
alytics and Quantitative Management of Technology: 4th International
Conference on Information Technology and Quantitative Management
(ITQM).
[20]
B. Wessels, R. Finn, K. Wadhwa, and T. Sveinsdottir, Open Data and
the Knowledge Society.
Amsterdam University Press, Mar 2017.
[21]
G. Li, Developing the Data Knowledge Industry.
Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 84–96.
[22]
J. C. Alsalamah, Shada, Gray, William Alexander and Hilton, “Sharing
patient medical information among healthcare team members while
sustaining information security,” in 15th International Symposium for
Health Information Management Research (ISHIMR 2011).
Zurich:
University of Zurich, 2011, pp. 553–554.
[23]
T. Hardjono, D. Shrier, and A. Pentland, Trust::Data: A New Framework
for Identity and Data sharing.
Boston: Visionary Future, 2016.
[24]
S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” [re-
trieved: March, 2018]. [Online]. Available: http://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf
[25]
S. Suzuki and J. Murai, “Blockchain as an Audit-Able Communica-
tion Channel,” in Proceedings - International Computer Software and
Applications Conference, vol. 2, 2017, pp. 516–522.
[26]
X. Liang, S. Shetty, D. Tosh, C. Kamhoua, K. Kwiat, and L. Njilla,
“ProvChain: A Blockchain-Based Data Provenance Architecture in
Cloud Environment with Enhanced Privacy and Availability,” in Pro-
ceedings - 2017 17th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster,
Cloud and Grid Computing, CCGRID 2017, 2017, pp. 468–477.
[27]
A. Azaria, A. Ekblaw, T. Vieira, and A. Lippman, “MedRec: Using
blockchain for medical data access and permission management,” in
Proceedings - 2016 2nd International Conference on Open and Big
Data, OBD 2016, 2016, pp. 25–30.
[28]
Q. Xia, E. B. Sifah, K. O. Asamoah, J. Gao, X. Du, and M. Guizani,
“MeDShare: Trust-Less Medical Data Sharing Among Cloud Service
Providers via Blockchain,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, 2017, pp. 14 757–
14 767.
[29]
E. C. Ferrer, “The blockchain: a new framework for robotic swarm
systems,” arXiv:1608.00695, 2016.
[30]
V. Strobel, E. Castello Ferrer, and M. Dorigo, “Managing Byzantine
Robots via Blockchain Technology in a Swarm Robotics Collective De-
cision Making Scenario,” IRIDIA – Technical Report Series, Brussels,
Tech. Rep., 2018.
[31]
H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A.
Arcas, “Communication-Efﬁcient Learning of Deep Networks from
Decentralized Data,” arXiv:1602.05629, 2016.
[32]
“Tensorﬂow
lite,”
[retrieved:
March,
2018].
[Online].
Available:
http://www.tensorﬂow.org/mobile/tﬂite/
[33]
J. Metcalf and K. Crawford, “Where are human subjects in Big Data
research? The emerging ethics divide,” Big Data & Society, vol. 3, no. 1,
jan 2016, pp. 1–14.
[34]
B. C. Stahl and M. Coeckelbergh, “Ethics of healthcare robotics: To-
wards responsible research and innovation,” Robotics and Autonomous
Systems, vol. 86, 2016, pp. 152–161.
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

