Self-monitoring of Physical Frailty; a Proactive Approach in Community-dwelling 
Elderly People 
Joan Vermeulen1, Jacques CL Neyens1, Marieke D Spreeuwenberg1, Erik van Rossum1,2, Luc P de Witte1,2 
1 CAPHRI, Maastricht University, Department of Health Services Research, Maastricht, The Netherlands 
2 Centre of Expertise on Innovative Care and Technology, Research Center for Technology in Care, Zuyd University of 
Applied Sciences, Heerlen, the Netherlands 
j.vermeulen@maastrichtuniversity.nl 
 
 
Abstract—The main objective of the dissertation was to develop 
and evaluate a self-monitoring and feedback system that can 
be used by community-dwelling elderly people to gain insight 
into (changes in) indicators of physical frailty that are 
predictors of increased risk of disability. To achieve this, the 
following research questions were addressed: 1) What is the 
predictive value of physical frailty indicators on disability in 
community-dwelling elderly people?, 2) Can simple, innovative 
technologies be used to obtain valid and reliable estimates of 
physical frailty indicators?, and 3) How can simple, innovative 
technologies be integrated into a self-monitoring system that 
provides regular feedback to elderly people regarding (changes 
in) physical frailty indicators? The studies described in the 
dissertation show that physical frailty indicators (e.g., physical 
activity, weight, grip strength, balance) are predictive of 
disability development in community-dwelling elderly people. 
Simple, innovative technologies that can be used by elderly 
people to obtain valid and reliable estimates of these indicators 
are a bathroom scale that can measure weight and balance, a 
Grip-ball that can measure grip strength, and a smartphone 
that can measure the amount of daily physical activity. These 
devices were incorporated into a self-monitoring and feedback 
system during a user-centered design process. Small scale 
usability tests and a pilot study show that the system satisfied 
most needs of the end users and, despite a few technical errors, 
elderly people considered the system easy-to use which resulted 
in good adherence to the daily monitoring regimen.  
Keywords- frailty; elderly people; physical functioning, 
telemonitoring; self-management 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The number of frail elderly people is increasing in the 
Netherlands and other Western societies [1]. Frail elderly 
people have an increased risk of adverse health outcomes 
such 
as 
disability, 
fall 
incidents, 
hospitalization, 
institutionalization and even death compared to non-frail 
elderly people [2]-[4]. As a consequence, frailty is also 
strongly associated with increased use of (informal) 
healthcare and community services [5] [6].  
A 
difficulty 
in 
offering 
interventions 
to 
(frail) 
community-dwelling elderly people aimed at disability 
prevention or reduction is to identify people who might 
benefit most from such programs at a stage that disability is 
not yet present or still reversible. Various methods are 
currently being used to screen elderly people in the 
community to determine their level of frailty; and with that 
their eligibility for participation in preventive intervention 
programs since frailty is considered to be a state of pre-
disability [7]. Most frequently used screening methods are 
self-report 
questionnaires, 
checklists 
used 
by 
care 
professionals (sometimes including physical performance 
tests), and clinical judgment of care professionals [8] [9]. 
Disadvantages of these screening methods are that the 
decision to offer a preventive intervention program is based 
on a single cross-sectional assessment of frailty, that the 
number of false-positive classifications is too high [10], and 
that screening methods are often not part of daily routine in 
primary care [11]. Finally, and more importantly, the current 
top-down approach in which care professionals decide 
whether preventive interventions should be started based on 
the outcome of a frailty screening instrument, does not 
facilitate the participation of frail elderly people in making 
decisions regarding their own health care. This is 
unfortunate since involvement of elderly people in their own 
care process can empower them and improve patient 
outcomes [12] [13]. The increasing uptake of every day 
technologies, such as smartphones, computers, and internet 
among elderly people and in health care, creates 
opportunities to support elderly people in their own health 
behaviors and involve them in the care process [14].  
The main objective of this thesis is to develop and 
evaluate a self-monitoring and feedback system that can be 
used by community-dwelling elderly people to gain insight 
into (changes in) indicators of physical frailty that are 
predictors of increased risk of disability. To achieve this, the 
following research questions are addressed:  
1. What is the predictive value of physical frailty 
indicators on disability in community-dwelling 
elderly people?  
2. Can simple, innovative technologies be used to 
obtain valid and reliable estimates of physical 
frailty indicators?  
3. How can simple, innovative technologies be 
integrated into a self-monitoring system that 
provides regular feedback to elderly people 
regarding (changes in) physical frailty indicators? 
  
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II. 
PREDICTIVE VALUE PHYSICAL FRAILTY INDICATORS 
A systematic review and longitudinal study with one year 
follow-up were conducted to study the predictive value of 
physical frailty indictor, such as weight, gait speed, balance, 
physical activity, grip strength, and exhaustion, on disability 
development in older adults aged above 65 years.  
A. 
Systematic literature review 
A systematic search was performed in 3 databases 
(PubMed, CINAHL, and EMBASE) from January 1975 
until April 2010. Prospective, longitudinal studies that 
assessed the predictive value of individual physical frailty 
indicators on disability in Activities of Daily Living (ADL) 
in community-dwelling elderly people aged 65 years and 
older were eligible for inclusion. Articles were reviewed by 
two independent reviewers who also assessed the quality of 
the included studies. After initial screening of 3081 titles, 
360 abstracts were scrutinized, leaving 64 full text articles 
for final review. Eventually, 28 studies were included in the 
review. The methodological quality of these studies was 
rated by both reviewers on a scale from 0 to 27. All included 
studies were of high quality with a mean quality score of 
22.5 (SD 1.6). Findings indicated that physical frailty 
indicators can predict ADL disability in community-
dwelling elderly people. Slow gait speed and low physical 
activity/exercise seem to be the most powerful predictors 
followed by weight loss, lower extremity function, balance, 
muscle strength, and other indicators. These findings should 
be interpreted with caution because the data of the different 
studies could not be pooled due to large variations in 
operationalization of the indicators and ADL disability 
across the included studies. Nevertheless, the review 
suggests that monitoring physical frailty indicators in 
community-dwelling elderly people might be useful to 
identify elderly people who could benefit from disability 
prevention programs [15]. 
B. 
Longitudinal study 
The aim of this one-year follow-up study was to investigate 
the predictive value of self-reported decline in weight, 
exhaustion, walking difficulty, grip strength and physical 
activity on development of disabilities in community-
dwelling elderly people. Community-dwelling elderly 
people aged 70 years or older were recruited via four Dutch 
general 
practitioners. 
687 
participants 
received 
a 
questionnaire at baseline regarding weight loss, exhaustion, 
walking difficulty, grip strength, physical activity, and 
disability. The same questionnaire was sent to them after 
one year follow-up. Disability was operationalized in two 
ways: as increased dependence and as increased difficulty in 
daily activities. Univariate and multivariate logistic 
regression analyses were used to determine whether self-
reported decline in five physical indicators at baseline 
predicted development of dependence or increased difficulty 
in daily activities after 1 year. The analyses were controlled 
for age, gender and baseline disability. 401 participants with 
a mean age of 76.9 years (SD 5.2) were included in the 
analyses. 84 of them reported increased dependence (21%) 
and 76 reported increased difficulty (19%) in daily activities 
after one year follow-up. All physical indicators, except 
weight loss, were significant univariate predictors of 
disability. Multivariate analyses revealed that self-reported 
decrease in physical activity (e.g., walking, cycling, 
gardening) was a significant predictor of development of 
dependence (OR = 1.89, 95% CI = 1.02-3.51) and 
development of difficulty (OR = 1.98, 95% CI = 1.05-3.71) 
in daily activities. Based on the findings from this study, it 
can be concluded that community-dwelling elderly people 
who report decreased physical activity have a higher risk to 
develop disability after 1-year follow-up [16]. 
III. 
VALIDITY AND RELIABILITY OF SELF-MONITORING 
TECHNOLOGIES 
Four studies were conducted to evaluate the validity and 
reliability of balance measurements conducted with a 
modified bathroom scale, grip strength measurements 
conducted 
with a Grip-ball, and physical activity 
measurements conducted with a smartphone-based activity 
monitoring application. These validation studies have 
revealed that simple self-monitoring technologies can be 
used to provide valid and reliable estimates of indicators of 
physical frailty in community-dwelling elderly people.  
A. 
Balance measurements of a bathroom scale 
Validity and reliability of balance measurement of a 
modified bathroom scale were studied during a cross-
sectional study and a six-month follow-up study. The aim of 
the cross-sectional study was to investigate the construct 
validity of a bathroom scale measuring balance in elderly 
people. Participants for this study were recruited via nursing 
homes and an organization that provides exercise classes for 
community-dwelling elderly people. Eligibility criteria for 
both groups were: aged 65 years or older and being able to 
step onto a bathroom scale independently. The balance 
measurements of the bathroom scale were compared to the 
following three clinical balance measurements that were 
conducted by a geriatric physiotherapist: Performance 
Oriented Mobility Assessment (POMA), Timed Up and Go 
(TUG), and Four Test Balance Scale (FTBS). An 
independent samples t-test was performed to determine 
whether nursing home patients scored lower on these four 
balance tests compared to community-dwelling elderly 
people. Correlations were calculated between the bathroom 
scale balance scores and those of the clinical balance tests 
for nursing home patients and community-dwelling elderly 
people separately. Forty-seven nursing home patients with a 
mean age of 81 years (SD 6.40) and 54 community-dwelling 
elderly people with a mean age of 76 years (SD 5.06) 
participated in the study. The results showed that nursing 
home patients had significantly lower scores on all four 
balance tests compared to community-dwelling elderly 
people. Correlations between the bathroom scale scores and 
190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the POMA, TUG, and FTBS in nursing home patients were 
all significant: .49, -.60, and .63 respectively. These 
correlations were not significant in active community-
dwelling elderly people, -.04, -.42, and .33 respectively. 
Linear regression analyses showed that the correlations for 
the bathroom scale and POMA, bathroom scale and TUG, 
and bathroom scale and FTBS did not differ statistically 
between nursing home patients and community-dwelling 
elderly people. These results suggest that the modified 
bathroom scale is useful for measuring balance in elderly 
people. However, the added value of this assessment 
method for clinical practice remains to be demonstrated 
[17]. 
The aim of the six-month follow-up study was to study 
the relation between balance scores of a modified bathroom 
scale and falls and disability in a sample of older adults. 
Participants were recruited via physiotherapists working in a 
nursing home, geriatricians, exercise classes, and at an event 
about health for older adults. Inclusion criteria were similar 
to the cross-sectional study described above. Forty-one 
nursing home patients and 139 community-dwelling older 
adults stepped onto the modified bathroom scale 3 
consecutive times at baseline to measure their balance. Their 
mean balance score on a scale from 0 to 16 was calculated; 
higher scores indicated better balance. Falls and disability 
were measured at baseline and after 6-months follow-up 
using questionnaires. The cross-sectional relation between 
balance and falls and disability at baseline was studied using 
t-tests 
and 
Spearman 
correlations. 
Univariate 
and 
multivariate logistic regression analyses were conducted to 
study the relation between balance measured at baseline and 
falls and disability development after 6 months follow-up. 
Hundred twenty-eight participants with complete data sets 
(25.8% male, 24 nursing home patients) and a mean age of 
75.33 years (SD 6.26) were included in the analyses of this 
study. Balance scores of participants who reported at 
baseline that they had fallen at least once in the past 6 
months were lower compared to non-fallers, 8.9 and 11.2 
respectively (P < .001). The correlation between mean 
balance score and disability sumscore at baseline was -.51 
(P < .001). No significant associations were found between 
balance at baseline and falls after 6 months follow-up. 
Baseline balance scores were significantly associated with 
the development of disability after 6-months follow-up in 
the univariate analysis (OR = .86, 95% CI = .76-.98) but not 
in the multivariate analysis when correcting for age, gender, 
and baseline disability (OR = .95, 95% CI =.80-1.12). 
Therefore, it can be concluded that there is a cross-sectional 
relation between balance measured by a modified bathroom 
scale and falls and disability in older adults. Despite this 
cross-sectional relation, longitudinal data showed that 
balance scores have no predictive value for falls and might 
only 
have 
limited 
predictive 
value 
for 
disability 
development after 6-months follow-up. 
B. 
Grip strength measurements of a Grip-ball 
The purpose of this cross-sectional study was to evaluate 
the reliability and validity of grip strength measurements 
obtained with a Grip-ball in older adults. Forty nursing 
home patients and 59 community-dwelling older adults aged 
60 years or older were invited to participate in this study. 
Grip strength in both hands was measured 3 consecutive 
times during a single visit using the Grip-ball and Jamar 
dynamometer. Test-retest reliability was described using 
Intraclass Correlation Coefficients (ICCs). Concurrent 
validity was evaluated by calculating Pearson’s correlations 
between the mean Grip-ball and Jamar dynamometer 
measurements and between the highest measurement out of 
3 trials. Known-groups validity was studied using t-tests. 
Eighty eight participants (33 men) with a mean age of 75 
years old (SD 6.8) were included in this study. ICCs for the 
Grip-ball were .97 and .96 for the left and right hand 
respectively (P<.001). ICCs for the Jamar dynamometer 
were .97 and .98 for the left and right had respectively 
(P<.001). Pearson’s correlations between the mean scores of 
the Grip-ball and Jamar dynamometer were .71 (P <.001) 
and .76 (P <.001) for the left and right hand respectively. 
Pearson’s correlations between the highest scores out of 3 
trials were .69 (P <.001) and .78 (P <.001) for the left and 
right hand respectively. T-tests revealed that the Grip-ball 
and Jamar dynamometer both detected grip strength 
differences between men and women, and not between 
nursing home patients and community-dwelling older 
adults. Grip-ball measurements did not confirm higher grip 
strength of the dominant hand whereas the Jamar 
dynamometer did. Based on these finding, the conclusion an 
be drawn that the Grip-ball provides reliable grip strength 
estimates in older adults. Correlations found between the 
Grip-ball and the Jamar dynamometer measurements 
suggest acceptable concurrent validity. The Grip-ball seems 
capable of detecting ‘larger’ grip strength differences but 
might have difficulty detecting ‘smaller’ differences that 
were detected by the Jamar dynamometer. The Grip-ball 
could be used in practice to enable home-based self-
monitoring of grip strength in older adults. However, for the 
implementation of the Grip-ball as a screening and 
monitoring device in practice, it is important to gain insight 
into intersession reliability during home-based use of the 
Grip-ball and clinical relevance of changes in grip strength. 
C. 
Measuring physical activity with a smartphone 
Since 
smartphones 
are 
equipped 
with 
built-in 
accelerometers they can be used for self-monitoring of 
physical activity which is an important health behavior and 
predictor of functioning, especially in older adults. The 
objective of this study is to investigate the validity of a 
smartphone-based activity monitoring application in adults 
aged below and above 65 years old. Ten adults aged below 
65 years and ten adults aged 65 years or older were asked to 
monitor their daily physical activity with a smartphone and 
an ActiGraph GT3X for 7 consecutive days. Spearman 
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

correlations between the counts per minute of the two 
devices were calculated for adults aged below and above 65 
years separately. For both devices, each monitored minute 
was classified into four categories of activity intensity based 
on the counts per minute: sedentary, light, moderate, and 
high activity intensity. Association and agreement between 
the two devices was analyzed using Pearson’s correlations, 
paired t-tests and Bland-Altman plots. Data from 8 adults 
aged below 65 years and 7 adults aged above 65 years could 
be included in the analyses due to malfunctioning of the 
Actigraph GT3X (n=3) or smartphone (n=1) or due to 
usability problems with the smartphone-based application 
that had to be operated to monitor activity (n=1). Spearman 
correlations between the counts per minute of the 
smartphone and the ActiGraph were .76 and .84 for adults 
aged below and above 65 years respectively. Pearson’s 
correlations between the two devices for total number of 
minutes spent in different activity intensity categories per 
day per participant were high in both groups (range .79-.99). 
Paired t-tests and Bland-Altman plots revealed that the 
smartphone underestimates the number of sedentary minutes 
per day in participants aged below and above 65 years with 
5.74% and 6.35% respectively compared to the ActiGraph. 
In addition, the smartphone overestimated the number of 
minutes spent at moderate intensity in adults aged below 65 
years by indicating almost twice as many minutes spent in 
this activity intensity category compared to the Actigraph. 
Furthermore, the number of minutes spent at light activity 
intensity in adults aged above 65 years was overestimated 
with 8.22% by the smartphone compared to the ActiGraph.  
In conclusion, the activity monitoring application needs to 
be optimized before it can be implemented in practice. 
Concurrent validity of the smartphone-based activity 
monitoring application was better in adults aged above 65 
years compared to adults aged below 65 years. Differences 
seem to exist between individual participants.  
IV. 
USER-CENTERED DEVELOPMENT AND TESTING OF THE 
MONITORING AND FEEDBACK SYSTEM 
The modified bathroom scale, Grip-ball, and smartphone 
were integrated into a monitoring and feedback system in 
close 
collaboration 
with 
elderly 
people 
and 
care 
professionals during a User-Centered Design (UCD) 
process. The iterative user-centered development process 
consisted of the following phases: (1) Selection of user 
representatives; (2) Analysis of users and their context; (3) 
Identification of user requirements; (4) Development of the 
interface; and (5) Evaluation of the interface in the lab. 
Subsequently, the monitoring and feedback system was 
tested in a pilot study by five patients who were recruited 
via a geriatric outpatient clinic. Participants used a bathroom 
scale to monitor weight and balance, and a mobile phone to 
monitor physical activity on a daily basis for six weeks. 
Personalized feedback was provided via the interface of the 
mobile phone. Usability was evaluated on a scale from 1 till 
7 using a modified version of the Post-Study System  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: The monitoring and feedback system 
 
Usability Questionnaire (PSSUQ); higher scores indicated 
better usability. Interviews were conducted to gain insight 
into the experiences of the participants with the system. The 
developed interface uses colors, emoticons, and written 
and/or spoken text messages to provide daily feedback 
regarding (changes in) weight, balance, and physical 
activity. Figure 1 shows a screenshot of the interface. 
Participants of the pilot-study rated the usability of the 
monitoring and feedback system with a mean score of 5.2 
(SD .90) on the modified PSSUQ. The interviews revealed 
that elderly people were able to use the system and 
appreciated the feedback that was provided to them. The 
monitoring and feedback system satisfied most needs and 
preferences of the elderly people and, despite a few 
technical errors that occurred during the pilot study which 
annoyed the users and sometimes caused confusion, they 
considered the system easy-to-use which resulted in good 
adherence to the daily monitoring regimen. It can be 
concluded that involvement of elderly users during the 
development process resulted in an interface with good 
usability. However, the technical functioning of the 
monitoring system needs to be optimized before it can be 
used to support elderly people in their self-management 
[18].  
Collaboration with end-users during user-centered design 
(UCD) of telecare products as described above can help to 
take the needs and requirements of potential end-users into 
account during the development of innovative telecare 
products and services. However, this multidisciplinary 
collaboration often poses challenges to the persons 
involved. Understanding how members of multidisciplinary 
development teams experience the UCD process might help 
to gain insight into factors that members with different 
backgrounds consider critical during the development of 
telecare products and services. Therefore, a qualitative study 
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

that was conducted to gain insight into experiences of 25 
members of multidisciplinary development teams of four 
different Research & Development (R&D) projects during 
the UCD process of telecare products and services. The 
R&D projects aimed to develop telecare products and 
services that can support self-management in elderly people 
or patients with chronic conditions. Seven participants of 
this study were representatives of end-users (elderly persons 
or patients with chronic conditions), three were professional 
end-users (geriatrician and nurses), five were engineers, four 
were managers (of R&D companies or engineering teams), 
and six were researchers. All participants were interviewed 
by a researcher who was not part of their own development 
team. The following topics were discussed during the 
interviews: aim of the project, role of the participant, 
experiences during the development process, points of 
improvement, and what the project meant to the participant.  
These 
interviews 
revealed 
that 
multidisciplinary 
collaborations can be challenging and that various barriers 
and facilitators influenced the development process. 
Multidisciplinary team members from different backgrounds 
often experience similar barriers (e.g., different members of 
the development team speak a ‘different language’) and 
facilitators (e.g., team members should voice expectations at 
the start of the project to prevent miscommunication at a 
later stage). However, some barriers and facilitators are only 
experienced 
by 
stakeholders 
who 
share 
a 
similar 
background (e.g., only managers of R&D companies 
experience that differences of opinion about a business case 
is a barrier and only end-users express that the project 
manager has an important facilitating role in end-user 
participation). Insights into these similarities and differences 
can improve understanding between team members from 
different backgrounds which optimizes collaboration during 
the user-centered development of telecare products and 
eHealth applications that support care and wellbeing [19].   
V. 
DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
The studies described in the dissertation show that 
physical frailty indicators (e.g., weight, balance, grip 
strength, and physical activity,) are predictive of disability 
development in community-dwelling elderly people and that 
simple, innovative technologies can be incorporated in a 
self-monitoring and feedback system that elderly people can 
use to obtain valid and reliable estimates of (changes in) 
these indicators. Based on the research presented in this 
dissertation, the self-monitoring and feedback system was 
further optimized so that it can be used by community-
dwelling elderly people to gain insight into (changes in) 
indicators of their physical functioning. This could support 
and facilitate a more pro-active approach in early detection 
of increased risk for disability with a stronger focus on self-
management. The system, or its separate parts, can be used 
by elderly people with different levels of physical 
functioning as long as they are able to learn how to use the 
system, which makes it less applicable for elderly people 
with cognitive deficits.  
Based on the current (lack of) knowledge regarding the 
variability of indicators of physical functioning and the 
clinical relevance of changes in such indicators, feedback 
can now only be based on current guidelines of 
healthy/normal weight, grip strength, and physical activity. 
Since the modified bathroom scale is a new measuring 
instrument for which no guidelines are available, feedback 
regarding balance is currently more difficult to interpret 
compared to the other indicators that are measured by the 
self-monitoring system. The disadvantage of using current 
guidelines to provide feedback is that these guidelines are 
mostly reactive. They only signal changes in indicators of 
physical functioning when they are already below the cutoff 
point for ‘healthy’ or ‘normal’ functioning. Due to this, 
current guidelines might not stimulate a pro-active 
approach. Furthermore, separate guidelines exist for 
separate indicators of physical functioning which does not 
facilitate interpretation the combination (of changes in) 
indicators that are present in one person. A possible strength 
of the self-monitoring and feedback system could be that the 
combination of four physical frailty indicators is taken into 
account which makes it possible to detect changes in 
multiple indicators at once.  
Some elderly persons might prefer to use the system 
independent of professional care processes whereas others, 
for example those who already have lower physical 
functioning, might use the system in a care context with 
support of care professionals. In case of the latter, a 
database should be developed in which the self-monitoring 
data of the elderly person can be stored and presented to a 
care professional. This database should be seamlessly 
embedded in the care process and should communicate with 
existing information infrastructures of involved care 
professionals. Depending on the care context and purpose 
with which the monitoring and feedback system is being 
used, the monitoring regimen that elderly persons choose to 
follow can differ.  
The system can be integrated with other care 
technologies or services that support health and independent 
living in community-dwelling elderly people. Examples of 
such technologies could be Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) 
technologies (e.g., sensors for fall detection or detection of 
activity), health risk appraisal services, or services that 
provide interventions that support people in maintaining an 
active lifestyle or improving physical functioning. Such 
integrated pro-active systems can support independence in 
older persons. However, in order for such integrated 
systems to succeed, new business models should be 
developed in which the costs and benefits of such 
interventions for different stakeholders are specified. Such 
business cases are needed to facilitate implementation of 
innovations.  
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Before the self-monitoring and feedback system can be 
implemented in practice, future research is needed regarding 
several issues. Currently, a study is being conducted in 
which 13 community-dwelling elderly people use the 
optimized monitoring and feedback system on a daily basis 
for 6 months independent of a care context. This study will 
provide insight into the long-term experiences and 
acceptance of the system. Furthermore, information will be 
collected regarding falls, disability, illness, health care use, 
and physical functioning using questionnaires, diaries, and 
bi-monthly examinations by a geriatric physical therapist. 
Combining this information with the self-monitoring data 
that was collected by community-dwelling elderly people 
using the self-monitoring and feedback system will provide 
insight 
into 
how 
the 
home-based 
self-monitoring 
measurements can be interpreted and into the clinical 
relevance of changes that are detected. Besides the ongoing 
feasibility study, future research should focus on the clinical 
relevance of changes in (a combination of) indicators of 
physical frailty that predict disability development should be 
studied. Large scale cohort studies can provide insight into 
the development of such indicators in elderly people over 
time. Big data or data mining methodologies could be used 
to identify patterns or pathways that lead to adverse 
outcomes. Furthermore, ways to integrate the system in 
daily care (or welfare) routines should be explored. 
Different organizations and elderly users of the system 
might have different requirements for this integration. 
Needs and preferences of elderly persons and professionals 
working in such organizations should be taken into account. 
Finally, the possibilities to provide training and/or tailored 
disability prevention programs to community-dwelling 
elderly people using the system to support them in their self-
management should be examined. Such research should also 
focus on (cost-)effective components of such interventions. 
Physical activity might be considered a relevant component 
of such training or intervention programs since it is an 
important health behavior for preventing and reducing 
disability. Further exploration and improved understanding 
of 
the 
issues 
mentioned 
above 
can 
support 
the 
implementation of the self-monitoring and feedback system 
in practice which might facilitate a more proactive approach 
regarding frailty and disability prevention in community-
dwelling elderly people. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] United Nations. World Population Ageing 2009. New York: United 
Nations, 2010.  
[2] K. E. Ensrud, et al, “A comparison of frailty indexes for the 
prediction of falls, disability, fractures, and mortality in older men,” J 
Am Geriatr Soc, vol 57, 2009, pp. 492-498, doi: 10.1111/j.1532-
5415.2009.02137.x. 
[3] L. P. Fried, et al, “Frailty in older adults: evidence for a phenotype,” J 
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci, vol. 56,  2001, pp. M146-156. 
[4] M. D. Rothman, L. Leo-Summers, and T. M Gill, “Prognostic 
significance of potential frailty criteria,” J Am Geriatr Soc, vol. 56,  
2008, pp. 2211-2116, doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2008.02008.x 
[5] S. Rochat, et al, “Frailty and use of health and community services by 
community-dwelling older men: the concord health and ageing in 
men project.,”Age Ageing, vol. 1,  2010, pp. 1-6, doi: 
10.1093/ageing/afp257 
[6] S. Hoeck, G. Francois, J. Geerts, J. van der Heyden, M. Vandewoude,  
and G. van Hal, “Health-care and home-care utilization among frail 
elderly persons in Belgium,” Eur J Public Health, vol 22, 2012, pp. 
671-677. 
[7] G. Abellan an Kan, Y. Rolland, H. Bergman, J. E. Morley,  S. B. 
Kritchevsky, and B. Vellas, “The I.A.N.A. Task Force on frailty 
assessment of older people in clinical practice,” J Nutr Health Aging, 
vol. 12, 2008, pp. 29-37. 
[8] T. Pialoux, J. Goyard, and B. Lesourd, “Screening tools for frailty in 
primary health care: a systematic review,” Geriatr Gerontol Int, vol. 
12, 2012, pp. 189-197, doi: 10.1111/j.1447-0594.2011.00797.x 
[9] S. A. Sternberg, A. Wershof Schwartz, S. Karunananthan, H. 
Bergman, and A. Mark Clarfiels, “The identification of frailty: a 
systematic literature review,” J Am Geriatr Soc, vol. 59,  2011, pp. 
2129-2138, doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2011.03597.x 
[10] E. Pijpers, I. Ferreira, C. D. A. Stehouwer, and A. C. Nieuwenhuijzen 
Kruseman, “The frailty dilemma. Review of the predictive accuracy 
of major frailty scores,” Eur J Inter Med, vol. 23,  2012, pp. 118-123, 
doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2011.09.003 
[11] B. Vellas, et al, “Looking for frailty in community-dwelling older 
persons: the Gérontopôle Frailty Screening Tool (GFST),” J Nutr 
Health Aging, vol. 17,  2013, pp. 629-631, doi: 10.1007/s12603.  
[12] H. De Haes, “Dilemmas in patient centeredness and shared decision 
making: a case for vulnerability,” Patient Educ Couns, vol. 62, 2006, 
pp. 291-298. 
[13] S. J. Grifin, A. L. Kinmonth, M. W. Veltman, S. Gillard, J. Grant,  
and M. Stewart, “Effect on health-related outcomes of interventions 
to alter the interaction between patients and practitioners: a 
systematic review of trials,” Ann Fam Med, vol. 2,  2004, pp. 595-
608. 
[14] A. Piau, E. Campo, P. Rumeau, B. Vellas, and F. Nourhashemi, 
“Aging society and gerontechnology: a solution for an independent 
living?” J Nutr Health Aging, vol 18, 2014, pp. 97-112, doi: 
10.1007/s12603 
[15] J. Vermeulen, J. C. L. Neyens, E. Van Rossum, M. D. 
Spreeuwenberg, and L. P. De Witte, “Predicting ADL disability in 
community-dwelling elderly people using physical frailty indicators: 
a systematic review,” BMC Geriatr, vol. 11,  2011, pp. 33, doi: 
10.1186/1471-2318-11-33 
[16] J. Vermeulen, M. D. Spreeuwenberg, R. Daniëls, J. C. L. Neyens, E. 
Van Rossum, and L. P. De Witte, “Does a falling level of activity 
predict disability development in community-dwelling elderly 
people?” 
Clin 
Rehabil, 
vol. 
12, 
 
2012, 
pp. 
1-9, 
doi: 
10.1177/0269215512465209 
[17] J. Vermeulen, J. C. L. Neyens, M. D. Spreeuwenberg, E. Van 
Rossum, J.  Duchene, D. J. Hewson, L. P. De Witte, “Construct 
validity of a modified bathroom scale that can measure balance in 
elderly people,” J Am Med Dir Assoc, vol. 13,  2012, pp. e1-5, doi: 
10.1016/j.jamda.2012.06.009  
[18] J. Vermeulen, J. C. Neyens, M. D. Spreeuwenberg, E. van Rossum, 
W. Sipers, H. Habets, D. J. Hewson, and L. P. de Witte, "User-
centered development and testing of a monitoring system that 
provides feedback regarding physical functioning to elderly people”, 
Patient Prefer. Adherence, vol. 7, 2013, pp. 843-854, doi: 
10.2147/PPA.S45897 
[19] J. Vermeulen, R. Verwey, L. M. J. Hochstenbach, S. van der Weegen, 
Y. P. Man, and L. P. de Witte LP, “Experiences of Multidisciplinary 
Development Team Members During User-Centered Design of 
Telecare Products and Services: A Qualitative Study,” J Med Internet 
Res, 
vol. 
16, 
 
2014, 
pp. 
e124, 
doi 
10.2196/jmir.31
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

