Telenursing Service for Neonatal Post-discharge Home Care 
 
Valentina Isetta 
University of Barcelona - CIBERES, 
 Faculty of Medicine 
Unit of Biophysics and Bioengineering 
Barcelona, Spain 
valentina.isetta@ub.edu 
Carmen Lopez-Agustina 
Hospital de Sant Pau 
Neonatal Home Care Program 
Barcelona, Spain 
clopez@santpau.cat 
Montserrat Vila 
Hospital de Sant Pau 
Supervisor of Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
Barcelona, Spain 
mvila@santpau.cat 
Asunción Clemente 
Hospital de Sant Pau 
Head of Pediatric Nursing Section  
Barcelona, Spain 
aclemente@santpau.cat
Meritxell Cucala 
Hospital de Sant Pau 
Innovation & Projects, Nursing Direction 
Barcelona, Spain 
mcucala@santpau.cat 
Ramon Farré 
University of Barcelona - IDIBAPS - CIBERES,  
Faculty of Medicine 
Unit of Biophysics and Bioengineering 
Barcelona, Spain 
rfarre@ub.edu 
 
Abstract—The 
application 
of 
Information 
and 
Communication Technology (ICT) in nursing care is 
becoming more widespread but few examples have been 
reported in neonatal care. The post-discharge period of sick 
newborns from a Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) is a 
challenging time for young families. Neonatal Home Care 
Programs offer home support after discharge but clinical 
and geographical constraints render this service inaccessible 
to many families that could benefit from it. This paper 
describes a new web-based application that provides online 
monitoring of babies after discharge from a NICU. By 
accessing to a personal area on the website, parents are 
asked to periodically answer a questionnaire about the 
newborn’s health status (weight, feeding, sleep, etc.). The 
answers are continuously monitored by professional nurses, 
who can communicate online with parents to advise them 
about good baby care. Moreover, high-quality informative 
documents of use to babies’ families are available online. 
The aim of this tool is to ease pressure on the healthcare 
system from additional visits, reduce hospitalization and 
improve parents’ satisfaction. The results of a usability test 
with potential users are shown. 
Keywords-eNurse; 
neonatology; 
telemedicine; 
home 
monitoring. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The pressure to contain health costs, particularly by 
avoiding hospitalizations and promoting the early 
discharge of patients, is generating a greater demand for 
home healthcare at a time when this resource is rapidly 
becoming less available. Telemedicine involves the use of 
information technology that facilitates communication 
between patients and healthcare professionals. This 
technology has been increasingly considered to potentially 
have a key role in closing the gap between the demand for 
and availability of home healthcare services [1]. 
In the last decade, the telemedicine concept has been 
expanded to nursing care because it can provide efficient, 
long-distance healthcare. Telenursing offers easy access to 
high-quality care and reduces the costs and problems 
related to travel to health facilities. Patient satisfaction 
with telenursing is based on prompt, expert care from 
professional nurses that enhances patients‟ involvement in 
their own care and strengthens the nurse-patient 
relationship [2]. Most nurses recognize the contribution 
that Information and Communication Technology (ICT), 
and in particular the Internet, can make to their practice 
and their patients‟ understanding of their health and care 
[3]. Telenursing is progressively becoming more extended 
as a valuable technique for delivering nursing care, 
particularly in home healthcare.  
Examples of telenursing applications include the use of 
different 
telecommunication 
tools, 
particularly 
the 
telephone and, more recently, the Internet. Telephone 
triage is already a well-established application in many 
clinical fields, allowing nurses to determine whether the 
caller is in need of healthcare and, if necessary, refer 
him/her to the proper care source [4][5]. In order to 
provide a health service built around patients' needs, 
including the need for knowledge and information, the 
Internet is increasingly preferred over the telephone. A 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

pilot experiment with a Nurse-led Web Chat Triage 
produced positive reactions from patients [6]. Web-based 
tools for the support of chronic disease management, such 
as dyspnea in COPD patients [7], or for educational 
intervention, such as Web-assisted tobacco control [8], are 
recent examples of successful telenursing applications 
using the Web. 
 Neonatal care is a field where telenursing could be an 
interesting support tool, but there have been only a few 
studies to date. The admission of a newborn into a 
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) and the period just 
after the discharge pose emotional, educational, and 
logistic problems for a parent. Young families without 
experience in critical care medicine need not only high-
quality medical care but also effective and resourceful 
information sharing with health professionals. 
One previous study described a program in which 
nurses provided updates to family members of NICU 
patients on the Internet [9]. The authors reported 
significant improvements in family satisfaction with NICU 
in-patient very low birth weight (VLBW) care and pointed 
out the need to extend this service to the post-discharge 
period. Programs of neonatal post-discharge home 
assistance, or transitional care, are already established in 
many neonatal departments. Typically, they provide in-
home and telephone support delivered by clinical nurse 
specialists for a period after infants are discharged. Wide-
ranging program evaluations have revealed a decreased 
demand in health care resources (mainly emergency 
departments and pediatricians‟ consulting rooms) and 
improved maternal confidence and satisfaction with 
community service [10]. However, this kind of service is 
expensive and difficult to maintain with the resources 
currently available to public health. Therefore, it would be 
of great interest to have a support tool which can establish 
a direct contact between parents and NICU staff after 
baby‟s discharge, increase parental involvement in baby‟s 
care as well as guarantee the cost-effectiveness. 
In 2004, the Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau 
(HSP) of Barcelona launched the Neonatal Home Care 
Program (NHCP), which provides home assistance 
delivered by neonatal nurses and has demonstrated its 
effectiveness in reducing hospitalization and increasing 
users‟ satisfaction. The NHCP established clinical criteria 
and a maximum distance from a patient‟s home, which 
necessarily limit the number of patients that can be 
included. To overcome these geographical and clinical 
limitations of the NHCP, the HSP Neonatal Care 
Department decided to expand it, implementing the 
eNHCP, an Internet-based support and monitoring 
 
Figure 1.  eNHCP home page screenshot. Translation from original version in Catalan: Header: “Babies at home”. Menu-bar: “Home”, “Tips for 
baby care”, “Useful links”, “Online baby follow-up”, “About us”. Content: ” Congratulations, parents, and thank you for your visit to „Babies at 
home‟! You as parents, and we as health professionals, know that the most important thing is the health of your children. From the Neonatal Unit at 
the Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau we have created a page where the babies are the stars and you will find tips, links and answers to 
frequently asked questions regarding baby care. Use the menu to navigate to different sections of the website.”, “Project developed with the 
collaboration of the Unit of Biophysics and Bioengineering, Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona.” 
 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

program for newborn patients after discharge. The 
application developed essentially comprises a web service 
managed by the NHCP nurses, which provides high-
quality educational information about neonatal care to new 
parents and baby monitoring through a survey that parents 
fill in periodically. The aim is to relieve the pressure on the 
healthcare system caused by additional visits, reduce 
hospitalization and enhance parents‟ empowerment and 
satisfaction. 
The eNHCP web tool, described in detail in this paper, 
was developed in close collaboration with the Unit of 
Biophysics and Bioengineering, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Barcelona. A preclinical validation of the 
tool was performed by a usability validation test with 
potential users, the results of which are shown.  
 
 
II. 
TOOL DESCRIPTION 
The web tool was implemented using PHP language 
and MySQL database on a Linux/Apache server. All user 
interface components were developed as dynamic server-
side pages. Javascript components were implemented in 
order to enforce completion and internal consistency of all 
forms and questionnaires contained in the web tool. 
The application was developed with a focus on 
usability and structure simplicity. In each development 
stage, special efforts were made to guarantee the 
maintainability and versatility of the tool. The system 
architecture was designed to allow frequent updating of 
the individual pages and easy adaptability to different 
clinical applications. 
The web application functioning was successfully 
tested with the most important operating systems and web 
browsers. 
The application consists of three main areas: 
 
Free-access area; 
 
eNHCP Parents Area; 
 
eNHCP Staff Area. 
 
A. Free-access Area 
This area is an open platform that all parents can freely 
access to find useful information about newborn care. A 
screenshot of the home page is shown in Figure 1. 
The top menu bar contains the links to the different 
sections of the website. The main sections are: 
 
“Tips for baby care”, which contains several 
informative 
documents 
available 
for 
free 
download written by the NHCP nurses and 
pediatricians. These documents contain helpful 
advice about newborn care, such as feeding, 
bathing, sensory stimulation, massage, how to 
avoid hazards, primary care, when to go to the 
 
 
Figure 2.  eNHCP “Online baby follow-up” page screenshot. By logging in, parents can access to their exclusive area. Nurses and healthcare 
professionals can access to their special area by clicking to the link in the lower right corner of the page. Translation from original version in 
Catalan: Header: “Babies at home”. Menu-bar: “Home”, “Tips for baby care”, “Useful links”, “Online baby follow-up”, “About us”. 
Content:”Online baby follow-up. Access to this section is exclusively for parents registered to the online baby follow-up service.”, “Login. Your 
e-mail address. Your password. Enter.”, “Forgot your password?”, “Healthcare professionals”. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

pediatrician, etc. Instructive videos are available in 
the multimedia section; 
 
“Useful links”, where parents can find a 
comprehensive list of breastfeeding and neonatal 
nursing association websites; 
 
“Online baby follow-up”, where parents and 
nurses can access, after authentication, their 
respective restricted areas of the eNHCP website 
(see Figure 2). By clicking on the link “Forgot 
your password?” users can retrieve their password, 
which will be automatically sent to their e-mail 
address. 
 
B. eNHCP Parents Area 
Once their eligibility has been established, parents are 
informed about the web tool and their informed consent is 
obtained. In order to guarantee the confidentiality of all 
patients and preserve security, parents included in the 
eNHCP can access this private area by logging in with 
their personal username and password, assigned by the 
NHCP nurse during the enrollment. The eNHCP web tool 
identifies the user and dynamically generates pages 
containing only the information available to each user. 
In this section all parents find a periodic questionnaire 
formulated by the NHCP nurses about the baby‟s 
conditions (weight, feeding, sleeping, body temperature, 
skin color, etc.).It comprises 18 questions covering the 
essential topics that NHCP nurses usually investigate and 
assess during home visits. The questionnaire has been 
carefully designed to be autonomously answered by 
parents, who are recommended to respond it every four 
days. Their answers are stored, together with the patient 
authentication data, in a relational data base developed 
with the MySQL management system. All data are stored 
in the secure environment of the hospital server. 
Furthermore, the baby‟s weight trend is plotted and 
continuously updated on the basis of the periodic 
questionnaire answers. This section was created in order to 
give parents a visual feedback of their baby‟s progress. 
Another important function integrated into the website 
is the possibility of exchanging messages via e-mail with 
the eNHCP nurses, in order to clarify doubts and answer 
questions about baby care. In the same way, parents can 
make direct contact with the Webmaster, who is available 
to solve potential technical problems related to the 
website‟s functioning. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  eNHCP nurse page screenshot. Visualization of parents‟ answers to the periodic questionnaire by dynamic Flas charts. Translation from 
original version in Catalan: Header: “Babies at home. Online baby follow-up”. Menu-bar: “Baby record”, “Deregister a baby”, “Register a baby”, 
“Log out”. Title: ”Data of baby number…”. Graphs: “Weigth”, “Feeding”, “Intakes per day”. 
 
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

C. eNHAP Staff Area 
By clicking on the link “Professionals” (see the lower 
right corner of the screenshot of Figure 2), the eNHCP 
nurses and pediatricians can enter their own authentication 
page, similar to that of the parents (as shown in Figure 2). 
By logging in, they can access the special staff area, where 
they can undertake three main management activities: 
 
Monitoring eNHCP babies‟ status. In this section 
the eNHCP patients list is displayed and, by 
selecting one, nurses can observe a baby‟s data 
corresponding to parents‟ answers to the periodic 
questionnaire. Data are retrieved from the 
MySQL database and shown in dynamic Flash 
charts (see Figure 3). After the baby‟s data 
evaluation, nurses can, if necessary, write a 
message directly to the parents with advice and 
comments about the newborn‟s care; 
 
Registering a new baby on the eNHCP. Nurses 
have to fill in a simple form with the 
identification data for each baby, such as his/her 
electronic health record number, name initials 
and contact e-mail address. The parents of twins 
or triplets are asked to provide an e-mail address 
for each baby. In order to protect the newborns‟ 
personal information, the baby‟s name and 
surname are not included on the registration form. 
When the registration is complete, a “welcome” 
e-mail is sent to the contact e-mail address with 
the parents‟ credentials needed for authentication 
by the web tool. The username is the contact e-
mail address and the password is automatically 
assigned, with the possibility of changing it at 
anytime; 
 
Deregistering a baby when he/she meets the 
clinical criteria for final discharge. In order to 
obtain feedback of users‟ acceptance of the 
eNHCP web tool, a concluding satisfaction 
survey is automatically sent to the parents just 
after the deregistration. Parents‟ answers are 
automatically sent via e-mail to the eNHCP e-
mail box to be evaluated by the nurse; they are 
also stored in the MySQL database to be 
available for further analysis. 
 
 
III. 
PRE-CLINICAL VALIDATION 
Before being introduced into routine clinical use, the 
web tool described above was assessed by a usability test 
with potential users, in accordance with the UNE-EN 
62366 rules. This standard, entitled "Medical devices - 
Application of usability engineering to medical devices", 
defines the process of development and testing that should 
be followed to identify and validate the usability features 
of a medical device with respect to its security and normal 
use. Specifically, the aim of this test was to assess the 
opinion of potential users on the usability and usefulness 
of the web tool. 
A questionnaire similar to the final satisfaction survey 
proposed on the eNHCP site was given to 15 parents of 
patients admitted to the HSP NICU. An NHCP nurse had 
already explained them the eNHCP concept by showing 
them a website prototype. 
The survey comprised 8 statements about the 
usefulness of the eNHCP contents and functions, and 
possible answers were distributed on a scale from 0 (I 
strongly disagree) to 5 (I strongly agree). The results are 
shown in Table 1. The potential users showed a level of 
agreement of 4.67 ± 0.49 (mean ± SD) to the first 
statement, corresponding to an overall positive evaluation 
of the helpfulness of the eNHCP website. 
 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The web tool described in this paper represents a cheap 
and straightforward approach to support home healthcare. 
Its application to neonatal care opens up new horizons in 
the follow-up of NICU patients after discharge. Besides 
providing high-quality educational contents about neonatal 
care to parents, the novelty of this tool resides in offering 
to nurses a valuable and easy procedure for the home 
monitoring of newborns, as well as fast long-distance 
communication 
with 
families. 
Furthermore, 
the 
questionnaire periodically answered by parents is a 
monitoring 
approach 
which 
promotes 
a 
higher 
involvement of parents in their baby‟s care and, 
consequently, enhances their care skills and self-
confidence during a usually stressful period such as the 
one of post-discharge from NICU. 
The concept of this tool as an interactive website is a 
very convenient method, due to the wide availability of 
TABLE I.  
USABILITY TEST WITH POTENTIAL USERS 
 
Survey statement 
Answer (mean ± SD)* 
1. In general the Web service "Babies at home" could be helpful. 
4.67 ± 0.49 
2. The available information could help me take care of the baby. 
4.27 ± 0.80 
3. The information available on the website could clarify my doubts. 
4.00 ± 0.76 
4. The e-mail service with nurses available on the website could be useful. 
4.37 ± 0.76 
5. The files and recommended links could be useful. 
4.07 ± 0.70 
6. The use of the website could avoid visits to the primary care center. 
4.47 ± 0.64 
7. The use of the website could avoid visits to the emergency department. 
3.87 ± 0.64 
8. I would recommend this website. 
4.67 ± 0.49 
                    *0 = I strongly disagree, 5 = I strongly agree. 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Internet-connected 
computers 
among 
healthcare 
consumers, especially in the homes of young families. 
Moreover, as usability and structural simplicity were 
crucial to the development of the application architecture, 
the training required by nurses and parents is minimal. 
Concerns about security and personal data confidentiality 
have been minimized, as this kind of application can be 
easily incorporated into the secure environment of a 
hospital server. 
By using this tool, well-established neonatal home care 
programs could be effectively integrated, reducing costs 
and overcoming clinical and geographical limitations. Its 
routine use would be expected to reduce visits to primary 
and emergency care centers resulting from lack of 
information and insecurity on the part of parents, thereby 
improving the cost-effectiveness of the NHCP service. 
Given the highly positive reactions obtained from the 
usability test with potential users, in July 2011 the website 
started to be used as part of a pilot test with real patients. 
At the end of pilot period the impact of the eNHCP web 
application will be formally assessed in terms of cost-
effectiveness and users‟ (both parents and NICU staff) 
satisfaction. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Jenkins R.L. and White P. Telehealth advancing nursing 
practice. Nurs Outlook 2001; 49(2):100-105. 
[2] Lorentz M.M. Telenursing and home healthcare. the many 
facets of technology. Home Healthc Nurse 2008; 
26(4):237-243. 
[3] Lupianez-Villanueva F., Hardey M., Torrent J., and Ficapal 
P. The integration of Information and Communication 
Technology into nursing. Int J Med Inform 2011; 
80(2):133-140. 
[4] Kaminsky E., Carlsson M., Hoglund A.T., and Holmstrom 
I. Paediatric health calls to Swedish telenurses: a 
descriptive study of content and outcome. J Telemed 
Telecare 2010; 16(8):454-457. 
[5] St George I., Cullen M., Gardiner L., and  Karabatsos G. 
Universal telenursing triage in Australia and New Zealand - 
a new primary health service. Aust Fam Physician 2008; 
37(6):476-479. 
[6] Eminovic N., Wyatt J.C., Tarpey A.M., Murray G., and  
Ingrams G.J. First evaluation of the NHS direct online 
clinical enquiry service: a nurse-led web chat triage service 
for the public. J Med Internet Res 2004; 6(2):e17. 
[7] Nguyen H.Q., Donesky-Cuenco D., Wolpin S., Reinke 
L.F., Benditt J.O., Paul S.M., and Carrieri-Kohlman V. 
Randomized controlled trial of an internet-based versus 
face-to-face dyspnea self-management program for patients 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: pilot study. J 
Med Internet Res 2008; 10(2):e9. 
[8] Norman C.D., McIntosh S., Selby P., and Eysenbach G. 
Web-assisted tobacco interventions: empowering change in 
the global fight for the public's (e)Health. J Med Internet 
Res 2008; 10(5):e48. 
[9] Gray J.E., Safran C., Davis R.B., Pompilio-Weitzner G., 
Stewart J.E., Zaccagnini L., and Pursley D. Baby CareLink: 
using the internet and telemedicine to improve care for 
high-risk infants. Pediatrics 2000; 106(6):1318-1324. 
[10] Lasby K., Newton S., and von Platen A. Neonatal 
transitional care. Can Nurse 2004; 100(8):18-23. 
 
 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

