Managing Self-Management in Healthcare: from a Systemic Perspective
Åsa Smedberg 
Department of Computer and Systems Sciences 
Stockholm University 
Kista, Sweden 
asasmed@dsv.su.se 
Piero Giacomelli 
IT Department 
Spac S.p.A. 
Arzignano, Italy 
giacomellip@spac-spa.it 
 
 
Abstract— 
Self-management 
among 
patients, 
especially 
chronically ill patients, has shown to be crucial for their ability to 
adjust 
lifestyle, 
increase 
empowerment 
and 
maintain 
a 
satisfactory quality of life. The use of the Internet and ICT tools 
support self-management on different levels. With the new and 
improved patient role, the patient becomes more actively involved 
in decisions and treatments. More personalized care and support 
become also possible. The question is how enhanced emphasis on 
self-management affects healthcare. By taking a systemic 
perspective, this paper elaborates on the complexity of self-
management and on healthcare management issues related to 
self-management. It proposes a holistic view on managing self-
management in healthcare. 
Keywords-self-management; 
ICT 
tools; 
complexity; 
control; 
management; systemic; viable; holistic. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The patient role is becoming more self-managing. Self-
management among patients, especially those with chronic 
diseases, has shown to be crucial for their wellbeing [1]. Self-
management includes taking care of the body and disease, 
adapting in order to carry out daily activities, managing 
changed life conditions and roles, and also emotional changes 
and uncertainty about the future. Self-management brings with 
it a new patient role in which the patient becomes more active. 
The patients can be said to act as ”prosumers of wellness rather 
than passive consumers” [2, p. 180]. Greater empowerment is 
detected among patients who engage in online support groups 
[3][4], and power is also somehow slightly shifted from the 
healthcare system to the patient [4].  
A sense of control and social belonging are important to all 
people, but for patients with chronic and severe diseases, this 
imposes a certain challenge [3]. When becoming a long-term 
patient, you need to redefine your role and adjust living 
conditions or lifestyle. This can lead to a feeling of being 
outside the norm and alienated, why interaction in groups of 
patient peers becomes important [3]. Through peer interaction, 
experiences, skills and inspiration can be shared among 
patients and others with similar health concerns [3]–[5]. This 
kind of interaction takes place independently of formal 
healthcare but can be supported by it. 
Self-management can help patients develop a sense of 
control over their situation, and to influence on practical 
conditions and interventions. Increased patient involvement 
implies a new approach from the healthcare system and the 
healthcare professionals [2]. The change concerns attitudes and 
approaches to care, and to the relations between patient and 
doctor; it is very much a conceptual change. It also demands 
for new ways of using ICT for communication and 
interventions [6]. For effective self-management, conversations 
between the healthcare and the patients are important [6]. It is 
also in the conversations that conditions for interventions and 
self-management tools are decided upon. Allowing the patients 
to be more in control implicates that these conversations are 
emphasized. However, it is a challenge for the healthcare to 
manage the idea of patient-centric care and the support of self-
management among the patients. Healthcare management is to 
be further explored in this respect. 
This paper will investigate the concept of self-management 
from a systemic perspective. The perspective helps us regard 
the complexity and viability of self-management, and how to 
manage it. The following section, Section 2, addresses the 
concept of self-management and complexity in relation to self-
management. Thereafter, in Section 3, different types of self-
management tools are introduced. In Section 4, a holistic view 
on how to manage self-management is proposed, and the last 
section, Section 5, concludes and points out a way forward. 
II. 
SELF- MANAGEMENT 
Self-management has been identified as “[...] the tasks that 
an individual must undertake to live well with one or more 
chronic conditions. These tasks include gaining confidence to 
deal with medical management, role management, and 
emotional management.” [7, p. 3]. Another way to address 
self-management is to refer to “the individual’s ability to 
manage the symptoms, treatment, physical and psychosocial 
consequences and life style changes inherent in living with a 
chronic condition. Efficacious self-management encompasses 
ability to monitor one’s condition and to effect the cognitive, 
behavioural and emotional responses necessary to maintain a 
satisfactory quality of life.” [8, p. 178]. 
Examples of activities included in self-management 
programs are: how to deal with frustration and pain, what 
exercises to do, how to take medication, effective ways to 
communicate with relatives, friends and health professionals, 
what food/nutrition that is recommended, and how to evaluate 
new treatments [1]. Encouraging the patient to be more self-
managing, and thereby involved in the healthcare more 
actively, has shown to be helpful for several care goals, for 
example, increased patient satisfaction, development of 
healthy behaviors and improved wellbeing of patients [1][8]. 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Self-management support includes also educational 
components, teaching the patients about self-management 
skills [1] [9]. Examples of key skills for the patients are 
problem solving skills, including communicating with close 
ones and healthcare professionals, day-to-day decision making 
skills, such as knowing when to exercise and when not to. 
Other examples are skills to access relevant resources, to build 
relationships with healthcare providers, and the ability to make 
short term action plans and carry them out [9].  
A. Self-Management and Complexity 
Whenever a person is to handle a situation, and the 
involved tasks, he or she needs to adjust to the situation and to 
the complexity it holds. As mentioned previously, for self-
management, the tasks include “gaining confidence to deal 
with medical management, role management, and emotional 
management” [7, p. 3]. When considering this from a systemic 
perspective, to manage the situation and its tasks, the person 
amplifies his or her abilities and skills and attenuates the 
situation through models and filtering of information [10]-
[12]. Both amplification and attenuation are needed to manage 
the situations we meet (see Fig. 1). How much we are to 
amplify and attenuate depends on the relation between 
ourselves and the situation, considering the tasks involved. In 
everyday situations that we manage without great efforts, we 
maneuver and adjust often without being conscious about it.  
However, we often become overwhelmed by situations due 
to the imbalance between our own individual complexity and 
the complexity of the situation [11]. This is especially evident 
when we face a new or more complex situation. Management 
of situations unfamiliar or difficult to us requires that we 
develop relevant models and skills. We need also to look for 
adequate performance criteria and performance goals [11][12]. 
Learning can be seen as a struggle with insufficient variety, 
forcing us to enhance our performance [12]. However, if the 
desired outcomes are recognized as impossible to achieve, 
they may have to be changed [12]. Otherwise, they will lead to 
errors and failures in performance all the time.     
The practice of self-management must also consider that 
given a limited knowledge of the patient, a certain type of self-
management may lead to more harm than good. One crucial 
thing for successful health treatment is that the patient takes 
his or her medicine as described, for example. The patient may 
forget to take the medicine, or perhaps takes it too often. One 
of the most common risks in this area, documented in the 
medical literature, is the overdose of prescribed medications 
among diabetic patients [13]. Another example is the 
corticosteroids and bronchodilators, generally used by chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients during the 
exacerbation phase. Once again, the risk is the abuse of this 
treatment, i.e., the patient goes on a light distress and even if it 
is not needed, he or she uses the bronchodilator. Conversely, if  
a patient does not use a bronchodilator when needed, he or she 
will go on a respiratory distress. 
There is a need for balance between the desired outcomes, 
patient’s current abilities and the situation at hand. Based on 
this, appropriate levels, or types, of self-management will be 
necessary to decide upon. What the patient is able to manage  
Figure 1.  Managing the complexity of a situation [11, p. 55] 
at a certain time, and what needs to be managed by the 
healthcare professionals, is crucial to have a continuous 
dialogue about. 
B. Self-Management and Changed Relations 
To enhance self-management of patient groups, especially 
those with chronic diseases, puts new demands on the 
healthcare system and the care professionals. The relation 
between patients and the healthcare provider is to be more 
characterized by collaboration, with frequent and productive 
conversations [2]. In comparison with the traditional relation 
between the patient and the healthcare provider, the 
collaborative relation is less characterized by the doctor telling 
the patient what to do and more about combining the different 
types of expertise that the doctor and the patients possess [1]. 
The patient is to become part of the conversations and 
participate in setting goals and developing care plans. While 
the physician is expert in medicine, the patient is the expert 
regarding his or her life, situations in daily life, history and 
past abilities. To include the different expertise, and to let the 
patient not only be in the centre but also an active participant, 
physicians and other health professionals are expected to have 
two-way conversations with the patients about goals, 
treatments, possible side-effects of medication and evaluations 
of treatments.   
The emphasis on self-management and collaboration 
makes patient education a necessary activity of the healthcare 
system: to help the patients with the practical tools so they can 
manage more easily and be more involved in the interventions 
and also as independent as possible [1][9].  
III. 
ICT-SUPPORT FOR DIFFERENT TYPES OF SELF-
MANAGEMENT 
Greater patient participation and control can be achieved 
through available ICT tools [3][4][6]. There is a wide range of 
ICT-based self-management tools, spanning from online self-
help groups that allow for an autonomous patient role, to home 
surveillance systems that let the patient take a subordinate role 
due to the nature of the health conditions [6]. For patients who 
need home surveillance for their safety, there are video camera 
surveillance and sensor-based surveillance systems that can 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

facilitate this. In these situations, the patient’s role is 
subordinate, and it is crucial that the systems do not violate the 
patient privacy or become too controlling. In order for these 
systems to be regarded as self-management tools at all, the 
patient has to be in charge of how the systems are used [6]. 
In between the autonomous and the subordinate roles, there 
are ICT tools supporting a structured patient role. Examples of 
these are interactive telemedicine consultation and messaging 
systems, allowing for patient-doctor communication to be 
more continuous. Other tools for the structured role are blood 
glucose 
meters, 
weight 
scales, 
apnea 
monitors 
and 
neurological monitors. There are also tools that let the patient 
be included in communication, education and decision making 
processes together with healthcare professionals. These ICT 
tools address the collaborative dimension of the patient role 
[6].  
A. Online Self-Help Groups 
The most autonomous type of self-management tool is the 
online self-help communities and self-help books [6]. These 
tools let groups of patients communicate, learn and act 
independently of the healthcare professionals. Online self-help 
groups let patients exchange knowledge and experiences, and 
the groups support the participants in helping each other 
develop new skills and attitudes. Previous studies have shown 
how self-help groups for patients with severe illnesses 
contribute to increased empowerment and improved ability to 
approach the healthcare with their health concerns [3] [4]. One 
example of a web-based community platform for different 
patient groups is PatientsLikeMe in which patients can share 
experiences, and the system can also aggregate the 
information as to serve the participants with decision support 
[2]. If you want to know about the experienced side effects of 
a certain medicine, for example, you can search for this in the 
online community and get aggregated data from hundreds of 
patients who are taking the medicine. Healthcare becomes 
then more than merely a patient-centric healthcare; it is also 
about patients co-creating healthcare and wellness [2]. 
Another example is WeAre.Us, an online health 
community for supporting conversations between patients, 
families and related stakeholders. This platform also 
contributes to a kind of collective intelligence through 
aggregated tracking and gathering of group information [2]. A 
further example is the NetDoctor sites in Europe with different 
areas for information from the healthcare, ask-the-expert 
systems (Q&As) and conversations in web-based communities 
for self-help groups.  
There are also self-help groups for people who suffer from 
lifestyle problems, such as unhealthy eating habits, too little 
physical exercise, smoking and abuse of alcohol, for example. 
The online communities on lifestyle issues are valuable for 
prevention purposes, but they are also important for people 
with chronic diseases, such as diabetic. Another example is 
stress 
management 
through 
conversations 
in 
online 
communities with the aim to prevent dysfunction due to 
negative stress exposure [14].  Social support is important 
when trying to develop new habits and behaviors that last [15] 
[16]. Also, in comparison with advice from healthcare 
professionals, the self-help groups have shown to offer 
complementary and more practical hands-on advice [17].   
B. Discussion on ICT-Support for Self-management 
For all these tools supporting self-management, it is 
important that they serve the purpose of allowing the patient as 
much own control and independence as possible. As 
mentioned before, even tools that facilitate subordinate patient 
roles, like the surveillance systems, should not violate the 
patient privacy or become too controlling. The choice and 
combination of self-management tools depend on the nature of 
patient conditions and the decision made by the patient, the 
doctor and the healthcare institution together. Especially for 
patients with chronic and multiple diseases, the negotiation 
about self-management tools, and how they are to be used, is 
crucial for their wellbeing. Also, if the nature of the health 
condition changes in character and the patient’s health status 
deteriorate or progress gradually, 
the 
communication 
concerning the tools will have to be continuous. In addition, 
the learning curve is a factor that needs to be considered.  
There are different kinds of knowledge and skills that the 
patient needs to possess, one is to know how to use the ICT 
tools for self-management. The more in control of the ICT 
tools the patient becomes, the more likely it is that he or she 
will use the technology. The emphasis on self-management 
makes patient education a necessary component of the 
healthcare system, to help patients with the practical tools and 
the 
practices 
they 
need. 
Patient 
education 
includes 
introduction to self-help groups for peer communication and 
how to use an apnea monitor, for example.  
If we assume that self-management is critical and that we 
have to figure out the patient, in the context of remote 
monitoring, we need to move beyond traditional roles. 
Obviously, until the patient manage to self-medicate, the 
problem with under- and overdosing is inevitable. But 
surprisingly in home-care and remote monitoring, this kind of 
risk is often not managed through the software and 
telemedicine platforms.  What can we then put in place to 
mitigate the risk of such events from occurring? Most of the 
clinical picture of the patient involves trying to record in an as 
accurate as possible manner all the doses taken. However, the 
situation may be complicated by the fact that the overdose (or 
a too low dose) in emergency situations may be adequate. The 
typical example is a diabetic patient where the proportion of 
glucose in the blood exceeds a certain level for which it is 
necessary to add an extra dose of insulin, in order to bring it 
back to normal levels. In this case, the patient knows through 
the symptoms (e.g., headache) that something is going on. By 
measuring blood sugar level, this can be verified before 
adjusting and putting in an additional dose of insulin. In this 
case, we have an additional medication that is not scheduled, 
i.e., it deviates from the daily doses of insulin. The majority of 
current diabetic control software applications allow the patient 
to simply record additional measurements of glucose and 
additional insulin medication. 
Some improvements could be done by a simple real time 
alert system for the clinician that is following the patient. The 
use case will be the following. The patient receives his or her 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

medical drug prescription on the home monitoring platform. 
If, for some reason, there is an additional drug intake 
registered by the software, an alert should be sent to the 
clinical care alerting that the patient is overdosing. However, 
this simple suggestion could be further improved, and a global 
refactoring of traditional remote monitoring systems should be 
done in order to archive also the possibility of having a patient 
that is not only self-medicating but who is also an active part 
of the cure and able to make decisions with the clinician. 
IV. 
PROPOSAL OF A HOLISTIC VIEW ON MANAGING SELF-
MANAGEMENT 
This section will explore the systemic perspective of self-
management further. A systemic model, the viable systems 
model, will be introduced, as well as applied and discussed. 
With a systemic or holistic approach, systems are regarded 
as a set of interrelated parts that form a whole with certain 
systems 
goals 
[18][19]. 
The 
mutual 
relations 
and 
communication between the parts of the system are as 
important as the parts themselves, since the whole system is 
greater than the sum of the constituent parts. A characteristic 
of living systems is their ability to alter and adapt to new 
conditions and demands of situations in the environment, in 
order to maintain viable.  
The patient care can be regarded as a living system with 
the different care components seen together, as interrelated, 
and with certain goals of patient recovery, health and 
wellbeing. 
This 
includes 
considering 
self-management 
components and the healthcare activities, provided by formal   
givers, together, in which the different actors and their 
activities affect each other as well as the outcomes.  
In Fig. 2, the viable systems model by Stafford Beer is 
illustrated [10]. It shows the relations between overall 
management (the upper square) and the operations (the System 
1 circles) being managed. Management is divided into three 
different subsystems: System 3 is responsible for planning for 
the System 1 to function well, to distribute resources and to 
follow up the results. System 2 manages oscillation of System 
1 and tries to enhance the togetherness of the different 
operations of System 1. System 4 deals with changes of the 
system, and looks for changes in the environment for the 
system to consider and adjust to. System 5 is the one that 
makes sure that there is a balance between internal stability 
and change, i.e., any conflicts between System 3 and System 4 
is handled by System 5. 
The environment is important for the system, since it 
provides the context and conditions that the system has to 
adjust to. In the case of the care of the patient, there are 
regulations, treatments, development of ICT tools, other 
patients, work and social environments of the patient, daily 
situations that the patient has to deal with, and so on. As can 
be seen in the figure, some parts of the overall environment 
are better known by the operations of System 1 than 
management of the top level. This goes for work and social 
environment, and specific situations that the patient 
experiences, for example. Variety is to be adjusted to this and 
should be taken into account when planning for patient care,  
 
Figure 2.  The viable systems model [10, p. 136] 
especially the self-management activities. However, as shown 
earlier, there are also new types of ICT tools that offer 
possibilities for patients to interact with peers, and help them 
make use of the collective intelligence of the self-help group. 
This increases the patients’ variety and their ability to have 
conversations with the healthcare about treatments as well. 
A. Self-Management as Part of the Whole 
The viable systems model by Stafford Beer can be used to 
deal with the concerns of integrated self-management in the 
total patient care. System 1 is the operational part that needs to 
be managed as a whole. In the patient care system, this System 
1 consists of all activities necessary for a patient’s health care 
and wellbeing. Looking into System 1, we find the different 
operations, such as medication/treatment programs, surgery 
and aftercare, such as treatments by physiotherapist, for 
example. In addition, we need to include self-management as 
one integrated operation. All the operations should be 
managed as a whole and get resources to work well. This is 
managed by System 3. It is also dependent on System 2, i.e., 
the one trying to avoid oscillation from occurring in System 1. 
In our case, System 2 would be someone who regulates and 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

makes sure that there are common health-related concepts and 
understanding among the operations, and who schedules 
different care activities so that they are performed in line with 
one another. System 4 contributes by managing change, and it 
can suggest addition of care activities or ICT-support to the 
operations.  
In order for the healthcare to manage the situation, in 
which self-management becomes a natural part of the patient 
care, the ideas behind self-management need to be well-known 
to the healthcare. In addition, the use of self-management tools 
has to be embedded in the everyday healthcare practices. Since 
self-management includes a demand for education of the 
patients and their close ones, this will also have to be part of 
healthcare management. 
To have two-way conversations with patients and to let 
them take part in decision-making situations leads to an 
increase in complexity in the patient – healthcare relation. 
More variables will have to be handled. For a well-working 
overall system for patient care, the health and wellbeing of the 
patient, i.e., seen from several perspectives, should be present 
to both the healthcare professionals and the patients. 
B. The Viable Self-Management System 
In the previous section, we addressed the whole care 
system in which self-management was one integrated part. If 
we focus on self-management, i.e., the next recursive level 
down, we will find different self-management operations. 
Among the operations of the System 1 of self-management, 
there are different types of activities and ICT tools appropriate 
for a certain patient (lifestyle self-help groups and monitoring 
of blood sugar, for example). As mentioned before, the types 
of self-management tools relevant for a certain patient should 
be discussed on a continuous basis due to changes in the 
patient’s health status (both progress and deterioration) and his 
or her experienced wellbeing. In managing the system for self-
management, we therefore find planning and evaluation of 
self-management operations. While System 3 plans and 
follows-up the outcome of the different self-management 
activities, System 4 looks for new ways of supporting self-
management for the patient. This calls for ongoing processes 
of planning, evaluation and for scanning the environment for 
new tools and situations to be managed by the patient. To keep 
a balance in the self-management system, System 5 resolves 
any conflicts between stability (System 3) and change (System 
4).  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have discussed self-management for 
increased health and wellbeing among patients. Since self-
management has shown to be of great importance to patients, 
it has to be an integrated part of today’s healthcare. The 
complexity of patients and their situation is to be addressed. 
Evaluation of self-management tools will also be needed. If 
embedded in the healthcare, this will allow for continuous 
evaluations of the set of ICT tools for a certain patient, 
including suggestions for improvements in the self-
management support. We have therefore proposed a systemic 
approach to managing self-management based on the viable 
systems model by Stafford Beer. This view offers different 
roles and functions necessary to ensure that self-management 
is viable and also well integrated in the overall care system.  
When self-management becomes a natural part of 
healthcare, the healthcare system has to further develop 
criteria for measuring effectiveness. Adequate level of control 
and inclusion in decision-making, experienced wellbeing of 
the patient, together with health status, are examples of criteria 
related to self-management. Future research work will focus 
on how to measure effectiveness, when patients and their close 
ones come to play a greater role in the care process, and when 
self-management through ICT tools are being further explored 
and implemented. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Wagner, H., E. and McCorkle, R. 2010. Self-management support. 
Psycho-Oncology. 63:464-468. 
[2] Tapscott, D. and Williams, A.D. 2010. MacroWikinomics – Rebooting 
business and the world. 343-359, Atlantic Books. 
[3] Barak, A., Boniel-Nissima, M. and Suler, J., Fostering empowerment in 
online support groups. 2008. Computers in Human Behavior, 24. 
Elsevier. 1867-1883. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2008.02.004 
[4] van Uden-Kraan, C.F., Drossaert, C.H., Taal, E., Shaw, B.R., Seydel, 
E.R. and van de Laar, M.A. 2008. Empowering processes and outcomes 
of participation in online support groups for patients with breast cancer, 
arthritis, or fibromyalgia, Qualitative Health Research. 18, 405-417. 
DOI: 10.1177/1049732307313429. 
[5] Smedberg, Å. and Sandmark, H. 2011. Stress intervention online -
Designing for self-help through multiple help. In Proceedings of the 
Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social 
Medicine. IARIA conference. 120-125. ISBN: 978-1-61208-003-1. 
[6] Barrett, M., J. 2005. Patient self-management tools: An overview. 
California 
Healthcare 
Foundation. 
Available: 
http://www.chcf.org/publications/2005/06/patient-selfmanagement-
tools-an-overview Accessed on September 20, 2014. 
[7] McGowan, P. 2005. Self-management: A background paper. Centre on 
Aging, University of Victoria. 
[8] Barlow, J., Wright, C., Sheasby, J., Turner, A. and Hainsworth, J. 2002. 
Self-management approaches for people with chronic conditions: A 
review. Patient Education and Counseling, 48, 177-187. 
[9] _2011. Self-management support: a health care intervention. BC 
Ministry of Health, British Columbia. June, 10, 2011. 
[10] Beer, S. 1966. Diagnosing the system for organisations. John Willey. 
[11] Espejo, R. and Reyes, A. 2011. On managing complexity: variety 
engineering. Organizational systems. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 49-73. 
[12] Espejo, R., Schuhmann, W., Schwaninger, M. and Bilello, U. 1996. 
Organizational transformation and learning : A cybernetic approach to 
management. Chichester: Wiley.  
[13] Ridha, A. and Zoghbi, W. 1985. Insulin overdose in eight patients: 
insulin pharmacokinetics and review of the literature. Medicine. 64.5: 
323-332. 
[14] Smedberg, Å. and Sandmark, H. 2012. Dynamic stress management: 
self-help through holistic system design. In Å. Smedberg (Ed.), E-health 
communities and online self-help groups: Applications and usage (pp. 
136-154). Hershey, PA: Medical Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-866-8.ch009. 
[15] Baughman, K., Logue, E., Sutton, K., Capers, C., Jarjoura, D. and 
Smucker, W. 2003. Biopsychosocial characteristics of overweight and 
obese primary care patients: do psychosocial and behavior factors 
mediate sociodemographic effects? Preventive Medicine. No. 37: 129-
137. Academic Press. 
[16] Norman, G. J. 2007. A review of ehealth interventions for physical 
activity and dietary behavior change. Am J Prev Med.. 33(4): 336-345. 
[17] Smedberg, Å. 2007. To design holistic health service systems on the 
Internet. Int. J. Social, Management, Economics and Business 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Engineering, Vol:1, No 7: 369-375. World Academy of Science, 
Engineering and Technology. 
[18] Churchman, C. W. 1968. The systems approach. Delacorte Press. 
[19] Schoderbek, P. P., Schoderbek, C. G. and Kefalas, A. G. 1990. 
Management systems – Conceptual considerations. Richard D. Irwin, 
Inc. 
 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

