Towards an Internet-based Infectious Disease Management Platform to Increase 
Patient Safety 
MJ Wentzel1, J Karreman2, JEWC van Gemert-Pijnen1 
1Psychology and Communication of Health and Risk 
2 Technical and Professional Communication 
Behavioral Sciences 
University of Twente 
Enschede, Netherlands 
M.J.Wentzel@utwente.nl, J.Karreman@utwente.nl, J.vanGemert-Pijnen@utwente.nl
 
 
Abstract— An infectious disease communication portal will be 
developed guided business modeling and Human Centered 
Design principles. This platform will offer several features 
such as education, document sharing, decision aids, and 
outbreak and prevalence monitoring, depending on the needs 
of 
the 
key-stakeholders 
(caregivers, 
payers, 
insurance 
companies, patients, policy-makers). Data-mining will be 
applied to logged website use of a previously implemented 
infectious disease management information website. This will 
render an understanding of actual use patterns, information 
need, and search strategies. Preliminary results are presented 
and implications for further research and platform design are 
described. These results include: 1. Users most often skip the 
website’s homepage, it is therefore important to support user 
orientation. 2. Users spend a considerable amount of time 
searching on the website, a more optimal fit between user and 
technology is needed. 3. Users switch between information 
meant for different target groups, information should thus be 
aimed towards user goals instead of user identity. 
Keywords- 
internet-based 
communication 
platform;  
healthcare associated infection control; information need; 
patient safety; logfile analysis. 
 
I. 
BACKGROUND 
In this paper, we describe the development of the e-
Disease Management Eursafety Health Net platform 
eDEHN) based on the evaluation of a previously developed 
and implemented website [1] to promote patient safety. The 
eDEHN-platform will function as a disease management 
platform offering several features such as education, 
document sharing, decision aids, outbreak and prevalence 
monitoring, and video-conferencing, depending on the needs 
of the key-stakeholders (caregivers, payers, insurance 
companies, patients, policy-makers), see Figure 1. 
The platform development will be guided by the ceHRes 
(center for eHealth research) roadmap that integrates 
business modeling and Human Centered Design [2]. By 
applying data-mining to the MRSA-net website, valuable 
information on actual use patterns renders focal points for 
the development of the new communication platform that 
shares MRSA-net goals. This summative evaluation can 
serve as input for the up-scaling of the current website to an 
infectious disease management platform. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Eursafety Health Net feature overview. 
A. Patient Safety 
World-wide, patient-safety is increasingly seen as a focal 
area of healthcare. Due to increases in microbial antibiotic 
resistance, healthcare associated infections (HAI) form an 
increasing treat to patient safety [3], [4]. MRSA for example 
has received much attention in recent years for it is the cause 
of many HAIs, not seldom with fatal consequences. To fight 
this problem of microbial antibiotic resistance and 
subsequent difficult or untreatable HAIs, infection control 
strategies need to be applied. Since neither people nor 
bacteria are constrained by national or regional borders, 
cross border cooperation is needed to ensure effective 
infectious disease management [5]. Cautious antibiotic use, 
resistance pattern monitoring, and hygienic measures are 
among the necessary control measures to fight the spread of 
resistant bacteria and infections. To inform all actors 
involved in the care process on the exact measures they 
should take in case of infectious agents, good information, 
education, and communication is needed. Patient safety can 
benefit greatly from efficient communication, education, and 
information sharing. 
47
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

B. eHealth technology 
To enhance patient safety regarding MRSA, a website 
was developed using Human Centered Design methods. 
Information need and structure were identified and labeled 
through 
scenario-based 
testing 
and 
card-sorting. 
Subsequently, website design was tested and adjusted by 
using mock-ups [6]. Initial tests showed improvement: 
HCWs were significantly quicker in finding and using 
information in the internet tool than with paper-based 
protocols and they were significantly more successful in 
completing scenario tasks [7]. Likewise, content aimed at the 
public was created. Patient empowerment was stimulated 
since the website provides information to answer questions 
the public (or patients) may have about MRSA.  
Since February 2008 MRSA-net can be visited online [1]. 
It currently pulls about 12,000 visitors per month, mainly 
originating from its target countries: the Netherlands and 
Germany. 
Regardless 
MRSA-net’s 
success, 
eHealth 
technology evolves and successful disease management and 
infection control ask for a broader set of tools than protocol 
communication alone. MRSA-net is a starting point, but in 
our goal of supporting cross border infectious disease 
management we need to develop the tools HCWs need to 
control HAIs and deliver safe care.  
Cooperation and information is not limited to HCW 
practice; in infectious disease management patient values 
cannot be overlooked. Participatory healthcare, healthcare 
that is organized towards enabling patients to be informed so 
that they can think and co-decide about the care and 
cooperate with HCWs, can be realized more easily with 
eHealth technology. This use of interactive health technology 
or Medicine 2.0, aims to use technology to involve patients 
in the care process and offer tools better equipped to meet 
user needs [8]. Applying eHealth to the broad field of HAI 
control seems logical and viable. 
C. Infectious Disease Management 
A variety of antibiotic-resistant infectious agents 
compromise safety and thus need to be controlled, as stated 
in World Health Organization fact sheet No. 194 [3].  
Increasing patient safety through the reduction and control of 
HAI in Dutch and German border regions through cross-
border collaboration is the goal of MRSA-net’s successor: 
the Eursafety Health Net project [9]. Providing HCWs with 
knowledge on infection control protocols, facilitating 
information exchange and monitoring of resistance patterns, 
as well as creating and enabling public and professional 
awareness and adequate education is deemed necessary. One 
of the sub-goals of the project is the development of an 
ehealth communication platform that facilitates cross-border 
collaboration on infection control. This platform should 
support all project partners, HCWs, patients or public in the 
joint goal of infection control and patient safety. Because 
successful infection control asks for specific measures taken 
at different points in the care process, offering timely 
information and education on infection control is essential. 
E-learning and e-decision aids are among the tools that 
eHealth technology has to offer. Also, cross-border 
monitoring of resistance patterns and antibiotic use can be 
realized in internet-based modules. To assess how the 
communication platform can support such activities, research 
will be done. Furthermore, to ensure a complete and 
successful 
implementation, 
a 
business 
model 
will 
simultaneously be created for this eHealth project [10].  
D. Business modeling and eHealth development 
Besides all good intentions eHealth technologies often 
lack a full implementation. Reasons for this unsuccessful 
implementation can be numerous, but a misfit between end-
user needs and technology properties are not uncommon 
[11]. To ensure a good implementation, a thorough 
understanding of the user, his/her goal or task, and the 
context in which the application will be used are essential. 
Involving the users in different phases of the design process 
is important for researchers and developers. Participatory 
design, or co-creation, ensures that end-users are kept central 
throughout the development. The field of Human Centered 
Design offers methods to inquire users and accomplish user-
driven applications [2]. In addition, applying business 
modeling to healthcare services can generate trust, 
commitment, and ownership among stakeholders. To 
illustrate this, MRSA-net design was not based on 
stakeholder participatory design, but on user participatory 
design which resulted in some reluctance of important 
stakeholders to accept and implement the technology [12]. 
Business modeling tackles this problem of unsuccessful 
implementation and creates new perspectives on user and 
stakeholder involvement in creating viable, implementable 
eHealth technologies [10].  
Following the ceHRes roadmap, we aim to develop the 
eDEHN platform based on the right assumptions and 
observations regarding its stakeholders and users [2]. In the 
first phase of the ceHRes roadmap, contextual inquiry, the 
project is planned and the problem (for which a solution will 
be developed) is investigated. To ensure that the proposed 
solution (communication platform with various applications) 
really supports its users and fulfills a need, the problem 
(increasing patient safety with regard to infectious disease 
management) needs to be assessed and understood [2]. The 
eDEHN platform is currently in the phase of problem 
analysis: in order to design effective disease management 
technologies, we need to understand how the technology 
implemented in the MRSA-net project is used and what 
information is accessed or requested. 
E. Summative Evaluation 
Given the initial test results and formative evaluations 
performed on the MRSA-net website, its prospects were 
promising [7]. However, as many eHealth designers 
currently know or are discovering due to more stringent 
evaluations, actual use may differ substantially from 
intended use. In a similar way, the intended users may not be 
the actual users, since freely accessible websites that serve a 
broad audience can pull many different visitors. Summative 
evaluation is important because it tells us what information is 
requested through the MRSA-net website, and how this is 
done. It tells us what the important areas of interest regarding 
infection disease management are. Possibly, additional topics 
48
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

of interest surface that need to be addressed to enable HCWs 
to provide safe care, or address the public’s information need 
and enable patient empowerment.  
To illustrate this, one assumption that is valid for MRSA-
net’s intended users but possibly not for its actual users is 
that MRSA-net users have a specific question or information 
need when searching for guideline-based information. 
However, translating an (sometimes implicit) information 
need into a well defined search query or recognize the topic 
of interest can be difficult. Especially when persons are 
familiar with a subject (as is probably the case with HCWs 
that use MRSA-net) they may be unable to form effective 
queries [13]. The so called ‘exploratory seeking’ may not be 
supported as well as ‘known item seeking’ by MRSA-net’s 
question-answer set-up [14]. 
Further, taking a close look at use patterns can identify 
information processing problems. Information on MRSA-net 
contains a question-answer structure: predefined questions 
translating an information need are matched with protocol-
based answers. This structure may be efficient in providing 
concise, ready to use information for persons seeking so-
called procedural information (learning to do) [15]. 
However, MRSA-net users may find it difficult to process 
this question-answer structured information when they 
search for less action oriented information. To what extent 
the current structure of MRSA-net offers information that 
users can process effectively depending on their information 
need will be researched. Again, this will be applied in the 
new platform by adjusting the content and structure to user 
goals.  
In sum, we apply the ceHRes roadmap by starting with a 
summative evaluation of MRSA-net. This evaluation also 
serves as input for the contextual inquiry phase of Eursafety 
Health Net and renders input for the eDEHN-platform. We 
start our research by posing the following questions:  
II. 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
1. How can the platform be positioned on the Internet in 
terms of accessibility? 
2. How can we make navigation and content smart, 
simple, and tailored to user needs?  
3. How can we supply content based on mental models of 
intended users?  
4. Can we enhance the effectiveness in terms of 
successful information supply? 
III. 
METHODS 
A. Dataset (logfiles) 
MRSA-net use has been logged and data on general use 
are available via the web-stats program (AWSTATS) in the 
content management system. This data consist of visitors, 
page views, users, entry and exit pages, etc. logged since 
March 2008 until present. To give an indication of the 
dataset’s size: in 2009, MRSA-net was visited 154,894 times 
with on average 4.33 pages viewed per visit. 
In addition, specific pages accessed have been extracted 
into a dataset offering more precise information on 
individual user actions: User type (public or professional, 
German or Dutch), search strategy (web site search engine 
entry, frequently asked questions, or topic selection), viewed 
answer, and session duration are available for analyses. 
B. Data-mining, content analysis, and card sort 
Data-mining has been used previously to get an insight 
into use patterns and information need of website users [16] 
[17]. We decided to apply this method because since its 
launch, MRSA-net traffic has been logged and we thus have 
empirical data of > 2 years MRSA-net use. These log files 
can tell us how MRSA-net is used and to some extent by 
whom, or in other words, give a ‘digital fingerprint’ [18] of 
MRSA-net users. Similarly, information accessed on certain 
topics within MRSA-net can be identified and the extent to 
which the website fulfills the information need can be 
demonstrated through analysis. 
To get an insight into MRSA-net use and its performance 
in meeting user needs, we start with giving an overall picture 
by reporting general statistics such as visit numbers and 
frequencies of certain topics accessed and search methods 
applied (macro-level log analysis).  
To assess whether the actual topic structure fits the 
information need of MRSA-net users and whether new 
topics need to be addressed, we perform a content analysis 
on the questions posed via the website’s search engine. Per 
user group (German/Dutch, Professional/Public) we will 
perform card-sorts with the questions posed on MRSA-net as 
input to identify new topics. These new topics as well as the 
‘fit’ of the current information structure with actual user 
information need (number of topics accessed) will be 
validated subsequently in interviews with members of the 
MRSA-net target user groups.  
Finally, we take a look at the sequence of activities 
performed by single users through micro mining analysis 
[17] to gain insight into the way the website is used, what 
purpose it actually fulfills opposed to initial design ideas, and 
to what extent user are successful in fulfilling their 
information goals with the website. For example, a single 
user who scrolls through many topics on the website may not 
indicate a user who has one practical (protocol) question, but 
points towards a user wants to learn more about MRSA 
control in a broad sense.  
In sum, we will combine general log analysis on a macro 
level, content analysis of open search queries, and micro-
mining analysis to answer our research questions. 
IV. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
Although we have not yet terminated our analyses, we 
anticipate that our research results in more efficient ways of 
disseminating information regarding infectious disease 
management and patient safety. Thus, in the development of 
the eDEHN platform, information structure will be tailored 
towards user goals and needs based on MRSA-net analysis 
outcomes. User specific differences in information need and 
subsequent website use by the different user groups will be 
used as focal points in the development of the Eursafety 
Health Net platform to ensure the platform meets user (and 
stakeholder) needs.  
49
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

1. 
Some preliminary findings include the observation 
that although users are expected to enter the website via the 
homepage where they are instructed and guided towards the 
information they need, users most often enter MRSA-net 
directly on answer pages via bookmarks, hyperlinks, or 
search engines. For example, it is observed that internet 
search engines (like Google) stably account for about 70% of 
all visits. This strategy of (knowingly or unknowingly) 
skipping the homepage holds implications for the positioning 
and timing 
of introductory 
information; the 
aims, 
trustworthiness, 
and 
reliability 
should 
be 
always 
recognizable for users regardless of how they access the 
information. 
2. 
In addition, user-assisting features such as the 
breadcrumb trail become useless when users directly access 
answer pages. This means we should have a clear 
understanding of when these features are useful and 
supportive for navigation or user orientation, and apply them 
accordingly. 
3. 
Another preliminary result that calls our attention is 
that some users tend to have long sessions (more than 20 
minutes) on MRSA-net, accessing a multitude of (different) 
answers. This may indicate that these users cannot easily find 
the information they need on MRSA-net or that they have 
diverse or broad information needs. In both cases, a more 
optimal fit between user and technology (structure and 
content) is needed. 
4. 
A remarkable finding is that professionals and 
public may have similar information needs, or they have no 
clear ideas about what they can expect when entering via the 
public professional entry. Users switch between professional 
and public content, indicating that (professional) guidelines 
insufficiently address public concerns. For example, a mental 
health care worker may start searching in public content, but 
finds out that professional content (guidelines/protocols for 
MRSA-control in health care facilities) apply to the 
institution where he/she works too. Thus, they cannot be 
divided into public or professional easily. Users may not 
always know which category they belong to, thus 
information should be aimed towards user goals instead of 
user identity. In addition, clinical guidelines should provide 
sufficient information on public-topics in (semi-)professional 
settings, since HCWs do not provide care in a professional 
vacuum. 
The preliminary results indicate we need a better system 
for searching, finding, and using information. Eursafety 
Health Net platform can benefit from further research into 
information search behavior and dialogue optimization, 
which will be inspired by the upcoming results of the present 
research. It will be our challenge to supply information and 
facilitate communication in ways that keep adjusting and 
responding to our users’ needs. Future research activities 
include:  
• 
Positioning via stakeholder meetings via needs 
assessment and co-creation 
• 
Focus groups with key stakeholders to define the 
features most in need and requirements for the platform 
• 
Interaction, dialogue optimization based on needs 
assessment, experiments, and data-mining (current research) 
• 
Content management optimization based on data-
mining (current research) and user tests. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
MRSA-net. Accessed on 9 December 2010. Available from: 
www.mrsa-net.nl. 
[2] 
J. E. W. C. van Gemert-Pijnen, N. Nijland, M. A. H. van Limburg, S. 
M. Kelders, B. J. Brandenburg, et al., "Introducing a holistic 
framework for eHealth technologies, " unpublished. 
[3] 
World Health Organization.. fact sheet N°194: Antimicrobial 
Resistance, 
WHO: 
Geneva, 
2002, 
available 
from: 
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs194/en/index.html. 
[4] 
European Commission. (December 2005). Public consultation on 
strategies for improving patient safety by prevention and control of 
healthcare-associated 
infections. 
Available 
from: 
http://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_threats/com/cons01_txt_en.pdf. 
Accessed 18 Oktober 2010.  
[5] 
R. Köck, K. Becker, B. Cookson, J. E. van Gemert-Pijnen, S. 
Harbarth, et al., "Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
(MRSA): burden of disease and control challenges in Europe," Euro 
surveillance: European communicable disease bulletin, vol. 15, 2010, 
pii:19688. 
[6] 
F. Verhoeven and M. Steehouder, "The development of a web-based 
information tool for cross-border prevention and control of 
Methicillin Resistant Staphylococcus aureus," International Journal of 
Infection Control, vol. 4, 2008. 
[7] 
F. Verhoeven, J. Gemert-Pijnen, A. Friedrich, I. Daniels-Haardt, and 
M. Hendrix, "Ontwikkeling van een web-based learning tool ter 
preventie en bestrijding van meticillineresistente Staphylococcus 
aureus," Infectieziekten-bulletin, vol. 19, 2008,  pp. 6-9. 
[8] 
G. Eysenbach, "Medicine 2.0: Social Networking, Collaboration, 
Participation, Apomediation, and Openness," J Med Internet Res, vol. 
10,  2008, doi:10.2196/jmir.1030. 
[9] 
Eursafety Health Net. Accessed on 12 October 2010. Available from: 
www.eursafety.eu. 
[10] M. A. H. van Limburg, R. M. G. Hendrix, H. C. Ossebaard, N. 
Nijland, E. R. Seydel, et al., "Business modelling to advance the 
design and implementation of eHealth innovations," unpublished. 
[11] N. Nijland, J. van Gemert-Pijnen, H. Boer, M. Steehouder, and E. 
Seydel, "Evaluation of internet-based technology for supporting self-
care: problems encountered by patients and caregivers when using 
self-care applications," Journal of medical Internet research, vol. 10, 
2008. 
[12] F. Verhoeven, "When staff handle staph: user-driven versus expert-
driven communication of infection control guidelines," Dissertation, 
Enschede: University of Twente, 2009. 
[13] O. Vechtomova and H. Zhang, "Articulating complex information 
needs using query templates," Journal of Information Science, vol. 
35, 2009, pp. 439-452. 
[14] P. Morville and L. Rosenfeld, Information architecture for the World 
Wide Web, 2 ed. Beijing: O´Reilly, 2002. 
[15] J. C. Redish, "Reading to learn to do," IEEE Transactions on 
professional communication, vol. 32, pp. 289-293, 1989. 
[16] M. Chau, X. Fang, and O. R. L. Sheng, "Analysis of the query logs of 
a web site search engine," Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology, vol. 56, pp. 1363-1376, 2005. 
[17] D. Nicholas and P. Huntington, "Micro-Mining and Segmented Log 
File Analysis: A Method for Enriching the Data Yield from Internet 
Log Files," Journal of Information Science, vol. 29, pp. 391-404,  
2003, doi: 2003.10.1177/01655515030295005. 
[18] D. Nicholas, P. Huntington, and J. Homewood, "Assessing used 
content across five digital health information services using 
transaction log files," Journal of Information Science, vol. 29, p. 499, 
2003.
50
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

