Context-sensitive Communication in Hospitals: A User Interface 
Evaluation and Redesign of Ascom Wireless IP-DECT Phones 
 
a Terje Solvoll, b Annelies Tiemersma, c Edouard Kerbage, d Stefano Fasani, e Ashok Babu Ravuri, f Gunnar Hartvigsen 
a,b,c,d,f Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and 
Telemedicine, University hospital of North Norway, 
Tromsø, Norway 
a,e,f Department of Computer Science, 
University of Tromsø, 
Tromsø, Norway
a terje.solvoll@telemed.no, b a.e.tiemersma@student.utwente.nl, c edouard.kerbage@viacesi.fr,   
d s.fasani1@campus.unimib.it, e ara013@post.uit.no, f gunnar@cs.uit.no 
 
 
Abstract 
- 
A 
variety 
of 
issues 
related 
to 
communication is a common phenomenon in current 
hospital settings. Sharing information by contacting 
colleagues, medical attendants, investigatory facilities 
and other resources, results in many communication 
events. This generates interruptions from mobile 
communication devices, which is a big concern for many 
physicians. In general, wireless phones are not currently 
widely in use at Norwegian hospitals, due to suspicions 
of increased interruption rates. Only a few staff 
members carry a wireless phone. Before introducing 
such devices as standard equipment, usability and user 
satisfaction are important factors, and have to be 
accounted for. The fact that such devices could 
introduce unnecessary interruptions is a motivation for 
developing a context sensitive solution. Observations and 
interviews from a study carried out by the first author, 
regarding the use of wireless phones at a hospital in 
Norway, showed that users were unsatisfied with the 
phones user interfaces. This kept them from using the 
full functionality of the system. This article presents an 
evaluation of the existing user interface of two wireless 
phones intended for hospital use, and suggests an 
improved user interface, which also intends to support 
context-sensitive communication. The new interfaces 
were considered an improvement compared to the old 
interfaces.  
Keywords – HCI; user interface design; context-
sensitive 
communication; 
wireless 
communication; 
heuristic evaluation. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Many activities within hospitals and healthcare processes 
require reliable communication systems. Sharing information 
by contacting colleagues, medical attendants, investigatory 
facilities and other resources, results in a lot of 
communication events. Clinical questions are often complex 
and not clearly defined, and will therefore require frequent 
conversations and discussions [1].  Devices currently used to 
communicate 
at 
hospitals, 
are 
mainly 
pagers, 
but 
wired/wireless phones and Personal Digital Assistants 
(PDA), are in use [2]. These devices can both be personal 
and role-based, since communication in many cases is not 
aimed to one person, but to a role such as; ‗the nurse on call‘, 
or ‗the physician on the next shift‘ [3]. Because of this, some 
staff members at today‘s hospitals are carrying multiple 
devices for different roles and purposes [2, 4]. 
However, communication in hospitals has shown to 
suffer from poor practice and inefficiency caused by an 
insufficient infrastructure, especially when the need of 
communication is urgent [1, 3, 5]. A more extensive use of 
mobile phones can offer a solution to this problem by 
improving accessibility and communication in hospitals [1, 
5, 6]. Compared to the usage of pagers, important advantages 
can be achieved by offering two-way text and voice services. 
Providing smaller delays in communication may lead to 
improved patients care, and also reduce the risk of medical 
errors [5].  
Despite the advantages of mobile phones, there are also 
well-known downsides to the usage of these devices. The 
increased availability and accessibility can cause an overload 
of numerous interruptions on key human resources, such as, 
senior physicians, or ‗on call‘ staff [4, 7]. These interruptions 
can lead to a diversion of attention, errors, and may disturb 
in situations such as, in outpatient clinic, or in the operating 
theatre [4, 7]. A context-sensitive system can provide a 
solution to control availability and interruptions [4]. Based 
on the phones‘ location, a person‘s role and schedule, 
interruptions can be avoided, and calls can be redirected to 
other available resources. Combining the personal and role 
based devices into one single device, will also offer an 
improvement to the mobile communication [7].  
In general, mobile phones are currently not widely in use 
at hospitals. Only a few staff members carry a wireless 
phone due to the suspicion of a phone interrupting more than 
a pager [2, 4]. Before introducing wireless phones as 
standard hospital equipment, usability and user satisfaction 
are important factors to account for. A study, carried out by 
the first author, regarding the usage of mobile phones at St. 
Olav‘s Hospital in Trondheim, mid Norway (an early adopter 
of 
implementing 
mobile 
phones), 
observations 
and 
interviews showed that the users were unsatisfied by the 
current user interface of the phones [8, 9]. It kept them from 
37
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

using the functionality of the system fully, especially the way 
messages were handled. 
In this article, we investigate the role of user interface 
design on mobile communication devices used within health 
care, in order to improve the interface, and to include support 
for context-sensitive communication.  We start out by 
presenting context sensitive communication systems for 
hospitals, in Section II. Section III describes the wireless 
phones subjected in this paper; the Ascom 9d24 and d62, and 
methods used. In Section IV we present the results from the 
evaluation, and our suggestions for an improved user 
interface. Further, in Section V, we discuss the evaluation 
and prototype, and then the limitations of the study, before 
we conclude and describe future work in Section VI.  
II. 
CONTEXT SENSITIVE SYSTEMS FOR MOBILE 
COMMUNICAION IN HOSPITALS 
We are involved in designing and developing a system 
for managing availability and interruptions from mobile 
devices, used by physicians in hospitals [7, 10-12]. The 
purpose of this work is to develop a new, low impact context 
sensitive 
communication 
system, 
based 
on 
existing 
infrastructure. Each physician will only need to be equipped 
with one mobile communication device for both personal 
and role based communication. The system will be 
connected to a reliable context aware communication 
system, which controls and reduces interruptions in a safe 
and reliable way [7]. Such devices or systems, based on 
existing infrastructure, are, by the authors‘ awareness, not 
currently available for hospitals. Due to space limit, we refer 
to [7, 10-12] for more details about our system.  
However, several studies have been carried out within 
hospital settings with improved communication and 
interruption reduction in mind [1, 6, 13-16]. Other systems, 
like the AwareMedia and the AwarePhone systems to 
Badram 
et 
al. 
[17, 
18], 
support 
context 
aware 
communication. These systems in combination form a 
complete communication system for clinicians in a surgical 
ward. They are based on GSM/3G, and not systems more 
widely used in hospital settings, like; Digital Enhanced 
Cordless Telecommunication (DECT) / Internet Protocol-
(IP)-DECT, or wireless IP phones. We believe that systems 
connected to public phone networks could lead to further 
user resistance due to suspicions of more interruptions from 
outside the hospital, and will also be more expensive than the 
usage of existing infrastructure. 
III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The phones subjected in this paper are already in use in 
hospital settings, and also in the context-sensitive system 
being developed at the Tromsø Telemedicine Laboratory 
(TTL) at Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and 
Telemedicine (NST) [7, 10-12]. The phones are based on an 
IP-DECT system, used for wireless communication, 
offering voice and text services, and also role-based 
communication and alarms. In this Section we present the 
subjected phones, and the method used in the paper. 
A. Ascom 9d24 
The Ascom 9d24 is a wireless handset designed for usage 
in demanding conditions like in offices, security and 
hospitals. The handsets are resistant to water, dust and 
scratches, and can withstand falling on the floor [19]. There 
are three different versions of the 9d24: The ‗Talker‘, which 
only supports voice communication, the ‗Messenger‘, 
offering both voice and text functionalities, and the 
‗Protector‘ with additional alarm functions, including an 
alarm button on top of the handheld, a man-down alarm and 
a pull-cord alarm. 
As can be seen in Figure 1, the 9d24 has 3 soft keys that 
Figure 1. Ascom 9d24 handset. 
. 
 
 
      Figure 2. Main screen. 
              Figure 3. Main menu 
. 
 
 
      Figure 4. Modes.      
              Figure 5. Edit screen 
. 
 
 
Figure 6. Incoming call      
         Figure 7. Call list 
. 
 
 
38
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

correspond to the options on the display, a keypad, a call 
button, a menu button, navigation buttons and, on the side, 
buttons to regulate the volume. The one color display is 
illuminated in blue and has a resolution of 128x64 pixels. 
Due to space limits, we refer to [19] for further information 
about the phone. 
1) Ascom 9d24 user interface 
Figures 2-7 show screenshots of the graphical user 
interface. The main screen (Figure 2) displays the name of 
the user, and the current mode (Mode is the user profile of 
the phone, also called profile on other phones) in use. The 
top bar of the screen shows a clock and several icons, 
indicating new voice or text messages, audio settings, 
activated alarms, battery power and other events. The 
functions of the soft keys on the bottom of the main screen 
can be defined by the user, normally the most-used features. 
By pressing the ‗Menu key‘ (Figure 1), the main menu 
opens, consisting of 5 tabs with icons representing the 
function of the tab (Figure 3). The tabs can be opened to 
select an item in the list (Figure 4). The ‗>‘ sign indicates 
that another menu will open when pressing ‗>‘ on the 
‗Navigation key‘ (Figure 1). Options to edit the settings of 
the modes will open when pressing the ‗modes menu‘ 
(Figure 5). These modes refer to profile settings, and will be 
applied when the mode is activated. 
The ‗Call key‘ (Figure 1) is both used to start and end a 
call. Figure 6 shows the screen of an incoming call. The 
number of the caller, or a name, when the number is listed in 
the local phonebook of the phone, is displayed. All incoming 
‗‘, outgoing ‗‘ and missed ‗!‘ calls are stored in the call 
list (Figure 7). Due to space limits, we refer to [19] for 
further information about the phone.  
B. Ascom d62 
The Ascom d62 is a wireless IP-DECT phone, designed, 
like the 9d24, for usage in demanding conditions (industry, 
offices, security, hospitals, etc.). As the Ascom 9d24, the 
Ascom d62 exists in three different versions. There is only 
one version of the physical phone, but as you buy different 
licenses, you may improve the phone‘s characteristics: The 
―talker‖ only allows voice communication and 12 character 
display messages. The ―messenger‖ offers both voice and 
messaging communication. The ―protector‖ offers alarm 
functions, and base station location [19]. 
 The Ascom d62 looks more like a regular GSM phone 
than the 9d24 (Figure 8). It has a color display, and a five-
directional navigation button. It has a ―hook on‖ and ―hook 
off‖ button, 3 soft keys, a keypad, and side buttons on the 
left to regulate the volume and to mute the phone. A 
headphone jack is present on the right side, and the alarm 
button is located on the top of the handset. The display has a 
resolution of 128*160 pixels and supports 65 000 colors and 
6 lines of 20 characters. 
1) Ascom d62 user interface 
Figures (9 to 14) are screenshots of the graphical user 
Figure 8. Ascom d62 handset. 
. 
 
 
Figure 9. Main Screen      
              Figure 10. Main menu 
. 
 
 
  Figure 11. Profiles    
             Figure 12. Profile options 
. 
 
 
Figure 13. Incoming call    
             Figure 14. Call list 
. 
 
 
39
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

interface. The main screen (Figure 9) displays the name of 
the user (Owner ID) and the network the phone is connected 
to. On the top of the screen, time and date are displayed, and 
also several icons can be displayed, indicating new voice or 
text messages, audio settings, battery power, network 
reception, and other events. 
The phone only displays a ‗?‘ icon beneath the battery 
icon, if the selected profile is not the default. The red icon on 
the bottom-right corner indicates the version of the phone 
(talker, messenger, and here protector). The functions of the 
soft keys, on the bottom of the main screen, can be defined 
by the user. The keypad can be locked and unlocked by 
pressing ‗*‘ and the left soft key. 
By pressing the centre of the ‗Navigation key‘ (Figure 8) 
in the main screen (Figure 9), the main menu opens. The 
main menu consists of 8 icons representing the sub-menus‘ 
functions (Figure 10). By opening a menu using the ‗select‘ 
or the centre of the ‗Navigation key‘, you end up in a sub-
menu containing an item list. These items can be other sub-
menus, or selectable items like; profiles (Figure 11). In some 
cases, by selecting an item, you can push a ‗more‘ button 
with a soft key, which offers new options (Figure 12). 
Figure 13 shows the screen of an incoming call. The 
number of the caller, or a name, when the number is listed in 
the local phonebook of the phone, is displayed. The left soft 
key enables the loudspeaker. All incoming, outgoing, and 
missed calls are stored in the call list (Figure 14). The left 
‗Call key‘ (Figure 8) is used to start and answer a call, while 
the right ‗Call key‘ is used to end a call, or to cancel 
everything and go back to the main screen (Figure 9). 
C. Methods 
The method used to evaluate the user interfaces has 
similarities to heuristic evaluation where 3-7 usability 
experts identify challenges of an interface, using their 
experience and design heuristics [20, 21]. The challenges are 
then ordered according to their importance and expected 
impact on usability. 
The test users involved here, all have a technical 
background within computer science and communication. 
The testing began by spending some time on using each 
phone, starting with the Ascom 9d24, and then the Ascom 
d62. Different tasks were performed, for example sending 
and receiving messages, calling, using the phonebook and 
changing settings. Initially the user manual was not used in 
order to test intuitive use, since the end users are not likely to 
pay close attention to the manual when start working with 
the handheld [22]. 
The various points raised in the Ascom 9d24 evaluation, 
were re-examined with the Ascom d62. In this way, we 
evaluated the differences between the two handsets, and 
revealed the resolved problems in the Ascom d62. 
Based on guidelines for interface design [20, 23-25], we 
made a list of possible usability problems. Since the phones 
are intended to be used in hospitals, the context and 
requirements of usage in a health care environment was kept 
in mind when identifying the problems [26]. Also a set of 
guidelines for the design of context-aware mobile devices 
[27], was used to minimize usability risks. 
To solve the revealed problems, and enhance the 
usability, we suggest adjustments to the user interfaces. This 
includes 
changes 
to 
support 
context 
sensitive 
communication. The new interface is visualized in a low-
fidelity prototype, using Microsoft PowerPoint 2007, which 
should be advanced enough at this stage of the evaluation 
[21, 28, 29]. The prototype makes it possible to interact with 
the interface by simulating the button functions, and showing 
the design with enough detail to get feedback on the usability 
from test users. 
To test the usability of the adjusted interface and 
compare it to the current version, a small scale user test is 
done. Four users with technical background, as the heuristic 
evaluation method recommends [20, 21], 3-7 usability 
experts, all familiar with the Ascom 9d24 and d62 phones, 
were asked to perform a number of tasks using the prototype. 
During, and afterwards performing the tasks, they gave 
feedback on the interface. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
In this section, we present the results from the 
evaluation, redesign, and the prototype evaluation. 
A. Evaluation 
To identify the most important usability challenges of the 
Ascom 9d24 and d62 phones, the current interface was 
evaluated, and some issues were found: 
1) Menu navigation – is confusing and not consistent in 
the way of selecting items in the different menus, and also 
differences in returning to the previous menus (d924). Most 
of these issues are improved on the d62 phone. 
2) Messaging – Before writing the message, the user has 
to select a number or person from the phone book. The 
number is not editable later. The message is also erased if an 
incoming alarm, message, or phone call occurs while 
writing the message. This also happens if you leave the 
phone unused for 2 minutes while writing the message. 
When reading a received message, it is not possible to 
resturn a call to the sender directly from the message. If the 
phone is switched off, all messages will be deleted (9d24). 
Most of these issues are improved on de d62 phone, but on 
both phones, the list of received messages only shows the 
first words of the message, and the date/hour you received 
it, while the name of the sender would be more informative. 
3) Calling – When a call is not answered on the 9d24, 
an exclamation mark appears at the top of the main screen to 
notify the user of a missed call, and you have to go each 
step through the menu to the call list to get more 
information. This is not the case on d62, which shows this 
as a large message on the screen, and enables you to go 
directly to the call list by just pressing one button. 
4) Feedback – In general, the feedback given on the 
phones is good. Feedback on the current mode of the 9d24 
is displayed in the main screen, the placing of the text may 
however not be appropriate, because it appears just above 
the soft keys, which may lead the user to think it is a soft 
40
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

key function. On the d62 it is impossible to know which 
mode is used. 
5) Buttons – The phones have no on/off button. To 
switch on the phone the user has to press the call button for 
a few seconds. It is not clearly shown that the button has 
this function. On the d62, the same procedure is used for 
switching off the phone. While the 9d24 requires many 
steps; through the mode menu tab, the mode ‗switch off‘ at 
the bottom of the list, has to be selected. However, this is 
because the phone is not intended to be switched off often. 
When the phone is not in use, it should be placed in the 
charger, which automatically changes its mode to ‗in 
charger‘. Users have indicated that it is not clear how to 
enter the menu on both phones, and wants different buttons 
for answering/ending calls on the 9d24 like the d62. 
6) Other issues – A general remark from the users about 
the overall appearance, is that both phones are quite large 
compared to ordinary mobile phones. This is mainly due to 
the large screen size, which was perceived as a positive 
property of the phone. A smaller device is more comfortably 
carried, for instance in a coat pocket, as health care workers 
often do [4, 7]. 
B. Redesign  
Evaluation of the current interfaces resulted in ideas of 
improvement. A prototype with the proposed changes was 
made, and tested in a small-scale usability test. 
1) Prototype 
To simulate the functionalities of buttons, we used 
hyperlinks in PowerPoint to switch to the menu screen 
related to the particular button. In the following sections, we 
are presenting our suggested new user interfaces. 
a) Suggested changes to the Ascom 9d24 
Main screen: The new main screen (Figure 15) is quite 
similar to the original. However, the bar at the top of the 
screen is changed. Icons indicating signal strength and 
battery power are shown to the user. In critical situations, 
which may occur in hospitals, the user has to rely on the 
performance of the system. Also the mode of the phone is 
now shown in the top bar. We believe that this placing is 
more logic than on the lower part of the screen. When the 
location detection is activated, a ―dot within a circle‖ will 
appear in the top bar. This informs the user that location 
information is shared, and mode will change automatically. 
Functions accessible through the soft keys are; the 
phonebook, change mode to ‗away‘, and the mode menu. 
From the phonebook users can start a call, or writing a 
message by selecting the receiver in the contact list.  
Pressing the middle soft key will change the mode to 
‗away‘, e.g., when having an unexpected patient consult, or 
emergency situation where interruptions are not wanted. To 
select another mode, the right soft key will open the mode 
menu. This means that two soft keys are assigned to change 
the status of the phone. It is still possible to adjust the 
functions of the soft keys according to the user‘s 
preferences, and also the four directions of the navigation 
key are programmable to open assigned features. 
Main menu: The main menu in the new interface is 
presented as a list, and not by using tabs (Figure 16). The 
advantage of the tabs (Figure 3) was to show all the 5 items 
at once. However, this was not considered as added value in 
navigation representation, and therefore the list is chosen to 
make the main menu look more like the sub menus. It is 
now possible to scroll from the last item to the first in the 
list, and a quick jump to menu items is offered by using the 
numbers corresponding to the menu item. 
Three menu items are shown at once. Design guidelines 
regarding number of menu items presented, recommends 
three or more items, which leads to better usability than one 
or two, due to human memory [21]. The main menu consists 
of six items, and showing only three lines is therefore not 
expected to affect the usability. 
The soft keys in the main menu are ‗select‘ on the 
middle key and ‗back‘ on the right key. This placing will be 
the same throughout the whole menu. The middle position 
to select a highlighted item is chosen because it is closest to 
the navigation button used for scrolling, and therefore, the 
easiest button to press when navigating with one hand. 
Pressing the ‗back‘ key will bring the user one step back, to 
the previous screen. The menu button will always return to 
the main menu. 
Another change in the interface is battery power, signal 
strength, and clock, not only visible in the main screen, but 
also above the menus. They can be considered during use: 
Time, for Instance, can influence the decision to call 
someone, or sending a message. 
Messages: The inbox shows all received messages with 
the name of the sender, and date. New messages are 
Figure 16. Ascom 9d24 prototype main menu 
. 
 
 
Figure 15. Ascom 9d24 prototype main screen 
. 
 
 
Top bar 
 
UserID  
 
 
 
 
Soft key functions 
 
 
 
41
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

indicated with a closed envelope, and read messages with a 
check mark (Figure 17). 
It is possible to call the sender directly from the message 
list, using the call button when the name is highlighted. 
When the message is opened (Figure 18), the name of the 
sender and time are displayed, followed by the message. An 
arrow appears when the message contains more text than is 
currently shown on the screen. The user can reply to the 
sender by using the middle soft key, or call back, using the 
call button. These actions, among others, are also accessible 
through the options menu on the left soft key. 
Calls: When receiving a call, the name of the caller is 
shown, or the number, when the contact is not in the contact 
list (Figure 19). The call can be answered using the call 
button, or the middle soft key. During a call, a ―hook off‖ 
icon is displayed in the top bar (Figure 20). 
Modes: The mode, or profile of the phone, can be set 
using the mode menu, but can also change automatically 
based on for instance location, or calendar in a context 
sensitive system [7, 10-12]. The current mode is displayed 
in the main screen, but can also be shared with possible 
communication partners (Figure 21). In the new interface, 
the caller receives a message with predefined availability 
information of the one he/she is trying to contact; for 
instance, ‗only available for text messages‘. The soft keys 
offer the possible options for the caller to choose, based on 
the shared information. A similar principle is used by 
Schmidt et al. in an application for context aware telephony 
[30]. 
b) Evaluation of 9d24 prototype 
A small usability test was done to evaluate the adjusted 
interface. A few tasks were performed by the test users, like 
placing a call, receiving a message, and changing modes. 
During and after the tests, they gave feedback and 
comments on the usability of the interface. 
Main screen:  The placing of the current mode in the 
right upper corner was perceived as good. Also the icon 
indicating the location detection switched on, was perceived 
as an improvement. One test user mentioned that it would 
also be useful to show the current detected location in the 
main screen. In this way the user can check whether this 
location is correct. However, we considered this as 
unimportant information to the intended user of the phone. 
Interaction with the interface will mainly happen when the 
user has a specific goal, like; writing a message, or 
answering a call. We believe that it is not beneficial for the 
usability, and may be distracting, if a lot of information is 
shown on the main screen. 
Menu navigation: The possibility to use the numeric 
keys to select menu items seems useful; in this way users 
are able to remember their own sequence of numbers to 
frequently used items. There is, however, no indication 
whether the selected menu item is a branch item, opening 
another menu list or a leaf item, or starting an action. In the 
old interface, branch items were indicated with a > sign (see 
Figure 19. Ascom 9d24 prototype Incoming call (number) 
Figure 20. Ascom 9d24 prototype Incoming call (name & number) 
Top bar 
 
 
Name and number   
    of the caller 
  
 
Soft key functions 
 
 
 
Figure 21. Ascom 9d24 prototype Availability check 
Figure 18. Ascom 9d24 prototype Messages 
. 
 
 
Figure 17. Ascom 9d24 prototype Inbox 
. 
 
 
42
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

Figures 6 and 7). Since the text usually clearly explained the 
function of the item, the test users did not perceive this as a 
usability problem. However, this will be considered in the 
next version of the interface. 
Another remark regarding the menu navigation, was that 
the left and right buttons of the navigation key (Figure 1) are 
not used when browsing through the menu. In our prototype 
these buttons are not used at all, and seemed unnecessary. 
However, in the real interface they will be used when 
writing messages, or entering text or numbers. This was not 
a possibility in the prototype. The left and right button of the 
navigation key can also be set as shortcuts to preferred 
functions, accessible from the main screen. 
Soft keys: The three soft keys in the main screen: 
contacts, away and modes (Figure 15), where evaluated as 
convenient. A soft key to write a new message were 
recommended, instead of the ‗modes‘ key. On the other 
hand, it is easy to access the ‗new message‘ function from 
the contact list, by selecting the recipient. There is a soft 
key, shortcut to ‗contacts‘, therefore this is not seen as an 
important problem. It is also possible to change the 
functions of the soft keys to the user‘s personal preferences. 
Visibility: A general remark was that the text size is 
smaller in the prototype than in the original interface. More 
text on the screen is pleasant, especially when using the 
phonebook, contact list, and message list. However, making 
the text size too small might influence the visibility. For 
example, the time and date details in the call list (Figure 22). 
c) Suggested changes to the Ascom d62 
Main screen: The main screen is substantially identical 
to the original (Figure 23). The reception indicator, battery 
icon, and the clock is not moved, but the date is moved left 
to leave some space for the mode in use, here; 
‗Available‘. The ‗?‘ icon is displayed if the automatic 
change of mode is activated. Network information, user, and 
license used, here; ‗protector‘, are always located in the 
same position. The soft keys are default set for hospital use, 
but remain customizable. 
The ‗SMS‘ button is a shortcut to write a text message, 
the ‗Call key‘ allows you to make a call from the call list, 
the phonebook, or by typing a number. The ‗Modes‘ button, 
allows you to quickly change from ‗Available‘ to ‗Away‘, 
and enables or disables the automatic change of 
mode/profile. The ‗Menu‘ key provides access to the main 
menu of the phone. 
It is possible to create custom shortcuts with the 
navigation keys and the 9 numeric keypad keys, but the 
customization of these phones will hardly ever happen as 
shown by studies conducted in hospitals. Thereby, the most 
frequently used functions are set by default. 
Modes: The modes can be set via the dedicated menu in 
the main menu, but can also, as explained above, 
automatically change by the position of the phone, the 
user‘s schedule, his role, etc., as explained in [7, 10-
12]. The mode in use is displayed on the main screen, but 
can also be shared with other users. This information is 
important, due to whether it is appropriate to contact this 
person (Figure 24). In the new interface, the caller receives 
a message with availability information of the person he/she 
tries to contact. The soft keys permit to choose whether you 
still want to call, to send a message, or if you want to cancel 
the call. It is, of course, always possible to define personal 
modes, and use them manually. 
Messages: Previously, it was only possible to send a 
message to a single contact. This has been changed, and it is 
now possible to send messages to multiple contacts (Figure 
25), both by typing a number manually, or by adding a 
number from the phonebook. It is also possible to send a 
message directly from the phonebook. The left soft key 
brings you directly to the phonebook, and if a number is 
entered manually, it will display an ―ok‖ button to validate 
the given number. Once one or more numbers of contacts 
has been selected, the left soft key opens a menu to send the 
message, to remove a recipient, or to access the phonebook 
to add more recipients.  
It is also possible to save a new contact directly from a 
message, either the senders‘ number, or a number in the 
message. That is, when a number from a message (or call) is 
selected, a screen offers to save it as a new or existing 
contact (Figure 26). It is also possible to overwrite an 
existing number, or set a second number to the same 
contact. Originally, when one or more numbers were present 
in a message, it was only possible to save one of those 
numbers. It is now possible to record a number in a 
message, in addition to all the options already present 
(Figure 27). 
Figure 22. Ascom 9d24 prototype Call list 
Figure 23. Ascom d62 
prototype Main screen 
Figure 24. Ascom d62 
prototype Availability 
screen 
43
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

Visibility improvements were also made on the 
inbox. Unread messages are displayed in bold, which 
divides them form the read messages. This allows you to 
quickly see if a message has been read or not (Figure 28). 
Previously, the only difference was the envelope icon. Also 
the sender's number and the time of the message are 
displayed on the selected message. 
d) Evaluation of d62 prototype 
Main screen: Placing the used mode in the upper right 
corner was perceived as a good improvement, and fits with 
the other information provided by the phone in this area of 
the screen (sound, battery, etc.). The icon indicating that the 
mode is changing automatically was also perceived as a 
major improvement. One of the test users indicated it is 
useful to show the current location detected by the device, 
so that the user can check the correctness. However, it is not 
expected that the end users will pay close attention to the 
main screen. The interaction with the interface is mainly 
about sending and receiving messages, or transmitting and 
receiving 
calls. We 
believe 
that 
showing 
extensive 
information on the main screen is not an improvement, but 
rather a possible distraction. 
Soft keys: The choice of ‗menu‘, ‗SMS‘ and ‗Profiles‘ 
for the soft keys, were perceived as a good choice. It is also 
possible to personalize these buttons, if a problem of 
effectiveness is found. 
Contacts: The new principle of the contact list, allowing 
to register a new contact, or to save a number on an existing 
contact, was received as an improvement, but not 
necessarily useful in everyday use. The new interface for 
sending an SMS to several persons was considered intuitive 
and efficient. 
Calls: No major changes have been made on the calls, 
but having a confirmation when a call is rejected, were 
perceived 
as 
a 
significant 
improvement. Providing 
information on the screen about the status of the person you 
want to call, were also perceived as very positive feedback. 
This means that you can use context information to avoid 
interrupting someone, without blocking communication. 
Visibility: In general, the visibility was already good in 
the original interface. However, some improvements have 
been greeted positively, like; using bold fonts on unread 
messages, and normal text for the read messages, the display 
of the sender's number, the date and time of reception, and 
the start of the message contents when selecting a 
message. Another improvement was proposed by one of the 
test users: Instead of putting many options for the recipient's 
number, or a number in a message, an option covering all 
the possible actions could be implemented under the name 
―use number‖, and thereby improve the visibility of the 
screen, and at the same time, avoiding having too many 
options, which uses almost the entire display. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
It is well known that the usage of mobile phones enables 
higher availability and accessibility, but can also introduce a 
numerous of interruptions [4, 7]. This often leads to user 
resistance against wireless phones in clinical settings. A 
context-sensitive system for mobile communication can 
provide a solution to control the availability, and thereby the 
interruptions [4]. The easiest way to do this, is to introduce 
an already developed solution, like the AwareMedia and the 
AwarePhone systems to Badram et al. [17, 18]. But, we 
believe it is less expensive, and that the user resistance will 
be lower by utilizing an existing infrastructure, and well 
known devices used in clinical settings, but with user 
interfaces more equal to conventional 3G/GSM mobile 
phones. 
The Ascom phones exploited in this article are used in 
existing infrastructures at several hospitals, and are thereby 
well known devices for health care workers. A new user 
interface is designed with the aim to improve the usability 
of two wireless Ascom phones. We have made an attempt to 
solve the usability challenges, which were identified in the 
current interfaces. Another goal was to suggest a user 
interface more suitable to context sensitive functions. It was 
not possible to deal with all the problems, since some of 
them concerned the physical design of the phone. Only the 
design of the graphical user interface is changed.  
The design is implemented in a low-fidelity prototype, 
which at this stage should be advanced enough [21, 28, 29]. 
A low-fidelity prototype can be helpful in testing usability 
focused on the use and design of the interface, while not 
Figure 27. Ascom d62 
prototype Message options 
Figure 28. Ascom d62 
prototype Inbox 
Figure 25. Ascom d62 
prototype sending  message 
Figure 26. Ascom d62 
prototype saving a number 
44
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

being distracted by the design of the phone itself [28], which 
was not subject to this redesign. This prototype did not 
resemble the actual physical design of the device, but 
consisted of an image of the phone with different screens, 
which changed interacting with mouse clicks on buttons 
within the image. The ideas for the graphical user interface 
are displayed in detail. Although the prototype could be 
used to perform a few tasks, the functionality of the 
interface was limited. Selecting items and browsing through 
the menu, did not always work, but making a fully 
functional interface, was not the goal of the prototype. The 
intention was to give test users an impression of the design, 
choice of soft key functions, and the menu structure. During 
the user test it was sometimes difficult for the test users to 
focus on the design of the screen, and not on problems 
caused by incorrect links, or the fact that not all 
functionalities were implemented. This may have influenced 
the results of the usability evaluation, but it was helpful to 
see how the users performed the tasks, and the expected, or 
unexpected actions they performed to complete the task. 
Asking specific questions about the users‘ opinion on the 
design, or the location of items on the screen, also led to 
useful feedback.  
Another problem with the prototype was that the users 
initially tended not to click on the simulated buttons of the 
real phone, but directly on the screen. This is a common 
problem when testing with low fidelity prototypes [21]. This 
was solved after a few minutes of training. A shortcoming 
of the prototype was that the size of the display in the 
prototype was slightly bigger than on the real phone. 
Feedback on visibility and size of items could therefore 
have been influenced.  
Only four test users have evaluated the new interface, 
and critically reviewed the design, to see what could still be 
a challenge, or points of improvement. This is a low number 
of evaluators, but according to the method used, heuristic 
evaluation, where 3-7 usability experts identifies challenges 
of an interface, using their experience and design heuristics 
[20, 21], it turned out to be sufficient at this first stage of the 
redesign. Before more test users, and also the intended end 
users, like hospital staff, are involved, it has been useful to 
develop this prototype, which allowed us to see if the 
adjusted interface fitted the expectations of the usability 
experts, and whether they perceived it as an improvement 
compared to the old interface. 
Our approach is limited to one manufacturer, but we 
believe that the ideas can be used in general, when 
designing user interfaces for mobile phones intended for use 
in context sensitive systems at hospitals. 
VI. 
CONCLUTION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this article, the user interface of two Ascom IP-DECT 
phones is evaluated, and improvements are suggested. These 
improvements 
include 
support 
for 
context-sensitive 
communication in hospital environments.  
The most important usability challenges found were: 
 
No consistent way of selecting options or to return 
to a previous screen (9d24) 
 
Large text size  (9d24) 
 
When writing a text message, it will be deleted if 
interrupted by a call or another message (9d24) 
 
No reply options of received text messages  (9d24) 
 
Missed call list is not easily accessible  (9d24) 
 
Not clear how to enter the main menu  (9d24) 
 
No way to know which mode is used  (d62) 
 
Undefined functions for the soft keys on the main 
screen (d62) 
 
Only one recipient possible when sending a text 
message (d62) 
 
Impossible to save a number on an existing contact 
(d62) 
 
Not enough visual difference between read and 
unread messages (d62) 
 
Dismissal of a call by the cancel button (d62) 
An adjusted interface was made, with attention to the 
identified usability problems of the current phones. The new 
interfaces include aspects for using the phones within a 
context-sensitive communication system: 
 
Current status or mode displayed on the main screen 
 
An icon indicating that the location detection is 
activated and on the d62 an icon showing if the 
automatically change of mode is available 
 
A soft key on the main screen to quickly switch to 
the ‗away‘ mode 
 
Easy access to the mode menu, to change 
availability status manually 
 
Automatic messages to show availability status to 
callers (d62) 
 
Automatic message to know the status of the 
recipient (d62) 
The prototypes of the interfaces were evaluated by test 
users, and were considered to be an improvement compared 
to the old interfaces. However, some points of doubt where 
mentioned. Particularly about the many options available in 
some of the menus on the d62. In addition, questions were 
asked related to the preferences of hospital workers, the 
intended end users. To test the usability of the user 
interface, it is important to involve the actual end users. This 
will be done in the next phase of the project, were we also 
have to include and work closer with Ascom AB (during the 
project, we have discussed several solutions with some of 
their engineers), to plan and implement a more advanced 
prototype, running on the actual phones. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This research is supported by the Research Council of 
Norway, grant no. 176852/S10. We would like to thank 
Ascom AB all help so far in the project, and for loaning us 
the equipment for our Context lab.  
 
45
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

REFERENCES 
[1] 
E. Coiera and V. Tombs, "Communication behaviours in a 
hospital setting: an observational study." BMJ. 1998 
February 28, 1998;316(7132): pp. 673-676. 
[2] 
K. J. Ruskin, "Communication devices in the operating 
room." Current opinion in anaesthesiology. 2006 Dec;19(6): 
pp. 655-659. 
[3] 
M. A. Munoz, M. Rodriguez, J. Favela, A. I. Martinez-
Garcia, and V. M. Gonzalez, "Context-aware mobile 
communication in hospitals" Computer 2003;36(9):pp. 38-
46. 
[4] 
J. Scholl, P. Hasvold, E. Henriksen, and G. Ellingsen, 
"Managing Communication Availability and Interruptions: A 
Study 
of 
Mobile 
Communication 
in 
an 
Oncology 
Department."  Pervasive Computing 2007. pp. 234-250. 
[5] 
R. G. Soto, L. F. Chu, J. M. Goldman, I. J. Rampil, and K. J. 
Ruskin, "Communication in critical care environments: 
mobile telephones improve patient care." Anesth Analg. 
2006 Feb;102(2): pp. 535-541. 
[6] 
P. A. Spurck, M. L. Mohr, A. M. Seroka, and M. Stoner, 
"The impact of a wireless telecommunication system on time 
efficiency." J Nurs Adm. 1995 Jun;25(6): pp. 21-26. 
[7] 
T. Solvoll and J. Scholl, "Strategies to reduce interruptions 
from mobile communication systems in surgical wards." 
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare. 2008;14(7):pp. 389-
392. 
[8] 
T. Solvoll, J. Scholl, and G. Hartvigsen, "Physicians 
interrupted by mobile devices – relations between devices, 
roles and duties." Studies in Health Technology and 
Informatics, 2010;160: p. 1365. 
[9] 
T. Solvoll, J. Scholl, and G. Hartvigsen, "Physicians 
interrupted by mobile devices in hospitals – understanding 
the interaction between devices, roles and duties." 
unpubliched. 
[10] T. Botsis, T. Solvoll, J. Scholl, P. Hasvold, and G. 
Hartvigsen, 
 
"Context-aware 
systems 
for 
mobile 
communication in healthcare - A user oriented approach." 
Proceedings of the 7th Wseas International Conference on 
Applied Informatics and Communications. 2007: pp. 69-74. 
[11] T. Solvoll, S. Fasani, A. B. Ravuri, A. Tiemersma, and G. 
Hartvigsen, "Evaluation of an Ascom/trixbox system for 
context 
sensitive 
communication 
in 
hospitals." 
8th 
Scandinavian Conference on Health Informatics; 2010. 
August 23-24, 2010; Copenhagen: Tapir Academic Press; 
2010. 
[12] A. B. Ravuri. "Design of a location - based Ascom/trixbox 
prototype for Context-Sensitive Communication system in 
hospitals." Tromsø: Master Thesis, Department of Computer 
Science, University of Tromsø; 2010. 
[13] R. D. Acuff, L. M. Fagan, T. C. Rindfleisch, B. J. Levitt, and 
P. M. Ford, "Lightweight, Mobile E-Mail for Intra-Clinic 
Communication." 1997 AMIA Annual Fall Symposium; 
1997; pp. 729-733; Nashville, TN. 
[14] S. A. Eisenstadt, M. M. Wagner, W. R. Hogan, M. C. 
Pankaskie, F. C. Tsui, and W. Wilbright, "Mobile workers in 
healthcare and their information needs: are 2-way pagers the 
answer?" Proc AMIA symp. 1998. pp. 135-139.  
[15] A. Minnick, K. Pischke-Winn, and M. B. Sterk, "Introducing 
a two-way wireless communication system." Nurs Manage 
1994 25(7): pp. 42-47. 
[16] M. J. Sammon, L. S. B. Karmin, E. Peebles, D. D. 
Seligmann, "MACCS: Enabling communications for mobile 
workers within healthcare environments." MobileHCI'06; 
2006-09-29: pp. 41-44: ACM. 
[17] J. E. Bardram and T. R. Hansen, "The AWARE architecture: 
supporting context-mediated social awareness in mobile 
cooperation."  Proceedings of the 2004 ACM conference on 
Computer supported cooperative work; Chicago, Illinois, 
USA: ACM; 2004: pp. 192-201. 
[18] J. E. Bardram, T. R Hansen, and M. Soegaard, 
"AwareMedia: a shared interactive display supporting social, 
temporal, and spatial awareness in surgery."  Proceedings of 
the 2006 20th anniversary conference on Computer 
supported cooperative work; Banff, Alberta, Canada: ACM; 
2006: pp. 109-118. 
[19] http://www.ascom.se/sw.  24.12.2010. 
[20] J. Nielsen and R. L. Mack, "Usability inspection methods." 
New York: John Wiley; 1994. 
[21] M. Jones and G. Marsden, "Mobile interaction design." 
Chichester: Wiley; 2006. 
[22] D. G. Novick and K. Ward, "Why don't people read the 
manual?"  Proceedings of the 24th annual ACM international 
conference on Design of communication; Myrtle Beach, SC, 
USA. 1166329: ACM; 2006. pp. 11-18. 
[23] B. Shneiderman and C. Plaisant, "Designing the user 
interface: 
strategies 
for 
effective 
human-computer 
interaction." Boston: Addison-Wesley; 2005. 
[24] A. Cooper, R. Reimann, D. Cronin, and A. Cooper, "About 
face 3: the essentials of interaction design." Indianapolis, 
Ind.: Wiley Pub.; 2007. 
[25] J. Gong and P. Tarasewich, "Guidelines for handheld mobile 
device interface design." Proceedings of the 2004 DSI 
Annual Meeting; 2004; pp. 3751-3756. 
[26] V. L Patel and A. W. Kushniruk, "Interface design for health 
care 
environments: 
the 
role 
of 
cognitive 
science." 
Proceedings / AMIA  Annual Symposium. 1998:pp. 29-37. 
[27] J. Häkkilä and J. Mäntyjärvi, "Developing Design Guidelines 
for 
Context-Aware 
Mobile 
Applications." 
The 
3rd 
International 
Conference 
on 
Mobile 
Technology, 
Applications and Systems — Mobility; 2006 Oct. 25-27; 
Bangkok, Thailand. 
[28] S. 
Love, 
"Understanding 
mobile 
human-computer 
interaction." Amsterdam: Elsevier/Butterworth-Heinemann; 
2005. 
[29] J. Rudd, K. Stern, and S. Isensee, "Low vs. high-fidelity 
prototyping debate." interactions. 1996;3(1):p.76-85. 
[30] A. Schmidt, A. Takaluoma, and J. Mäntyjärvi, "Context-
Aware telephony over WAP." Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing. 2000;4(4):pp. 225-229. 
 
46
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

