Multicenter Support Network for CPAP Therapy Follow-up in Sleep Apnea 
 
Valentina Isetta 
University of Barcelona-CIBERES, 
Faculty of Medicine 
Unit of Biophysics and Bioengineering 
Barcelona, Spain 
valentina.isetta@ub.edu 
Josep M. Montserrat 
Sleep Lab, Pneumology Department, 
Hospital Clinic-IDIBAPS-CIBERES, 
Barcelona, Spain 
jmmontserrat@clinic.ub.es
Carmen León 
Sleep Lab, Pneumology Department, 
Hospital Clinic, 
Barcelona, Spain 
mcleon@clinic.ub.es 
David Fonollosa 
LinkCare, Hospital Clinic, 
Barcelona, Spain 
dfonollo@clinic.ub.es 
Josep Roca 
Pneumology Department, 
Hospital Clinic-IDIBAPS-CIBERES, 
Barcelona, Spain 
jroca@clinic.ub.es 
Ramon Farré 
University of Barcelona-IDIBAPS-CIBERES, 
 Faculty of Medicine, 
Unit of Biophysics and Bioengineering 
Barcelona, Spain 
rfarre@ub.edu 
 
 
Abstract— Despite its fast penetration into many fields, the 
application of information and communication technologies in 
clinical practice is still limited, especially in respiratory 
medicine. The availability of tools such as the Internet has 
grown rapidly but it is rarely considered as an option for 
management of the Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome 
(OSAS). We developed a novel multicenter support system for 
the follow-up of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) 
therapy in patients with OSAS. The system essentially consists 
of a support network that allows several sleep centers to 
perform online monitoring of their patients, whose data are 
stored in a secure central server. Patients interact with the 
system through a web-based interface that can be accessed 
from their home personal computer or tablets. By visiting the 
website, patients can answer a weekly questionnaire about 
their status and therapy, with access to continuously updated 
temporal trends in a graphic format. The system also provides 
easy communication with sleep center staff by e-mail and 
videoconference. After the development phase, the system has 
started to be put into operation. The positive preliminary 
results obtained show the potential usefulness of the Internet as 
a tool for supporting home monitoring of CPAP treatment in 
OSAS. 
Keywords-eHealth; 
Obstructive 
Sleep 
Apnea; 
CPAP; 
telemedicine; home monitoring. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) is a serious 
disorder caused by partial or complete obstruction of the 
upper airway and it is associated with deterioration of quality 
of life, daytime sleepiness, neurocognitive impairment and 
cardiovascular disease [1]. OSAS is estimated to affect 2–4% 
of adult men and 1–2% of adult women in Western countries 
[2][3]. OSAS is strongly related to obesity even though it is 
also increasingly identified in non-obese subjects with a 
particular craniofacial structure. The incidence of OSAS is 
likely to grow in parallel with the spread of obesity now 
occurring in many countries. European and Spanish public 
health resources assigned to this problem have proved to be 
relatively inadequate and unlikely to handle the increase in 
OSAS cases [4], so cheaper and alternative management 
approaches are needed. 
The most frequently used treatment for OSAS is 
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) applied through 
a mask to the nose or the mouth of the patient at home during 
sleep. This pressure in the mask is transmitted to the 
pharyngeal area, thereby avoiding upper airway obstruction. 
One critical factor in CPAP effectiveness is compliance. A 
minimum of 4 hours per night of CPAP use is recommended 
to avoid compromising outcomes. However, a number of 
patients suspend or underuse CPAP treatment, mainly due to 
the numerous side effects and lack of knowledge about 
possible solutions [5][6]. Some of these side effects could be 
easily solved by a close follow-up, especially during the first 
weeks, but busy sleep centers have difficulties in giving such 
support [7]. Accordingly, there is a clear need to improve 
patients’ understanding of the expected advantages of CPAP 
use and to monitor and properly address side effects of CPAP 
therapy, as well as facilitate the communication of patients 
with sleep centers. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

It has recently been recognized that telemedicine could 
have a valuable role in improving CPAP adherence and should 
be integrated into OSAS patients’ care as fast as possible [8]. It 
has been shown that simple telemedicine interventions, such as 
weekly phone calls to clarify doubts and encourage CPAP use, 
can markedly improve compliance [9]. A randomized clinical 
trial showed that the use of a telephone-linked communication 
system providing feedback and counseling to OSAS patients at 
home improved CPAP adherence, patients’ functional status 
and reduced depressive symptoms [6]. Furthermore, another 
previous study employed an Internet-based informational 
support service for problems experienced with CPAP use [10]. 
Despite the organizational limitations and poor differences 
between intervention and control group follow-up, they 
obtained good patients’ acceptance of this monitoring 
approach. It is also remarkable that telehealth interventions, 
such as televisits, have been found to improve CPAP 
adherence in a small group of nonadherent patients versus a 
placebo-controlled group [11]. The cost of the interventions, 
including the telehealth monitor, home installation and 
telephone charges, was lower than the same number of 
presential visits. Nevertheless, larger studies are needed to 
generalize any conclusion. 
Under the framework of an Investigation Project 
promoted by the Spanish Society of Pneumology and 
Thoracic Surgery (SEPAR) on sleep-related respiratory 
disorders, we developed a multicenter support system for the 
follow-up of CPAP therapy in OSAS patients. This system 
essentially comprises a support network that can be 
connected with several sleep centers to monitor and 
communicate online with their patients, whose data are 
stored in a secure central server. Patients interact with the 
system through a user-friendly web-based interface that can 
be accessed from their home personal computer or tablet. 
Moreover, videoconferencing is available to promote long-
distance communication with the sleep center and provide 
non-presential visits. 
This telemedicine application seeks to introduce a new 
approach to CPAP therapy monitoring, which focuses on 
enhancing patients’ motivation and self-management skills 
and strengthening the professional-patient relationship, in 
order to improve CPAP compliance and reduce presential 
clinical visits. 
In this paper, the telemedicine support system is 
described in detail and preliminary results of the practical 
application phase on OSAS patients are shown. 
 
II. 
SYSTEM OVERVIEW AND FUNCTIONALITIES 
The system was implemented using PHP language and all 
the user interface components were developed as dynamic 
server-side pages. In order to enforce completion and internal 
consistency of all the forms and surveys contained in the web 
application, Javascript components were employed. The 
system was developed with a focus on usability and 
structural simplicity. During each development stage, special 
effort was made to guarantee the maintainability and 
versatility of the tool. The system architecture was designed 
to allow frequent updating of the individual modules and 
easy adaptability to different clinical requirements. The web 
application functioning was successfully tested with the most 
important operating systems (Windows XP, Windows Vista, 
Windows 7, Mac OS X) and web browsers (Internet Explorer 
6 and later versions, Mozilla Firefox, Google Chrome, Opera 
and Safari). 
The system overview is shown in Figure 1. The main 
actors of this structure are: the patient, the Sleep Center and 
the Central Server. 
 
A. Patient interface to the system 
Patients included in the project are given access to an 
Internet-based application implemented as an interactive 
website. The equipment needed is nothing more than an 
Internet-connected computer or tablet, a microphone and a 
webcam. In order to ensure the confidentiality and preserve 
security, patients can access the website by logging in with 
their personal username and password, assigned during the 
enrollment. The system identifies the user by comparing 
inserted credentials to the ones stored in the Central Server 
and dynamically generates pages containing only the 
information available to each user. After logging in, patients 
are redirected to the website Home Page. The menu bar 
contains the links to the different sections of the website. 
 
The “Questionnaire” button in the menu bar of the 
website redirects patients to a short questionnaire they 
are asked to answer once a week. The questionnaire is 
composed of 6 questions about patients’ weight, the 
amount and kind of physical activity they have done 
over the week, the time they have slept and used the 
CPAP device, the occurrence of sleepiness in daytime 
and problems caused by the use of the CPAP device. In 
order to ensure patients’ compliance with the weekly 
questionnaire, an e-mail reminder is sent automatically 
to each patient once a week. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Network overview. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
In the “Your record” section, the patient’s parameters, 
which correspond to the weekly questionnaire answers, 
are plotted in dynamic Flash charts and continuously 
updated. This section was created in order to give 
patients a visual feedback of their answers to the weekly 
questionnaire (Figure 2). 
 
In the “Useful files and links” section, high-quality 
informative documents about OSAS management and 
CPAP therapy are available for free download. 
Moreover, a list of links to the official websites of the 
most relevant OSAS patients associations is also 
provided. Educational videos that train patients in the 
correct use of the CPAP device and mask are accessible 
in this section. 
 
A validated list of answers to “Frequently asked 
questions” elaborated by sleep specialists is available. 
 
By clicking on the “Contact the center staff” button, the 
patients can easily communicate online with the sleep 
center staff by exchanging messages via e-mail to 
discuss doubts and ask questions regarding OSAS and 
CPAP therapy. 
 
In addition, the “Televisit” button gives patients access 
to an interesting function of the system which allows 
them 
to 
talk 
to 
the 
sleep 
center 
staff 
by 
videoconferencing. For this purpose, the LinkCare 
Videoconference Module was integrated into the system 
[12]. Videoconferences are scheduled by the sleep center 
staff and patients automatically receive a confirmation e-
mail containing the day and time of the appointment. 
When a videoconference is undertaken, a new browser 
window opens, containing the videoconference client. 
The user enters the videoconference client application 
according to his/her user role in the system (professional 
or 
patient). 
Patients 
enter 
the 
videoconference 
application as simple participants and they are unable to 
activate or deactivate their webcam and microphone. 
This tool allows patients to see the healthcare 
professionals and receive teaching and support regarding 
their therapy.  
 
The application also provides continuous technical 
support. By visiting the section “Technical support”, 
patients can directly contact the Webmaster, who is 
available to solve potential technical problems about the 
website functioning. 
 
B. Sleep center 
Several sleep centers can connect simultaneously to the 
support system. The healthcare professionals from each 
center can undertake the following management activities: 
 
Patients’ status monitoring. Each center can access only 
the list of its own patients. The sleep center staff can 
observe patients’ data, corresponding to their answers to 
the weekly questionnaire. Data are retrieved from a 
MySQL database connected to the Central Server and 
shown in dynamic Flash charts. After evaluating the 
patients’ data, if necessary, professionals can write them 
a message with advice and comments about their status. 
 
New patient registration. The sleep center staff has to fill 
in a simple registration form inserting the identification 
data of each patient, such as the electronic health record 
(EHR) number, name initials and a contact e-mail 
address. To protect patients’ personal information, their 
 
 
Figure 2. Screenshot of the “You record” page. Two of the six charts are shown here. Translation from original version in Spanish: Header: 
“Online follow-up of CPAP therapy”. Top menu-bar: “Questionnaire”, “You record”, “Useful files and links”, “Frequently asked questions”, 
“Contact the sleep staff”, “Televisit”, “Technical support”, “Log out”. Content:”Your weight”, ”Your physical activity”. 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

name and surname are not included in the registration 
form. In addition, some initial medical data are 
requested, such as weight, height, apnea-hypopnea index 
(AHI), cumulative time with oxygen saturation less than 
90% (CT90), etc. Once the registration is completed, a 
“welcome” e-mail is sent to the patients’ contact e-mail 
address with the credentials needed for authentication by 
the website. The username is the contact e-mail address 
and the password is automatically assigned, with the 
possibility of changing it at any time. If necessary, 
professionals can also deregister a patient and prevent 
his/her access to the website. 
 
E-mailing and videoconferencing. Besides e-mail 
communication, sleep center staff can easily arrange a 
videoconference meeting with patients via a simple 
management interface that communicates with the 
LinkCare Videoconference Module. By filling in a short 
form, professionals schedule the videoconference for a 
time suited to both them and their patients. Professionals 
enter the videoconference application as coordinators, 
allowing them to activate or deactivate the webcam and 
the microphone of the different participants of the 
meeting. 
 
C. Central Server 
All network data, such as the patients’ answers and 
authentication data, are stored in the system Central Server. 
Data storing is supported by a relational database developed 
with the MySQL management system, which is incorporated 
into the secure environment of the “Hospital Clinic” of 
Barcelona server. The central server administrator is 
responsible for all data management and system functioning 
supervision. Moreover, the administrator is in charge of the 
registration in the network of the sleep centers included in 
the project. 
 
III. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
Once the development phase was finished, the system’s 
practical application phase began. The support system is 
already operating in the main center for the project, the 
“Hospital Clinic” of Barcelona. 
So far, the group of patients included has been selected 
from consecutive patients coming to the “Hospital Clinic” 
sleep center for a routine CPAP therapy monitoring visit. At 
the end of the visit, the nurse in charge of the patients 
proposed the enrolment in the study. The patients who 
declared they had good computer-Internet skills and were 
available to participate in the study were included. The sleep 
center staff took note of the patients’ personal data and e-
mail addresses. After being recruited, patients received a first 
e-mail containing information about the study and the 
personal credentials required to access the web interface. In 
order to ensure patients’ compliance with the weekly 
questionnaire, an e-mail reminder was sent automatically to 
each patient once a week. Moreover, after the third 
completion of the weekly questionnaire a more personalized 
e-mail was sent in order to thank them for their collaboration 
and to encourage them to keep answering the questionnaire. 
At the end of the monitoring period, participants were invited 
to express their satisfaction about the website by answering 
an online questionnaire (Table 1). This questionnaire was 
developed 
from 
the 
Telemedicine 
Satisfaction 
and 
Usefulness 
Questionnaire 
(TSUQ), 
a 
5-point 
Likert 
questionnaire designed as part of the telemedicine project 
IDEATel and validated in English and Spanish [13]. 
Of a total of 163 consecutive patients from the Sleep 
Clinic, 66 reported basic knowledge of the Internet and 
agreed to participate. After 12 weeks of monitoring, the 
participation rate was high (82%). Thirty-five patients 
responded to the online satisfaction survey and the results are 
presented in Figure 3. Patients showed a level of agreement 
to the statement "Overall, I am satisfied with the web 
service" of 4.3 ± 0.58 points (mean ± SD, 1 = I strongly 
disagree, 5 = I strongly agree) and expressed their potential 
interest in participating in a long-term web-based monitoring. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The multicenter support system we have developed 
represents a novel telemedicine approach to CPAP therapy 
follow-up in OSAS, where the main objective is patients’ 
confidence and improved therapy adherence. The availability 
of easy communication tools with the sleep center staff can 
help patients to rapidly solve problems related to CPAP use 
TABLE I.  
PATIENTS’ SATISFACTION SURVEY 
 
Survey statement 
1. 
In general, I am satisfied with the CPAP follow-up web service. 
2. 
The CPAP follow-up web service has helped me to better manage my health and medical needs. 
3. 
I follow my doctor’s advice better since working with the CPAP follow-up web service. 
4. 
The CPAP follow-up web service has been easy to use. 
5. 
The weekly questionnaire of the CPAP follow-up web service has been easy to fill. 
6. 
In the future I would like to use the CPAP follow-up web service as part of my treatment control. 
7. 
In the future I would like to receive comments from my doctor about my weekly questionnaire answers. 
8. 
In the future I would like my doctor use information from the CPAP follow-up web service for my medical visits. 
9. 
Files and information links about sleep apnea and CPAP therapy available on the website have been useful. 
10. The ability to review the progress of my parameters on the “Your record” page has been useful. 
. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

and consequently increase their satisfaction with community 
service. This system application can be particularly 
interesting for the management of difficult-to-treat patients, 
because they do not adapt easily to CPAP, and of special 
populations. Moreover, the possibility of carrying out non-
presential visits via videoconference represents a valuable 
opportunity to release sleep clinics from a considerable 
amount of support interventions and extra visits, thereby 
enhancing the cost-effectiveness of CPAP therapy. 
It is remarkable that this system can be readily applicable 
thanks to the widespread availability of Internet-connected 
home computers or tablets in the population [14]. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The Spanish Society of Pneumology and Thoracic 
Surgery (SEPAR) and NEXES (CIP-ICT-PSP-2007-225025) 
partially supported this project. The authors wish to thank 
Esteve-Teijin for financial support for the clinical 
implementation of this telemedicine application. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Consenso Nacional sobre el síndrome de apneas-hipopneas 
del sueño Arch Bronconeumol 2005; 41(Supl.4):3-110. 
[2] Gibson 
G.J. 
Obstructive 
sleep 
apnoea 
syndrome: 
underestimated and undertreated. Br Med Bull 2004; 72:49-
65. 
[3] Young T., Peppard P.E., and Gottlieb D.J. Epidemiology of 
obstructive sleep apnea: a population health perspective. Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 165(9):1217-1239. 
[4] Duran-Cantolla J., Mar J., de La Torre M.G., Rubio A.R., and 
Guerra L. [The availability in Spanish public hospitals of 
resources for diagnosing and treating sleep apnea-hypopnea 
syndrome]. Arch Bronconeumol 2004; 40(6):259-267. 
[5] Rolfe I., Olson L.G., and Saunders N.A.. Long-term 
acceptance of continuous positive airway pressure in 
obstructive sleep apnea. Am Rev Respir Dis 1991; 
144(5):1130-1133. 
[6] Sparrow D., Aloia M., Demolles D.A., and Gottlieb D.J. A 
telemedicine intervention to improve adherence to continuous 
positive airway pressure: a randomised controlled trial. 
Thorax 2010; 65(12):1061-1066. 
[7] Santamaria J., Iranzo A., Ma M.J., and de Pablo J. Persistent 
sleepiness in CPAP treated obstructive sleep apnea patients: 
evaluation and treatment. Sleep Med Rev 2007; 11(3):195-
207. 
[8] Kwiatkowska M. and Ayas N. Can telemedicine improve 
CPAP adherence? Thorax 2010; 65(12):1035-1036. 
[9] Chervin R.D., Theut S., Bassetti C., and Aldrich M.S. 
Compliance with nasal CPAP can be improved by simple 
interventions. Sleep 1997; 20(4):284-289. 
[10] Taylor Y., Eliasson A., Andrada T., Kristo D., and Howard R. 
The role of telemedicine in CPAP compliance for patients 
with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Sleep Breath 2006; 
10(3):132-138. 
[11] Smith C.E., Dauz E.R., Clements F., Puno F.N., Cook D., 
Doolittle G., and Leeds W. Telehealth services to improve 
nonadherence: A placebo-controlled study. Telemed J E 
Health 2006; 12(3):289-296. 
[12] LinkCare. http://www.linkcarehs.es. 2011. (last access: 
November 2011) 
[13] Bakken S., Grullon-Figueroa L., Izquierdo R., Lee N.J., 
Morin P., Palmas W., Teresi J., Weinstock R.S., Shea S., and 
Starren J. Development, validation, and use of English and 
Spanish versions of the telemedicine satisfaction and 
usefulness questionnaire. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2006; 
13(6):660-667. 
[14] Spanish Observatory for Telecommunications and the 
Information Society (ONTSI). The Networked Society 2009 
Annual Report. 2010 Edition.  2010.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Results of patients’ satisfaction survey (mean ± SD) where 1 means “I strongly disagree” and 5 means “I strongly agree”. Survey statements 
are in Table I. 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

