Security Analysis of a Patient Monitoring System for the Internet of Things in 
eHealth 
Kashif Habib, Arild Torjusen, Wolfgang Leister 
Norwegian Computing Center 
Oslo, Norway 
Kashif.Sheikh@nr.no, Arild.Torjusen@nr.no, Wolfgang.Leister@nr.no 
 
 
Abstract—A patient monitoring system for the Internet of 
Things in eHealth can be established through the integration of 
wireless body area network, communication infrastructure, 
and the hospital network. The dynamic and heterogeneous 
environment of the Internet of Things may facilitate the pa-
tient with mobility options. However, security-related prob-
lems may obstruct the development of such a comprehensive 
patient monitoring system. While assessing the security of a 
patient monitoring system, it is necessary to realise that it may 
not be enough to only look into the security related aspects of 
the body area network. Instead, the overall patient monitoring 
system should be treated as a connected and integrated 
eHealth system. This paper analyses the important security 
issues that can put the eHealth system at risk. The specific se-
curity goals and requirements, vulnerabilities, threats, and 
attacks are analysed and some possible security recommenda-
tions with direction for future work are discussed. 
Keywords- Internet of Things, Patient Monitoring System, 
eHealth System, Security.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Wireless and mobile communications have played a sig-
nificant role towards the development of the Internet of 
Things (IoT). The IoT is a network of interconnected things, 
such as biomedical sensors, radio frequency identification 
tags, actuators, and smartphones [1]. The IoT presents a con-
cept of dynamic and heterogeneous network environment, 
where things communicate and exchange information in an 
automated or semi-automated way [2], and embed real world 
information into networks [3]. The communication capabili-
ties and support for dynamic environment in the IoT can 
provide significant advantages to the existing healthcare sys-
tem [4]. The IoT can assist the existing healthcare system by 
developing flexible remote Patient Monitoring System 
(PMS) that can benefit the patients by getting quick medical 
responses from the medical practitioners. However, security 
related issues may obstruct the development of such a com-
prehensive PMS.  
1.1 Contribution and Organisation of This Paper  
A significant contribution of this paper is the integrated 
security analysis of the IoT based PMS, i.e., we highlight the 
security related aspects in the whole eHealth system includ-
ing Body Area Network (BAN), communication network, 
and health care enterprises. In order to analyse the security of 
a PMS, Section II presents the eHealth system architecture. 
Section III presents the security analysis of a PMS by focus-
ing on security goals and requirements, threats, vulnerabili-
ties, and attacks. Related work is high-lighted in Section IV. 
Section V provides discussion and security recommenda-
tions. Section VI concludes the paper and addresses future 
work. 
 
II. 
EHEALTH SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE  
 
Patient
Motion Sensor
Glucose Sensor
ECG Sensor
Smartphone
Blood Pressure Sensor
Body Temprature Sensor
Health Enterprise/
Research
Internet
Wireless body area network
(i)
Communication network
(ii)
Healthcare services
(iii)
 
Figure 1.  The IoT based patient monitoring system 
 
Patient
Motion Sensor
Glucose Sensor
ECG Sensor
Smartphone
Blood
 Pressure Sensor
Body
 Temprature
 Sensor
Home (Office, Nursing 
home, etc)
Public Places (Cafe, 
Library, etc)
Transport (Car, Bus, 
Train, Ambulance,  etc)
Hospital (Waiting room, 
ICU, Surgery, etc)
Figure 2. Schematic of the IoT in patient mobility scenarios 
 
A PMS is comprised of three segments, i.e., (i) BAN, (ii) 
communication network, (iii) hospitals and health care enter-
prises [5]. As depicted in Figure 1, the BAN includes the 
actual patient, medical sensors, and the patient’s smartphone. 
The devices in the BAN are configured by clinical staff for 
data collection. The patient’s smartphone collects the moni-
tored information which is then forwarded to the hospital via 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

a communication network. The communication networks 
including broadband network and 3G/4G network connect 
the BAN with a hospital network. Hospital and the 
healthcare enterprise evaluate the Patient’s medical data and 
respond accordingly. The healthcare enterprise can also per-
form further data analysis for research purposes. 
The mobility feature of the IoT in eHealth provides vari-
ous possibilities of patient’s locations during the monitoring 
sessions.  As shown in Figure 2, the patient’s movement in 
between different locations is highlighted with dotted lines. 
The patient monitoring sessions keep the patient connected 
with healthcare workers, even when the patient is outside the 
hospital environment. 
III. 
SECURITY ANALYSIS 
In the process of assessing the security of a PMS, it is es-
sential to understand that it is not enough to only analyse the 
security issues at the BAN. Instead, security of the entire 
system including BAN, backend communication network, 
and hospital network should be analysed. The different seg-
ments of a PMS have several security requirements and pos-
sess vulnerabilities that can be exploited by threat agents to 
launch attacks against eHealth system. Quality of service 
(QoS), safety, and security are key aspects in the deployment 
of a PMS. Thus, identification of security related require-
ments, vulnerabilities, and threats are keys to the develop-
ment of a trustworthy system. The identification of system 
assets, possible vulnerabilities and threats, and appropriate 
countermeasure can help to understand the associated system 
risks. The terms such as authentication, availability, confi-
dentiality, integrity, information system, threat, vulnerability, 
and security requirements, are used in this paper in relation 
to their meanings defined by [6].  
From a system point of view, transferring complete and 
accurate information from the patient to the hospital is al-
ways necessary. Failure to do so may cause a threat to the 
patient’s health. People with bad intentions can send wrong 
data to the hospital by miss-utilising the devices. The quality 
of data may also vary depending upon the quality of com-
munication links. The data from BAN is sent using public 
communication infrastructures to the hospital. Hence, data 
authentication is also very important.  
Data security and patient’s privacy are certainly the im-
portant challenges in the deployment of PMS. In order to 
highlight specific security requirements in PMS, we analyse 
the system as a sequence of segments, identify related securi-
ty requirements, vulnerabilities, threats and attacks of each 
segment, and possible security solutions for identified issues. 
A. Security Goals and Requirements 
Successful deployment of a PMS relies upon secure 
transfer of the patient’s vital signs to the hospital. The secure 
transfer requires that the PMS satisfies major security goals, 
requirements, and QoS requirements such as device/user 
authentication, authorisation, confidentiality, privacy, integ-
rity, access control, availability, interoperability, reliability, 
usability, and resource efficiency. While security require-
ments are very important, some other factors such as incor-
rect use of devices, control on data disclosure, and usage also 
need proper attention. Table 1 provides a summary of the 
security goals and requirements in a PMS. The specific secu-
rity requirements and security goals for all three segments 
are identified in the following sections. 
TABLE 1. SECURITY GOALS AND REQUIREMENTS 
BAN 
Communication 
Network 
Healthcare 
Enterprise 
Data confidential-
ity, data integrity, 
data availability, 
data authentica-
tion. 
Data confidentiality, 
data integrity, data 
reliability, data 
accuracy, data au-
thentication. 
Data confidentiality, data 
integrity, data availability, 
patient and data authentica-
tion, physical security, 
access control. 
1) Body Area Network (BAN) 
The communication links inside the BAN are built using 
wireless technologies. The security requirements and goals in 
such network need more attention in comparison to struc-
tured networks. Data confidentiality is required to protect 
data disclosure while in storage at local node or exchanged 
between nodes. Data confidentiality should sustain even if 
the nodes in the network are compromised. The leaked data 
may disclose the patient’s disease related information. Data 
integrity is required to protect against modification of data 
not only while in transit but also when in storage. The modi-
fied data can lead the health personnel towards wrong diag-
nosis of the patient. Data availability is required to ensure 
that health personnel get timely access to the patient’s data. 
Delayed or no access to the information may prevent the 
patient’s treatment procedures. Data authentication is re-
quired to detect and identify any forged data sent by an ad-
versary. It is also important to establish trust in the received 
data and in the overall system. 
2) Communication Network 
Once the patient’s health status is monitored and pro-
cessed inside BAN and stored in the smartphone, then data is 
transferred by the communication network. Data confidenti-
ality is required to prevent information disclosure in case of 
interception of communication session. Data integrity is nec-
essary to ensure that the data transferred from BAN to the 
hospital is unmodified. Data reliability requirement can en-
sure that the data from BAN to the hospital is available even 
in case of a link or node failure. Data accuracy is required to 
ensure that the data is fresh and not reordered by an adver-
sary. 
3) Hospital and Healthcare Enterprise 
The patient’s data are collected at the hospital for medi-
cal diagnosis and treatment. Physical security requires re-
stricted physical access to the medical servers in the hospital 
containing patient’s medical records. Weak physical security 
procedures may allow unauthorised persons to alter the data 
and system. Data confidentiality is required to limit the data 
monitoring at the PMS servers for only authorised persons. 
Data integrity is required to ensure that the data is secure 
against unauthorised modification. Data availability is re-
quired to ensure that data is available to the medical staff 
even in case of any system failure. Authentication mecha-
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

nism is required to not only authenticate the users in the hos-
pital but also to ensure that data is received from the correct 
patient. 
B. Threats, Vulnerabilities, and Attacks 
BAN, communication networks, and hospital network are 
vulnerable to various security threats, mainly due to the in-
herent vulnerabilities of wireless communication. Table 2 
provides a summary of threats, attacks, and vulnerabilities in 
a PMS. We highlight only specific vulnerabilities, threats, 
and attacks in different segments of a PMS. 
TABLE 2. THREATS, VULNERABILITIES, AND ATTACKS 
BAN 
Data impairment, dropped data, data counterfeit, data disclosure, 
frequency jamming threat, data collision threat, compromised 
data routing threat (e.g. route spoofing, selective forwarding, 
sinkhole, Sybil, worm holes), data flooding threat, data eaves-
dropping threat, Denial of Service (DoS) attack [7, 8]. 
Comm. Net-
work 
Wi-
Fi 
Data eavesdropping, data tampering, unauthorised data 
access and spoofing, rogue access point, man-in-the-
middle attack, DoS attack [9]. 
3G/ 
4G 
Mobile-to-mobile attacks, patient’s location and activity 
tracking attack, man-in-the-middle attack, data eaves-
dropping, scrambling attack, DoS attack [10]. 
Hospi-
tal 
Physical security, unauthorised data  access, social engineering 
attack, removable distribution media threat, data interception, 
faulty hardware, software attacks such as virus, worms, Trojans, 
and spyware, DoS attack [11, 12]. 
1) Body Area Network (BAN) 
The main participant in the BAN is the patient, so lack of 
patient’s awareness and training or negligence regarding use 
of sensors and devices may result in lost and stolen data and 
devices. For data collection and forwarding, the BAN utilises 
a patient’s personal device such, as smartphone that is vul-
nerable against unauthorised access. The patient may install 
an application on smartphone that can enable the patient 
monitoring software to share data with other applications or 
may even become unresponsive. 
Frequency jamming refers to a threat where an adversary 
intentionally interferes with frequencies of the BAN by using 
external device. The interference can make the devices and 
components in the network unresponsive leading into net-
work blockage. Data collision is a threat at link layer com-
munication in the BAN, where an adversary tries to corrupt 
the data frame by transmitting at same frequency which is 
used by the actual node. Data collision refers to a situation 
where the bits sequence in the data frame header is changed 
due to collision. At the receiving end, the error checking 
mechanism detects that as an error and rejects received data. 
Thus, a change in the data frame header is a threat to data 
availability in the BAN.  
Compromised data routing is a threat at network layer 
communication in the BAN where an adversary can exploit 
the vulnerabilities of routing protocols to misdirect the data. 
Some possible routing related threats are spoofing, selective 
forwarding, sinkhole, Sybil, and worm holes. Route spoofing 
is a threat to data routing in BAN where an adversary may 
spoof the routing information. Route spoofing may create 
routing loops, isolate nodes in the network, and poise the 
source route. Route forwarding is a threat where an adver-
sary may compromise a node in the network to allow only 
selective forwarding of medical parameters. Such forwarding 
can prevent the hospital from receiving complete medical 
data of the patient.  
Sinkhole is an attack where an adversary can forge the 
routing table so that the nodes forward their data to a select-
ed node. Once the network nodes starts forwarding their data 
to a compromised node, the adversary may exploit other vul-
nerabilities in the network to initiate other attacks. Sybil is a 
threat in which a node illegitimately claims multiple identi-
ties in a BAN. Sybil attack can be very damaging where an 
adversary can forge a network node to act maliciously by 
claiming false identities or by impersonating other devices 
with fraudulent intention. Wormhole is a threat that can be 
setup in active or passive modes. An adversary can selective-
ly analyse network traffic and drop packets to cause disturb-
ance in data flow over the network. In a wormhole attack, an 
adversary forges a node that can forward packets to a par-
ticular node in a tunnel. In reality the forwarding tunnel is a 
false route that gives control to an adversary to selectively 
drop or forward received packets.  
Data flooding is an attack at the transport layer in the 
BAN, where an adversary can exhaust the memory resources 
by sending connection requests repeatedly. The flood of 
connection requests can consume the memory resource that 
develops resource constraints for genuine nodes. The lack of 
data synchronisation is a threat at transport layer in the BAN 
where an adversary can de-synchronise the pre-established 
connection by sending request for retransmission of missed 
frames. Repeated retransmission of frames can exhaust re-
sources and degrade network performance. Data eavesdrop-
ping is a threat to patient’s privacy and safety, where an ad-
versary can intercept a message for further analysis. The 
intercepted messages may contain information related to 
patient’s disease and physical location that can help the ad-
versary to extract useful and confidential data.  
The DoS is an attack that occurs when the overall traffic 
exceeds outside the total capacity of the system. The adver-
sary can compromise nodes to initiate the DoS attack. DoS 
attack is very harmful for patient monitoring because una-
vailable system may affect the patient’s life and safety. 
Threats such as jamming, exhaustion, flooding, de-
synchronisation, and compromised routing can cause DoS 
attack in a PMS. 
2) Communication Network 
The broadband communication channels are mostly used 
when patient is at locations such as home, nursing home, 
doctor’s office, hospital, and transported to the hospital in an 
emergency scenario. The data transmission equipment such 
as patient’s smartphone can perform data switch to the mo-
bile networks that depends upon the patient’s activity such as 
when visiting public places (transport, shop, café, etc.). 
While the patient’s data is transferred using communication 
network, the adversary can exploit the vulnerabilities in net-
work protocols, system applications, and operating system.  
 
 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

a) 
WiFi Communication Network Security Threats 
Eavesdropping is a threat where the adversary can inter-
cept the traffic to monitor patient’s data. Data tampering is a 
threat where the adversary can modify the message contents 
of the intercepted data. Unauthorised access is a threat where 
the adversary can access patient’s data and network re-
sources using patient’s identity. The smartphone can connect 
to a rouge access point that is set up by the adversary to fully 
control patient’s data for malicious use. The adversary can 
disable the network from serving the patient through DoS 
attack. Jamming is a common type of this attack, wherein the 
adversary can use external frequency source to emit random 
radio signal or let out frequent packets transmission to keep 
the channel busy, so that the receiver can only receive rather 
than transmitting. While the smartphone transmits data to-
wards hospital through access point, the adversary can ex-
ploit man-in-the-middle attack. The adversary can imperson-
ate the patient to gain access into information and can also 
inject false data.        
b) 
3G/4G Communication Network Security Threats 
The 4G network offers IP based communication for 
smartphones through which the devices can directly ex-
change data. In such a case, smartphone-to-smartphone at-
tack is possible, wherein a compromised smartphone can aim 
at draining the battery of targeted smartphone through con-
tinuous network connection. Data eavesdropping is a threat 
in 3G/4G networks where the adversary analyse the traffic 
within a range of particular base station to monitor particular 
node. An adversary may interrupt management data ex-
changed between smartphone and base station to extract in-
formation regarding encryption scheme. Further, messages 
intercepted from targeted patient’s smartphone can disclose 
confidential information. The mobility scenario supports 
patient’s movement across different locations. As the patient 
moves from one location to another, sent messages can be 
used by an adversary to collect, aggregate, and analyse in-
formation regarding patient’s movements and activities. Re-
vealing the patient’s location, movement, and activity track-
ing is a threat to patient’s privacy. Before patient’s 
smartphone starts transmitting data, it performs preliminary 
signalling operation with the serving base station. Signalling 
operations include authentication and key management, reg-
istration, and IP-based connection establishment. The adver-
sary can initiate a signalling attack on the serving base sta-
tion by actuating extra state signals that clog the base station. 
The excessive burden on the base station results in DoS at-
tacks and the patient’s smartphone cannot send data due to 
base station unavailability. A Man-in-the-middle attack can 
occur when the adversary exploits the vulnerabilities of the 
initial handshake between patient’s smartphone and the base 
station. The adversary deceives the smartphone by appearing 
as a legitimate base station, can eavesdrop on all communi-
cation, and insert fake messages. Scrambling is jamming 
attack on radio frequency for short intervals of time during 
transmission of control or management information frames. 
This attack interrupts the communication that can prevent the 
patient’s smartphone from sending data causing availability 
issue. 
3) Hospital/Healthcare Enterprise Threats 
An information system at the hospital receives patient’s 
data. Both the patient’s data and information system can be 
attacked from inside and outside of hospital network. An 
adversary can access the information system to remove and 
change patient’s data or interrupt the system operations. In 
case of system interruption, the patient’s data become una-
vailable to healthcare personnel that can cause serious harm 
to the patient’s treatment. A malware can infect and propa-
gate to the whole hospital network that can cause unavaila-
bility and disruption. Changes and updates in software con-
figuration of patient monitoring servers can unstable the sys-
tem configuration, resulting in system malfunctioning and 
communication interruption. The users who are not related to 
PMS may also browse machines linked to the PMS through 
the hospital wide network to perform malicious activities. 
Due to weak physical security procedures at the hospital, the 
unauthorised users can gain access into the information sys-
tem. Even for personal gains, the authorised users can also 
disclose patient’s data to concerned parties such as Health 
Insurance Company. Without proper awareness training, the 
healthcare personnel are vulnerable to social engineering 
attacks from adversary for obtaining patient’s data. Without 
having a proper policy for need to know, the administrators 
responsible only for network management may also access 
patient’s data and use it for wrong purposes. Removable dis-
tribution media is also a threat because it can be used to steal 
information and to propagate viruses in a PMS. The data 
exchange among computers of PMS through hospital LAN is 
vulnerable to interception by adversary for data sniffing. The 
hospital LAN is vulnerable to DoS attack that can jeopardise 
a PMS. Third party maintenance staff may install contami-
nated software upgrades that propagates virus into the sys-
tem. Hardware issues, such as faulty devices can cause inter-
ruption in a PMS. 
IV. 
RELATED WORK IN SECURITY OF EHEALTH 
SYSTEM 
The security aspects of eHealth system have been an ac-
tive research field among researchers. While discussing the 
security issues in an eHealth system, the existing literature 
mostly focus on either BAN or healthcare enterprise net-
work. There is a lack of specific security analysis for an 
eHealth system where the security aspects of BAN, commu-
nication network, and healthcare enterprise are combined and 
treated for the whole PMS. A summary of related research 
efforts towards security of eHealth system are briefly high-
lighted in this section. 
A case study to assess security risks and threats in a wire-
less BAN for the real time remote health monitoring system 
is presented by Lim et al. [13]. The authors assessed the se-
curity risk based on the critical needs of acknowledge risks 
and threats in real time eHealth system. Don et al. [14] de-
scribed a conceptual architecture of activity based risk analy-
sis for monitoring the health status of the patient. They used 
event filtration and aggregation based on the concept of situ-
ation awareness while utilising smartphone to transfer the 
data collected through sensors. They conclude that security 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

issues such as miss utilisation of the device, authentication, 
QoS, and reliability need proper solutions. Maglogiannis et 
al. [15] presented a model approach for performing risk 
analysis study of healthcare information system. They used 
Bayesian network to model the interrelationship between 
assets, threats, and vulnerabilities of healthcare information 
system in their methodology.  They identified high rank risks 
and suggested several countermeasures to limit the vulnera-
bilities of the healthcare network operations. Shin [16] de-
signed a framework and provided risk analysis for remote 
health monitoring systems. The author proposed a health 
monitoring architecture to provide security services such as 
authentication, audit, key management, and data fusion using 
unreliable personal mobile devices. However, they suggested 
that the concerns about privacy and information quality may 
obstruct the development of eHealth systems. 
Security and privacy requirements in wireless BAN are 
surveyed and analysed by Li et al. [7]. In particular, the au-
thors looked into security aspects such as secure distributed 
data storage and fine grained distributed data access control. 
They suggested that the security, usability, and privacy pro-
tection of the data collected from patient is a major concern 
either it is in storage or transmission. Saleem et al. [8] high-
lighted the security requirements and DoS attacks in WBAN. 
According to the authors, it is not appropriate and secure to 
directly adopt IEEE 802.15.4 security framework for 
WBAN. 
Kargl et al. [17] analysed the security and privacy re-
quirements of eHealth system. They presented an eHealth 
system model to discuss security threats and attacks, re-
quirements, and recommended guidelines for security mech-
anisms. The authors analysed some healthcare projects to 
highlight security and privacy issues in healthcare system 
[18]. They presented a review of existing schemes to provide 
security solutions in healthcare scenario. Shahri et al. [12] 
studied the possible threats on health information system and 
presented a tree model for identification of threats to perform 
risk assessment. Leister et al. [19] presented the threat as-
sessment of mobile PMS associated to both short range and 
long range mobile wireless communication infrastructure. In 
order to determine the security requirements, they empha-
sised mainly on biomedical sensor networks. Kotz [20] ex-
amined and developed taxonomy of privacy related threats to 
mobile health technologies. The technologies that could sup-
port privacy sensitive mobile health system are also dis-
cussed.  
Leister et al. [21] presented a framework to evaluate 
adaptive security for the IoT in eHealth and developed sce-
narios to access the adaptive security solutions. The authors 
suggested that security and QoS mechanisms are interrelated 
and may impact each other. The security objectives of 
eHealth IoT applications and their adaptive security decision 
making needs are analysed by Savola et al. [22]. The authors 
proposed a high level adaptive security mechanism based on 
the security metrics to cope with that security challenges and 
issues.  
The trend in the evolution of 4G wireless communica-
tions and its security is explored by Rahman et al. [23]. The 
authors introduced the system architecture, security require-
ments, and security issues of 4G wireless networks. Seddigh 
[24] studied the security issues in 4G networks. The study 
focused on the vulnerabilities and attacks at different layers 
in 4G network. The authors highlighted the security weak-
nesses in 4G networks and gave few suggestions on security 
issues and development of appropriate countermeasures. The 
inclusion of the smartphone into remote PMS can reduce 
cost and increase flexibility, but smartphone platform does 
not meet security protection requirements of international 
standards for health data [25]. 
V. 
DISCUSSIONS AND SECURITY 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
The security mechanisms for the IoT in eHealth should 
be generic enough to avoid interoperability issues among 
various platforms without affecting a system’s usability. The 
existing security mechanisms that are developed for tradi-
tional computer networks may not be very well suited for the 
IoT in eHealth. One of the reasons for lesser suitability could 
be the dynamic and heterogeneous environment offered by 
the IoT, which can allow the patient to enjoy mobility sce-
narios. As the physical parameters of the patient are changed 
due to the mobility scenarios, the security requirements, vul-
nerabilities, and threats may also vary. Another reason could 
be resource constraints of the sensors, such as lack of storage 
capacity and processing power that may cause difficulties in 
terms of implementing traditional security mechanisms. The 
adaptive security mechanisms may work better than static 
security mechanisms for such resource constraints and dy-
namic environments. Adaptive security mechanisms have the 
potential to adjust security parameters to the level of detected 
threats, available energy and memory, and application re-
quirements [26]. The adaptive security terminology refers to 
a situation, where security mechanisms or policies can 
change in automated or semi-automated way in response to 
events [27]. According to Abie [28], monitor, analyser, 
adapter, and adaptive knowledge database are the core com-
ponents of the adaptive security model. The monitor collects 
security attributes and environmental data. The analyser de-
termines the current security levels and matches it against the 
security requirements. The adapter decides by using a plan-
ning function about how and what security parameters need 
to be changed for adaptation.  
Adaptive security mechanisms may provide better securi-
ty against various security attacks in the PMS. For instance, 
encryption mechanisms are used to counter data confidential-
ity issues.  Mostly, the strength of the encryption mecha-
nisms depends upon the complexity of the algorithm requir-
ing sufficient storage space and processing power. Such al-
gorithms may drain sensor’s battery making it unavailable. 
Thus, lightweight adaptive encryption mechanisms may be a 
better choice. The encryption mechanism may adapt to vari-
ous key lengths based on the available energy level in the 
battery, patient’s current location, and current threat level. 
The authentication mechanisms can provide the data and 
patient’s proof of origin. The traditional authentication 
mechanisms built on passwords, tokens, and biometric mo-
dalities can be made adaptive using context information from 
the external environment and inside the system’s environ-
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

ment. The context aware and adaptive authentication mecha-
nisms could provide more flexibility to the whole PMS. 
The patient’s smartphone is used to collect and process 
vital signs for further transmission. Smartphone is a mobile 
device that inherits the risk of lost device. Therefore, the 
patient should be vigilant towards physical security of 
smartphone. For the sake of patient’s convenience and ease 
in system’s usability, one can ignore the login procedure that 
is necessary for patient/device authentication. Unencrypted 
data in the smartphone can be a threat to patient’s privacy so 
clear text storage and transmission should be avoided. Soft-
ware attacks such as malware, virus, worms, Trojan, spy-
ware, and adware can infect the smartphone resulting in 
leaked and lost data. The smartphone should be equipped 
with security mechanism to guard against such threats. The 
smartphone has constraints in terms of energy and pro-
cessing power so such security mechanisms that require 
much processing power may drain smartphone battery. 
Therefore, light weight security mechanisms should be en-
couraged to avoid such issue. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND  FUTURE WORK 
The existing healthcare system can gain a lot from the 
IoT in terms of patient monitoring outside the hospital envi-
ronment. However, security issues require flexible, context 
aware, and adaptive security mechanisms. While making a 
security decision, the security mechanisms should incorpo-
rate security requirements, threats, and attacks based on the 
patient’s location and environmental context. We provided a 
security analysis of PMS for the IoT in eHealth. However, 
there is a need for a method that could determine the threat 
and attack level in a given context and adjust security mech-
anisms to balance system usability and quality of communi-
cation. In future, we plan to build a framework to develop 
context aware adaptive security mechanisms for the IoT in 
eHealth with a tendency to adapt a security decisions based 
on the given threat level. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work presented here has been carried out in the re-
search project ASSET – Adaptive Security for Smart Internet 
of Things in eHealth (2012–2015) funded by The Research 
Council of Norway. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Habib and W. Leister, “Adaptive Security for the 
Internet of Things Reference Model”, 6th Norwegian 
Information Security Conference, NISK 2013, pp. 13-24. 
[2] Vision and Challenges for Realizing the Internet of Things, 
European Union, pp. 1-236, 2010. 
[3] Future Internet Strategic Research Agenda, Version 1.1, 
European Future Internet X-ETP Group, pp. 1-73, 2010. 
[4] H. Abie and I. Balasingham, “Risk-Based Adaptive 
Security for Smart IoT in eHealth”, BodyNets, 2012, pp. 
269-275. 
[5] K. Habib, A. Torjusen, and W. Leister,  “A Novel 
Authentication Framework Based on Biometric and Radio 
Fingerprinting for the IoT in eHealth,” SMART 2014, July 
20 - 24, 2014, pp. 32-37. 
[6] Minimum Security Requirements for Federal Information 
and Information Systems, NIST, FIPS PUB 200, 2006. 
[7] M. Li, W. Lou, and K. Ren, "Data Security and Privacy in 
Wireless Body Area Networks," Wireless Communications, 
IEEE, vol.17, no.1, pp. 51-58, February. 2010. 
[8] S. Saleem, S. Ullah, and K. S. Kwak, “A Study of IEEE 
802.15.4 Security Framework for Wireless Body Area 
Networks,” Sensors; 11(2): pp. 1383-1395, 2011. 
[9] M. M. Noor and W. H. Hassan, “Wireless Networks: 
Developments, Threats and Countermeasures,” (IJDIWC) 
3(1): pp. 119-134, 2013. 
[10] B. Matt and C. C. Li, "A Survey of the Security and Threats 
of the IMT-Advanced Requirements for 4G Standards," 
IEEE Conference Anthology, 1-8 January. 2013, pp.1-5. 
[11] Case Study, Threat Analysis of Medical Device. [Online].  
http://www.ptatechnologies.com/default.htm 
[12] A. B. Shahri and Z. Ismail, "A Tree Model for Identification 
of Threats as the First Stage of Risk Assessment in HIS," 
Journal of Inf. Sec., Vol. 3 No. 2, pp. 169-176, 2012. 
[13] S. Lim, T. H. Oh, and Y. B. Choi, T. Lakshman, "Security 
Issues on Wireless Body Area Network for Remote 
Healthcare Monitoring," SUTC 2010, 2010, pp. 327-332. 
[14] S. Don, E. Choi, and D. Min, "A Situation Aware 
Framework for Activity Based Risk Analysis of Patient 
Monitoring System," iCAST, Sep. 2011, pp. 15-19. 
[15] I. Maglogiannis and E. Zafiropoulos, "Modeling Risk in 
Distributed Healthcare Information Systems," EMBS 2006, 
Aug. 30 - Sept. 3 2006, pp. 5447-5450.  
[16] M. Shin, “Secure Remote Health Monitoring with 
Unreliable Mobile Devices,” Journal of Biomedicine and 
Biotechnology,  Article ID 546021, 5 pages, 2012. 
[17] F. Kargl, E. Lawrence, M. Fischer, and Y. Y. Lim, 
"Security, Privacy and Legal Issues in Pervasive eHealth 
Monitoring Systems," ICMB, 7-8 July. 2008, pp. 296-304.  
[18] P. Kumar and H-J. Lee, “Security Issues in Healthcare 
Applications Using Wireless Medical Sensor Networks: A 
Survey,” Sensors: 12(1) pp. 55-91, 2012. 
[19] W. Leister, H. Abie, A-K. Groven, T. Fretland, and I. 
Balasingham, "Threat Assessment of Wireless Patient 
Monitoring Systems," ICTTA, 7-11 April. 2008, pp.1-6. 
[20] D. Kotz, "A threat taxonomy for mHealth privacy," 
COMSNETS, 4-8 Jan. 2011, pp. 1-6. 
[21] W. Leister, M. Hamdi, H. Abie, and S. Poslad, “An 
Evaluation Scenario for Adaptive Security in eHealth,” 
PESARO, IARIA, 23-27 February. 2014, pp. 6-11. 
[22] R. M. Savola, H. Abie, and M. Sihvonen, “Towards 
Metrics-Driven Adaptive Security Management in e-Health 
IoT Applications,” ICST,  2012, pp. 276-281. 
[23] A. Rahman and K. Sharma, “Fourth Generation of Mobile 
Communication Network: Evolution, Prospects, Objectives, 
Challenges and Security,” IJRIM, Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2012. 
[24] N. Seddigh, B. Nandy, R. Makkar, and J. F. Beaumont, 
"Security advances and challenges 
in 4G wireless 
networks," PST, 17-19 Aug. 2010, pp. 62-71. 
[25] C. C. Tan, L. Bai, D. S. Mastrogiannis, and J. Wu, "Security 
Analysis of Emerging Remote Obstetrics Monitoring 
Systems," Healthcom , 10-13 Oct. 2012, pp. 329-334. 
[26] L. Gheorghe, R. Rughinis, and N. Tapus, "Adaptive 
Security Framework for Wireless Sensor Networks," 
INCoS, 19-21 Sept. 2012, pp. 636-641. 
[27] L. Marcus, “Introduction to Logical Foundations of an 
Adaptive Security Infrastructure,” July,  2004, pp.1-12. 
[28] H. Abie, "Adaptive Security and Trust Management for 
Autonomic Message-Oriented Middleware," MASS, 12-15 
Oct. 2009, pp. 810-817. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

