Do-It-Yourself Health Care:  
A Three-Step Approach to Supporting Patient Self-Management in Clinical Practice 
 
Veronica Janssen 
Health, Medical and Neuropsychology 
Leiden University 
Leiden, the Netherlands 
e-mail: VJanssen@FSW.leidenuniv.nl 
Roderik Kraaijenhagen 
Hearts4People Foundation 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
e-mail: roderik.kraaijenhagen@cardiovitaal.nl
 
 
Abstract— Implementation issues plague the uptake and 
effectiveness of self-management programs in clinical practice. 
Using a participatory design, we developed an innovative 
three-step approach to support patient self-management in the 
field. This approach is based on existing evidence-based 
techniques and is supported by a Web-based patient portal. 
The focus of this online patient portal is threefold: firstly, 
patients are taught the skills and helped to build the confidence 
to adequately self-manage their disease in the home-
environment. Secondly, professionals are provided with the 
tools and techniques to guide and monitor this process. 
Thirdly, the portal allows for data sharing, long-term progress 
monitoring and efficient communication between different 
health care providers. The authors are currently in the process 
of evaluating this approach and assessing the uptake, usability 
and usefulness in clinical practice.  
Keywords-self-management; 
health 
care; 
e-health; 
implementation; participatory design; patient portal 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Support is growing for a new conceptualization of 
health that views health as 'the ability to adapt and self-
manage' [1]. This definition is process-oriented and 
encourages people to take an active role in managing their 
own health. Self-management programs aim to support 
patients in coping pro-actively with being (chronically) ill. 
Such programs focus on building the skills and confidence 
necessary to make informed decisions, engage in health 
promoting activities and manage the impact of the illness on 
life. Research shows that supporting self-management has 
beneficial effects on people’s health behaviors, quality of 
life, clinical symptoms and use of health care resources [2]. 
However, the wide dissemination and uptake of self-
management initiatives in clinical practice lags behind [3]-
[5]. Next to financial, managerial and technical problems, 
there are two important reasons for the problematic uptake 
and implementation of self-management in practice. Firstly, 
adequate self-management requires behavior change on 
multiple levels: patients need the skills and confidence to 
learn how to ‘adapt and self-manage’ their illness, and 
professionals need the motivation and tools to build a 
collaborative partnership with their patients and families. 
Most self-management programs, however, focus on 
providing skills training for patients, but do not provide any 
such training for professionals [6]. Secondly, most self-
management programs are offered in isolation from the 
chronic care system, meaning that self-management skills, 
activities and (electronic) tools for support are not integrated 
by the multiple partners involved in long-term disease 
management or embedded in the day-to-day routines of care 
[6].  
In an attempt to address these issues, we have developed 
an innovative approach to aid self-management in practice 
that focuses on (a) providing patients with a set of tools and 
techniques to help them build their confidence, manage the 
impact of their illness on their lives and engage in healthy 
behaviors, (b) providing health care professionals with a set 
of tools and techniques to help them transform the patient-
caregiver relationship and (c) aiding collaboration between 
primary and secondary health care providers using an 
overarching electronic self-management support system. 
This approach joins several theories of health behavior 
change [7]-[9] and is based on existing evidence-based 
techniques and interventions [7][10]-[12] and is supported 
by online self-management tools.  
This paper is organized as follows. Section II gives the 
theoretical and conceptual background of the three-step 
approach to self-management. Part A in Section II goes into 
finer detail with respect to the development of the Web-
based patient portal. Part B addresses the use of the self-
management approach and patient portal in clinical practice. 
Part C describes the evaluation of the approach. The 
conclusions close the article. 
II. 
A THREE-STEP APPROACH TO SELF-MANAGEMENT  
Central to our approach is the idea that self-management 
is an interactive, ‘staged’ process – rather than a set of skills 
used in isolation [7]-[12]. Each stage, or step, commands 
patients to obtain specific knowledge, learn specific skills 
and form adaptive cognitions. It supports patients to move 
through these series of stages and requires health care 
professionals to employ different methods for behavioral 
change, tailor the mode and level of intensity of 
communication, and offer varying settings in which to 
practice self-management skills. We propose that full self-
management may be achieved in three distinct steps, the 
first of which is termed ‘self-confidence’. High levels of 
243
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

self-efficacy are a prerequisite for behavior change [8]. 
Thus, in this first phase, self-management support focuses 
on empowering patients and enhancing self-control by 
means of education, skills training and by offering patients a 
safe and controlled environment in which to explore and 
extend their boundaries. In this stage patients will 
communicate frequently with health professionals, and 
practice their newly learned skills mostly in a controlled, 
face-to-face setting (e.g., rehabilitation or health (care) 
center). The second phase, which is termed ‘self-regulation’, 
focuses on guiding patients in self-regulating their (new) 
behaviors and learning them to monitor relevant risk factors 
and parameters for the management of their disease [10]-
[12]. Support for behavior change in this phase focuses on 
learning patients how to set salient and achievable goals, 
practice the skills they need to achieve these goals in real-
life situations, and overcome barriers to change [10]-[12]. 
Patients will still communicate regularly with health 
professionals in this stage, but face-to-face contact will be 
alternated with online and/or telephone contact (e.g., e-
coaching). The third and final phase is the ‘self-
management’ phase in which patients draw upon their skills 
and experiences to adequately manage their risk factors and 
embed their healthy behavior in day-to-day life. Self-
management support in this stage focuses on leveraging the 
skills developed and integrating new behaviors and skills in 
the home-environment [7]. This means that communication 
with health care professionals in this stage will be almost 
solely internet-or telephone-based and that the frequency of 
contact will gradually fade-out.  
A. Development of a Web-Based Patient Portal 
As we have a strong background in cardiology and since 
there is a clear need to help cardiac patients in maintaining 
adequate self-management over time, we have developed 
and pilot-tested our three-step approach in close dialogue 
with patients in cardiac rehabilitation. Using both qualitative 
and quantitative methods, we first assessed cardiac patients’ 
as well as health care professionals’ needs and preferences 
regarding self-management. Such participatory design of 
(online) self-management programs is thought to increase 
implementation success and uptake rates in practice [13]. 
Structured interviews were carried out with 13 patients and 
5 health care professionals [14]. Both patients and 
professionals confirmed the need for a more systematic 
approach to aiding self-management in practice. Patients 
indicated that they would appreciate online access to their 
personal health information in addition to face-to-face 
contact. 
Health 
care 
professionals 
valued 
efficient 
communication and stressed the importance of being able to 
track patients’ progress over time. Moreover, they indicated 
a need for tools and techniques to help them ask 
motivational questions to aid patients in the process of 
behavior change. On the basis of this input a mock-up 
version of a Web-based patient portal to support self-
management (MyHealthePortal) was developed. Using a 
questionnaire, patients’ needs and preferences as well as 
factors associated with intention to use this Web-based 
patient portal were assessed [15]. The questionnaire was 
filled out by 113 cardiac rehabilitation patients (34% 
females and 66% males, mean age 63 years). Patients 
especially valued being able to objectively monitor their 
progress, and being able to obtain adequate feedback from 
health care professionals on progress, lifestyle behaviors 
and relevant risk factors. Furthermore, they indicated a need 
for low-threshold communication with professionals [15]. 
The vast majority (97%) of patients used the internet several 
times a week and 69% indicated that they strongly intended 
to use the Web-based patient portal [15]. On the basis of this 
input, the mock-up version was improved. The look and feel 
and the different functionalities of this updated version were 
assessed in three patients by means of a qualitative thinking 
aloud study. The Web-based patient portal was rated as 
useful, 
but 
several 
design-related 
problems 
(e.g., 
consistency with other systems, error management, visibility 
of system status) appeared to impact ease-of-use. These 
problems were addressed and the design was updated 
accordingly; screenshots of ‘MyHealthePortal’ are displayed 
in Fig. 1. 
B. Do-It-Yourself Health Care 
MyHealthePortal is currently used in ‘blended’ (i.e., 
using a combination of online support and face-to-face 
contact) forms of cardiac rehabilitation. It allows both 
patients and health care professionals to set salient goals that 
are linked to patients’ life goals, choose suitable face-to-face 
treatment modalities that will help support these goals, and 
monitor progress on both objective (e.g., blood pressure, 
cholesterol, weight, physical activity etc.) and subjective 
(e.g., well-being, self-reported goal progress etc.) outcome 
measures. The patient portal dashboard visually displays the 
journey through the three steps of behavior change and the 
actual progress on outcomes. The program is inherently 
empowering, as the patients themselves – as opposed to the 
clinician – determine their own curriculum and (learn how 
to) indicate to health care professionals what it is they need 
to move from one stage to the next. Progress towards self-
set goals is rewarded by bonus points, which can be 
exchanged for lifestyle-related gadgets. Such elements have 
been shown to increase adherence to and effectiveness of 
interventions [16]. The Web-based portal also allows 
patients to continue with self-monitoring their dietary 
habits, exercise and smoking behavior, blood pressure, body 
weight and cholesterol after termination of the program. Not 
only does continuous monitoring and feedback prevent 
relapse into old lifestyles [7], the portal also allows 
electronic input of data from various devices (such as blood 
pressure monitors, weight scales and activity trackers) and 
sharing of this data between different levels of the health 
care system. Thus, the portal smooths the transition from 
primary to secondary care (and vice-versa), and aids the 
interoperability of health care providers and systems.  
The Web-based portal also acts as a powerful tool to 
help health care professionals shape the patient-caregiver 
relationship. 
The 
three-step 
approach 
to 
full 
self-
management is reflected in a behavior-change ‘ladder’: a 
series of small behavior change steps that ultimately lead to 
full self-management of the behavior. A series of questions 
244
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

based on motivational interviewing techniques guide health 
care professionals in their communication with the patient; 
thus, professionals have the tools to assess the stage the 
patient is in with regards to a specific behavior, discuss 
motivation to change with the patient and help the patient 
determine what their next step might be and what they need 
in order to take this step. Moreover, the Web-based portal 
allows health care providers involved in different levels of 
care to guide and monitor this process in the long-term, 
share data and communicate efficiently about the patient’s 
progress. 	  	  
C. Practice-Based Implementation-Evaluation 
The authors are currently in the process of implementing 
and evaluating our approach in a number of cardiac 
rehabilitation centers in the Netherlands. We feel that our 
three-step approach to full self-management and the do-it-
yourself patient portal are applicable to other areas in which 
lifestyle modification plays an important role, such as 
cardiovascular risk management, diabetes and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease management.  
In order to evaluate actual use in the field and to obtain 
feedback on both the user experience and on clinically 
relevant outcomes measures, we aim to include several 
approaches. First of all, Rapid Application Development 
Processes, such as the Agile methodology, can be used for 
iterative usability evaluations. Thus, the patient portal can 
be continuously updated and the user experience improved. 
Secondly, in order to evaluate which components of the 
self-management 
approach 
impact 
upon 
important 
outcomes, such as cardiac risk factors and health behaviors, 
we suggest an alternative to the randomized controlled trial 
(RCT) design. RCT designs typically evaluate the efficacy 
of an intervention - which can be defined as the 
effectiveness of an intervention under ‘ideal conditions’. 
When 
a 
(behavioral) 
intervention 
is 
subsequently 
implemented in clinical practice, the residual effect may be 
much smaller as a result of delivery and compliance issues 
[17].  Therefore, alternatives to RCT-designs have been 
suggested that have greater ecological validity and greater 
generalizability as they are intertwined with the process of 
implementation [18]. So-called ‘multivariate testing’ (or 
‘split testing’) methods are widely used to compare which of 
several versions of a Website performs better in terms of 
conversion rates [19]. We suggest that the concept of A/B 
testing may also be applied to comparing different versions 
of a behavioral intervention. For example, by comparing 
automated versus human coaching, text-message reminders 
versus online reminders, automatic registration of behavior 
versus self-monitoring etc., the content of the intervention 
can be optimized. Performance indicators would be progress 
in terms of the three self-management steps (e.g., move 
from self-confidence to self-regulation), and actual behavior 
shown (e.g., physical activity, smoking, diet etc.). When 
carried out in multiple settings and across a large group of 
participants, A/B testing will be able to project the impact of 
our approach in real-life situations, as well as allow for 
ongoing development and innovation. Thus, the ‘optimal 
intervention’ (for a specific setting) can be determined from 
a range of evidence-based behavior-change methods and 
supportive tools. Furthermore, uptake and implementation 
issues can be tackled whilst they are occurring.  
III. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper argues that adequate self-management requires 
(1) gaining the self-confidence to change behavior(s), (2) 
monitoring and self-regulating the new behavior(s), 
ultimately leading to (3) embedding the new behavior(s) in 
daily life. In order to support this process, a Web-based 
patient portal has been developed, which allows progress 
and outcome monitoring, and personal coaching. The portal 
provides tools and techniques for the professional to 
monitor patient-progress and give motivational feedback. 
The authors are currently implementing and evaluating this 
approach in cardiac rehabilitation. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Huber et al., “How should we define health?” BMJ, vol. 343, 
2011, pp. d4163-4166. 
[2] 
D. de Silva, “Helping people help themselves.” Long Acre, London: 
Health Foundation, 2011.  
[3] 
R. E. Glasgow, D. Kurz, J. M. Dickman, D. Osuna, L. Strycker, and 
D. K. King. “Linking internet-based diabetes self-management to 
primary care: Lessons learned and implications for research 
translation and practice implementation.” Transl. Behav. Med., vol. 2, 
2012, pp. 313–321.  
[4] 
B. Appiah et al. “Challenges and opportunities for implementing 
diabetes self-management guidelines.” J. Am. Board. Fam. Med., vol 
26, no. 1, 2013, pp. 90–92.  
[5] 
M. F. Harris, A. M. Williams, S. M. Dennis, N. A. Zwar, and G. P. 
Davies. “Chronic disease self-management: Implementation with and 
within Australian general practice.” Med. J. Aust., vol. 189, no. 10, 
2008, pp. 17-20.  
[6] 
A. Kennedy et al. “Implementation of a self-management support 
approach (WISE) across a health system: a process evaluation 
explaining what did and did not work for organisations, clinicians and 
patients.” Implement. Sci., vol. 9, 2014, pp. 1–16.  
[7] 
V. Janssen, V. de Gucht, H. van Exel, and S. Maes. “A self-regulation 
lifestyle program for post-cardiac rehabilitation patients has long-
term effects on exercise adherence.” J. Behav. Med., vol. 37, no. 2, 
2014, pp. 308–321.  
[8] 
A. Bandura. “Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavior.” 
Psychol. Rev., vol. 84, no. 2, 1977, pp. 191–215. 
[9] 
C. S. Carver and M. F. Scheier. “On the Self-Regulation of 
Behavior.” Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001. 
[10] V. Janssen, V. de Gucht, E. Dusseldorp, and S. Maes. “Lifestyle 
modification programmes for patients with coronary heart disease: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.” 
Eur. J. Prev. Cardiol., vol. 20, no. 4, 2013, pp. 620–640.  
[11] V. Janssen, V. de Gucht V, H. van Exel, and S. Maes. “Beyond 
resolutions? A randomized controlled trial of a self-regulation 
lifestyle programme for post-cardiac rehabilitation patients.” Eur J 
Prev Cardiol., vol. 20, no. 3, 2013, pp. 431-441.  
[12] S. Michie, C. Abraham, C. Whittington, J. McAteer, and S. Gupta. 
“Effective techniques in healthy eating and physical activity 
interventions: a meta-regression.” Health Psychology., vol. 28, no. 6,  
2009, pp. 690–701. 
[13] G. Demiris et al. “Patient-centered Applications: Use of Information 
Technology to Promote Disease Management and Wellness.” A 
245
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

White Paper by the AMIA Knowledge in Motion Working Group. J. 
Am. Med. Informatics. Assoc. vol. 15, no. 1, 2008, pp. 8–13. 
[14] L. Lam, “Acceptatie en waardering van eHealth onder patienten van 
het Cardiovitaal programma,” unpublished. 
[15] L. van Wieringen, “Development of a self-management portal within 
cardiac rehabilitation,” unpublished. 
[16] J. Hamari, J. Koivisto, and H. Sarsa. “Does gamification work? - A 
literature review of empirical studies on gamification.” Proc. Annu. 
Hawaii. 
Int. 
Conf. 
Syst. 
Sci., 
2014, 
pp. 
3025–3034, 
doi:10.1109/HICSS.2014.377. 
[17] C. G. Victora, J. P. Habicht, and J. Bryce. “Evidence-Based Public 
Health: Moving Beyond Randomized Trials.” Am. J. Public Health., 
vol. 94, no. 3, 2004, pp. 400–405.  
[18] C. P. Bonell et al. “Alternatives to randomisation in the evaluation of 
public health interventions: design challenges and solutions.” J. 
Epidemiol. Community Health., vol. 65, no. 7,  2011, pp. 582–587.  
[19] R. Kohavi, R. Longbotham, D. Sommerfield, and R. M. Henne. 
“Controlled experiments on the Web: Survey and practical guide.” 
Data. Min. Knowl. Discov., vol. 18, no. 1, 2009, pp. 140–181. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Screenshot of ‘MyHealthePortal’ 
246
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

