eHealth Wikiplatform to Increase the Uptake and Impact of eHealth Technologies 
 
 
Lisette van Gemert-Pijnen, Nicol Nijland  
Maarten van Limburg, Saskia Kelders, Lex van Velsen.  
Center for eHealth Research & Disease Management, 
University of Twente, Enschede, the Netherlands. 
n.nijland@utwente.nl; j.vangemertpijnen@utwente.nl; 
a.h.m.vanlimburg@utwente.nl; s.m.kelders @utwente.nl, 
l.s.vanvelsen@utwente.nl 
 
 
Hans C. Ossebaard, 
National Institute for Public Health and the Environment, 
The Netherlands. 
hans.ossebaard@rivm.nl 
Bart Brandenburg, 
Medicinfo, 
bart.brandenburg@medicinfo.nl 
 
 
Abstract - We have constructed an evidence-based holistic 
guideline to develop technologies in order to improve the 
measurable impact of eHealth. It accounts for most observed 
deficiencies and comprises human-centred, context-sensitive 
and practical principles that are effective and useful for all 
stakeholders. These principles are: multidisciplinary in action, 
development as co-creation, the social nature of technology, 
integration of development, implementation and evaluation. 
The guideline is published as an on line eHealth wiki in order 
to share knowledge and information on how to improve the 
uptake and impact of eHealth technologies in a collaborative 
effort of researchers, developers, policymakers, and healthcare 
professionals. In the panel presentation we will elaborate and 
discuss the possibilities of the wiki to contribute to better 
outcomes in eHealth. We will show cases in which the eHealth 
wiki has been applied, and we’ll show the benefits of this 
holistic approach. We invite participants to discuss the use of a 
virtual knowledge platform to increase the quality of eHealth 
technologies and to foster the implementation of eHealth 
technologies in practice.   
 
Keywords - eHealth; design; implementation; holistic; health 
2.0; wiki 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
eHealth technologies may contribute to solve some 
serious challenges to global health and health care. The 
impact of eHealth technologies on healthcare practice is 
below professional expectation, which is widely discussed 
in scientific literature [1-7]. In our research [8-18] we have 
identified four clusters of major causes: a) inadequate 
research methods, b) lack of knowledge about the process of 
technological innovation, c) a skewed medical expert-driven 
approach to eHealth technologies, and d) the use of 
inapplicable old world theories on human behavior. These 
causes often lead to the development of high-tech solutions 
that are unsuitable for use in complex healthcare 
environments or in patients’ social situations. 
 
The development of eHealth technologies involves a 
lot more than simply designing a product or a service, and 
includes more than merely procuring stand-alone medical 
devices. We recognize the social dynamics and the 
significance of eHealth technologies and its potential for 
improving healthcare. Creating a new technology works as a 
catalyst for innovation. It induces clarification of how the 
process of healthcare delivery actually runs; who are the key 
stakeholders; how is payment organized et cetera. It also 
illustrates the interdependencies between technology, 
healthcare providers, their social-cultural setting, and the 
infrastructural organization of healthcare. Ideally, all 
stakeholders 
should 
be 
aware 
of 
these 
complex 
relationships. In the wake of Health 2.0 and Medicine 2.0 
initiatives, a growing number of studies have emphasized 
the importance of a participatory development process 
involving (end-)users, and other stakeholders such as 
payers, decision-makers, insurers, government officials to 
increase the uptake of eHealth-interventions. To support a 
participative development process we have introduced a 
holistic research and development guideline; the CeHReS 
roadmap [19]. 
A. CeHRes Roadmap 
A holistic approach accounts for the major issues of finance, 
management and the biased technology-driven approach. It 
constructs a productive fit through the integration of social 
sciences, engineering and business modelling. In the 
international arena  (EU-eHealth, European Centre for 
Public Policy [20]) the need for a holistic eHealth approach 
towards durable technological interventions and sustainable 
innovations in healthcare has been explicitly emphasized. 
The roadmap (Fig. 1) serves as a practical guideline to 
help plan, coordinate and 
execute 
a participatory 
development process of eHealth technologies. The 
guideline is meant for developers (e.g., technicians, 
designers, health care professionals), researchers and 
policy-makers. It also serves as a tool for educational 
purposes (e.g., students, healthcare providers) and as an 
analytical instrument to support decision-making in eHealth.  
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
Figure 1. CeHRres roadmap  
 
The guideline is based on reviews in the field of eHealth 
and progressive insights from current research projects 
using the guideline. Multidisciplinary theories and 
methods from psychology, communication, and human-
computer interaction design  are used to study the capacities 
of technology for behavior change.  
 
The model integrates persuasive technology and 
business modelling. Persuasive technology is used to 
make 
technologies 
human-centered, 
tailored 
to 
stakeholders’ needs, capacities and capabilities to change 
their (professional) behavior. Business modelling is 
interwoven with the development of eHealth technologies 
to foster ownership by co-creation and to construct 
business cases to successfully implement eHealth 
technologies. The roadmap consist of five cycles (see 
Fig. 1).  
1. Contextual inquiry. To understand the problem and 
needs 
of 
various 
stakeholders, 
the 
contextual 
environment should be analyzed (field observations, 
focus groups, literature reviews etc). This results in an 
overview of problems and needs that are prioritized into a 
strategy for possible solutions by stakeholders. 
2. Value-specification. Next, the stakeholders determine 
who the key-stakeholders are involved with the 
innovation 
in 
healthcare. 
These 
key-stakeholders 
determine the critical vales (socio-economic, cultural, 
clinical) based on the problem and needs inventory, using 
software for critical decision making to prioritize these 
values, important for the next step. 
3. Design. The value specification will be translated into 
functional requirements and technical requirements via 
experts (for example hygiene experts) and technical 
design experts. These requirements will be evaluated by 
the other stakeholders (end-users).  
4. Operationalization. A business case and implement-
tation 
plan 
will 
be 
developed 
by 
stakeholders 
(management, payers, providers et al.) based on the 
Contextual inquiry and value specifications and design 
requirements. 
5. Evaluation cycles. These formative and summative 
evaluations cycles consist of research activities to test 
whether the technology fits with needs and contexts; and 
what the effects are (clinical, behavioral, organizational). 
 
B. eHealthwiki-toolkit 
The eHealthwiki toolkit is based on web 2.0 technology 
to share health research information. This is why the Dutch 
National Institute for Public Health and the Environment 
(RIVM) invests in its development. Thus a narrative 
literature review on current eHealth frameworks for 
development, implementation and evaluation was conducted 
to obtain insight in the quality criteria for development and 
implementation of eHealth technologies [19].  
 
The eHealthwiki toolkit will be used as a virtual 
knowledge network for sharing information to enhance the 
quality of the development and implementation of eHealth 
technologies. The objective of the eHealthwiki is to foster 
collaboration between research, business and healthcare 
practice (supply and demand). It communicates and 
generates evidence of best-practices to enhance the social 
impact of research. The wiki is demand driven and functions 
as a virtual knowledge platform providing methods, tools 
and key features for successful eHealth technologies.  
 
The wiki represents the CeHRes Roadmap (see 
Appendix I) and its corresponding tools for eHealth 
development and implementation (via a clickable image, 
tools are linked to the roadmap). The wiki supports 
participatory development via the collaborative effort of 
researchers, developers and healthcare professionals. The 
eHealth wiki structure captures the several cycles of the 
roadmap. The cycles, like contextual inquiry (see Appendix 
II) and the corresponding methods and tools are depicted 
and explained for usage in practice.  
C. The panel discussion 
To discover the values of the eHealthwiki we will 
organize several panel discussions among stakeholders 
during the autumn of 2011 (researchers, developers, 
engineers, policymakers, insurers, healthcare providers et 
al.). 
The proposed eTelemed-panel consists of researchers 
and developers in the field of social sciences, medicine, 
engineering and business modeling. Conform the holistic 
guideline (Fig. 1), we are carrying out the contextual inquiry 
and value specification among key-stakeholders to adjust 
the design (content &structure) to stakeholders’ needs. 
Several workshops have been carried out to show how the 
wiki can enhance the quality of eHealth technologies 
demonstrating the use of the methods and tools in our 
research 
& 
development 
projects 
(teledermatology; 
Infection control, etc). The eTelemed-panel discussion will 
address several generic, controversial issues to discuss the 
challenges of health 2.0 platforms , virtual collaboration and 
185
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the credibility of eHealth platforms in general. We will 
elaborate on issues such as: 
- 
How would a 2.0 knowledge platform for eHealth 
be useful for several stakeholders?  
- 
How to use it as a virtual tool for collaboration? 
- 
How to manage an eHealth wiki and to deal with 
credibility and to avoid ‘vandalism’? 
- 
Will it work in diverse settings; What are the 
challenges in other fields using an ehealthwiki 
(semantic-wiki 
for 
ehealth 
education) 
for 
collaborative 
development 
of 
guidelines 
for 
medical practice, sharing knowledge of best-
practices (research-wiki), for education, disruptive 
wiki’s (ebuss-wiki) to create innovative structures 
for healthcare (based on business models)?  
- 
How to inspire collaborative use of the wiki and 
convey it to a variety of research areas in eHealth? 
- 
How to use an eHealthwiki as an instrument to 
enhance the social impact of research? (putting 
evidence into practice)? 
- 
How to solve implementation issues in various 
contexts? 
We will ask the panelists to prepare statements for the 
discussion; the presentation will be moderated by Lisette 
van Gemert-Pijnen (first author).  
The outcomes will be used to contribute to general 
academic debate with regard to the usefulness of a wiki for 
improving collaboration in eHealth. The outcomes will also 
be used to upgrade the eHealthwiki and to finalize its’ 
design. The eHealthwiki will ultimately be disseminated via 
web2.0 communities for eHealth research and development 
and via other virtual knowledge networks for eHealth 
development. 
II. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper we have introduced a holistic guideline for 
the development of eHealth technologies and the connected 
eHealth toolkit for research and development. At the moment 
we are discussing the value of such an approach for the 
quality of eHealth technologies (design and implementation) 
Outcomes are used to upgrade the design of the 
eHealthwiki 
and 
to 
develop 
an 
infrastructure 
for 
implementation. Furthermore we will work to make the 
broader case on how wiki-development facilitates scientific 
collaboration and the social impact of science. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Black AD, Car J, Pagliari C, et al. The impact of eHealth on the 
quality and safety of health care: a systematic overview. PLoS Med 
2011;8(1):e1000387. PMID:21267058 
[2] WorldHealthOrganization. 
Medical 
devices: 
managing 
the 
mismatch: an outcome of the priority medical devices project. 
Geneva, Switserland: WHO Press, 2010. ISBN:9789241564045  
[3] Arnrich B, Mayora O, Bardram J, Tröster G. Pervasive healthcare: 
paving the way for a pervasive, user-centered and preventive 
healthcare 
model. 
Methods 
Inf 
Med 
2010;49(1):67-73. 
PMID:20011810 
[4] Atienza AA, Hesse BW, Gustafson DH, Croyle RT. E-health 
research and patient-centered care examining theory, methods, and 
application. Am J Prev Med Jan 2010;38(1):85-88. PMID:20117562 
[5] Chaudhry B, Wang J, Wu S, et al. Systematic review: impact of 
health information technology on quality, efficiency, and costs of 
medical 
care. 
Ann 
Intern 
Med 
2006;144(10):742-752. 
PMID:16702590 
[6] Chaudhry SI, Phillips CO, Stewart SS, et al. Telemonitoring for 
patients with chronic heart failure: a systematic review. J Card Fail 
Feb 2007;13(1):56-62. PMID:21080835 
[7] Ammenwerth E, Brender J, Nykanen P, Prokosch HU, Rigby M, 
Talmon J. Visions and strategies to improve evaluation of health 
information systems. Reflections and lessons based on the HIS-
EVAL workshop in Innsbruck. Int J Med Inform Jun 30 
2004;73(6):479-491. DOI:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2004.04.004 
[8] Kelders SM, Van Gemert-Pijnen JE, Werkman A, Nijland N, Seydel 
ER. Effectiveness of a Web-based intervention aimed at healthy 
dietary and physical activity behavior: a randomized controlled trial 
about users and usage. J Med Internet Res 2011;13(2):e32. 
PMID:21493191 
[9] Kelders SM, van Gemert-Pijnen JE, Werkman A, Seydel ER. Usage 
and effect of a web-based intervention for the prevention of 
overweight; a RCT. Stud Health Technol Inform 2010;160(Pt 1):28-
32. PMID:20841644 
[10] Kelders SM, van Gemert-Pijnen JE, Werkman A, Seydel ER. 
Evaluation of a web-based lifestyle coach designed to maintain a 
healthy 
bodyweight. 
J 
Telemed 
Telecare 
2010;16(1):3-7. 
PMID:20086259 
[11] Nijland N. Grounding eHealth: towards a holistic framework for 
sustainable eHealth technologies. Enschede: University of Twente, 
2011. ISBN:9789036531337 
[12] Nijland N, Cranen K, Boer H, van Gemert-Pijnen JE, Seydel ER. 
Patient use and compliance with medical advice delivered by a web-
based triage system in primary care. J Telemed Telecare 
2010;16(1):8-11. PMID:20086260 
[13] Nijland N, van Gemert-Pijnen J, Boer H, Steehouder MF, Seydel 
ER. Evaluation of internet-based technology for supporting self-
care: problems encountered by patients and caregivers when using 
self-care applications. J Med Internet Res 2008;10(2):e13. 
PMID:18487137 
[14] Nijland N, van Gemert-Pijnen JE, Boer H, Steehouder MF, Seydel 
ER. Increasing the use of e-consultation in primary care: results of 
an online survey among non-users of e-consultation. Int J Med 
Inform Oct 2009;78(10):688-703. PMID:19625210 
[15] Nijland N, Van Gemert-Pijnen JEWC, Kelders SM, Brandenburg 
BJ, Seydel ER. Factors influencing the use of a web application for 
supporting the self-care of patients with type 2 diabetes type II: a 
longitudinal 
study. 
J 
Med 
Internet 
Res 
2011;In 
press. 
DOI:10.2196/jmir.1603 
[16] Verhoeven F. When staff handle staph: user-driven versus expert-
driven communication of infection control guidelines. Enschede: 
University of Twente, 2009. ISBN:9789036528689 
[17] Verhoeven F, Tanja-Dijkstra K, Nijland N, Eysenbach G, van 
Gemert-Pijnen L. Asynchronous and synchronous teleconsultation 
for diabetes care: a systematic literature review. J Diabetes Sci 
Technol May 2010;4(3):666-684. PMID:20513335 
[18] Verhoeven F, van Gemert-Pijnen L, Dijkstra K, Nijland N, Seydel E, 
Steehouder 
M. 
The 
contribution 
of 
teleconsultation 
and 
videoconferencing to diabetes care: a systematic literature review. J 
Med Internet Res 2007;9(5):e37. PMID:18093904 
[19] Van Gemert-Pijnen JEWC, Nijland N, Ossebaard HC, et al. A 
holistic framework to improve the uptake and impact of eHealth 
technologies. 
J 
Med 
Internet 
Res 
2011; 
In 
press. 
DOI:10.2196/jmir.1672 
[20] European Centre for Public Policy. URL: http://health.parlicentre.eu/ 
186
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Appendix I: Screenshot of Homepage eHealthwiki 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
Appendix II: Screenshot of eHealth wiki depicting the Roadmap and its cycles  
 
 
 
 
 
188
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

