 
Adolescents Experiences with Video Consultations in Specialized Mental Health 
Services in Norway 
Henriette Lauvhaug Nybakke  
Norwegian Centre for E-health Research 
Tromso, Norway 
      e-mail: henriette.lauvhaug.nybakke@ehealthresearch.no  
Monika Knudsen Gullslett 
Norwegian Centre for E-health Research 
Tromso, Norway  
e-mail: monika.knudsen.gullslett@ehealthresearch.no
 
Frank Atle Larsen 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromso, Norway 
e-mail: frank.atle.larsen@unn.no 
 
Abstract—This project explored adolescents experiences with 
video consultations using a qualitative approach. Results from 
the study can be summarized in the six themes: 1) Therapy on 
the screen, 2) “Not for real” – The screen as a filter, 3) The 
screen as a “looking glass,” 4) Emotions on the screen, 5) 
Therapy in a physical setting, 6) Tools for Therapy.  
Keywords-Video consultations; mental health; adolecents  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Historically, social relations and meetings between 
people usually took place in physical environments. During 
the last decades, the story is in a persistent change, and we 
have moved from the physical to the digital. It has given us 
new possibilities for communication, such as Video 
Consultations (VC) for adolescents within mental health 
services. Use of VC can potentially reduce problems related 
to traveling to the mental health care facility, as Norway 
consists of long distances and at times extreme weather 
conditions. The aim of this project was to provide knowledge 
about adolescent’s experiences with the use of VC, and how 
the experience was compared to face-to-face meetings with 
their therapist.  
The adolescents’ experiences with VC are understood in 
light of Goffman’s theory of frontstage and backstage, 
related to sense and impact of place or place-lessness. 
Goffman have been analyzing and describing situations 
when people interact with each other in physical settings, 
either frontstage or backstage [1]. Electronic media facilitate 
communication in real time between people who are in 
different places. In addition, we let us inspire by Actor-
Network theory (ANT). ANT is used to study the relations 
between actors within a network, and how these relations 
change when a new actor (technology for VC) is introduced 
[2][3]. 
The methodological framework of the project is 
explained in Section 2, followed by a presentation of the 
results in Section 3, Section 4 consists of a discussion of VC 
for adolescents within mental health services, and finally 
conclusions and suggestions for further research in Section 5.  
 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
33 individual interviews with adolescents between 16 and 
23 years of age were conducted digitally between August 
2021 and April 2022. The qualitative in-depth interviews 
were 
based 
on 
a 
hermeneutical-phenomenological 
perspective [4]. A semi-structured thematic interview guide 
was used during the interviews, which was made in co-
creation between researchers and persons with user 
experiences.  
Administration personnel at the local mental health 
facility identified adolescents that suited the inclusion 
criteria, which were as follows: 1) VC in the period from 
March 16th to August 5th, 2021. 2) Between 16 and 23 years 
old. A psychologist from the local facility contacted and 
asked potential informants by phone. The ones who said yes 
were contacted by a researcher to schedule an interview. 
None of the informants retracted after the interviews. All 
participants received written and verbal information about 
the study. Consent was sent by mail to the project leader and 
stored separately from any data material. The informants are 
anonymized.   
The analysis of the interviews is inspired by an abductive 
approach [5]. It can be viewed as a cyclic process, which 
started during the transcription of the interviews. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
The results reveal that the use of VC is a complex matter, 
and that adolescents are a heterogeneous group with different 
preferences and needs. The following six themes emerged 
during the analysis: 1) Therapy on the screen, 2) “Not for 
real” – The screen as a filter, 3) The screen as a “looking 
glass,” 4) Emotions on the screen, 5) Therapy in a physical 
setting, 6) Tools for Therapy. The phenomena described 
within the themes are not discrete from another. The 
informants reported similar experiences with VC, but there 
were also individual preferences.  The six themes are further 
elaborated below:  
1) Therapy on the screen contains the difference between 
therapy and communication on screen versus in a physical 
setting. This includes difficulty and inhibition to talk about 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
inner thoughts, not able to fully observe body language or to 
have eye contact.  
2) “Not for real” – The screen is based on the perception 
of adolescents of VC as “unreal” and “less personal”. They 
experienced that the screen removed something from the 
relation.  
3) The screen as a “looking glass” describes the 
adolescents experiences with seeing their own image on the 
screen, and how this affected them during VC (distracting, 
challenging, triggering, etc.) The effect of your own image 
on the screen can be considered as the looking glass effect.  
4) Emotions on the screen stems from several adolescents 
who told that it was difficult to show emotions on screen. 
They did not receive the necessary emotional support and 
closeness. One of the consequences was that they did not talk 
about difficult topics. Several of those reasons are highly 
intertwined with already presented themes. However, some 
talked more about difficult topics in a less personal medium.  
5) Therapy in a physical setting is about the meaning of 
place, or lack thereof. Informants had experienced VC at 
home and/or at school. Their experiences differentiated 
based on surroundings at each location, for example fear that 
people would overhear versus feeling safe that no one would 
listen in.  
6) Tools for therapy are about tools that are being used in 
a physical setting, for example a white board, which some of 
the informants missed during VC. Either because it could not 
be used, or because it was not optimal during VC.  
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
VC can in some cases bring new opportunities for 
understanding and treating illness in context, leading to a 
greater emphasis on psychosocial approaches.  
Previous research on the use of VC shows that it can 
reduce travel-time, costs related to traveling to health care 
facilities and hours absent from school, and that trauma-
experienced adolescents shared more relevant information 
during VC than in a physical consultation [6][7]. However, 
adolescents could experience disturbances when having 
consultations at home and the naturalness of the relation with 
the therapist was reduced, and the screen could become a 
‘barrier’ for communication [7][8]. It is consistent with our 
findings, where the adolescents described the screen as a 
“not for real”, the inability to read each other’s body 
language on the screen, and how place and surroundings 
plays in.  
Use of VC may be challenging to get a complete and 
complex understanding and knowledge about the users’ 
situation in his or her context. This finding indicates a 
thorough assessment regarding use of VC. The adolescents 
in our study expressed that a combination of video and 
physical consultations was preferable. Their individuality 
and preferences should be considered when further 
developing and offering VC. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
VC was a rapid solution during the international corona 
crisis. Norwegian health authorities aim to improve mental 
health services, and to broaden the offer of digital solutions 
for the increasing number of adolescents in need of mental 
health care [9]. VC have the potential to increase the 
availability and flexibility of mental health services for 
adolescents and their caregivers, including communication 
between adolescents and service providers. There is a need 
for further investigation on use of VCs, including qualitative 
and quantitative research, to build solid, evidence-based 
knowledge that can contribute to providing mental health 
care at a distance. Further research should focus on user 
experiences, organizational change, co-creation between 
stakeholders, and implementing VCs to offer safe and 
accessible services. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper stems from the research project “Video 
Consultations in Mental Healthcare – young peoples' 
experiences”. The Northern Norway Regional Health 
Authority funded the project (project funding number HNF 
1592-21). We acknowledge the support and assistance 
provided to us by the service users of the mental health 
clinics in the hospital as we conducted this research. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Goffman, The presentation of self in everyday life, vol. 21. 
London: Harmondsworth, 1978.   
[2] K. Cresswell, “Using Actor-network theory to study health 
information technology interventions,” Stud Health Technol 
Inform, vol. 263, pp. 87-97, 2019. 
[3] K. Cresswell, A. Worth, and A. Sheikh, “Actor-Network 
Theory and its role in understanding the implementation of 
information technology developments in healthcare,” BMC 
Med Inform Decis Mak, vol. 10, pp. 1-11, 2010. 
[4] S. Kvale and S. Brinkmann, The Qualitative Research 
Interview as a Craft, 3rd ed. Hans Reitzels forlag, 2015. 
[5] N. Blaikie, Approaches to Social Enquiry. Polity Press, 1993.  
[6] D. L. Cunningham, E. H. Connors, N. Lever, and S. H.  
Stephan, “Providers' perspectives: utilizing telepsychiatry in 
schools,” Telemedicine and e-Health, vol. 19, pp. 794-799, 
2013. 
[7] S. K. Davidson, et al., “Best practice during teleconsultations 
with adolescents: a scoping review,” J Adolesc Health, vol. 
70, pp. 714-728, 2022.  
[8] A. Haig-Ferguson, et al., ““It's not one size fits all”; the use of 
videoconferencing for delivering therapy in a Specialist 
Paediatric Chronic Fatigue Service,” Internet Interv, vol. 15, 
pp. 43-51, 2018. 
[9] Norwegian Ministry of Health and Care Services, National 
plan for children and young peoples mental health (2019–
2024). Prop. 121 S (2018–2019) Proposition to the Storting. 
Oslo, 2019. Retrieved march, 2023 from 
https://www.regjeringen.no/contentassets/1ea3287725fa4a239
5287332af50a0ab/no/pdfs/prp201820190121000dddpdfs.pdf 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

