RFID-based Body Sensors for e-Health Systems and Communications  
Vijey Thayananthan 
Computer Science Department, 
Faculty of Computing and Information Technology 
King Abdul Aziz University, Jeddah 21589, 
Saudi Arabia 
thayananthan@live.co.uk 
 
 
Ahmed Alzahrani 
Computer Science Department, 
Faculty of Computing and Information Technology 
King Abdul Aziz University, Jeddah 21589, 
Saudi Arabia 
Ahmed_azahrani@hotmail.com
Abstract— Body sensors for e-health applications are 
involved in patients’ health monitoring and risk prediction 
systems. They can be used with RFID tags in some e-health 
applications which may be either internal or external. Body 
sensors are implantable and easy to fit around the particular 
organ in the human body. Long term diseases such as 
cancer, diabetic etc. need permanent body sensor. In this 
paper, RFID based body sensors are considered for e-health 
system and communications. This paper proposes a 
theoretical model of e-health system for people with 
diabetic and other long term diseases. In the theoretical 
model of risk prediction system, biosensor (glucose sensor) 
is considered as a body sensor. Quick care and resolution 
may be considered with latest technologies such as wireless 
networks, sensors and 2G-RFID system. Through this 
model, patients will be able to manage their life as normal 
because it is simple to use.  
 
Keywords-Body sensors; e-health system; RFID; risk 
prediction.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In e-health systems and communications, RFID-based 
body sensors can be used in many e-health applications not 
only for risk prediction. This device based on risk prediction 
system can be used easily with low-cost, and handy because 
this new system can be integrated within mobile phones. It 
means that the additional feature will be added to the mobile 
phone. Body sensors observe all behavior of the body 
conditions whenever we need. If any abnormal condition is 
diagnosed, body sensor reports to patient through the mobile 
phone. If patient’s condition gets serious or risk factor is 
higher than normal conditions, message will be reported to 
risk monitoring staff who works close to area. Here, patient’s 
location at the time may be different from his normal 
registered residence, but patient’s current location can be 
identified using latest communication technology.  
 
The body sensor, e-health system and communications, 
are mainly depending on the e-health applications, which 
show quick risk predictions. This system is not only for 
patients but also it fits to others who really want to monitor 
their body conditions and fitness daily. In addition to these 
benefits, it could be used anywhere and during the travelling 
or on the move. Some risks are age dependent, but this paper 
focuses on common risks predictions for all ages. In the 
human body, palms and feet have sensible area where 
prediction system can be used to monitor some risks through 
the e-health systems and communication.   
 
The proposed theoretical model of e-health system can be 
applied to people with diabetic and other long term diseases. 
In this model, communication aspect of risk prediction 
system is designed with RFID-based body sensor. Through 
this model, patients’ quick care and possible resolutions 
during the emergency situations can be delivered quickly and 
accurately. This model is targeted to patients with incurable 
long term disease such as diabetic and cancer because the 
risk factor of damaging other organs in the body is very high.   
 
Wireless body sensor network (WBSN) is widely used in 
patient’s monitoring, and risk prediction of e-health system 
[4]. When patients use WBSN nodes around the body 
randomly, constraint communication channel (CCC) is 
considered with transmission latency. In order to provide 
efficient e-health system, the improvement of CCC depended 
on resources and delays are necessary in terms of quality and 
quantity. Wearable sensors are introduced that RFID tags 
embedded with sensor are allocated to each position where 
risk is predictable. 
 
Active RFID tags integrated with sensors use battery 
during the communication. Passive RFID tags integrated 
with sensor don’t use battery because they receive necessary 
operating power from the RFID reader. In most of the e-
health systems, passive RFID tags with sensors are used to 
implement the wireless environment around the patient.  
Further, advantages of passive RFID tags such as lower cost, 
smaller size, longer life time etc. are useful.    
 
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II explains the RFID-based e-health systems and 
overall tasks of body sensors. Section III introduces the 
theoretical model for monitoring and risk prediction system 
with ADCA techniques. In Section IV, wireless networks 
for e-health systems are given with general discussions and 
recommendations. Overall conclusions will be in Section V.   
237
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II. 
RFID BASED E-HEALTH SYSTEM 
The complete e-health systems and communications are 
divided into few tasks they are body sensors functions, e-
health system interfaced with RFID tags, RFID readers and 
microprocessor, e-health data and signals from e-health 
applications and relevant communication system which 
control the emergency and priority situations. To design and 
develop such communications system, the Adaptive 
Dynamic Channel Allocation (ADCA) technique for 
patients’ monitoring and risk predicting data transmission is 
briefly mentioned. 
A. Body sensors and functions 
Body sensors have many types, which work according to 
the internal, abnormal and physical conditions of the body. 
Internal nerves system may affect the body; therefore, body 
sensor should be able to observe the nerve system. If 
particular organ is damaged and started to function strangely, 
it needs to be monitored with a special type of body sensor 
[13].  Some time same body sensor may be used, but it must 
be located to near that particular organ. Physical conditions 
such as weight, height, temperature etc. are observed by 
basic body sensors. They are easy to use, but functions are 
changed according to the e-health applications. If it is normal 
fever, it will monitor the temperature and display the results 
through the e-health system [2]. If it is high temperature 
monitored from the body sensor, the e-health systems and 
communications 
act quickly 
to 
solve 
the problem 
straightaway.  Here, the priority of the communication is 
very important rather than the other actions. 
   
B. RFID reader and e-health system 
Communication between the RFID reader and dedicated 
microprocessor is interfaced by few data and control signals. 
Here, e-health system consists of RFID reader, which 
connects the external systems, RFID tags embedded with 
body sensor [15] and microprocessor, which handles relevant 
signal processing for efficient communication. In e-health 
system, internal and external communications including 
interfacing must be efficient and reliable, but their signal 
properties such as rate, bandwidth etc. are varied according 
to the requirements. Data and control signals are very useful 
to make a quick connection or link for emergency e-health 
applications. RFID tags receive all pulses from the body 
sensors and pass all information to RFID reader.  
 
C. Data from e-health applications 
Data varied with e-health applications [16] need to be 
analyzed for risk predictions. Analyzed data can be used as 
reference data or signal which could be even different to 
individual patient. Communications between the e-health 
system and e-health application must be accurate. Data can 
be corrupted between these because many devices may be 
involved around there without any protections. Same 
equipment may have more than two features, which may be 
interfered each other. It is called feature interaction, which is 
one of the serious issues addressed in e-health systems. 
However, data must be cleaned and secured throughout the 
analysis otherwise risk prediction will be wrong. Data and 
relevant signals used in RFID reader and microprocessor are 
obtained carefully from the body sensors through the RFID 
tags.  
D. Communications for e-health applications 
Reliable and secure communication should be allocated 
for e-health applications because risk prediction should be 
able to handle within the fraction of the second. Is it 
possible? Heart attack needs to be responded within fixed 
minutes otherwise all communication systems are useless. 
Responding time for individual prediction depends on the e-
health applications.   In the next section, channel selection 
and priority procedures are considered for a theoretical 
model. As soon as I complete the practical model for the 
future risk prediction system, I can provide all the 
limitations and conditions in the next paper. 
 
III. 
MODEL OF RISK PREDICTION SYSTEM 
The theoretical model of risk prediction system can be 
applied as a general platform to all e-health applications 
which are either implemented with existing systems or new. 
This theoretical model should be able to use for multi e-
health applications simultaneously.  
                                                                                                                       
As shown in Figure 1, patient monitoring and risk 
prediction are combined with relevant communication 
schemes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Patient monitoring and e-health system 
 
 
In addition to this, communication is divided according 
to the priority. For instance, if patient needs immediate 
action within fixed time, RFID tag displays necessary 
procedures as a First Aid steps. Anyone around may provide 
First Aid before the e-health solution is executed. Through 
the other services, doctor, ambulance, and solution 
providers of e-health deliver the practical solution as soon as 
 
Body sensors 
& RFID tags  
RFID 
reader 
Access 
point 
wireless 
network 
e_health  
solutions 
Determine t from 
from patient’s 
location 
Communications 
Infrastructure 
Other 
services 
238
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

possible. Doctors don’t need to read all the history after he 
reaches the patient’s home. While he is travelling on the 
way, he must be informed what to do to save the life. 
Multiple solutions are considered simultaneously within 
limited time. In order to do such actions, constraint 
communication should be established. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  ADCA technique for patient  monitoring 
A. Sensors for risk prediction system  
Sensors are widely used in e-health systems, which 
monitor and record all necessary information from allocated 
sensors. In this paper, glucose sensor monitors all the 
abnormal behavior of blood circulations in the vassal. If the 
concentration of glucose level is increased in the blood 
vassal, diabetic patient may take self decision for quick care 
[1]. If patients are unable to do certain precautions, 
automatic care will be considered according to the priority.    
 
 
In this technique, patient’s emergency or priority calls 
are considered for quick decisions. In order to allocate the 
channel, flow chart depicted in Figure 2, will provide 
necessary steps [3].   
 
Time t can be calculated from patient’s location 
information where patient requests the call. It is the time 
interval between the acceptance and departure of the new 
call. 
 
!i
e
v
k
v
i
i =
 
 
 
 
 
      (1) 
 
Equation (1) represents Poisson distribution, which can be 
used for recording the arrival calls [7].   
 
e t
k
µ
1
=
  
 
 
 
 
      (2)  
 
From the equation (2), k is calculated as the probability of 
calls.  Here, µ  is the mean value of calls. When patient’s 
call is active during the interval t the probability k, is 
calculated to compute the expected number of channels. 
 
B. ADCA technique 
The ADAC algorithm is used to borrow available 
bandwidth from neighbours’ base stations when they are free 
to lend for emergency cases [5]. Wireless networks allow 
patients to use more than base station, but they are within the 
coverage area. If some base stations get busy than other base 
stations, channels should be transferred to other available 
base stations. During the channel allocation, delay is very 
important and it should be reduced. This situation should be 
identified and solved with where ADCA algorithm should 
have appropriate modifications. Hybrid multichannel multi-
radio [6] is introduced to enhance the performance which is 
better than pure ADCA. Moreover, in order to decrease the 
blocking call probabilities bandwidth and to increase the 
system’s overall performance, degradation and upgrade 
policies have been considered [14]. Through dynamic 
channel selection, devices can adaptively move to a clean 
channel as needed to avoid interference. 
 
No 
End 
 C > E 
  Calculate k 
Call request 
Start 
 C > 0 
End 
Yes  
Number of users from other 
neighbouring locations 
Compute expected 
number of channels E 
Find Available 
number of channels C 
Find Available 
number of channels C 
Reject  
Accept the call 
Yes  
Yes  
No 
No 
Determine t from 
patient’s location 
239
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

C. Palm-based risk prediction with sensors 
According to the [9], palms are considered as risk 
prediction area where we can use our new prediction 
system. Main sensible area of risks indicated by numbers is 
clearly shown on each part of the palms given in Figure 3. 
These areas are represented as risk monitoring points 
because most of the symptoms linked with particular organ 
can be identified through these points. Nerve between the 
particular point and organ is very important. If it is 
damaged, risk predictions through these points will fail 
straightaway. In that case, body sensor should be used 
directly from that particular organ.  All points indicated by 
numbers are linked with each part of the human organ. For 
instance, assume a human organ is in trouble for some 
reason and nerve is not damaged. In this case, risk 
prediction is possible through that point, but efficient body 
sensor must be used. Generally, if any of an organ in the 
human body is started with minor problems, sensible areas 
or points indicated in the palm will be affected with some 
kind of pain. Sensors will identify the pain including pulses 
which behave abnormal during the risk time. Pain may be 
continued for several days or months in regular interval. 
Risk prediction cannot be confirmed without proper 
monitoring. It means that each e-health application has 
certain properties, characteristics and definitions. According 
to the e-health application, patient’s monitoring pattern will 
change.  
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Risk monitoring points for prediction 
 
These body sensors (biosensors) will predict the risks 
and abnormal behaviour in the particular organ. In order to 
identify these risks, proper risk prediction system for all 
ages is considered in the next section.  
 
Wearable gloves can be designed with RFID tags, which 
contain correct sensor and necessary facilities to monitor the 
risk area indicated in Figure 3.  They are linked with high 
speed wireless technology, so monitored data and patient’s 
information are analyzed quickly. In order to finalize the 
results, efficient sensors must be used.   
 
Figure 3 provides specific numbers, which are called risk 
indicating area. If body sensor is used in number 25, the 
basic history of the diabetic patient can be identified. It 
depends on the body sensor and abnormal pulses created 
from that specific number. If body sensor is slightly moved, 
correct signal would not be recorded therefore, correct 
decision may not be possible.   
 
IV. 
WIRELESS NETWORKS 
Wireless networks, such as WLAN, WiFi, WiMax, etc., 
are considered in the E-health implementations. The 2.4 GHz 
ISM band is allocated in many wireless network and 
technologies (examples: Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, ZigBee/802.15.4, 
DECT, etc.) in hospitals and homes. In ten years, wireless 
network will be everywhere because RFID sensors and 
wireless sensors network (WSN) have been applied most of 
the applications in profit and nonprofit organisations.   
 
In E-health, WSNs have been deployed in where 
individual E-health application is monitored. In this paper, 
RFID sensors are incorporated with WSN which consists of 
a group of RFID tags integrated with RFID sensor. These 
RFID sensors are supplied by low energy batteries and 
having very limited sensing, signal processing, and wireless 
communication capabilities. All RFID sensors transmit data 
to the same collector node, known as base station (BS). 
Such networks have been deployed in a wide range of 
monitoring in E-health applications.  
 
Wireless sensors networks in E-health applications are 
increased with significant traffic loads during the busy 
period. In order to simplify this problem, MAC protocols 
based on deterministic scheduling algorithms can be used 
[8]. In this research, optimized version of this algorithm will 
be consensually considered. In order to control the delay 
and save the power, TDMA-based MAC protocols can be 
used, but it needs superframe time-slot to transmit data. The 
proposed algorithm for our research should help to improve 
this time-slot and reduce energy consumption in E-health 
applications. 
 
240
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A. Discussion and recommendations 
Communication is established through many ways, which 
increases the efficiency of e-health systems they are such as 
e-health via high speed satellite and mobile network 
communications.  In order to increase the quality of service 
in the e-health system, the digital video broadcasting through 
satellite version 2 (DVB-S2) can be applied [10]. Through 
this version, variable rates can be applied to individual e-
health application.   
 
In 
order 
to 
improve 
the 
e-health 
systems’ 
communication, maximum lifetime of WBSN and WBAN, 
minimum energy route and efficient way of using constraint 
are challenging issues.     
 
The e-health systems and communications prefer to 
allocate 
bandwidth 
efficiently 
when 
integrating 
heterogeneous wireless networks is obviously a challenge. 
“Consistency medical QoS providing over integrated 
WiFi/WiMax wireless networks” is challengeable research. 
Efficient radio resource management, scheduling and 
connection admission control, are still open issues in 
WiMax networks they are also crucial in integrated 
WiFi/Wimax wireless networks for E-Healths services. 
 
Some risks may be unbelievable, but they need to be 
monitored at least 24 hours continuously. Some risks may be 
monitored more than 24 hours, but not continuously. Some 
cases are different it means that monitoring should be done 
over a fixed period of time in daily or monthly basis. In order 
to monitor such a risk prediction data, programmable e-
health system will be recommended.   
 
According to [12], traffic-awareness is most helpful when 
traffic demands are concentrated at a small number of 
heavily-loaded access points located close to each other.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Body sensors are very useful in patients’ health 
monitoring and risk prediction systems. When they are used 
with RFID tags, e-health systems and communications are 
processed easily, accurately and quickly. Body sensors are 
implantable for long term diseases such as cancer, diabetic 
etc. without major surgery. 
 
In the theoretical model of prediction system, channel 
selections and priorities are very important. Existing 
dynamic channel allocation algorithms are investigated and 
compared with modified algorithm, which should be less 
complex than the existing one. Quick responding and 
complexities are traded off; therefore, channel selection 
algorithms must be considered carefully.  
 
RFID 
and 
wireless 
based 
e-health 
system 
are 
investigated with body sensors. Although there are few 
disadvantages when they are used individually, multiple 
actions and solutions can be performed simultaneously.   
 
Communication for e-health system should be efficient 
reliable and secure for multiple e-health applications. In 
order 
to 
improve 
such 
an 
e-health 
systems 
and 
communication, ADCA technique should be modified to 
multiple rate e-health applications with latest high speed 
network and communication technology.   
 
Diabetic patient may have a lot of other symptoms 
because it will easily damage most of the human organs very 
quickly. Risk prediction system will help to find all risks in a 
daily basis without pricking pain. In order to improve the 
risk prediction methodology in the e-health system, risk 
prediction and patient monitoring should be integrated with 
WBSN or RFID technology. In the future e-health system, 
immediate resolutions techniques are also added.  It means 
that efficient ADCA technique should be used to implement 
the priority channel for a particular patient.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I would like to give my particular thanks to my 
collaborator Prof. G. Markarian for his insightful comments 
and constructive suggestions.   
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Allen, N. A., Fain, J. A., Braun, B., and Chipkin, S. R. (2009). 
Continuous Glucose Monitoring in Non–Insulin-Using 
Individuals with Type 2 Diabetes: Acceptability Feasibility, 
and Teaching Opportunities. DIABETES TECHNOLOGY & 
THERAPEUTICS, Volume 11, Number 3, pp.151-158. 
[2] Bielskis, A. A., Denisovas, V., Drungilas, D., and Gricius, G. 
(2010). Multi-Agent-Based Human Computer Interaction of 
E-Health Care System for People with Movement Disabilities. 
ISSN 1392 – 1215, Italy. 
[3] Papazoglou, P. M., Karras, D. A., and Papademetriou, R. C. 
(2005). A dynamic channel assignment simulation system for 
large 
scale 
cellularTelecommunications, 
ECE 
Dept., 
University of Portsmouth, UK.   
[4] Challa, N., Cam, H., and Sikri, M. (2008). Secure and 
Efficient Data Transmission over Body Sensor andWireless 
Networks. Computer Science and Engineering Department, 
Arizona State University, Tempe, Az 85287, USA: Hindawi 
Publishing 
Corporation 
EURASIP 
Journal 
onWireless 
Communications and Networking. 
[5] Dagtas, S., Pekhteryev, G., Sahinoglu, Z., Cam, H., and 
Challa, 
N. 
(2008). 
Real-Time 
and 
SecureWireless 
HealthMonitoring. USA: Hindawi Publishing Corporation, 
International Journal of Telemedicine and Applications. 
[6] Ding, Y., Pongaliur, K., and Xiao, L. (2008). Hybrid Multi-
Channel Multi-Radio Wireless Mesh Networks. Michigan 
State University, USA: Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering. 
[7] Varpe1, D., and Mundada, G. (2011).  A Distributed Dynamic 
Channel Allocation In Cellular Communication, Department 
of 
Electronics 
and 
Telecommunication, 
PICT, 
Pune 
University, Pune, Maharashtra,India  
[8] Gama, Ó., and Carvalho, P. (2007). A Time-slot Scheduling 
Algorithm 
for 
e-Health 
Wireless 
Sensor 
Networks. 
241
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Department of Informatics, University of Minho Braga, 
Portugal. 
[9] Devendra, V. (1997). Health in your hands, Navneet 
publication (India) Ltd, Thirty-fifth edition, pp. 65-70.  
[10] Panayides, A., Pattichis, M., Pattichis, C., and Pitsillides, A. 
(2011). A Tutorial for Emerging Wireless Medical Video 
Transmission Systems. Department of Computer Science, 
University of Cyprus, Cyprus: Ieee Antennas & Propagation 
Magazine, Accepted For Publication. 
[11] Park, C., and Chou, P. H. (2010). An Ultra-Wearable, 
Wireless, Low Power, ECG Monitoring System. University of 
California. 
[12] Rozner, E., Mehta, Y., and Akella, A. (2007). Traffic-Aware 
Channel Assignment in Enterprise Wireless LANs. University 
of Texas at Austin. 
[13] Sullivan, T. J., Deiss, S. R., and Cauwenberghs, G. (2007). A 
Low-Noise, Non-Contact EEG/ECG Sensor. Division of 
Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego: 
IEEE. 
[14] Vergados, D. D. (2008). Simulation and Modeling Bandwidth 
Control in Wireless Healthcare Information Systems. 
Department of Information and Communication Systems 
Engineering, Greece: SIMULATION, Vol. 83, Issue 4, pp. 
347–364 
[15] Yang, L., Vyas, R., Rida, A., Pan, J., and Tentzeris, M. M. 
(2008). 
Wearable 
RFID-Enabled 
Sensor 
Nodes 
for 
Biomedical Applications. Georgia Electronic Design Center, 
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, USA: 
Electronic Components and Technology Conference, EEE, pp 
2156-2159. 
[16] Zeeb, E. (2010) Generic Platform forAdvanced E-Health 
Applications. University of Rostock, 18057 Rostock, 
Germany: 
Institute 
of 
Applied 
Microelectronics 
and 
Computer Engineering. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
242
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

