Measurement  of Shoulder and Trunk Movements in Hemiplegic Participants Using  
a System for Collecting Motion Data  
Yukihide Nishimura, Hiroyuki Tsuboi,  
Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, 
Iwate Medical University 
 Morioka, Japan 
e-mail: ynishi@iwate-med.ac.jp, hiroyuki.tsuboi@j.iwate-
med.ac.jp,  
Yoshitoshi Murata, Oky Dicky Ardiansyah Prima 
Faculty of Software and Information Science, 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Japan 
e-mail: {y-murata, prima} @iwate-pu.ac.jp
Abstract—Upper limb and trunk functionalities are important 
for performing activities of daily living, such as eating, 
drinking, clothing and personal care. However, hemiplegic 
patients impair upper extremity functionalities, the activities 
are performed by using compensatory movement strategies. 
Recently, Takahashi and Murata et al. developed a system for 
collecting motion data with a cloud service. The purpose of this 
study was to investigated whether clinical application of this 
system for collecting motion data is available as assessment for 
hemiplegic patients. Two hemiplegic participants and one 
healthy participant performed drinking task, and the angles of 
shoulder abduction and trunk flexion were calculated. Angles 
of shoulder abduction and trunk flexion during drinking 
between non-paretic and healthy sides were similar, however, 
the larger angles of shoulder abduction and trunk flexion 
during drinking by paretic side showed compared with them 
by non-paretic and healthy sides. We believe that this system 
will be available as a quantitative assessment of activities of 
daily living in patients with disabilities. 
Keywords-rehabilitation treatment; activities of daily living; 
disability; functional recovery. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
Upper limb functionality is important for performing 
Activities of Daily Living (ADL). However, patients who 
have suffered neurological damage owing to stroke may 
have impaired upper extremity functionality (hemiplegia), 
then the activity must be performed by using compensatory 
movement strategies. Therefore, hemiplegic patients needed 
the rehabilitation treatments to improve upper limb and 
compensatory functionalities. Thus, to assess the movements 
of upper limb and trunk when performing ADL is important 
to evaluate impairment severity and help in the design of 
physical and occupational therapy interventions tailored to 
hemiplegic patients. 
Recently, many researchers have tried to estimate 
physical activities from acceleration and/or gyro sensor data 
obtained from wearable devices and/or smart phones. In 
addition, Zhang et al. developed a cyber-physical system for 
patient-centric healthcare applications and services that was 
built on cloud and big data analytics technologies [1]. The 
system consisted of a data collection layer, a data 
management layer and an application service layer to collect 
and follow up on many kinds of big data. It used a security 
tag to maintain security. Doukas et al. also proposed a 
mobile system that enables electronic healthcare data 
storage, update and retrieval using cloud computing [2]. A 
mobile application was developed using Google’s Android 
OS and Amazon’s S3 to provide management of patient 
health records and medical images. Based on the above 
background, Takahashi et al. developed a system for 
collecting motion data using Google Firebase service [3]. 
The system collects and stores sensor and video data 
synchronously, and allows appropriate persons to access 
stored motion data. The number of subjects in previous 
studies for a quantitative assessment of movement, such as 
three-dimensional (3-D) motion analysis is relatively small 
[4][5]. However, we believe that the system developed by 
Takahashi et al. can be expected collecting big data. The 
collecting big data may allow a better understanding of limbs 
and trunk functionality for performing ADL and help in the 
design of physical and occupational therapy interventions 
tailored to hemiplegic patients. 
The purpose of this study was to investigate whether 
clinical application of a system for collecting motion data is 
available as assessment on rehabilitation treatment for 
hemiplegic patients. 
In Section II, the method in this study is explained. The 
results are outlined and discussed in Section III. Conclusion 
and future work are described in Section IV. 
II.
METHODS
Two hemiplegic adult participants and one healthy adult 
participant were participated in this study. The upper limb 
functionalities in hemiplegic participants were assessed with 
Fugl–Meyer Assessment of Upper Extremity (FMA-UE). 
The arm impairment can be classified based on FMA-UE 
scores between 39 and 57 (moderate impairment) and 58 to 
64 (mild impairment) in accordance with previous report [4]. 
Hemiplegic participant A had moderate arm impairment 
(FMA-UE scores: 43) and hemiplegic participant B had mild 
impairment (FMA-UE scores: 59). All participants could 
drink a cup of water without assistance. Participants 
performed drinking task three times on both sides, 
respectively. The angles of shoulder abduction and trunk 
flexion during second task were calculated. The task was 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

performed in the following steps: 1) reaching out for the cup, 
2) grasping and transporting the cup forward to the mouth, 3) 
drinking, 4) transporting the cup backward to the pickup 
point, and 5) returning the hand to the initial position [5]. 
Shoulder and Trunk movements were measured with a 3-D-
gyro sensor. We used two SONY Smart Watch 3 units as the 
3-D gyro sensor [6]. 3-D gyro sensors were placed on the L1 
spinous process and upper arm (see Figure 1).  
Figure 1. Wearable device placements. 
Figure 2. Recording of movie during drinking 
The movies during drinking were recorded by the tablet-
type device that accepted to 3-D gyro sensors (Figure 2). The 
data were expressed in relation to the percentage of the 
drinking task cycle that had lapsed (0–100% of the drinking 
task cycle). 
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 3 showed the data of changes of angle on shoulder 
abduction (Figure 3A) and trunk flexion (Figure 3B) during 
drinking. Time of drinking by paretic side was longer than 
by non-paretic side in each hemiplegic patient.  
Figure 4 showed angle of shoulder abduction (Figure 4A) 
and trunk flexion (Figure 4B) during drinking on normalized 
times. Angles of shoulder abduction and trunk flexion during 
drinking between non-paretic and healthy sides were similar, 
however, the larger angles of shoulder abduction and trunk 
flexion during drinking by paretic side showed compared 
with them by non-paretic and healthy sides. 
In this study, we measured shoulder and trunk 
movements in two hemiplegic participants using a system for 
collecting motion data with a cloud service, and found that 
the larger angles of shoulder abduction and trunk flexion 
during drinking by paretic side compared with non-paretic 
and healthy sides. In general, 3-D imaging measurement 
technique is powerful tool for a quantitative assessment of 
movement in all degrees of freedom, previous studies have 
reported that movement when drinking for hemiplegic 
patients using 3-D motion analysis. In fact, some studies 
revealed that larger shoulder abduction in hemiplegic 
patients compared with healthy individuals [4][5]. In 
addition, we insist that angle of shoulder on normalized time 
during drinking (Figure 4A) in this study was similar to that 
using 3-D motion analysis [5]. Also, trunk movement has 
been reported to have a significant correlation with stroke 
impairment severity [4][7]. This was confirmed in this study, 
i.e., the difference of trunk flexion between paretic and 
nonparetic sides in hemiplegic participant with moderate 
impairment level was larger at 20% during drinking than that 
in hemiplegic participant mild impairment level (Figure 4B).  
Alt Murphy et al. [4] purposed that compensatory trunk 
movements should be considered as an essential part of 
movement patterns after stroke and included in evaluation 
models.  
Finally, we suggest that using of a system for collecting 
motion data with a cloud service reflect more real physical 
activities and/or functionalities. 
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We believe that a system for collecting motion data with a 
cloud service will be available as a quantitative assessment 
of ADL in patients with disabilities. The future work must 
assess of the reliability of data obtained from this system. In 
addition, to be more developed this system need to 
investigate many patients who have suffered neurological 
damage owing to stroke and cervical spinal cord injuries. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 3. Raw data of shoulder (A) and trunk (B) in two hemiplegic 
participants and one healthy participant obtained from wearable devices. 
Figure 4. angles of shoulder (A) and trunk (B) on normalized time. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank Shunpei Okimura, Fumiaki Yamaguchi, Ryo 
Sato, Katsunori Takahashi, Syuusuke Takahashi, Shota 
Idobata and Minami Suzuki for the technical assistance. The 
research 
and 
development 
were 
supported 
by 
the 
MIC/SCOPE #181602007. 
REFERENCES
[1]
Y. Zhang, M. Qiu, C. W. Tsai, M. M. Hassan, and A. Alamri, 
“Health-CPS: Healthcare cyber-physical system assisted by 
cloud and big data”, IEEE, SystemsJournal, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 
88-95, 2017. 
[2]
C. Doukas, T. Pliakas, and I. Maglogiannis, “Mobile 
healthcare 
information 
management 
utilizing 
cloud 
computing and android OS”, IEEE, 2010 Annual International 
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology, pp. 1037-1040, 2010. 
[3]
R. Takahashi,  Y. Murata, and O. D. A. PrimaI, “A system for 
collecting motion data on patients’ activities of daily living”, 
unpublished. 
[4]
M. Alt Murphy, C. Willén, and K. S. Sunnerhagen, 
“Kinematic 
variables 
quantifying 
upper-extremity 
performance after stroke during reaching and drinking from a 
glass”, Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair, vol. 25, no. 1, 
pp. 71-80, 2011. 
[5]
K. Kim, et al., “Kinematic analysis of upper extremity 
movement during drinking in hemiplegic subjects”, Clinical 
Biomechanics, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 248-256, 2014. 
[6]
SONY Smart Watch 3, https://www.sonymobile.com/global-
en/products/smart-products/smartwatch-3-swr50/#gref, 
 [retrieved: January, 2019]. 
[7]
G. Thielman, T. Kaminski, and A. M. Gentile, “Rehabilitation 
of reaching after stroke: comparing 2 training protocols 
utilizing trunk restraint”, Neurorehabilitation and Neural 
Repair, vol. 22, no. 6,pp. 697-705, 2008. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

