Evaluation of HelloDoctor 24x7 Healthcare Services in Rural India: A Case Study 
Ashish Joshi  
         Center for Global Health and Development &HSRA 
College of Public Health, UNMC 
Omaha, UNMC 
Email: Ashish.joshi@unmc.edu 
 
Navya R Rao  
Center for Public Health Informatics 
Asian Institute of Public Health 
Bhubaneswar, India 
e-mail: nramesh@aiph.ac.in 
                                                                                        Pinaki Panigrahi  
Center for Global Health and Development 
College of Public Health, UNMC 
Omaha, UNMC 
Email: ppanigrahi@unmc.edu 
 
Abstract—The poor state of healthcare systems and 
outcomes in developing countries is widely known. There 
has been a growth in telephone consultation to assess 
patients' symptoms, providing health information and 
referring patients to appropriate levels of care. In this 
case study, we evaluate the utilization of HelloDoctor 
24X7 health hotline services aimed to facilitate health 
information, consultation and referral services over a 
three month period (June-Sep 2011) in the State of 
Orissa, India. A total of 1900 calls were received during 
this three month period. Gender data was available on 
1377 callers of which 74% calls (n=1023) were made by 
males. 68% of the calls were made in the evening. Health 
information was delivered in 11% of the cases, doctor 
information was provided in 6%, 
and hospital 
information and medicine related general information 
was delivered in 6% of the cases. Of the total 1900 calls 
made, only 94 were referred during this time period that 
included 17% of the calls being actually referred to the 
specialists. 48% of the calls were made to gather 
information 
about 
treatment 
and 
8% 
gathered 
information about medicines. Common ailments for 
which the calls were made included fever, diarrhea and 
vomiting, diet and weight management, allergies and 
women health related issues. 
 
         Keywords-health hotlines; evaluation; rural; triage; 
information. 
       
           I.    INTRODUCTION 
 
There has been an increase in the use of telephone 
consultation and triage; the process where calls, from people 
with a health care problem, are received, assessed and 
managed by giving advice or by referral to a more 
appropriate service [1]. These systems, in general, aim to 
help with the provision of out of hours care, manage 
demand for care, or provide an additional source of help and 
advice that is not limited to out of hours care alone.  
Health hotlines are medical call centers that provide health-
related information, advice, referrals, and sometimes 
prescriptions to individual callers over a phone line [2]. 
Callers are connected to health professionals such as nurses, 
paramedics, or physicians, who usually follow standard 
protocols to assess medical situations and provide 
information and advice. Health hotline is described as a 
service whose main goal is to provide medical advice and 
information over the telephone and has following four 
characteristics [2]: (a) it primarily gives information to 
callers who are individual patients, but many also serve as 
medical personnel or health workers, delivers information to 
callers mainly through a voice call, over the caller’s wireless 
or landline telephone connection, (c) more inbound service 
as it receives many more calls than it makes; the limited 
number of outbound calls may be for follow up or reminders 
and (d) callers may be anywhere and need not be at a 
specific location such as a telemedicine center, a health 
clinic or with a health worker. Health hotlines provide 
several services such as medical information, triage, 
consultation, diagnosis, referral, treatment and counseling.  
                The poor state of healthcare systems and 
outcomes in developing countries is widely known. There 
are more than four billion mobile connections-most in 
developing countries-health hotlines accessible to mobile 
phone basic health information [2]. This can provide care 
even to people in sparsely populated or low income areas 
where there are few health care facilities and doctors. There 
are several factors that might hinder achieving good health 
outcomes and these include lack of primary care physicians, 
lack of financial resources to consult better quality 
providers, high cost of health facilities and presence of low 
quality primary care facilities and personnel are often not 
highly skilled.  
                  People lack basic information about the location 
and availability of pharmacies, clinics and laboratories and 
about prescription medicines. People widely consult with 
informal, sometimes traditional, healthcare providers who 
may not be trained or ethical [3]. Poor information leads to 
poor healthcare outcomes. Individuals spend time and 
money to go to the doctor because they don’t know the 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

condition and travel long distances to find that the 
healthcare provider is unavailable. Health hotline providers 
in developing countries have been and utilize diverse 
approaches to deliver healthcare services. These include 
deploying of phone and video units at pharmacies linked to 
health hotline [4], multiple interventions in rural areas to 
strengthen and supplement health system [5], integration of 
patient records with existing facilities and build new clinics 
[6] and expansion of rural telemedicine facilities [7]. The 
hotlines utilize health call agents from diverse backgrounds 
and roles and responsibilities and can include doctors, 
nurses, paramedics and non medical personnel. Several 
health hotlines have been developed in developing countries 
including Pakistan [4], India [5], Mexico [6] and 
Bangladesh [7]. Health Management Research Institute 
(HMRI) is a not for profit organization and offers free 
services 
includes 
phone 
consults, 
counseling 
and 
complaints, information on facilities and drugs and mobile 
health clinics [5]. The top caller complaints in this case were 
recurring abdominal pain and back and knee pain [5].                           
                    However, Health line is for profit organization 
offering phone consults information on facilities and drugs, 
test results interpretation and discounts on hospital visits. 
The major caller complaints included chronic diseases, 
ENT, early pregnancy, and diarrhea [7]. Health hotlines may 
be sponsored by a government, a healthcare provider, or a 
Mobile 
Network 
Operator 
(MNO) 
and 
some 
are 
independent. Health hotline providers can provide proper 
information at right times that can significantly reduce the 
overall cost associated with healthcare. Informed individuals 
can prevent adverse health outcomes, treat some conditions 
themselves, and make the right decisions during medical 
emergencies. A health hotline can create a low-cost, 
widespread, infrastructural model for the delivery of health 
information. Health hotlines face several challenges such as 
difficulty in identifying who and what services to offer, 
reimbursement model associated with these services, 
measures of effectiveness of these services, associated 
medical liabilities and how can these services be 
sustainable. Another major limitation of existing Health 
hotlines is the limited evaluation of these services especially 
in developing countries. There is a continuous ongoing need 
to evaluate and gauge effectiveness of Health Hotline 
programs.  
            The objective of our study is to evaluate ―Hello 
Doctor 24X7 healthcare services, a health hotline aimed to 
deliver health information, consultations, and triage and 
referral services to individuals from diverse settings such as 
urban, rural and tribal in the State of Orissa, India.  
 
HelloDoctor 24x7 healthcare services 
HelloDoctor 24X7 [8] provides an opportunity for 
healthcare service providers to extend their services and 
facilities to the patients in need. As a result, general public 
is empowered to make informed decisions. People anytime, 
anywhere can dial on 0674-66 55 555 and can have 
necessary information to take proper healthcare decisions 
free of cost. It uses a Peopletech call center [9] package that 
sends calls to a health call agent and allows an agent to 
place calls. It can run in an inbound, outbound (as predictive 
or manual dialing) or blended capacity (handling inbound 
and outbound calls in the same agent session). There is also 
the ability to allow for Interactive Voice Response (IVR) 
applications 
interacting 
with 
customers' 
calls. 
The 
HelloDoctor 24X7 services have both individual and 
institutional members. The program is managed by 
individuals with two roles: health advice officers and 
healthcare associates.  
               These individuals had diverse backgrounds and 
included healthcare professionals including medical trained 
allopathic doctors, other professionals including (Ayuvedic / 
Homeopathic / Physiotherapy), nurses or other paramedical 
staff. The professionals were trained in addressing the needs 
of the health information seekers. An initial training was 
provided to the different health advice officers and 
healthcare associates. The Hello Doctor 24X7 has 
developed clinical protocols for the management of minor 
ailments and while initial support can be provided by the 
health advise officers and if needed the calls can be triaged 
to the specialists. The health information service providers 
support for providing health information relevant to specific 
hospitals, nursing homes, clinics, consultants, blood donors, 
ambulance and information about the doctors on call. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Hellodoctor 24X7 healthcare delivery services 
 
                               
                                   II. METHODS 
 
Hello 24X7 
Individual 
User  
Institutional 
Members 
Health Advise 
Officers 
 
Healthcare 
Associates 
 
Tele triage 
Follow the protocol 
Own Doctors’ 
panel 
Health Information Service 
Problems list, Second opinion 
Hospital/Nursing Home/clinics 
Consultants/Blood donors 
Ambulance/ Doctor on call 
 
Doctors 
Counselor 
Dietician 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Analysis was performed on the data gathered during June 
2011-Sep-2011 using the HelloDoctor 24X7 services. The 
data recorded during every call included caller id, date and 
time of the call, age, gender, purpose and if the call was 
triaged or not. The entire data gets stored in the Microsoft 
SQL database. For the purpose of this study we particularly 
explored the utilization of HelloDoctor 24X7 services over 3 
month period (June-Sep 2011).  The date and time variable 
was further stratified into month, day (Monday to Sunday) 
and time (morning/afternoon) to explore and better 
understand the temporal utilization of these services.  
 
III. STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 
 
Descriptive analysis was performed and means and standard 
deviation was reported for the continuous variables and 
frequency 
distribution 
for 
the 
categorical 
variables.  
Stratified analysis was performed to examine the average 
number of calls during different days and time. Further 
stratified analysis was performed to determine differences in 
the number of health information calls made either by males 
or females during this time period. Correlation analysis was 
performed to determine association between the number of 
calls and the day (i.e. Monday to Sunday) and time 
(morning/afternoon) of the calls. All analysis was performed 
using SAS version 9.1 
 
     IV. RESULTS 
 
Overall 1900 calls were made during a 3 month period 
(June-Sep 2011) (Figure2). There has been a consistent 
increase in the total number of calls over these months. The 
average age of the callers was 20 years (SD=20.6). Gender 
data was available on 1377 callers of which 74% (n=1023) 
were males and 26% (n=354) were females. 68% (n=1345) 
of the calls were made in the evening as compared to the 
remaining 32% calls that were made in the morning 
(n=554). Fifty three calls have been received for the month 
of September (Till September 3, 2011). 
 
 
 
                  Figure 2. Total number of calls during June-Sep 2011 
 
We also performed analysis to explore temporal utilization 
of these health information calls. Figure3 illustrates that the 
majority of calls were made on Friday (n=300/1900), 
followed by Wednesday (n=273/1900) and Saturday 
(n=272/1900).  Our results reflect a change in the utilization 
of health information calls using the HelloDoctor 24X7 
services.   
 
 
 
Figure 3. Average number of calls stratified by days of the week 
 
Results also show that majority of the calls were made in the 
afternoon for the different days of the week (Figure4).  
Majority of the calls were made on Thursday afternoon 
(n=204) followed by Friday afternoon (n=203). Results 
showed that the lowest number of calls were made on 
Thursday morning (n=67) 
 
 
  
Figure 4. Calls stratified by the time of the day  
 
 Our results also showed gender disparity in the utilization of 
HelloDoctor 24x7 healthcare services (Figure5). Males were 
consistently making use of these services than females for all 
the days of the week.  Most of the calls by males were made 
on Sunday while most of the calls by females were made on 
Monday. 
 
 
 
        Figure 5. Gender comparisons of health information calls 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Additional analysis was performed to determine the 
characteristics of the calls during the time period from June-
Sep2011.  Results found 18% (n=340) of the calls to be 
prank calls. In 11% (n=210) of the cases, health information 
was received, doctor information was provided in 6% 
(n=121), hospital information and medicine related general 
information in 6% (n=108) cases.  Additional calls gathered 
neurologist (4%; n=73), orthopedic, obstetrics and skin and 
venereal disease related information (3%; n=63).  
 
                 We also performed triage analysis to determine 
the frequency of calls that were referred to the specialists. Of 
the total 1900 calls made during this time period, 94 were 
referred.  Of these calls, only 17% (n=16) of the calls were 
actually referred to the specialists. 46% (n=43/94) of the 
calls were made to gather information, 48% (n=45/94) of the 
calls focused primarily on treatment and the remaining 8% 
(n=6/94) was to gather information about medicines. 
Common ailments for which the calls were made included 
fever, diarrhea and vomiting, diet and weight management, 
allergies and women health related issues.  
 
                              V. DISCUSSION 
 
Telephone access and consultation can be used to overcome 
geographical barriers. Health hotline provides health 
information and can help the public make informed 
decisions. They can also help in providing information and 
handling surges during specific emergency responses. 
Previous studies have shown that people from the remote 
areas in Bangladesh, now find it convenient to pick up their 
mobiles and call for help. The rural areas, where 80% of the 
populations inhabit, lack hospitals, clinics, health facilities 
and particularly qualified doctors. To be able to talk to a 
doctor is a unique privilege for the villager or an individual 
in a regular medical situation or emergency. However, there 
is a significant need to continuously evaluate health hotlines 
programs so that greater adoption and dissemination of 
these services can be done.  
                 The results of our study present an overview of the 
utilization of the health hotline program HelloDoctor 24X7 
serving the rural areas of Orissa. The program facilitates 
delivery of health information, consultation, triage and 
referral services. Results of our study show significant age 
and gender variation in seeking HelloDoctor 24X7 
healthcare services. Males were likely to utilize these 
services. Results showed significant variation in the times 
when these calls are made. Majority of the calls were made 
during afternoon than morning that might reflect a need of 
more trained staff when the call load is more. Health hotlines 
is an excellent way to answer and be in touch with those who 
consider this service as a place where to find somebody 
interested in their requests, for not having, sometimes, the 
possibility to access to information otherwise. 
               However, there are several limitations of the study. 
The health hotline delivery model is not a full substitute for 
traditional, in person modes of health information delivery. 
Several factors also limit the ability of health hotlines to 
provide information and advice to callers. First, some callers 
require in-person consultations, prescription drugs, or other 
treatments that may not be affordable even if they are 
available nearby. Second, health hotlines have limited 
ability to follow up with callers to understand the results of 
their information and advice. Patients do not regularly call 
to report the results after they complete a course of 
treatment or act on the hotline’s advice. This makes it 
difficult for hotlines to judge how successful their 
interventions have been and how to adapt their protocols or 
recommendations. If anything, the patient is more likely to 
call back if the advice or prescription has not worked. 
Another limitation of the study was that it did not really 
gauge the effectiveness of the health hotlines in improving 
health outcomes.  
              There is a need to develop health call center 
protocols, algorithms and tools for specific scenarios to 
advise the community on how to self-triage, identify 
symptoms and call for help or advice. There is a significant 
need 
to 
provide 
consistent, 
accurate 
information, 
collecting/maintaining structured data to characterize 
events/responses (situational awareness) and developing 
capability and capacity to adapt to public health 
emergencies (technology tools can assist with this).  
 
       ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 
We would like to acknowledge Dr. Manik, Dr. Devendra 
Tewari and Ashok Mallick from HelloDoctor 24X7 services 
for providing support in providing the data and description of 
the program.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Bunn F., Byrne G., and Kendall S. Telephone consultation 
and triage: effects on health care use and patient satisfaction. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2004, Issue 4. Last 
accessed 1 September, 2011.  
[2] Ivatury G.,  Jesse M., and Alison B. A Doctor in Your Pocket: 
Health 
Hotlines 
in 
Developing 
Countries, 
GSMA 
Development Fund, 2009, 119-152. Last accessed 2 
September, 2011.  
[3] Bagchi S. Telemedicine in rural India. PLoS Med, 2006, 3 
(3): e82. Last accessed 8 September, 2011. 
[4] Akter., Shahriar., D'Ambra., John.,  Ray., and Pradeep. User 
Perceived Service Quality of mHealth Services in Developing 
Countries. 18th European Conference on Information Systems 
http://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2010/134. 
Last 
accessed 
10 
September, 2011 
[5] Bergkvist Sofi. Human Resources in Healthcare, Health 
Informatics and Healthcare Systems, 2010, 127-153. Last 
accessed 10 September, 2011.  
[6] MedicalHome 
http://www.mhealthinfo.org/project/medicallhome-hotline. 
Last accessed 13 September, 2011.   
[7] Mohammad R. Health-Line Medical Call Center Using 
Cellular Phone Technology in Bangladesh: Lessons Learned 
in Breaking Economic and Social Barriers in Accessing 
Healthcare. 135th Annual American Public Health Association 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Scientific Conference Nov 3-7, 2007. Last accessed 9 
September 2011. 
[8] Hello 
Doctor 
24x7   
http://www.hellodoctor24x7.com/index.html. Last accessed 
13 September, 2011 
[9] Peopletech. http://peopltech.co.in/case01.htm. Last accessed 
13 September, 2011 
[10] Wetta-Hall., and Ruth. Help on the Line: Telephone Traige 
Use, Outcomes, and Satisfaction within an uninsured 
population. Evaluation and the Health professions, 28 (4), 
414-427. 
Last 
accessed 
11 
September 
2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

