Implementing and Learning to Use Video Meetings in Mental Health Hospital 
Departments 
Therapists’ Experiences from Internal and External Meetings. A Qualitative Study 
 
Monika K. Gullslett 
Norwegian Centre for E-health Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromso, Norway 
e-mail: monika.knudsen.gullslett@ehealthresearch.no 
 
Line Silsand 
Norwegian Centre for E-health Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromso, Norway 
e-mail: line.silsand@ehealthresearch.no 
 
Elin Breivik 
Norwegian Centre for E-health Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromso, Norway 
e-mail: elin.breivik@ehealthresearch.no 
 
Etty R. Nilsen 
Faculty of Health and Social Sciences 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Porsgrunn, Norway 
e-mail: etty.nilsen@usn.no 
 
Abstract—Over several years, e-consultations and the use of 
Video Meetings (VMs) in the follow-up of patients in mental 
health services have become more and more common. During 
the winter and spring 2020, the pandemic accelerated and 
increased the use of VMs also in mental health services.   The 
objective of this study has been to develop and advance 
comprehensive knowledge about therapists’ use of VM in 
specialized mental health services. The therapists’ external and 
internal collaboration is studied, as well as how their work is 
influenced.  The study uses a qualitative approach, based on 
hermeneutic-phenomenological methodology. 33 interviews 
with therapists and management in three mental health 
hospital departments were carried out (using VMs) from 
March 2020 - February 2021. A semi-structured interview 
guide was used to encourage reflections on use of VMs. 
Overall, VMs as a communication tool is seen as efficient, in 
particular in remote areas. The results are presented in the 
following themes: lack of strategy for implementation and 
training, meeting structure and suitability of VMs for learning, 
security and safety measures pertaining to physical context, 
and managers’ facilitation of VMs. 
Keywords-implementation; organizational learning; mental 
health service; therapist; digital meetings; video meetings. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Opportunities for new work methods have emerged for 
healthcare personnel during the pandemic and have caused a 
rapid increase in the use of video meetings (VMs) both in 
consultations with patients and with collaboration partners 
within mental health. Traditionally, therapists in mental 
health work in collaboration with their patients and 
collaborating partners through physical meetings. The focus 
of this article is the experiences of therapists in mental 
health hospitals of the use of VMs in meetings with 
collaboration partners. 
 Treatment and consultation via VMs represent a range 
of challenges for both therapists, patients and other partners 
involved [1]. We study the impact of using VMs through 
three different theoretical lenses: organizational learning, 
virtual 
communities 
of 
practice, 
and, 
finally, 
implementation of technology in organizations.   
Organizational learning can be seen as collective 
processes of learning and knowledge sharing, and the focus 
is on the work situation as a shared context, and on the 
social processes in this context [2]. The shared context 
represents an opportunity for learning and knowledge 
sharing. A shared context facilitates learning, since 
knowledge, and especially tacit knowledge, cannot be 
counted on as flowing freely between the members of an 
organization if they do not interact or see each other work 
[3]. 
In the literature, shared contexts and situations are 
referred to as communities of practice [4], organizational 
spaces [5], and learning spaces [6]. The communities will 
vary along dimensions such as type of workplace and 
occupational group [7]. The increased use of technology 
(here VMs) has actualized the discussion of physical space 
vs. virtual spaces for the purpose of learning and sharing 
knowledge, and some studies pre-covid have investigated 
virtual communities of practice [8][9]. 
Where communities of practice are seen as emergent 
based on interest, and often informal, in the work 
environment, virtual communities of practice require 
initiative. They rarely have the feature that face-to-face 
communities of practice have, in that employees can bump 
into each other, or take an initiative with low effort and 
planning – like contacting the colleague next door.   
Implementation of technology generally initiates a 
change process in organizations and has the potential to alter 
the way we work and the power relations in an organization. 
However, many change initiatives fail due to poor 
preparations and lack of training, and are slow to be 
implemented [10]. During the last two years, the pandemic 
accelerated and increased the use of VMs, also in mental 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

health services [1]. Previous studies show that training is 
one of the situational factors that can hinder intention to use 
technology [11]. The pandemic has led to extensive use of 
VMs in various contexts. When lockdowns, social 
distancing and working from home due to COVID-19 were 
introduced, VMs were used to a large extent for all types of 
meetings, with or without patients, as well as within or 
between organizations. Over the last two decades a high 
number of studies has been published that identify barriers 
and opportunities for the implementation of VMs in health 
organizations, and lately studies that address the use of VMs 
during the pandemic. Practically, and in terms of saving 
time and being able to gather people from various 
organizations in the same meeting, the VMs are popular and 
considered efficient, in particular in remote areas.    
Still, there is a knowledge gap to fill, particularly 
concerning the interaction and organizational learning when 
health 
professionals 
collaborate 
by 
using 
video 
technology. The aim of this study is to develop and advance 
comprehensive knowledge about therapists in specialized 
mental health hospitals and their experiences in using VMs 
in collaboration with different parts of the service, and how 
the 
use 
of 
VMs 
influences 
their interactions 
and 
organizational learning.     
The research questions in this paper are 1) What are the 
barriers for interaction and organizational learning in 
internal and external VMs? and 2) How do the therapists 
experience 
both 
interorganizational 
interaction 
and 
interaction with collaboration partners in VMs?  
The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we give 
an account of the Method and Study Design. This is 
followed by a presentation of the Results in Section 3. 
Section 4 contains the Discussion, and this is followed by 
the Conclusion in Section 5.  
II. 
METHOD AND STUDY DESIGN 
A. Research design 
A qualitative and explorative study, using in-depth 
interviews, was conducted at three sites, all departments in 
different mental health hospitals. The study’s methodological 
approach was based in the social sciences, using an iterative 
process between inductive and deductive strategy that aimed 
to uncover—and then interpret—knowledge about the actors 
in question [12]. This entailed exploring how the therapists 
experienced, understood, and created a context for using 
VMs in therapeutic meetings and interaction with colleagues 
and external collaborators. This perspective works well with 
the hermeneutic-phenomenological approach employed in 
our analysis; moreover, our choice of research strategy was 
integrated into the objectives of the study and the research 
questions under investigation [13][14]. The researchers’ 
hermeneutic position will, even if the data gathering and 
analysis were done with a reflexive and open-minded view, 
affect the results based on the theoretical approach and 
researchers’ preconceptions.  
TABLE I.  
INFORMANTS IN THE STUDY - AN OVERVIEW 
Participants 
Number 
interviewed 
Interviews 
Researcker 
Hospital 1 
14 
Video 
interviews 
MKG 
Hospital 2 
13 
Video 
interviews 
MKG 
Hospital 3 
6 
Video 
interviews 
MKG 
In this context the concept “therapist” is used about mental health 
professionals, who are trained to provide treatments in different 
ways. There was diversity in age, gender, and professional 
background among the informants in all the hospitals: 
psychologists, psychiatrists, milieu therapists (nurses and social 
workers), all with at least three years of university education. The 
informants were 27-66 years at the time of the interviews.  
B. Interviews 
Semi-structured interviews were conducted from late 
March 2020 to mid-February 2021. The interviews were 
carried out as VMs. The first author of the paper conducted 
all the interviews and opened each interview by asking the 
therapist to tell a story about when, how, and why they had 
implemented VMs in their mental health service for the first 
time. An interview guide was developed beforehand and 
sent out to all informants prior to the interview. When the 
Covid-19 restrictions were implemented, one of the 
recommendations for mental health workers was to follow 
up their patients by using VMs [15]. We had already 
planned a qualitative study at the hospital on different 
aspects regarding the organization and implementation of 
VMs during normal circumstances. When the societal 
lockdown occurred, we accelerated the process to 
investigate the therapists’ experiences of being rushed into a 
large-scale implementation of VMs in the hospital 
environment. We sent a request for participation to the 
management at the first hospital on 20 March 2020. The 
management redistributed the request to everyone in the 
mental health departments, stating that participation should 
be given priority. The second hospital got the request in 
May 2020, and the third in October 2020. A similar 
procedure was followed at each site. We recruited a total of 
33 employees from different disciplines and departments.  
C. Analysis 
All interviews were recorded and transcribed verbatim. 
The transcriptions were undertaken by a professional firm 
just after the interviews were completed. To validate the 
content, the first author read all the transcriptions and 
compared them to the recorded interviews. The analysis was 
conducted through a reflexive, open-minded and abductive 
process, which enabled an intuitive understanding of the 
meaning of the text as a whole [16]. Following the initial in-
depth reading of the interviews, the content was categorized 
and grouped together to identify important themes according 
to the research questions. The themes in the analysis 
emerged through an iterative process of reading and 
interpreting, to identify meaningful units [12][16]. All 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

authors conducted the analysis and reflected on the findings 
together with the first author, who read the most central 
nodes coded in NVivo. All authors contributed to the 
writing of the paper’s background, discussion sections, and 
its revisions.   
D. Ethical approval and considerations 
The study was approved in advance by the ethical 
committee (PVO), Helse Nord (project ID 2462). The 
participants were given both written and verbal information 
about the study, before agreeing to participate. The included 
informants sent their consent via mail to the first author, and 
these were stored without any connection to the gathered 
data material. The participants signed an informed consent 
form. The data are anonymized in the presentations.  
E. Authors’ contributions 
All authors made significant contributions to the 
manuscript. The study was conceived by MKG, and was 
drafted in close cooperation with ERN, LS and EB. MKG 
collected data and MKG, LS and EB contributed to the 
analysis. The manuscript was written by MKG, ERN, LS 
and EB, and all authors read and approved the content of the 
final manuscript.  
III. 
RESULTS 
The focus of the paper is the therapists’ experiences with 
implementation and use of VMs, and, in particular, their 
opportunities for interaction with collaboration partners and 
learning when video technology sets premises for practice. 
In this study we focus on how the therapists experience their 
interorganizational interaction, as well as their interaction 
with external collaboration partners. Furthermore, we 
investigate barriers for communication, interaction, and 
organizational learning in VMs. The following main themes 
emerged from the analysis:  A. Learning and training when 
implementing VMs in the organization (shared context), B. 
Content and context – barriers and drivers in VMs, and C. 
Culture and structure in VMs. 
A. Learning and training when implementing VMs in the 
organization (shared context) 
The informants in the study were asked about the 
training they received when the hospitals rushed into a 
large-scale implementation of VMs, due to the societal 
lockdown during the covid pandemic.    
The informants distinguish between two types of 
training, where the first encompasses being able to use the 
video technology and to set up and connect to VMs. The 
other concerns how to interact both with internal and 
external partners in VMs. Informants from one of the 
organizations had been trained and had used VMs regularly 
during the last years prior to the pandemic. However, most 
of the informants had received training during test periods, 
for instance as part of a research project:     
“We received training together with colleagues to test 
VMs for a period of time to learn how to use VM in 
connection with a research project. […] It was up to the 
staff if they wanted to use it further…”. 
All in all, few of the informants have used VMs in their 
professional practice prior to the pandemic. In some clinical 
units, super-users have been qualified and given the 
responsibility to train colleagues. In other units, training was 
often limited to support from colleagues. Independent of the 
type of training and previous experiences with VMs, the 
start-up phase was characterized by trials and errors. Several 
informants emphasized continuous training as important to 
become familiar with the VM tools. The sharing of 
experiences between colleagues was highlighted as essential 
in this process.   
“Some of us colleagues got access to and training in use 
of VMs and we passed on training to the others. (...) We 
carried out training within the team, and we simply 
learned a little from each other. (...) Gradually it 
became more systematized, but at the very beginning of 
the pandemic, there was a lot of trial and error”. 
Informants with different degrees of experience in using 
VMs, reported frequent technical problems as a main 
challenge. Technical problems are a common source of 
frustration and an obstacle for continuing use of VMs after 
the pandemic. These problems are time and energy 
consuming during meetings, as the following quote 
illustrates:    
“You spend a lot of time and energy getting the 
technology and different solutions to work together; 
someone falls out, comes in, does not hear, the image 
freezes… So, it creates laughter and also a lot of 
frustration. It is unfortunate when addressing an 
important issue. If the digital tool had been effortless, 
then it would have been something that you should 
definitely continue with, because you otherwise spend a 
lot of time traveling or others have to come in here”.   
This quote also illustrates the connection between 
technical problems and lack of technical proficiency on one 
hand, and the serious character of the content in the 
meetings on the other. This is a matter that we will return to 
further down.  
B. Content and context – barriers and drivers in VMs 
Apart from learning how to use the technology; another 
type of learning revolves around how VMs should be 
accomplished. The informants reflect on the need for 
training and structures that help to achieve a safe 
environment with meaningful and valuable discussions in 
VMs, and not only focus on efficiency.   
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

“Hmm… It´s like a voice in my head says no, VMs can 
never replace physical meetings. But I don’t know if it's 
just because it's different to meeting digitally. Because 
we are taught to meet in physical rooms, right? We have 
never been trained in digital evaluation or digital 
assessment or digital treatment. It has never been a 
topic”. 
Uncertainty related to context and content may be a 
barrier to using VMs. Nevertheless, training in how to 
communicate and interact in digital meetings has never been 
raised as an issue in most departments. An important issue 
raised by several of the informants’ concerns safety and 
privacy when actors from different organizations connect 
and collaborate through VMs. The informants were 
specifically concerned with protecting patient privacy, being 
exposed to conversations about patients, often connected to 
persons present in the room who should not be part of the 
meeting. This is particularly important when sensitive 
patient issues are discussed, and particularly pertinent in a 
health care setting, as the following quote shows: 
  
“It turned out that there was another person in the room 
that I was not aware of being there. It was actually a bit 
uncomfortable. I thought I knew who was in the room 
...”. 
  
The quote below underscores this point further: using 
VMs for discussions of sensitive information requires that 
the organization has prepared physical rooms suitable for 
VMs and can be difficult to comply with when healthcare 
personnel work from home. This might appear as an 
oxymoron, since VMs are introduced to make the physical 
location less important.   
“Last week I had a meeting with a colleague when she 
was in the home office. It was the child welfare service 
and the two of us who had a meeting. Suddenly she 
started moving (the person moved to another room), and 
I heard someone coming in, so it was a bit of an 
awkward situation. And I thought that if I had been a 
patient, I would have had the feeling; who is it in the 
room now? It was very inappropriate."    
Many informants pointed out that it was difficult to 
address complicated issues, especially if there are many 
participants in the meeting. In-depth discussions about for 
instance professional matters. were by many perceived as 
less suitable for VMs. 
“It is not so easy to communicate when there are more 
than 5-6 people. Then it becomes difficult to 
communicate and discuss. But if a leader is only going 
to give information about things that are important for 
us to know, then it works with many in the same meeting, 
because then we mute and listen”.    
VMs work well for giving and receiving information, as 
well as for addressing administrative matters. Several 
participants in this study shared that it is easier to plan 
meetings and ask for advice from collaborating partners, 
when meeting digitally. VMs demand less time when there 
is no need to travel to a physical meeting, and less time is 
used for small talk compared to physical meetings.  
 “I think it (VMs) is very suited for information 
exchange. A bit also because there are so many 
participants and finding a time that suits everyone is 
difficult. I have many patient consultations during the 
day, so it is easier for me to find three quarters of an 
hour - an hour between consultations than having to 
travel to the school or the health centre”.  
C. Culture and structure in VMs 
Another issue brought up by the informants, was 
meeting culture and meeting structure when using VMs. 
Several informants found that VMs are well structured (by 
nature), and that they are allowed to speak without being 
interrupted. Furthermore, as VMs are often shorter and more 
to the point than physical meetings, it is easier to find time 
for them.  
“I feel like it is either it’s working or not (VMs). It works 
very well with the persons you are used to working with, 
and who use the same technology as you. Then I think it 
works well”.   
However, some of the informants address the need for a 
new and different awareness of each other when 
participating through VMs. The changed awareness referred 
to the above-mentioned structure in meetings, and that all 
participants get their time to speak during meetings, since it 
is difficult to observe body language through a video 
camera.  
“The challenge in VMs is that often everybody is talking 
at once. Because, when everybody is sitting in the room 
you see very quickly if someone is going to say 
something, but you do not do that [in VMs] until they 
have started talking. So, it becomes challenging to get 
the discussion to flow”.  
In meetings with many participants, most turned off their 
cameras. This made it hard for the chair of the meeting to 
judge how the information was received. Some of the 
informants emphasized that it is challenging to exercise 
good leadership and to chair in VMs because of less 
feedback from the participants, compared to physical 
meetings. A concern is that it in the long run, the interaction 
between colleagues and collaborators will be affected, and 
there is a danger that the work environment will 
deteriorate.    
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

“(...) I miss the meetings where we all gather (...) I also 
believe that during the pandemic, many people has been 
“locked inside” their own little bubble and is busy with 
their own stuff. The consequence is, that we can act and do 
things without any influence from our colleagues or 
collaborators – and that is not a good thing”.    
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The study has displayed a series of challenges for the 
use of VMs in mental health service meetings, internally 
and externally. These challenges pertain to implementation 
and learning, more particularly to 
• 
Lack of strategy for implementation and training 
• 
Meeting structure and suitability of VMs for 
learning 
• 
Security and safety measures pertaining to physical 
context 
• 
Managers’ facilitation of VMs. 
 
This study demonstrates that the experiences of the 
therapists’ concern at least two areas: (1) learning the 
technological skill, and (2) learning how to carry out a 
successful VM. Successful is described by the informants as 
creating a safe environment with meaningful and valuable 
discussions. Implementation of technological tools for 
digital meetings, like the use of VMs are thoroughly 
researched within the IS field (see for instance [17][18]) and 
findings from the present study largely matches extant 
research on several matters: The strategy for training varied, 
from (1) training super-users, and expect the skills that the 
superusers acquire to trickle down, to (2) learning by doing. 
The continuous and iterative learning and support, both in 
the initial adoption phase and in the continuance, called for 
by research [19], was lacking, particularly in the initial 
phase. Despite the often lacking or flawed strategy for 
learning, the training phase of implementation within the 
organization offered an arena for rapid learning and co-
creation amongst colleagues. The pandemic provided the 
urgency called for in change management [20].  
Part of the implementation, as experienced by the 
therapists, was learning how to make the VMs work. As 
shown in previous studies, the technology in itself provides 
resistance in that it often does not work at all, or not 
according to its purpose [21]. In inter and intra 
organizational 
meetings, 
which 
additionally 
are 
interdisciplinary and cross-professional, and where the topic 
is, for instance,  treatment plans for specific patients, thus 
highly sensitive, a digital field for learning across 
professions and organizations is created [4][22]. In VMs, 
however, the meeting structure, or lack thereof, becomes 
strongly visible since use of VMs demands more planning 
and structure than face-to-face meetings. Lack of structure 
appears to harm the interaction. The informants call for 
more structure, but a strict structure might on the other hand 
harm learning processes and development of innovative 
solutions.   
The informants view the use of VMs as efficient, less 
costly, and easy to organize. However, when asked about 
the implementation and the content of the meetings, a 
number of barriers and challenges emerge from the data and 
there appears to be limitations as to the suitability for VMs 
in particular situations. Both inter-organizationally and with 
external actors, the meeting participants in this setting work 
interdisciplinary and inter-professionally. When the various 
professions and disciplines contribute with their knowledge, 
the meeting is an arena for learning and for sensemaking 
through interaction [23][24]. However, VMs differ from 
face-to-face meetings in several aspects, and require 
attention paid to structure and culture in a different manner 
for the participants to be heard and seen. 
Several stages in the transfer from physical meetings to 
VMs appear to happen randomly and without a strategy, and 
this particularly affects the need to take security and safety 
measures. In the healthcare context, where they constantly 
handle sensitive information and personal data, two 
dimensions of safety emerged: (1) the digital safety and (2), 
ironically, the physical safety. During the pandemic, a part 
of the hospital’s practice is moved to the private sphere: the 
homes. During treatment, it is the home of the patient in one 
end of the conversation and the home-office of the therapists 
in the other [1]. In this study, the therapists interact with 
each other and with other professional groups and 
individuals, within or outside their organization. Security 
and safety measures are similarly relevant since the 
conversations evolve around treatment of vulnerable 
individuals.   
Encryption does not ensure what we have coined as 
physical safety, meaning securing the physical environment 
where the therapists are situated when s/he works from 
home. Ensuring the physical safety, for example who is 
present, is an organizational and managerial issue, and 
points to lack of facilitation and control on the 
management’s part, in order to create a safe and evolving 
digital community.  
VMs are not a static form of collaboration. On the 
contrary, the study shows that interaction through VMs take 
place in a new context, and organizational learning, 
including transfer of tacit knowledge, does not take place 
automatically, as the partners are not present in the same 
physical environment.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this study, the context, which is therapists in the 
mental hospital and their interaction, expands extant 
research and underscores the salience of context in the 
process of implementing and using technology. It 
demonstrates that training cannot be seen as ‘one size fits 
all’. In this sense it is salient to raise the question of how 
each individual learn. Being digital and handling VMs 
successfully, is a skill that must be learned through training 
and use. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

To further develop digital collaboration, in this case 
VMs, the organizations must focus on which organizational 
processes should be changed. e.g., whether it requires a 
change in workflow and whether changes in power relations 
occur. 
Managers on all levels in the organizations must be 
involved in the implementation process with a clear 
strategy. To plan and perform useful VMs require 
managerial facilitation and considerations that are novel 
compared to regular physical meetings.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper stems from the research project, ‘Distance 
Follow-Up in the Specialist Health Care Service’, funded by 
The Ministry of Health and Helse Nord. We acknowledge 
the support and assistance provided to us by the staff 
members of the mental health clinics in the hospitals while 
we conducted this research. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. K. Gullslett, E. Kristiansen, and E. R. Nilsen, “Therapists’ 
Experience of Video Consultation in Specialized Mental 
Health Services During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Qualitative 
Interview Study,” JMIR Hum Factors, 8(3), 2021.  
[2] S. Newell, M. Robertson, H. Scarbrough, and J. Swann, 
“Managing knowledge work and innovation,” Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan, X, 277 s, 2009. 
[3] G. von Krogh, K. Ichijo, and I. Nonaka, “Enabling 
Knowledge Creation. How to Unlock the Mystery of Tacit 
Knowledge and Release the Power of Innovation,” Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 292, 2000. 
[4] E. Wenger, “Communities of Practice. Learning, Meaning, 
and Identity. Learning in doing, social, cognitive and 
computational 
perspectives,” 
Cambridge: 
Cambridge 
University Press, 1998. 
[5] D. Yanow, “Talking about Practices: On Julian Orr's Talking 
About Machines,” Organization Science, 27(12): p. 1743-
1756, 2006. 
[6] M. Thompson, Structural and Epistemic Parameters in 
Communities of Practice,” Organization Science, 16(2): p. 
151-164, 2005. 
[7] K. Handley, T. Clark, R. Fincham, and A. Sturdy, “A space 
for reflection and learning? An investigation of physical, 
relational 
and 
existensial 
space 
in 
client-consultancy 
projects,” 
in 
OLKC 2006. 
University 
of 
Warwick: 
Unpublished, 2006. 
[8] M. A. Ergan, A. T. Vold, and E. R. Nilsen. “Virtual 
Communities of Practice - Experiences from VCoP,” in  
[9] Proceedings of the 15th European conference on knowledge 
management, 2014. 
[10] S. 
Valenti, 
and 
S. 
Sutton, 
“Strengthening 
Virtual 
Communities of Practice (VCoPs): An Evidence-Based 
Approach,” Journal of Education for Library and Information 
Science, 61(1): p. 106-125, 2020. 
[11] H. K. Andreassen, L. E. Kjekshus, and A. Tjora, “Survival of 
the project: A case study of ICT innovation in health care,” 
Social Science & Medicine, 132(0): p. 62-69, 2005. 
[12] A. M. Fuglseth, and Ø. Sørebø, “The effects of technostress 
within the context of employee use of ICT,” J Computers in 
Human Behavior, 4. 40: p. 161-170, 2014. 
[13] N. Blaikie, “Approaches to social enquiry: Advancing 
knowledge,” 2 ed., Cambridge: Polity Press, 2007. 
[14] C. Pope, S. Ziebland, and N. Mays, “Qualitative research in 
health care: Analysing qualitative data,” British Medical 
Journal, 320(7227): p. 114-116, 2000. 
[15] S. Kvale, and S. Brinkmann, “Interviews: learning the craft of 
qualitative research interviewing,”  Los Angeles, Calif.: Sage. 
XVIII, 354 s. : ill., 2009. 
[16] Directorate of eHealth, “Corona: How to get started with 
Video Consultations,” Directorate of eHealth: Oslo, 2021. 
[17] S. Kvale, and S. Brinkmann, «Interview: Det kvalitative 
forskningsinterview som håndværk,» Hans Reitzels Forlag, 
2015. 
[18] W. J. Orlikowski, and D. Robey, “Information technology and 
the structuring of organizations,” Information systems 
research, 2(2): p. 143-169, 1991. 
[19] K. Osmundsen, J. Iden, and B. Bygstad,” Digital 
Transformation: Drivers, Success Factors, and Implications,” 
in MCIS, 2018. 
[20] Ø. Sørebø, and T.R. Eikebrokk, “Explaining IS continuance 
in environments where usage is mandatory,” Computers in 
Human Behaviour, 2008. 
[21] J. P. Kotter, “Leading change,” Harvard Business Review 
Press, 2012. 
[22] E. R. Nilsen, J. Dugstad, H. Eide, M. K. Gullslett, and T. 
Eide, “Exploring resistance to implementation of welfare 
technology in municipal healthcare services – a longitudinal 
case study,” BMC Health Services Research, 16(1): p. 657, 
2016. 
[23] T. Eide, et al., “Trust-based service innovation of municipal 
home care. A longitudinal mixed methods study,” In review: 
p. 1-27. 
[24] T. Hernes, and O. Olsen, «Organisering i en verden i 
bevegelse. Organisering,» Oslo: Cappelen Damm akademisk, 
2016. 
[25] K. E. Weick, “Sensemaking in Organizations,” Foundations 
for Organization Science, ed. D. Whetten. Vol. 1, Thousand 
Oaks: Sage. 229, 1995. 
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

