The Grid, Classiﬁcation of eHealth Applications Towards a Better (re)Design and
Evaluation
Saskia M. Akkersdijk∗, Saskia M. Kelders†, Julia E. W. C. van Gemert - Pijnen‡ and,
Louise M. A. Braakman - Jansen §
Center for eHealth Research & Disease Management
University of Twente,
Enschede, the Netherlands
Email: {s.m.akkersdijk∗, s.m.kelders†, j.vangemert-pijnen‡, l.m.a.braakman-jansen§}@utwente.nl
Abstract—eHealth holds a diverse range of successful and
unsuccessful applications. It is often unclear why this difference
in success appears because eHealth is usually approached as a
black box. Additionally, we tend to evaluate non-treatment-like
and treatment-like applications the same way. Both approaches
focus on searching for effects and outcomes. This results in
applications that are wrongfully put away. Placing an application
on the continuous dimensions of use-structure and caregiver
involvement on the grid presented in this paper helps to make
conscious and better decisions when (re)designing and evaluating
eHealth applications. Positioning on the grid inﬂuences the terms
’user’ and ’usage’ but also has implications for the way we can
evaluate and (re)design eHealth applications. The grid is a tool to
gain insight, facilitate thought processes, and start discussions,
and is not meant to be a formal and rigid model. This tool
helps making conscious choices in (re)design and evaluation of
applications.
Keywords—eHealth; classiﬁcation; evaluation; design.
I. INTRODUCTION
In eHealth, there is a diverse range of successful and
unsuccessful applications and interventions. When observing
these applications we observe that applications that represent
a form of treatment tend to be more successful than those
that are more supportive of nature. Often it is unclear why
one application is successful, when the other is not. A reason
why we cannot always explain the difference in success is
because eHealth is often approached as a black box. With a
black box we search for its effects and focus on outcomes. It
would be better to examine eHealth technology from a holistic
perspective, in which the technology itself also has value,
and we focus on the mechanisms behind the success. To ﬁnd
these mechanisms it is necessary to open the black box. An
important reason why we observe differences in success is that
we evaluate non-treatment-like applications the same way we
evaluate the treatment-like interventions, focused on outcome
measures or usage numbers. This results in applications that
are maybe wrongfully put away because they do not measure
up to the measurements they are wrongfully compared to. In
this paper we search for a tool to give a better inside in the
application, which helps with a (re)design and evaluation of
that application.
One of the ways applications are often evaluated is measur-
ing to which extent therapies are followed as intended. This
measurement of adherence is one of the primary determinants
of success in treatments [1], and overall effectiveness of health
systems decreases by poor adherence [1]. Although adherence
might be one of the primary determinants of success in therapy
there are also examples of applications with a low adherence
that are successful. An example of this is QuitNet; a program
for smoking cessation [2][3][4]. Adherence to this program is
low (23%) [5], but the program can be successful in promoting
cessation and preventing relapse [2]. These studies show that it
is possible for an eHealth application to have a low adherence
but still be successful for a certain group of users.
Studies with eMentalHealth interventions often ﬁnd a high
dose - response relationship (also called a usage - outcome
relation). An example of this is the study of Bolier et al.
[6]. Donkin et al [7] further explored the usage - outcome
relation. The study of Donkin investigates which usage met-
rics are important in predicting and explaining outcomes for
an internet-delivered trail targeting depressive symptoms for
those with risk factors for or diagnosis of cardiovascular
disease (Cardiovascular Risk E-couch Depression Outcome
(CREDO)). Their study shows that there is not always a linear
dose-response relation, but could be curvilinear (e.g., reaches a
saturation point where no further beneﬁt is obtained), or even
more complex.
There is a broad range of different eHealth applications
and variety in how these applications should be used. These
variations can be put on a continuous scale. At one end of the
continuum (see Figure 1) we see applications forcing the user
to use the intervention in a speciﬁed way, for example a ﬁxed
use of the modules of an intervention. An example of such an
application is the Web-based ‘Living to the full’ intervention.
‘Living to the full’ consists of nine lessons which have to be
completed in a speciﬁc order in a 12-week period [8]. These
applications are often a (web-based) program of a method,
course or intervention.
At the other end of the continuum we see applications
that leave the usage free, without a strict protocol for each
user. QuitNet, the application that was mentioned before for
cessation treatment, is such an application. This website offers
advice and assistance to quit smoking. Usage frequency of the
program and how the program is used is left to the user.
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

Another important factor that varies among different
eHealth applications is the involvement of a caregiver. Some
eHealth applications are used in close collaboration between
patient and caregiver, others with no involvement of a caregiver
at all and all variations in between. Caregiver involvement is
often found to be necessary to ensure adherence and increase
effects for web-based interventions for people with depression
symptoms, or chronic conditions [9][10][11][12][13][14].
Knowing where your application is positioned on these
two dimensions can help with (re)designing and evaluating
your application. These two dimensions form a grid, and
applications can be put somewhere on this grid depending on
its usage-structure and caregiver involvement. The positioning
of an application on the two dimensions inﬂuences the term
’user’ and ’usage’ but also has implications for the way
we can (re)design and evaluate the application. The aim of
this paper is to present a tool to give a better inside in the
application, which helps with a (re)design and evaluation of
that application.
In Section 2 (The Grid), we will take a closer look at
the grid, after which we will discuss implications based on
the different positions an application can take on the grid
in Section 3 (Implications). We will end this paper with
a discussion and conclusion in Section 4 (Discussion and
Conclusion).
II. THE GRID
Based on our observations of eHealth applications and the
extremes we see, we could classify each application on the
following grid based on their characteristics:
Fig. 1. The grid
In this section, we will take a closer look at the two
dimensions of the grid. We will ﬁrst look at the dimension
of use-structure, after which we will look at the dimension of
caregiver involvement. Finally, we will describe some eHealth
applications and their position on the grid.
The dimension of use-structure has at one end of the contin-
uum applications that force the user to use the intervention in a
speciﬁc way(railroad them). This can be in a speciﬁc order, for
a speciﬁc number of times/lessons, or for a speciﬁc duration.
These interventions often have a speciﬁc end that is known
beforehand and are often based on theories about mental health
behavior like acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) or
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). Because they often ﬁnd
their origin in know theories and therapies they are often more
‘treatment’ like and help deliver a form of short term care. As
discussed in the introduction, ‘Living to the full’ is a good
example for this end of the continuum. ‘Living to the full’
has been published as a self-help book [15] and is based on
mindfulness [16][17] and ACT [18]. The intervention consists
of nine lessons which have to be completed in a speciﬁc order
in a 12-week period. Whether participants worked through a
lesson in one session or in multiple sessions was up to them
[8].
At the other end applications that leave the usage free with-
out a strict protocol for each user. There is no speciﬁc order or
duration for which this application should be used, therefore
they have no speciﬁc end. These free-to-use applications often
focus more on support and long term care. As discussed in the
introduction, ‘QuitNet’, the application for cessation treatment,
is a good example for this end of the continuum. This website
offers advice to quit smoking, assistance in setting a quit date,
tailored information, assessment of motivation and nicotine
dependence, practical counseling (skills training and problem
solving), tailored assistants in selecting pharmacotherapies and
intra- and extra-treatment social support. How QuitNet is used
is completely up to the user.
The vertical dimension represents a form of caregiver
involvement, which varies among eHealth applications. For
example treatment-driven applications involve caregivers usu-
ally, while lifestyle interventions can be used autonomously.
Research ﬁnds caregiver involvement important, but it is not
clear what the dosage and frequency of involvement should
be [9][10][11][12][13]. With applications that target people
with chronic conditions, there often is some form of caregiver
involvement. However, these applications often struggle to
ﬁnd their ﬁt into daily life, and adherence is often low
[19]. Users ﬁnd it difﬁcult to embed these application in
their own life, while caregivers struggle to embed them into
their daily practice [20]. Nonetheless, caregiver involvement is
often found to be necessary to ensure adherence and increase
effects for web-based interventions for people with depression
symptoms, or chronic conditions [14].
To illustrate the positioning of an eHealth application on
the grid, we will now position ‘Living to the full’ on the grid,
after which we will describe another application (‘My Health
Platform’) and its position on the grid.
As discussed in the introduction,‘Living to the full’ (LttF)
consists of nine lessons which have to be completed in a
speciﬁc order in a 12-week period. The intervention is used
without involvement of a caregiver.
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

Fig. 2. Positioning of ‘Living to the full’ on the grid
We would place ‘Living to the Full’ at the bottom of the
left corner on the grid for the following reasons:
• horizontal dimension: Usage of ‘Living to the Full’ (such
as how it is used, how often) is pre-deﬁned. Exactly when
(time) a lesson is completed is left to the user. Therefore
we would place ‘Living to the Full’ just a small bit to
the right out on the horizontal dimension.
• vertical dimension: ‘Living to the full’ is a standalone
program without caregiver support, usage is completely
left to the user. Therefore we would place ‘Living to the
Full’ completely at the bottom of the vertical dimension.
‘My HealthPlatform’ (MHP) is an online platform to sup-
port self-care and self-management for people with a chronic
illness (e.g. increased cardiovascular risk, COPD, Diabetes
mellitus type 2). It is designed to help users keep an overview
of and be a director of their own health and lifestyle, alone or
in cooperation with a caregiver or expert. In MHP they can
monitor their health, ﬁnd information about their condition,
but also use one of the lifestyle coaches. While the usage of
most of the platform is unstructured, the coaches follow a 12
week schedule.
Fig. 3. Positioning of ‘My HealthPlatform’ on the grid
We would place ‘My HealthPlatform’ at the right-hand side,
in the middle of the vertical dimension on the grid for the
following reasons:
• horizontal dimension: Usage of MHP (such as how it is
used, how often, and whether or not a coach is used) is
left to the user. We would not place MHP completely at
the right side, because the coaches do require the user
to use them in a speciﬁc way and for a predetermined
number of weeks.
• vertical dimension: Usage of MHP is mostly left to the
user. When MHP is used in cooperation with a caregiver,
the caregiver is able to see at home measurements of the
user, which provides more insight in the health status of
their patient.
You can position MHP on a different position on the grid
based on other arguments. In this case, especially the vertical
dimension of the grid leaves room for discussion. We would
like to emphasize that when we would ask multiple people to
position the same application on the grid we are very likely to
end up with as many different positions as we asked people.
We would like to argue that this is perfectly ﬁne, because the
main purpose of the grid is to help you think about certain
characteristics of you application and about the implications
of the positioning on the grid. In the next section we will talk
about some of these implications of the different positions on
the grid.
The examples discussed did not have a form of caregiver
involvement that in our argumentation would be positioned
in the upper halve of the grid. An example that would be
positioned in the upper left corner of the grid could be an
application that only is used in a face-to-face consult with a
caregiver in which the ‘patient’ and caregiver together work
through a ﬁxed number of modules in a ﬁxed order. An
example that would be positioned in the upper right corner of
the grid could be an application in which you could consult
your caregiver whenever you have question about your health
problem.
III. IMPLICATIONS
Positioning on the grid has several implications for the terms
‘usage’ and ‘user’ and for the (re)design and evaluation of
eHealth applications. In this section, we will discuss some
of these implications. We will start with the implications
on the terms ‘user’ and ‘usage’ after which we will discuss
implication for (re)design and evaluation.
A. User
Deﬁning when someone is a user is quite clear when you
are dealing with applications that are on the left-hand side of
the grid. A person that uses the application is a user, and one
who does not is not a user. With applications that leave the
usage up to the user the way people use the application can
vary widely, which leads to a discussion about the term ‘user’
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

in this context. We will discuss some questions around the
term user, after which we will give our view on the answers.
An important question is: when does a person become a
user of the application? There are several possible answers to
this. We could argue that a person who uses the application
is a user, but is there a minimum amount of usage before that
person becomes a user, or is 10 seconds enough? And what
about someone who does not use the application for a long
period of time? Is that person not a user during this period?
And could we deﬁne certain activities in the application that
a person must have done before that person is marked as a
user?
For applications that focus on monitoring health or increas-
ing health awareness (mostly positioned on the right-hand side
of the grid), we can argue that by only becoming aware of
such an application a person could potentially be triggered to
become more involved in his own health. This means that, in
order to have an effect on a person, it does not automatically
require that person to use that application. Is this person then
a user? We might argue that this person is not a user of the
application because he/she did not interact with it. However,
the application could still have an effect. In this case the person
is not a user in the most common sense of the word, but due
to the effect that the application had it balances on the edge
of the deﬁnition of ‘user’.
When we consulted the people who used MHP (Figure
3), it became clear that they had their own view on being
a user. There were quite a lot of people who had used the
application only a couple of times and therefore declined to
join several studies (interviews, questionnaires, and usability
testing) because they did not see themselves as ‘users’. In their
minds their deﬁnition of a user involves a certain number of
reoccurring visits to the application, entering some monitoring
data into the system, or participating in the program of a
coach. Because they did not meet their own standards of
the term user, they thought they could not participate in the
study. This example shows that using the system does not
equal being a user, at least not for the people who used it.
People might have expectations about the intended usage of
an application, it is relevant to communicate the intended use
to avoid misunderstanding about the usage.
For evaluation purposes the deﬁnition of what we would
call a user can focus on several aspects:
1) The percentage of registered users who see themselves
as user, could be a measurement for evaluation of an
application. The number of registered users who see
themselves as user tells you about their involvement
with an application and this in turn can show which
role the application holds in their lives and whether the
application helps them.
2) You do not always know beforehand who will be ‘user’.
With evaluations of an application it is important to
deﬁne which group of people can be deﬁned as user, this
group does not always include the groups you thought
of before the application was used. For one type of
evaluation, questionnaire, or interview, another groups
of users might be suitable.
3) An important user that is often forgotten is the caregiver.
The caregiver can have his own section in the application
where he can see caregiver-speciﬁc functionality, he can
have its own version of the application, or he can have
the same functionality as a patient user. It is important
to realize that the caregiver is a user as well, a user
with different needs than a ‘patient’. Additionally, both
users (the caregiver and the ‘patient’) affect each other
and how they use the application, which means that both
types of users should be included in the (re)design and
all evaluations.
B. Usage
The term ‘usage’ (in the context of an application) can
mean a lot of things, such as: How often people return to a
website, paths that users follow on a website, how often certain
elements on a site are used, etc. This can all be measured
by logging user actions with timestamps on a website. How
we can use these measurement and what they tell us about
the system/application differs between the extremes on the
horizontal use-structure dimension of the grid. Measuring the
use of a system or application is useful and insightful for both
ends of the spectrum, but evaluating this use differs and the
implications/interpretations are different.
For ‘railroaded’ application, like ‘Living to the full’ (see
Figure 2), usage measurements can tell you much about the
applications. ‘Railroaded’ application, positioned at the left-
hand side of the grid, often are similar or represent a therapy.
The user has to follow the structure within the application,
do certain actions in a certain order, and use it for a certain
amount for it to be successful. Therefore, we can deﬁne
‘normal’, or ‘ideal’ use. We can compare the measured use
with the way the application should be used (this can be
whether someone completed the application, or the use within
an application).
Achieving the goal of the application is not completely
dependent on the use (the amount and which parts) for
applications which leave the user free (right-hand side of the
grid). The duration of usage of these applications is often
longer and different situations can be seen than with the use of
an ‘railroaded’ application. For applications positioned at the
right-hand side of the grid there is no deﬁnition of ’normal’
use, in quantity or in order. This is a contrast with applications
positioned at the left-hand side of the grid were the ‘correct’
following of the structure is essential.
Because there is no prescribed use for applications at the
right-hand side of the grid, we cannot measure to which
extend the measured usage deviates from the optimal use.
For example, the measured use of an application positioned
at the right-hand side of the grid (like ‘MHP’ in Figure
3) could show users that were dormant for maybe months
or years, after which they suddenly used it again. This is
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

unlikely to happen in an application that is ‘railroaded’.
Because we cannot deﬁne ‘normal use’, adherence, in which
we compare the occurring usage with the optimum usage,
cannot be measured for applications on the right-hand side of
the grid. As mentioned before, applications positioned on the
left-hand side often are more treatment like, in contrast with
application on the right-hand side that are more supportive
and longer term. This leads to a different type of ‘lessons’
and therefore a different kind of use. The same difference also
makes for different characteristics of the user (e.g. in type of
motivation), which also leads to different use.
The occurring usage and the use-structure of an application
go together. When your application is ‘railroaded’ and posi-
tioned at the left-hand side of the grid users have all a similar
usage pattern, while with an application that leaves the use up
to the user the occurring usage patterns can vary greatly.
Even though measurements like adherence are not really
suitable for applications that are positioned at the right-hand
side of the grid, usage measurements can still be very valuable.
These measurements can tell you much about the interaction
with the application, which parts are used most, which parts
are often used subsequent of each other, after which part do
they stop, etc. Knowing more about the interaction with the
application is valuable for improving applications, but can
also be valuable for ﬁnding mechanisms behind application
success. Combining usage measurements with use context
(what triggered the session) can be used to ﬁnd a better ﬁt
of the content to the context, or improve interaction with the
application. By improving the system, and better tuning it to
the needs of the users (based on context en measured usage)
we can increase the effect of applications.
Finally, when we are looking at the usage of an application
we should not forget to observe the usage of the application
by the caregiver. Caregivers play an important role in the
usage of an application by their ‘patients’ because their usage
can be driven by input of said caregiver. When a caregiver
does not work with the application as intended or adequate
this will inﬂuence the usage of the ‘patient’ user as well.
When the application is mend to be used with a form of
caregiver involvement and the caregiver is less involved than
the ‘patient’ expects, the ‘patient’ user will experience less
added value of the application.
C. Implications on (re)Design
With an existing application, the grid can be used during
the redesign process. Determining the current position of the
application on the grid based on the characteristics of the
application can help you to reﬂect on your current application
by facilitating the thought process about your applications
and its characteristic. A ﬁrst step in the redesign process is
to reﬂect whether it is feasible to reach the objectives of
the application from its current position; is it possible to
accomplish the goal of the application with this position or
is the position of the application on the grid not suitable for
the goal of the application. The second step is to determine if
the current position is the best, or if there are better alternative
positions. When the current position and the desired position
are known, the next step is to identify their differences.
Knowing these differences, it is then possible to determine
if the application should be changed and can give a indication
about how the application should be changed.
Of course you can also use the grid when designing an
application from scratch. The grid can help facilitate the
thought process of design choices and their effects to make
a better conscious decisions.
D. Implications on Evaluation
Implications on the use-structure dimension of an applica-
tion are about evaluation procedures. ‘Railroaded’ applications
can be evaluated by measuring the usage and comparing it to
the optimum usage in contrast to applications on the right-
hand side of the grid were usage can vary widely. Because
usage can vary so widely it is also harder to link measured
effects to a speciﬁc element of the application. Applications
on the right-hand side of the grid are less feasible to evaluate
with an Randomized Controlled Trial (RCT), because they are
used for a much longer time, which makes it difﬁcult to keep
the circumstances constant. Secondly, for applications on the
right-hand side of the grid it can be harder to ﬁnd changes in
measurements like quality of life, because they target larger
groups and the changes they accomplish are often small. This
does not imply that these changes are unimportant. It would
be more suitable to evaluate applications that are positioned
on the right-hand side of the grid on processes rather than on
effects. While applications that are positioned on the left-hand
side of the grid are easier to evaluate on effects, because they
have a ﬁxed setting and use-time.
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
There are different ways to classify eHealth that provide
an overview of eHealth, such as device driven, based on
the medium the technology uses (web-based, mobile apps,
etc.), context-of-care driven (eCare, eTherapy, eAppointment,
ePrevention, etc.), or actor driven (based on the interaction
between the actors of such a system). The grid we propose is
not meant to replace these classiﬁcations, because they provide
an overview that our grid does not provide. However, our grid
serves as an extension of these. The different classiﬁcations
mentioned above serve a different need, while they did not
serve our need for a simple way to have some guiding when
(re)designing and evaluating eHealth applications. We were
looking for a better way to help make a conscious choice
in order to ﬁnd a better ﬁt (in (re)design and evaluation).
Positioning of an eHealth application on the grid helps to
become more aware of implications this has (as discussed in
Section III).
Based on the position of an application on the grid we
discussed that the term ‘user’ can include a different group
of people. Those who ‘use’ an application do not always
perceive themselves as a ‘user’, because they have expectations
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

about the intended usage of an intervention. It is relevant
to communicate the intended use to avoid misunderstanding
about the usage. The percentage of users who see themselves
as a user might be an additional measurement for evaluating
an application, because it includes values about involvement
with the application. An important group of ‘users’ that is
often forgotten are the caretakers. They often also use the
application, and their use or their communication about the
application inﬂuences the use of the application by their
patients.
Adherence is an important measurement for application
positioned on the left-hand side of the application. For these
applications, we can deﬁne ‘normal’ or intended use. Because
‘normal’ or intended use is often a lot harder to deﬁne for
applications positioned on the right-hand side of the grid (there
often is no prescribed use) and usage patterns can vary widely,
the measurement of adherence is not suitable. However, usage
measurements can be valuable for process evaluations and
improvement of the application.
The grid can help with the (re)design process by gaining
more insight facilitated by the thought process needed for
placement of the application on the grid. It is important to
think through whether the intended (or current) position of
the application is suitable for the goal of the application, or
that another position might be better.
Positioning of an application on the grid (left versus right,
and with or without caregiver involvement) inﬂuences which
sorts of evaluations are suitable. Evaluations can be focused
on process or effects and positioning on the left-hand of the
grid are more suitable for effects evaluations than positions at
the right-hand side of the grid.
The grid is a tool to gain insight, facilitate thought pro-
cesses, and start discussions, and is not meant to be a formal
and rigid model. This tool helps making conscious choices in
(re)design and evaluation of applications.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Sabat, “Adherence to long-term therapies,” World Health Organiza-
tion, Tech. Rep., 2003.
[2] A. Graham, N. Cobb, L. Raymond, S. Sill, and J. Young, “Effectiveness
of an internet-based worksite smoking cessation intervention at 12
months,” Journal of Occupational & Environmental Medicine, vol. 49,
no. 8, pp. 821 – 828, 2007.
[3] J. Saul, B. Schillo, S. Everred, M. Luxenberg, A. Kavanaugh, N. Cobb,
and A. L, “Impact of a statewide internet-based tobacco cessation
intervention,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 9, no. 3, 2007.
[4] N. K. Cobb, A. L. Graham, B. C. Bock, G. Papandonatos, and D. B.
Abrams, “Initial evaluation of a real-world internet smoking cessation
system,” Nicotine & Tobacco Research: Ofﬁcial Journal of the Society
for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 207 – 216,
2005.
[5] D. S. Kelders, “Understanding adherence to web-based interventions,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Universiteit Twente, Enschede, 2012, [accessed:
2016-03-08]. [Online]. Available: http://doc.utwente.nl/81967/
[6] M. L. Bolier, M. M. Haverman, P. J. Kramer, D. G. J. Westerhof,
P. H. Riper, P. J. A. Walburg, B. Boon, and P. E. Bohlmeijer,
“An internet-based intervention to promote mental ﬁtness for mildly
depressed adults: randomized controlled trial,” Journal of medical
internet research, vol. 15, no. 9, pp. 1 – 18, 2013, [accessed:
2016-03-08]. [Online]. Available: http://doc.utwente.nl/83748/
[7] L. Donkin, I. B. Hickie, H. CHristensen, S. L. Naismith, B. Neal, N. L.
Cockayne, and N. Clozier, “Rethinking the dose-response relationship
between usage and outcome in an online intervention for depression:
Randomized controlled trial,” Journal of Medical Internet Research,
vol. 15, no. 10, p. e231, 2013.
[8] D. J. van Gemert-Pijnen, D. S. Kelders, and P. E. Bohlmeijer,
“Understanding the usage of content in a mental health intervention
for depression: An analysis of log data,” Journal of medical internet
research, vol. 16, no. 1, p. e27, 2014, open access, [accessed:
2016-03-08]. [Online]. Available: http://doc.utwente.nl/88658/
[9] G. Andersson and P. Cuijpers, “Pros and cons of online cogni-
tive–behavioural therapy,” The British Journal of Psychiatry, vol. 193,
no. 4, pp. 270–271, 2008.
[10] ——, “Internet-based and other computerized psychological treatments
for adult depression: A meta-analysis,” Cognitive Behaviour Therapy,
vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 196–205, 2009, [accessed: 2016-03-08]. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/16506070903318960
[11] Z. Hilvert-Bruce, P. J. Rossouw, N. Wong, M. Sunderland, and
G.
Andrews,
“Adherence
as
a
determinant
of
effectiveness
of
internet cognitive behavioural therapy for anxiety and depressive
disorders,”
Behaviour
Research
and
Therapy,
vol.
50,
no.
78,
pp. 463 – 468, 2012, [accessed: 2016-03-08]. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0005796712000708
[12] P. Musiat and N. Tarrier, “Collateral outcomes in e-mental health: a
systematic review of the evidence for added beneﬁts of computerized
cognitive behavior therapy interventions for mental health,” Psycholog-
ical Medicine, vol. 44, pp. 3137–3150, 11 2014.
[13] V. Spek, P. Cuijpers, I. Nykl´ıcek, H. Riper, J. Keyzer, and V. Pop,
“Internet-based cognitive behaviour therapy for symptoms of depression
and anxiety: a meta-analysis,” Psychological Medicine, vol. 37, pp. 319–
328, 3 2007.
[14] J. D. Piette, A.-M. Rosland, D. Marinec, N. S.and Striplin, S. J.
Bernstein, and M. J. Silveira, “Engagement with automated patient
monitoring and self-management support calls: Experience with a
thousand chronically-ill patients,” Medical Care, vol. 51, no. 3,
pp. 216 – 223, 2013, [accessed: 2016-03-08]. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.org/10.1097/MLR.0b013e318277ebf8
[15] E. T. Bohlmeijer and H. Monique, Voluit Leven. Mindfulness of de kunst
van het ervaren, nu als praktisch hulpboek.
Amsterdam: Boom, 2008.
[16] J. Kabat-Zinn, Full catastrophe living: using the wisdom of your body
and mind to face stress, pain, and illness.
New York: Delacorte Press,
1990.
[17] ——, Wherever you go, there you are: Mindfulness meditation in
everyday life.
New York: Hyperion, 1994.
[18] S. C. Hayes, K. D. Strosahl, and K. G. Wilson, Acceptance and
commitment therapy: An experiential approach to behavior change.
The Guilford Press, 1999, [accessed: 2016-03-08]. [Online]. Available:
http://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=CTgSzAdxc8cC&pgis=1
[19] M. F. Sieverink, D. S. M. Kelders, D. L. M. Braakman-Jansen, and
D. J. E. van Gemert-Pijnen, “The added value of log ﬁle analyses
of the use of a personal health record for patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus: Preliminary results,” Journal of diabetes science and
technology, 2014, published online before print, [accessed: 2016-03-08].
[Online]. Available: http://doc.utwente.nl/89290/
[20] M. F. Sieverink, D. L. M. Braakman-Jansen, Y. Roelofsen, S. H.
Hendriks, R. Sanderman, H. J. Bilo, and D. J. E. van Gemert-Pijnen,
“The diffusion of a personal health record for patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus in primary care,” International journal on advances
in life sciences, vol. 6, no. 3&4, pp. 177 – 183, 2014, [accessed:
2016-03-08]. [Online]. Available: http://doc.utwente.nl/93390/
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

