Application of Holo-Hilbert Spectral Analysis on Human Breathing Movement with 
Isovolume Maneuver 
 
Jia-Hua Lee 
Institute of Biomedical Engineering 
National Chiao Tung University 
Hsinchu, Taiwan R.O.C. 
e-mail: jessie1992a@gmail.com 
Ya-Chen Chen 
Institute of Computer Science and Engineering  
National Chiao Tung University 
Hsinchu, Taiwan R.O.C. 
e-mail: milktea0623@gmail.com 
 
Tzu-Chien Hsiao* 
Department of Computer Science, Institute of Biomedical 
Engineering, Biomedical Electronics Translational Research Center 
National Chiao Tung University 
Hsinchu, Taiwan R.O.C. 
e-mail: labview@cs.nctu.edu.tw 
 
Abstract—Breathing is one of essential processes for human to 
inhale and exhale air for gas translation. People modulate 
respiratory frequency (fast or slow) and depth (deep or shallow) 
consciously or unconsciously. Different breathing patterns 
perform distinct breathing movement and physiological 
mechanism. Breathing movement could be described by 
observing 
thoracoabdominal 
movement 
which 
is 
a 
combination of cooperated muscle contraction from rib cage 
and abdomen. Isovolume maneuver (IVM) is a typical 
respiratory pattern with different respiratory frequency and 
depth. To investigate the effect of respiratory pattern, it is 
important to observe the transition state between different 
respiratory modulations. In 2016, Huang proposed Holo-
Hilbert spectral analysis (HHSA) for identifying the joint 
frequency and amplitude modulation. To obtain the transition 
period, HHSA is adopted to investigate time-frequency 
modulation (Time-FM) and time-amplitude modulation (Time-
AM) during IVM. Simulation and experiment results indicate 
that time-AM spectrum and FM-AM spectrum can identify the 
time-variate transition period between spontaneous breathing 
(0.3 Hz) and paced breathing (0.1 Hz). This achievement could 
be helpful for detecting transition state of respiration, 
especially during exercises or suffering cardiopulmonary 
disease for long-term care. 
Keywords-Holo-Hilbert spectral analysis (HHSA); Empirical 
mode decomposition (EMD); Isovolume manuver (IVM) 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Breathing is an essential and important process for gas 
exchange. The mechanism of human breathing is the 
pressure gradient of airflow to induce inhaling or exhaling 
with a series of cooperation between ribs and muscles [1][2]. 
People can modulate instantaneous respiratory frequency 
(fast or slow) and depth (deep or shallow) consciously or 
unconsciously. There are two common breathing types, 
thoracic breathing (TB) and abdominal breathing (AB). TB 
is implemented by the contraction of intracostal muscles to 
raise rib cage and to increase lateral and anteroposterior 
dimension of thoracic cavity. Most of gas exchange happens 
in upper lungs. AB is commonly used during sleep and 
mainly implemented by the contraction of abdominal 
muscles. It would drive the deeper descending of the 
diaphragm and inhale air into the entire lungs. The lung 
volume during AB is usually larger than TB and performs 
slowly rate and more effective on gas exchange. In addition, 
different breathing types, especially AB, could stimulate 
parasympathetic nervous system and lead human to feel 
relaxed [3][4]. 
In physiological study, the dynamic function of breathing 
can be described by observing thoracoabdominal movement 
(TAM) consisting of related muscular contractions and 
relaxations between rib cage (RC) and abdomen (ABD) [5]. 
One of non-invasive methods to measure breathing pattern is 
respiratory inductive plethysmograph (RIP). In general, RIP 
belts are placed on the RC and ABD to measure the TAM 
and quantify the breathing features including respiratory rate, 
tilde volume, energy of breathing, and phase shift of TAM 
[6]. Literature has reported that  patterns of RC and ABD 
movements can be used to identify breathing types (TB and 
AB) [7][8]. However, breathing pattern is dynamical changes, 
it is important to observe the transition state between 
different respiratory modulations.  
In signal processing, noise reduction with band-pass filter 
has time delay problem. Empirical mode decomposition 
(EMD) [9] is used to decompose biosignals into oscillatory 
modes with different frequencies without introducing any 
phase delay [10].  Each component decomposed by EMD is 
regarded as a meaningful mode called intrinsic mode 
function (IMF). The instantaneous frequency responses of 
the IMFs derived through direct quadrature and showed in 
Hilbert spectrum [11]. In EMD process, mode mixing has 
seemed to be a problem, which is defined as a pattern of 
signals whose activities reside within the same frequency of 
different IMFs. In a new method, named Holo-Hilbert 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

spectral analysis (HHSA) and proposed by Huang et. al. in 
2016, there exists a physical phenomenon in the mode 
mixing [12]. It extends EMD method and uses nested EMD 
with Hilbert-Huang Transform (HHT) to identify the 
modulations in nonlinear systems [12]. In addition to 
frequency variation, data containing amplitude variation 
would influence EMD process. HHSA brings out a high-
dimensional spectrum called Holo-Hilbert spectrum to see 
the variation in frequency and amplitude. 
The iso-volume maneuver (IVM), which is widely used 
for calibrating respiratory sensors and thoracoabdominal 
movement evaluation [13][14], is a typical respiratory 
pattern with spontaneous breathing and paced breathing. To 
investigate the effect of respiratory pattern, it is important to 
observe the transition state between different respiratory 
modulations. HHSA has been proposed recently to identify 
the frequency and amplitude modulations in nonlinear 
systems. This study used HHSA to investigate time-
frequency modulation (Time-FM) and time-amplitude 
modulation (Time-AM) during IVM.  
 
II. 
METHOD AND METERIAL 
A. Holo-Hilbert spectral analysis method 
HHSA extends current spectral analysis such as Fourier 
analysis and Hilbert spectral analysis, which are based on 
additive expansion to show the variation on frequency. It 
gets the lower frequency envelop as amplitude fluctuation 
from the higher carrier frequency oscillations and expands 
original time-frequency spectrum into a higher-dimensional 
representation of the FM-AM spectrum, with the FM 
representing the fast-changing carrier intra-mode frequency 
variations and the AM representing the slow-changing 
envelope inter-mode frequency variations [12]. A best way 
to present the advantage in HHSA as shown in (1). A 
multiplicative data would be regarded as the addition from 
two terms by using an additively based method. On the other 
hand, it could be considered as a cosB term with the 
amplitude modulation by cosA term. Therefore, we could 
obtain the amplitude variation through HHSA if it exists 
amplitude modulation. 
x(t) = cosA·cosB = (1/2) [cos(A+B)+cos(A-B)]        (1) 
Before introducing HHSA method, realized the EMD 
algorithm ahead. The steps of EMD are shown in Fig. 1(a). 
First, we can find the local maximum and local minimum to 
produce upper envelope and lower envelope by a cubic 
spline and calculate the mean of these two envelopes. Then, 
subtract the mean envelope from the oringinal data. The 
above detrending operation is called sifting process, which is 
based on energy-associated extraction in each timescale [9]. 
After sifting process, we need to determine whether the 
result is an intrinsic mode function (IMF). An IMF would 
satisfy the following two requirements: (1) the number of 
local extrema must be equal or differ at most by one to the 
number of zero-crossing; (2) at any point, the value of the 
mean envelope must approximately equal to zero. If the 
 
result is an IMF, output the IMF and deduct it from the 
original data to get the residue. If not, replace the original 
data by the result and perform sifting process again. Last, 
determine whether the residue is monotonic. If it is not a 
monotonic function, use the residue as original data and 
execute above steps. Else, EMD procedure is finished and 
gets lots of IMFs decomposed by EMD method. 
The steps of HHSA method are shown in Fig. 1(b). Data 
would be decomposed by EMD method more than one time. 
First, original data execute EMD method and obtain many 
IMFs, treating as IMFi that means i-th IMF. We take the 
absolute value on each IMFi and identify all the maxima on it 
to produce envelope by a natural spline which be viewed as 
the time fluctuation of the amplitude function. Then, perform 
EMD method on these envelopes and produce another lots of 
IMFs, treating as IMFij that means j-th IMF in the envelop of 
IMFi. The step, decomposing envelopes by EMD method, 
would constantly execute to delineate the amplitude function. 
With each additional layer of decomposition on the 
envelopes, need additional dimensions to accommodate the 
amplitude variations. This study presents two layers EMD 
method in HHSA and gets Holo-Hilbert spectrum with four – 
dimensional data including time, FM frequency, AM 
frequency, and energy density. Besides the FM-AM 
spectrum, defined in [12], we show the Time-FM spectrum 
and Time-AM spectrum to investigate FM frequency 
variation and AM frequency variation on breathing pattern in 
timescale. 
B. Simulation and IVM data collection 
This study simulated breathing pattern by using pure 
sinusolid wave and showed two different breathing types 
alternating appeared as Fig. 2. One breathing rate is 20 times 
per minute (0.3 Hz). The other one is 6 times per minute (0.1 
Hz) and has larger amplitude than the amplitude of 0.3 Hz 
breathing rate. The breathing pattern executes five times in 
simulation.  
Procedure of IVM includes alternate spontaneous 
breathing (near 0.3 Hz) and paced breathing (0.1 Hz) in  
 
 
(a)                                                    (b) 
Figure 1.  Illustration to the procedure of (a) EMD algorithm and (b) 
HHSA. 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
iso-volume status. Subject (female, 24 years old, 165 cm, 
50kg) was instructed to perform IVM as following four steps 
for five times. (1) The subject breathed freely for 24 seconds 
and prepared to start the IVM. (2) The subject was asked to 
inhale deeply and slowly to hold the breath for 6 seconds. 
The lung volume kept equivalent during the IVM. (3) The 
subject was instructed to move abdominal wall inward for 5 
seconds and moved outward for 5 seconds. The abdominal 
wall moved inward and outward for three times. (4) The 
subject was asked to exhale and take a break for 24 seconds. 
During IVM, shift air between RC and ABD as much as 
possible with the holding breath.  
Fig. 3 illustrates the data, which were be acquired by two 
RIP sensors (RIPmate Adult Thorax Alice 5 Inductance Kit, 
Ambu Inc., Denmark) during IVM procedure. The RIP 
sensor was worn below the axilla to record RC movement as 
shown in Fig. 3(a), and the other RIP sensor was placed on 
the navel to record ABD movement as shown in Fig. 3(b).  
Both RIP signals were acquired by a data acquisition hub (NI 
SCB-68, National Instruments, USA) and a data acquisition 
card (NI USB 6255, National Instruments, USA) at a 
sampling rate of 50 Hz and were subsequently transferred to 
a computer (Acer Veriton M2610). The program controlling 
the instructions and data acquisition was developed using 
LabVIEW platform (LabVIEW 2012, National Instruments, 
USA). 
III. 
RESULTS 
Fig. 4(a) illustrates Hilbert spectrum with EMD method 
and instantaneous frequency in simulation data. Fig. 4(b), 
4(c), and 4(d) illustrate HHSA method including FM-AM 
 
spectrum, Time-FM spectrum, and Time-AM spectrum 
respectively. In Hilbert spectrum, we observe the alternate 
frequency, 0.33Hz and 0.1 Hz, in timescale which is 
consistent with the condition we gave. Because the 
magnitude is calculated by energy density, larger amplitude 
indicates as high magnitude and red color in this case. In 
FM-AM spectrum, it presents high energy (high magnitude) 
when FM frequency is equal to 0.1Hz and 0.33 Hz and 
obtain high energy when AM frequency is within the range 
of 0.015 to 0.02 Hz. In Time-FM spectrum, the distribution 
of frequency is similar to Hilbert spectrum but different in 
color. In Time-AM spectrum, we find the high energy at 
about 0.015 Hz in AM frequency and appear high frequency 
(0.09 Hz) near transition timing. 
Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 indicate the results of RIP signals from 
RC and ABD movement. We see RC movement first. In 
Hilbert spectrum, it appears the floating frequency with time. 
The frequency in spontaneous breathing is about 0.2 to 0.4 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
(d) 
Figure 4.  The spectra for the simulating data consist of (a) Hilbert 
spectrum, (b) Time-FM spectrum, (c) Time-AM spectrum, and (d) 
FM-AM spectrum.  
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 3.  RIP signals from (a) RC movement and (b) ABD 
movement during IVM. The dense part is for spontaneous breathing 
and the loosely part is for paced breathing. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Simulation of spontaneous breathing (0.3 Hz) and paced 
breathing (0.1 Hz) with sinusoidal pattern. 
 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Hz with yellow and green color and the frequency in paced 
breathing range from 0.05 to 0.15 Hz with red color (higher 
energy). In FM-AM spectrum, there are two faint parts in 
FM frequency at 0.05 to 0.1 Hz and 0.15 to 0.4Hz 
respectively and appears higher energy near 0.02 Hz in AM 
frequency. In Time-FM spectrum, more complex than 
simulating data, we could recognize three distinct ranges. 
One of them is in the range of 0.05 to 0.1 Hz with green and 
blue color that is viewed as the frequency of paced breathing. 
Another is ranging from 0.2 to 0.4 Hz with yellow and green 
colors that refers to the frequency of spontaneous breathing. 
The other one is most obvious that joined both of above and 
crossed the range from 0.05 to 0.4 Hz. In Time-AM 
spectrum, there is a clear orange line in 0.02Hz but others 
information is irregular. 
The spectra in ABD data compare to RC data, there are 
some difference in FM-AM spectrum and Time-FM 
spectrum. In FM-AM spectrum, the energy in lower 
frequency is larger and more centralized than RC in FM 
frequency. In Time-FM spectrum, the red region shows 
lower frequency than RC.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
We performed the simulated breathing data on four-type 
spectra and found that the similar distribution of frequency in 
Hilbert spectrum and Time-FM spectrum expect of 0.1 Hz 
and 0.3 Hz components allocated different colors, implying 
different energy densities. Compared to Hilbert spectrum, the 
pure frequency variation is clearly displayed in Time-FM 
spectrum. This performance could be the effect of 2nd EMD 
process, displaying it in another Time-AM spectrum. In 
addition, we find two bright points near 0.02Hz in AM 
frequency in FM-AM spectrum. AM is the slow changing 
envelope 
frequency 
variation 
that 
presents 
cyclic 
characteristics in the envelopes. In simulation, breathing 
pattern executed five times could be regarded as transition 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
(d) 
Figure 6.  The spectra for the RIP signal with ABD movement consist 
of (a) Hilbert spectrum, (b) Time-FM spectrum, (c) Time-AM 
spectrum, and (d) FM-AM spectrum. 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
(d) 
Figure 5.  The spectra for the RIP signal with RC movement consist of 
(a) Hilbert spectrum, (b) Time-FM spectrum, (c) Time-AM spectrum, and 
(d) FM-AM spectrum. 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

period with five periods in the envelopes and its frequency is 
0.016 Hz. It is close to the higher energy in AM frequency 
indicated in FM-AM spectrum and Time-AM spectrum. 
Comparing real breathing pattern with simulating 
breathing pattern and RC movement with ABD movement, 
we find some results. (1) There are two cases under the 
highly varied frequency of spontaneous breathing. In 
simulating case, we could clearly see the frequency in 
Hilbert spectrum and Time-FM spectrum. But in real case, 
the energy would spread to adjacent frequency, so the 
frequency is ambiguous. (2) In Time-AM spectrum, we find 
the higher frequency timing close to the transition timing in 
simulating case, but could not find in real case fellow the 
same rule. It may owing to the energy of higher frequency 
pretty lower than main energy that is difficult to indicate 
clearly in dynamical respiration. (3) The main distribution of 
frequency on ABD movement is lower than RC movement 
in Time-FM spectrum that present higher energy on paced 
breathing than spontaneous breathing. It may cause by 
performing TB during spontaneous breathing but we need to 
more experiment data to prove. (4) There are some 
unreasonable distribution of energy in Time-FM spectrum. 
As the Fig. 5(b) shows that the main distribution of energy 
range from 0.05 to 0.4 Hz, it is composed by two kind of 
frequency of breathing pattern. After being decomposed by 
EMD method, it should be divided into two different 
frequencies. 
The IMFs decomposed by EMD on RC data shown as 
Fig. 7(a). We find the mode mixing problem in IMF6. We 
repeat the same process after removing IMF6 from RC data. 
In Time-FM spectrum shown as Fig. 7(c), we can find 0.1 
Hz frequency of paced breathing obviously and 0.2 to 0.4 Hz 
in spontaneous breathing. Followed by above steps on ABD 
data, we can obtain clear frequency in spontaneous breathing 
and paced breathing. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this study, we have used HHSA method on simulation 
of breathing pattern and respiratory movement data with 
IVM procedure. The frequency of amplitude fluctuation can 
be found in both Time-AM spectrum and FM-AM spectrum. 
Therefore, the transition period between spontaneous 
breathing (0.3 Hz) and paced breathing (0.1 Hz) can be 
found in Holo-Hilbert spectrum. Based on the HHSA method, 
we got the FM frequency and AM frequency in timescale to 
investigate the transition from spontaneous breathing to 
paced breathing. Related results are helpful for exploring the 
transition state on human breathing and dynamical 
respiratory pattern especially when people doing exercises or 
suffering cardiopulmonary disease for long-term care. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was fully supported by the Taiwan Ministry of 
Science and Technology under grant numbers MOST 105-
2634-E-009-003 and MOST 105-2221-E-009-159. This 
work was also supported in part by the "Aim for the Top 
University Plan" of Biomedical Electronics Translational 
Research Center in National Chiao Tung University and 
Ministry of Education, Taiwan. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. W. John, Respiratory Physiology: the essentials. Alphen aan den 
Rijn: Wolters Kluwer, 2012. 
[2] W. F. Ganong, Review of Medical Physiology, 22 ed.: Mcgraw-hill, 
2005. 
[3] A. Conrad, et al., "Psychophysiological effects of breathing 
instructions for stress management," Applied Psychophysiology and 
Biofeedback, vol. 32, pp. 89-98, 2007. 
[4] R. Kaushik, R. M. Kaushik, S. K. Mahajan, and V. Rajesh, 
"Biofeedback assisted diaphragmatic breathing and systematic 
relaxation versus propranolol in long term prophylaxis of migraine," 
Complement. Ther. Med., vol. 13, pp. 165-174, 2005. 
[5] K. Konno and J. Mead, "Measurement of the separate volume 
changes of rib cage and abdomen during breathing," Journal of 
Applied Physiology, vol. 22, pp. 407-422, 1967. 
[6] J. Hammer and C. J. L. Newth, "Assessment of thoraco-abdominal 
asynchrony," Paediatr Respir Rev, vol. 10, pp. 75-80, 2009. 
[7] J.-L. Chen, Y.-C. Chen, and T.-C. Hsiao, "Recognizing thoracic 
breathing 
by 
ensemble 
empirical 
mode decomposition," 
in 
Information, Communications and Signal Processing (ICICS) 2013 
9th International Conference on, pp. 1-5, 2013. 
[8] Y.-C. Chen and T.-C. Hsiao, "Instantaneous phase difference analysis 
between thoracic and abdominal movement signals based on 
complementary 
ensemble 
empirical 
mode 
decomposition," 
BioMedical Engineering OnLine, vol. 15, pp. 1-21, 2016. 
[9] N. E. Huang, et al., "The empirical mode decomposition and the 
Hilbert spectrum for nonlinear and non-stationary time series 
analysis," Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A, vol. 454, pp. 903-995, 1998. 
[10] C.-C. Chang, S.-C. Kao, T.-C. Hsiao, and H.-Y. Hsu, "Assessment of 
autonomic nervous system by using empirical mode decomposition-
based reflection wave analysis during non-stationary conditions," 
Physiological measurement, vol. 35, pp. 1873-1883, 2014. 
[11] N. E. Huang, et al., "On instantaneous frequency," Adv. Adapt. Data 
Anal., vol. 1, pp. 177-229, 2009. 
[12] N. E. Huang, et al., "On Holo-Hilbert spectral analysis: a full 
informational spectral representation for nonlinear and non-stationary 
data," Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A, vol. 374, pp. 1-21, 2016. 
[13] R. C. C. Barbosa, C. R. F. d. Carvalho, and H. T. Moriya, 
"Respiratory inductive plethysmography: a comparative study 
between isovolume maneuver calibration and qualitative diagnostic 
calibration in healthy volunteers assessed in different positions," 
Jornal Brasileiro de Pneumologia, vol. 38, pp. 194-201, 2012. 
[14] R. Gilbert, J. Auchincloss, and D. Peppi, "Relationship of rib cage 
and abdomen motion to diaphragm function during quiet breathing," 
Chest Journal, vol. 80, pp. 607-612, 1981. 
   
 
(a)                                                     (b) 
 
 
                             (c)                                                    (d) 
Figure 7.  (a) The IMFs for the real data on RC. (b) The IMFs for the 
real data on ABD. (c) Time-FM spectrum of RC data removing IMF6. 
(d) Time-FM spectrum of ABD data removing IMF6. 
 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

