Videoconferencing in Mental Health Care 
Professional Dilemmas in a Changing Health Care Practice 
 
Ruud Janssen, Hilco Prins, Annemarie van Hout, 
Jan Nauta, Marike Hettinga 
Research Group ICT-innovations in Health Care 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
tjwm.janssen@windesheim.nl 
Lian van der Krieke, Sjoerd Sytema 
University Center for Psychiatry 
University Medical Center Groningen 
University of Groningen 
Groningen, The Netherlands 
j.a.j.van.der.krieke@umcg.nl
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents the findings of an exploratory 
study into challenges and dilemmas faced by mental health care 
professionals 
when 
implementing 
and 
applying 
videoconferencing with their clients. Focus was on two different 
forms of outreaching mental health care: intensive psychiatric 
family therapy (IPFT) and flexible assertive community 
treatment (FACT). During four focus group sessions with 19 
mental health care professionals, issues, challenges and 
dilemmas were identified and discussed. Among the issues 
uncovered are: feelings of missing intangible, nonverbal but 
nevertheless important cues in the conversation with a client; an 
increased psychological ‘distance’ towards the client, making 
the communication more to-the-point but also superficial; and 
(for IPFT) difficulties in overseeing and interpreting 
interactions between family members. The mental health care 
professionals interviewed realize that, due to ongoing health 
care budget cuts, they will need to rely more frequently on 
videoconferencing with clients. This raises the following 
professional challenges and dilemmas: (1) how to integrate 
videoconferencing into treatment programs and individual 
treatment plans while maintaining quality of care; (2) what to 
take into account when applying videoconferencing in specific 
situations, such that it is safe and responsible; and (3) how to 
make their colleagues aware of the potential benefits of using 
videoconferencing with clients. Based on these findings, an in-
depth ethnographic study is currently being prepared. 
Keywords-e-mental health; challenges; ethnography. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Like any other domain in the Dutch health care sector, 
mental health care is under constant pressure by society, 
government and health insurance companies to save costs and 
work more efficiently. In response, professionals and 
organizations in mental health care are increasingly turning 
towards telecare solutions such as e-mental health and 
videoconferencing. However, effect studies into the 
application of videoconferencing in mental health care show 
a mixed picture: large scale quantitative studies such as 
randomized controlled trials still leave many questions 
unanswered, and the effects found are open for interpretation 
[1][2][3]. Qualitative research has shown that innovation 
processes, such as the introduction of telecare technologies, 
typically proceed in rather ‘messy’ and unpredictable ways, 
obfuscating quantitative analysis [4]. Qualitative research has 
also shown that the introduction of telecare technology can 
influence daily care practice in subtle and unexpected ways 
[4][5]. Some researchers have therefore argued to use a 
qualitative, ethnographic approach when studying the effects 
of introducing telecare and establishing its potential for health 
care practice [4][6]. These findings have been the starting 
points for the exploratory study discussed in this paper. The 
aims of this study were to uncover challenges and dilemmas 
faced by mental health care professionals when implementing 
and applying videoconferencing with their clients, and to 
determine the research questions for a two year long, in-depth 
ethnographic follow-up study. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: 
Section II describes the method used, and Section III reports 
the preliminary results. Section IV summarizes the challenges 
and dilemmas identified and concludes with the aim of the 
follow-up study. 
II. 
METHOD 
To make an inventory of the issues encountered by mental 
health care professionals when implementing and using 
videoconferencing with their clients, four focus group 
sessions were organized in March 2014. Two sessions were 
held with professionals working in intensive psychiatric 
family therapy (IPFT) and two with professionals working in 
flexible assertive community treatment (FACT) teams. 
A. IPFT and FACT 
IPFT [7] and FACT [8] represent two very different forms 
of outreaching mental care. IPFT is an intervention aimed at 
counseling families with children where family members are 
having multiple and serious psychiatric problems. It consists 
of clearly outlined phases and takes about six months to 
complete. During this time, the professional visits the family 
twice a week at their own home. FACT, on the other hand, is 
aimed at people with serious and ongoing psychiatric 
problems. FACT-teams are multidisciplinary and provide 
coaching and support to their clients which is both flexible 
(depending on what is momentarily required) and assertive 
(the professionals taking the initiative, sometimes using 
coercion). Team members frequently visit clients in their own 
homes, in day centers or on the streets. In the IPFT and FACT 
teams that participated in the focus groups, videoconferencing 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

had been introduced earlier to partly supplant visits to clients 
(‘blended care’). 
B. Focus group setup 
Focus group sessions were scheduled to last one hour and 
were structured as follows. After a brief introduction, 
professionals were first asked to describe their work and how 
videoconferencing played a role in it. Participants were asked 
to recollect positive and negative experiences with 
videoconferencing that they recently had; these recollections 
were then briefly discussed. Next, a series of more specific 
questions were asked about videoconferencing, e.g., “What 
are 
the 
benefits 
and 
disadvantages 
of 
using 
videoconferencing?”, “Does videoconferencing influence 
what you try to achieve with clients?”, “Can it be used with 
all clients and in all situations?”, “How do you decide between 
face-to-face visits and videoconferencing?”, and “What 
advice would you give to colleagues less experienced with 
videoconferencing?”. Sessions were concluded with a brief 
wrap-up. During all sessions two researchers were present: 
one moderating the discussion, and the other taking notes. 
Interview notes were analyzed by bottom-up clustering 
(affinity diagramming, [9]). 
III. 
RESULTS 
In total, 19 professionals were interviewed: 6 working in 
IPFT teams, and 13 working in FACT teams. In the IPFT and 
FACT teams that participated in the focus groups, 
videoconferencing had been introduced several months to 
several years earlier, as part of small-scale pilots. In one case 
(focus group no. 4), the organization was preparing for a wider 
implementation of videoconferencing. The professionals 
interviewed therefore had varying degrees of experience with 
videoconferencing; see Table I for more details. 
TABLE I.  
FOCUS GROUP PARTICIPANTS 
Focus 
Group 
Participants 
IPFT / 
FACT 
Male / 
Female 
Experience with 
videoconferencing 
1 
IPFT 
0 / 3 
one year 
2 
IPFT 
1 / 2 
one year 
3 
FACT 
0 / 4 
several months 
4 
FACT 
4 / 5 
several months to several years 
 
A. The role of videoconferencing in IPFT 
IPFT as practiced by the focus group participants, consists 
of three phases. In the first phase (a six-week period during 
which home visits are made twice a week) the professional 
establishes a working relation with the family, explores their 
problems and strengths, and drafts a plan with them. During 
this phase videoconferencing is not yet used, but if both 
parties consent it will become part of the plan. During the 
second phase (which can last anywhere from six weeks to four 
months) the professional counsels the family in working 
towards the goals set out in the plan. When professional and 
family have agreed to use videoconferencing, home visits are 
reduced to once a week and alternated with video calls. The 
third phase starts when the goals have been reached and 
counseling comes to an end. The frequency of home visits and 
video calls is then further reduced, to bi-weekly. This phase 
usually lasts another two months. After the third phase, 
families can still contact the professional (they receive 
vouchers to do so), but only through videoconferencing. 
The IPFT professionals in our focus groups emphasized 
that they had made deliberate choices regarding the use of 
videoconferencing when they designed the IPFT program. 
They felt strongly that visiting families, and observing family 
members in their own homes, was a strength of IPFT that 
should be preserved. Videoconferencing was considered less 
suitable for the first phase, when the professional is still in the 
process of getting to know a family and their problems. In 
contrast, the participants did see specific benefits of 
videoconferencing in the later phases, such as more flexibility 
in planning appointments during evening hours – a time 
preferred by many families. 
B. The role of videoconferencing in FACT 
In the FACT teams we interviewed, videoconferencing 
was also used in scheduled appointments, but more frequently 
it was the client who took the initiative for a video call. In 
some cases, videoconferencing at a client’s initiative was 
limited to the professionals’ desk hours; in other cases, it was 
possible throughout the day and team members took turns in 
answering calls. To further facilitate this, clients could view 
who was online, and during evening hours their calls were 
automatically forwarded to a professional at a clinic. Another 
notable difference is that instant messaging (‘chat’) was also 
used. Communication via chat typically happened throughout 
the day, which allowed for an easily accessible and continuous 
line of communication between client and professional. 
The FACT teams we interviewed did not use 
predetermined guidelines pertaining to videoconferencing. 
Instead, during the team meeting at the start of each day, team 
members would discuss clients’ situations and whether or not 
to use videoconferencing with them. Videoconferencing 
would only be used with a client if a suitable therapeutic 
relationship had been established first. Video calls were used 
to save travel time and to reduce the invasion of a client’s 
privacy. Furthermore, video calls were often used instead of 
regular phone calls, making these contacts more personal. 
Last, videoconferencing was considered a first step towards 
reduced frequency of contact and increased independence of 
a client. 
C. Differences between video and face-to-face contact 
When participants were asked to describe the differences 
between face-to-face visits and videoconferencing, they 
stressed the importance of face-to-face visits for observing 
social interactions, getting to know the client and their 
situation, building up trust, and interpreting what is going on. 
On the other hand, videoconferencing had its own uses, for 
instance to quickly check up with a client on their current 
situation or their progress. The participants agreed that 
videoconferencing could not fully supplant face-to-face visits, 
but that it could supplement these visits very well. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

1) Videoconferencing is brief and to-the-point 
Focus group participants frequently mentioned that, 
compared to face-to-face contact, videoconferencing is brief, 
concrete, and to-the-point. There are fewer opportunities to 
get distracted during a video call, making the conversation 
more focused. Questions asked are pertinent and short, and the 
conversation solution-oriented and aimed at reaching 
agreement (“Okay, so how will we go about that?”). There are 
certain advantages to this conversation style: it sometimes 
allows for asking ‘tough’ questions, offering the professional 
an opportunity to get more quickly to the bottom of a difficult 
situation. Furthermore, the professional is literally ‘at a 
distance’ from the client, forcing the latter in a more active 
role. Videoconferencing can thus stimulate a client’s self-
reliance, especially near the end of an intervention. However, 
all this comes at a price: due to their intensity, video calls 
require more concentration and effort, and a more thorough 
preparation by the professional. 
2) Videoconferencing improves approachability 
Members 
of 
FACT 
teams 
mentioned 
that 
videoconferencing and chat improve the approachability of 
professionals and clients. Videoconferencing is used to briefly 
check up on a client without creating the disturbance 
associated with a regular visit. To some contact-averse or 
care-averse clients, videoconferencing is less threatening than 
a visit. Chat, in particular, can be used to maintain a 
continuous line of communication with a client throughout the 
day, allowing the professional to gradually coach a client 
towards a particular goal. 
FACT teams explicitly compared videoconferencing to 
ordinary phone calls. Contact with a client over the phone is 
common, but videoconferencing adds a personal touch to 
these contacts. This more quickly creates a bond between 
professional and client, which in turn helps to reduce the 
number of ‘no shows’ at scheduled appointments. An 
additional advantage of videoconferencing compared to 
phone calls is that the professional can observe facial 
expressions and some of the nonverbal behavior of a client. 
3) Videoconferencing remains at the surface 
During all focus group sessions, participants quickly 
acknowledged that videoconferencing creates a certain 
distance to a client, with the conversation itself remaining 
somewhat at the surface. The focus and intensity of a video 
call are clearly beneficial for a pertinent conversation, but they 
make videoconferencing unsuited for situations where the 
professional needs to get acquainted with a client, or explore 
what might be going on in a family (‘the deeper layer’, in the 
words of one of the participants). Some of the reasons 
mentioned were that nonverbal signals are easily missed 
during videoconferencing, and that video calls typically lack 
the atmosphere and leeway needed to stimulate a more open 
conversation. As one participant explained, “In a video call, 
you continuously have to stay focused. When you visit people 
at home, there is always a moment when you can lean back 
and just look around”. 
4) Home visits reveal more about a client 
Focus group participants agreed that visiting clients at 
home reveals more about them and their situations. They 
mentioned examples such as seeing the interactions between 
family members (“Where they sit, how they look, whether the 
living room looks tidy, and what the teenage daughter is doing 
in the background.”), clients being more at ease and more 
‘themselves’ (“People tell different stories when you see them 
at home.”), ‘rituals’ that establish trust and maintain a 
personal relationship (“Small-talk while hanging your coat or 
drinking a cup of coffee together.”), brief interruptions that 
reveal something about daily life (“The telephone rings, the 
neighbor steps in.”). As one participant explained, “Entering 
someone’s house gives you the clues to start a conversation, 
to build up a relationship. During a video call there is no 
neighbor who’s got something to say, your only clue is to 
notice that your client is still wearing their pajamas. The 
atmosphere is very different when someone is making you a 
cup of tea; you enter a conversation completely different then. 
Sensing the atmosphere is important; it contains clues about 
how someone is doing.” Intangible and nonverbal signals, 
such as these, are absent (or will at least more easily be 
missed) during a videoconference. 
D. Issues in using videoconferencing 
The differences between face-to-face contact and 
videoconferencing lead to certain issues that professionals 
need to cope with. In the current situation, where 
videoconferencing still plays a relatively minor role, these 
issues do not seem to be of great urgency. However, the 
professionals interviewed expect that they will need to rely 
more heavily on videoconferencing in the near future: using it 
more frequently, but also in more complex situations. 
1) Situations where videoconferencing is not suited 
The participants all work in secondary care. Clients and 
families with relatively straightforward problems are 
increasingly taken care of in primary care, hence, only 
complex cases (e.g., clients with multiple disorders, or 
families with alcohol or drug abuse) remain. The participants 
are skeptical about the suitability of videoconferencing for 
these situations (“When a family is in chaos, it is going to be 
very difficult to use videoconferencing for a to-the-point 
discussion of goals.” and “When the communication in a 
family is breaking down, or in fact each time when you need 
to know what is really going on, videoconferencing just won’t 
do it.”). One of the IPFT team members wondered what to do 
in situations where there is a suspicion of ill-treatment: “I 
might easily miss out on certain signals, yet I have a 
responsibility. Sometimes you have this feeling that something 
else is going on, and in such cases home visits are extremely 
important.” FACT team members also expressed concerns: 
“You need to build up a relation first; there must first be a 
solid foundation before you can rely on videoconferencing, 
and in cases where coercion is needed, videoconferencing 
may not be suitable at all”.  
2) Consequences for the profession 
All focus group participants had become experienced with 
videoconferencing in the context of small-scale pilots, making 
them the pioneers in their respective organizations. And 
although they had experienced the drawbacks themselves, 
they had also learned that videoconferencing, if properly used, 
can bring some advantages. During the focus group 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

discussions some of them expressed concerns that they were 
unable to convince their colleagues, who had not partaken in 
these pilots, of these potential benefits: “Videoconferencing is 
primarily regarded as a means to save costs; as something 
that deteriorates the care we provide. It would help if both the 
positive effects and the contraindications could be 
substantiated, to better inform our colleagues and to reduce 
the resistance they feel towards videoconferencing.” With 
regard to the professional competences required for properly 
using videoconferencing, most participants agreed that any 
mental health care professional should be able to use 
videoconferencing: “It may require extra skills to assess 
whether or not to use videoconferencing with a client the next 
time. This is a matter of experience, of knowing which signals 
are important. But this is not new: when you visit a client at 
home, you also have to make such decisions.” Nevertheless, 
some participants expressed concerns: “What will it do to our 
role as professional caregivers? If I find myself sitting behind 
a screen most of the time, will I still have the same 
professional attitude? I will miss visiting clients at home, or 
going over a conversation when I am cycling back home.” 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
A. The challenges and dilemmas identified 
Among the issues uncovered in this exploratory study are, 
briefly summarized: feelings of missing intangible, nonverbal 
but nevertheless important cues in the conversation with a 
client; an increased psychological ‘distance’ towards the 
client, which makes the communication more to-the-point in 
some cases, and somewhat superficial in others; and 
difficulties in overseeing and interpreting interactions 
between family members. These issues need to be investigated 
before recommendations can be given regarding the proper 
use of videoconferencing. The shared expectation among the 
participating health care professionals that they will need to 
rely more frequently on videoconferencing with clients, raises 
a few important professional challenges and dilemmas. These 
are: (1) how to integrate videoconferencing into treatment 
programs and individual treatment plans while maintaining a 
good quality of care; (2) what factors to take into account 
when applying videoconferencing in specific situations, or 
with specific clients, such that it is safe and responsible to do 
so; and (3) how to make colleagues inexperienced in the use 
of videoconferencing more aware of the potential benefits of 
using videoconferencing with clients. 
B. Follow-up study 
Reviewing the results of this exploratory study, we can 
conclude that videoconferencing affects the conversation and 
relation between client and professional, and hence the care 
that is being provided. Other researchers have drawn similar 
conclusions [10][11]. Turner [10], for instance, interprets 
these effects in terms of differences in presence, in particular 
differences in the available primary, secondary, and tertiary 
context. Primary context refers to what appears salient to both 
participants; in face-to-face contact this refers to the 
immediate surroundings of the participants. Secondary 
context refers to what is available within the primary context 
but which is outside the focus of the participants. For instance, 
the room in which the participants meet, and the objects and 
other people inside it. Tertiary context refers to ancillary 
context. This may, for instance, include the walk up to the 
house and through the hall, or a brief encounter with a 
neighbor. In videoconferences, these three contexts are very 
different: the primary context is represented by the viewable 
image. Within this image, limited secondary context is 
available: in the background, or as background sounds that 
give information on what is going on outside of the displayed 
image. Tertiary context, however, is unavailable in a 
videoconference, as are the cues that this context may provide. 
Problems arise when participants fail to realize these effects 
of mediated communication. Turner illustrates this by a 
striking example where a telepsychiatrist prescribed physical 
exercise (bicycle riding) to an imprisoned patient, not 
realizing that this patient was bound to a wheelchair. 
Based on the findings of this study, and informed by the 
research of Pols [4], Oudshoorn [5], and Turner [9], an in-
depth ethnographic study is currently being prepared. The aim 
of this study is to investigate the sometimes subtle ways in 
which videoconferencing affects the conversation between a 
client and a professional. Building upon on the acquired 
insights, we further aim to develop instruments (e.g., a 
storybook, an online course, or a serious game) to better equip 
mental health care professionals, and make them more aware 
of the benefits and pitfalls of videoconferencing. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the professionals who participated 
in our study and their respective organizations: Dimence, 
GGZ Drenthe, and GGZ Noord-Holland-Noord. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. H. Shore, “Telepsychiatry: videoconferencing in the delivery 
of psychiatric care”, Am J Psychiatry, vol. 170, no. 3, March 
2013, pp. 256-262. 
[2] R. O’Reilly, J. Bishop, K. Maddox, L. Hutchinson, M. Fisman, 
and J. Takhar, “Is telepsychiatry equivalent to face-to-face 
psychiatry? Results from a randomized controlled equivalence 
trial”, Psychiatr Serv, vol. 58, no. 6, June 2007, pp. 836-843. 
[3] L. Hulsbosch, P. Tamis-Ten Cate, A. Nugter, and H. Kroon, 
Zorg 
op 
afstand 
in 
de 
langdurende 
geestelijke 
gezondheidszorg: een randomised controlled trial naar telezorg 
bij GGZ Noord-Holland-Noord. Utrecht, The Netherlands: 
Trimbos Instituut, 2011. (Telecare in long term mental health 
care: a randomised controlled trial. In Dutch.) 
[4] J. Pols, Care at a Distance: On the Closeness of Technology. 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Amsterdam University Press, 
2012. 
[5] N. Oudshoorn, Telecare Technologies and the Transformation 
of Healthcare, New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011. 
[6] S. Reeves, A. Kuper, and B. D. Hodges, “Qualitative research 
methodologies: ethnography”, BMJ, vol. 337, August 2008, 
pp. 512-514. 
[7] G. H. F. van der Most and A. H. Roosma, “Intensieve 
psychiatrische 
gezinsbehandeling”, 
Tijdschrift 
voor 
Psychiatrie, vol. 43, no. 8, 2001, pp. 579-583. (Intensive 
psychiatric family therapy. In Dutch, with English summary.) 
[8] J. R. van Veldhuizen, “FACT: a Dutch version of ACT”, 
Community Ment Health J, vol. 43, no. 4, August 2007, pp. 
421-433. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[9] J. Hackos and J. Redish, “User and task analysis for interface 
design,” New York: Wiley, 1998. 
[10] J. W. Turner, “Telepsychiatry as a case study of presence: do 
you know what you are missing?”, J Comput-Mediat Comm, 
vol. 6, no. 4, June 2006. 
[11] C. May, L. Gask, T. Atkinson, N. Ellis, F. Mair, and A. Esmail, 
“Resisting and promoting new technologies in clinical practice: 
the case of telepsychiatry”, Soc Sci Med, vol. 52, no. 12, June 
2001, pp. 1889-1901. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

