Technology Assisted Self-management Support  
for Improving Cancer Pain Control  
Laura M.J. Hochstenbach  
School for Public Health and Primary Care (CAPHRI) 
Department of Health Services Research 
Maastricht University, the Netherlands 
l.hochstenbach@maastrichtuniversity.nl  
Annemie M. Courtens  
Department of Patient and Care 
Maastricht University Medical Centre, the Netherlands 
a.courtens@mumc.nl   
Sandra M.G. Zwakhalen   
School for Public Health and Primary Care (CAPHRI) 
Department of Health Services Research 
Maastricht University, the Netherlands 
s.zwakhalen@maastrichtuniversity.nl  
Joan Vermeulen  
School for Public Health and Primary Care (CAPHRI) 
Department of Health Services Research 
Maastricht University, the Netherlands 
j.vermeulen@maastrichtuniversity.nl   
Maarten van Kleef  
School for Mental Health and Neuroscience (MHeNS) 
Department of Anesthesiology 
Maastricht University Medical Centre, the Netherlands 
maarten.van.kleef@mumc.nl   
 
Luc P. de Witte  
School for Public Health and Primary Care (CAPHRI) 
Department of Health Services Research 
Maastricht University, the Netherlands 
l.dewitte@maastrichtuniversity.nl  
 
Abstract—Pain continues to be a prevalent and distressing 
symptom in patients with cancer. Integration of patient self-
management and professional care through care technology 
provides promising opportunities in the outpatient setting. 
Researchers, technicians, health professionals and patients 
collaborated during an iterative development process. Co-
creation resulted in a technology assisted multi-component 
self-management support intervention delivered by specialized 
nurses to outpatients with cancer pain. The intervention 
consists of an iPad application for patients, which is connected 
to a web application for nurses. Both applications are 
embedded in a multidisciplinary care organization. This paper 
provides a description of the intervention. 
Keywords-cancer 
pain; 
self-management 
support; 
telemonitoring; education; feedback; outpatients; nursing; 
eHealth intervention. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Patients with cancer experience multiple physical and 
psychosocial symptoms, having an enormous impact on 
their daily functioning and quality of life [1]. Pain is 
considered one of the most common symptoms, reported by 
59% of patients on active treatment, 64% of patients with 
advanced disease, and 33% of patients after curative 
treatment [2]. Despite available treatment options, pain 
control is still suboptimal in 50% of all patients with cancer 
pain [3]. Fragmentation of care organization, deficient pain 
communication, and reluctance towards pain medication 
contribute to inadequate pain management in the outpatient 
setting 
[4][5][6]. 
Actively 
involving 
and 
remotely 
supporting patients seems conditional to improving 
outcomes, since the actual pain management of cancer 
patients is performed at home [7].  
Various valuable attempts have been made in developing 
and evaluating interventions to support cancer pain self-
management. Nurses specialized in pain were found to make 
substantial contributions to day-to-day pain management in 
the outpatient setting [8]. Due to differences in content, 
structure and outcomes of interventions, it remains difficult 
to draw firm conclusions about how to provide optimal self-
management support [9]. Recommendations have been 
formulated with regards to the implementation of multiple 
components, the importance of self-efficacy and the 
integration 
of 
interventions 
into 
routine 
practice 
[10][11][12]. Care technologies could contribute to the 
integration of patient self-management and professional care. 
Therefore, this project is focused on the development and 
evaluation of a self-management support intervention that 
integrates multiple components and is delivered by 
specialized nurses to outpatients with moderate to severe 
cancer pain. Requirements for self-management support [13] 
include assisting patients to access information about their 
pain and adverse effects and telling them what is normal and 
when and how to get help. It also involves empowering 
patients to recognize and monitor their symptoms and 
providing them with insight and feedback about how they are 
doing. Supporting patients to undertake strategies to manage 
their symptoms better and to have confidence is extremely 
important. Based on these requirements, researchers and 
252
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

technicians as well as health professionals and patients 
collaborated in an iterative development process. Involving 
these different perspectives was meant to ensure an 
intervention fit with daily practice and preferences in order 
to increase implementation success, while at the same time 
taking previous research and technological opportunities into 
account. This paper provides a description of the 
intervention. 
 
II. 
INTERVENTION 
The intervention consists of an iPad application for 
patients, which is connected to a web application for nurses. 
Both applications are embedded in a multidisciplinary care 
organization. Patients receive the intervention alongside the 
pain treatment that is provided to them by their treating 
physician. 
Patients and nurses obtain log-in information to gain 
access to the applications. Accordingly, pain medication can 
be entered into the nurse application and activated to be 
visible in the patient application. Monitored data are saved 
on secured servers. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Screenshots of the application for patients (in Dutch):  
a) home screen, b) extra pain intensity score, c) graphical feedback,  
and d) medication intake schedule 
 
A. Patient application  
The application for patients involves pain, side effects 
and medication monitoring, graphical feedback, education, 
and nurse support (Fig. 1). Patients are reminded to 
complete diaries, take medication, read education materials 
and check text messages from the nurse by visual and sound 
notifications. 
 
1) Diary: The pain diary is presented to patients twice 
daily and involves questions about their pain, adverse 
effects, interference of pain with activity or sleep, and 
satisfaction with pain treatment. Diary questions were based 
on the present-day pain anamnesis and composed together 
with a multidisciplinary palliative team. Providing nurses 
with enough information without burdening patients too 
much was considered important. The pain diary contains a 
skip pattern; affirmative answers on particular questions 
result in sub-questions to obtain more information. In 
between, these diaries, registration of extra pain intensity 
scores is optional. These optional scores may provide a 
better reflection of pain over time, as cancer pain is 
characterized by fluctuations. 
 
2) Medication: The application includes a personalized 
medication day schedule. In accordance with this schedule, 
patients are requested to register intake of medication in 
time. A restricted 4-hour time frame, starting 2-hours before 
and finishing 2-hours after the scheduled intake time should 
motivate patients to take and register their medication on 
time. Accurate registrations are important for graphical 
feedback as well as nurse advice. General medication icons 
were added to support patients visually.  
Pain intensity scores from the diaries, as well as the 
extra pain intensity scores, are depicted in a graph together 
with the medication intake moments. Pain scores are 
indicated with bullets, closed and open squares represent 
intakes of respectively ‘around the clock’ and ‘as needed’ 
medication. The graphical information provides insight into 
pain patterns over time and the possible influence of 
medication intake and daily routines.  
 
3) Education: Patients receive education about causes of 
pain, treatment of pain, recognition of symptoms that 
require action, and methods that patients themselves can 
implement to better control pain. The education is divided 
into three ‘obligatory’ sessions, in which information is 
presented dosed and in a logical sequence. Each session 
consists of several topics. After completion of these 
sessions, specific topics, as well as additional information 
about pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatments, 
can be ‘voluntarily’ reread. Based on prescriptions of 
patients, the information about pain medication is tailored 
by “The information presented here is (is not) applicable to 
your situation, since you do (do not) take this medication”. 
 
4) Contact: In case of questions, patients have the 
opportunity to send text messages to the nurse via the 
application. Nurses attempt to answer these messages within 
one workday.  
 
B. Nurse application  
Nurses enter the application to monitor and analyze the 
situation of patients regarding pain once every workday. In 
addition to the composition of the medication overview, the 
application for nurses includes completed pain diaries, 
composite graphs, information about scheduled and actual 
medication intake, and a text message function (Fig. 2).  
253
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

In case of red flags or text messages from patients, 
nurses receive an email notification. 
 
 
Figure 2. Screenshots of the application for nurses: a) weekly overview of 
overall risk flags, b) evening diary, c) composite graph with pain intensity 
scores and medication intake moments and d) medication intake details 
 
1) Completed diaries: Diary questions and answers are 
tagged with colored flags that support nurses in their 
monitoring tasks: red flags required immediate action, 
yellow flags asked to keep an eye, and green flags indicated 
everything is okay. Frequency of certain answers during 
subsequent diaries determines the color of flags. 
 
2) Composite graph and medication details: Pain 
intensity scores as registered by patients are summarized in 
a composite graph together with their pain medication 
intake. Pain scores are depicted with bullets. Squares 
differentiate between registration of ‘around the clock’ 
medication (green, closed) and ‘as needed’ medication 
(green, open) as well as medication that has not been 
registered (red, closed). The graphic view can be adapted by 
changing the date. Pain medication details, including 
strength, dose, scheduled and actual intake time provide 
nurses with additional information. 
 
3) Multidisciplinary organisation of care: Besides 
sending text messages, nurses have the opportunity to 
consult patients by phone. When necessary, and also on a 
regular basis, nurses will inform the treating physician about 
the situation of patients regarding pain. In case pain relief is 
inadequate, the nurse consults the pain specialist or the 
multidisciplinary palliative team for advice. Advice is 
reported to the treating physician who decides on follow-up, 
changes in prescription or other interventions.  
 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
The intervention integrates patient self-management and 
professional care through care technology, facilitating 
partnership with shared responsibilities. The proposed 
intervention, which is to be tested in a randomised 
controlled trial, is believed to improve pain management in 
outpatients with cancer.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This study was supported by a grant from the Dutch 
Cancer Society (UM2011-5079). IDEE Maastricht UMC+, 
the Netherlands (www.idee-mumc.nl) and Sananet Care BV, 
the Netherlands (www.sananet.nl) were involved in 
intervention development. The authors would like to thank 
health professionals and patients for sharing their 
experiences and ideas.   
 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. S. Cleeland, F. Zhao, V. T. Chang, J. A. Sloan, A. M. 
O’Mara, P. B. Gilman, M. Weiss, T. R. Mendoza, J. W. Lee, 
and M. J. Fish, “The symptom burden of cancer: Evidence for 
a core set of cancer-related and treatment-related symptoms 
from the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Symptom 
Outcomes and Practice Patterns study”, Cancer, vol. 119, 
Dec. 2013, doi: 10.1002/cncr.28376.  
[2] M. H. van den Beuken-van Everdingen, J. M. de Rijke, A. G. 
Kessels, H. C. Schouten, M. van Kleef, and J. Patijn, 
“Prevalence of pain in patients with cancer: A systematic 
review of the past 40 years”, Annals of Oncology, vol. 18, pp. 
1437-1449, Mar 2007, doi: 1093/annonc/mdm056. 
[3] S. Deandrea, M. Montanari, L. Moja, and G. Apolone, 
“Prevalence of undertreatment in cancer pain. A review of 
published literature”, Annals of Oncology, vol. 19, pp. 1985-
1991, Jul 2008, doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdn419 
[4] R. Jacobsen, Z. Liubarskiene, C. Moldrup, L. Christrup, P. 
Sjogren, and J. Samsanaviciene, “Barriers to cancer pain 
management: A review of empirical research”, Medicina 
(Kaunas), vol. 45, pp. 427-433, Jul 2009, doi: -. 
[5] W. H. Oldenmenger, P. A. Sillevis Smitt, S. van Dooren, G. 
Stoter, and C. C. van der Rijt, “A systematic review on 
barriers hindering adequate cancer pain management and 
interventions to reduce them: A critical appraisal”, European 
Journal of Cancer, vol. 45, pp. 1370-1380, May 2009, doi: 
10.1016/j.ejca.2009.01.007. 
[6] T. Luckett, P. M. Davidson, A. Green, F. Boyle, J. Stubbs, 
and M. Lovell. “Assessment and management of adult cancer 
pain: A systematic review and synthesis of recent qualitative 
studies aimed at developing insights for managing barriers 
and optimizing facilitators within a comprehensive framework 
of patient care”,  Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 
vol. 46, pp. 229-253, Aug 2013, doi: 10.1016/j.jpainsymman. 
2012.07.021. 
254
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[7] K. L. Schumacher, S. Koresawa, C. West, C. Hawkins, C. 
Johnson, E. Wais, M. Dodd, S. M. Paul, D. Tripathy, P. Koo,  
and C. Miaskowski, “Putting cancer pain management 
regimens into practice at home”, Journal of Pain and 
Symptom Management, vol. 23, pp. 369-382, May 2002, 
doi:10.1016/S0885-3924(02)00385-8. 
[8] A. H. Vallerand, S. Musto, and R. C. Polomano, “Nursing's 
role in cancer pain management”, Current pain and hedeache 
reports, vol. 15, pp. 250-262, Aug 2011, doi: 10.1007/s11916-
011- 0203-5. 
[9] A. Koller, C. Miaskowski, S. de Geest, O. Opitz, and E. 
Spichiger, “A systematic evaluation of content, structure, and 
efficacy 
of 
interventions 
to 
improve 
patients' 
self-
management of cancer pain”, Journal of Pain and Symptom 
Management, vol. 44, pp. 264-284, Aug 2012, doi: 
10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2011.08.015. 
[10] J. Barlow, C. Wright, J. Sheasby, A. Turner, and J. 
Hainsworth, “Self-management approaches for people with 
chronic conditions: A review”, Patient Education and 
Counseling, vol. 48, pp.  177-187 Oct-Nov 2002, doi: 
10.1016/S0738-3991(02)00032-0. 
[11] R. L. Kravitz, D. J. Tancredi, T. Grennan, D. Kalauokalani, R. 
L. Street Jr , C. K. Slee, T. Wun, J. W. Oliver, K. Lorig, and 
P. Franks, “Cancer Health Empowerment for Living without 
Pain (Ca-HELP): Effects of a tailored education and coaching 
intervention on pain and impairment”, Pain, vol. 152, pp. 
1572-1582, doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2011.02.047. 
[12] M. I. Bennett, A. M. Bagnall, and S. Jose Closs, “How 
effective are patient-based educational interventions in the 
management of cancer pain? Systematic review and meta-
analysis”, Pain, vol. 143,  pp.  192-199, Jun 2009, doi: 
10.1016/j.pain.2009.01.016. 
[13] K. R. Lorig and H. Holman. “Self-management education: 
History, definition, outcomes, and mechanisms”, Annals of 
Behavioral Medicine, vol. 26, pp. 1-7, Aug 2003, doi: 
0.1207/S15324796ABM2601_01.
 
 
  
 
 
255
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

