Exchanging  Nursing Oncology Care Data With use of a Clinical Data Ware House 
William Goossen, Frank Boterenbrood, Irene Krediet 
department ICT innovations in health care 
Christelijke Hogeschool Windesheim  
Zwolle, the Netherlands 
e-mail: wtf.goossen@windesheim.nl 
 
Abstract— Isala Clinics Hospital and Icare Homecare under 
leadership of Windesheim use a multi-method approach to 
standardize nursing data for oncology care based on Detailed 
Clinical Models (DCM), and use these DCM as requirements 
for the Electronic Health Record (EHR) system. Further, the 
DCM are used for extracting the data from EHRs into a 
Clinical Data Ware House (CDWH) that will be deployed for 
different data uses. Data uses include exchanging clinical data 
from hospital to homecare using Health Level 7 v3 Care 
Record message, and reuse data for quality reporting. This 
paper presents the research approach including the design for 
the infrastructure, and the results from the first phase. The 
paper illustrates that based on existing materials, widely 
available for nursing, it is feasible to determine the data needs 
for exchange and for various data use purposes. In particular 
the results of standardization and messaging are presented.  
Keywords: oncology nursing, detail clinical models DCM, 
electronic health record EHR, nursing informatics, clinical data 
ware house, HL7 v3 Care Record. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION   
Many development projects towards the electronic health 
record (EHR) state that one reason for their existence is the 
abundance of data for secondary uses [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. It is 
assumed that the exchange of clinical data for continuity of 
care and the extraction of clinical data from the EHR can be 
taken for granted. However, that is not the case. There are 
several reasons why the electronic exchange and aggregation 
from the EHR for continuity of care or for secondary use 
cannot be taken for granted, but needs substantive work, 
including tackling privacy issues, EHR performance, data 
use, EHR format, and data aggregation [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8].  
These distinct tasks are combined into a project for 
nursing care for oncology patients, currently treated in the 
Isala Clinics and supported at home by Icare Homecare. The 
research questions for this project are the following: 
1. How can a CDWH for Isala Clinics be developed for 
basic patient data, generic nursing data and data about 
oncology nursing, allowing management of EHR data?  
2. Can the nursing data be standardized and mapped to 
specifications for different data uses as electronic exchange, 
quality indicators and clinical studies? 
3. Can we use existing standards (DCM, HL7) to 
facilitate electronic exchange of nursing oncology care data?  
This paper further describes the background, such as 
earlier research in medical databases, a short introduction of 
the participants, and the various concepts involved in this 
project. The Methods describes the selection of useful DCM 
for oncology patients. The Results section explains which 
nursing data and DCM are selected, the requirements for the 
CDWH, and the legal aspects. A blueprint of the CDWH is 
presented, and the paper ends with the discussion and 
conclusions for the project. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
A. Clinical Data Ware House 
Huff et al are among the firsts to define a clinical data 
warehouse as a separate system linked to an EHR [5]. 
Sahama & Croll define a Data Warehouse as a data structure 
optimized for distribution, mass storage and complex queries 
[6]. An ISO Technical specification guides a standard 
approach to CDWH development [7]. These and other inputs 
lead to the main tasks for this project: 
 
Privacy regulations prevent different uses of an 
individual’s clinical data. In order to allow electronic 
exchange and secondary use of clinical data, regulations, 
consent, and data protection measures have to be 
followed [1].  
 
Performance of the EHR might be jeopardized when 
large queries are carried out on the records directly [3]. 
Similarly all clinical data required for continuity of care 
and specified purposes might not be available in one 
system and need to be collected and combined from 
multiple data sources [7]. 
 
Clinical data are useful for continuity of care. Electronic 
exchange of data requires a high level of standardization 
of nursing data in order to allow their use by receiving 
EHR [2, 7, 9]. 
 
The EHR format is not necessarily fit for secondary data 
use. This format can be both its structure e.g. type and 
number of record tables, nature of the data (free text, 
numbers, coded), and use versus non-use of standard or 
local terminology and coding. To use EHR data for 
exchange and secondary uses it is required to export 
data from the EHR, standardize and collect data in the 
format for secondary data use, and import the data into a 
clinical data ware house (CDWH) [3, 4, 5].  
 
Data have to be aggregated for secondary data use [3]. 
Aggregation involves a process of selection of subsets of 
data relevant for the purpose, and to collect and store 
them separately [8]. Next, the intended manipulations to 
the data have to be defined, such as construction of 
numerators and denominators, the querying of the data 
set, and their calculations or statistical analysis [8]. 
Hence, for our project, a new type of CDWH is defined: 
use of a polyvalent database with structured data, including 
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the data context, linkage to medical knowledge and meta-
information, 
using 
unique 
code 
from 
standardized 
terminologies that facilitate data exchange for continuity of 
care, and queries for different purposes.   
B. Participants in the project 
The project is carried out by the Windesheim department 
of ICT innovations in health care. This lector led research 
group focuses on the quality of information management in 
health care, meaningful application of health information 
technologies, and their evaluation. Researchers and students 
from Windesheim School of Information Sciences (SIS) and 
School of Health Care (SHC) participate in this project. 
Isala Clinics Hospital is the largest Top-clinical hospital 
in the Netherlands, with 5300 employees and 1000 beds. Per 
annum Isala Clinics treats more than 502.000 patients in out-
patient visits, 47.000 patients via admissions and 48.000 in 
day care. Besides all basic care and treatment, top clinical 
functions offered include heart surgery, neonatal intensive 
care, trauma center, neurosurgery and bone and stem cell 
transplants. Innovation, education and research is carried out 
by the Isala Academy, with 180 to 200 annual peer reviewed 
publications in health research.  
Icare Homecare is one of the brands of the Espria 
concern for home care, child care, maternity care, mental 
health care, among others. Espria has 16.000 employees at 
full concern level. Espria offers living, welfare, care and 
social services. Icare offers the home care, mainly via 
professional nurses, one specialty concerns the oncology 
visits in collaboration with Isala Clinics. 
C. Detailed Clinical Models (DCM) and Health Level 7 
(HL7) v3 Care Record Messages 
Detailed clinical Models (DCM) link clinical concepts 
(data) via linkages to standard terminologies and codes to 
define the semantics, and identify the clinical context and 
knowledge. DCM handle the conceptual level and add a 
logical model in Unified Modeling Language (UML) to 
represent it [9]. For implementations, these UML models are 
transformed into the required technology.  
The HL7 working group ‘Patient Care’ developed HL7 
v3 messages allowing clinical content to be exchanged 
between EHR’s, or systems for secondary data use [7]. Each 
message has specific dynamics for the care process. In 
particular sender, receiver and subject data are included, as 
well as clinical data. The Care Record message is useful for 
sending structured nursing data between health care facilities 
for continuity of care [7]. DCM examples for clinical 
purposes include their transformation into HL7 v3 Care 
Record messages. This is using DCM in a Model Driven 
Architecture (MDA) approach [10]. 
D. Electronic Health Records (EHR) in Isala and Icare 
Both health care institutions work with EHR systems of 
quite older generations with a major focus on administrative 
data and elementary clinical data. Both systems do not 
include all required nursing data for oncology care, and do 
not include a full nursing care plan. So one of the outcomes 
of this project is the functional requirements document 
describing for one specialty what their future EHRs needs to 
be capable of. The Isala Academy is carrying out clinical 
research and needs the CDWH for this. At this moment a 
research data base is used and functions well for the specific 
purpose. However, it does require multiple manual data entry 
activities, and the consistency with clinical data and research 
data can be difficult to keep at some times. In addition, 
quality reporting is increasingly important. Hence, the 
polyvalent database in the form of a CDWH is seen as a 
strategic asset to standardize data, to obtain requirements for 
the EHR, and to facilitate clinical reporting and research by 
the oncology nurses. 
III. 
METHODS 
The project started in September 2011 and follows 
different steps including identifying data needs of nurses for 
oncology care. Next is that these data are standardized using 
the DCM approach [9]. The oncology nurses reviewed and 
completed a data set and the relevant DCM.  
The literature review of CDWH and analysis of current 
systems and data uses resulted in a complete set of 
requirements on which the data warehouse can be built. The 
final step is the actual functional design and the CDWH 
implementation.  
Along the nursing data content and the technical 
requirements for the CDWH itself, also specifications for the 
HL7 Care Record message and its DCM based content 
where established.  
In order to meet privacy regulations data with patient 
names and id for continuity of care, and data for quality 
studies, 
indicators, 
reporting 
and 
research 
will 
be 
anonymous. Using legal inquiry, the way how this can be 
done is described.  
This is all illustrated in Fig 1. Current EHR and auxiliary 
system data will be mapped to the DCM specifications in the 
next phase, as are the query definitions. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Juridical & ethical aspects  
In medical information systems, personal data is stored 
and processed in patient records. These data are personal and 
processing data about a person is subject to legislation i.e.: 
the Dutch Personal Data Protection Act [11], which is in 
alignment with the European Data Directive [12]. In fact, 
according to article 16 of the Dutch Personal Data Protection 
Act, data describing one’s health is considered to be special 
data, of which processing is prohibited except for specific  
institutions  and  purposes  identified  by  article  21 [13]. 
Therefore, special attention is required when processing 
medical information. This paragraph discusses the impact of 
juridical and ethical aspects on the design of the CDWH.  
According to the Dutch Personal Data Protection Act, 
several dimensions of data processing are of special interest: 
 
Transparence. Inform the patient about what data is 
processed and by whom. Request approval . 
 
Purpose-specification. The purpose of data processing 
activities must match the purpose for data collection. 
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Legitimate basis. Data processing activities are in line 
with business goals, patient approval and (inter)national 
legislation as supervised by the Dutch Data Protection 
Authority. 
 
Retention. Data will be stored for a limited time. 
 
Data Quality. The processes will include activities to 
ensure optimal data quality. 
 
Data Security. Shielding data from unauthorized use 
will be in line with available technical solutions. 
 
In this case, medical data of patients are used for two 
purposes: data exchange with care partners and scientific 
research. A legitimate basis for these types of processing can 
be created by acquiring explicit approval from the patient. 
Currently, patients are informed about the use for scientific 
research only. In this project, Isala is advised to inform 
patients about the data transfer to business partners as well.  
As part of this research a limited survey amongst   
patients indicates that patients may not feel comfortable with 
their data being used for unknown purposes. Acquiring 
approval should therefore include an explanation of the 
(implications of the) types of data which will be processed. 
Medical data is classified as the most sensitive group of data 
available; therefore, additional to creating a legitimate basis, 
data used for scientific research should be made anonymous 
by removing all personal identifications. 
This has implications for the design of the CDWH. In the 
CDWH, special data marts for scientific research will be 
defined, providing researchers access to anonymous data 
only. Data determined for information exchange between 
care partners will be made available by separate data marts, 
giving authorized care partners access to identifying 
information. In the areas of retention and data quality, 
additional information needs to be acquired. In the remainder 
of the project, additional privacy enhancing technologies 
may be identified and added. 
B. Nursing oncology data set and DCM 
In order to find out which general patient information is 
needed in the transfer from the hospital to homecare for 
oncology patients, 4 lists were created containing general 
patient 
information 
and 
information 
on 
the 
care 
organizations and next, were distributed to 13 nurses 
working in both organizations. These 4 lists came from 
HL7v3 CMETSs person and patient and from data of the 
V&VN/NICTIZ project e-Overdracht [14]. The nurses were 
asked to score whether or not a specific item was important 
for them to know in the transfer of oncology patients. A total 
set of 80 data elements/concepts was determined and 
integrated into one general questionnaire and implemented in 
the CDWH.  Then, the work group in the project started with 
reviewing existing DCM on their relevance to this 
questionnaire. This is necessary for the CDWH data and 
coding requirements. The  DCM are partly available from 
earlier external projects and are drawn up according to the 
National DCM guideline for DCM projects in the 
Netherlands [9], and will be submitted to a national DCM 
repository [15]. A list of DCM was drawn up of which some 
need smaller alterations in order to be linked to the specific 
group of patients. Available DCM that are found to be 
important 
are 
e.g. 
pain, 
nutrition, 
length, 
weight, 
sensitiveness etc. (Table 1). 
TABLE I.  
DCM AVAILABLE AND SELECTED 
Table 1: DCM available and selected  
Pain 
Sensitiveness 
Nutrition  
Length 
Diabetes treatment 
Weight 
Usage of appliances 
Social information 
Decubitus wound 
classification 
Person / patient data (HL7 
CMET) 
Defecation 
 
 
Additional DCM where created to augment the existing 
examples.  After some research, it was concluded that 
patients with esophagus carcinoma or stomach carcinoma 
need homecare and that for the nurses who provide 
homecare, it is important to know which tumor typology the 
patient has. Therefore, a DCM for the TNM classification of 
esophagus carcinoma and a DCM for TNM of stomach 
carcinoma was designed. Also, a start was made on the 
design of the treatment of esophagus cancer and tube feeding 
(Table 2). In the next phase of the project, more DCM will 
be selected or created.  
TABLE II.  
ADDITIONAL DCM’S CREATED 
Table 2: Additional DCM’s created  
Tumor typology esophagus carcinoma 
Tumor typology stomach carcinoma 
Generic data about cancer treatment esophagus cancer 
Tube feeding care 
 
C. CDWH Requirements 
Analysis of the existing situation in the Isala clinics and 
Icare, and the literature study for the CDWH revealed a set 
of functional requirements for the CDWH. These are 
presented here:  
 
Data are standardized and structured according to DCM 
format in the Dutch National Guideline [9], and draft 
ISO technical specification DTS 13972. [16] 
 
Data are coded using a unique code per data element and 
a unique code per value where a value set is applicable. 
Codes are used from Snomed CT, LOINC, ICD-10, ICF, 
ICNP, among others.  
 
DCM’s selected and created are accepted by the nursing 
profession with Isala and with Icare as fit for purpose 
and properly defined. To achieve this, a verification and 
adoption process was used.  
 
The CDWH shall be able to export data in HL7 v3 
clinical statement format in order to have payload for 
the Care Record message [7].  
 
Specifications of the current Isala Research Database are 
to be met. For this reason, besides the basic DCM 
materials, the tumor typology from existing research 
was used for additional DCM. 
185
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
The data specifications and import /export for the EHRs 
and CDWH are based on national or international 
standards. The same will have to apply to the queries 
that will be developed in a later phase.  
 
Standards based automatic import from EHR to CDWH.  
 
The CDWH shall be able to import raw data from 
different systems, store them in the agreed DCM based 
standard format per data element with codes and 
contextual information. 
 
The CDWH shall be able to sort data and support 
different queries, among those that are Structured Query 
Language (SQL) based.  
 
The existing data in the hospital will be queried / 
extracted from EHR and auxiliary systems to be mapped 
and coded into the required content format for CDWH 
storage. 
 
The EHR and auxiliary systems data will be exported in 
XML format, or transformed to XML for import in the 
CDWH. 
 
The CDWH can export the standards based data to XML 
format. 
 
Storage of the standardized data in the CDWH shall not 
be independent, meaning not dependent on specific 
applications or application formats.  
 
The CDWH shall allow sorting, combining, grouping, 
calculating, and aggregating data using different 
techniques. 
 
The CDWH should allow defining different queries, 
reports, and other functions in order to generate data 
extractions and /or reports, quality indicators, and 
research data. 
The addition, the requirements where used to draw up an 
initial blueprint for the CDWH. Figure 2 illustrates the main 
components of the CDWH approach. In particular the 
distinction that a separate data type is created per use is seen 
as beneficial for both privacy reasons and for ease of 
development and deployment.  
D. Instructions 
Ongoing part of the project is the preparation of teaching 
materials. These include instructions for nurses with respect 
to structured and coded data entry in EHR, and for use of 
results from the CDWH, for instance using quality indicators 
in practice to improve patient care directly. Further teaching 
materials will be the CDWH functional design aiming at 
students and technicians in health care to create such 
CDWH. A business case package aims at health care 
managers and decision makers to justify investments.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
 
There is a challenge for the nursing profession to reuse 
nursing data. Like with any goldmine: the mining needs a 
careful construction and security measures to be safe. We 
have discussed legal implications, consent for data exchange 
and consent for data use and data protection measures. In a 
first pilot, some patients were interviewed and think they 
need to know exactly what goes over the wire about them.  
Nurses determined a baseline set of about 80 data 
elements, grouped in several DCM. Standardizing patient 
data via DCM methodology proofs a constructive way for 
professional content and technological specifications. DCM 
are available in a repository, allowing a jump start in the 
project because they adhere all to the same technical format. 
[9,16]  
Requirements for the CDWH could be determined via the 
literature, however, review of current uses of different data 
bases in the Isala Clinics, did reveal additional requirements. 
In particular separating the EHR/IT use of data and the 
queries against the data in the CDWH is seen in practice as 
an important requirement to keep up system performance. 
The solution to create a separate data mart for each data use 
is not uncommon. However, what we have added here is the 
storage of identified patient data in the CDWH as part of the 
daily operations in the hospital, as such not requiring 
additional consent, and allowing measures for data 
corrections to be dealt with at that level.  
Next, each purpose can identify the data required, ensure 
specific consent issues handled, and specify the query for the 
data mart. That data mart will store the data, the consent and 
only identified data will go in the data mart for the continuity 
of care exchange, and only anonymous data will go into the 
data marts for quality reporting and research purposes. 
Hence, for the patient it is always clear were his / her data 
are used for and consents can be given separated.  
On the technical level, the import from data from several 
source systems into the CDWH is identified, the storage in 
CDWH, the allowed use in the data mart, and finally the 
exports to the relevant subsystems. This architecture is solid 
and allows a step by step completion. CDHW in itself are not 
new, however for polyvalent data use, and in particular DCM 
based data storage brings new dimensions.  
For Windesheim, the set of methods and examples serves 
as a large library of instruments useful for ICT in health care 
projects.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project is funded by SIA RAAK Publiek: project id: 
2011-13-41 P. http://www.innovatie-alliantie.nl/english.html   
Irene Krediet contributed to the nursing DCM work 
section. Frank Boterenbrood contributed to the CDWH 
methodology section, the criteria and the legal parts. William 
Goossen is responsible for the whole of the paper. We wish 
to thank our 11 students that worked on this project during 
the September 2011 – January 2012 semester. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Dick RS, Steen EB (1991). The Computer-based Patient 
record. An essential technology for health care. Washington 
DC, National Academy Press. 
[2] Johnson SB. Generic data modeling for clinical repositories. J 
Am Med Inform Assoc. 1996;3(5):328-39. 
[3] Bellika JG, Sue H, Bird L, Goodchild A, Hasvold T, 
Hartvigsen G. Properties of a federated epidemiology query 
system. Int J Med Inform. 2007;76 (9):664-76. 
[4] Sahama TR,. Croll PR, (2007). A Data Warehouse 
Architecture for Clinical Data Warehousing. In:  John F. 
186
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Roddick and James R. Warren, Eds.. First Australasian 
Workshop on Health Knowledge Management and Discovery 
(HKMD 2007), Ballarat, Australia. Conferences in Research 
and Practice in Information Technology, Vol. 68.  
[5] Huff SM, Haug PJ, Stevens LE, Dupont RC, Pryor TA. HELP 
the next generation: a new client-server architecture. Proc 
Annu Symp Comput Appl Med Care. 1994: 271–275. 
[6] ISO/TS 29585  Health informatics — Deployment of a 
clinical data warehouse. Geneva, ISO. 
[7] Goossen, W. (2009). Sending electronic nursing discharge 
messages using the HL7 v3 Care Provision standard. Stud 
Health Technol Inform, 146, 269-275. 
[8] Goossen WT. (2002). Statistical analysis of the nursing 
minimum data set for the Netherlands. Int J Med Inf 
2002;68(1-3): 205-18. 
[9] Goossen Baremans ATM (Ed). Guideline DCM [Richtlijn 
DCM] 
2010. 
Amsterdam, 
Amersfoort, 
Parelsnoer 
& 
Results4Care. 
Available 
at 
http://results4care.wikispaces.com/DCM_UML_StyleGuide. 
visited February 3, 2013. 
[10] Michael van der Zel & William Goossen (2010). Bridging the 
gap 
between 
software 
developers 
and 
healthcare 
professionals. Model Driven Application Development.  
Hospital Information Technology Europe, vol 3, no 2,  20-22.  
[11] Wet 
Bescherming 
Persoonsgegevens 
WBP, 
http://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0011468/geldigheidsdatum_0
4-10-2012, visited February 3, 2013. [Data Protection Law] 
[12] Dutch 
Data 
Protection 
Authority, 
http://www.dutchdpa.nl/Pages/en_ind_wetten_eu.aspx, visited 
February 3, 2013. 
[13] Wet 
Bescherming 
Persoonsgegevens 
WBP, 
http://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0011468/geldigheidsdatum_0
4-10-2012, visited February 3, 2013. [Data Protection Law] 
[14] Goossen, W. (2011a). Internal publication workpackage 2: 
Exchanging nursing data for oncology care with a Clinical 
Data 
ware 
house. 
Zwolle: 
Christelijke 
Hogeschool 
Windesheim. 
[15] Nictiz. Dutch repository of Detailed Clinical Models. Den 
Haag, Nictiz, http://www.nictiz.nl/page/Standaarden/Eenheid-
van-Taal/Detailed-Clinical-Models, visited February 3, 2013. 
[16] ISO DTS 13972. Health Informatics: Detailed Clinical 
Models. Geneva, ISO. 
 
 
Figure 1.  DCM review, adjust, create, CDWH & message specification and uses, and privacy measures for the developmental process. 
 
Figure 2.  Architecture and main components for the CDWH for oncology nursing. 
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

