An E-health Evaluation Case study : Evaluating The New Laboratory Information 
System   
 
Güney Gürsel, Hüsamettin Gül 
Department of Medical Informatics 
Gülhane Military Medical Academy (GATA) 
Ankara, TURKEY 
ggursel@gata.edu.tr, hgul@gata.edu.tr 
Kaya Kuru 
School of Computing, Engineering and Physical Sciences 
University of Central Lancashire 
Southampton, UK 
kkuru@uclan.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract—Healthcare is one of the technology-intensive areas.  
Almost all healthcare organizations use an information system, 
without it, managing daily works and providing the continuity 
of healthcare is impossible. Information technologies staff has 
to support, manage, and improve the information system. To 
do this, they are supposed to foretell the hardware and 
software requirements, improve the system they manage in the 
competitive environment, to survive, and further to pioneer. In 
this respect, evaluations are carried out to reveal the weak and 
strong sides of information systems in operation. In this sense, 
a case study is performed in this study, to evaluate a healthcare 
information system. Particularly, the recently deployed 
laboratory information system (LIS) is evaluated by means of 
questionnaires, applied to both patients and users of the 
laboratory information system. Laboratory information system 
is evaluated on the basis of Function sufficiency, Decreasing 
Work Load, Speed, Learning Ease, Improving Service Quality, 
Availability, Help Manuals, User Satisfaction, and Patient 
Satisfaction features. The features needing to be improved in 
terms of the effectiveness and efficiency of LIS are measured 
based on the threshold value.  The results are presented in a 
variable table according to the threshold value selected by the 
evaluator. As the target threshold value increases, the number 
of features needing to be improved also increases.   
Keywords- evaluation; healthcare information system; 
laboratory information system; e-health evaluation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Healthcare industry is growing and developing rapidly, 
not only in health services, but also in information 
technologies (IT) related to it. Particularly electronic health, 
E-Health, is the main IT related area to meet the immediate 
needs of this industry. E-Health is in the intersection of 
medical informatics, public health, and business; it can be 
defined as the use of information and communication 
technologies to improve healthcare [1]. From primary care 
institutions to big healthcare centers, every healthcare 
organization uses an information system, named as 
Healthcare Information System (HCIS). HCIS is the system 
composed of data, workflows, users, and technology; used 
to collect, store, process, and provide the needed 
information 
to 
support 
healthcare 
institutions 
and 
professionals [2]. HCISs are composed of several 
components such as hardware, software, data, database, 
workflows, business-driven intelligent approaches; to 
support healthcare institutions and professionals, in terms of 
collecting, storing, processing, and disseminating the 
required work-based information. Moreover, these systems 
are in the interest of many actors such as engineers, 
technicians, 
physicians, 
nurses, 
laboratory 
staff, 
administrative staff, managers, governmental and private 
social security/profession institutions, and patients. Hence, 
these systems include many different levels of actors; they 
should be open systems to help these actors interact with 
each other.  The purpose of a HCIS is; to contribute to a 
high quality, efficient health care, for patients, consumers, 
and medical research [3]. HCISs are more complex when 
compared to other systems, because they incorporate into 
many sub-systems such as Radiology Information system 
(RIS), Laboratory Information System (LIS), Picture 
Archiving and Communication Systems (PACS), Hospital 
Information System (HIS). Thus, they should be supported 
by established intelligent mechanisms to manage this level 
of complexity. 
With the growth in the industry, the need for qualified 
computer support of healthcare organizations grows 
proportionally. Almost all the hospitals have a HIS; all 
laboratories have a stand-alone or a HIS built-in LIS. 
Ironically, although health institutions invest huge amounts 
in Information Systems (IS), it is estimated that nearly 60-
70% of IT implementation projects fail in healthcare [4]. IS 
projects in other fields share similar aftermath with the 
healthcare as well. They have bad reputation for exceeding 
budget and schedule, failure in realizing the expectations and 
having poor return of investment [5]. Literature tells, of 
260.000 projects, 25% were cancelled before finish, 47% 
exceeded the budget [5]. These findings substantiate that, a 
huge amount of money is lost together with invaluable 
efforts and time. Loss of confidence to the systems is the 
worst of all.   
Literature shows “Improving IT Quality” as one of the 
top five concerns that face IT staff [6]. To improve, first we 
should know the weak sides of our IS. Taking the current 
picture will reveal the points to improve, by measuring the 
level of success and failure. “You can’t manage it, if you 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

can’t measure it” tells the importance of measuring the 
quality of your system [7].  
To improve IS, in our context it is HCIS, it must/should 
be evaluated from the time being started to be developed, to 
the time taken out of operation, i.e. in the system’s life 
cycle, iteratively [8-10]. These iterative evaluations help 
eliminate the reasons of bad reputations of HCISs given 
above, by means of early recognition of the problems. They 
also help eliminate the implementation problems by means 
of on-time interventions [11].  
Briefly, evaluation can be defined, by drawing from the 
literature, as “measuring the extent of meeting the specified 
criteria of a system, in a specified context” [12]. Evaluations 
can be made both by government and public sector 
organizations; fortunately, the number of evaluations is 
rapidly increasing [13].  
Implementation of a new HCIS is not an easy process. 
There exist many problems and challenges [14]. Some of 
these problems and challenges may be technical (low speed 
system, frequent outages, etc.), and some of them may be 
organizational or user dependent (poor implementation 
planning, resistance to change etc.). With a rigorous early 
deployment evaluation, these problems and challenges can 
be determined early and improved before the problem 
deteriorates.    
The structure of the manuscript is organized as follows: 
In section 2, “Materials and Methods”, Materials used in the 
study and the methods used to get the study results will be 
described, in section 3, “Results”, the results of the study 
will be presented without any comment, and these results 
will be further discussed in the section 4, “Discussion”. The 
findings of the study and the proposed future work will be 
in the section 5, “Conclusion and Future Work” part.  
A. Motivation 
In a Hospital of 1700 HIS users, Biochemistry 
department outsourced its LIS and quit using the built-in LIS 
of the HIS. This new system takes the orders of hospital 
from biochemistry and needed information from the HIS, 
then disseminates these orders to the related auto analyzers. 
After the auto analyzers are through with the tests, it gives 
some facilities to the Biochemistry doctors (Such as delta 
checks). Finally, if the responsible doctor approves the test 
result, LIS sends the results to the HIS. 
In the old system, the orders were seen in the work lists 
of the staff in built-in HIS module. An (only one) operator 
will make the “specimen received” action in the HIS and 
then the patient will attend a queue for giving specimen. Five 
nurses get the specimen simultaneously. All the auto 
analyzers were communicating with the HIS independently. 
The facilities provided with were limited. 
In this study, evaluation of a newly implemented HCIS, 
namely LIS, is performed. The purpose of the study is to 
evaluate the LIS on the basis of Function sufficiency, 
Decreasing work load, Speed, Learning ease, Improving 
service 
quality, 
Availability, 
Help 
Manuals, 
User 
Satisfaction, Patient Satisfaction features; and get the early 
deployment evaluation results to determine the weak sides of 
the system to improve.  
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
A. Questionnaires 
Data are collected using the face-to-face questionnaire 
method. Two different questionnaires are prepared and 
applied to capture the evaluation results; one for the patients 
and one for the laboratory staff. Both staff and patients are 
asked to express their answers using 3-point Likert scale 
(Disagree, Partially Agree, Agree) ranging from 1 
(Disagree) to 3 (Agree). 3 point Likert scale is used instead 
of 5 point scale, to prevent patients from hesitating between 
middle answers such as Moderately Agree, Moderately 
Disagree. In staff questionnaire, also 3 point Likert scale is 
used to keep the consistency with the patient questionnaire. 
Patient data are only used for evaluation for Patient 
Satisfaction whereas staff data are used for all features 
under evaluation. 
B. Data 
The questionnaires are applied to the patients visiting the 
laboratory in randomly selected days. 138 patients and 42 
staff (all employees) have participated in the study 
voluntarily. Staff has biochemistry physicians, nurses, 
administrative staff, assistants, pharmacists, and biologists.    
C. Statistical Analysis:  
The internal consistencies of the answers to the 
questionnaires are measured by reliability coefficient (ρ) 
given in (1) to (5).  Reliability is the degree of measurement 
being consistent and reproducible [15].  One important goal 
of a measurement study is to quantify the reliability of a 
measurement process. A reliability coefficient value of 0.7 
or above is usually adequate, although higher reliability is 
always desirable. Measurements with reliabilities of 0.5 or 
less are rarely adequate for anything but preliminary 
research. In this study, ρ greater than 0.70, is considered 
reliable.  

j
i
ij
ij
ij
ij
total
n
n
X
X
SS




2)
(


 
j
i
ij
ij
j
n
j
ij
n
i
objects
n
n
X
n
X
SS
j
i







2
1
2
1
)
(
)
(

 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
j
i
ij
ij
i
n
i
ij
n
j
ns
observatio
n
n
X
n
X
SS
j
i







2
1
2
1
)
(
)
(

 
 
SSerror = SStotal – SSobjects – SSobservations
 
 
(Reliability)   












 
)1
/(
)1
1)(
/(
1
i
objects
j
i
error
n
SS
n
n
SS


 
 
 
Where 
i is the number of users (or patients),  
j is the number of questions, 
X is the weight of the answer, 
SStotal   
= Total sums of squares, 
SSobjects  
= Sums of squares for objects, 
SSobjservations  = Sums of squares for answers, 
SSerror    
= Sums of squares for error. 
 
Answers to the questions are analyzed by nonparametric 
Kruskal Wallis test to determine if there is any difference 
between the branches of staff. p < 0.05 level is considered 
as statistically significant.  Nonparametric test is used since 
data do not come from a normal distribution, regarding the 
normality test applied to the data. 
D. Features Under Evaluation 
Function sufficiency, Decreasing Work Load, Speed, 
Learning Ease, Improving Service Quality, Availability, 
Help Manuals, User Satisfaction, and Patient Satisfaction 
features of the LIS were evaluated.  
TABLE I.  
RELIABILITIES  
Staff 
n  
ρ 
Physicians 
8 
0.81 
Nurses 
8 
0.76 
Operators 
6 
0.90 
Laboratory assistants 
9 
0.79 
Pharmacists 
3 
0.68 
Biologists  
8 
0.96 
Total 
42 
0.89 
 
 
a. n = the number of staff 
 
 
b. ρ = reliability  
 
 
 
The final rating RF of the feature j is computed by 
 

W R n
RF
k
i
i
i
j
/
1




where k is the number of Likert scales employed (3 for this 
study) , W is the weight (1 to 3) of the Likert scale i, R is the 
number of answers given as that Likert scale and n is the total 
number of answers.  
RF can have values ranging from 1 to 3, where 1 is the 
worst and 3 is the best value. If RF of the feature is below the 
threshold value, the feature is considered as weak and needs 
to be improved. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
A. Staff Data 
As stated before, 42 staff have participated in the study. 
Although the study was on volunteered basis, whole staff 
participated.  
In Table I, the reliability values which are calculated by 
(1) to (5) are given. Operators have the highest reliability 
with a value of 0.90, whereas Pharmacists have the lowest 
reliability with a value of 0.68. All the staff has satisfactory 
reliability values higher than 0.70, if we accept Pharmacist as 
0.70 which is very near. Overall reliability is 0.89.  
In Table II, RF values calculated by (6) are given. For RF 
values, Learning Ease is the first with a value of 2.86, 
whereas Availability is the last with a value of 2.36. Overall 
RF appeared to be 2.62.  
To see the statistical significant difference among the 
branches of staff, statistical comparison is employed using 
Kruskal Wallis test. Only the difference in nurses appeared 
to be statistically significant in some features, and one in 
physicians and laboratory assistants. The descriptives about 
the statistically significant p values of the features under 
study of nurses are given in Table III. For the features 
Function Sufficiency, Decreasing Work Load, Availability 
and Help Manuals, nurses do not agree with the other 
groups.  
In addition to nurses, physicians and laboratory assistants 
do not agree with other groups in Function Sufficiency as 
well (p < 0.011). 
TABLE II.  
RF VALUES OF THE FEATURES UNDER STUDY  
Feature 
RF value 
Function sufficiency 
2.61 
Decreasing Work Load 
2.46 
Speed 
2.65 
Learning Ease 
2.86 
Improving Service Quality 
2.85 
Availability 
2.36 
Help Manuals 
2.46 
User Satisfaction 
2.82 
Patient Satisfaction 
2.59 
Overall 
2.62 
a. RF = Final Rating 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE III.  
DESCRIPTIVES OF STAFF COMPARISON  
Feature 
p 
Function sufficiency 
0.011 
Decreasing Work Load 
0.009 
Availability 
0.019 
Help Manuals 
0.020 
B. Patient Data 
Reliability of the patients’ questionnaire is 0.87. 38.40% 
of the patients stated that they applied for giving specimen 
for analysis and the rest were in the laboratory for taking 
results. 
Majority of the patients (84.78%) stated that they had 
applied to the biochemistry department before, when the old 
system was in use.  
The most important observation is the decrease in the 
duration of the processes. Patients who had applied before 
expressed that they have waited shorter than their previous 
application for transaction (86.96%).  
The majority of the patients expressed that they were 
able to take the service more easily with fewer processes 
(94.20%). 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In this study, evaluation of a newly deployed HCIS, LIS, 
is performed using face-to-face questionnaires. Both the 
patients and the staff showed great interest in the study by a 
high rate of participation. The high participation shows that, 
stakeholders of the system (patients and staff in this study) 
consider the evaluations as an opportunity to express their 
feelings and problems faced, to whom in charge of 
developing and running the systems. The best way to send 
the message “your ideas are taken into account for improving 
the system“ can be given by means of evaluations. That may 
certainly help increase user acceptance and attention to the 
information system. It won’t be false if we disclose that the 
more user-centric the evaluation, the higher the participation 
is. 
If we start from patients’ results, having 84.78% patients 
that took service in both systems gives us a healthy 
comparison chance. Of them, 94.20% state they get the same 
services in fewer steps. That means; the new system has 
shortened the workflow and eliminated some outmoded 
steps. This is good for a new system; actually one of the 
most expected virtue of the ISs is to make renovations in the 
business.  The majority of the patients experiencing both 
systems states that the service time is shorter (86.96%), 
which fortifies the renovation of the new system. Drawing 
from the findings of patients data, we can say that the new 
LIS satisfied the patients.  
The results of reliability measures given in Table I 
substantiate that the study has a high reliability. It shows the 
internal consistency of the answers, which leads us to the 
true and unbiased results. 
 
 
 
 
TABLE IV.  
WEAK FEATURES ACCORDING TO THRESHOLD VALUES 
Feature 
RF 
t = 2.40 
t = 2.50 
t= 2.75 
Function sufficiency 
2.61 
 
 
  
Decreasing Work Load 
2.46 
 
  
  
Speed 
2.65 
 
 
  
Learning Ease 
2.86 
 
 
 
Improving Service Quality 2.85 
 
 
 
Availability 
2.36 
 
 
  
  
Help Manuals 
2.46 
 
 
  
User Satisfaction 
2.82 
 
 
 
Patient Satisfaction 
2.59 
 
 
  
 
 
RF = Final Rating 
 
t = threshold 
 = Improvement  needed 
 
Almost all the RF values are near or above 2.5. That is 
also good from the staff point of view. User Satisfaction, 
Improving Service Quality and Learning Ease have the 
highest values. Having a high value in Improving Service 
Quality feature is compatible with the patients’ results. With 
these findings, it can be definitely said that, there is an 
increase in service quality with this system change. As in 
patients, the system appeared to have satisfied the staff as 
well.  It seems, it is an easy to learn system.  
Speed, Availability and Help manuals are the least 
ranked features, when compared to the others. In this study, 
for the new system, we can say that, these features are the 
main improvement needed areas, although they are not so 
bad.   
The areas of improvement can be determined by a 
context and management dependent threshold value. We do 
not propose a threshold in this study. This threshold is 
relative to the context and situation. For a newly adopted 
system it can be 2.30 or something, while 2.70 or higher for 
a high standard-like management. In Table IV, the change in 
improvement needed areas is given according to the three 
different thresholds. It is one when the threshold is 2.4, it 
becomes three when the threshold is increased to 2.5 and 
becomes six out of nine when the threshold is 2.75.   
According to the statistical analysis, there are problems 
in nurses, physicians and laboratory assistants. Different 
from other groups, they don’t think the functions of the LIS 
are sufficient. When we think that these groups are the core 
staff of the laboratory, this finding should be seriously taken 
into consideration.  
Evaluations give some extra messages as well. If the 
findings are lower than expected, there can be a lack of 
communication or training in the target users. They may not 
know some important features or they may not know how to 
use the system efficiently. Because of these reasons, the 
results may be lower than expected. The best solution would 
be eradicating the reasons and then reevaluate the system to 
see the difference before and after.     
Unrealistic expectations are another point of bias in 
evaluations. In other words, the evaluation results become 
lower if the expectations of the users are unrealistically high. 
Some methodologies should be employed to keep the 
expectations in a realistic level. In this respect, Nevo and 
Chan find in their study that managers are able to generate 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

realistic expectations [16]. As the Ryker et al. put forth, if 
these groups’ expectations from HCIS can be found 
unrealistic (very relative issue, so the management must be 
very careful to make this decision), the management can 
organize some committees and arrange interviews with these 
users to set realistic expectations [17].  
 As we have stated above, if there is a problem with the 
communication (if a variable is expected to give higher 
values but the result is low) then IS staff should organize on-
site trainings and improve the communication channels with 
users. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Many international institutes, both governmental and 
nongovernmental, regulate many standards about the HCIS; 
they employ classification and nomenclature systems, 
security and privacy measures, and many other great effort 
products and mechanisms. Despite these huge great efforts, 
they fail. Consecutively some questions arise: How can 
HCISs be measured, to determine if they are good enough? 
Do we evaluate them properly? Do they really meet the 
needs of the owner institutes? Do we really need them? The 
answers to these questions are mostly overlooked, and 
eventually HCISs fail.  
Evaluations should be done iteratively, both to get user 
acceptance, and improve the system. Users should be in the 
center, because, it is the users that makes a system better, it 
is the users that makes a wonderful system useless. It is the 
managements’ ability that makes the users use the system 
properly. Evaluating the system in a user centric manner is 
an option to accomplish.   
For a future work, this study can be deepened in staff 
group basis, to customize the system. A user group (like 
nurses in our study), can be unhappy with the system, while 
others are happy. To eradicate the problems of this group, a 
deeper study is required.  
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Eysenbach, "What is e-health?" Journal of medical Internet 
research, 
vol.3. 
issue 
2, 
e-20, 
Jun. 
2001, 
doi:  
10.2196/jmir.3.2.e20. 
[2] K. A. Wager, F. W. Lee, and J. P. Glaser, “Managing 
Healthcare Information Systems: A Practical Approach for 
Healthcare Executives”, Wiley, San Francisco, 2005,  pp. 92. 
[3] R. Haux, “Health information systems- past, present, future”, 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 75, Mar-
Apr 2006, pp. 268-281, doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2005.08.002 
[4] E. Ammenwerth, C. Iller, and C. Mahler, “IT-adoption and 
the interaction of task, technology and individuals: a fit 
framework and a case study”, BMC Med Inform Decis Mak, 
vol.6, Jan. 2005, pp.1-13, doi : 10.1186/1472- 6947-6-3. 
[5] R. Stanley and L. Uden, “Why Projects Fail, from the 
Perspective of Service Science”. The Seventh International 
Conference on Knowledge Management in Organizations: 
Service and Cloud Computing, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
January 2013, pp. 421-429, ISBN 978-3-642-30866-6.  
[6] Z. S. Yang, L. Hao, and Y. H. Zhang, “A New Method for 
Information System with Good Performance”. Advanced 
Materials Research, vol. 753, Aug. 2013, pp. 3014-3017, doi: 
10.4028/www.scientific.net/AMR.753-755.3014, 
retrieved: 
Dec., 2014. 
[7] N. Gorla, T. M. Somers, and B. Wong, “Organizational 
impact of system quality, information quality, and service 
quality”. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, vol. 
19, 
issue 
3, 
Sep. 
2010, 
pp.207-228, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.jsis.2010.05.001. 
[8] D. A. Protti, “Proposal to use a balanced scorecard to evaluate 
Information for Health: an information strategy for the 
modern NHS (1998–2005)”, Comput Biol Med, vol.32, , 
May. 2002, pp. 221-236, doi: 10.1016/S0010-4825(02)00017-
3 
[9] E. Ammenwerth, S. Gräber, G. Herrmann, T. Bürkle, and J. 
König, “Evaluation of health information systems—problems 
and challenges”, International Journal of Medical Informatics 
vol. 71, Sep. 2003, pp.125-135, doi: 10.1016/S1386-
5056(03)00131-X. 
[10] H. Al-Yaseen, S. Al-Jaghoub, M. Al-Shorbaji, and M. Salim, 
“Post-Implementation Evaluation of HealthCare Information 
Systems in Developing Countries”, The Electronic Journal 
Information Systems Evaluation, vol. 13, issue 1, 2010, pp. 9-
16.  
[11] A. W. Kushniruk and V. Patel, “Cognitive and usability 
engineering methods for the evaluation of clinical information 
systems”, Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 37, Feb. 
2004, pp.56–76, doi : 10.1016/j.jbi.2004.01.003. 
[12] G. Gürsel, N. Zayim, K. H. Gülkesen, A. Arifoğlu, and O. 
Saka, “A new approach in the evaluation of hospital 
information 
systems,” 
Turkish 
Journal 
of 
Electrical 
Engineering & Computer Sciences, vol. 22 issue 1, Jan. 2014, 
pp.214-222, doi: 10.3906/elk-1110-15 
[13] J. E. Furubo, R. C. Rist, and R. Sandahl, “International Atlas 
of Evaluation”. Transaction Publishers. London, 2002, pp. 1–
26.  
[14] M. Berg, “Implementing information systems in health care 
organizations: myths and challenges”, Int J Med Inf, vol. 64, 
Dec.2001, pp. 143–156, doi:10.1016/S1386-5056(01)00200-
3. 
[15] C. P. Friedman and J. C. Wyatt, “Evaluation Methods in 
Medical Informatics“, Springer, 1997, pp. 89-117.  
[16] D. Nevo and Y. E. Chan, “A temporal approach to 
expectations and desires from knowledge management 
systems”, Decision Support Systems, vol.  44, Nov. 2007, pp. 
298-312, doi : 10.1016/j.dss.2007.04.003.  
[17] R. Ryker, R. Nath, and J. Henson, “Determinants Of 
Computer User Expectations And Their Relationships With 
User Satisfaction: An Empirical Study”, lnformation 
Processing & Management, vol. 33, issue 4, Jul. 1997, pp. 
529-537, doi : 10.1016/S0306-4573(97)00016-2. 
 
 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

