Are Mobile Devices Ready for Telementoring? A Protocol Design for Randomized 
Controlled Trials 
Andrius Budrionis, Gunnar Hartvigsen, Johan Gustav Bellika 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of Northern Norway 
Tromsø, Norway  
Email: {Andrius.Budrionis; Gunnar.Hartvigsen; Johan.Gustav.Bellika} @telemed.no 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a study addressing the usability 
issues of relatively small touchscreen devices used as endpoints 
for telementoring. The trial is motivated by the need for 
systematic knowledge and user experiences on the use of 
mobile devices for remote supervision of surgeons. Having a 
stationary computer equipped with relatively large screen and 
using mouse as an input device in mind, we challenge mobile 
touchscreen gadgets in order to find out if the same (or 
sufficient) 
qualities 
of 
mentoring 
from 
the 
mentor’s 
perspective are maintained. The presented study protocol 
exploits 
crossover 
randomized 
controlled 
trail 
design 
addressing the usability of mobile touchscreen devices for 
controlling a moving scene (video) and freehand sketching.  
Keywords-telementoring; 
mobile 
devices; 
usability; 
telestration; platform; RCT. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Supervision of medical personnel over distance in order 
to improve patient outcome has been discussed from 1960s 
[1]. Technologies changed while the years passed by finally 
bringing the computational power, required for establishing 
telementoring session, to the devices surrounding us every 
day. One could call it the time when the dreams come true - 
the high availability of medical experts without any 
dedicated hardware became feasible. The employment of 
the ubiquitous technology to serve as a mediator between 
two remote parties pushed the domain to a new dimension.  
However, is there any proof that the new dimension ensures 
the same qualities of mentoring? Literature search identifies 
no interest in investigating the aspects of technology shift in 
clinical settings. It supports the claim that mobile 
touchscreen devices were considered and accepted as 
inevitable technological progress. But, is it the way to go? 
There are no doubts that mobile gadgets used in random 
settings are more likely to fail than stationaries, located in 
surgeon’s office. Varying network coverage, battery 
constrains, interruptions by surrounding people and many 
other reasons create a fertile environment for unforeseen 
adverse events. However, not enough credit for the 
mentioned facts was given in publications so far.  
Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic 
Surgeons 
(SAGES) 
defines 
telementoring 
(or 
teleproctoring) as “a real-time and live interactive 
monitoring (evaluation) of technique(s) or procedure(s) of 
an applicant seeking privileges, or a surgeon seeking to 
certify or document his competence in a specific technique 
or procedure(s)” [2]. It is a process consisting of two 
interacting parties – a surgeon (mentee), performing an 
operation in the operating room and seeking for an advice 
from the domain expert (mentor) who is not available on 
site. The paper focuses on the infrastructure to facilitate the 
interaction between mentor and mentee.  
The recent shift from stationary platforms to mobile 
touchscreen devices has not left telementoring systems 
behind. While bringing new features and possibilities, it 
brought new challenges as well. This paper summarizes the 
protocol for a Randomized Controlled Trial (RCT) aiming 
to compare different devices and find out whether they can 
be used as mentoring endpoints on mentor side. In the scope 
of the paper, platform refers to different hardware employed 
in a study, not looking into the differences of software 
platforms.  
A telementoring system, developed in Norwegian Centre 
for Integrated Care and Telemedicine (NST) and deployed 
at University Hospital of North Norway (UNN), is used in 
the experiment. Telestration (drawing of freehand sketches 
over live video) is used in a combination with Video 
Conferencing (VC) system [3]. Notwithstanding the 
advantages of live video annotating in actual telementoring 
session, using the feature in the experiment allows us to 
compare mouse and touchscreen inputs for mentoring, 
extending the comparison of the platforms [4]. 
The paper is structured as follows: after a brief 
background on telementoring, the gap in research regarding 
the usability of touchscreen devices for telementoring is 
stated. Method section covers the study design and scenario, 
followed by the expected results. The paper is concluded by 
discussing the advantages of selecting the crossover study 
design and admitting potential biases and weaknesses. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Search for research comparing different input devices 
reported a low interest in the analyzed topic. Baldus and 
Patterson summarized the reported attempts to measure the 
differences in performing pointing and dragging actions in 
still scenes and office environment. Moreover, a comparison 
of mouse, touchscreen and touchpad was presented while 
controlling a still scene in a moving environment (vehicle) 
[5]. A gap in research dealing with usability of different 
197
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

inputs while controlling a moving scene (video) and 
freehand hand sketching was identified.  
III. 
METHOD 
To produce sound proof on the analyzed topic, a RCT 
was constructed, employing the crossover study design 
(Figure 1). Instead of employing the common approach for 
the RCT (one type of intervention per arm), we let the 
participants experience all 3 devices in a randomized order. 
The absence of dependency on the interventions (devices) 
allows minimizing the number of participants as well as 
enables the reflection of preferences on the platforms [6]. 
Due to the high (and increasing) number of mentoring 
devices, generalization initiative was imposed. The pool of 
endpoints was divided into three groups based on the screen 
size, forming the arms of the study:   
1. Screen size >13” laptop/desktop computer located in the 
office of the surgeon, representing stationary platforms. 
Mouse is used for annotating;  
2. Touchscreen size 9”-10” Tablet computer, representing 
middle-sized mobile devices;  
3. Touchscreen size <=5” Smartphone, representing small-
sized mobile devices.  
Even though the technologies allow using a wide 
selection of devices on each arm (which would be a typical 
scenario in a real case), the choice was limited in order to 
produce consistent and comparable results independent on 
different hardware on the same arm of RCT. The following 
devices were selected to represent the platforms: 
1. Stationary device – Lenovo X220, I7, Windows 7 
equipped with external monitor; 
2. Tablet – Asus MeMO Pad, Full HD, Android 4.2; 
3. Smartphone – Samsung Galaxy S4, Android 4.3. 
Public wireless network infrastructure at the hospital is 
used for the experiment. All devices run the latest version of 
Google Chrome web browser as client software to run the 
telementoring service. 
Surgeons at UNN are recruited to participate in the 
study. As the study employes an imitation of a mentoring 
session, the inclusion criteria for the participants are not 
emphasized. The properties of mentoring, observed on the 
mentee side are not taken into consideration in this study. 
Every participant is asked to perform the same 
mentoring task on all three platforms in a randomized order. 
After each device, they fill in the questionaire, reflecting 
their experiences on the mentoring endpoint. Minimum 
washout period between testing different device is set to 3 
days. Results are accumulated on a server side database for 
further analysis.  
In the scope of this particular study, we collect the 
following data: 
1. Mentor response time - duration between the initiation 
of mentoring session and mentor being present online 
(Figure 2); 
2. Mentor’s interaction with the device – coordinates of 
annotations, use of pause, resume and zoom functions 
are logged; 
3. Final outcome of mentoring – video and overlaid 
annotations are recorded; 
4. User experiences on every device are recorded by filling 
in an online questionnaire after each round.  
The task for this particular experiment was defined as an 
imitated surgical mentoring session. The following scenario 
is being pursued: participants of the experiment are given 
the devices they will use for mentoring during a regular 
work day at the hospital. At random order and time, they are 
notified (by email and text messaging) to connect to the 
C 
B 
A 
C 
C 
A 
B 
Tablet (9”-10” 
touchscreen) 
 
Stationary 
device (>13” 
screen, mouse) 
Smartphone 
(<=5” 
touchscreen) 
  Mentors 
Randomize 
Stationary 
device (>13” 
screen, mouse) 
Tablet (9”-10” 
touchscreen) 
Smartphone 
(<=5” 
touchscreen) 
Smartphone 
(<=5” 
touchscreen) 
Tablet (9”-10” 
touchscreen) 
Stationary 
device (>13” 
screen, mouse) 
B 
A 
Figure 2. Mentor response time 
Figure 1. Schematic Trial Design 
198
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

mentoring service and perform the task. After the mentor is 
connected, a short video, recorded during laparoscopic 
procedure, is broadcasted to the device. Participants are 
asked to identify and mark certain locations in the video 
(Figure 3).  
 
Figure 3. Telementoring task 
A schematic view of the trial is depicted in Figure 4. 
Mentor side of the link facilitates all the functionality 
required to complete the mentoring task, while mentee part 
acts as an infrastructure for capturing the progress of the 
mentor for further analysis.  
 
Figure 4. Mentor-Mentee interaction 
IV. 
EXPECTED RESULTS 
The paper presents a protocol for the oncoming study 
focusing on the usability of newly introduced devices. It is 
addressing the topic, which until now was considered to be 
natural due to the technological progress. While the move 
from stationary to mobile platforms is natural in many 
settings, medical domain deserves a more detailed outlook. 
The critical scenarios in the domain require in depth 
research before adopting the new devices.  
The study, firstly, looks into the response time of the 
surgeon on call. It is defined as duration between mentee 
initiates request for supervision and mentor is connected to 
the system and is ready to assist (Figure 2). Due to the use 
of ubiquitous technologies, it should considerably decline, 
shortening the duration of the procedure (no need to get to 
predefined 
mentoring 
“station”, 
mentor’s 
office 
to 
supervise).  
Secondly, we aim at studying whether the representation 
of surgical videos on small screens ensures the same (or 
sufficient) perception of the progress transmitted from the 
operating room. The complexity of projecting and 
perceiving a high resolution video on a small screen are 
obvious, however, having the technical advances of screen 
technology and the experience of surgical personnel in 
mind, the applicability of different sized endpoints for 
mentoring needs to be tested and evaluated.  
Finally, we look at the way the user interacts with the 
device. In our case, it is either using mouse input or 
touchscreen in order to produce freehand annotations over 
live video stream. The study questions if different inputs can 
generate the same or comparable result, when it comes to 
accuracy. Is touchpad as good (or good enough) compared 
to mouse? 
It is difficult to answer the postulated questions based on 
quantitative measurements. Differences of the devices 
(screen size, input using touchscreen of mouse) may have 
influence on mentoring process. However, we aim at 
answering whether the sufficient quality of mentoring is 
maintained while roaming among the platforms. Moreover, 
the trade between increasing availability of the domain 
experts due to the use of mobile ubiquitous devices and 
higher quality and accuracy, possibly ensured by stationary 
platforms, is also worth mentioning. No studies report what 
qualities of the mentoring process are considered sufficient. 
The results of the study contribute to defining the minimal 
set of requirements for surgical telementoring systems [7].  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper presented a method to evaluate the use of 
mobile devices in health care settings with respect to the 
established technology (stationary platform – control arm in 
RCT design). It built the fundamentals for further 
investigations following the presented template. Imitated 
surgical telementoring session was selected for the case 
study. The identified gap of knowledge in literature 
regarding the use of different input devices in clinical 
settings encourages making the study protocol more generic 
for applying it in a wide range of settings. Generalization 
and reuse of the presented approach is straightforward. The 
main challenge is classification of high number of 
technological instances to representative clusters.  
The 
selected 
crossover 
study 
design 
gives 
a 
comprehensive comparison of the different platforms. The 
main advantage of taking this approach is the fact that study 
could be performed including relatively low number of 
participants. As the order of using different devices is 
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

randomized, every mentor gets a chance to try every device. 
Eventually, the comparison of results can be performed at 
the level of individual (using results from testing stationary 
device as control), minimizing the bias caused by previous 
personal experience with the technologies or specific 
technical skills. It supplements the generalized comparison 
of the results among the different RCT arms [6].  
The weak point of the study, possibly having some 
implications on final results, is the memory effect of the 
participants. They are asked to perform the same task three 
times, which will stimulate learning and may introduce bias. 
To minimize it, the order of the devices is randomized for 
every participant. In addition, washout periods after each 
step of the trial are imposed.   
We also admit that the results of the study may be case 
and mentor experience dependent, especially when it comes 
to perceiving important internal body structures, represented 
on a small screen. However, this study emphasizes the use 
of the different devices and experiences of the users rather 
than mentoring process itself or how it is perceived on the 
mentee side. Therefore, the mentoring task performed on 
each device is kept simple to minimize the advantage of 
more experienced mentors. By including the mentors based 
on their experience it could improve the outcome; however, 
an objective measure of surgical skills is complicated due to 
the number of approaches [8]. In addition, differentiation 
based on experience would complicate the inclusion criteria 
for the participants, increasing the numbers of the surgeons 
to be recruited, as well as producing partitioned results.  
Future work, first of all, concerns the analysis of the 
results from the current study. A series of trials, following 
the same study design, are planned in order to test and 
compare the properties of different platforms and video 
processing techniques used for remote mentoring. The 
results will form solid fundamentals for the development of 
telementoring systems.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This research was funded by a Helse Nord grant (ID 
5614/HST1025-11) to the Norwegian Centre of Integrated 
Care and Telemedicine (NST), University Hospital of North 
Norway (UNN). The study would not have been possible 
without the support of the Mobile Medical Mentor (M3) 
project team at NST and collaborators at UNN.  
REFERENCES 
[1] K. M. Augestad and R. O. Lindsetmo, “Overcoming 
Distance: Video-Conferencing as a Clinical and Educational 
Tool Among Surgeons,” World J. Surg., vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 
1356–1365, Apr. 2009. 
[2] Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic 
Surgeons, 
“Guidelines 
for 
the 
Surgical 
Practice 
of 
Telemedicine,” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.sages.org/publications/guidelines/guidelines-for-
the-surgical-practice-of-telemedicine/ 2014.01.15. 
[3] A. Budrionis, K. M. Augestad, and J. G. Bellika, 
“Telestration in Mobile Telementoring,” in eTelemed 2013, 
The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, 
and Social Medicine, 2013, pp. 307–309. 
[4] A. Budrionis, K. M. Augestad, H. R. Patel, and J. G. Bellika, 
“An Evaluation Framework for Defining the Contributions of 
Telestration in Surgical Telementoring,” Interact. J. Med. 
Res., vol. 2, no. 2, p. e14, Jul. 2013. 
[5] T. Baldus and P. Patterson, “Usability of pointing devices for 
office applications in a moving off-road environment,” Appl. 
Ergon., vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 671–677, Nov. 2008. 
[6] B. Jones, Design and analysis of cross-over trials, 2nd ed. 
Boca Raton, Fla: Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2003. 
[7] A. Budrionis, K. Augestad, H. Patel, and J. Bellika, “Towards 
Requirements for Telementoring Software,” Scand. Conf. 
Health Inform. 2012, 2012. 
[8] I. Ghaderi, F. Manji, Y. S. Park, D. Juul, M. Ott, I. Harris, 
and T. M. Farrell, “Technical Skills Assessment Toolbox: A 
Review Using the Unitary Framework of Validity,” Ann. 
Surg., Jan. 2014. 
 
200
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

