Towards Patient-Centered Telemedicine 
Juha Puustjärvi 
University of Helsinki 
Helsinki, Finland 
juha.puustjarvi@cs.helsinki.fi 
Leena Puustjärvi 
The Pharmacy of Kaivopuisto 
Helsinki, Finland  
leena.puustjarvi@kolumbus.fi
 
 
 
Abstract— Patient-centered care is an emerging healthcare 
model that is changing how people think about health and 
about the patients themselves. It emphasizes the coordination 
and integration of care, and the use of appropriate 
information, communication, and education technologies in 
connecting patients, caregivers, physicians, nurses, and others 
into a healthcare team where the health system supports and 
encourages cooperation among team members. However, in 
spite of the widespread adoption of telemedicine, existing 
telemedicine applications do not support patient centered-care. 
In this paper, we present our designed cloud based 
telemedicine system that supports patient-centered care. It 
exploits Personal Health Records (PHRs) in sharing patient’s 
clinical documents, and it manages medical consultation 
requests by exploiting a Consultation ontology. The system and 
the PHRs may be located anywhere in the Internet, and its 
consulting organizations may include any healthcare provider 
having the ability for consultation.  
Keywords - telemedicine; patient-centered care; personal 
health records; CCD standard, cloud computing; ontologies; 
eHealth ecosystem  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Telemedicine is the use of telecommunication and 
information technologies in order to provide clinical health 
care at a distance [1]. It aims to eliminate distance barriers 
and can improve access to medical services that would often 
not be consistently available in distant rural communities [2]. 
In particular, telemedicine is viewed as a cost-effective 
alternative to the more traditional face-to-face way of 
providing medical care [3].  
At the same time, the introduction of new emerging 
healthcare trends, such as patient-centered care [4], 
pharmaceutical care [5], and personal health records (PHRs) 
[6], are changing how people think about health and about 
the patients themselves.  In addition, many studies have 
demonstrated that the provision of these healthcare models 
can 
increase 
compliance 
with 
treatment 
regimens, 
satisfaction with the health care provider and medical 
facility, and improve the ultimate health outcome for the 
individual [7].  
It is also true that patients who do not understand their 
treatment instructions, disease management, or prescription 
requirements are more likely to mishandle their health, be 
hospitalized more frequently, and have much higher medical 
costs than their more involved counterparts [8]. 
Unfortunately, none of the categories of telemedicine 
support these emerging healthcare trends: Store-and-forward 
telemedicine involves acquiring medical data and then 
transmitting this data to the system that is accessible to 
patient’s physician. Interactive services provide real-time 
interactions between patient and physician. It includes phone 
conversations, online communication and home visits. 
Remote monitoring enables medical professionals to monitor 
a patient remotely using various technological devices. 
Patient-centered care emphasizes the coordination and 
integration of care, and the use of appropriate information, 
communication, and education technologies in connecting 
patients, caregivers, physicians, nurses, and other into a 
healthcare team where health the system supports and 
encourages cooperation among team members [9]. It is based 
on the assumption that physicians, patients and their families 
have the ability to obtain and understand health information 
and services, and make appropriate health decisions.  
Pharmaceutical care emphasizes the movement of 
pharmacy practice away from its original role on drug supply 
towards a more inclusive focus on patient care [10]. It 
emphasizes the responsible provision of drug therapy for the 
purpose of achieving definite outcomes that improve 
patient’s quality of life [11]. 
A PHR is a record of a consumer that includes data 
gathered from different sources such as from health care 
providers, pharmacies, insures and the consumer [12]. It 
includes 
information 
about 
medications, 
allergies, 
vaccinations, illnesses, laboratory and other test results, and 
surgeries and other procedures [13]. PHRs are owned by the 
patients and they can only be accessed by the patient and 
those that are authorized by the patient. 
In our vision PHRs can significantly contribute to the 
introduction of patient-centered care. Further in telemedicine 
they do not only improve the quality of care but also 
significantly increase the efficiency of consulting physicians. 
PHRs also allow individuals to access and coordinate their 
lifelong health information and make appropriate parts of it 
available to those that are authorized by the individual [14].  
Further, cloud computing [15] provides an ideal technical 
infrastructure for a variety of e-health services including 
PHRs. As anyone with a suitable Internet connection and a 
standard browser can access an application in a cloud, 
sharing 
patient’s 
clinical 
documentation 
among 
the 
healthcare team is straightforward to those that are 
authorized by the patient. 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

In this paper, we describe our work on designing a cloud-
based telemedicine system that captures PHRs and manages 
consultation requests by a software module called 
Consultation server. It changes the traditional telemedicine 
paradigm: its main goal is not only to provide a cost-
effective alternative to the more traditional face-to-face way 
of providing medical care but rather to provide a data 
infrastructure for information sharing among patient’s 
healthcare team.  
Further, our designed telemedicine infrastructure allows 
location independence in the sense that the consultation 
manager, called Consultation Server, and the PHRs may be 
located anywhere in the Internet, and its stakeholders may 
include any healthcare provider having the ability for 
consultation. Further, a patient can be cared in any place 
having an Internet connection. Thus, such a global 
architecture also changes the traditional telemedicine 
ecosystems which only aim to provide clinical health care at 
a distance. 
In the design of the Consultation Server we have 
followed the idea of knowledge oriented organizations [16]. 
Its key idea is to revolve all applications around a shared 
ontology.  The main gain of such architecture is that the 
applications that manage the consultation related data can 
interoperate by accessing the shared ontology, which in our 
architecture is called Consultation ontology. It is specified in 
OWL (Web Ontology Language) [17], and so the 
applications can query the ontology by SPARQL [18]. As 
OWL ontologies and its instances are presented in RDF 
(Resource Description Framework) [19], the ontology is 
updated by inserting RDF-statements in the ontology.   
In our introduced terminology the participants of the 
Consultation Server that agree to work together for 
practicing telemedicine is called as a telemedicine affinity 
domain. Examples of possible telemedicine affinity domains 
include nationwide and regional affinity domains, regional 
federations made up of several local hospitals, healthcare 
providers, and insurance provider supported communities. 
A useful feature of a telemedicine affinity domain is that 
it is global: its components can locate anywhere in the 
Internet, and it can be exploited by patients and consulting 
physicians as far as they have an Internet connection.  
The notion of telemedicine affinity domain has 
similarities with the clinical affinity domain of the IHE XDS 
[20], which studies the problem of patient’s scattered clinical 
documentation. Its key idea is that patient’s clinical 
documents are dynamically retrieved from a clinical affinity 
domain by exploiting relevant registries. This model assumes 
that patients’ clinical documentation follow them as they 
move from one clinical affinity domain to another. Another 
difference between IHE XDS and PHRs is that in the former 
patient’s clinical documentation is managed by healthcare 
authorities while in the latter they are managed by a patient.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, in 
Section 2, we give a motivating scenario of our ideas in 
practice. Then, in Section 3, we consider the structure of 
CCD documents and show how they can be used for 
exchanging clinical information as well as structuring PHRs. 
In Section 4, we present the architecture of the Consultation 
Server and the Consultation Ontology in a graphical way. 
We also give a variety of useful queries that the ontology 
enables. In Section 5, we do not consider the Consultation 
Server from technology point but rather as ecosystems 
having many interconnected parts. Finally, Section 6 
concludes the paper by analyzing potential risks that may 
jeopardize the deployment of our designed telemedicine 
system. We also shortly consider our future work on 
integrating the Consultation Server with other e-health tools 
used by the physicians.  
II. 
MOTIVATING SCENARIO 
Assume that a patient, named Nancy Taylor, has an 
online Web-based free personal PHR, where her health data 
and information related to the care given to her is stored. She 
can access her PHR from any place having an Internet 
connection.   
One day Nancy discovered a rash on her waist, and so 
she decided to visit the nearest general practitioner having a 
contract with a telemedicine affinity domain.  The 
practitioner examines Nancy’s rush but the practitioner does 
not know what kind of treatment or medication should be 
prescribed for Nancy, and so the practitioner decides to 
request medical consultation by his Web browser.  
To carry out the consultation the practitioner first takes a 
photo from Nancy’s waist. Then the practitioner fills the 
request document by describing the symptoms of the rash 
and attaches the photo to the document. The document also 
provides a hierarchical classification (i.e., a taxonomy) of 
diseases.  The practitioner marks the node “skin disease”. In 
addition, authorized by Nancy the practitioner adds a link to 
Nancy’s PHR and authorization for its use (including 
required access rights).    Finally, the practitioner clicks the 
submit button, and so the document is delivered to the 
Consultation Server, which maintains a queue of the pending 
requests.   
Each request includes a set of metadata items such as 
disease(s), source of request, language and possible priority 
of the request. The function of the metadata items is to 
enable automatic matching of the requests and the consulting 
physicians. So the Consultation Server shows for a 
consulting physician only the requests that match with his or 
her profile. Therefore, each consulting physician of the 
affinity domain also has a profile, which has values for the 
metadata items and is stored in the Consultation Server.   
Assume that a physician, named John Smith, is a 
specialist in a hospital of a telemedicine affinity domain. In 
addition his profile matches with the request concerning 
Nancy, and so the request is in the consultation request 
queue shown for him.  
After a few minutes John Smith picks up the consultation 
request document and examines the symptoms described in 
the document as well as the attached photo. Immediately he 
recognizes Nancy’s rash as shingles (herpes zoster), which 
can be treated by a medicinal product named Aciclovir. Then 
he checks from Nancy’s PHR whether Nancy has some 
allergies that would prevent the use of the drug or whether 
she has some ongoing medical treatment that could cause 
mutual negative effects. As there are no such findings the 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

physician updates Nancy’s PHR by the prescribed 
medication and by the diagnosis he made. Finally John 
constructs and signs the prescription electronically, which is 
then electronically delivered to the general practitioner 
visited by Nancy.  
III. 
USING CCD STANDARD IN PHRS 
A. PHRs vs. EHRs 
In medical consultation, as well as in any medical 
treatment, a complete and accurate summary of the health 
and medical history of the patient is of prime importance.  A 
problem here is that as a patient may have lived in various 
places and a patient may have many healthcare providers, 
including primary care physician, specialist, therapists and 
other medical practitioners, patient’s health documentation 
may be distributed over several healthcare providers.  
PHRs provide a simple way for solving the problem of 
patients’ scattered clinical documentation [21]. They differ 
from EHRs (Electronic Health Record) [22] in that they are 
owned by the patients and they can only be accessed by the 
patient and those that are authorized by the patient while 
EHRs assume that the health records are designed only for 
use by health care providers and are owned by medical 
authorities.  
Managing fragmented healthcare documentation by 
EHRs has been successful only in a very few industrialized 
countries, such as in Singapore and Denmark [23]. Instead 
successful results from the use of PHRs are reported from 
many countries and communities. Therefore we have also 
concluded that the use of PHRs instead of national EHR’s in 
managing patients’ health documentation is a more 
appropriate solution in the context of telemedicine.   
B. Web-Based  PHRs 
PHRs can be classified according to the platform by 
which they are delivered. In web-based PHRs health 
information is stored at a remote server, and so the 
information can be shared with health care providers. They 
also have the capacity to import data from other information 
sources such as a hospital laboratory and physician office. 
However, importing data to PHRs from other sources 
requires the standardization of PHR-formats.  
Various standardization efforts on PHRs have been done. 
In particular, the use of the Continuity of Care Record (CCR 
standard) of ASTM [24] and HL7’s [24] Continuity of Care 
Document (CCD standard) [25] has been proposed.  From 
technology point of view CCR and CCD-standards represent 
two different XML schemas designed to store patient clinical 
summaries [23]. However, both schemas are identical in 
their scope in the sense that they contain the same data 
elements. 
Web-based PHRs are core components in our proposed 
ecosystem. However, it does not assume that all patients 
have a PHR, but it encourages patient to acquire a PHR.  
Using a PHR does not require patients to own any personal 
devices for internet connection nor any efforts for managing 
it. Rather it requires patient to authorize healthcare personnel 
to maintain and access their PHR.   
Acquiring a PHR is a tempting opportunity as there are 
many freely available web-based PHRs available, and 
moving personal data between standard-based PHR is 
supported by the vendors. For example, as the support of the 
Google Health was retired on January 2012 Microsoft has 
developed a transfer process for the user of the Google 
Health for moving their health records into Health Vault. 
Similar to Dossia and World Medical Card, it is a web-based 
system to store, maintain and share health and fitness 
information. They support a number of exchange formats 
including industry standards such as the CCR and CCD 
standards.  
C. CCD Standard  
We have given preference to CCD standard (an XML 
schema) as it is nowadays increasingly used for specifying 
the structure of exchanged clinical documents as well as 
specifying the structure of the PHR. This feature simplifies 
the update of the PHR as well as the generation of the 
clinical documents that will be stored in the PHR. 
Further, we have assumed that XML based CCD and 
CCR standards are the most appropriate standards as they are 
commonly used within PHRs.  Their schemas contain the 
same data elements, and thereby transformation between 
these formats can be easily done. 
The CCD standard is a constraint on the HL7 CDA 
standard. The CCD standard has been endorsed by HIMMS 
(Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society 
Though) 
[26] 
and 
HITSP 
(Healthcare 
Information 
Technology Standards Panel) [27] as the recommend 
standard for exchange of electronic exchange of components 
of health information. 
Although the original purpose of the CCD documents 
was to deliver clinical summaries between healthcare 
organizations, nowadays the XML schema of the CDD 
documents is increasingly used for specifying the structure of 
the PHRs.   The same schema can be used in message as all 
its parts are optional, and it is practical to mix and match the 
sections that are needed.  
D. The Structure of a CCD document 
Each CCD document have one primary purpose (which is 
the reason for the generation of the document), such as 
patient admission, transfer, or inpatient discharge. Further, 
each CCD document, as well all HL7 CDA documents, is 
comprised of the Header and the Body.   
A CCD document that includes a header and the 
Medications section from the Body is presented in Fig. 1.  
The content of the document is derived from the scenario 
presented in Section 2, i.e., the document would be inserted 
in Nancy Taylor’s PHR, which is based on the CCD-
standard.  
In a PHR the CCD documents are usually organized into 
hierarchical structures that simplify the search of documents, 
e.g., grouping together the documents by episode, clinical 
specialty or time period. Yet each clinical document is stored 
as a stand-alone artifact, meaning that each document is 
complete and whole in itself. 
 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
<CCDfile> 
    <DocumentID>DOC_123</DocumentID> 
    <Patient> 
        <PatientID>AB-12345></PatientID> 
        <PatientName>Nancy Taylor></PatientName> 
    </Patient> 
    <Medications> 
        <Medication> 
            <MedicationID>Medication.567</MedicationID> 
            <DateTime> 
                <ExactDateTime>2012-03-01TO12:00</ExactDateTime> 
            </DateTime> 
             <Source> 
                <Actor> 
                    <ActorID>Pharmacy of  Health</ActorID> 
                    <ActorRole>Pharmacy</ActorRole> 
               </Actor> 
            </Source> 
            <Description> 
                <Text>Two tablets twice a day</Text> 
            </Description> 
            <Product> 
                <ProductName>Aciclovir </ProductName>  
                <BrandName>Zovirax</BrandName>  
            </Product> 
            <Strenght> 
                <Value>400</Value> 
                <Unit>milligram</Unit> 
            </Strenght> 
            <Quantity> 
                <Value>40</Value> 
                <Unit>Tabs</Unit> 
            </Quantity> 
        </Medication> 
    </Medications> 
 </CCDfile> 
 
Figure 1. A simplified example of a CCD document. 
 
IV. 
CONSULTATION SERVER 
A. The Architecture of the Comsultation Server 
In designing the internal architecture of the Consultation 
Server we have followed the idea of knowledge oriented 
organizations [16, 28], where the key idea is to revolve all 
applications around a shared ontology. As illustrated in Fig. 
2, in our solution all the applications of the Consultation 
Server are revolved around the Consultation Ontology.  
The users access the Consultation Ontology through the 
Consultation Portal, which provides connections to the 
relevant cloud applications. The applications are based on 
the use cases of the various user groups. For example, 
Submit Consultation Request and Pick-up a Consultation 
Request are two typical applications developed for 
physicians.  These applications interoperate through 
accessing the same data items included in the Consultation 
Ontology.  
Note that although the Consultation ontology is specified 
in QWL and queried by SPARQL (i.e., by a RDF-based 
query language), it is stored for the efficiency reasons in a 
relational database [29].  
 
Browser
Browser
Consultation Portal
Consultation Ontology (stored in relations)
Application 1
. . .
…
Browser
Cloud applications
Consultation Server
Patient’s
family members
Consulting 
specialist  
Patient and 
general practitioner
Application 2
Application n
Pharmacist
In a pharmacy
Browser
 
 
Figure 2. The components of the cloud-based Consultation Server. 
 
B. The Structure of the Consultation Ontology 
A portion of the Consultation ontology is graphically 
presented in Fig. 3. In this graphical representation ellipses 
represent classes and rectangles represent data type and 
object properties. Object properties relate objects to other 
objects while data type properties relate objects to datatype 
values. Classes, data type properties and object properties are 
modelling primitives in OWL [17]. 
Note that in Fig. 3 we have presented only a few of 
objects’ datatype properties. For example, in the figure we 
have omitted most of the datatype properties from the classes 
Physician and Organization. Instead all the datatype 
properties of the class Consultation request are presented in 
the figure. The class Speciality and its datatype property 
Class represent a taxonomy. That is, except for the root node 
there is a link from each class instance to its parent.  
The idea behind this taxonomy is that the symptoms and 
the specialities of the physicians are specified by the same 
vocabulary. This feature simplifies the matching of 
consultation requests and physicians’ specialities.  
 
Consultation
request
Consultation
Physician 
Organization
Super Class
Performs
Speciality
Works in
Has
Concerns 
Is classified
Submitting time 
Priority
State
PHR-link
Symptoms
Activation time
State
Physician name
ID
Speciality name
Organization name
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Graphical presentation of a portion of the Consultation 
Ontology. 
 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The Consultation Ontology enables a variety of useful 
queries for physicians such as the followings:  
 
• 
Is there any pending consultation request having 
classification “Skin diseases”. 
• 
Is there (in the affinity domain) any physicians 
having speciality in diabetes.  
• 
Is there any consultation request matching with my 
speciality. 
• 
Is there any pending consultation request that is 
submitted by a physician of the University Hospital.   
• 
Is there any consultation request that has been 
pending over ten minutes. 
• 
Give me the names and specialties of the consulting 
physicians that work in a specific affinity domain. 
 
Note that the Consultation Server can support more than one 
telemedicine affinity domain. Further, as most OWL 
ontologies, such as the Consultation Ontology, are usually 
stored in relational database systems, it is also possible to use 
the triggering mechanism of the SQL [30] in automating the 
management of the consultation requests. For example, a 
request can be automatically allocated to a physician having 
required speciality and having no ongoing consultation.   
C. Cloud Computing and SaaS 
Cloud 
computing 
is 
an 
appropriate 
choice 
for 
telemedicine 
consultation 
management 
as 
it 
allows 
organizations to use applications without installation. 
Moreover, in most cases cloud-based solutions reduces the 
cost of acquiring, delivering, and maintaining computing 
power [15]. However, in our vision the main goal behind 
cloud computing is to achieve synergy through controlled 
sharing of data.   
In particular the Saas (Software as a Service) model of 
cloud computing is appropriate for the Consultation Server. 
It is a software delivery model in which applications are 
hosted by service provider and made available to customers 
over the Internet. It provides access to software and its 
functions remotely as a Web-based service.  
Further, there are various architectural ways for 
implementing the SaaS model. For example, in the case 
where the Consultation Server serves more than one 
telemedicine affinity domain we could use the following 
software architectures:    
 
1. Each telemedicine affinity domain has a customized 
version of the Competence Server that runs as its 
own instance.  
2. Many telemedicine affinity domains use separate 
instances of the same application code. 
3. A single program instance serves all telemedicine 
affinity domains. 
 
In our designed version the Consultation Server supports 
only one clinical affinity domain as so only one version and 
one instance is required.  
V. 
TELEMEDICINE ECOSYSTEM  
To succeed e-health systems should not be considered 
just as a technical infrastructure but rather as ecosystems 
having many interconnected parts [31].  
So far we have considered the technical infrastructure 
and the services of our designed telemedicine oriented cloud-
based ecosystem. The other key parts of the ecosystem are 
governance regulations, financing and stakeholders. For 
now, we shortly consider what kind of new alternatives the 
introduction of cloud-based solutions gives for these parts of 
the ecosystem.  
A. Governance Regulations  
E-health application that maintains patients’ health 
documentation must adhere to national legislated policies 
and regulations, which concerns privacy and security issues. 
One problem is that in many countries that are just beginning 
to investigate on e-health application do not yet have enough 
mature legislation with respect to e-health. Thereby national 
governments have an important role in promoting the 
development of appropriate legislation concerning e-health.   
In our developed telemedicine ecosystem patient’s health 
documentation is not stored in the national archives but 
rather on PHR system, where the patient’s health 
documentation is owned by the patient and only used by the 
physicians, patient’s family members and healthcare 
personnel authored by the patient. As a result, patients’ 
health documentation is not under the control of national 
healthcare authorities, and thus is not so tightly dependent on 
whether there is advanced legislation for e-health.  
B. Financing Cloud-Based E-Health Ecosystems  
In designing an e-health ecosystem it is important to 
ensure that appropriate funding is in place for its 
implementation and operation. Financing can come from a 
variety of sources, such as government or public-private 
partnerships.   
 Financing PHRs is not an actual problem as there are 
many freely available web-based PHRs available. Further 
there are many freely available PHRs for specific 
communities, e.g., for employees of specific organization, 
customers of a specific insurance company or for the 
customers of a specific healthcare provider.  
C. Stakeholders of Global  Ecosystem 
In designing the implementation of an e-health 
ecosystem, it is of prime importance to involve in 
preparation all the key stakeholders, such as governments, 
public and private healthcare providers, patients, as well as 
patient advocacy groups [31].  
As our proposed ecosystem is not nationwide but rather 
“internet-wide”, the system itself as well as its stakeholders 
may span over many countries. For example, governments 
and healthcare providers from a variety of countries may be 
involved in the ecosystem, and each stakeholder has different 
objectives and motivations for participating in the ecosystem.  
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The goal of our work has been to show that cloud-based 
global telemedicine ecosystems that support patient centered 
care can be implemented from technology point of view. Yet 
there are many problems that may jeopardize the success of 
such ecosystems.  In particular, the introduction of new 
technology requires training: the incorrect usage of a new 
telemedicine technology, due to lack of proper training, may 
ruin the whole ecosystem. In addition, a consequence of 
introducing a new telemedicine practice is that it 
significantly changes the daily duties of the healthcare 
personnel, and the role of patient and patient’s family 
members. Therefore one challenging aspect is also the 
changing the mind-set of the involved healthcare personnel.   
The introduction of a new technology in telemedicine is 
also an investment. It includes a variety of costs including 
software, hardware and training costs. Introducing and 
training the staff on new technology is a notable investment, 
and hence many organizations like to cut on this cost as 
much as possible.  
In order to minimize the changes that the introduction of 
the system will cause on healthcare personnel, in our future 
work we will investigate how telemedicine consultation can 
be linked into physicians’ day-to-day work patterns. In 
particular, we will consider how the functionalities of the 
Consultation Portal can be integrated with other e-health 
tools used by the physicians. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D.  M.  Angaran, “Telemedicine and Telepharmacy: current status 
and future implications,” American Journal of Health System 
Pharmacy. 1999 Jul 15; vol. 56: 1405-26 
[2] W. J. Blyth, "Telecommunications, Concepts, Development, and 
Management," 
Second 
Edition, 
Glencoe/McCgraw-Hill 
Company,1990, pp. 280-282. 
[3] G. Kontaxakis, et al. “Integrated telemedicine applications and 
services for oncological positron emission tomography,”  Oncology 
Reports, vol.15: pp. 1091–1100, 2006. 
[4] A. Bauman, H. Fardy, and H. Harris, “Getting it right; why bother 
with patient centred care?,” Medical Journal of Australia, 179(5), pp. 
253-256, 2003. 
[5] K. Wiedenmayer, R. Summers, C. Mackie, A. Gous, M. Everard., D. 
Tromp, “Developing pharmacy practice,” World Health Organization 
and International Pharmaceutical Federation. 2006. 
[6] M. S. Raisinghan and E. Young, “Personal health records: key 
adoption issues and implications for management,” International 
Journal of Electronic Healthcare. vol. 4, No.1 pp. 67-77. 2008. 
[7] J. Puustjärvi and L. Puustjärvi, “Providing Relevant Health 
Information to Patient-Centered Healthcare,” In the Proc of the 12th 
IEEE Conference on e-Health Networking, Applications and 
Services. pp.  215-220. 2010. 
[8] P. Little, H. Everitt, and I. Williamson, “ Observational study of 
effect of patient centredness and positive approach on outcomes of 
general practice consultations,” British Medical Journal,”  pp. 908-
911, 2001. 
[9] R. Gillespie, D. Florin, and S. Gillam, “How is patient-centred care 
understood by the clinical, managerial and lay stakeholders 
responsible for promoting this agenda?, ”Health Expectations, vol. 7 
No 2, pp. 142-148, 2004.  
[10] I. Mil, J. Schulz, and M. Tromp, “Pharmaceutical care, European 
developments in concepts, implementation, teaching, and research: a 
review,” Pharm World Sci. Dec 2004; 26(6), pp.303–11. 
[11] C. D. Hepler, “Clinical pharmacy, pharmaceutical care, and the 
quality of drug therapy.” Pharmacotherapy.  2004 ,24(11), pp. 1491–
98. 
[12] D. Lewis, G. Eysenbach, R. Kukafka, P. Stavri, and  H. Jimison, 
“Consumer health informatics: informing consumers and improving 
health care,” New York: Springer. 2005. 
[13] W. S. Tuil, A. J. Hoopen, D. Braat, P. Vries, and J.  Kremer J. 
“Patient-centred care: using online personal medical records in IVF 
practice,” Hum. Reprod., November 1, 21(11). pp. 2955 - 2959. 2006. 
[14] J. Puustjärvi, and L. Puustjärvi, ”Personal Health Ontology: Towards 
the Interoperation of E-health Tools,” International Journal of 
Electronic Healthcare, vol. 6, No.1, pp. 62 – 75. 2011. 
[15] G.Boss, P. Malladi, D. Quan, L. Legregni, and H. Hall, “Cloud 
Computing,” Available at: 
http://download.boulder.ibm.com/ibmdl/pub/software/dw/wes/hipods/
Cloud_computing_wp_final_8Oct.pdf. Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[16] M. Daconta, L. Obrst,  and K. Smith. The semantic web. :A Guide to 
the Future of XML, Web Services, and Knowledge Management, 
John Wiley & Sons. 2003 
[17] OWL 
– 
WEB 
OntologyLanguage. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/ Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[18] [1] 
SPARQL 
Query 
Language 
for 
RDF. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/ Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[19] RDF 
– 
Resource 
Description 
Language. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.w3.org/RDF/  Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[20] A. Dogac, B. Gokce, T. Aden, and T.  Laleci, “Eichelberg, M.. 
“Enhancing IHE XDS for Federated Clinical Affinity Domain 
Support,” IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in 
Biomedicine, vol.11, No. 2. 2007. 
[21] J. Puustjärvi, and L. Puustjärvi ”Moving from Remote Patient 
Monitors to Cloud-Based Personal Health Information Systems: a 
Way to Practicing Patient-Centered Chronic Care Model,”  In the 
proc. of the International Conference on Health Informatics. pp. 37-
45. 2012. 
[22] EHR, 
Electronic 
Health 
Record, 
Available 
at: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electronic_health_record Last accessed 
2013-5-10. 
[23] Benson, T., Principles of Health Interoperability HL7 and SNOMED. 
Springer. 2010. 
[24] Continuity of Care Record (CCR) Standard. Available at: 
http://www.ccrstandard.com/  Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[25] CCD, What Is the HL7 Continuity of Care Document? Available at: 
http://www.neotool.com/blog/2007/02/15/what-is-hl7-continuity-of-
care-document/  Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[26] HIMMS (Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society, 
http://himms.org/ Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[27] Healthcare Information Technology Standards Panel, http://hitsp.org/ 
Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[28] J. Davies, D. Fensel and F. Harmelen. Towards the semantic web: 
ontology driven knowledge management. West Sussex: John Wiley & 
Sons.2002. 
[29] Introduction to Relational Databases. Available at: 
http://www.databasejournal.com/sqletc/article.php/1469521/Introduct
ion-to-Relational-Databases.htm  Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[30] SQL tutorial. Available at: http://www.w3schools.com/sql/default.asp 
Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[31] R. Shehadi, W., Tohme, J., Bitar, and S., Kutty, “Anatomy of an E-
Health Ecosystem”, Available at: 
http://www.booz.com/media/__tracked/media/uploads/BoozCo-
Anatomy-of-E-Heatlh-Ecosystem.pdf Last accessed 2013-5-10.
 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

