First Experiences Implementing Predictive Analytics Tools in a Clinical Routine 
Setting  
Examples from the Heidelberg University Hospital 
 
Oliver Klar 
Department of Medical Information Systems 
University Hospital Heidelberg 
Heidelberg, Germany 
oliver.klar@med.uni-heidelberg.de 
Rasim Atakan Poyraz 
Department of Medical Information Systems 
University Hospital Heidelberg 
Heidelberg, Germany 
atakan.poyraz@med.uni-heidelberg.de 
Raluca Dees 
Department of Medical Information Systems 
University Hospital Heidelberg 
Heidelberg, Germany 
raluca.dees@med.uni-heidelberg.de 
Gerd Schneider 
Department of Medical Information Systems 
University Hospital Heidelberg 
Heidelberg, Germany 
gerd.schneider@med.uni-heidelberg.de 
Oliver Heinze 
Department of Medical Information Systems 
University Hospital Heidelberg 
Heidelberg, Germany 
oliver.heinze@med.uni-heidelberg.de 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—The rise of Artificial Intelligence(AI) is ubiquitous. In 
healthcare it is seen as a key technology supporting clinicians in 
their daily routine. The PART research project (Predictive 
Analytics of Robustness Testing) aims to develop an AI driven 
system which has the focus on networked device monitoring, 
profitability analysis and predictive maintenance in a clinical 
environemt. However before thinking about sophisticated AI 
algorithms at Heidelberg University Hospital we experienced a 
variety of difficulties according to medical device data 
acquisition from various manufactures and data protection 
which have to be solved first. This paper focuses on those 
difficilitues in a very early stage of the project and makes 
suggestions for suitable solutions.  
Keywords-clinical artificial intelligence; artificial intelligence 
in healthcare; monitoring networked medical devices. 
I. 
BACKGROUND 
The University Hospital Heidelberg is a maximum care 
center running most of its patient record systems 
electronically. An important part of the information systems 
architecture is the integration of medical devices especially 
in the operating room [1]. Having those devices integrated, it 
is important to know which device is up and running, which 
one has got a problem and needs maintenance. The  
Predictive Analytics for Robustness Testing (PART) project 
aims to develop a monitoring system for networked medical 
devices of various manufactures in everyday clinical practice. 
The focus is on profitability analysis, predictive maintenance 
and monitoring of networked medical devices using data 
mining strategies. The monitoring system should manage a 
wide range of devices from various manufacturers within the 
clinic. This work presents first experiences in designing and 
implementing such a vendor-independent monitoring system 
facing the real world setting of a university hospital. 
Subsequently, the complexity of the development will be 
briefly outlined from the perspective of a hospital. 
II. 
METHODS &  RESULTS 
There are several obstacles according to medical devices, 
device data and data protection that have to be taken in 
advance of realizing a powerful monitoring system. First, one 
has to address problems caused by heterogeneity. Medical 
devices are mostly, due to reasons of independence, from 
different manufacturers. This ranges from infusion pumps to 
the latest CT or MRI scanners. Even though there are 
standards for networked medical devices in operation rooms 
(e.g., IEEE 11073) [2][3], the communication of these 
medical devices works mostly via proprietary interfaces and 
protocols and manufacturers are very reluctant disclosing 
those interfaces, or implementing given standards. Further, 
expensive medical devices like CT scanners usually have 
extensive maintenance contracts which include that 
maintenance, repair and service may only be performed by a 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

service engineer of the manufacturer itself. Collecting 
relevant data from such medical devices, e.g., getting 
information about the condition and operating status is 
demanding. Gathering data by additional attached IoT 
sensors in a sterile environment like an operation room is 
under serve restrictions due to aspects like patient safety. This 
makes it very difficult to just gather data from each 
networked device and analyse it. In PART the current 
question is not which data mining algorithms fit the most for 
our needs, the question is where is the data coming from in 
the first place. Hence, we are looking in all directions and 
started working with simulated medical device data as well 
to get familiar with the data mining approaches. Another 
subject is data protection and privacy. By monitoring medical 
devices, collecting and analysing data it could be possible to 
draw conclusions about patients, treatment and the work of 
clinical personnel itself. This is sometimes seen very 
critically by the clinic staff and requires a close examination 
and further steps like anonymization of the medical device 
data. Although networked medical devices in clinical 
environments produce a high volume of data, it is quite 
challenging, as described above, to access, evaluate and 
generate added value from this data treasure. In order to 
develop a multi-vendor system that uses AI for monitoring, 
profitability analysis and predictive maintenance, one has to 
address those mentioned issues first. 
III. 
DISCUSSION AND OUTLOOK 
At Heidelberg University Hospital our strategy is to work 
closely together with device manufactures to address the 
former mentioned issues like heterogeneity, proprietary 
interfaces and protocols and lack of medical device data 
itself. Further with the experience made, we have lowered our 
aspiration on our way to a AI driven system for predictive 
maintenance and start with simple descriptive analytics on 
simulated medical device data. When established, such a 
monitoring system has several benefits for the clinic. It 
should make the complete IT infrastructure more robust and 
stable. Detecting problems of networked medical devices in 
early stages or in a best case scenario, before they are going 
to happen, saves maintenance time and costs. Further, with 
workload statistics of the medical devices one gets a good 
tool for tracking the usage and can adapt the inventory 
accordingly. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is funded by the German Federal Ministry of 
Education and Research under reference number 16KIS0785 
as part of the PART project. We thank all partners within the 
PART project. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Dees, et al. „Implementing, Connecting, and Evaluating a Standard-
Based Integrated Operating Room within a German University 
Hospital.“ ACI Open, Vol. 02, Nr. 01, DOI: 10.1055/s-00034447Georg 
Thieme Verlag KG, Stuttgart, Deutschland, Januar 2018. 
[2] M. Kasparick, S. Schlichting, F. Golatowski and D. Timmermann. 
"Medical DPWS: New IEEE 11073 Standard for safe and interoperable 
Medical Device Communication." 2015: 223–228. 
[3] M. Max, et al. "From SOMDA to application – integration strategies in 
the OR.NET demonstration sites." 
Biomedizinische Technik. 
Biomedical Engineering, Feb 01, 2018: 69-80. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

