A Quantitative Survey About the Interest of Digital Natives in Second Opinion and 
Quality/Trust in Online Health Information 
René Baranyi, Dennis Matthias Binder, Nadja Lederer, Thomas Grechenig 
Research Group For Industrial Software 
Vienna University of Technology 
Vienna, Austria 
{ rene.baranyi, dennis.binder, nadja.lederer, thomas.grechenig }@inso.tuwien.ac.at 
 
Abstract— Growing access to qualified medical information 
triggers interest and helps patients with their medical conditions, 
get second opinions, or just share some experience with others. 
To explore the thoughts of digital natives - what information is 
accepted and sought after and what information is considered 
irrelevant or unnecessary - in health information systems, a 
quantitative survey, from the end users’ point of view, with 56 
people was conducted. The sample consisted of semi-digital 
natives aged between 18 and 35. The main results show that a 
large number of people (78.6%) do an online research after a 
doctor’s consultation. In terms of second opinion, only 33.9% 
would in principle consider taking a second opinion from online 
health consulting. 
 
Keywords-survey; second opinion; user opinion; information 
system; quality of information.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, the Internet and modern media are constantly 
integrated into our daily lives. Web 2.0 and social networking 
services in general have been experiencing a boost during 
recent years. 67% of Internet users (n=860) are on Facebook, 
Pinterest accounts for 15% of Internet users (n=1,802), the 
percentage of people using Twitter is twice as high as in 
November 2010 [1]. The primary purpose of these sites ranges 
from social to professional networking, content production and 
sharing, to making recommendations and/or location-based 
services [2]. Sharing information with friends or peers in one’s 
community has seemingly become a societal “norm”. 
A. Health-related information seeking 
The dissemination of health-related data and usage of online 
support groups in the medical sector, however, remains rather 
unobtrusive. Survey participants were found to be quite 
reluctant when it comes to sharing information about their 
health [3]. Difference in means showed that people who work 
in a technical field are more likely to share data about a disease 
(t-test: T=2.071; df=46; p=0.044; 1 - β=0.90). However, users 
overall do acknowledge benefits by other people’s health 
disclosure. This ambivalence in opinion is mainly attributed to 
awareness of data security and privacy [3]. 
B. Social media for health 
Only 3.8% of Internet users (n=3,244) reported to use 
online support groups dealing with similar diagnoses or 
medical 
conditions 
in 
2005 
[4]. 
PatientsLikeMe, 
CureTogether, TuDiabetes, CaringBridge are a few examples 
of such social networks that provide support by and for 
patients [5][6]. In fact, a much higher percentage of 58.5% of 
Internet users explored the Web for information about their 
health [4]. Other reported uses of social media in healthcare 
are professional education, patient - doctor communication [2], 
patient education [7] or even behavior change. The options 
available are ample, at least in theory. Social media is 
perceived positively in the health sector [3], especially cancer 
patients are actively educating themselves [2]. Nonetheless, 
security aspects, data privacy and access remain crucial in 
deciding whether or not to disclose health-related information. 
On the bright side, investigating and sharing health data 
paves its way for obtaining, respectively, providing second 
opinions. A recent report on social media in healthcare 
revealed that 45% of the participants in a survey (n=1,060 
adults altogether) denoted social media to “affect their 
decisions to seek a second opinion” [5]. Commonly referred to 
as the process of consulting another person about a matter of 
interest, the authors add the aspect of looking up health-related 
information to the definition of second opinions. These are, in 
general, not limited to a specific field. In here, we focus on 
second opinions in medicine.  
C. Second opinions in healthcare 
Underlying motives why people want to get a second 
opinion are differing. Anxiety disposition, dissatisfaction with 
the first specialist, desire to have a say in the decision, need for 
more information, hopes and expectations that the second 
opinion differs from the first one were revealed as key factors 
that drove the need to consult a second physician among 
patients in the Netherlands [8].  
A survey among the six US states Florida, Indiana, 
Louisiana, Missouri, New Hampshire and New York revealed 
that one out of five patients consulted a second specialist after 
having visited a doctor the year prior to the study [9]. 
Perception of being treated badly, affiliation with ethnical 
groups, among others, were identified as motives to get 
consults. It was, however, not investigated which disease was 
the driving force one wanted to get a second opinion on.  
Regarding the way these are provided, literature even 
reports that remote second opinions exist [10]. One example is 
the Johns Hopkins University [11]. 
It seems that second opinion is not that widely spread 
among medical professionals. Hence, the authors’ approach is 
to investigate quality and trust of digital natives in online 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

health information as a starting point before such systems get 
implemented. 
Presumably, 
more 
general 
topics 
like 
recording/administration and processing of data intertwined 
with social media may have an impact on one’s viewpoint 
regarding second opinion (or how it may be delivered) as well. 
The authors strongly believe that the perspective of digital 
natives thereupon may reveal certain trends and help figure out 
key aspects to consider when building an information system 
handling second opinion. To the authors’ knowledge no such 
study targeting digital natives has been conducted. 
This paper starts with a description of related work (Section 
II), followed by the methodology used from acquiring to 
analyzing the data (Section III). Afterwards, the results are 
presented (Section IV). Section V, then discusses results and 
contributions. Finally, a conclusion is given in Section VI and 
some future work is presented. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Related work dealing with online health information and 
social media is manifold. The authors are well aware that each 
diagnosis yields different treatment options. We acknowledge 
that one’s medical history or background also affects the 
attitude towards second opinion and online health information. 
However, covering all types of diagnoses is impossible. Also, 
to the authors’ knowledge, publications handling results as 
they are outlined in such detail in this paper are not existent. 
Related work presented in this section makes no claim to be 
complete and aims to look at a broad perspective in online 
health information and second opinions. Research is divided 
into three general categories (which have been defined and 
explained in the introduction): health-related information 
seeking, social media for health and second opinions in 
healthcare. Then, our approach in this paper is to build on and 
to enrich the literature presented here. 
A. Health-related information seeking 
KHRESMOI, which is a project of the European Union, 
undertook a survey about health search among the general 
public [12]. Participants (n=385) answered a questionnaire 
about their Internet use in relation to health information. Most 
contributions were recorded in France, Spain, and the USA 
with 23%, 14%, and 10%. They found that 24% of the sample 
population look for health-related information at least once a 
day, whereas the largest focus (68%) was attributed to general 
information about health issues. The second most important 
topics for health search were long-term chronic diseases 
(59%), directly followed by healthy lifestyle and nutrition 
(50%).  
A study among Swiss citizens (n=1,075) found that during 
the previous 12 months the primary sources for health-related 
matters were newspapers and magazines (70%), followed by 
talking to family and friends (47%) [13]. The Internet was 
consulted by 41% of the respondents. Another question related 
to the kind of information sought upon in general (n>=4,049). 
The four top candidates mentioned were treatments, 
illnesses/diseases, alternative therapeutic approaches and 
measures for health protection. 
On the downside, Gualtieri argues that using “Dr. Google” 
as one’s proxy for a medical first opinion may likely yield 
serious (negative) consequences [14]. Especially, if people are 
not adequately equipped with health literacy skills and do not 
disclose information found on the Internet with their health 
care provider. Hence, she proposes to strengthen the doctor-
patient relationship to possibly reduce non-disclosure and rule 
out misleading information. This could be done by directing 
patients to appropriate health websites or specifically asking 
about a patient’s Internet search prior to the appointment. 
B. Social media for health  
A social network targeting people suffering from 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) - a neurodegenerative 
disease - is specifically designed to enable health information 
sharing and support by peers [7]. That is, current treatment 
information is shared with others, as well as diagnoses and 
alike. One of the study’s main findings was that the revelation 
of symptoms, treatment and health, respectively, disease 
progress triggered targeted messaging, like recommendations 
to others, requests for advice, or simply building relationships 
with patients sharing similar experience. Among 123 postings 
that were selected for analysis 23% (n=29) referred to 
treatment, whereas 7% (n=9) referred to symptoms or 
outcomes. 
A study among Australian health professionals (n=935) 
investigated 
trends 
of 
social 
media 
adoption 
for 
healthcare [15]. It was found that 9.5% used social media for 
(professional) health purposes, whereas 19.1% reported 
personal usage only. The majority (71.3%) reported to not use 
social media at all. Not comprehending how social media can 
be used for the health sector was the most common reason for 
non-adoption of social media (83%), followed by face-to-face 
communication preferences (53.1%). Other factors were 
attributed to lack of time (50.9%) and reasoning that social 
media fosters addiction (49.6%). 
C. Second opinions in healthcare 
Vashitz et al. [17] found out that, in a survey with 332 
participants (orthopedic surgeons: n=172; neurologists: n=160) 
surgeons were more likely to be affected by a primary opinion 
than neurologists. The study group was given the information 
about the opinion itself, the control group had only revealed 
that the patient already had an opinion, without saying what it 
was. It was shown that interventional scores for study group 
surgeons were significantly higher than for control group 
surgeons (2.25 vs 1.97; p = 0.03). Also, significant difference 
was 
identified 
comparing 
study 
group 
surgeons 
in 
interventional scores in relation to their baseline interventional 
score. No significant differences were found among 
neurologists. 
The possibility of obtaining a second opinion is listed as a 
reason to collect medical data at home by Austrian and 
German citizens [16]. Among a sample of 151 Austrians and 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

137 Germans, 13% versus 6% reported to do so. Much more 
common reasons were insurance issues (36% versus 17%) and 
understanding one’s treatment (25% versus 23%). 
A study at the Sydney Cancer Centre revealed that 123 out 
of 1,892 outpatients sought a second opinion [10]. Those 
whose motives were dissatisfaction (compared to others) 
reported that the second specialist helped with their concerns 
(92% vs 37%, χ2
1 = 11.92, P = 0.001). Other findings were that 
younger, more educated, female cancer patients are more 
likely to seek second opinions, maybe because they want to 
obtain more detailed information. 
III. 
METHODS 
The study design was divided into the three stages: 
research, construction, and realization (see Figure 1). First of 
all, a literature review was conducted to identify current 
research about content and functions of an information system 
in the health sector and second opinions in the context of 
telemedicine applications. After doing some brainstorming, the 
study setting was defined. The target population included 
individuals being older than 18 years of age, whose profession 
is not a medical one. In a next step, a questionnaire was 
developed, which was in turn evaluated and refined after 
having performed a pretest on it with 15 participants. 
Questions asked were of both open-ended and closed nature. 
Additionally, questions with four-level-based items were 
included to avoid a central tendency bias. A fifth point was 
provided in case a question was not applicable to a participant. 
The questionnaire was then administered to a sample 
population of the target group in different courses at the 
Vienna UT. 56 people returned it. To analyze the results, four-
level-based question items were subsumed and transformed to 
yes/no, respectively, positive/negative answers.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
The questions asked can be looked up in Table I. Specific 
questions are represented as “Q <XX>” within all figures. Due 
to limited space, the percentage and actual number of people 
who indicated a specific answer is not depicted in the 
graphical charts, if it is less than 5%. Instead, the exact 
numbers 
are 
given 
in 
the 
textual 
description. 
The 
categorization of the question was done afterwards to have a 
better overview.  
The participants were separated into four age groups: age 
18-25 (61%, n=34), age 26-35 (29%, n=16), age 36 – 49 (5%, 
n=3), 50 and older (5%, n=3). To check if a person is used to a 
PC or not, a control question was asked. The threshold was 
two hours daily in front of the PC. Only 16.1% spend less than 
two hours working with it, so most of the participants are 
computer affine.  
TABLE I.  
QUESTIONS 
Nr 
Question 
01 
What’s your age? 
02 
How much time do you spend in front of the PC? 
03 
What do you associate with the term health? 
04 
How important are the above stated points? 
05 
How important is healthcare for you? 
06 
How important is the security of medical data for you? 
07 
Would you use electronic devices to measure your sport 
activities? (mp3 player, cell phone, pulse monitor, software 
etc.)? 
08 
If "yes" - which devices and appropriate programs? If "no" - 
why not? 
09 
Would you like to administrate and collect your complete 
training progression online? 
10 
Do you look up possible diseases before a consultation? 
11 
Do you look up possible treatments before a consultation? 
12 
Do you inform yourself about diagnosed illnesses after a 
consultation? 
13 
Do you inform yourself about diagnosed treatments after a 
consultation? 
14 
Would you inform yourself about a disease and its treatment on 
a website? 
15 
Imagine you need a nonacute appointment with your doctor, 
how would you like to arrange it?  
16 
Would you prefer to use an information system (website) to 
make a nonacute appointment regarding your last answer? 
17 
Could you imagine to schedule appointments via a website? 
18 
Do you keep old diagnostic findings? 
19 
Would you use a website, where you can securely administrate 
old diagnostic findings? 
20 
A second opinion is an independent diagnosis of a different 
doctor. Have you ever had a second opinion? 
21 
How would you like to get a second opinion? (in person from a 
different doctor, internet research, etc.) 
22 
Would you use the opportunity to get a second opinion over the 
PC? 
23 
Would you do a whole medical consultation virtually over the 
PC, if possible? 
24 
Would you like to get a second opinion in the course of a 
consultation over the PC? 
25 
Would you transmit medical data for the use of an online 
consultation? 
26 
What would you like to have online via PC from a doctor? 
Please choose at most 3 answers. 
27 
Which of the following functions within an information system 
(website) would you use? Please choose at most 5 answers. 
28 
What should an information system have or which functions 
should it cover for you to use it? You can also choose functions 
stated above, if they are true. 
 
Figure 1. Methodology 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A. General Information 
Obtaining general information from respondents is covered 
by questions 1, 2, 26, 27 and 28. 
For question 26 the participants had the possibility to 
choose up to three answers. The majority of the asked 
participants wants information about diseases (n=28) and food 
(n=28) from an online doctor. The answer with the highest 
credit was giving a prescription (n=29) via PC. A significant 
number of people  (8 out of 56) do not want anything from an 
online doctor. See Table II and Table III for all answers. 
Only 25 people addressed the question of what an 
information system should cover (Q 28). Six out of 25 people 
(24%) stated that security of their (medical) data is very 
important and that they want to be in full control of the data. 
Four people (16%) only desired a personal doctor’s 
consultation. One person wrote that the system should not 
require user’s personal data. Another one fancied a translation 
of medical data in case of emergency while being in a foreign 
country. Further answers noted were allergy information, 
administration of old diagnostic findings, information/rating of 
a doctor, reservation system, easy access, reminder of 
upcoming consults, having more than one online profile, 
newsfeeds about medical/sports innovations/knowledge, and a 
friend finder to get in contact with people who share the same 
disease.  
B. Diagnostics and Security 
One of the most important questions is one about data 
security (Figure 2). For more than half (60%) of the 
respondents security of medical data is very important, for 
21% it is important and only for 17% it is less or not important 
(Q 6). Unsurprisingly, 76% of the asked participants keep their 
old diagnostic findings (Q 18). Only 40% would store their old 
diagnostic findings online on a secure website (Q 19). 
C. Health-Related Questions  
One of the first questions was about participants’ 
associations with the term health (Q 3). More than one item 
could be chosen from a list of answers. In addition, 
respondents could frame their own answers. 
TABLE II.  
ANSWERS FOR Q 26 
Answers 
Count 
Issue a prescription 
29 
Dietary information 
28 
Information about different diseases 
28 
Establish a training schedule 
20 
Nothing 
8 
Do online consults 
7 
Diagnose someone based on virtual consults 
6 
Diagnose someone based on previously transferred health record 
6 
Sign someone off sick/healthy 
1 
 
Healthy food and sports activities are topmost chosen answers 
that are associated with health. A great number of 37 people 
think that drug abuse, too much smoking and alcohol 
consumption are not healthy. 28 times people mentioned that 
preventive medical check-ups are also related to the term 
health. 
 
TABLE III.  
ANSWERS FOR Q 27 
Answers 
Count 
Consultation on refreshing vaccinations 
28 
Schedule appointment with any doctor 
28 
Evaluating a doctor and their performance 
23 
Archive/manage old diagnostic findings 
22 
Dietary consults 
19 
Consultation on different diseases 
16 
Consultation on treating a disease using home remedies 
13 
Consultation on pollen flight regarding allergy sufferers 
13 
Consultation on treatment/therapy of specific diseases 
12 
Graphically represent training success with charts 
12 
Manage allergies and antibiotics intolerance 
11 
Establish a training schedule 
11 
Online transfer of medically relevant data to one’s respective 
doctor 
6 
Documentation of performance/achievements in sports 
6 
Archive/manage one’s health record respectively one’s 
relatives’ health records 
6 
Nothing at all 
6 
* check for antibiotics intolerance 
1 
In question 5, the importance of health protection is shown. 
14% (n=8) thought of it as very important, while 66% (n=37) 
said it is important. 13% (n=7) felt it as being less important, 
while 7% (n=4) indicated it is not at all important for them. 
D. Sports activities 
The majority (73%) wants to use or still use a device to 
measure their sports activities. Only 14% do not want to use a 
device and the last 12% gave no answer to this question 
(Figure 3 Q 7). Looking at the number of people who want to 
use a device to measure their sports activities, only 14% 
strongly agree and 23% agree that they want to administrate 
and manage their complete training progress online. 30% do 
not want this and 26% of the asked people strongly disagreed 
on that. Furthermore, 5% (n=3) were not sure what to answer 
 
Figure 2. Diagnostics and security 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

to this question (Figure 3 Q 9). 
E. Consultation and Diseases 
Prior to seeing a medical professional, potential treatment 
options are investigated by 23%, who agree and 16%, who 
strongly agree, compare Figure 4 Q 11. 41% do not agree to 
inform themselves before a doctoral visit, 20% indicate strong 
disagreement. Similar but more positive feedback is given for 
question 10. 16% (n=9) strongly and 25% (n=14) still agreed 
on that question, whereas 23% (n=13) strongly and 35% 
(n=20) disagreed which is shown in Figure 4 Q 10. 
Furtheron, 41% reported strong agreement towards 
informing themselves about their diagnosis after they had seen 
a medical professional, whereas 38% agreed to doing so, 
compare 
Figure 
4 
Q 12. 
Disagreement 
and 
strong 
disagreement was found in 19% respectively 2% (n=1) of the 
total number of respondents.  
A similar tendency can be observed once asking about 
suggested treatment by medical professionals and if patients 
educate themselves after their doctoral visits (see Figure 4 
Q 13). The majority of the respondents indicated to do inform 
themselves about treatment options. 15 people strongly agreed 
(26.79%), 24 people agreed to doing so (42.86%). 14 people 
disagreed (25%) upon answering this question and 3 people 
strongly disagreed (5.36%). Conform to the findings above, 
nobody chose the neutral answer of being unsure.  
Looking up information about one’s conditions and 
available treatments at designated websites was perceived 
rather positively by respondents, compare Figure 4 Q 14. 19 
persons strongly agreed to educating themselves (33.93%), 
whereas 18 people agreed (32.14%). Only 19 people disagreed 
to taking responsibility as in informing themselves about their 
options (28.57%), whereas three of them strongly disagreed 
(5.36%). Nobody indicated to not being sure about this topic. 
F. Doctoral Appointment 
Questions 15-17 focus on different ways to schedule 
appointments with one’s doctor. Answers for question 15 were 
cell phone (66.04%, n=35), face-to-face (13.21%, n=7), email 
(11.32%, n=6), online web form (1.89%, n=1), online 
reservation system (1.89%, n=1), online calendar of doctor 
(1.89%, n=1) and online website (1.89%, n=1). Questions 15 
and 16 show that most people will use their cell phone for 
contacting a doctor for a nonacute appointment rather than an 
online platform (39%). One person gave no answer to this 
question.  
In general, 36% would strongly agree and 30% agree to 
schedule an appointment via a website. A number of 32% 
would not do this and only one person was not sure what to 
answer. All values regarding question 16 and 17 are in 
Figure 5. 
G. Second Opinion and Virtual Consultation 
Exactly 50% of the sample population indicated they had 
obtained a second opinion before. 43% had never done so and 
7% could not remember or were not sure (question 20). Upon 
responding to question 20 the participants were asked how 
they want to get a second opinion (Q 21). It was possible to 
choose more than one answer. Most people (n=40) obtain their 
second opinion from another doctor in person. The second 
most common answer was the web research and only three 
people would get a second opinion from a friend. A great 
number of 13 people (23%) gave no answer to this question. 
Answers for question 21 were personally (n=40), web 
research (n=10), friends (n=3) and no answer (n=13). To 
follow up, respondents were asked if they would use the 
opportunity to obtain a second opinion via their PC (question 
22), see Figure 6 Q 22. 30% agreed and 5% strongly agreed. 
Among the majority of 33 people who disagreed, 21% had a 
strong disapproval regarding this topic. 5% indicated to not 
being sure about electronically consulting a doctor other than 
one’s primary choice. 61% strongly denied using an 
opportunity to do an entire medical consultation virtually over 
the PC, compare Figure 6 Q 23. Only 9% were in favor of 
such an opportunity and 25% disagreed to use it. 5% felt 
unsure about their answer to this question and no one would 
strongly agree. 
 
Figure 4. Consultation and diseases 
 
 
Figure 3. Using device during sport  
 
Figure 5. Doctor appointment  
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Respondents were asked if they would obtain a second 
opinion by the use of online, i.e., virtual, consultation hours 
via the PC, see Figure 6 Q 24. Results show a tendency 
towards disagreement: 27% versus 43% disagreed respectively 
strongly disagreed. 25% seemed rather positive towards this 
topic, whereas 4% (n=2) strongly agreed. Only one person 
(1.79%) indicated to be not sure about what they would do.  
Although most people would not use a second opinion via 
PC and would not store their diagnostic findings online 
(question 19), 47% would forward their medical data during 
an online consultation. This is shown in Figure 6 Q 25. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The work presented here gathers information about second 
opinion and the usage of modern media for health-related 
topics. Although the sample size of 56 is not the biggest, it can 
be seen as a good starting point for further research. The results 
show that security is very important when it comes to health-
related data. In terms of health and diet, people want to have 
more information about diseases regarding nutrition, which 
might be associated with the wish of a healthy lifestyle and the 
support of the doctor to help them. Another interesting aspect is 
that the skepticism for a virtual doctor consultation is very 
high. This might also be associated with security issues, but 
needs to be clarified within further research. Another bias of 
this research is that the majority of returned questionnaires was 
answered by younger people (age <35), only a few came from 
people older than 35. But the authors consider younger people 
as a target group for second opinion and the usage of modern 
media, which makes this age group very important. Further 
research should include a larger sample size as well as a 
quantitative study and a comparison between different 
countries and different educational aspects, which were also 
not taken into consideration within this work.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
As a final result, people do want to have additional 
information through other channels rather than from the 
doctors themselves. The results suggest that a virtual 
consultation or second opinion without direct patient contact 
will never be a full alternative to the normal doctor’s visit. To 
prove this, additional data must be acquired. Follow-up studies 
are necessary to support the trends presented here. A study with 
a larger sample size as well as more heterogeneous age 
distribution is taken into consideration. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank everybody who took the 
time and answered the questionnaire.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Pew Research Center, “The Demographics of Social Media Users - 
2012.” 
[2] 
D. S. Dizon, D. Graham, M. A. Thompson, L. J. Johnson, C. Johnston, 
M. J. Fisch, and R. Miller, “Practical guidance: the use of social media 
in oncology practice,” J. Oncol. Pract., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. e114–124, 
Sep. 2012. 
[3] 
A. Schaar, A. Valdez, and M. Ziefle, “Social Media for the eHealth 
Context. A Requirement Assessment,” in Advances of Human Aspects 
of Healthcare, Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis Group, 2013. 
[4] 
N. L. Atkinson, S. L. Saperstein, and J. Pleis, “Using the Internet for 
Health-Related Activities: Findings From a National Probability 
Sample,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. e4, 
Feb. 2009. 
[5] 
“Social media ‘likes’ healthcare: From marketing to social business,” 
PwC. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.pwc.com/us/en/health-
industries/publications/health-care-social-media.jhtml. [Accessed: 19-
Jul-2013]. 
[6] 
“Your Choice: Your Privacy or Your Life?,” Dose of Digital. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.doseofdigital.com/2010/04/your-choice-your-
privacy-your-life/. [Accessed: 19-Jul-2013]. 
[7] 
J. H. Frost and M. P. Massagli, “Social Uses of Personal Health 
Information Within PatientsLikeMe, an Online Patient Community: 
What Can Happen When Patients Have Access to One Another’s 
Data,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. e15, 
May 2008. 
[8] 
W. A. M. Mellink, A. M. V. Dulmen, T. Wiggers, P. M. M. 
Spreeuwenberg, A. M. M. Eggermont, and J. M. Bensing, “Cancer 
patients seeking a second surgical opinion: results of a study on 
motives, needs, and expectations,” J. Clin. Oncol., vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 
1492–1497, Apr. 2003. 
[9] 
T. H. Wagner and L. S. Wagner, “Who gets second opinions?,” Health 
Aff. (Millwood), vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 137–145, Oct. 1999. 
[10] M. H. N. Tattersall, R. F. Dear, J. Jansen, H. L. Shepherd, R. J. Devine, 
L. G. Horvath, and M. L. Boyer, “Second opinions in oncology: the 
experiences of patients attending the Sydney Cancer Centre,” Med. J. 
Aust., vol. 191, no. 4, pp. 209–212, Aug. 2009. 
[11] Johns Hopkins University, “Remote Medical Second Opinions,” 2013. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/international/ 
patients/second_opinions.html. [Accessed: 10-Oct-2013]. 
[12] N. Pletneva, A. Vargas, and C. Boyer, “KHRESMOI - D8.1.1 
Requirements for the general public health search,” General public 
survey report version 2, May 2011. 
[13] G. Marstedt, “Auf der Suche nach gesundheitlicher Information und 
Beratung: Befunde zum Wandel der Patientenrolle,” 2013. [Online]. 
Available: http://forum-gesundheitspolitik.de/dossier/PDF/Informierte-
Patient.pdf. [Accessed: 11-Nov-2013]. 
[14] L. N. Gualtieri, “The doctor as the second opinion and the internet as 
the first,” in CHI ’09 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2009, pp. 2489–2498. 
[15] W. T. Usher, “Australian health professionals’ social media (Web 2.0) 
adoption trends: early 21st century health care delivery and practice 
promotion,” Aust. J. Prim. Health, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 31–41, 2012. 
[16] A. Hoerbst, C. D. Kohl, P. Knaup, and E. Ammenwerth, “Attitudes and 
behaviors related to the introduction of electronic health records among 
Austrian and German citizens,” Int. J. Med. Inform., vol. 79, no. 2, pp. 
81–89, Feb. 2010. 
 [17] G. Vashitz, J. S. Pliskin, Y. Parmet, Y. Kosashvili, G. Ifergane, S. 
Wientroub, and N. Davidovitch, “Do first opinions affect second 
opinions?,” J. Gen. Intern. Med., vol. 27, no. 10, pp. 1265–1271, Oct. 
2012. 
 
Figure 6. Second opinion and virtual consultation  
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

