Process Evaluation of a Cluster Randomised Controlled Trial of  a Monitoring and 
Feedback Tool Embedded in a Counselling Protocol to Stimulate Physical Activity  
Study protocol procesevaluation RCT It’s LiFe! 
Renée Verwey1 
 Research Centre Technology in Care, Zuyd University  
of Applied Science, Heerlen, The Netherlands 
renee.verwey@zuyd.nl 
Huibert Tange 
 School for Public Health and Primary Care (CAPHRI) 
Maastricht University, The Netherlands 
h.tange@maastrichtuniversity.nl 
Trudy van der Weijden 
School for Public Health and Primary Care (CAPHRI) 
Maastricht University, The Netherlands 
trudy.vanderweijden@maastrichtuniversity.nl 
Sanne van der Weegen1 
School for Public Health and Primary Care (CAPHRI) 
Maastricht University, The Netherlands 
s.vanderweegen@maastrichtuniversity.nl 
Marieke Spreeuwenberg 
School for Public Health and Primary Care (CAPHRI) 
Maastricht University, The Netherlands 
m.spreeuwenberg@maastrichtuniversity.nl 
Luc de Witte 
Research Centre Technology in Care, Zuyd University  
of Applied Science, Heerlen, The Netherlands 
luc.dewitte@zuyd.nl
 
 
Abstract— This paper describes the study protocol of the 
process evaluation of a cluster randomized controlled trial of  a 
monitoring and feedback tool embedded in a counselling 
protocol to increase physical activity of people with COPD or 
type 2 diabetes in primary care. Both qualitative and 
quantitative data were collected from participating patients 
and nurses of the two intervention groups. Functioning and use 
of the tool were evaluated by system, - and helpdesk logging.  
The researchers developed questionnaires and interview topics 
by 
translating 
key 
elements 
of 
process 
evaluations 
(recruitment, reach, context, fidelity, dose delivered, dose 
received, - exposure and satisfaction) into structured questions 
regarding the different components of the intervention; the 
Self-management Support Program and the use of the tool.  
Keywords- 
physical 
activity, 
behavior 
change, 
self-
management support, primary care nursing, remote sensing 
technology,  proces evaluation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Physical inactivity is one of the key risk factors for 
noncommunicable diseases such as type 2 diabetes (DM2) 
and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD). In the 
global action plan for the prevention and control of 
noncommunicable diseases, the World Health Organization 
proposes a 10% relative reduction in prevalence of 
insufficient physical. All sort of actions are needed to reduce 
physical inactivity, for example through people-centered 
primary health care. Primary health care interventions are 
necessary to empower people with noncommunicable 
diseases to seek early detection and manage their own 
condition better, by providing them with tools for self-care 
and 
self-management 
through 
information 
and 
communication technologies such as eHealth or mHealth [1]. 
 In the project Interactive Tool for Self-management 
through Lifestyle Feedback! (It’s LiFe!), a monitoring and 
personalized feedback tool was developed [2] and tested 
[3][4] according to User Centered Design principles. The 
tool aims to support patients with DM2 or COPD in 
achieving a more active lifestyle. The tool consists of three 
elements:  
 
a 3D accelerometer worn on the hip;  
 
an application (app) on a Smartphone; 
 
a web application1. 
 
Patients receive different types of feedback concerning the 
amount of activity in relation to an activity goal (constantly), 
automatic feedback messages from the system (intermittent), 
and feedback from their practice nurse (during and in 
between consultations). Use of the tool is part of a behavior 
change counselling protocol for practice nurses named the 
Self-management Support Program (SSP). 
The effects of this intervention were evaluated during a 
cluster randomized controlled trial (RCT It’s LiFe!) among 
24 practices, which were randomized in three groups. The 
nurses in the two intervention groups provided the SSP, one 
intervention group with and the other group without the use 
of the It’s LiFe! tool. The third group received care as usual. 
The program was carried out by the nurses during four 
consultations spread over a period of six months. A detailed 
study protocol of this effect study has been published in 
advance [5]. 
Incorporating a process evaluation is necessary to 
examine the receipt of the intervention in depth [6-9]. From 
                                                           
1 Both authors contributed equally to this study. 
 
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the results of a related feasibility study [10], it was known 
that for most participating nurses and patients the use of 
mobile technology would be a new experience. Also a wide 
range of differences in the performance of the intervention 
by the nurses and in the adherence of participants in using 
the tool was expected. Therefore, the aim of the process 
evaluation of the RCT It’s LiFe! was to examine: 
 
who participated in the intervention, who dropped 
out and for what reasons (recruitment, reach and 
context); 
 
to what extent was the intervention executed and 
received as intended (fidelity, dose delivered, dose 
received-exposure); 
 
how participants experienced different aspects of the 
intervention (both the monitoring and feedback tool 
and the SSP) (dose received-satisfaction); and what 
suggestions participants had for improvements.  
Section (II) of this paper presents the methods of the 
process evaluation, which was conducted in parallel with the 
effect study.   
II. 
METHODS 
A.  Study design  
From December 2012 until July 2014, the process 
evaluation was conducted amongst the participating general 
practices in the intervention groups of the RCT It’s LiFe!  
The research questions were derived from the following 
elements of the framework of Saunders: recruitment, reach, 
context, fidelity, dose delivered, dose received - exposure, 
and dose received – satisfaction [6][11]. The researchers 
developed the questionnaires and interview topics by 
translating these theoretical key elements of process 
evaluations into structured questions regarding the different 
components of the intervention (Table 1). 
 
B. Data collection  
Table 2 provides an overview of the data collection 
methods and the timing of the process evaluation.   
After informed consent was given by the participant, 
participant characteristics (i.e., demographics) were gathered 
by 
means 
of 
self-administered 
questionnaires. 
The 
researchers collected reasons for refusal and dropout 
through-out the intervention period.  To establish exposure, 
the nurses in both intervention groups were asked to keep 
record of all consultations. Compliance with the use of the 
tool was also measured objectively by extracting information 
from the It’s LiFe! server. Technical problems were logged 
by members of the help-desk. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
COMPONENTS OF THE INTERVENTIONS 
Intervention components 
 
SSP 
TOOL 
Materials and Instruction 
Instruction booklet about 
the SSP 
Manual and instruction by the 
PN 
Leaflet disease specific 
information 
Instruction movies on the 
website 
Leaflet with local sports,-
activities 
Helpdesk 
 
Consultations 1-4: 
different aspects  
 
The accelerometer, the app and/or 
the website 
Assessment physical 
activity level (SQUASH 
and diary) 
Views of physical activity 
results 
Risk communication 
Use of the “remarks by 
measurement of today” 
option 
Goal setting and SMART 
activity planning 
 
Send and respond to sessions: 
“registration”  
“diary” 
“preparation for goal setting” 
“set up an action plan” 
“feedback” 
Discussing barriers and 
facilitators 
 
Feedback 
 
 
Approximately two weeks after the second consultation, 
all nurses of both intervention groups were interviewed per 
telephone to ask them about their experiences. In the 
interviews, which lasted approximately half an hour, special 
attention was given to the factors that influenced compliance 
with the intervention at two levels: complying with the 
advised strategies during the first two consultations and 
using the monitoring and feedback tool. Directly after the 
intervention period, a questionnaire about their experiences 
and the feasibility of the intervention was sent to all nurses 
and participants.  
TABLE II.  
DATA COLLECTION  
Data Collection 
Patients 
    Dropout call researchers (when it occurred) 
    Questionnaire  (after the intervention) 
Practice Nurses 
    Inclusion list (at baseline) 
    Consultation evaluation forms  (per consultation)  
 
    Interview  (by phone after  2th consultation) 
    Questionnaire  (after the intervention) 
Tool  
    System log file  server (continuously) 
 
    Helpdesk log file (continuously) 
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

In choosing the outcomes and measurements of the 
process evaluation, the potential for increased Hawthorne 
effects was taken into account by minimizing the contacts 
between researchers and patients, for example by arranging a 
website for participating patients and an helpdesk which they 
could contact in case there were questions or problems. For 
the same reason, patients were not interviewed during the 
intervention [12]. 
 
C. Data analysis  
Quantitative data were analyzed by means of descriptive 
statistics, and Fishers exact and Pearson Chi-square tests, 
using the IBM Statistical Product and Service Solutions 
statistics version 22. Qualitative data (results of open 
questions and interviews) were analyzed by two researchers 
(RV, SvdW) independently using NViVo version 9 in order 
to identify relevant themes. A concurrent triangulation 
strategy was applied to confirm, cross validate and 
corroborate the findings. The analysis of the process data 
took place before the outcome data were analyzed, to avoid 
bias in interpretation [13]. 
 
Hypotheses and possible outcomes of the process 
evaluation were based on the outcomes of a previous 
conducted feasibility study in two family practices with 20 
participants [10]. We expected: 
 
Difficulties in finding enough practices who were 
willing to cooperate in the study; 
 
A drop-out rate of 10% of the patients and 0% of the 
practice nurses; 
 
A complete and acceptable execution of the 
intervention in more than 50%; 
 
Less technical problems compared to the feasibility  
study; 
 
That more than 75% of the participants in group 1 
would use the tool until the end of the intervention; 
 
An overall satisfaction with the intervention in more 
than 75% of the participants (both patients and 
practice nurse). 
   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank all participants, practice nurses and 
GP’s who participated in this study, Babette van Doorn and 
April Boessen with their help recruiting general practices and 
Claudia Valentijn and Arjan Hageman for their work at the 
help-desk. Furthermore, Eveline Habets is acknowledged for 
her help in conducting and transcribing the interviews.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] World Health Organization, Global action plan for the 
prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases 2013-
2020. 2013. [Online]. Retrieved 10-01-2015: 
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/94384/1/9789241506
236_eng.pdf?ua=1. 
[2] S. van der Weegen, R. Verwey, M. Spreeuwenberg, H. Tange,  
T. van der Weijden, and L. de Witte, “The Development of a 
Mobile Monitoring and Feedback Tool to Stimulate Physical 
Activity of People With a Chronic Disease in Primary Care: A 
User-Centered Design.” JMIR mhealth and uhealth, 1(2): 
2013 p. e8. doi:10.2196/mhealth.2526  
[3] R. Verwey, S. van der Weegen, H. Tange, M. Spreeuwenberg, 
T. van der Weijden, and L. de Witte, “Get moving: the 
practice nurse is watching you! A case study of the user-
centred design process and testing of a web-based coaching 
system to stimulate the physical activity of chronically ill 
patients in primary care.” Informatics in primary care,20(4): 
2012, p. 289-98. ISSN 1475-9985 
[4] S. van der Weegen, R.Verwey, H.Tange, M. Spreeuwenberg, 
and L. de Witte, “Usability testing of a monitoring and 
feedback tool to stimulate physical activity.” Patient Prefer 
Adherence, 8: 2014, p. 311-22. doi: 10.2147/ppa.s57961 
[5] R. Verwey, S. van der Weegen, M. Spreeuwenberg, H. Tange, 
T. van der Weijden, and L. de Witte, “A monitoring and 
feedback tool embedded in a counselling protocol to increase 
physical activity of patients with COPD or type 2 diabetes in 
primary care: study protocol of a three-arm cluster 
randomised controlled trial.” BMC Family Practice, 15(1): 
2014, p. 93. doi: 10.1186/1471-2296-15-93 
[6] L. Linnan and A. Stecckler, “Proces evaluation for public 
health interventions and research: an overview, in Proces 
Evaluation for Public health Interventions and Research” 
2002, Jossey-Bass: San Francisco. p. 1-23. 
[7] P. Craig, P. Dieppe, S. Macintyre, S. Michie, I. Nazareth, and  
M. 
Petticrew, 
“Developing 
and 
evaluating 
complex 
interventions: the new Medical Research Council guidance.” 
Int 
J 
Nurs 
Stud, 
50(5): 
2013, 
p. 
587-92. 
doi: 
10.1136/bmj.332.7538.413 
[8] H. Hasson, “Systematic evaluation of implementation fidelity 
of complex interventions in health and social care.” 
Implementation Science, 5(1): 2010.doi:10.1186/1748-5908-
5-1 
[9] R. Grol, M. Wensing, M. Eccles, and D. Davis, “Improving 
patient care : the implementation of change in health care.” 
2013; Retrieved: 10-01-2015 
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/book/10.1002/9781118525975. 
[10] R. Verwey, S. van der Weegen, M. Spreeuwenberg, H. Tange, 
T. van der Weijden, and L. de Witte, “A pilot study of a tool 
to stimulate physical activity in patients with COPD or type 2 
diabetes in primary care.” Journal of Telemedicine and 
Telecare, 20(1): 2014, p. 29-34. 
doi: 10.1177/1357633x13519057 
[11] R. Saunders, “Developing a process-evaluation plan for 
assessing health promotion program implementation: a how-
to guide.” Health promotion practice, 6(2): 2005, p. 134 - 47. 
doi:10.1177/1524839904273387 
[12] S. Audrey, J. Holliday, N.Parry-Langdon, and R. Campbell,  
“Meeting the challenges of implementing process evaluation 
within randomized controlled trials: the example of ASSIST 
(A Stop Smoking in Schools Trial).” Health education 
research, 21(3): 2006  p. 366-77. doi: 10.1093/her/cyl029 
[13] A. Oakley, V. Strange, C. Bonell, E. Allen, and J. Stephenson,  
“Process evaluation in randomised controlled trials of 
complex interventions.” BMJ (Clinical research ed.), 
332(7538): 2006, p. 413-6. doi: 10.1136/bmj.332.7538.413 
 
 
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

